THE

HISTORY

OF

SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF

Queen MARY and of King JAMES VI.

TILL

His AccEssION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A

REVIEwofthe ScoTTISHHISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

Minifler of LADY YESTER'S, Edinburgh.

VOLUME II.

A NEW EDITION.

LONDON:

Printed for T. CADELL, in the Strand,

MDCCLXXXI.

# BOOK VI.

THE

HISTORY

OF

SCOTLAND.

BOOK VI.

T H E unexpe&ed blow, by which the Re- B o oK

gent was cut off, struck the King's party VI.
with the utmost consternation. Eliza- -'--

beth bewailed his death as the most fatal disaster I570°
which could have befallen her kingdom; and was °cc«fiond

by the Re-

inconsolable to a degree that little suited her dig- gent'sdeaJh,
nity. Mary's adherents exulted, as if, now, her
refforation were not only certain, but near at
hand. The infamy of the crime naturally fell on
those, who expressed such indecent joy at the com-
mifion of it. And as the affaffin made his escape
on a horse, which belonged to Lord Claud Ha-
milton, and fled directly to Hamilton, where he
was received in triumph, it was concluded that
the Regent had fallen a sacrifice to the resentment
of the Queen's party, rather than to the revenge
of a private man. On the day after the murder,

VYL. II. B Scottr,

·r ----^-

B o o K Scott of Buccleugh, and Ker of Ferniherft, both

VI. zealous abettors of the Queen's cause, entered

England in an hostile manner, and plundered and
burnt the country, the inhabitants of which ex-
peEted no such outrage. If the Regent had been
alive, they would scarce have ventured on such
an irregular incursion, nor could it well have
happened so soon after his death, unless they had
been privy to the crime.

THIs was not the only irregularity, to which the

anarchy that followed the Regent's death gave oc-
cafion. During such general confusion, men
hoped for universal impunity, and broke out into
excesses of every kind. As it was impolfible to
restrain these, without a fettled form of govern-

Steps taken ment, a Convention of the nobles was held, in
ewain order to deliberate concerning the ele&ion of a

n".ohte Regent. The Queen's adherents refused to be

rFeb. 12. present at the meeting, and protested against its

proceedings. The King's own party was irrefo-
lute, and divided in opinion. Maitland, whom
Kirkaldy had set at liberty, and who obtained
from the nobles then assembled a declaration ac-
quitting him of the crime which had been laid
to his charge, endeavoured to bring about a coa-
lition of the two parties, by proposing to admit
the Queen to the joint adminiflration of govern-
ment with her ton. Elizabeth adhering to her an-
cient system with regard to Scottish affairs, la-
boured, notwithstanding the folicitations of Ma-
ry's friends *, to multiply, and to perpetuate the
fations, which tore in pieces the kingdom. Ran-

* See Append. No. I. dolph,

d lph, whom she dispatched into Scotland on the -o- o a
first news of the Regent's death, and who was her VI.
usual agent for such services, found all parties so 157o.
exasperated by mutual injuries, and so full of irre-
concilable rancour, that it cost him little trouble
to inflame their animosity. The Convention broke
up without coming to any agreement; and a new
meeting, to which the nobles of all parties were
invited, was appointed on the first of May *.

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still A coalitio

of parties

continued to acknowledge the King's authority, attempted
were at the utmost pains to restore some degree of n v"""a
harmony among their countrymen. They pro-
cured for this purpose, an amicable conference
among the leaders of the two facions. But while
the one demanded the restoration of the Queen,
as the only thing which could re-establish the
public tranquillity; while the other esteemed the
King's authority to be so sacred, that it was, on
no account, to be called in question or impaired;
and neither of them would recede in the least
point from their opinions, they separated without
any profpe&t of concord. Both were rendered
more averse from reconcilement, by the hope of
foreign aid. An envoy arrived from France with
promises of powerful fbccour to the Queen's ad-
herents; and as the civil wars in that kingdom
seemed to be on the point of terminating in peace,
it was expeted that Charles woulld soon be at
liberty to fulfil what he promised. On- the other
hand, the Earl of Sussex was assembling a power-
ful army on the borders, and its operations could

* Cr..wv"f. Mem. 131. Calderw. ii. I ,j

7

B 2 not

B o o K not fail of adding spirit and strength to the King's

VI. party *.
1570. THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the
Queen's faCtions proved ineffeaual, it contributed some-
parlv in
p~n onof what to moderate, or suspend their rage; but
Edinburgh. they loon began to a&t with their usual violence.

Morton, the most vigilant and able leader on the
1 ing's fide, solicited Elizabeth to interpose, with-
out delay, for the safety of a party, so devoted to
her interett, and which flood so much in need of

April zo. her assistance. The Chiefs of the Queen's fation,

assembling at Linlithgow, marched thence to
Edinburgh; and Kirkaldy, who was both Gover-
nor of the Castle, and Provost of the town, pre-
vailed on the citizens, though with some diffi-
culty, to admit them within the gates. Together
with Kirkaldy, the Earl of Athole, and Mait-
land, acceded almost openly to their party; and
the Duke and Lord Herries, having recovered
their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour, resumed the
places which they had formerly held in their
councils. Encouraged by the acquisition of per-
sons, so illustrious by their birth, or so eminent
for their abilities, they publifled a proclamation,
declaring their intention to support the Queen's
authority, and seemed resolved not to leave the
city before the meeting of the approaching Con-
vention, in which, by their numbers and influ-
ence, they did not doubt of securing a majority of
voices on their tide f.

Endeavour AT the fame time, they had formed a design of
to involve
the nation kindling war between the two kingdoms. And if
in a warwith

* Crawf. Mem. 34 -j- Ibid. I37. Calderw. ii. I76.

they could engage them in hostilities, and revive B OO K
their ancient emulation and antipathy, they hoped, VI.
not only to dissolve a confederacy of great advan-
tage to the King's cause, but to reconcile their
countrymen to the Queen, Elizabeth's natural
and most dangerous rival. With this view, they
had, immediately after the murder of the Regent,
prompted Scott and Ker to commence hostilities,
and had since infligated them to continue and ex-
tend their depredations. As Elizabeth foresaw,
on the one hand, the dangerous consequences of
rendering this a national quarrel; and resolved, on
the other, not to fuffer such an insult on her go-
vernment to pass with impunity; Lhe issued a pro-
clamation, declaring that she imputed the out-
rages which had been committed, not to the Scot-
tilh nation, but to a few desperate and ill-defign-
ing persons; that, with the former, lhe was re-
solved to maintain an inviolable friendflhip, where-
as the duty, which she owed to her own fubjeds,
obliged her to chastise the licentiousness of the
latter *. Sussex and Scroop, accordingly, entered
Scotland, the one on the east, the other on the
weft borders, and laid waste the adjacent coun-
tries with fire and sword 1-. Fame magnified the
number and progress of their armies, and Mary's
adherents, not thinking themselves safe in Edin-
burgh, the inhabitants whereof were ill affetced
to their cause, retired to Linlithgow. There by April s.
a public proclamation they asserted the Queen's
authority, and forbad giving obedience to any,
but the Duke, or the Earls of Argyll and Huntly,

* Cald. ii. 18r. t Cabala, 174.

B 3 whom

B OOK K whom she had constituted her Lieutenants in the

VI. kingdom.

S7o. THE nobles who continued faithful to the King,

1570.
King's par- though considerably weakened by the defection of

einbergh, so many of their friends, assembled at Edinburgh
May on the day appointed. They issued a counter-pro-

clamation, declaring those who appeared for the
Queen, enemies of their country; and charging
them with the murder both of the late King, and
of the Regent. They could not, however, pre-
fume so much on their own strength as to ven-
ture either to elec a Regent, or to take the field
against the Queen's party; but the assistance,
which they received from Elizabeth, enabled
them to do both. By her order, Sir William
Drury marched into Scotland, with a thousand
foot, and three hundred horse; the King's ad-
herents joined him with a considerable body of
troops, and advancing towards Glasgow, where
the adverse party had already begun hostilities by
attacking the cafile, they forced them to retire,
plundered the neighbouring country, which be-
longed to the Hamiltons, and, after seizing some
of their castles, and rating others, returned to
Edinburgh.

Mot;rvs of UNDER Drury's prote&ion, the Earl of Lennox
Ehzabeth's
condua returned into Scotland. It was natural to com-

itih rgard mit the government of the kingdom to him,

during the minority of his grandson. His illus-
trious birth, and alliance with the royal family of
England, as well as of Scotland, rendered him
worthy of that honour; and his resentment against
Mary being implacable, and his estate lying in

Enuland,

England, and his family residing there, Eliza- B OOK
beth considered him as a man, who, both from VI.
inclination and from interest, would aa in con-
cert with her, and ardently wished that he might
succeed Murray in the office of Regent. But, on
many accounts, ihe did not think it prudent to
discover her own sentiments, or to favour his pre-
tensions too openly. The civil wars in France,
which had been excited by a pretended zeal for -
religion, and carried on with a fierceness that did
it real dishonour, appeared now to be on the point
of coming to an issue; and after thedding the best
blood, and wasting the richest provinces in the
kingdom, both parties desired peace with an ar-
dour that facilitated the negotiations which were
carrying on for that purpose. Charles IX. was
known to be a paflionate admirer of Mary's
beauty. Nor could he, in honour, fuffer a Queen
of France, and the most ancient ally of his crown,
to languilh in her present cruel situation, without
attempting to procure her relief. He had, hi-
therto, been obliged to satisfy himself with re-
monftrating, by his ambassadors, against the in-
dignity with which the had been treated. But if
he were once at full liberty to pursue his incli-
nations, Elizabeth would have every thing to
dread from the impetuosity of his temper, and
the power of his arms. It therefore became ne-
ceffary for her to aat with some reserve, and not
to appear, avowedly, to countenance the choice
of a Regent, in contempt of Mary's authority.
The jealousy and prejudices of the Scots required
no less management. Had flhe openly supported

B 4 Lennox's

B o o Lennox's claim; had she recommended him to

VI. the Convention, as the candidate whom the ap-
-7' proved; this might have roused the independ-

ent spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a dif-
covery of her intention, she might have defeated
its success. For there reasons, she hefirated long,
and returned ambiguous answers to all the mef-
fnges, which the received from the King's party.
A more explicit declaration of her sentiments
was at last obtained, and an event. of an extraor-
dinary nature seems to have been the occasion of
it. Pope Pius V. having ifTued a bull, whereby
he excommunicated Elizabeth, deprived her of
her kingdom, and absolved her subjects from their
oath of allegiance, Felton, an Englishman, had
the boldness to fix it on the gates of the Bifnop
of London's palace. In former ages, a Pope,
moved by his own ambition, or pride, or bi-
gotry, denounced this fatal sentence against the
most powerful monarchs; but as the authority of
the court of Rome was now less regarded, its
proceedings were more cautious; and it was only
when they were roused by fbme powerful Prince,
that the thunders of the church were ever heard.
Elizabeth, therefore, imputed this flep, which
the Pope had taken, to a combination of the
Roman Catholic Princes against her, and sus-
pected that some plot was on foot in favour of
the Scottish Queen. In that event, she knew that
the safety of her own kingdom depended on pre-
serving her influence in Scotland ; and in order to
flrengthen this, flhe renewed her promises of pro-
tecting the King's adherents, encouraged them to

pro-

proceed to the election of a Regent, and even B o oK
ventured to point out the Earl of Lennox, as the VI.
person who had the belt title. That honour was I7o 1570.
accordingly conferred upon him, in a Convention
of the whole party, held on the 12th of July *.

THE Regent's first care was to prevent the meet- Lennox

elefied Re-

ing of the Parliament, which the Queen's party gent.
had summoned to convene at Linlithgow. Hav-
ing effeced that, he marched against the Earl of
Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and
forced the garrison, which he had placed in Bre-
chin, to surrender at discretion. Soon after, he
made himself master of some other castles. Em-
boldened by this fuccefsful beginning of his ad-
ministration, as well as by the appearance of a
considerable army, with which the Earl of Sussex
hovered on the borders, he deprived Maitland of
his office of Secretary, and proclaimed him, the
Duke, Huntly, and other leaders of the Queen's
party, traitors and enemies of their country f.

IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the Mary', ad.

Queen's adherents had recourse to the King of gotiate
Spain f, with whom Mary had held a close cor- with sva'i,
refpondence ever since her confinement in Eng-
land. They prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to
fend two of his officers to take a view of the
country, and to examine its coasts and harbours;
and obtained from him a finall supply of money
and arms, which were sent to the Earl of Hunt-

* Spotfw. 240. Cald. ii. 186. See Append, No. II.
+ Crawf. Mem. 159. Cald. ii. J98.

L See Append. No, 111.

Bo o

o ly *. But this aid, so disproportionate to their

VI. exigencies, would have availed them little. They

v were indebted for their safety to a treaty, which

Eliibeth' Elizabeth was carrying on, under colour of re-
Lopofestra storing the captive Queen to her throne. The
xo=o- first Reps in this negotiation had been taken in

.weenMa. the month of May; but hitherto little progress

1y and her
fjeas, was made in it. The peace .concluded between

the Roman Catholics and Hugonots in France,
and her apprehenflons that Charles would inter-
pose with vigour in behalf of his fifter-in-law,
quickened Elizabeth's motions. She affeaed to
treat her prisoner with more indulgence, she
listened more graciously to the folicitations of
foreign ambassadors in her favour, and seemed
fully determined to replace her on the throne of
her anceffors. As a proof of her sincerity, she
laboured to procure a cessation of arms between
the two contending facions in Scotland. Len-
nox, elated with the good fortune which had
hitherto attended his administration, and flatter-
ing himself with an easy triumph over enemies
whose estates were wasted, and their forces dif-
pirited, refused, for some time, to come into this
measure. It was not safe for him, however, to
dispute the will of his proteatrefs. A cessation of
hostilities during two months, to commence on
the third of September, was agreed upon; and
being renewed from time to time, it continued
till the first of April next year --.

SooN after, Elizabeth dispatched Cecil and Sir

Walter Mildmay to the QOjeen of Scots. The

* Anders. iii. Izz. Crawf. Mem. 153. - Spotfw. 243.

dignity

dignity of these ambassadors, the former her prime B o oK
Minister, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer, VI.
and one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all -57.
parties that the negotiation was serious, and that
the hour of Mary's liberty was now approaching.
The propositions, which they made to her, were
advantageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince,
in Mary's situation, had reason to expet. The
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh; the re-
nouncing any pretensions to the English Crown,
during Elizabeth's own life, or that of her pofte-
rity; the adhering to the alliance between the
two kingdoms; the pardoning her fubjeas, who
had taken arms against her; and her promising
to hold no correspondence, and to countenance
no enterprise, that might disturb Elizabeth's go-
vernment; were among the chief articles. By
way of security for the accomplishment of these,
they demanded that some persons of rank should
be given as hostages, that the Prince her for
thould reside in England, and that a few castles
on the border thould be put into Elizabeth's
hands. To some of these propositions Mary con-
fented; some the endeavour'ed to mitigate; and
others she attempted to evade. In the mean time,
the transmitted copies of them to the Pope, to the
Kings of France and Spain, and to the Duke of
Alva. She insinuated, that without some timely
and vigorous interposition in her behalf, she would
be obliged t.o accept of these hard conditions, and
to purchase liberty at any price. But the Pope
was a distant and feeble ally, and by his efforts
against the Turks, his treasury was entirely ex-
haufted. Charles had already begun to medi-

tate

B o o K tate that conspiracy against the Hugonots, which

VI. marks his reign with such infamy; and it required

v much leisure, and perse& tranquillity, to bring

that execrable plan to maturity. Philip was em-
ployed in fitting out that fleet, which acquired
so great renown to the Christian arms, by the
viAory over the infidels at Lepanto; the Moors
in Spain threatened an infurredion ; and his sub-
jects in the Netherlands, provoked by much op-
preifion, and many indignities, were breaking
out into open rebellion. All of them, for there
different reasons, advised Mary, without depend-
ing on their aid, to conclude the treaty on the best
terms the could procure *.

;izabeth's MARY, accordingly, consented to many of
the condaa Elizabeth's demands, and discovered a facility of
et i". disposition, which promised still further concef-

fions. But no concession she could have made,
would have satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of
her repeated profefllions of sincerity to foreign
ambassadors, and notwithstanding the solemnity
with which she carried on the treaty, had no
other objea in it, than to amufc Mary's allies,
and to gain time f. After having so long treated
a Queen, who fled to her for refuge, in so un-
generous a manner, she could not now difinifs
her with safety. Under all the disadvantages
of a rigorous confinement, Mary had found means
to excite commotions in England, which were
extremely formidable. What desperate effecs of
her just refCntment mighlt be expeted, if ihe were
set at liberty, and recovered her former power ?

* AnLdr f. ivo. iil. 119, Izo t Digger Co'npl. Ar.b. -S

What engagements could bind her, not to revenge B o o K
the wrongs the had fuffered, nor to take advantage VI.
of the favourable conjuntures that might present
themselves ? Was it possible for her to give such
security for her behaviour, in times to come, as
might remove all suspicions and fears ? And was
there not good cause to conclude, that no future
benefits could ever obliterate the memory of past
injuries? It was thus E1 zabeth reasoned; though
she continued to act as if her views had been en-
tirely different. She appointed seven of her privy
counsellors to be commissioners for fettling the
articles of the treaty; and as Mary had already
named the Bishops of Ross, and Galloway, and
Lord Lcvingfton, for her ambassadors, Ihe required
the Regent to impower proper persons to appear
in behalf of the King. The Earl of Morton, Pit- '57'*
cairn, abbot of Dunfermling, and Sir James Mac-
gill were the persons chosen by the Regent. They
prep.red for their journey, as slowly as Elizabeth
herself could have wifled. At length they arrived
at London, and met the commissioners of the
two Queens. Mary's ambassadors discovered the Feb. g»
strongest inclination to comply with every thing
that would remove the obstacles which flood in
the way of their miftrefs's liberty. But when Mor-
ton and his afrociates were called upon to vindi-
cate their conduct, and to explain the sentiments
of their party, they began, in justification of their
treatment of the Queen, to advance such maxims
concerning the limited powers of Princes, and the
naceral right of fubjeAs to resist and to controul
them, as were extremely shocking to Elizabeth,
whole notions of regal prerogative were very ex-

alted,

B o o K alted. With regard to the authority which the

VI. King now poffeffed, they declared that they nei-
'" ' ther had, nor could possibly receive inft'ruaions,

to consent to any treaty, that tended to subvert,
or even to impair it in the least degree *. No-
thing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than
such a reply from the commiflioners of the King
of Scots to the Queen of England. His party de-
pended absolutely on her protetion, her hand had
seated him on the throne, and to her power he owed
the continuance of his reign. With the utmost
cafe, she could have brought them to talk in a
very different manner; and whatever conditions
lhe might have thought fit to prescribe, they
would have had no other choice but to submit.
This declaration, however, she affected to confi-

t proves der as an insuperable difficulty. And finding

that there was no reason to dread any danger from
the French King, who had not discovered that
eagerness in support of Mary, which was expected;
the reply made by Morton furnished her with a

March 24. pretence for putting a flop to the negotiation, till

the Regent thould fend ambassadors with more
ample powers. Thus, after being amused for ten
months with the hopes of liberty, the unhappy
Queen of Scots remained under ftriater custody
than ever, and without any profpe& of escaping
from it; while those fubjeds, who still adhered to
her, were exposed, without ally or prote&or, to
the rage of enemies, whom their success in this
negotiation rendered still more insolent t.

* Cald. ii. 234. Digges, 51. Haynes, 523, 524.
t And. iii. 91, &c.

ON the day after the expiration of the truce, B o o

which had been observed with little exa6tnefs on VI.
either fide, Captain Crawford of Jordan-hill, a gal-
lant and enterprising officer, performed a service of Dunbartoa
great importance to the Regent, by surprising the "f by"ie
castle of Dunbarton. This was the only fortified Wegst.
place in the kingdom, of which the Queen had
kept poffeflion, ever since the commencement of
the civil wars. Its situation on the top of an high
and almost inaccessible rock, which rises in the
middle of a plain, rendered it extremely ifrong,
and in the opinion of that age impregnable; as it
commanded the river Clyde, it was of great con-
sequence, and esteemed the most proper place in
the kingdom for landing any fbreign troops that
might come to Mary's aid. The strength of the
place rendered Lord Fleming, the governor, more
secure than he ought to have been, considering its
importance. A soldier, who. had served in the
garrison, and had been disgusted by some ill usage,
proposed the scheme to the Regent, endeavoured
to demonstrate that it was practicable, and offered
himself to go the foremost man on the enterprise.
It was thought prudent to risk any danger for so
great a prize. Scaling-ladders, and whatever else
was necessary, were prepared with the utmost fe-
crecy and dispatch. All the avenues to the castle
were seized, that no intelligence of the design might
reach the governor. Towards evening, Crawford
marched from Glasgow, with a small but deter.
mined band. By midnight, they arrived at the
bottom of the rock. The moon was set, and the
sky, which hitherto had been extremely clear, was
covered with a thick fog. It was where the rock

was

B o o K was highest, that the assailants made their attempt,

VI. because in that place there were few centinels, and
S' they hoped to find them least alert. The first lad-
I57 I. der was scarce fixed, when the weight and eagerness

of those who mounted, brought it to the ground.
None of the assailants were hurt by the fall, and
none of the garrison alarmed at the noise. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock, and
fastened the ladder to the roots of a tree, which
grew in a cleft. This place they all reached with
the utmost dfficulty, but were still at a great dif-
tance from the foot of the wall. Their ladder was
made fast a second time; but in the middle of the
ascent, they met with an unforeseen difficulty. One
of their companions was seized with some sudden
fit, and clung, seemingly without life, to the lad-
der. All were at a stand. It was impoflible to
pass him. To tumble him headlong was cruel;
and might occasion a discovery. But Crawford's
presence of mind did not forsake him. He or-
dered the soldier to be bound fast to the ladder,
that he might not fall when the fit was over: And
turning the other fide of the ladder, they mounted,
with ease, over his belly. Day now began to
break, and there still remained a high wall to
scale; but after surmounting so many great diffi-
culties, this was soon accomplished. A sentry ob-
served the first man, who appeared on the parapet,
and had just time to give the alarm, before he was
knocked on the head. The officers and soldiers
of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and more
solicitous about their own safety, than capable
of making resistance. The assailants rushed for-
wards, with repeated shouts, and with the utmost

fury;

fury; took poffefion of the magazine; seized the BOO K
cannon; and turned them against their enemies. VI.
Lord Fleming got into a small boat, and fled all
alone into Argylefhire. Crawford, in reward of
his valour and good conduct, remained matter of
the castle; and as he did not lose a single man in
the enterprise, he enjoyed his success with unmixed
pleasure. Lady Fleming, Verac the French En-
voy, and Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrew's,
were the prisoners of greatest diflinction *.

VERAc's character protected him from the usage, A:chbfnop

which he merited by his aCtivity in flirring up ene- drew' pu,-
mies against the King. The Regent treated the

t eath by

lady with great politeness and humanity. But a
very different fate awaited the Archbishop; he
was carried under a f~rong guard to Stirling;
and as he had formerly been attainted by act of
Parliament, he was, without any formal trial,
condemned to be hanged; and on the fourth day
after he was taken, the sentence was executed.
An attempt was made to convit him of being
accessary to the murder both of the King and Re-
gent, but these accuiftions were supported by no
proof. Our historians obierve, that he was the filr-
Bishop in Scotland who died by the hands of the
executioner. The high offices he had enjoyed,
both in church and slate, ought to have e'xempted
him from a punifi:ment infliCed only on the lovcftl
criminals. But his zeal for the Queie, his abi-
lities, and his profeion, rendered him odious and
formidable to the King's adherents. Lernns'x

* Buch. 394.

VoL. II. C hated

BOOK K hated him as the person, by whose counsels the

VI. reputation and power of the house of Hamilton

were supported. And party rage, and personal
enmity, dictated that indecent fcntence, for which
some colour was fought, by imputing to him such
odious crimes *.

Kirkaldy THE loss of Dunbarton, and the severe treat-
defends the
caie of rnent of the Archbishop, perplexed and enraged
in urgh the Queen's party; and hostilities were renewed
een'"s with all the fierceness which disappointment and

indignation can inspire. Kirkaldy, who, during
the truce, had taken care to increase the number
of his garrison, and to provide every thing necef-
fary for his defence, issued a proclamation de-
claring Lennox's authority to be unlawful, and
usurped; commanded all who favoured his cause
to leave the town within fix hours; seized the
arms, belonging to the citizens; planted a bat-
tery on the steeple of St. Giles, repaired the walls,
and fortified the gates of the city; and,, though
the affecions of the inhabitants leaned a different
way, held out the metropolis against the Regent.
The Duke, Huntly, Home, Herreis, and other
chiefs of that faaion, repaired to Edinburgh with
their followers ; and having received a finall fum
of money, and some ammunition from France,
formed no contemptible army within the walls.
On the other fide, Morton seized Leith, and for-
tified it; and the Regent joined him with a con-
fiderable body of men. While the armies lay so
near each other, daily fkirmithes happened, and

* spotfw. 252.

with

with various success. The Queen's party was not B o o K
itrong enough to take the field 'againif the Regent, VI.
nor was his superiority so great as to undertake 5''
the siege of the castle, or of the town *.

SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands Bth par-

of his enemies, the Regent had summoned a par- parlian .ei.,
liament to meet in that place. In order to prevent ay '4.
any objecion against the lawfulness of the meeting,
the members obeyed the proclamation as exactly
as possible; and assembled in a house at the head
of the Canongate, which, though without the
walls, lies within the liberties of the city. Kirk-
aldy exerted himself to the utmost to interrupt
their meeting; but they were so fitrongly guard-
ed, that 1ll efforts were vain. They passed an
act attainting Maitland and a few others, and
then adjourned to the 28th ofAuguft t.

THE other party, in order that their proceed-

ings might be countenanced by the fame shew of
legal authority, held a meeting of parliament
soon after. There was produced in this assembly,
a declaration by the Queen, of the invalidity of
that deed, whereby (he had resigned the Crown,
and consented to the coronation of her son. Con-
formable to this declaration, an adc was paficd,
pronouncing the resignation to have been extorted
by fear; to be null in itself, and in all its confe-
quences; and enjoining all good fubjets to ac-
knowledge the Queen alone to be their lawful
Sovereign, and to support those who afted in her
name. The present eftabliflhment of the protest-

t Crawf. Mem. 177.

* Cald. ii. 233, 8rc.

B o o r ant religion was confirmed by another statute;

VI. and, in imitation of the adverse party, a new

_57i. meeting was appointed on the 26th of Augut *.

M fcb'e MEANWHILE, all the miseries of civil vwar defo-

do,,o,,. lated the kingdom. Fellow-citizens, friends, bro-
n.... thers, took different tides, and ranged thcmfclves

under the flandards of the contending fations.
In every county, and almost in every town and
village, King's-men and 9ueen's men were names of
distinction. Political hatred difibived all natural
ties, and extinguifhfed the reciprocal good-will
and confidence which hold mankind together in
fbciety. Religious zeal mingled itself with these
civil diftintions, and contributed not a little to
hcighten, and to inflame them.

""t °.f€ THE faciions which divided the kingdom were,
a'i ons., in appearance, only two. But in both these, there

were persons, with views and principles, so differ-
ent from each other, that they ought to be diflin-
guilhed. With tbme, considerations of religion
were predominant, and they either adhered to the
Queen, because they hoped, by her means, to re-
cftablifh Popery, or they defended the King's au-
thority, as the best support of the Proteflant faith.
Among these the opposition was violent and irre-
concilable. Others were influenced by political
motives only, or allured by views of intered; the
Regen: aimeld at uniting these, and did not despair
of gar'n..lg, by rcntle arts, many of Mary's adhe-
rencs to acknowledge the King's authority. Mait-
la nd aid Kirkaldy had formed the fame dcfign

* Crawf. Mem, 177.

of a coalition, but on such terms, that the Qeen BE o K
might be recfored to some share in the govern- VI.
mcnt, and the kingdom thake off its dependence r571"
on England. Morton, the ablest, the moit am-
bitious, and the molt powerful man of the Kiin's
party, held a particular course; and moving only
as he was prompted by the court of Englanid,
thwarted every measure that tended towards a
reconcilement of the faations; and as he fcrved
Elizabeth with much fidelity, he derived both
power and credit from her avowed protection.

THE time appointed by both parties for the

meeting of their parliaments now approached.
Only three peers and two bishops appeared in
that which was held in the Qicen's name at
Edinburgh. But, contemptible as their numbers
were, they passed an at for attainting upwards
of 200 of the adverse faEtion. The meeting at
Stirling was numerous and splendid. The Re-
gent had prevailed on the Earls of Argyll, Eglin-
ton, Ca;ils, and Lord Boyd, to acknowledge the
King's authority. The three Earls were among
the noft powerful noblemen in the kingdom, and
had hitherto been zealous in the Queen's cauIe.
Lord Boyd had been one of Mary's commiaion-
ers at York and Weftminq-er, and, fnce th.it
time, had been admitted into all her r'on- fe'c:t
counciL. But, during that turbulent period, ic
condu&c of individuals, as wecll as thc p':inc:i-,i
of sa&ti nrs, varied i often, that thit 'l-.ic o2 f i.o-
nour, the chier prfi-ervatcve :of ro . '
radi o", w.as e,:ur-Y:v 1jft ; a ,::., V-: ...:: ::' 1 i--

L ,,1

to decorum, men sudden! ': d

C3

B o o K and adopted all the violent paflions of the other.

VI. The defetion, however, of so many persons of
_' dinlin/cion, not only weakened the Queen's party,

but added reputation to her adversaries.

The King's AFTER the example of the parliament at Edin-
parly Iur-
pnfrc in burgh, that at Stirling began with framing acts
stirling. against the opposite fation. But in the midst of

all the security, which confidence in their own
numbers, or distance from danger could inspire,
they were awakened, early one morning, by the

PCt. 3- shouts of the enemy in the heart of the town. In

a moment the houses of every person of diftinc-
tion were firrounded, and before they knew what
to think of so strange an event, the Regent, the
Earls of Argyll, Morton, Glencairn, Calfils, Eg-
linton, Montrose, Buchan, the Lords Sempil,
Cathcart, Ogilvie, were all made prisoners, and
mounted behind troopers, who were ready to carry
them to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the author of
this daring enterprise; and if he had not been in-
duced by the ill-timed solicitude of his friends
about his safety, not to hazard his own person in
conducting it, that day might have terminated the
contest between the two factions, and have re-
flored peace to his country. By his direaion,
four hundred men, under the command of Hunt-
ley, Lord Claud Hamilton, and Scott of Buc-
cleagh, set out from Edinburgh, and, the better to
conceal Their design, marched towards the south.
_ But they soon wheeled to the right, and horses
having been provided for the infantry, rode
itraight to Stirling. By four in the morning,
they arrived there; not one sentry was polled on

7 the

the walls, not a single man was awake about the B o o K
place. They met with no resistance from any per- VI.
son they had seized, except Morton. He defend- "
ing his house with obstinate valour, they were 7
obliged to set it on fire, and he did not surrender
till forced out of it by the flames. In performing
this, some time was consumed; and the private
men, unaccustomed to regular discipline, left their
colours, and began to rifle the houses and shops of
the citizens. The noise and uproar of the town
reached the castle. The Earl of Mar sallied out
with thirty soldiers ; fired briskly upon the enemy,
of whom almost none but the officers kept toge-
ther in a body. The townfimen took arms to as-
sift their governor; a sudden panic struck the as-
failants; some fled, some surrendered themselves
to their own prisoners ; and had not the borderers,
who followed Scott, prevented a pursuit, by car-
rying off all the horses within the place, not a man
would have escaped. If the Regent had not un-
fortunately been killed, the lots on the King's fide
would have been as inconsiderable, as the alarm
was great. Thinik on the Archbijhop of St. Andrew's,
was the word among the Queen's soldiers; and
Lennox fell a sacrifice to his memory. The of- The ,e.

gent killed,

ficer, to whom he surrendered, endeavouring to
protect him, loft his own life in his defence. He
was slain, according to the general opinion, by
command of Lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy
had the glory of concerting this plan with great
secrecy and prudence; but Morton's fortunate
obitinacy, and the want of discipline among his
own troops, deprived him of success, the only

C 4 thing

B o o K thing wanting to render this equal to the most ap-

VI. plauded military enterprifcs of the kind *,

As so many of the nobles were afhembled, they

157I.
Mar chuocn proceeded, without delay, to tile election of a Re-

e.' gent. Argyll, Morton, and Mar, \were candidates

for the office. Mar was chofecn by a majority of
voices. A.l.idrc all the fierce diflenfions which
had prevailed so long in Scotland, he had diftin-
guifhed himself by his moderation, his humanity,
and his difinterefiednefs. And as his power was
far inferior to Argyll's, and his abilities not so
great as Morton's, he was, for thefc reasons, less
formidable to the other nobles. His merit, too,
in having so lately rescued the leaders of the party
from imminent defiruAion, contributed not a little
to his preferment.

Pr'cee;:irs WTHILE these things were carrying on in Scot-
in England
gosint ri- land, the trai.!aclions in England were no less
T'Y intererLng to Mary, and flill more fatal to her

cause. The' parl:ament of that kingdom, which
met in April, pf:f:'d an a&c, by which it was de-
clared to be high treason to claim any right to
the Crown duri;g the life of the Q0u en ; to affirm
that the title of any other pcifon was better than
hers, or to maintain that the parliament had not
po, .er tc KiiCe' and to limit the order of fuc-
ccfi' !. 1: is i iarkable fiatute was intended
not only for the rcurity of their own Sovereign,
but to curb the r:ftlefs and intrigui'g fipirit of the
Scottish Quen, aid her ad! cren.s -.

rv7itlase Atr thlis time, a treaty of nl irr i' e between

,:E- L~,,Za0,: and t .e .'. es A.oJo, t e I'r'ca

,cr,.v. 2z6. Cr;oi.f. rc2. zo. f L;'md. 4<.

Ki g's

King's brother, was well advanced. Both courts B o o K
seemed to desire it with equal ardour, and gave VI.
out, with the utmost confidence, that it could
not fail of taking place. Neither of them, how- 171.
ever, wished it success ; and they encouraged it
for no other end, but because it served to cover
or to promote their particular designs. The whole
policy of Catherine of Medicis was bent towards
the accomplishment of her deteftabie project for
the deftrudtion of the Hugonot chiefs; and by
carrying on a negotiation for the marriage of her
son with a Princess who was justly esteemed the
protearefs of that party, by yielding some things
in point of religion, and by discovering an indif-
ference with regard to others, she hoped to amuse
all the Protefiants in Europe, and to lull asleep
the jealousy even of the Hugonots themselves.
Elizabeth flattered herfelfwith reaping advantages
of another kind. During the dependence of the
negotiation, the French could not with decency
give any open assistance to the Scottifn Qieen ; if
they conceived any hopes of success in the treaty
of marriage, they would, of course, interest them-
selves but coldly in her concerns; Mary herself
must be deijeted at losing an ally, whom the had
hitherto reckoned her most powerfulprotector; and
by interrupting her correspondence with France,
one source, at least, of the cabals and intrigues
which disturbed the kingdom, would be fiopt.
Both Queens succeeded in their schemes. Ca-
therine's artifices imposed on Elizabeth, and blind-
ed the Hugonots. The French discovered the
utaiofc indifference about the interefi of the 'GLC-

tiih

3 OO K tifh Queen ; and Mary, considering that court as
VI. already united with her rival, turned herself, for
' ' protecion, towards the King of Spain *. Philip,
1571.
Norto'k's whose dark and thoughtful mind delighted in the
conf"racy myifcry of intrigue, had held a secret correspond-
of Mary. ence with Mary, for some time, by means of the

Bishop of Ross, and had supplied both herself and
her adherents in Scotland with finall sums of mo-
ney. Ridolphi, a Florentine gentleman, who re-
sided at London under the charader of a banker,
and who a&ed privately as an agent for the Pope,
was the person whom the Bishop intrulted with
this negotiation. Mary thought it necessary, like-
wife, to communicate the secret to the Duke of
Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately restored to
liber:y, upon his solemn promise to have no fur-
ther intercourse with the Queen of Scots ; which,
however, he regarded so little, that flhe took no
step in any matter of moment, without his ad-
vice. She complained in a long letter, which
the wrote to him in cyphers, of the baseness with
which the French court had abandoned her in-
terest; ihe declared her intention of imploring the
assistance of the Spanish Monarch, which was now
her only resource ; and recommended Ridolphi to
his confidence, as a person capable both of ex-
plaining and advancing the fcherne. The Duke
commanded Hickford, his secretary, to decy-
pher, and then to burn this letter; but whether
he had been already gained by the court, or re-
solved at that time to betray his matter, he dif-
obeyed the latter part of the order, and hid the

* Digges, 144. 148. Camrnd. 434. letter,

letter, together with other treasonable papers, B o oK.
under the Duke's own bed. VI.

RIDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omit-

ted none of those arguments, and spared none of
those promises, which are the usual incentives to
rebellion. The Pope, he told him, had a great
fum in readiness to bestow in so good a cause.
The Duke of Alva had undertaken to land ten
thousand men not far from London. The Ca-
tholics to a man would rife in arms. Many of
the nobles were ripe for a revolt, and wanted only
a leader. Half the nation had turned their eyes
towards him, and called on him to revenge the
unmerited injuries which he himself had fuffered;
and to rescue an unfortunate Queen, who offered
him her person, and her crown, as the reward of
his success. Norfolk approved of the design, and
though he refused to give Ridolphi any letter of
credit, allowed him to use his name in negotiating
with the Pope and Alva *. The Bishop of Ross,
who, from the violence of his temper, and im-
patience to procure relief for his mistress, was apt
to run into rafl and detperate designs, advifcd the
Duke to affemblefecretly a few of his followers, and
at once to seize Elizabeth's person. But this the
Duke rejeaed as a scheme equally wild and ha-
zardous. Meanwhile, the English court had re- Difcoered

by Eliza-

ceived some imperfe& information of the plot, by beth.
intercepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and an ac- August,
cident happened, which brought to light all the
circumitances of it. The Duke had employed
Hickford to tranfinit to Lord Herreis, some mo-

* Anders. iii. 16x.

ney,

B o o K ney, which was to be difiributed among Mary's

VI. friends in Scotland. A person not in the secret

_,_
" was intrufted with conveying it i, the borders,

157 ' and he, fufpeding it from the wicht to be gold,

whereas he had been told that it was fiver, car-
ried it directly to the Privy Council. The Duke,
his domeftics, and all who were privy, or could
be fulpeched of being privy to the design, were

sept. 7 taken into custody. Never did the accomplices

in a conspiracy discover less firmncfs, or fr\Tants
betray an indulgent master with greater baifncfs.
Every one confeffed the whole of what he knew.
Ilickford gave dirtations how to find the papers
which he had hidden. The Duke himftlf, relv-
ing at first on the fidelity of his affociatcs, and be-
lieving all dangerous papers to have been deltroy-

ed, confidently asserted his own innocence; but
when their depolitions and the papers themfclves
were produced, afconifhed at their treachcry, he
acknowledged his guilt, and implored : ie Queen's
mercy. His offence was too heinous, and too
often repeated, to obtain pardon ; and Lliz.berth
thought it necessary to deter hei fubjcAs, by his
punilhment, from holding correspondence wi h the
Quecn of Scots, or her emifiaries. Being trled by
his Peers, he was found guilty of high treason, and,
afier several delays, fultered death for the cr me *.

Ti-e discovery of this conspiracy produced many

effetcs, extremely detrimental to Mary's intzrdl.
Thie BI.l'op of Ross, who appeared by the con-
feilon of all concerned, to be the prime mover in
ev-ry cab!al ~ gainft Elizabeth, was taken i.ito cuft

* Ands. iii. i49. State Trials, 185. tody,

tody, his papers searched, himself committed to B o o K
the Tower, treated with the utmofe rigour, threat- VI.
ened with capital punishment, and, after a long
confinement, set at liberty, on condition that he I571
flould leave the kingdom. Mary was not only
deprived of a servant, equally eminent for his zeal
and his abilities, but was denied from that time
the privi!cge of having an ambassador at the Eng-
lifhl court. The Spanish ambassador, whom the
power and dignity of the prince he represented
exempted from such insults as Ross had iuffered,
was commanded to leave England *. Mary her-
self was kept under a flriEter guard than formerly,
the number of her domeftics abridged, and no
perlbn permitted to fee her, but in presence of
her keepers j-.

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, foreseeing the Ei;zabeth

storm which was gathering on the continent r[a"
againri her kingdom, began to wish that tran- Pain'the

or oQueen's

quillity were reltored in Scotland; and irritated party.
by Mary's late attempt against her government,
The dctel lined to act, without disguise or ambi-
guiry, in favour of the King's party. This refo-
]ution ine inti:,at .i to the leaders of both fac&ions.
Many, ihe oc themr, had held such a criminal oa.:s,
correfrondei,ce with her avowed enemies, and had
excited f.ich dan erous consp.iracies both against
her ciowvn and her life, that ihe would henceforth
c' n..ler her a:, *,nuxorrhy a of protecion, and would
n -. - c:.inlt to rtitore her to liberty, far less to
r . cr on her ,hrcne. She exhorted them,
t . ., to unite in acknowledging the King's

"

-- Sti63. "}" Stryrc, Ann. ii. ;o.

au;hoirity.

B o o K authority. She promised to procure by her me-

VI. diation equitable terms for those who had hither-

Y to opposed it. But if they still continued re-

I571. fractory, she threatened to employ her utmost

power to compel them to submit *. Though this
declaration did not produce an immediate effec;
though hostilities continued in the neighbourhood
of Edinburgh; though Huntly's brother, Sir
Adam Gordon, by his bravery and good con-
duc&, had routed the King's adherents in the
North in many encounters; yet such an explicit
discovery of Elizabeth's sentiments contributed
not a little to animate one party, and to depress
the spirit and hopes of the other t.

1572. As Morton, who commanded the Regent's
Hiofiitiies forces, lay at Leith, and Kirkaldy frill held out the
carried on
between town and caffle of Edinblrgh, scarce a day passed

without a skirmish. And while both avoided any
decisive aaion, they harassed each other by attack-
ing small parties, beating up quarters, and inter-
cepting convoys. There operations, though little
memorable in themselves, kept the pafions of both
factions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and
wrought them up, at last, to a degree of fury,
which rendered them regardless not only of the laws
of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of
combat, that this implacable rage appeared; both
parties hanged the prisoners they took, of whatever
rank or quality, without mercy, and without trial.
Great numbers fuffered in this flocking manner;
the unhappy viaims were led, by fifties at a time,

* See Append. No. IV.
- Cald. ii. 289. 294. Strype, ii. 76,

to execution; and it was not till both sides had B o o K
frnarted severely, that they discontinued this bar- VI.
barous pratice, so reproachful to the charaater of
the nation *. Mean while, those in the town and
caffle, though they had received a supply of money
from the Duke of Alva f, began to fuffer for want
of provisions. As Morton had destroyed all the
mills in the neighbourhood of the city, and had
planted small garrisons in all the houses of firength
around it, scarcity daily increased. At lass all the
miseries of famine were felt, and they muff have
been soon reduced to such extremities, as would
have forced them to capitulate, if the Englifll and
French ambassadors had not procured a suspension
of hostilities between the two parties $.

THOUGH the negotiation for a marriage be- Leagaete;

tweenEnrg

tween Elizabeth and the Duke of Anjou, had been land and "
fruitless, both Charles and fie were desirous of France,
concluding a defensive alliance between the two
Crowns. He considered such a treaty, not only
as the best device for blinding the Protestants,
against whom the conspiracy was now almost ripe
for execution; but as a good precaution, likewise,
against the dangerous consequences to which that
atrocious measure might expose him. Elizabeth,
who had hitherto reigned without a single ally,
now saw her kingdom so threatened with intestine
commotions, or exposed to invasions from abroad,
that the was extremely solicitous to secure the as-
fiftance of so powerful a neighbour. The dif-
ficulties arising from the situation of the Scottiih

* Crawf. Mem. 218. 220. j Cald. ii. 345.
T Id. 346.

B OOK o ieen, were the chief occasions of any delay.

VI. Charles demanded some terms of advantage for
--"-' Mary, and her party. Elizabeth refused to liflen
1572. to any proposition of that kind. Her obflinacy

overcame the faint efforts of the French Mo-
narch. Mary's name was not so much as men-
tioned in the treaty ; and with regard to Scottilh
affairs, a short article was inserted, in general and

Apr" "i. ambiguous terms, to this purpose, " That the par-

ties contraaing shall make no innovations in Scot-
land ; nor fuffer any firanger to enter, and to so-
ment the factions there; but it shall be lawful for
the QOeen of England to chastise, by force of
arms, those Scots who flall continue to harbour
the English rebels now in Scotland *." In con-
sequence of this treaty, France and England as-
feced to ac in concert with regard to Scotland,
and Du Croc, and Sir William Drury, appeared
there, in name of their respective Sovereigns.
By their mediation, a truce for two months
was agreed upon, and during that time con-
ferences were to be held between the leaders of
the opposite factions, in order to accommodate
their differences, and restore peace to the king-
dom. This truce afforded a seasonable interval of
tranquillity to the Queen's adherents in the South;
but in the North it proved fatal to her interest.
Sir Adam Gordon had Rtill maintained his reputa-
tion and superiority there. Several parties, under
different officers, were sent againit him. Some of
them he attacked in the field; against others he

* Digges, 170. 191. Came. 444.

i employed

employed stratagem ; and as his courage and con- B oo oK
ducat were equal, none of his enterprises failed of VI.
success. He made war, too, with the humanity
which became so gallant a man, and gained
ground by that, no less than by the terror of his
arms. If he had not been obliged, by the truce,
to suspend his operations, he would, in all proba-
bility, have brought that part of the kingdom to
submit entirely to the Queen's authority *.

NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and fuc- proreed;gs

cess, Mary's interest was on the decline, not only nngi Ala.
in her own kingdom, but among the English. '"
Nothing could be more olTenfive to that nation,
jealous of foreigners, and terrified at the pro-
fpea of the Spanish yoke, than her negotiations
with the Duke of Alva. The parliament, which
met in May, proceeded against her as the most
dangerous enemy of the kingdom; and after a
solemn conference between the Lords and Com-
mons, both houses agreed in bringing in a bill to
declare her guilty of high treason, and to deprive
lier of all right of fuccemon to the Crown. This
great carffe, as it was then called, occupied them
during the whole fefion, and was carried on with
much unanimity. Elizabeth, though fne ap-
plauded their zeal, and approved greatly of the
course they were taking, was satisfied v.ith fllew-
ing Mary what the might expec from the resent-
ment of the ination; but as she did not yet think
it time to proceed to the most violent extremity
against her, the prorogued the parliament t-.

" Crawf'. Mem, t D'Ewes Journ. 206, &c.
VoL. II. D THESE

B o o0 THESE severe proceedings of the English par-

VI. liament were not more mortifying to Mary, than

"* the coldness and neglea of her allies the French.
1572.
Tlr Fr.nch The Duke of Montmorency, indeed, who came
ne'",. over to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a

shew of interesting himself in favour of the Scot-
tifh Quiiecn; but, instead of soliciting for her li-
berty, or her refloration to her throne, all that
he demanded was a flight mitigation of the ri-
gour of her imprisonment. And even this small
requefl, he urged with so little warmth or im-
portunity, that no regard was paid to it *.

Tiemanf- THE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth

of Pans. much fatisfaaion, and she expeded from it a

great increase of fecuritv. She now turned her
whole attention towards Scotland, where the ani-
mofities of the two facions were still so high, and
so many interfering interefis to be adjusted, that a
general pacification seemed to be at a great dif-
tance. But while the laboured to bring them to
some agreement, an event happened which filled
a great part of Europe with aftoniflhment, and
with horror. This was the massacre of Paris;
an attempt, to which there is no parallel in the
history of mankind, eitiher for the dissimulation
which led to it, or for the cruelty and barbarity
with which it was put in execution. By the most
solemn promises of safety and of favour, the
leaders of the Protefiants were drawn to court;
and though doomed to defrrution, they were
received with caresses, loaded with honours, and

* Jebb, ii. eI

.

treated,

treated, for seven months, with every pofllble B o o K
mark of familiarity, and of confidence. In the VI.
midst of their security, the warrant for their de-' ' I572.
ftruEtion was issued by their Sovereign, on whose August4.
word they had relied; and, in obedience to it,
their countrymen, their fellow-citizens, and com-
panions, imbrued their hands in their blood. Ten
thousand Protestants, without diftinftion of age,
or sex, or condition, were murdered in Paris
alone. The fame barbarous orders were sent to
other parts of the kingdom, and a like carnage
ensued. This deed, which no Popiih writer, in
the present age, mentions without detestation,
was, at that time, applauded in Spain; and at
Rome, solemn thanksgivings were offered to God
for its success. But among the Protefiants, it
excited incredible horror; a striking piEture of
which is drawn by the French Ambassador at the
court of England, in his account of his first au-
dience after the massacre. " A gloomy sorrow,
says he, fat on every face; silence, as in the dead
of night, reigned through all the chambers of
the royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers
were ranged on each fide, all clad in deep mourn-
ing, and as I passed through them, not one be-
flowed on me a civil look, or made the least re-
turn to my falutes*."

BUT horror was not the only passion, with which Detrimental

this event inspired the Protestants; it filled them itre.
with fear. They considered it as the prelude to
fume greater blew, and believed, not without

J" Ca:-e, ii. n52uc
D s much

B o o K much probability, that all the Popish Princes had

VI. conspired the deftruc&ion of their fef. This opi-
572.~ nion did no finall difflrvice to Mary's affairs in

Scotland. Many of her adherents were Pro-
tellants; and, though they wished her refroration,
were not willing, on that account, to sacrifice the
faith which they profeffed. They dreaded her
attachment to a religion, which allowed its vo-
taries to violate the most solemn engagements,
and prompted them to perpetrate the most bar-
1barous crimes. A general confederacy of the
Protestants seemed to them the only thing that
could uphold the Reformation against the league
which was formed to overturn it. Nor could the

present efiablifhment of religion be long main-
tained in Britain, but by a striCt union with Eli-
zabeth, and by the concurrence of both nations, in
espousing the defence of it, as a common cause *.

rTh;-RFnt THE Regent took hold of this favourable con-

"o .ei, juncture for negotiating a general peace. And as

Ifsh p"'. he laboured for this purpose with the utmofi

zeal, and the adverse faction placed entire confi-
dence in his integrity, his endeavours could scarce
have failed of being fuccefsful. Maitland and Kir-
kaldy came so near to an agreement with him, that
scarce any thing remained, except the formality of
signing the treaty. But Morton had not forgot-
ten the disappointment he met with in his preten-
tions to the Regency; his abilities, his wealth, and
the patronage of the court of England, gave him
greater sway with the party, than even the Regent
himfif,; and he tool; pleasure in thwarting every

* )igges, 214. 26m.

mea-

measure pursued by him. He was afraid that, if B o o K
Maitland and his aifociates recovered any flare in VI.
the admliniflration, his own influence would be

-

considerably diminihed; and the Regent, by their
means, would regain that ascendant, which be-
longed to his tfation. With him, concurred all
thole, who were in poffefflon of the lands, which
belonged to any of the Queen's party. And his
ambition, and their avarice, frufcrated the Re-
gent's pious intentions, and retarded a biefing so
necefTary to the kingdom, as the establishment of
peace *.

SucH a discovery of the felfifhnefs and ambition tis aith,

which reigned among his party, made a deep im-
pression on the Regent, who loved his country, and
wished for peace with much ardour. This inward
grief broke his spirit, and by degrees brought on
a fettled melancholy, that ended in a distemper,
of which he died on the 29th of Otober. He
was, perhaps, the only person in the kingdom,
who could have enjoyed the office of Regent,
without envy, and have left it, without loss of
reputation. Notwithilanding their mutual ani-
mofities, both faltions acknowledged his views
to be honourable, and his integrity to be uncor-
rupted t.

No competitor now appeared againif Morton. :orto,

The Queen of England powerfully supported his

, u.

claim, and notwithilanding the fears of the peo- 'vel"*
ple, and the jealousy of the nobles, he was clec-ed
Regent; the fourth, who, in the fpac of five
years, had held that dangerous office.

* Melv. Z33. Crawf. Mern. 237.

. Id. 241.

D 3 As

B o o K As the truce had been prolonged to the first of

VI. January, this gave him an opportunity of continu-
S. i'ng the negotiations with the opposite party, which

had been set on foot by his predecessor. They pro-
duced no effeas, however, till the beginning of the

next year.

BEFORE we proceed to these, some events, hi-

therto untouched, defcrve our notice.

THE Earl of Northumberland, who had been

kept prisoner in Lochlevin, ever since his flight
into Scotland in the year 1569, was given up to
Lord Hunfdon governor of Berwick; and being
carried to York, fiuffered there the punishment of
his rebellion. The King's party were so fcnfible
of their dependence on Elizabeth's protecion, that
it was scarce polible for them to refuse putting
into her hands a person who had taken up arms
against her. But as a fum of money was paid, on
that account; and shared between Morton and
Douglas of Lochlevin, the former of whom, du-
ring his exile in England, had been much indebted
to Northumberland's friendship, the abandoning
this unhappy nobleman, in such a manner, to cer-
tain deltruation, was deemed an ungrateful and
mercenary aRion *.

Afirs of THis year was remarkable for a considerable in-
the church. novation in the government of the Church. Soon

afterthe Refcrmnation, the Popilh bishops had been
confirmed by law in poefcfion of part of their be-
nefices ,; but the spiritual jurisdiction, which be-
longed to their order, was exercised by fiperin-
tendants, though with more modeiare authority.

* Crawf. Mem. 55. 222. Camd. 445.

On the death of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, B o o
Morton obtained from the Crown a grant of the VI.
temporalities of that fee. But as it was thought '. -
indecent for a layman to hold a benefice, to which
the cure of fouls was annexed, lie procured Dou-
glas, recor of the University of St. Andrews, to
be chosen Archbishop; and allotting him a finall
pension out of the revenues of the fee, retained the
remainder in his own hands. The nobles, who
saw the advantages they might reap from such a
praaice, supported him in the execution of his
plan. It gave great offence, however, to the
Clergy, who, infRead of perpetuating an order,
whole name and power was odious to them,
wiled that the revenues which had belonged to
it, might be employed in supplying sech pariflies
as were still unprovided with fettled pastors. But
on the one hand, it would have been raflh in the
Clergy to have irritated, too much, noblemen, on
whom the very exi{tence of the Proteltant Church
in Scotland depended; and Morton, on the other,
conduted his scheme with such dexterity, and ma-
naged them with so much art, that it was, at las-,
agreed, in a convention compofcd of the leading
men among the Clergy, together with a committee
of privy council, " that the na-me and ofi~ce of
Archbilhop, and Eifhop, fhoukl be continued du,
ring the King's minority, i'nd tihe:i dignities be
conferred upon the belt qualified .mong the Pro-
teflant Miniliers; but that, with regard to their
fiiritual jurifdliions, they ihould lie ibihch. ro the
general aifembly of the Church." The Iule> s tr:
be observed in their ele ion ; and tlhe 5piurs ' !iho

D 4 V;CwereC

B o o K were tofupply the place, and enjoy the privileges,

VI. which belonged to the Dean and Chapter in times
1572. of Popery, were likewise particularly specified *.

And the whole being laid before the General As-
fembly, after some exceptions to the name of
Archbifjop, Dean, Chapter, &c. and a protefta-
tion that it should be considered only as a tempo-
rary constitution, till one more perse& could be
introduced, it obtained the approbation of that
court t. Even Knox, who was prevented from
attending the AlTembly by the ill slate of his
health, though he declaimed loudly against the
Simoniacal pa&ion, to which Douglas owed his
preferment, and blamed the nomination of a per-
son, worn out with age and infirmities, to an of-
fice, which required unimpaired vigour both of
body and mind, seems not to have condemned the
proceedings of the Convention ; and in a letter to
the Assembly, approved of some of their regula-
tions with refpecl to the Eletion of Bishops, as
worthy of being carefully observed J. In confe-
quence of the Affembly's consent to the plan
agreed upon in the Convention, Douglas was in-
flalled in his office, and at the fame time, an Arch-
bilhop of Giafgow, and a Bithop of Dunkeld,
were chosen from among the Protestant Clergy.
They were all admitted to the place in Parliament,
which belonged to the ecclesiastical order. But,
in imitation of the example set by Morton, fucli
bargains were made with them by different noble-

# Cald. ii. 30o. -i I.l. 3U.%
t See Appendix, No. v .

ieCl,

men, as gave them poffleflion only of a very small B oo oK
part of the revenues, belonging to their fees *. VI.

SooN after the dissolution of this assembly, Knox, "- 1S72.

the prime instrument offpreading and establishing Nov. f7.
the Reformed religion in Scotland, ended his life, Deah ,d
in the 67th year of his age. Zeal, intrepidity, dif- Kn"x.
interefiednefs, were virtues which he poffeffed, in
an eminent degree. He was acquainted, too, with
the learning cultivated in that age; and excelled
in that species of eloquence, which is calculated -
to rouse, and to inflame. His maxims, however,
were often too severe, and the impetuoficy of his
temper exceflive. Rigid and uncomplying himfclf,
he hewed no indulgence to the infirmities of others.
Regardless of the diftinEtions of rank and charac-
ter, he uttered his admonitions with an acrimony
and vehemence, more apt to irritate, than to re-
claim. This often betrayed him into indecent and
undutiful expreflions, with refpe(t to the Queen's
person and conduc. Those very qualities, how-
ever, which now render his character less amiable,
(itted him to be the infirument of Providence for
advancing the Reformation among a fierce people,
and enabled him to face dangers, and to surmount
opposition, from which a person of a more gen-
tle spirit would have been apt to firink back. By
an unwearied application to fludy and to bufinei,
as well as by the frequency and fervour of his pub-
lic discourses, he had worn out a confitction, na-
turally firong. During a lingering illnefi, he dif-
covered the utmofa fortitude; and nr: t the ap-

* Spots zG6.

i. real:c

B o o K proaches of death, with a magnanimity inseparable

VI. from his charater. He was conflantly employed
'' in acs of devotion, and comforted himself with
1572* those profpeats of immortality, which not only

preserve good men from defponding, but fill them
with exultation in their last moments. The Earl of
Morton, whowasprefent at his funeral, pronounced
his eulogium in a few words, the more honourable
for Knox, as they came from one whom he had
often censured with peculiar severity, C" There lies
He, who never feared the face of man *."

5j73. THOUGH Morton did no: desire peace from such

thre tr~nt generous motives as the former Regent, he labour-
treats with ^
the g(Qen's ed, however, in good earnest to establish it. The

public confusions and calamities, to which he
owed his power and importance when he was only
the second person in the nation, were extremely
detrimental to him, now that he was raised to be
the first. While so many of his nobles contlnued
in arms against him, his authority, as Regent,
was partial, feeble, and precarious. Elizabeth
was no less desirous of extinguishing the flame,
which file had kindled and kept so long alive in
Scotland I. She had discovered the alliance with
France, from which the had expeaed such ad-
vantages, to be no foundation of security. And
though appearances of friendciip ifill subsisted be-
tween her and that court, an, Charles daily re-
newed his protestations of inviolable adherence to
the treaty, ihe was convinced, by a fatal example,
how little fihe ought to rely on the promifcs or

* Spots. zC6. Cald. ii. 273. t Digges, 299.

I oaths

oaths of that perfidious Monarch. Her ambafia- B oo oK
dor warned her that the French held secret corre- VI.
fpondence with Mary's adherents in Scotland, and -
encouraged them in their obstinacy *. The Duke
of Alva carried on his intrigues in that kingdom,
with less disguise. She was persuaded that they
would embrace the first serene interval, which the
commotions in France and in the Netherlands
would allow them, and openly attempt to land in
Scotland. She resolved, therefore, to prevent
their getting any footing in the island, and to cut
off all their hopes of finding any aflifiance there,
by uniting the two parties.

THE fltuation of Mary's adherents enabled the is ov'er-

tu-es rI-

Regent to carry on his negotiations with them to t.j i.y
great advantage. They were now divided into two ~,',.
factions. At the head of the one, were Chatelbe- aO'.
rault and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy were
the leaders of the other. Their high rank, their
extensive property, and the numbers of their fol-
lowers, rendered the former considerable. The
latter were indebted for their importance, to their
personal abilities, and to the strength of the caflle
of Edinburgh, which was in their poffemon. The
Regent had no intention to comprehend both in
the fame treaty; but as he dreaded that the
Queen's party, if it remained entire, would be
able to thwart and embarrass his ad .iniitration,
he resolved to divide and weaken it, by a separate
negotiation. He made the first overture to Kir-
kaldy, and his associates, and endeavoured to re-

* Dirges, 296. 312.

1"I '#

B o o K ncw the negotiation with them, which, during

VI. the life of his predecessor, had been broken off

' 1" by his own artifices. But Kirkaldy knew Mor-

toil's views, and system of government, to be
very different from those of the former Regent.
Maitland considered him as a personal and impla-
cable enemy. They received repeated assurances
of protecion from France. And though the
siege of Rochelle employed the French arms at
that time, the fame hopes, which had so often de-
ceived the party, still amused them, and they ex-
pected that the obstinacy of the Hugonots would
loon be subdued, and that Charles would then be
at liberty to a&c with vigour in Scotland. Mean
while, a supply of money was sent, and if the
castle could be held out till Whitfunday, effec-
tual aid was promised *. Maitland's genius de-
lighted in forming fchcmes that were dangerous;
and Kirkaldy poffeffed the intrepidity necessary
for putting them in execution. The castle, they
knew, was so situated that it might defy all the
Regent's power. Elizabeth, they hoped, would
not violate the treaty with France, by sending
forces to his afitance; and if the French should
be able to land any considerable body of men, it
might be pomfble to deliver the Qieen from cap-
tivity, or at least to balance the influence of France
and England in such a manner, as to rescue Scot-
land from the d:Wfonourable dcpendance on the
latter, under which it had fallen. This splendid,
but chimerical proje&, they preferred to the friend.

* Di cge3, 3' .

ihLip

.hip of Morton. They encouraged the negotia- B o o K
tion, however, because it 'ferved to gain time; VI.
they proposed, for the fame purpose, that the whole _'"_'
of the Queen's party should be comprehended in
it, and that Kirkaldy fnould retain the command
of the castle fix months after the treaty was signed.
His interest prompted the Regent to reject the
former; his penetration discovered the danger of
complying with the latter; and all hopes of ac-
commodation vanished *.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to

fire on the city of Edinburgh, which, by the re-
turn of the inhabitants whom he had expelled, was
devoted as zealously as ever to the King's cause.
But as the Regent had now set on foot a treaty
with Chatelherault and Huntly, the cessation of
arms still continued with them.

THEY were less scrupulous than the other party, A-cent.d,

and listened eagerly to his overtures. The Duke Nu>l<na
was naturally unrteady, and the approach of old "'-"'
age increased his irresolution, and aversion to ac-
tion. The miseries of civil discord had afF.i&ed
Scotland almost five years, a length of time far be-
yond the duration of any former conteff. The war,
instead of doing service, had been detrimental to
the Queen ; and more ruinous than any foreign in-
vafion to the kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither
party had gained much honour; both had fuiffred
great losses; and had exhaufred their own estates,
in wasting those of their adversaries. The com-
mons were in the utmost misery, and longed ar-

S ,-l.l 235d, e.y

deriltv

B o o K dently for a peace, which might terminate this

VI. fruitless but deftruclive quarrel.

'573.

Artcl~es of
the treaty.
1kbJ. 13. A GREAT flep was taken towards this desirable

event, by the treaty concluded at Perth, between
the Regent on one hand, and Chatelherault and
Huntly on the other, under the mediation of Kil-
legrew, Elizabeth's Ambassador *. The chief arti-
cles in it were these; that all the parties compre-
hended in the treaty thould declare their approba-
tion of the Reformed religion, now established in
the kingdom; that theyfhould submit to the King's
government, and own Morton's authority as Re-
gent; that they should acknowledge every thing
done in opposition to the King, since his corona-
tion, to be illegal; that on both sides the prisoners
who had been taken should be set at liberty, and
the lands restored to their proper owners; that the
act of attainder passed against the Queen's adhe-
rents should be repealed, and indemnity granted
for all the crimes of which they had been guilty
since the ijth of June 1567; and that the treaty
thould be ratified by the common consent of both
parties in parliament t.

KIRKALDY, though abandoned by his associates,

who neither discovered solicitude nor made provi-
sion for his safety, did not lose courage, nor enter-
tain any thoughts of accommodation S . And

though

* See Append. No. VI. - Crawf. Mem. 25I.
T Melvil, whose brother, Sir Robert, was one of those who

joined with Kirkaldy in the defence of the castle, and who was
himself firongly attached to their party, aflerts that Kirkaldy
offered to accept of any reasonable terms of composition, but
that !1 his offers were recj ed by the Regent, Mclv. 240. But

as

Srge of the
clfiltc oC
Esin~urgh.

though all Scotland had now submitted to the B o o K
King, he still resolved to defend the caffle in the VI.
Queen's name; and to wait the arrival of the pro-
mifed succours. The Regent was in want of every
thing necessary for carrying on a siege. But Eli-
zabeth, who determined, at any rate, to bring the
dissensions in Scotland to a period, before the French
could find leisure to take part in the quarrel, soon
afforded him fufficient supplies. Sir William Dru-
ry marched into Scotland with 1500 foot, and a
considerable train of artillery. The Regent joined April 25.
him with all his forces; and trenches were opened
and approaches regularly carried on against the
castle. Kirkaldy, though discouraged by the loss
of a great fum of money, remitted to him from
France, and which fell into the Regent's hands
through the treachery of Sir James Balfour, the
most corrupt man of that age, defended himself
with bravery, augmented by despair. Three and
thirty days he resifted all the efforts of the Scotch
and English, who pushed on their attacks with
courage, and with emulation. Nor did he demand
a parly, till the fortifications were battered down,
and one of the wells in the castle dried up, and the

as Elizabeth was, at that time, extremely desirous ofreftoring
peace in Scotland, and her Ambassador Killegrew, as well as
the Earl of Rothes, used their utmcft endeavours to persuade
Kirkaldy to accede to the treaty of Perth, it seems more cre-
dible to impute the continuance of hostilities to Kirkaldy's
obstinacy, his diflruft of Morton, or his hope of foreign aid,
than to any other cause.

That this was really the cafe, is evident from the politi-e

testimony ofSpotfw. 269, 270. Camd. 448. Johnt. Iiift.
3, 4. Digge%, 334. Crawford'? accomnt agree?. in them.air,
with theirs, Mene. 263,

other

B o o K other choaked with rubbish. Even then, his fpi-

VI. rit was unfubdued, and he determined rather to
. .. fall gloriously behind the last intrenchment, than
1573. to yield to his inveterate enemies. But his gar-

rifon was not animated with the fame heroic or
desperate resolution, and rising in a mutiny, forced

sMy 29. him to capitulate. He surrendered himself to

Drury, who promiked, in the name of his miffrefs,
that he should be favourably treated. Together
with him, James Kirkaldy his brother, Lord
Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a few ci-
tizens of Edinburgh, and about 160 soldiers, were
made prisoners ÷.

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in

pay during the war, prevailed on their men to ac-
company them into the Low-countries, and enter-
ing into the service of the States, added, by their
gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military
virtue, which has always been the chara(teriftic cf
the Scottish nation.

Review of THUS by the treaty with Chatelherault and Hunt-
tr.f both ly, and the surrender of the castle, the civil wars in
P""·. Scotland were brought to a period. When we re-

view the ifate of the nation, and compare the
strength of the two fa&tions, Mary's partisans
among the nobles appear, manifestly, to have been
superior both in numbers and in power. But these
advantages were more than counterbalanced by
others, which their antagonists enjoyed. Political
abilities, military skill, and all the talents which
times of action form, or call forth, appeared thiefly
on the King's fide. Nor could their nein'ics uoaft

* Cald. ii.4o8. Melv. z40. Crawvf I' ;65g

bt any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur- B o OK
ray, tempered with wisdom; the profound fagaciry VI.
of Morton ; the subtle genius, and insinuating ad-
dress, of Maitland; or the fuccefsful valour of 1573.
* Kirkaldy; all which were, at first, employed in
laying the foundations of the King's authority.
On the one fide, measures were concerted with
prudence, and executed with vigour; on the
other, their resolutions were raflh, and their con-
duc& feeble. The people, animated with zeal for
religion, and prompted by indignation againit the
Queen, warmly supported the King's cause. The
Clergy threw the whole weight of their popularity
into the fame scale. By means of these, as well as
by the powerful interposition of England, the
King's government was finally eftabliihed. Mary
loft even that shadow offovereignty, which, amidst
all her fufferings, she had hitherto retained among
part of her own fubjeas. And as she was no longer
permitted to have an Ambassador at the court of
England, the only mark of dignity which the had,
for some time, enjoyed there, hne must henceforth
be considered as an exile stripped of all the ensigns
of royalty ; guarded with anxiety in the one king-
dom, and totally deserted or forgotten in the
other.

KIRKALDY and his associates remained in Dru- K;rkalJ

ry's cuflody, and were treated by him with great Put to
humanity, till the Qieen of England, whole pri-
foners they were, should determine their fate.
Morton insisted that they should fuffer the puniflh-
ment due to their rebellion and obifinacy; and
declared that, so longas they were allowed to live,

VoL. II. E he

B o o a he did not reckon his own person or authority fe-

VI. cure; and Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's

honour, or his promises in her name, gave them

7573. up to the Regent's disposal. He sirs confined

them to separate prisons; and, soon after, with

Augus 3. Elizabeth's consent, condemned Kirkaldy, and

his brother, to be hanged at the cross of Edin-
burgh. Maitland, who did not cxpect to be
treated more favourably, prevented the ignominy
of a public execution, by a volhintary death, and
" ended his days, i.ys Melvil, aftcr the old Ro-
man fashion *."

WHILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance

on the remains of her party in Scotland, Mary,
incapable of affording them any relief, bewailed
their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison. At
the fame time, her health began to be much im-
paired by confinement, and w ant of exercise. At
the entreaty of the French Ambairador, Lord
Shrewsbury her keeper v'as permitted to carry her
to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place
of her imprisonment. Cecil, who lately had been
created Baron of Burleigh, and Loid High Trea.
surer of England, happened to be there at the
fame time. And though no minifler ever entered
more warmly into the views of a Sovereign, or
gave fironger proofs of his fidelity and attach-
ment, than this great man, yet such was Eliza-
beth's difiruft of every person who approached
the Queen of Scots, that her fuplicions extended
even to him; and, while Mary juffly reckoned him
her most dangerous enemy, he found iome dil-

SMclv. 24?.

ficulty

ficulty in perfiading his own miflrefs that he was B o o K.
not partial to that unhappy Q.ieen *. VI.

THE Duke of Alva was this year recalled from 1573.

the government of the Netherlands, where his
haughty and oppreflive administration roused a
spirit, in attempting to subdue which, Spain ex-
hau{ted its treasures, ruined its armies, and loft
its glory. Requefens, who succeeded him, was
of a milder temper, and of a less enterpriting ge-
nius. This event delivered Elizabeth from the
perpetual disquietude, occasioned by Alva's ne-
gotiations with the Scottilh Queen, and his zeal
for her interest.

THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in pro- 1574.

found peace, many of the evils which accompany Tl'es_
civil war were ftil felt. The restraints of law, m niflr-

t n bee-

which, in times of public confusion, are little re- comes odi-
garded even by civilized nations, were totally de- °"5"
fpifed by a fierce people, unaccuffomed to the re-
gular administration ofjuftice. The disorders in
every corner of the kingdom were become intole-
rable; and, under the protecion of the one or the
other fation, crimes of every kind were committed
with impunity. The Regent set himself to redress
thefre, and, by his induitry and vigour, order and
security were re-established in the kingdom. But
he loft the reputation due to this important ser-
vice, by the avarice, which he discovered, in per-
forming it; and his own exactions became moie
pernicious to the nation than all the irregularities
which he renfrained t. Spies and informers were
every where employed; the remembrance of old

* Strype, ii. 248. 23. 1 See Append. No. VII.

E e offences

B o o K offences was revived; imaginary crimes were int

VI. vented; petty trespasses were aggravated; and
. delinquents were forced to compound for their

lives, by the payment of exorbitant fines. At
the fame time, the current coin was debafcd ",
licences were fold for carrying on prohibited
branches of commerce, unufoal taxes were iin-
posed on commodities; and all the refinements
in oppreflion, from which nations so imperfetly
polished as the Scots are usually exempted, were
put in pratice. None of these were complained
of more loudly, or with greater reason, than his
injustice towards the Church. The thirds of be-
nefices, out of which the Clergy received their
subsistence, had always been slowly and irregu-
larly paid to colleaors, appointed by the General
Assembly; and, during the civil wars, no pay-
ment could be obtained in several parts of the
kingdom. Under colour of redreftEng this griev-
ance, and upon a promise of afilgning every Mi-
rifter a flipend within his own parish, the Regent
extorted from the Church the thirds to which they
had right by law. But the Clergy, inlead of
reaping any advantage from this alteration, found

* The corruption of the coin, during Morton's admini

firation, was very great. Althougih the quantity of current
money coined out of a pound of Bullion, \was gradually in-
creased by former princes; the fiandard or finencfs fuffered
little alteration, and the mixture of alloy v as nearly the fame
with what is now used. But Morton mixed a fourth part of
alloy with every pound of silver, and funk, by consequence,
the value of coin in proportion. In the ear 1581, all the
money coined by him was called in, and appointed to be
recoined. The flandard was refiorcd to the fame purity as
formerly. Ruddim. Prrxf. to Anders. Diplom. p. 74.

that payments became more irregular and dilatory B oo oK
than ever. One Minister was commonly bur- VI.
dened with the care of four or five parishes, a .v.

S574.

pitiful salary was allotted him, and the Regent's
insatiable avarice seized on the reft of the fund *.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this

year, was a new misfortune to the Scottifhi Queen.
Henry III. who succeeded him, had not the fame
attachment to her person; and his jealousy of the
house of Guise, and obsequiousness to the Qujeen
Mother, greatly alienated him from her interest.

THE death of the Duke of Chatelherault mufr I575.

likewise be considered as some loss to Mary. As J*"' 2Z
the Parliament had frequently declared him next
heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great re-
speCt among his countrymen, and enabled him,
more than any other person in the kingdom, to
counterbalance the Regent's power.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews be-

tween the wardens of the Scottish and Englith
marches, a fcuffle happened, in which the English
were worited; a few killed on the spot; and Sir
James Forrester, the warden, with several gentle-
men who attended him, taken prisoners. But both
Elizabeth and the Regent were too sensible of the
advantage which resulted from the good under-
standing that subsisted between the two kingdoms,
to allow this flight accident to interrupt it.

THE domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was Atermpts of

in some danger of being disturbed by another cause. agft
Though the persons, railed to the dignity of Bi- Eprfop^d
shops, poffeffed very finall revenues, and a very

* Crawf. Mem. 272. Spots. 273. Cald. ii. 420. 427.

E 3 moderate

33 oo K moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom

VI the Regent and all his meatures were become cx-

L. .--- trcmely odicts, began to be jealous of that older,

75Knowing that corruptions iteal into the Church
gradually, under honourable names, and upon de-
cent pretences, they were afraid that, fioin fich
imall beginnings, the hierarchy might grow in
in time, to be as powerful and oppreffi; e as ever.
The chief author of there suspicions was MIr. An-
drew Melvil, a man, difringuiflhed by his uncom-
mon erudition, by the severity of his manners, and
the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
rciitement of an academy, he was unacquainted
with the arts of life ; and being more attentive to
the eils which he purfuied, than to the means
which he employed for promoting them, lie often
defeated laudable designs, by the impetuosity and
imprudence with which he cairied them on. A
quefiion was moved by him in the assembly,
" whether the office of Bishop, as now exercised
in the kingdom, were agreeable to the word of
God?" In the ecclesiastical judicatories, conti-
nual complaints were made of the Bishops for ne-
glect of duty, m ny of which their known re-
miffnel' too well juIlified. The Biliop of Dun-
keld, being accufcd of dilapidating his benefice,
was found guilty by the assembly. And the Re-
gent, intfead of checking, connived at these dil-
putes about ecclesiastical government, as they
diverted the zeal of the Clergy from attending to
his daily encoachments on the patrimony of the
Church *.

* (Cald. A~iTh~able , I574, &-c. JohlnfL H-ilL rS.

THE weight of the Regent's oppressive admini- B o o K

flration had, hitherto, fallen chiefly on those in the VI.
lower and middle rank ; but he began now to 1576.
take itch fleps, as convinced the nobles, that e nirritates

S1rome of the

their dignity would not long exempt them from nobles.
feeling the effects of his power. An accident,
which was a frequent cause of dissension among
the Scottish nobles, occasioned a difference be-
tween the Earls of Argyll and Athol. A vassal
of the former had made some depredations on the
lands of the latter. Athol took arms to punilh
the offender; Argyll, to protect him; and this
ignoble quarrel they were ready to decide in the
field, when the Regent, by interposing his autho-
rity, obliged them to disband their forces. Both
of them had been guilty of irregularities, which,
though common, were contrary to the letter of
the law. Of there the Regent took advan-
tage, and resolved to found on them a charge of
treason. This design was revealed to the two
Earls by one of Morton's retainers. The common
danger, to which they were exposed, compelled
them to forget old quarrels, and to unite in a close
confederacy, for theirmutual defence. Theirjunc-
tion rendered them formidable; they despised the
summons which the Regent gave them to appear
before a court of justice; and he was obliged to
desist florm any further prosecution. But the in-
jury he intended made a deep imprefion on their
minds, and drew on him severe vengeance *.

NOR was he more fuccefsful in an attempt, which

he made, to load Lord Claud Hamilton with the

* Crawf. Mcm. 285.

E 4 guilt

B o o guilt of having formed a conspiracy against his

'VI. life. Though those, who were supposed to be hiS

Saccomplices, were seized, and tortured, no evi-

dence of any thing criminal appeated; but, on
the contrary, many circumstances difcovcred his
innocence, as well as the Regent's fecict views,
in imputing to him such an odious design *.

turhn^ THE Scottish Nobles, who were almost equal

tcr ards tle to their Monarchs in power, and tieated by them

with much diltinaion, observed these arbitrary
proceedings of a Regent with the utmoll indig-
nation. The people, who, under a form of go-
vernment extremely simple, had been little ac-
cuftomed to the burden of tax-s, complained
loudly of the Regent's rapacity. And all began
to turn their eyes towards the young King, from
whom they expeaed the redress of all their griev-
ances, and the return of a more gentle and more
equal administration.

ame,,'s JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age.
education The Queen, soon after his birth, had committed
a;on. him to the care of the Earl of Mar, and during the

civil wars he had resided securely in the caffle of
Stirling. Alexander Erflkine, that nobleman's
brother, had the chief dirction of his education.
Under him, the famous Buchanan aced as pre-
ceptor, together with three other matters, the
most eminent the nation afforded for skill in those
sciences which were deemed necefary for a prince.
The young King fhewed an uncommon pafflion
for learning, and made great progress in it. And
yhe Scots fancied that they already discovered in

* Crawf. \cmn. z87.

h^im

him, all those virtues which the fondness or cre- B o o
dulity of subjects ufiually ascribe to princes during VI.
their minority. But as James was iill far from
that age at which the law permitted him to as- I577"
fume the reins of government, the Regent did
not fufficiently attend to the sentiments of the
people, nor refleEt, how naturally these prejudices
in his favour might encourage the King to anti-
cipate that period. He not only negle(ed to fe-
cure the friendship of those who were about the
King's person, and who poffeffed his ear, but had
even exafpcrated some of them by personal in-
juries. Their reflntment concurred with the am- n~i

.. th

bition of others, in infusing into the King early RgaOi's
lifpicions of Morton's power and designs. A
King, they told him, had often reason to fear,
seldom to love, a Regent. Prompted by ambi-
tion, and by interest, he would endeavour to
keep the Prince in perpetual infancy, at a distance
from his fubjecis, and unacquainted with business.
A finall degree of vigour, however, was fufficient
to break the yoke. Subjets naturally reverence
their Sovereign, and become impatient of the tem-
porary and delegated iurifliction of a Regent.
Morton had governed with rigour, unknown to the
ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The nation groan-
ed under his opprefilons; and would welcome the
firif profped of a milder administration. At pre-
sent theKing's name was scarce mentioned in Scot-
land, his friends were without influence, and his
favourites without honour. But one effort would
4tifcover Morton's power to be as feeble, as it was
arbitrary. The fame attempt would put himself

in

B o o K in pofleffion of his just authority, and refcuc the

VI. nation from intolerable tyranny. If he did not

--""'~' regard his own rights as a King, let him litten, at
1577 leal-, to the cries of his people t.
A plot TiHESE fl geCllions made a deep imrrcmfion on
fornmed a-
dt,,. the young King, who was trained up in an opinion
clb"".. that he wa.s born to command. Hiis approbation

of the design, however, was of fInall consequence,
without the concurrence of the nobles. The
Earls of Argyll and Athol, two of the most power-
ful of that body, were animatcd with implacable
resentment againfi the Regent. 'I o them the Ca-
bal in Stirling-caftle commnunicated the plot which
was on foot; and they entering warmly into it,
Alexander Lrfkine, who, since the death of his
brother, and during the mlnoritv of his nephew,
had the command of that fort, and the cuflody of
the King's person, admitted them secretly into
the King's presence. They gave him the fame
account of the misery of his lubjects, under the
Regent's arbitrary administration ; they complain-
ed loudly of the iniuitice w ith which themselves
had been treated, and bcfou:'ht the King, as the
only means for redrefing the grievances of the
nation, to call a council of all the nobles. James
consented, and letters were ilTued, in his name,
for that purpose; but the two Earls took care
that they should be sent only to fuich as were
known to bear no good will to Morton -.

THE number of these was, however, so incon-

fiderable, that, on the day appointed, far the

* Mlv!, 249. f e 2 rete78.

greater

greater part of the nobles assembled at Stirling; B oo oK
and so highly were they incensed against Morton, VI.
that although, on receiving intelligence of Argyll
and Athol's interview w ith the King, he had Mra578.

* made a feint as if he would resign the Regency,

they advised the King, without regarding this of-
ser, to deprive him of his office, and to take the
administration of government into his own hands.
Lord Glamis the Chancellor, and Herries, were
appointed to signify this resolution to Morton,
who was, at that time, in Dalkeith, his usual
place of retidcnce. Nothing could equal the jcy Her',gs

"is feei ,

with which this unexpected resolution fiiled the ,na reties,
nation, but the ilrprile occalioned by the leemcing
alacrity wich which the Regent descended from oib
high a flation. lie neither wanted tiagacity to
forefece the danger of resigning, nor inclination to
keep pociffion of an offce, for the expiration of
which the law had fixed so difiant a term. But
all the sources, whence the fadtion of which he
was head, derived their firength, had either failed,
or now supplied his adverharies with the means of
humbling him. The Commons, the city of Edin-
burgh, the Clergy, were all totally alienated from
him, by his multiplied oppreffions. Elizabeth,
having lately bound herself by treaty, to fend a
considerable body of troops to the afTiftance of the
inhabitants of the Nethcrlands, who were ftrug-
gling for liberty, had little leisure to attend to the
affairs of Scotland; and as the had nothing to
dread from France, in whole councils the Princes
of Lorrain had not, at that time, much infuence,
she was not displeased, perhaps, at the birth of

new

B o o K new fiaiions in the kingdom. Even those nobles,

VI. who had long been joined with Morton in faEtion,

or whom he had attached to his person by be-
nefits, Glamis, Lindsay, Ruthven, Pitcairn the
fccretarv, Murray of Tillibardin Comptroller, all
dcierted his falling fortunes, and appeared in the
council at Stirling. So many concurring circum-
stances convinced Morton of his own weakness,
and determined him to give way to a torrent,

March iz. which n as too impetuous to be rcfi~ed. He at-

tended the Chancellor and IHerries to Edinburgh;
was present when the King's acceptance of the
government was proclaimed ; and, in the presence
of the people, surrendered to the King all the
authority to which he had any claim in virtue of
his office. This ceremony was accompanied with
such excessive joy and acclamations of the mul-
titude, as added, no doubt, to the anguish which
an ambitious spirit mufft feel when compelled to
renounce lupreme power ; and convinced Morton
how entirely he had loft the affecions of his coun-
trymen. He obtained, however, from the King,
an act, containing the approbation of every thing
done by him in the exercise of his office, and a
pardon, in the most ample form that his fear or
caution could devise, of all past offences, crimes,
and treafons. The nobles, who adhered to the
King, bound themselves, under great penalty, to
procure the ratification of this at, in the first par-
liament *.

* Spots. 278. Crawf. Mem. 2S9. Cald. ii. 522.

A couN.

A COUNCIL of twelve Peers was appointed to B o o K

aflift the King in the adminiffration of affairs. VI.
And Morton, deserted by his own party, and un-

I"

able to struggle with the facion, which governed co,,,n,,es"
absolutely at court, retired to one of his feats, .." t,
and seemed to enjoy the tranquillity, and to be of ,t,-a1-

verse party.

occupied only in the amusements, of a country
life. His mind, however, was deeply difquieted
with all the unealy reflctions which accompany
disappointed ambition, and intent on schemes for
recovering his former grandeur. Even in this
retreat, which the people called the L.ion's-den, his
wealth and abilities rendered him formidable.
And the new Counsellors were so imprudent as to
rouse him, by the precipitancy with which they
hastened to strip him of all the remains of power.
They required him to surrender the cattle of
Edinburgh, which was flill in his poeffelon. He
refused at first to do so, and began to prepare for
its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having
taken arms, and repulsed part of the garrison,
which was sent out to guard a convoy of provi-
lions, he was obliged to give up the important
fortress, without resistance. This encouraged his
advertaries to call a parliament to meet at Edin-
burgh, and to multiply their demands upon him,
in such a manner, as convinced him that nothing
less than his utter ruin would satisfy their inve-
terate hatred.

THEIR power and popularity, however, began

already to decline. The Chancellor, the ablcit
and most moderate man in the party, having been
killed at Stirling, in an accidental rencontre be-

tween

B o OK twcen his followers and thlofe of the Earl of

VI. Crawford; Athol, who was appointcd his fuc-
--"- ' ceffor in that high offce, the Ea.iJs of Egling-

ton, Cathncfs, and Lord Ogilvie, all the prime
favourites at court, were eit!her avowed Papifts,
or fufpeccd of leaning to the opinions of that
feEt. In an age, when the return of popery was
tb much and tb jufftly dreaded, this gave uni-
versal alarm. And as Morton had always treated
the Papisx with rigour, this unr·afonable in-
dulgence made all zealous Protestants remember
that circumriftance in his adminiilration with great
praise *.

Refim

. his Ion.rox, to wh.om none o' th.'eC particulars

former au-
thority. were unknowvn, thought this the proper juncture

for fcttin g to work the infirnmen's w!hich he had
becn preparing. Having gained the confi'lence
of the Earl of Mar, and of the Countess his mo-
ther, he insinuated to therm th.at Al-.ani ier Erikine
had formed a plot to deprive hi.s n acew of the go-
vernment of Stirling-caftle, and the culody of
the King's person; and eaily iniduced an ambi-
tious woman, and a youth oi t\went:\, to employ
force to prevent this fuppotid injury. The Earl
repairing suddenly to Stirling, and being admit-
ted, as usual, into the caste with his attendants

April 26. seized the gates early in the morning, and turned

out his Uncle, who dreaded no danger from his
hands. The foldicrs of the garrison submitted to
him as t:heir govw rnor, and, with little danger
and no efiufion of blood, he became mafcer both
of the King's person, and of the fortress T.

* Spots. z8S. t Crid. ii. 535"

AN event so unexpeaed occasioned great con- B o o K

frernation. And though Morton's hand did not VI.
appear in the execution, he was universally be-

- -
I578.

lieved to be the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors saw it to be nccelTary, for their own
safety, to change their measures, and, initead of
pursuing him n ith such implacable resentment, to
enter into terms of accommodation with an ad-
verfary, still to capable of creating them trouble.
Four were named, on each fide, to adjust their
differences. They met not far from Dalkeith.
And when they had brought matters near a con-
clufion, Morton, who was too sagacious not to
improve the advantage which their security and
their attention to the treaty afforded him, set out
in the night-time for Stirling, and having gained Ma; >.
Murray of Tillibardin, Mar's uncle, was admit-
ted by him into the castle ; and managing matters
there with his usual dexterity, he loon had more
entirely the command of the fort, than the Earl
himself. He was likewise admitted to a feat in
the privy council, and acquired the fame afccnd-
ant in it *.

As the time appointed for the meeting of par-

liament at Edinburgh now approached, this gave
him some anxiety. HIe was afraid of carrying the
young King to a city, whose inhabitants were so
much at the devotion of the adverse fation. He
was no lels unwilling to leave James behind at
Stirling. In order to avoid this dilemma, he if-
sued a proclamation, in the King's name, chan-
ging the place of meeting from Edinburgh to

SCa!d. ii. 5 36.

Stirling-

B o o K Sciriing-cafle. Th!is Athol an:d his party rep're-

VI. tented as a flep alioc-ther uncon ijtu tional. The
1578 EKing, laid they, is Morton's lrilonr; tilhe pre-

58" tended counsellors are his tl,·v'-s; a parliament,

to which all the nobles may repair without fear,
and where they may deliberate with freedom, is
abfoiutely necessary for lettling the nation, after
dioirders of tich long continuance. But in an
assembly, called contrary to all form, held within
the walls of a garrison, and overawed by armed
men, what safety could members expec ? what
liberty could prevail in debate ? or what benefit

Ju'y 5. result to the public ? The Parliament met, how-

ever, on the day appointed, and, notwithstanding
the proteflation of the Earl of Montrolc and Lord
Lindsay, in name of their party, proceeded to
business. The King's acceptance of the govern-
ment was confirmed; the acd granted to Morton,
for his fccurity, ratified, ; ,me regulations, with
regard to the numbers and au.loritv of the privy
council, were agreed upon; and a pcnfion for
life granted to the Countels of Mar, who had
been so inltrumental in bringing about the late
revolution *.

Aryhl and MEANWHILE, Argyll, Athol, and their follow-
thl Atake
:i..as 3.ant ers, took arms, upon the specious pretence of re-

. cing the King from captivity, and the kingdom
from opprcirion. Janecs himself, impatient of the
fcrvitude in which he was held, by a man whom he
Lad long been taught to hate, secretly encouraged
their enterprise ; though, at the fame time, he was
obliged not only to disavow them in public, but

* Cald. ii. 547. Parl. 5 Jac. VI.

to levy forces against them, and even to declare, by B oo Mo
proclamation, that he was perfectly free from any VI.
constraint, either upon his person, or his will. Both

-

sides quickly took the field. Argyll and Athol
were at the head of 7000 men; the Earl of Angus,
IMorton's nephew, met them with an army 5000 Augsuft .
strong; neither party, however, was eager to en-
gages Morton distrusted the fidelity of his own
troops. The two Earls were sensible that a tingle
victory, however complete, would not be decifivei
and as they were in no condition to undertake the
siege of Stirling castle, where the King was kept,
their tfrength would focn be exhaufied, while Mor-
ton's own wealth, and the patronage of the Queen
of England, might furnish him with en'!lefs re-
sources. By the mediation of Bowes, whom Eli-
zabeth had sent into Scotland to negotiate an ac-
commodation between the two factions, a treaty rrza!e!i
was concluded, in consequence of which, Argyll nga",
and Athol were admitted into the King's presence;

,o,

some of their party were added to the Privy Coun- th~e;.
cil; and a Convention of nobles called, in order
to bring all remaining differences to an amicable
issue *.

So soon as James assumed the government into

his own hands, he dispatched the Abbot of Dun-
fermling to inform Elizabeth of that event; to of-
ser to renew the alliance between the two king-
doms; and to demand pofreffion of the efiatc,
which had lately fallen to him by the death of his
grandmother, the Counters of Lennox. That La-
dy's second son had left one daughter, Arabella

* Crawf. Mem. 307,

VOL, II. F Stewart,

B o o K Stcwart, who was born in England. And as the

VI. chief objeation against the pretensions of the Scot-

titlh line to the Crown of England, was that maxim

J of English law, which excludes aliens from any

right of inheritance within the kingdom, Eliza-
beth, by granting this demand, would have efta-
blifbed a precedent in James's favour, that might
have been esteemed decisive, with regard to a
point, which it had been her conflant care to keep
undecided. Without fuffering this delicate quef.
tlon to be tried, or allowing any new light to be
thrown on that, which the considered as the great
myllery of her reign, fie commanded the rents
of the estate to be fequefrered by Lord Burleigh,
Master of the Wards; and by this method of pro-
ceeding, gave the Scottish King early warning
how necessary it would be to court her favour, if
ever he hoped for success in claims of greater im-
portance, but equally liable to be controverted*.

1579. AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty,

the contending nobles were at lafl brought to some
agreement. But it was followed by a tragical
event. Morton, in token of reconcilement, hav-
ing invited the leaders of the opposite party to a

April 4,. great entertainment, Athol the Chancellor was,

soon after, taken ill, and died within a few days.
The symptoms and violence of the disease gave
rife to firong suspicions of his being poisoned; and
though the physicians, who opened his body, dif-
fered in opinion as to the cause of the ditfemper,
the Chancellor's relations publicly accused Mor-
ton of that odious crime. The advantage which

* Camd. 46x.

visibly

visibly accrued to him, by the removal of a man B o o K
of great abilities, and averse from all his measures, VI.
was fufficient proof of his guilt to the people, who -
are ever fond of imputing the death of eminent
persons to extraordinary causes *.

THE office of Chancellor was belftowed upon Moron's il.

Argyll, whom this preferment reconciled, in a ceJeba
great measure, to Morton's administration. He

o

had now recovered all the authority he poffeffed Hamlmton,
during his Regency, and had entirely broken, or
baffled, the power and cabals of his enemies.
None of the great families remained to be the ob-
jecs of his jealousy, or to obftrua his designs,
but that of Hamilton. The Earl of Arran, the
eldest brother, had never recovered the shock
which he received from the ill success of his pas-
sion for the Queen, and had now altogether loft
his reason. Lord John, the second brother, was
in poffeffion of the family estate. Lord Claud was
Commendator of Paisley; both of them young
men, ambitious, and enterprising. Morton dread-
ed their influence in the kingdom ; the courtiers
hoped to share their spoils among them; and as
all Princes naturally view their successors with jea-
lousy and hatred, it was easy to infuse these passions
into the mind of the young King. A pretence
was at hand tojuftify the most violent proceedings.
The pardon, stipulated in the treaty of Perth, did
not extend to those who were accessary to the mur-
der of the Regents Murray or Lennox. Lord
John and his brother were fuifpeed of being the
authors of both these crimes, and had been in-

" Spotfw. 306.

F ~

eluded

B o o K cluded in a general at of attainder on that ac-

VI. count. Without fimmoning them to trial, or ex-

amining a tingle witness to prove the charge, this
attainder was now thought fufficient to fubjeft
them to all the penalties which they would have
incurred by bei>g formally convicted. The Earls
of i.Morton, Niar, and Eglinton, together with
the iords IRuthvcn, Boyd, and Cathcart, received
a commiftion to ieize their persons and cftates.
On a few hours warning, a conliderable body of
troops was ready, and marcLed towards Hamil-
ton in hoffile array. Happily the two brothers
made their efeape, thou h with great difTiculty.
But their lands were confilcated ; the caiLles of
Hamilton and Draffan besieged; those wlho de-
fended them punifled. The Earl of Arran, though
incapable, from his ituation, of committing any
crime, was involved, by a flhamcful abuse of law,
in the common ruin of his family ; and as if he,
too, could have been guilty of rebellion, confined
a close prisoner. Thefre proceedings, so contrary
to the fundamental principles of juflice, were all
ratified in the subsequent parliament ".

ABOUT th;s time Mary sent, by Nauc her fecre-

tary, a letter to her son, together with some jewels
of value, and a vest embroidered with her own
hands. But as the gave him only the title of Prince
of Scotland, the meffcngcr was difmihifd, with-
out being admitted into his presence t.

'THOcGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no parti-

cular reason to fear any attempt of the Pop:ih

*Crawf. Mem. -11 . po:iw. ;c6.
| Crwf'. I~em. 3;4.

Princes

Princes in Mary's favour, she still continued to B oo K
guard her with the tame anxious care. Tie ac- VI.
quilition of Portugal, on the one hand, and the
defence of the Netherlands, on the other, fully
employed the councils and arms of Spain. France,
torn in pieces by intestine commotions, and under
a weak and capricious Prince, defpied anddiftruft-
ed by his own fubjeats, was in no condition to
disturb its neighbours. Elizabeth had long amused N-oo;a-

tions for a

that court by carrying on a treaty of marriage .m. i,
with the Duke of Alencon, the King's brother,. Z:"n .,
But whether, at the age of forty-five, The really kd~

h,

intended to marry a Prince of twenty? whether Aien.m.
the pleasure of being flattered and courted, made
her listen to the addresses of so young a lover,
whom fie allowed to visit her at two different
times, and treated with the most distinguishing
refoect ? or whecther considerations of interef:
predominated in this, as well as in every other
tranfaftion of her reign, are problems in hifiory
which we are not concerned to resolve. During
the progreis of this negotiation, which was drawn
out to an extraordinary length, Mary could ex-
pe& no assistance from the French court, and teems
to have held little correspondence with it. And
there was no period in her reign, wherein Eliza-
beth enjoyed more perfect security.

MORTON seems at this time to have been equal- Two\ o

ly secure; but his security was not so well found- v". au.,
ed. He had weathered out one storm, had crufil- ".n....

oUer james,

ed his adveriaries, and was again in poefiicon of
the sole direrion of affairs. But as the King was
Sow of an age, when the chLradter and d;i~pol:ions

B o o K of the mind begin to unfold themselves, and to

VI. become visible, the finalleft attention to these

L"" " might have convinced him, that there was reason

to expeca new and more dangerous attacks on his
power. James early discovered that excellive at-
tachment to favourites, which accompanied him
through his whole life. This passion, which na-
turally arises from inexperience, and youthful
warmth of heart, was, at his age, far from being
culpable; nor could it well be expeted that the
choice of the objets, on whom he placed his as-
felions, should be made with great skill. The
most considerable of them was Efme Stewart, a
native of France, and son of a second brother of
the Earl of Lennox. He was distinguished by the
title of Lord D'Aubigne, an estate in France,
which descended to him from his ancelfors, on
whom it had been conferred, in reward of their
valour and services to the French Crown. IHe ar-

Sept.

. rived in Scotland, about this time, on purpose to

demand the estate and title of Lennox, to which
he pretended a legal right. He was received, at
firfl, by the King with the respect due to so near
a relation. The gracefulness of his person, the
elegance of his dress, and his courtly behaviour,
made a great impremion on James, who, even in
his more mature years, was little able to resist
these frivolous charms; and his affection fiowed
with its usual rapidity and profusion. Within a
few days after Stewart's appearance at court, he
was created Lord Aberbrothock, soon after Earl,
and then Duke of Lennox, Governor of Dunbar-
pon caftie, Captain of the guard, first Lord of the

bed.

bed-chamber, and Lord High Chamberlain. At B o o K
the fame time, and without any of the envy or VI.
emulation which is usual among candidates for

, I579.

favour, Captain James Stewart, the second son of
Lord Ochiltree, grew into great confidence. But
notwithstanding this union, Lennox and Captain
Stewart were persons of very opposite characers.
The former was naturally gentle, humane, can-
did ; but unacquainted with the state of the coun-
try, and milled, or misinformed by those whom
he truffed; not unworthy to be the companion of
the young King in his amusements, but utterly
disqualified for acting as a Miniffter in directing
his affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the
vices which render a man formidable to his coun-
try, and a pernicious counsellor to his Prince;
nor did he pofiefs any one virtue to counterbalance
these vices, unless a dexterity in conducting his
own designs, and an enterprising courage, fupe-
rior to the sense of danger, may pass by that
name. Unrestrained by religion, regardless of
decency, and undismayed by opposition, he aim-
ed at objects seemingly unattainable; but under
a Prince void of experience, and blind to all the
defeCts of those who had gained his favour, his
audacity was fuccefsful; and honours, wealth,
and power, were the reward of his crimes.

BOTH the favourites concurred in employing They labour

to under-

their whole address to undermine Morton's cre- ie,, Mor-
dit, which alone obftrufted their full poffclTon of tr' utho.

power. And as James had been bred up with an
aversion for that nobleman, who endeavoured ra-
ther to maintain the authority of a Tutor, than

F 4 to

B o o to a& with the obsequiousness of a miniffer, they

VI. found it no difficult matter to accomplish their

design. Morton, who could no longer keep the

'579,
OaPb. 17. King Ihut up within the walls of Stirling-caftle,

having called a parliament to meet at Edinburgh,
brought him thither. James made his entry into
the capital with great solemnity; the citizens re,
ceived him with the loudest acclamations of joy,
and with many expensive pageants, according tQ
the mode of that age. After a long period of
thirty-feven years, during which, Scotland had
.been fubje&ed to the delegated power of Regents,
or to the feeble government of a woman, and had
fuffered all the miseries of civil war, and felt the
-insolence of foreign armies, the nation rejoiced
to fee the sceptre once more in the hands of a.
King. Fond even of that shadow of authority,
which a Prince of fifteen could possess, the Scots
flattered themselves, that union, order, and trans.
quillity would now be restored to the kingdom.
James opened the parliament with extraordinary
pomp, but nothing remarkable passed in it.

THESE demonfirations, however, of the people's

love and attachment to their Sovereign, encou-
raged the favourites to continue their infinuations'
against Morton; and as the King now resided in
the palace of Haly-rud-houfe, to which all his
fubjeas had access, the cabal against the Earl
grew daily stronger, and the intrigue, which oct
cafioned his fall, ripened gradually.

iyorton en- MORTON began to be sensible of his danger,
heavours to - *' ' '-
event and endeavoured to put a stop to the career of
'em' tennox's preferment, by representing him as a

for»

foramidable enemy to the Reformed Religion, a B o o Ki
secret agent in favour of Popery, and a known VI.
emifiary of the house of Guise. The clergy, apt
to believe every rumour of this kind, spread the 1580.
alarm among the people. But Lennox, either
out of complaisance to his mafier, or convinced
by the arguments of some learned Divines, whom
the King appointed to inftruit him in the prin-
ciples of the Protestant Religion, publicly re-
nounced the errors of Popery, in the Church of
St. Giles, and declared himself a member of the
Church of Scotland, by signing her Confeffion
of Faith. This, though it did not remove all
suspicions, nor silence some zealous preachers,
abated, in a great degree, the force of the ac-
cufation *.

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that

Morton was preparing to seize the King's person,
and to carry him into England. Whether despair
of maintaining his power by any other means,
had driven him to make any overture of that
kind to the English court, or whether it was a
calumny invented by his adversaries to render
him odious, cannot now be determined with cer-
tainty. As he declared at his death that such a
design had never entered into his thoughts, the
latter seems to be most probable. It afforded a
pretence, however, for reviving the office of
Lord Chamberlain, which had been for some time
disused. That honour was conferred on Lennox.
Alexander Erskine, Morton's capital enemy, was

* rrvf. Mem. 319. Spots. 308.

B o o K his deputy; they had under them a band of Gen-

VI. tlemen, ,who were appointed constantly to attend

11 the King, and to guard his person *.
EIZ.abhh MO'RTON was not ignorant of what his enemies
tbpof~i.fl" intended to insinuate by such unutial precautions

for the King's safety ; and as his lal resource, ap-
plied to Elizabeth, whose prote&ion had often
flood him in stead in his greatest difficulties. In
consequence of this application, Eowes her En-
voy accufcd Lennox of pratices againif the
peace of the two kingdoms, and insisted, in her
name, that he thould inifantly be removed from
the Privy Council. Such an unprecedented de-
mand was considered by the Counfcllors as an as-
front to the King, and an encroachment on the
independence of the kingdom. They affeted to
call in question the Envoy's powers, and upon
that pretence refused him farther audience; and
he retiring in disgust, and without taking leave,
Sir Alexander Home was sent to expostulate with
Elizabeth on the fubjea. After the treatment
which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth thought
it below her dignity to admit Home into her pre-
fence. Burleigh, to whom he was commanded
to impart his commiflion, reproached him with
his maiter's ingratitude towards a benefacrefs,
who had placed the Crown on his head, and re-
quired him to advise the King to beware of fa-
crificing the friendship of so necessary an ally to
the giddy humours of a young man, without ex-
perience, and strongly suspected of principles,

* Crawf. Merm. 30.o,

and attachments, incompatible with the happiness B o o K
of the Scottish nation. VI.

THIS accusation of Lennox haflened, in all pro- 1580.

bability, Morton's fall. The at of indemnity, Morion ac-
which he had obtained when he resigned the Re-

m uer of

gency, was worded with such scrupulous exact- tI',e
ness, as almost screened him from any legal pro-
fecution. The murder of the late King was the
only crime which could not, with decency, be
inserted in a pardon granted by his son. Here
Morton still lay open to the penalties of the law.
And Captain Stewart, who shunned no aCtion,
however desperate, if it led to power or to favour,
entered the council-chamber while the King and
nobles were assembled, and falling on his knees,
accused MVlorton of being accessary, or according Decem. 30.
to the language of the Scottish law, art and part,
in the conspiracy against the life of his Majefty's
father, and offered, under the usual penalties, to
verify this charge by legal evidence. Morton,
who was present, heard this accusation with firm-
ners; and replied with a disdainful smile, pro-
ceeding either from contempt of the infamous
characer of his accuser, or from confcioufiefs of
his own innocence, "C that his known zeal in pu-
niflhing those who were fufpeted of that detestable
crime, might well exempt himself from any sus-
picion of being accessary to it; nevertheless, he
would cheerfully submit to a trial, either in that
place, or in any other court; and doubted not
but his own innocence, and the malice of his ene-
mies, would then appear in the clearest light."
Stewart, who was fill on his knees, began to en-

1 quire

B o o K quire how he would reconcile his beftowing so

VI. many honours on Archibald Douglas, whom he

'C certainly knew to be one of the murderers, with

his pretended zeal against that crime. Morton
was ready to answer. But the King commanded

1581. both of them to be removed. The Earl was
Jnuary '. confined, first of all, to his own house, and then

committed to the caitle of Edinburgh, of which
Alexander Erskine was Governor; and as if it had
not been a fufficient indignity to subject him to
the power of one of his enemies, he was, soon
after, carried to Dunbarton, of which Lennox

Jan. s8. had the command. A warrant was, likewise, if-

sued for apprehending Archibald Douglas; but
he, having received timely intelligence of the ap-
proaching danger, fled into England *.

THn Earl of Angus, who imputed there violent

proceedings not to hatred againf Morton alone,
but to the ancient enmity between the houses of
Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed that
a conspiracy was now formed for the deftrudion
of the whole name, was ready to take arms in
order to rcfcue his kinfinan. But Morton ab-
folutely forbad any such a:tempt, and declared
that he would rather fufler ten thousand deaths,
than bring an imputation on his own charater by
seeming to decline a trial f.

Lzact!'s, ELIZABETH did not fa:l to interpose, with
wl~eamles in
order no warmth, in behalf of a man who had contributed
v e.m' ,so much to preserve her influcence over Scotland.

The late transactions in that kingdom had given
her great uneasiness. The power which Lennox

* Crawf. Mem. 323. t Johnlt. 64. Spotfv. 3 11.

had

had acquired independent of her was dangerous; B o o K
the treatment her Ambassadors had met with, dif- VI.
fered greatly from the refpe&t with which the Scots --,*-
were in use to receive her Ministers; and the at- '
tack now made on Morton fully convinced her
that there was an intention to sow the feeds of dif-
cord between the two nations, and to seduce James
into a new alliance with France, or into a marriage
with some Popish Princess. Full of thefre appre-
henfions, the ordered a considerable body of troops
to be assembled on the borders of Scotland, and
dispatched Randolph as her Ambassador into that
kingdom. He addressed himfeilfnot only to James,
and to his council, but to a convention of estates,
met at that time. He began with enumerating the
extraordinary benefits which Elizabeth had confer-
red on the Scottish nation: That without demand-
ing a single foot of land for herself, without en-
croaching on the liberties of the kingdom in the
smallest article, she had, at the expence of the
blood of her fubjeats, and the treasures of her
Crown, rescued the Scots from the dominion of
France, eitablilhed among them true religion, and
put them in polFiion of their ancient rights: That
from the beginning the had protetcd those who
espoused the King's cause, and by her affitance
alone, the Crown had been preserved on his hlead,
and all the attempts of the adverse fation baffled:
That an un:on, unknowvn to their ancellors, but
equally beneficial to both kingdoms, had f~bfiecd
for a long period of years; and though fb many
Popish Princes had combined to diflurb this hli-ppy
itace of thing.s, her care, and their conilancy, h;Id
hitherto dcf.Latcd all tzhcfee; eorts : Th?.t fie hd

Boo observed, of late, an unufnual coldness, diftruff,

VI. and estrangement in the Scottish Council, which
"o she could impute to none but to Lennox, a sub-
I58I. jeat of France, a retainer to the house of Guise,

bred up in the errors of Popery, and iill fufpea-
ed of favouring that fuperitition. Not satisfied
with having mounted so fast to an uncommon
height of power, which he exercised with all the
ralhnefs of youth, and all the ignorance of a
fIranger; nor thinking it enough to have deprived
the Earl of Morton of the authority due to his
abilities and experience, he had conspired the
ruin of that nobleman, who had often exposed
his life in the King's cause, who had contributed
more than any other fubjeat to place him on the
throne, to resist the encroachments of Popery,
and to preserve the union between the two king-
doms. If any zeal for religion remained among
the nobles in Scotland, if they wished for the
continuance of amity with England, if they va-
lued the privileges of their own order, he called
upon them, in the name of his Mistress, to re-
move such a pernicious counsellor as Lennox
from the presence of the young King, to rescue
Morton out of the hands of his avowed enemy,
and secure to him the benefit of a fair and im-
partial trial: And if force were necessary towards
accomplishing a design fb salutary to the King
and kingdom, he promised them the protetion
of his Mistress in the enterprise, and whatever
assistance they should demand either of men or
money *.

* Cald. iii. 6. Strype, ii. 621.

BUT these extraordinary remonftrances, accom- B oo oK

panied with such an unusual appeal from the King VI.
to his fubjeas, were not the only means employed '
by Elizabeth in favour of Morton, and against
-bennox. She persuaded the Prince of Orange to
iend an agent into Scotland, and under colour of
complimenting James on account of the valour
which many of his fubjeds had displayed in the
service of the States, to enter into a long detail of
the refilefs enterprises of the Popish Princes against
the Protefftant Religion; to beseech him to ad-
here inviolably to the alliance with England, the
only barrier which secured his kingdom againfc
their dangerous cabals; and above all things, to
difftruft the insinuations of those who endeavoured
to weaken or to dissolve that union between the
British nations, which all the Protestants in Eu-
rope beheld with so much pleasure *.

JAMES'S Counsellors were too intent upon the James de-

defftrution of their enemy to listen to these re- pe.....tO
monstrances. The officious interposition of the ainfahim.
Prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Eliza.
beth's merfage, and her avowed attempt to ex-
cite fubjecs to rebel against their Sovereign, were
considered as unexampled insults on the majesty
and independence of a crowned head. A gene-
ral and evasive answer was given to Randolph.
James prepared to assert his own dignity with fpi-
rit. All those fufpeded of favouring Morton
were tur:n-d out of ofiice, some of them were
required to surrender themfelvcs priu:crs; the

fen2 , .-

t

B o o K sensible men throughout the kingdom were comn

VI. manded to take arms; and troops were levied,
" and posted on the borders. The English Am-

baffador, finding that neither the public mani-
feffto wfich he had delivered to the Convention;
nor his private cabals with the nobles, could excite
them to arms, fled in the night-time out of Scot-
land, where libels against him had been daily
published, and even attempts made upon his
life. In both kingdoms every thing wore an hof-
tile afpe&. But Elizabeth, though flhe wifhled to
have intimidated the Scottifil King by her prepa-
rations, had no inclination to enter into a war with
him, and the troops on the borders, which had
given such umbrage, were soon dispersed *.

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for

Morton's safety, the more eagerly did his ene-
mies drive on their schemes for his defiruaion.
Captain Stewart, his accuflcr, was first appointed
Tutor to the Earl of Arran, and iton after both
the title and estate of his unhappy ward, to
which he advanced some frivolous claim, were
conferred upon him. The new-made Peer was
commanded to conduct Morton from Dunbarton
to Edinburgh; and, by that choice, the Earl
was not only warned what fate he might expe&t,
but had the cruel mortification of feeing his dead-
ly enemy already loaded with honours, in reward
of the malice which he had contributed to his
ruin.

He Is i.ed THE records of the Court of u'ficiary at this pe-
demned. rod are loft. The account which our hiflorians

* Cra',xf. Mem. 328. S:vype, ii. App. 13'.

give

gve of Morton's trial is inaccurate and unfatisfac- B o iK
tory. The whole proceedings seem to have been VI.
violent, irregular, and oppressive. Arran, in or- r8.
der to extort evidence, tortured several of the

aUrl's domefftics with unusual cruelty. During
the trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn
up in different parts of the city. The jury was
composed of the Earl's known enemies ; and
though he challenged several of them, his objec-
tions were over-ruled. After a ihort consultation,
his Peers found him guilty of concealing, and of
being art and part in the conspiracy against the
life of the late King. The first part of the ver-
dict did not surprise him, but he twice repeated
the words art and part with some vehemence, and
added, "c God knows it is not fo." The doom,
which the law decrees against a Traitor, was pro-
nounced. The King, however, remitted the cruel
and ignominious part of the sentence, and ap-
pointed that he should fuffer death next day, by
being beheaded *.

DURING that awful interval, Morton poffeffed His death,

the utmost composure of mind. He fupped cheer-
fully; slept a part of the night in his usual man-
ner, and employed the reft of his time in religious
conferences, and in ats of devotion, with fuome
Ministers of the city. The Clergyman who at-
tended him, dealt freely with his conscience, and
presSed his crimes home upon him. What he
confeffed with regard to the crime for which he
fuffered is remarkable, and supplies, in some mea-

" Spots 314. Johnif. 65. Crawf. Mem. 332. Cald, iii. 45.

Vor. II. G sure,

B o K iute, the imperfetion of our records. He ac-

VI. knowledged, that on his return from England

t" after the death of Rizio, Bothwell had informed

him of the conspiracy against the King, which
the Queen, as he told him, knew of and ap-
proved ; that he solicited him to concur in the
execution of it, which, at that time, he absolutely
declined; that soon after, Bothwell himself, and
Archibald Douglas, in his name, renewing their
folicitations to the fame purpose, he had required
a warrant under the Queen's hand, authorising
the attempt, and 's that had never been produced,
he had refused to be any farther concerned in the
matter. "' But, continued he, as I neither con-

fc rented to this treasonable aa, nor aflifted in

"' the committing of it, so it was impossible for me
" to reveal, or to prevent it. To whom could I
" make the diloovery ? The Queen was the au-
" thor of the ente. rife. Darnly was such a
" changeling, that no secret could be rafely com-
"' municated to him. -luntly and Bothwell, who
" bore the chief ivay in the kingdom, were them-
" selves the perpetrators of the crime." There
circumflances, it must be confefled, go some
length towards exvenuating Morton's guilt; and
though his apology for the favour he had thewn
to Archibald Doug'as, whom he knew to be one
of the conspirators, be far lets fatisfa&ory, no un-
easy refleaions seem to have difquieted his own
mind on that accounts1. When his keepers told

n;m tl:-t the guards ecre attending, and all things

SC' C.af.: er '\.pp. iii.

th ieadinefsi "C I praise my God, said he, I am .B o o K
** ready likewife." Arran commanded these VI.
guards, and even in those moments, when the o581.
mnoft implacable hatred is apt to relent, the ma-

of his enemies could not forbear this insult.

On the' fcaffold, his behaviour was calm; his
countenance and voice unaltered 3 and after some
time spent in devotion, he fuffered death with the
intrepidity which became the name of Douglas.
His head was placed on the public gaol of Edin-
burgh; and his body, after lying till sun-set on the
fcaffold, covered with a beggarly cloak, was car-
ried by common porters to the usual burial-place
of criminals. None of his friends durst accom-
pany it to the grave, or discover their gratitude
and refpecd by any symptoms of sorrow *.

ARRAN, no less profligate in private life, than Odous con;

audacious in his public condua, soon after drew Arrao.
the attention of his countrymen, by his infamous
marriage with the Counters of March. Before
he grew into favour at court, he had been often
entertained in her hufband's house, and without
regarding the laws of hospitality or of gratitude,
carried on a criminal intrigue with the wife of his
benefator, a woman young and beautiful, but,
according to the description of a cotemporary His-
sorian, " intolerable in all the imperfe&ions in-
cident to her fex." Impatient of any reltraint
upon their mutual desires, they, with equal ar-
dour, wished to avow their union publicly, andc
to legitimate, by a marriage, the offspring of their
unlawful passion. The Countess petitioned to be

* Crawf. Mem. 334. Spotfw. 314.

G

- divorced

B o O K divorced from her husband, for a reason which

VI. no modest woman will ever plead. The judges)
.,.-. over-awed by Arran, passed sentence without de-
Ju 6. lay. And this infamous scene was concluded by a

marriage, solemnized with great pomp, and be-
held by all ranks of men with the utmost horror*.

Oaob. 24. A PARLIAMENT was held this year, at the open-

ing of which some disputes arose between Arran
and the Earl now created Duke of Lennox. Ar-
ran, haughty by nature, and pufled on by his
wife's ambition, began to affect an equality with
the Duke, under whose protecion he had hitherto
been contented to place himfclf. After various
attempts to form a party in the council against
Lennox, he found him fixed so firmly in the King's
affecaions, that it was impoflible to shake him,
and rather than lose all intercft at court, from
which he was banitheid, he made the most humble
fubmifiions to the favourite, and again recovered
his former credit. This rupture contributed,
however, to render the Duke flill more odious to
the nation. During the continuance of it, Arran
affected to court the clergy, pretended an extra-
ordinary zeal for the Protestant religion, and la-
boured to confirm the suspicions, which were
entertained of his rival, as an emissary of the house
of Guise, and a favourer of Popery. As he was
supposed to be acquainted with the Duke's most
secret delns, his calumnies were liilened to with
more credit, than was due to his character. To
the fame cause we muff ascribe several acs of par-
liament uncommonly favourable to the Church,

particularly

particularly one, which abolished the praaice, BOOK
introduced by Morton, of appointing but one VI.
minister to several parishes. -TsT

No notice hath been taken for several years of ,ciefla(~i-

jEcclefiaftical affairs. While the civil govern- c
ment underwent so many extraordinary revolu-
tions, the Church was not free from convulsions.
Two objects, chiefly, engrossed the attention of
the Clergy. The one was the forming a system
of discipline, or Ecclesiastical polity. After long
labour, and many difficulties, this was at last
brought to some degree of perfe&ion. The As-
fembly solemnly approved of it, and appointed it
to be laid before the Privy Council, in order to
obtain the ratification of it in Parliament. But
Morton, during his adminifiration, and those
who, after hi.s fall, governed the King, were
equally unwilling to fee it carried into execution;
and by starting difficulties, and throwing in ob-
jecions, prevented it from receiving a legal fanc-
tion. The other point in view was the abolition
of the Episcopal order. The Bishops were so
devoted to the King, to whom they owed their
promotion, that the funtion itself was by some
reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being al-
lowed a feat in Parliament, and distinguished by
titles of honour, these not only occasioned many
avocations from their spiritual employments, but
soon rendered their charaAer and manners ex-
tremely different from those of the Clergy in thar
age. The nobles viewed their power with jea-
lousy ; the populace considered their lives as pro-
fane; and both wifled their downfal with equa,1

G 3 ardour.

B o o K ardour. The personal emulation between Melvil

VI. and Adamson, a man of learning, and eminent
5' for his popular eloquence, who was promoted, on

the death of Douglas, to be Archbilhop of St.
Andrew's, mingled itself with the pafflons on each
fide, and heightened them. Attacks were made,
in every assembly, on the order of Bishops; their
privileges were gradually circumscribed; and at
last an ac was passed, declaring the office of Bi-
shop, as it was then exercised within the realm,
to have neither foundation nor warrant in the
word of God; and requiring, under pain of ex-
communication, all who now poTcfifcd that ofice,
instantly to resign it, and to abflain from preach-
ing or adminiffering the sacraments, till they
thould receive permission from the Aflembly.
The court did not acquiesce in this decree. A
vacancy happening, soon after, in the fee of Glaf-
gow, Montgomery M'inifcr at Stirling, a man
vain, fickle, presumptuous, and more apt, by the
blemishes in his character, to have alienated the
people from an order already beloved, than to
reconcile them to one which was the oblec1 of
their hatred, firuck up an i. famous bargain with
Lennox, and on his recommeno:,t'on was cholca
ArchbilJop. The Prcibytery of ,i::'.,g, of which
he was a member, tl'e Pre±~-\:y of Gla-gow,
whither he was to be tranfla:cd, :he Ger.eial As-
femblv, vied w;Kh each other 'n p':ccuti;ng him

6b-:. on that account. In order to ifcrGcn Montgo-

n,ery, James ma.de trial both of gentle and of ri-
gorous measures, and both were equally ineffec-
tea., The General afnmbly was just ready to

Fronounce

pronounce against him the sentence of excom- B OOK

.

munication, when an Herald entered, and corn- VI.
manded them, in the King's name, and under C
pain of rebellion, to fltop further proceedings.
Even this injuncihon they dcfpifed. And though
IiContgomery, by his tears, and seeming peni-
tence, procured a flort respite, the sentence was
at last issued by th!eir appointment, and publiflhed
in all the churches throughout the kingdom.

THE firmness of the Clergy in a collective body,

was not greater than the boldness of some indi-
viduals, particularly of the Minifers of Edin-
burgh. They inveighed aaiIy against the cor-
ruptions in the administration, and, with the free-
dom of speech admitted into the pulpit in that
age, named Lennox and Arran as the chief au-
thors of the grievances under which the church
and kingdom groaned. The courtiers, in their
turn, complained to the King of the insolent and
seditious spirit of the Clergy, In order to check
the boldness of their discourses, James issued a
proclamation, commanding Dury, one of the
pmofl popular Ministers, not only to leave the
town, but to abstain from preaching in any other
place. Dury complained to the judicatories of
this encroachment upon the immunities of his
office. They approved of the docrine which he
had delivered; and he determined to disregard
the royal proclamation. But the magifirates be-
ing determined to compel him to leave the city,
according to the King's orders, he was obliged to
abandon his charge, after protesting publicly, at
the cross of Edinburgh, againfi the violence

G 4 'hkih

B o o K which was put upon him. The people accom-

VI. panied him to the gates with tears and lament-
1582 ations; and the Clergy denounced the vengeance

of Heaven against the authors of this outrage *.

IN this perilous situation flood the Church; t;E

authority of the judicatories called in queflion, and
the liberty of the pulpit reitrained, when a sudden
revolution of the civil government procured them
unexpected relief.

His favour. THE two favourites, by their ascendant over the
itesengage
theKingin King, poffeffed uncontrouled power in the king-
1eas,. dom, and exercifced it with the utmost wantonness.

James usually resided at Dalkeith or Kinneil, the
feats of Lennox and of Arran, and was attended
by such company, and employed in such amuse-
ments, as did not suit his dignity. The services
of those who had contributed most to place the
Crown on his head, were but little remembered.
Many who had opposed him with the greatcft vi-
rulence, enjoyed the rewards and honours to
which the others were entitled. Exalted notions
of regal prerogative, utterly inconsistent with the
constitution of Scotland, being inflillcd by his fa-
vourites into the mind of the young Monarch,
unfortunately made, at that early age, a deep im-
preflion there, and became the source of ah.oft
all his fubfcquent errors in the government of
both kingdoms i. Courts of juffice were held in
aimoft every county, the proprietors of land were
called before them, and upon the slightest ncglet
of any of the numerous forms, which arc peculiar

* Cacl. Affemb. 1-6-1-582. Sootf,'. 27-, &c.
, CAIld. iii. 152.

to feudal holdings, they were fined with unusual B o o K
and intolerable rigour. The Lord Chamberlain VI.
revived the obsolete jurifdiaion of his office over g582"
the Boroughs, and they were fubjeated to exac-

. ti;ns no less grievous. A design seemed, like-

wife, to have been formed to exasperate Eliza-
beth, and to dissolve the alliance with her, which
all good Protestants esteemed the chief security of
their religion in Scotland. A close correspond-
ence was set on foot between the King and his
mother, and considerable progress made towards
uniting" their titles to the Crown, by such a treaty
of association, as Maitland had projected; which
could not fail of endangering or diminilhing his
authority, and muff have proved fatal to those
who had acted against her with greatest vigour *.

ALL these circumstances irritated the impatient T- noUI

spirit of the Scottish nobles, who resolved to tole- Ti,4
rate no longer the insolence of the two minions, or tihln,
to fland by, while their presumption and inexperi-
ence ruined both the King and kingdom. Eliza-
beth, who, during the administration of the four
Regents, had the entire direction of the affairs of
Scotland, felt herself deprived of all influence in
that kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and
was ready to countenance any attempt to rescue
the King out of the hands of favourites, who were
leading him into measures so repugnant to all her
views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord
Ruthven, lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord
Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tutor of Glamis, the

* C ad. iii. I57. M.lecr

B o o K Matter of Oliphant, with several Barons and gen.

VI. tiemen of diftinaion, entered into a combination

,. for that purpose; and as changes in adminiftra-

t" ". tion, which, among polished nations, are brought

about flovwly and silently, by artifice and intrigue,
were in that rude age effeded suddenly and by
violence, the King's situation, and the security of
the favourites, encouraged the conspirators to have
immediate recourse to force.

e;zethe JAMEs, after having reSided for fi~me time in
King's per-
fn at Athol, where he enjoyed his fao.orite anufement
"the. of hunting, was now returning tovaids Edin-

burgh, with a finall train. lie was invited to
Ruthven-cafUle, which lay in his way; and as he
fufpeted no danger, he went thither in hopes of

tanz.2, farther sport. The multitude of firangers whom,

he found there gave him some uneafincfs ; and as
those who were in the fecrct arrived every moment
from different parts, the appearance of so many
new faces increased his fears. Hie concealed his
uneasiness, however, with the utmoit care; and
next morning prepared for the field, expctaing to
find there some opportunity of making his escape.
But just as he was ready to depart, the Nobles
entered his bed-chamber in a body, and presented
a memorial against the illegal and oppreiive ac-
tions of his two favourites, whom they represented
as most dangerous enemies to the rlcigion and li-
berties of the nation. James, though he received
this remonstrance with the complaiflance which
was necessary in his present situation, was ex-
tremely impatient to be gone; but as he ap-
proached the door of his apartment, the Tutor of

7 Glamis

Glamis rudely flopped him. The King comn- BooK
plained, expoftulated, threatened, and finding all VIb
these without effet, burfl into teals; " No mat- -~ J
ter, said Glamis fiercely, better children weep
than bearded men." These words made a deep
impression on the King's mind, and were never
forgotten. The conspirators, without regarding
his tears or indignation, dismissed such of his fol-
lowers as they fufpeted; allowed none but their
own party to have access to him; and though they
treated him with great relpeA, guarded his peiffon
with the utmost care. This enterprise is ufu.dly
called, by our historians, Te raid of Rutbven *.

LENNOX and Arran were astonished to the last con-m'

degree at an event so unexpeted, and so fatal to Arnrano
their power. The former endeavoured, but with-
out success, to excite the inhabitants of Edin-
burgh to take arms in order to rescue their Sove-
reign from captivity. The latter, with his usual
impetuosity, mounted on horseback the moment
he heard what had befallen the King, and with a
few followers, rode towards Ruthven-caftle ; and
as a confidcrable body of the conspirators, under
the command of the Earl of Mar, lay in his way
ready to oppose him, he separated himfelffrom
his companions, and with two attendants arrived
at the gate of the caffle. At the fight of a man
so odious to his country, the indignation of the
conspirators rose, and instant death must have
been the puniliment of his rashness, if the friend-
ship of Gowrie, or some other cause not explained
by our historians, had not saved a life so perni-

* Cald. iii. 134. Spotf.v. 320. Me!v. 357.

B o K cious to the kingdom. He was confined, how-

VI. ever, to the castle of Stirling, without being ad-

* mitted into the King's presence.
1582.
Command THE King, though really the prisoner of his own
i am0o fubjeLs, with whose conduct he could not help dif-
iingdcm. covering many symptoms ofdiigufb, was obliged to

publish a proclamation, signifying his approbation
of their enterprise, declaring that himself was at
full liberty, without any restraint or violence of-
fered to his person ; and forbidding any attempt
against those concerned in the Raid of Ruthven,
under pretence of rescuing him out of their hands.

Augutn. At the fame time, he commanded Lennox to

leave Scotland before the 20th of September *.

The con- SOON after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, ar-
Ilpirators
,ou7S- rived as ambafiadors from Elizabeth. The pre-
c'ldth, text of their embassy was to inquire after the

King's safety; to encourage and countenance the
conspirators was the real motive of it. By their
intercession, the Earl of Angus, who, ever since
the death of his uncle Morton, had lived in ex-
ile, obtained leave to return. And the accession
of a nobleman so powerful and so popular strength-
ened the faction ).

LENNox, whose amiable and gentle qualities

had procured him many friends, and who received
private amfirances that the King's favour towards
him was in no degree abated, seemed resolved,
at firfit, to pay no regard to a command extorted
by violence, and no lets dilagreeable to James,
than it was rigorous with regard to himself. But

SCall. iiia 152.

the power of his enemies, who were masters of B o o K
the King's person, who were secretly supported VI.
by Elizabeth, and openly applauded by the Clergy,

1 S2"

deterred him from an enterprise, the success of
which was dubious, and the danger certain, both
to himself and to his Sovereign. He put off the
time of his departure, however, by various arti-
fices, in expe&ation either that James might make
his escape from the conspirators, or that fortune
might present some more favourable opportunity
of taking arms for his relief.

ON the other hand, the conspirators were ex- Theircon-

duA ap-

tremely solicitous not only to secure the approba- proved by

an Afihm-

tion of their countrymen, but to obtain some le- bly and a
gal fanaion of their enterprise. For this purpose c .'.{J
they published a long declaration, containing the
motives which had induced them to venture on
such an irregular flep, and endeavoured to heighten
the public indignation against the favourites, by
representing, in the strongest colours, their inex-
perience and insolence, their contempt of the
nobles, their violation of the privileges of the
Church, and their oppression of the people. They
obliged the King, who could not with safety re-
fuse any of their demands, to grant them a remif-
sion in the most ample form; and not satisfied
with that, they applied to the Assembly of the
Church, and easily procured an as, declaring,
CC that they had done good and acceptable ser- o0^,
vice to God, to their Sovereign, and to their
native country ;" and requiring all sincere Protcit-
ants to concur with them in carry ing fcrward such
a laudable enterprise. In order to add the greater

vc-h

B o o K weight to this a&t, every Miniffer was enjoined to

VI. read it, in his own pulpit, and to infli&t the Cen-

l fures of the Church on those who set themselves

52 in oppoftion to so good a cause. A Convention

of efates assembled a few days after, pasTed an ad
to the fame effe&, and granted full indemnity to
the conspirators for every thing they had done *.

.!rnc~' JAMES was condutcd by them, firfc to Stirling,
dcuartule
f,,,,, scot- and afterwards to the palace of Haly-rud-houfe;

*I'"d* and though he was received every where with the

external marks of refpea due to his dignity, his
motions were carefully oblerved, and he was under
a reflraint no less stria than at the first moment
when he was seized by the conspirators. Lennox,
after eluding many commands to depart out of the
kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his journey.
He lingered, however, for some time in the neigh-
bourhood of Edinburgh, as if he had still intended
to make one effort towards refloring the King to
liberty. But either from the gentleness of his own
disposition, averse to bloodshed and the disorders
of civil war, or from some other cause unknown
to us, he abandoned the design, and fct out for

Sec, 30. France, by the way of England. The King issued

the order for his departure, with no lcfs reluaance
than the Duke obeyed it. And both mourned a
separation, which neither of them had power to
prevent. Soon after his arrival in France, the fa-
tigue of the journey, or the anguish of his mind,
threw him into a fever. In his last moments he
discovered such a firm adherence to the Protefant

* Cald. iii, 177. 187. 200. Spotfw. 322.

faith,

faith, as fully vindicates his memory from the im- B o OK
putation of an arachinent to Popery, with which VI.
he had been uncharitably loaded in Scotland *.
As he was the earlicft, and best beloved, he was,
perhaps, the most deserving, though not the most
able of all James's favourites. The warmth and
tenderness of his Mafter's affetion for him was
not abated by death itself. By many acs of kind-
ness and generosity towards his posterity, the King
not only did great honour to the memory of Len-
nox, but set his own charater in one of the most
favourable points of view.

THE success of the conspiracy, which deprived M^y'S anxiety

James of liberty, made great noise over all Eu- abouther
rope; and at last reached the ears of Mary in the
prison to which she was confined. As her own ex-
perience had taught her what injuries a captive
Prince is exposed to fuffer 3 and as many of those,
who were now concerned in the enterprise against
her son, were the fame persons whom she con-
fidered as the chief authors of her own misfortunes,
it was natural for the tendecrnefs of a mother to
apprehend that the fame calamities were ready to
fall on his head ; and such a profped did not fail
of adding to the distress and horror of her own
situation. In the anguith of her heart, ihe wrote
to Elizabeth, complaining in the bitterest terms
of the unprecedented rigour with which she her-
self had been treated, and beseeching her not to
abandon her son to the mercy of his rebellious
fudbjests; nor permit him to be involved in the
fame misfortunes under which the had so long

* Spotifw 324., groaned.

B o o K groaned. The peculiar vigour and acrimony of

VI. style, for which this letter is remarkable, discover
J . both the high spirit of the Scottish Queen, un-

subdued by her fufferings, and the violence of her
indignation at Elizabeth's artifices and feveritey.
But it was ill adapted to gain the end she had in
view, and accordingly it neither procured any mi-
tigation of the rigour of her own confinement, nor
any interposition in favour of the King ".

1583. HENRY III. who, though he feared and hated
AmbLafa- the Princes of Guise, was often obliged to court
dors arrive
from France their favour, interposed with warmth, in order to
Und. extricate James out of the hands of a party so

intirely devoted to the English interest. He
commanded M. de la Motte Fenelon, his ambaf-
fador at the court of England, to repair to Edin-
burgh, and to contribute his utmost endeavours
towards placing James in a situation more suit-
able to his dignity. As Elizabeth could not,
with decency, refuse him liberty to execute this
commifnion, ihe appointed Davison to attend him
into Scotland as her Envoy, under colour of con-
curring with him in the negotiation, but in
reality, to be a spy upon his motions, and to ob-
flrut his success. James, whose title to the
Crown had not hitherto been recognised by any of
the Princes on the continent, was extremely fond
of such an honourable embassy from the French
Monarch; and, on that account, as well as for the
lake of the errand on which he came, received Sec

., 7., nelon with great refpe6t. The nobles, in wxhofe

Pove, the king was, did not rclifh tlis interposition

' Cm.. 4S3.

bs the French court, which had long loft its an- B o oI
cietic influence over the affairs of Scotland. The VI.
Clergy were alarmed at the danger to which re-
ligion would be exposed, if the Princes of Guile
t-hould recover any ascendant over the public
councils. And though the King tried every me-
thod for restraining them within the bounds of
decency, they declaimed against the court of
France, against the Princes of Guise, againlt the
Ambassador, against entering into any alliance
with such notorious persecutors of the Church of
God, with a vehemence, which no regular go-
vernment would now tolerate, but which was then
extremely common. The Ambassador, watched
by Davison, distrusted by the nobles, and exposed
to the insults of the Clergy, and of the people,
returned into England without procuring any
change in the King's situation, or receiving any
answer to a proposal which he made, that the
government should be carried on in the joint
names of James, and the Queen his mother*.

MEANWHILE, James, though he dissembled with James cr.

capes out cf

great art, became every day more uneasy under the hands

of the col..

his confinemrent; his uneasiness rendered him con- i;iratorT.
tinually attentive to find out a proper opportunity
for making his escape; and to this attention he
at last owed his liberty, which the King of France
was not able, nor the Queen of England willing,
to procure for him. As the conspirators had
forced Lennox out of the kingdom, and kept
Arran at a difitance from court, they grew secure;

*Cald. iii. 207. Spotfw. 324. See Append. No. VIII.

VOL. II. and

B OO K and imagining that time had reconciled the King

VI. to them, and to his situation, they watched him
, with little care. Some occasions of discord had

arisen among themselves; and the French Ambaf-
fador, by fomenting these, during the time of his-
residence in Scotland, had weakened the union, in
which alone their safety conlifted *. Colonel Wil-
liam Stewart, the commander of the band of gen-
tlemen who guarded the King's person, being
gained by James, had the principal merit in the

June 27. scheme for restoring his Matfter to liberty. Under

pretence of paying a visit to the Earl of March
his grand uncle, James was permitted to go from
Falkland to St. Andrew's. That he might not
create any suspicion, he lodged at first in an open
defenceless house in the town, but pretending a
curiofiry to fee the castle, no sooner was he en-
tered with some of his attendants whom he could
trust, than Colonel Stewart commanded the gates
to be slut, and excluded all the reft of his train.
Next morning the Earls of Argyll, Huntly, Craw-
ford, Montrote, Rothes, with others to whom the
secret had been communicated, entered the town
with their followers; and though Mar, with fe-
veral of the leaders of the faction, appeated in
arms, they found themselves so far out-numbered,
that it was in vain to think of recovering pcfeff-
sion of the King's person, which had been in their
power somewhat longer than ten months. James
was naturally of so soft and ductile a temper, that
those who were near his perlbn commonly made a
deep imprefion on his heart, which was formed

* Camd. 4S.9

to be under the sway of favourites. As he re- B oo oc
rnained implacable and unreconciled to the con- VI.
fpirators, during so long a time, and at a period 1583"
of life when refentments are rather violent than
lasting, they must either have improved the op-
portunities of insinuating themselves into favour
with little dexterity, or the indignation with which
this first insult to his person and authority filled
him, must have been very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive. reroies,

however,

He resolved, however, by the advice of Sir James to treat

them with

Melvil, and his wifefit counsellors, to a& witlthe modertioun
utmost moderation. Having called into his pre-
fence the leaders of both faEtions, the neighbour-
ing gentry, the deputies of the adjacent boroughs,
the Ministers, and the heads of colleges, he de-
clared, that although he had been held under re-
ftraint for some time by violence, he would not im-
pute that as a crime to any man, but without re-
membering the irregularities, which had been so
frequent during his minority, would pass a general
at of oblivion, and govern all his fubjets with
undiftinguifhing and equal affetion. And as an
evidence of his sincerity, he visited the Earl of
Gowrie at Ruthven-caftle, and granted him a full
pardon of any guilt he had contrasted, by the
crime committed in that very place *.

BUT James did not adhere long to this prudent But Arran

and moderate plan. His former favourite, the rTi*h
Earl of Arran, had been permitted for some time ern ""m.
to reside at Kinneil, one of his country feats. As
soon as the King felt hirmfelf at liberty, his love

* Mileiv. 272.

H 2 for

B o o K for him began to revive, and he expressed a firong

VI. desire to fee him. The courtiers violently opposed

'-"--' the return of a minion, whose iniolent and over-

bearing temper they dreaded, as much as the na-
tion detested his crimes. James, however, con-.
tinued his importunity, and promising that he
should continue with him no longer than one day,
they were obliged to yield. This interview re-
kindled ancient affeLion; the King forgot his pro-
mile; Arran regained his ascendant over him; and
within a few days resumed the exercifi of power,
with all the arrogance of an undeferving favourite,
and all the raflhnefs peculiar to himfelif .

And the THE firif effea of his influence was a proclama-
S'aoter tion with regard to those concerned in the Raid f
1a"'

. Ruthven. They were required to acknowledge

their crime in the humblest manner; and the King
promised to grant them a full pardon, provided
their future conduct were such as did not oblige
him to remember past miscarriages. The tenour
of this proclamation was extremely different from
the act of oblivion, which the conspirators had
been encouraged to expect. Nor did any of them
reckon it safe to rely on a promise clogged with
such an equivocal condition, and granted by a
young Prince under the dominion of a minister
void of faith, regardless of decency, and tranf-
ported by the desire of revenge even beyond the
usual ferocity of his temper. Many of the lead-
ers, who had at first appeared openly at court, re-
tired to their own houses; and foreseeing the dan-

* Mclv. z74.

gerous

gerous florm which was gathering, began to look Bo OK
out for a retreat in foreign countries *. VI.

ELIZABETH, who had all along proteRed the jrS3.

conspirators, was extremely difguffed with mea- Flizabeth's
lures which tended so visibly to their deftruc'ion, In b-hai of
and wrote to the King a harsh and haughty letter, rorspi-
reproaching him in a style very uncommon among A","gla
Princes, with breach of faith in recalling Arran to
court, and with imprudence in proceeding so ri-
goroufiy against his belt and most faithful fubje&.
James, wich a becoming dignity, replied, that
promises extorted by violence, and conditions
yielded out of fear, were no longer binding, when
these were removed ; that it belonged to him alone
to chufe what minilters he would employ in his
fcrvice; and that though he resolved to treat the
conspirators at Ruthven with the utmost clemency,
it was necessary, for the fuppcrt of his authority,
that such an insult on hi3 person should not pass
altogether uncenfured t.

ELIZABETH'S letter was quickly followed by snt. r.

Wallingham her secretary, whom flhe appointed hm'semn
her Ambaflhdor to James, and who appeared at Scotland1
the Scottish court with a splendour and magni-
ficence well calculated to please and dazzle a young
Prince. Walsingham was admitted to several con-
ferences with James himfelf', in which he infifled
on the fame topics contained in the letter, and the
King repeated his former answers.

AFTER fuffering several indignities from the ar-

rogance of Arran and his creatures, he returned

* Melv. 278. Spotfw. 326. Cald. ,ii. 330.

SIelv.

279.

H 3 to

B o o K to England, without concluding any new treaty

VI. with the King. Wallingham was, next to Bur-

S- leigh, the Minifler on whom the chief weight of

the English adminiflration rested; and when a
person of his rank fiept so far out of the ordinary
road of business, as to undertake a long journey
in his old age, and under a declining slate of
health, some affair of consequence was supposed
to be the cause, or some important event was ex-
peaed to be the effe& of this meafuie. But as
nothing conspicuous either occasioned, or follow-
ed this embassy, it is probable that Elizabeth had
no other intention in employing this sagacious
Minister, than to discover, with exaftnefs, the ca.
pacity and disposition of the Scottifli King, who
was now arrived at a time of life, when, with
some degree of certainty, conjectures might be
formed concerning his charater and future con-
dut. As James poffeffed talents of that kind,
which make a better figure in conversation than
in action, he gained a great deal by this interview
with the English fcecretary, who, notwithflanding
the cold reception he met with, gave such an ad-
vantageous representation of his abilities, as de-
termined Elizabeth to treat him, henceforward,
with more decency and refpe& *.

ELIZ BETH'S eagernels to protea the confpira-

tors rendered James more violent in his proceed-
ings gainif them. As they had all refused to ac-
cept of pardon upon the terms vwhich he had of-
fered, they were required, by a new proclamation,
:o surrender themfelvcs prisoners. The Earl of

* M lv, 293. Ca.ll.ill.. . Jcbb, ii. 536.

Angus

Angus alone complied; the reft either fled into B o oK
England, or obtained the King's licence to retire VI.
into foreign parts. A Convention of estates was 1583
held, the members of which, deceived by an un- Decn,. 17.
worthy artifice of Arran's, declared those con-
cerned in the Raid of Ruthven to have been guilty
of hightreafon; appointed the act passed latt year
approving of their conduL to be expunged out of
the records; and engaged to support the King in
prosecuting the fugitives with the utmoit rigour
of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done

any thing that was uncommon in a barbarous age,
among mutinous nobles, and under an unsettled
ifate of government, muff be acknowledged to
have been guilty of an ari of treason against their
Sovereign; and James, who considered their
conduct in this light, had good reason to boast
of his clemency, when he offered to pardon them
upon their confefring their crime. But, on the
other hand, it must be allowed that, after the
King's voluntary promise of a general oblivion,
they had some reason to complain of breach of
faith, and could not, without the most unpardon-
able imprudence, have put their lives in Arran's

power.

THIE interest of the Church was considerably 1jg4.

affeaed by these contrary revolutions. While the Th C,.rgy

favour the

conspirators kept poffefion of power, the Clergy conIpira-
not only recovered, but extended their privileges. i,',ate the
As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be King.
unlawful, they took some bold measures towards
exterminating the Episcopal order out of the

H 4 Church

B o o K Church; and it was owing more to Adamnfon'

VI, dexterity in perplexing and lengthening out the
- ' process for that purpoIe, than to their own want
-584" of zeal, that they did not deprive, and perhaps

excommunicate all the Bishops in Scotland,
When the King recovered his liberty, things put
on a very different afpecl. The favour bestowed
upon Ar an, the enemy of every thing decent and
sacred, and the rigorous prosecution of thoie no-
bles, who had been the most zealous defenders of
the Protestant cause, were confidcred as sure pre-
sages of the approaching ruin of the Church.
The Clergy could not conceal their apprehensions,
nor view this impending danger in silence. Dru-
ry, who had been restored to his office as one of
the Ministers of Edinburgh, openly applauded
the Raid of Ruthb-en in the pulpit, at which the
King was so enraged, that, notwithstanding some
symptoms of his submission, he commanded him
to resign his charge in the city. Mr. Andrew
Melvil, being summoned before the Privy Coun-
cil to answer for the dotrine he had uttered in
a fcrmon at St. Andrew's, and accused of com-
paring the present grievances of the nation with
those under James III. and of intimating oblique-
ly that they ought to be redressed in the fame
manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave
with greater firmness. He declined the jurif-
dition of a Civil court, in a cause which he main-
tained to be purely Ecclesiastical; the Presbytery,
of which he was a member, had, as he contend-
ed, the ftc right to call him to account for words
spoken in the pulpki and neither tile King nor

council

council could judge, in the first instance, of the B o O K
do&rine delivered by Preachers, without violating VI.
the immunities of the Church. This exemption '-
from civil jurifdifion was a privilege which the 1
' Popish Ecclefiaftics, admirable judges of what-
ever contributed to increase the lustre or power of
their body, had long faruggled for, and had at laftc
obtained. If the fame plea had now been ad-
mitted, tile Protestant clergy would have become
independent on the civil Magistrate; and an or-
der of men extremely useful to society while they
inculcate those duties which tend to promote its
happiness and tranquillity, might have become
no less pernicious by teaching, without fear or
controul, the most dangerous principles, or by
exciting their hearers to the most desperate and
lawless actions. The King, jealous to excess of
his prerogative, was alarmed at this daring en-
croachment on it; and as Melvil, by his learning
and zeal, had acquired the reputation and autho-
rity of head of the party, he resolved to punish
him with the rigour which that pre-eminence ren-
dered necessary, and to discourage, by a timely
severity, the revival of such a dangerous claim.
Melvil, however, avoided his rage, by flying
into England; and the pulpits refounded with
complaints that the King had extinguished the
light of learning in the kingdom, and deprived
the Church of the ablefl and moit faithful guar-
dian of its liberties and discipline *.

THESE violent declamations of the Clergy

against the measures of the court were extremely

* Spotfw, 330. Cald. iii. 304.

accept-

So o K acceptable to the people. The conspirators,
VI. though driven out of the kingdom, still poffeffed
54 great influence there; and as they had every thing

to fear from the resentment of a young prince, ir-
ritated by the furious counsels of Arran, they
never ceased soliciting their adherents to take
arms in their defence. Gowrie, the only person
among them who had submitted to the King, and
accepted of a pardon, soon repented of a fiep
which loft him the esteem of one party, without
gaining the confidence of the other; and, after
fuffering many mortifications from the King's
negle&, and the haughtincfs of Arran, he was at
last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside
in France. *While he waited at Dundee for an op-
portunity to embark, he was informed that the
Earls of Angus, Mar, and the Tutor of Glamis,
had concerted a scheme for surprising the castle of
Stirling. In his situation, little persuasion was
necessary to draw him to engage in it. Under
various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay
ready to take arms on the day fixed by the con-
fpirators for the execution of their enterprise. His
lingering so long at Dundee, without any apparent
reason, awakened the suspicion c"f the court, prov-
ed fatal to himself, and difalipointed the success
of the conspiracy. Colonel William Stewart fur-
rounded the ho'lfe where he lod[-ed with a body of
foldierj, and, in spite of his refitance, took him
prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and
Glamis, seized the cali of Stirling, and ercting
their flandard theie, publfned a manifcfto, de-
daring tlhat they took ar:s' f',r no other reason

b but

but to remove from the King's presence a minion B o o M
who had acquired power by the molt unworthy VI.
a&ions, and who exercised it with the most into- I584.
lerable insolence. The account of Gowrie's im-
prifonment struck a damp upon their spirits.
They imputed it to treachery on his part, and sus-
peaed, that as he had formerly 'deferted, he had
now betrayed them. At the fame time, a fum of
money, with which Elizabeth had promised to
supply them, not being duly paid, and their
friends and vassals coming in slowly, they appear-
ed irresolute and difheartened; and as the King,
who a&ed with great vigour, advanced towards
them at the head of 20,000 men, they fled pre-
cipitately towards England, and with difficulty
made their escape *. This rash and feeble attempt
produced such effects as usually follow disappoint-
ed conspiracies. It not only hurt the cause for
which it was undertaken, but added strength and
reputation to the King; confirmed Arran's pow-
er; and enabled them to pursue their measures
with more boldness, and greater success. Gowrie
was the firflt victim of their resentment. After a
very informal trial, a jury of Peers found him
guilty of treason, and he was publicly beheaded
at Stirling.

To humble the Church was the King's next M-, 2 .

fRep. But as it became necessary, for this purpose, niehtio,
to call in the aid of the legislative authority, a
Parliament was hastily summoned : and while to
many of the nobles were banished out of the
kingdom, or forbidden to appear in the King's

* Home's litl. of House of Dougl. 376. Spotfw. ;30c

presence ;

B o o K presence; while Arran's haughtiness kept forne at

VI. a distance, and intimidated others; the meeting
1'4"' consisted only of those who were absolutely at the
1584.
Severe laws devotion of the court. In order to conceal the

Chrch, laws which were framing from the knowledge

of the Clergy, the Lords of the Articles were
sworn to secrecy; and when some of the Ministers,
who either suspected, or were informed of the
danger, deputed one of their number to declare
their apprehensions to the King, he was seized at
the palace-gate, and carried to a distant prison.
Others, attempting to enter the Parliament-houfe,

IMy n. were refused admittance* ; and such laws were

passed, as totally overturned the constitution and
discipline of the Church. The refusing to ac-
knowledge the jurifdidcion of the Privy Council;
the pretending an exemption from the authority
of the civil courts; the attempting to diminish
the rights and privileges of any of the three estates
in parliament, were declared to be high treason.
The holding assemblies, whether Civil or Eccle-
fiaftical, without the King's per.niflion or appoint-
ment; the uttering, either privately or publicly,
in sermons or in declamations, any false and scan-
dalous reports against the King, his ancestors, or
ministers, were pronounced capital crimes $.

WHEN these laws were published at the cross

of Edinburgh, according to the ancient custom,
Mr. Robert Pont, Minifl'er of St. Cuthbert's,
and one of the Lords of Session, solemnly pro-
tested againift them, in the name of his brethren,
because they had been passed without the know-

* Cald. iii. 365. t Parl. 8 Jac. VI.

3 ledge

ledge or consent of the Church. Ever since the B o o K
Reformation, the pulpits and ecclesiastical judi- VI.
catories had both been esteemed sacred. In the '"
former, the Clergy had been accustomed to cen-
Sfure, and admoniih with unbounded liberty. In
the latter, they exercised an uncontrouled and in-
dependantjurifdiction. The blow was now aimed
at both there privileges. These new ftarutes were
calculated to render churchmen as inconiiderable
as they were indigent; and as the avarice of the
nobles had firipped them of the wealth, the King's
ambition was about to deprive them of the power
which once belonged to their order. No wonder
the alarm was universal, and the complaints loud.
All the Ministers of Edinburgh forsook their
charge, and fled into England. The moft' emi-
nent Clergymen throughout the kingdom imitated
their example. Desolation and astonishment ap-
peared in every part of the Scottish Church; the
people bewailed the loss of Pastors, whom they
esteemed; and full of consternation at an event
so unexpected, openly expressed their rage againit
Arran, and began to fufpe& the King himifelf to
he an enemy to the Reformed Religion *.

* Spotfw. 33-.

# BOOK VII.

T II E

HISTORY

OF

SCOTLAND.

BOOK VII.

WHILE Scotland was torn by intestine sac- B o0ok

tions, Elizabeth was alarmed with the ru- VII.

mour of a proje& in agitation for setting Mary at 1iq4.
liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Cheshire gen- Th osmor-

tln n con-

tleman, was fufpe&ed of being deeply concerned frinary a-
in the design, and on that suspicion he was taken ~~th,
into custody. Among his papers were found two
lifts, one of the principal harbours in the king-
dom, with an account of their situation, and of
the depth of water in each; the other, of all the
eminent Roman Catholics in England. This cir-
cumftance confirmed the suspicion against him,
and some dark and desperate conspiracy was sup-
pofedjuft ready to break out. At firit he boldly
avowcd :.is innocence, and declared that the two

papers

_ I _C _ _ __

B o o K papers were forged by the Queen's Miniflers, iti

VII. order to intimidate or insnare him ; and he even
L endured the rack with the utmost fortitude. But
1584. being brought a second time to the place of tor-

ture, his rebolution failed him, and he not only
acknowledged that he had held a secret corre-
fpondence with the Queen of Scots, but dif-
covered a design that was formed to invade Eng-
land. The Duke of Guile, he said, undertook
to furnifl troops, and to condu& the enterprise.
The Pope and King of Spain were to Ilpply the
money necessary for carrying it on; all the Eng-
lifh exiles were eager to take arms; many of the
Catholics at home would be ready to join them at
their landing; Mendoza, the Spanith Ambaf-
fador, who was the life of the conspiracy, spared
no pains in fomenting the spirit of difaffe'ibon
among the English, or in hastening the prepara-
tions on the Continent; and by his command, he
made the two lifts, the copies whereof had been
found in his poffeflion. This confeflion he re-
trated at his trial; returned to it again after fen-
tence was passed upon him ; and retrated it once
more at the place of execution *.

To us in the present age, who are af~ited in form-

ing our opinion of this matter by the light which
time and history have thrown upon the designs and
charaEters of the Princes of Guise, many circum-
fiances of Throgmorton's confeffion appear to be
extremely remote from truth, or even from proba-
bility. The Duke of Guise was, at that junclure,
far from being in a situation to undertake foreign

SIIo!ingfhead, 1370.

cjnqueffs. XWithout either power or office at B o o K
court 3 hated by the King, and persecuted by the VII.
favourites, he had no leisure for any thoughts of

.

disturbing the quiet of neighbouring slates; and
his vast and ambitious mind was wholly occupied
in laying the foundation of that famous league,
which shook the throne of France, But about the
time Elizabeth detected this conspiracy, the close
union between the house of Guise and Philip was
remarkable to all Europe; and as their great
enterprise against Henry III. was not yet disclosed,
as they endeavoured to conceal that under their
threatenings to invade England, Throgmorton's
discovery appeared to be extremely probable;
and Elizabeth, who knew how ardently all the
parties mentioned by him wished her downfal,
thought that she could not guard her kingdom
with too much care. The indiscreet zeal of the D',,,- on
Englith exiles increased her fears. Not fatisfrid h ..;.. ,*-
with incessant outcries against her severity towards %,:i.l,
the Scottith Queen, and her cruel perfecurion of
her catholic fubjeas, not thin;king it enough thar
one Pope had threatened her with the sentence of
excommunication, and another had acually pro--
nounced it, they now began to disperse books 'and
writincs, in which they endeavoured to perluide
their disciples, that it 'would be a meritcrio'us
ation to take away her life ; they openly exhortcd
the maids of honour to treat her as Judith did
Holofernes, and, by such an illuitrious deed, to
render their own names honourable and sacred in
the Church throughout all future ages *. For all

" Camd. 497.

these

VoTL, II.

B o o K there reasons, Elizabeth not only inflited the

VII. punishment of a traitor on Throgmorton, but

* - commanded the Spanish ambassador inltantly to

leave England ; and that the might be in nodan-
ger of being attacked within the island, fie deter-
mined to use her utmost eitorts, in order to re-
cover that influence over the Scottish councils,
which she had for some time entirely loft.

She endea- THERE were three different methods, by which
v¶urs to re-
enhbiiflher Ehlizabeth might hope to accomplish this ; either
isRue

n by furnishing such cffetual aid to the banished

gaining Ar- nobles, as would enable them to refiume the chief
ran,

direaion of affairs; or by entering into such a
treaty with Mary, as might intimidate her son,
who being now accustomed to govern, would be
apt to agree to any terms rather than resign the
sceptre, or admit an associate in the throne; or
by gaining the Earl of Arran, to secure the di-
retion of the King his master. The last was not
only the easiest and fpeedicft, but moit likely to
be fuccelsful. This Elizabeth relbfolved to pur-
sue ; but without laying the other two altogether
aside. With this view she sent Davison, one of
her principal secretaries, a man of abilities and
address, into Scotland. A Minister so venal as
Arran, hated by his own countrymen, and holding
his power by the most precarious of all tenures, the
favour of a young Prince, accepted Elizabeth's
offers without hesitation, and esteemed the acqui-
fition of her protection to be the molt solid foun-

Atua 13. dation of his own greatness. Soon after he con-

fented to an interview with Lord Hunfdon the
Governor of Berwick, and being honoured with
the pompous title of Lieutenant General for the

King,

Zing, he appeared at the place appointed with a B o o K
splendid train. In Hunfdon's presence he re- VII.
newed his promises of an inviolable and faithful

-

attachment to the English interefi, and afRured
. him that James should enter into no negotiation,
which might tend to interrupt the peace between
the two kingdoms; and as Elizabeth began to
entertain the fame fears and jealousies concerning
the King's marriage, which had formerly dif-
quieted her with regard to his mother's, he un-
dertook to prevent James from listening to any
overture of that kind, till he had previously ob-
tained the Queen of England's consent

÷ -

THE banished Lords and their adherents soon Severe pro.

felt the effecs of Arran's friendihip with England. gins t"h
As Elizabeth had permitted them to take refuge in nol}e.
her dominions, and several of her Miniffers were
of opinion that she ought to employ her arms in
defence of their cause, the fear of this was the
only thing which reifrained James and his favour-
ite, from proceeding to such extremities against
them, as might have excited the pity or indig-
nation of the English, and have prompted them
to exert themselves with vigour in their behalf.
But every apprehension of this kind being now Augufl ,
removed, they ventured to call a parliament, in
which an act was passed, attainting Angus, Mar,
Glamis, and a great number of their followers.Their
estates devolved to the Crown, and according to
the pratice of the Scottish Monarchs, who were
obliged to reward the fa(tion which adhered to
them, by dividing with it the spoils of the van-

* Cald. iii. 49I. Melv. 315. See Append. No. IX.

I 2 quifhed,

B o OK quilhed, James dealt out the greater part of theAi

S .*

! to Arran and his aflociates *.

553 * NOR was the treatment of the Clergy less ri-

O"a,,ihe ogo ous. A!l '';nifl rs, rcadies, ~d

, profefibrsof

'cky. Colleges were c: ,ined to ifbic ; 'x, within forty,

da"'s, a paper tt lif, :ng t"Cir p' i anion of the
laws concerning the Chu:ch eci lc.' in last par.
liament. Many, overawed cr c,;!:' 'te by the
Court, yieldJed obedience; c'-her I, out. The
flipends of the latter \,- ec fcquef'!e .', rfome of the
more acive committed to pril :n, and numbers
compelled to Py the king, 'on. 'Tho:e who com-
plied, fell vndrv the fiu7Aci in of a?;ng from mer-
cenary or ambitious motih s. 'Tfhole l\ ho fuffered
acquired high reputation, by gixi Lg fich con-
vincing evidence of their firinnels and sincerity.
The judicatories of the Church were almost en-
tirely suppressed. In some places, Icarce as many
Ministers remained, as to pe'"frln t'ie duties of
religious worship ; they foion funk in reputation
among the peoy le, and being prohibitel not only
fiom discoursing of public aftairs, but obliged,
by the jealousy of the adminilcration, to frame
every sentiment and exprelion in f!ch a manner,
as to give the court no ofTence, their sermons
were deemed languid, insipid, and contemptible;
and it became the general opinion, that together
with the most virtuous of tlie nobe!s, and the moll
faithful of the Clergy, the power and vigour of re-
ligion were now banished out of the kingdom t.

MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one

of those fruitless negotiations with the Qjeen of

* Cald. iii, 527. i Ibid, iii. 5 q.

Scots,

Scots, which it had become almoff matter of form B o o
to renew every year. They lerved not only to VII.
amuse that unhappy Princess with some profpe El.
of liberty; but furnished an apology for eluding
the folicitations of foreign powers in her behalf;
and were of use to overawe James, by fhewing him
that fle could, at any time, set free a dangerous
rival to dispute his authority. These treaties tie
fuffered to proceed to what length she pleased,
and never wanted a pretence for breaking them
off, when they became no longer necessary. The
treaty now on foot was not, perhaps, more sincere
than many which preceded it; the reasons, how-
ever, which rendered it ineffetfual were far from
being frivolous.

As Crichton a Jeflit was failing from Slanders New on-

towards Scotland, the ship on board of which he gainu, li-
was a passenger happened to be chased by pirates, 2"Leth
who, in that age, often infeited the narrow seas.
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some
papers in his custody, and threw them away; but,
by a very extraordinary accident, the wind blew
them back into the ship, and they were immedi-
ately taken up by some of the passengers, who
carried them to Wade, the Clerk of the privy
council. He, with great induifry and patience,
joined them together, and they were found to
contain the account of a plot laid to have been
formed by the King of Spain, and the D'uke of
Guile, for invading England. The people wcre
not yet recovered from the fear and anxiety occa-
fioned by the conspiracy in which Throgmorton
had been ergaged, and as his discoveries alF'i'carcd

I 3 ,ow

B o o K now to be confirmed by additional evidence, not

VllI. only all their former apprehensions recurred, but
158.4 the consternation became general and excessive.

As all the dangers, with which England had been
threatened for some years, flowed either immedi-
ately from Mary herself, or from those who made
use of her name to justify their infurreaions and
conspiracies, this gradually diminished the com-
passion due to her firuation, and the Englifl, in-
itead of pity-ig, began to fear and to hate her.
Elizabeth, under whole wife and pacific reign the
English enjoyed tranquillity, and had opened
iburces of wealth unknown to their anceitors,
was extremely beloved by all her people; and re-
gard to her fafcty, not less than to her own inr
terest, animated them against the Scottish Queen.

Oc-fns In order to discourage her adherents, it was
ao .ffocia-
tion ncp- thcught necessary to convince them, by some

yn1f to public deed, of the attachment of the English to

their own Sovereign, and that any attempt against

pa,tr 9. her life would prove fatal to her rival. With this

view, an ffociation was framed, the fubfcribersof
which bound theinfelves by the mofl solemn oaths,
" to defend the Qwieen against all her enemies,
" foreign and domefric ; and if violence should
( b offered to her life, in order to favour the
" title of any pretender to the Crown, they not
, only engaged never to allow or acknowledge
" the perion or persons by whom, or for whom,
(c such a detestable aft fliould be committed, but
fr vowed, in the presence of the eternal God, to
a profecure such person or persons to the death,
i' and to pursue them, with their utmost venge,

3 " ance4

" ance, to their utter overthrow and extirpa- B 0 OK
" tion *." Persons of all ranks subscribed this VII.
combination, with the greatest eagerne, s and una-

. 4

nimity t.

MARY considered this combination, not only as which

an avowed delign to exclude her from all right of .
lucceffion, but as the certain and immediate fore-
runner of her deltru&tion. In order to avert this,
she made such feeble efforts as were still in her
power, and sent Naue her secretary to court, with
offers of more entire resignation to the will of
Elizabeth, in every point, which had been the
occasion of their long enmity, than all her fuffer-
ings hitherto had been able to extort J. But whe-
ther Mary adhered inflexibly to her privileges as
an independent Sovereign, or yielding to the ne-
ceffity of her situation, endeavoured, by concef-
fions, to sooth her rival, ihe was equally unfuc-
cefsful. Her firmness was imputed to obstinacy,
or to the secret hope of foreign am~fance; her
conceffons were either believed to be inincere,
or to flow from the fear of some imminent danger.
Her present willingness, however, to comply with
any terms were so great, that Walsingham warmly
urged his mistress to come to a final agreement
with her. But Elizabeth was persuaded, that it
was the spirit raised by the affociatiuon which had
rendered her so passive and compliant. She al-
ways imagined that there was something myfteri-
ous and deceitful in all Mary's actions, and fuif-
pe&ed her of carrying on a dangerous correlpond-
ence with the Englifn Catholics, both within and

* State Trials, i. 1:2. 1 Camd. 499*

$ Camd. ibid.

I 4 without

B o K without the kingdom. Nor were her suspicions

VII. altogether void of foundation. Mary had, about

'

' this timc, written a letter to Sir Francis Ingle-

field, urging him to haRfcn the execution of what
she calls the Great plot or DFilgnmicnt, without he-
fitating on account of any danger in which it
might involve her life, which ihe xwould moi wil-
1Ingly part with, if, by that facriicc, the could
procure relief for so great a number of the op-

sheistreat- pressed children of the Church *. Infiead, there-
ed with
~rater . fore, of hearkening to the ovcrtures wxx ich the
°ou". Scottiflh Qeen made, or gr~alting any mitiga-

tion of the hajrdflips of which fle comp'aincd,
Elizabeth resolved to take her o~~, of the hands of
the Eail of Shrev fbIury, and to appoint Sir Ami3as
Paulet and Sir Drue Drury to be her keepers.
Shrewibury had cii charged ]Iis trust \ith great
fidelity, du;ing fi."Len )cars, but, at the fame
time, had tnca:cd Mary with gentlenes and re-
spec, and 1'ad always ixvee':ened ha;flh commands
by the humanity with which hc put tihm in exe-
cution. The fame poiitenefs \-as nut to be ex-
peced from men of an inferior rank, whofc severe
vigilance, perhaps, was their chief recomii ·end-
ation to that employment, and the only merit
by which they could pretend to gain f:vour or
preferment J.

C.,, a np: As Jamecs was no less catcr, thai ever, to de-
, ', ;ive the baiiihed Nobkls or ilwabeth's

t rotec-

:ion, he ap, ointed the Ila ,"i elf Gray his Am-
bal:ador to th:e court of E..>land, anid i iruitcd
Lii,: waith the conduct of a tnego:iation for that

* ": pe, ill. :/6. -; Ca.rd. Fco.

purpose. An honour for which he was indebted B oo K
to the envy and jealousy of the Earl of Arran. VII.
Gray pof'effed all the talents of a Courtier; a
graceful person, an insinuating address, boundless I584*
ambition, and a restless and intriguing spirit.
During his residence in France, he had been ad-
mitted into the most intimate familiarity with the
Duke of Guise, and in order to gain his favour,
had renounced the Protestant Religion, and pro-
fefied the utmost zeal for the captive Queen, who
carried on a secret correspondence with him, from
which the expected great advantages. On his
return into Scotland, he paid court to James with
extraordinary afliduity, and his accomphlihmcnts
did not fail to make their usual impression on the
King's heart. Arran, who had introduced him,
began quickly to dread his growing favour ; and
flattering himself, that absence would efface any
fcntiments of tenderncfs from the mind of a young
Prince, pointed him out, by his malicious praises,
as the most proper person in the kingdom, for an
emba-y of fulch importance; and contributed to
raise him to that high dignity, in order to hasten
his fall. Elizabeth, who had an admirable dex-
terity in discovering the proper instruments for
carryino on her dcfigns, endeavoured, by caresses,
and by pielnts, to secure Gray to her interest.
The forier flattered his vanity, which was great;
the latter supplied his proilufenets, which was frill
greater. He abandoned him"lf " without reserve
to Eliz:beth's direcion, and not onlv unde,'took
to retain the King under the ifluence rs ,- ;gand,
but a;edL as a spy up mn the Scotrihh Qjje.n, and

bLt: r' I

B OO K betrayed to her rival every secret that he coulk

VII. draw from her by his high pretensions of zeal in
L'J her service *.
1584-
His intcreR GRAY'S credit with the English court was ex-
withe tremely galling to the banished nobles. Elizabeth
EigjId*. no longer thought of employing her power to re-

store them; she found it easier to govern Scot.
land by corrupting the King's favourites; and,

pccem. 31. in compliance with Gray's folicitations, she com-

manded the exiles to leave the north of England,
androremove into the heart of the kingdom. This
rendered it difficult for them to hold any corre-
fpondence with their partizans in Scotland, and
almost impossible to return thither without her
perminlion. Gray, by gaining a point which
James had so much at heart, rivetted himself
more firmly than ever in his favour; and by ac-
quiling greater reputation, became capable of
serving Elizabeth with greater success ".

I585. ARRAN had now poffeffed, for some time, all
'o"rlon the power, the riches, and the honours, that his
Snd info- immoderate ambition could desire, or the fond-
lence.

ness of a Prince, who set no limits to his liberality
towards his favourites, could beflow. The of-
fice of Lord Chancellor, the highefl and most im-
portant in the kingdom, was conferred upon him,
even during the life of the Earl of Argyll, who
succeeded Athol in that dignity ; and the public
beheld, with aftonilhment and indignation, a man
educated as a soldier of fortune, ignorant of law,
and a contemner of jufltice, appointed to preside

* Strype, iii. 302. Melv. 316. t C lId. iii. 643.
$ Crawf. Ofic. of State, App. 447.

'n parliament, in the privy council, in the court B o oK
of fetion, and intrufted with the supreme dif- VII.
pofal of the property of his fellow-fubjeats. He

8

was, at the fame time, governor of the castles of
Stirling and Edinburgh, the two principal forts
in Scotland; Provost of the city of Edinburgh;
and as if by all these accumulated dignities his
merits were not fufficiently recompenfed, he had
been created Lieutenant General over the whole
kingdom. No person was admitted into the
King's presence without his perminfion; no fa-
vour could be obtained but by his mediation.
James, occupied with youthful amusements, de-
volved upon him the whole regal authority.
Such unmerited elevation increased his natural
airogance, and rendered it intolerable. He was
no longer content with the condition of a fiibjec,
but pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo
Duke of Albany; and boasted, openly, t~at his
title to the Crown was preferable to that of the
King himself. But, together with these thoughts
of royalty, he retained the meanness suitable to
his primitive indigence. His venality as a judge
was scandalous, and was exceeded only by that
of his wife, who, in defiance of decency, made
herself a party in almost every question which
came to be decided, employed her influence to
corrupt or to overawe the judges, and almost
openly dicated their decisions *. His rapacious-
ness as a Minister was insatiable. Not satisfied
with the revenues of so many offices; with the
estate and honours which belonged to the family

*Cald. iii. 331. Scotflarvet's Staggering State, 7.

B o o K of Hamilton; or with the greater part of Gowrie's

VII. lands, which had fallen to his share ; he grasped
-.. at the poffeiiions of fiveral of the nobles. HIe re-
1585" quired Lord Maxvell to exchange part of his

efiate, for the forfeited lands of Kinneil ; and be-
cause hle as u. willing to cuit an ancient inherit-
ance for a poflfefi'n io precarious, lie ilirred up
againfc him, his hereditary rival, the Laird of
John:on, and inv.Aed L:t Corit r of the king-
dom in a civil -:ir. He co.,i,,:red to prison
the L1 of A 1o', Lu;i w jnie, and the Matter
of Camis, he

, rll, Le.a 'ic Le 1. ,' d not divorce

his wire, the d&i,.,-r of tie l'. "1 i- Gowrie, and
cnt.Al nis clate on lhhn ; the lccL.ii, because he
was unwilling to pa;t 'wih Lo :1 lands adjacent
to one of his citatcs; and the th.ird, fr refuting
to lepid him money. Hi-is fpis and informers
iILkd the vwholc coun;try, and initr:u 1d themielves
into c-eiy comIpary. The ,iearcL ne'ihours
dii:ru;'ed and feared each other. All familiar so-
ciery was at an end. Even the common inter-
courles of humani'y w:'e interru!ted, no man
knowing in whom to confide, or vwhere to utter
his complaints. Thcre is not perhal s in hihlory,
an example of a Minitlcr so univcrfllly detefcable
to a nation, or who more juilly deserved its de-
telation *.

ARaAN, notwithlfiandng', regardlcfs of the fen-

tin.e .ms, apd defpi >-g the mur:nT'rs of the people,
gave a looi to his natural temj cr, and proceeded
to aos fill molc violent. D.vid H-lome of Ar-
gary, and Patrick his brother, having received

SE "oyi" ;^. , 3e.r letter;

letters from one of the banified Lords, about B o o t.
private business, were condemned and. put to VII.
death, for holding correspondence with rebels. '
Cunninghame of Drumwhafel, and Douglas of 1 -8"

. Mains, two gentlemen of honour and reputation,

were accused of having conspired, with the exiled
nobles, to seize the King's person. A tingle wit-,
ness only appeared; the evidence they produced
of their innocence was unanfwerablei their ac-
cufer himself not long after acknowledged that he
had been suborned by Arran; and all men be-
lieved the charge againflt them to be groundless:
They were found guilty, notwithftandiog, and Feb. 9g.
fuffered the death of traitors *.

ABOUT the fame time that these gentlemen rry',, con

were punished for .a pretended confpiracyi Eliza- 'aa...
beth's life was endangered by a real one. Parry, labeth.
a Do&or of laws, and a Member of the Hore€ of
Commons, a man vain and fantafic, but of a re..
solute spirit, had lately been reconciled tq the
Church of Rome; and fraught with the zeal of
a new convert, he offered to demonstrate the fin.
cerity of his attachment to the religion which he
had embraced, by killing Elizabeth. Cardinal
Allen had published a boqk, to prove the murder
of an e;xcommunicated Prince to be not only laiwn.
ful, but a meritorious a&ion. The Pope'S Nuncio
at Venice, the Jeftits both there and at Paris, the
English exiles, all approved of tlh design. Tho .
Pope hirfelf exhorted him to perfeverp and
Sgranted him, fox his encouragement, a plenary
indulgvins, an. remiflion of his fins. Cardjpal

* Spotfw. 3.

3 Cad. iii. 794.

Bo o K di Como wrote him a letter to the ftame purpose;

VII. But though he often got access to the Queen,
" . fear, or some remaining sense of duty, restrained

him from perpetrating the crime. i appily, his
intention was at last discovered by Nevil, the only
person in England to whom he had communi-
cated it; and he himself having voluntarily con-

Msarch sessed his guilt, he fuffered the punishment which

it deserved *.

f,',rh . THESE repeated conspiracies againl their Sove-
p e fatal reign awakened the indignationof the Englifl par-
to Mary. liament, and produced a very extraordinary itatute,

which, in the end, proved fatal to the Queen of
Scots. By this law the association in defence of
Elizabeth's life was ratified, and it was further en-
ated, ,< That if any rebellion shall be excited in
" the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the
" hurt of her Majefty's person, by or for any per-
" son pretending a title to the Crown, the Queen
" shall empower twenty-four persons, by a corn-
," mirnion under the Great Seal, to examine into,
"c and pass sentence upon such offences; and after
" judgment given, a proclamation shall be issued,
<' declaring the persons whom they find guilty,
" excluded from any right to the Crown; and
cc her Majefty's fubjefs may lawfully pursue every
cc one of them to the death, with all their aiders
" and abettors : And if any design against the life
" of the Queen take effeA, the perbfons, by or for
"c whom such a detestable ac? is executed, and
" their ifuies, being in any wife assenting or privy
t, to the fame, shall be disabled for ever from

* State Trials, vol. i. 103.

" pretending

" pretending to the Crown, and be pursued to B oo o
" death in the like manner*." This aa was plainly VII.
levelled at the Queen of Scots; and whether we

8

confider it as a voluntary expression of the zeal and
,concern of the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or
whether we impute it to the influence which that
artful Princess preserved over her parliaments, it
is no easy matter to reconcile it with the general
principles of justice or humanity. Mary was
thereby rendered accountable not only for her own
actions, but for those of others; in consequence
of which, fle might forfeit her right of fucceflion,
and even her life itself.

MARY justly considered this a&t as a warning to The rigour

with whicti

prepare for the worst extremities. Elizabeth's mi- he was"
nifters, it is probable, had resolved, by this time, re"ae"'
to take away her life; and fuffered books to be
publifhfed, in order to persuade the nation, that
this cruel and unprecedented mealire was not only
necessary, but juftf . Even that thort period of
her days which remained, they rendered uncom-
sortable, by every hardship and indignity which ir
was in their power to inflit. Almost all her ser-
vants were difinmiffed; he was treated no longer
with the refpea due to a Queen; and though the
rigour of seventeen years imprisonment had broken
her constitution, she was confined to two ruinous
chambers, scarce habitable, even in the middle
of summer, by reason of cold. Notwithitand-
ing the scantiness of her revenue, the had been
accufftomed to distribute regularly fbme alm>.
among the poor in the village adjoining to the

* State Trihl , "o!. i. 23. * Strype, ii. 29

castle.

B o o K castle. Paulet, now, refused her liberty to pe?'

VII. form this pious and humane office, which had af'
'"-( forded her great consolation, amidst her own sus-

* 8$ ferings. The castle in which the resided, was con-

verted into a common prison , and a young man,
fufpe&ed of Popery, was confined there, and treat-
ed under her eye, with such rigour, that he died
of the ill usage. She often complained to Eliza-
beth of these multiplied injuries, and expoftulated
as became a woman, and a Queen; but as no
political-reafon now obliged that Princess to amuse
her any longer with fallacious hopes, far from
granting her any redress, she did not even deign
to give her any answer. The king of France,
closely allied to Elizabeth, on whom he depended
for assistance, was afraid of espousing Mary's cause
with any warmth ; and all his folicitations in her
behalf were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But
Caftlenau, the French ambassador, whose cmrpaf.
sion. and zeal for the unhappy Queen supplied the
defeAs in his inftru&ions, remonstrated with such
vigour against the indignities to which Ihe was ex-
posed, that, by his importunity, he prevailed at
length to have her removed to Tuthbury ; though
Ihe was confined, the greater part of another win-
ter, in her present wretched habitation *.

A breach NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the ne-
between
Mar, and gle& of her friends, made such an impreflion on

' Mary, as the ingratitude of her son. James had

hitherto treated his mother with filial refpe&, and
had even entered into negotiations with her, which
.gave umbrage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her

* Jebb, v. 2. 576-598.

i interest

interest that his good correspondence should con- B oo o
tinue, Gray, who, on his return into Scotland, VII.
found his favour with the King greatly increased 'C '
by the success of his embassy, persuaded him to I585-
. write a harsh and undutiful letter to his mother,

in which he expressly refused to acknowledge her
to be Queen of Scotland, or to confider his affairs
as conneaed, in any wife, with hers. This cruel
requital of her maternal tenderness overwhelmed
Mary with sorrow and despair. cc Was it for this, March 24,
" said ihe, in a letter to the French Ambassador,
"' that I have endured so much, in order to pre-
" serve for him the inheritance, to which I have
CC a just right ? I am far from envying his autho-
" rity in Scotland. I desire no power there; nor
" wish to set my foot in that kingdom, if it were
" not for the pleasure of once embracing a son,
"c whom I have hitherto loved with too tender
" affecion. Whatever he either enjoys or ex-
"c peas, he derived it from me. From him I
" never received affifrance, supply, or benefit of
" any kind. Let not my allies treat him any
"c longer as a King; he holds that dignity by my
" consent; and if a speedy repentance does not
" appease my just resentment, I will load him
- with a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown,
" with all my pretensions, to one who will re-
"c ceive them with gratitude, and defend them
(c with vigour *." The love which James bore
to his mother, whom he had never known, nay
whom he had been early taught to confider as the
most abandoned person of her sex, cannot be sup-

* Jebb, ii. 571. See Append. No. X.

Vot. II. K posed

B oo

o posed ever to have been ardent; and he did nda

VII. now take any pains to regain her favour. But
1585 whether her indignation at his undutiful behavi-

our, added to her bigoted attachment to Popery,
prompted Mary at any time to think seriously of
disinheriting her son; or whether these threaten-
ings were uttered in a sudden sally of disappointed
affetion, it is now no easy matter to determine.
Some papers which are itill extant seem to render
the former not improbable *.

Dangeronu CARES of another kind, and no less disquieting,
situation of

iizabceth; occupied Elizabeth's thoughts. The calm, which

she had long enjoyed, seemed now to be at an end;
and such florms were gathering in every quarter;
as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbour-
ing nations had undergone revolutions extromely
to her disadvantage. The great qualities which
Henry III. had displayed in his youth, and which
raised the expeAations of his subjects so high, va-
nifhed on his ascending the throne; and his ac-
quiring supreme power seems not only to have
corrupted his heart, but to have impaired his un-
derftanding. He soon loft the efleem and affec-
tion of the nation; anrd a life divided between the
aufterities of a superstitious devotion, and the ex-
travagancies of the most dissolute debauchery,
rendered him as contemptible as he was odious
on account of his rapaciousness, his profusion,
and the fondness with which he doated on many
unworthy minions. On the death of his only bro-
ther, those ftntiments of the people burlt out with
violence. Henry had no children, and though

* See Appendix, No. XI.

but thirty-two years of age, the succession of the B o o
Crown was already considered as open. The King VII.
of Navarre, a distant descendant of the royal fa- 158.
mily, but the undoubted heir to the Crown, was a from the
'zealous Protestant. The profpe2 of an event so ^c^^e5
fatal to their Religion, as his ascending the throne
of France, alarmed all the Catholics in Europe,
and the Duke of Guise, countenanced by the Pope,
and aided by the King of Spain, appeared as the
defender of the Romiflh faith, and the asserter of
the Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In
order to unite the party, a bond of confederacy
*as formed, distinguished by the name of the Holy
League. All ranks of men joined in it with emu-
lation. The spirit spread with the irrefifltible ra-
pidity, which was natural to religious passions in
that age. The deftruaion of the Reformation, hot
only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to be
the objet and wish of the whole party; and the
Duke of Guise, the head of this mighty and zeal-
ous body, acquired authority in the kingdom, far
superior to that which the King himself poffeFed.
Philip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly from te,
increased the naval power of Spain, and had at last PhdiplI.
reduced under his dominion all that portion of'the
Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenean moun-
tains, and which Nature seems to have destined to
form one great monarchy. William, Prince of
Orange, who first encouraged the inhabitants of
the Netherlands to assert their liberties, and whole
wisdom and valour formed and proteced the riling
commonwealth, had fallen by the hands of an as-
faffin. The superior genius of the Prince of P'arma

K 2 had

B OO K had given an entire turn to the fate of the war nl

VII. the Low Countries; all his enterprises, concerted
<" ~ with consummate skill, and executed with equal

bravery, had been attended with success ; and the
Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, were on
the point of falling under the dominion of their
ancient master.

H"C wi NONE of thole circumstances, to which Eliza.
and rigorous
cadct. beth had hitherto owed her security, existed any

longer. She could derive no advantage from the
jealousy which had subsisted between France and
Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with
the Duke of Guise, had an equal sway in the coun-
cils of both kingdoms. The Hugonots were
unable to contend with the power of the League;
and little could be expe&ed from any diversion
they might create. Nor was it probable that the
Netherlands could long employ the arms, or di-
vide the strength, of Spain. In this situation of
the affairs of Europe, it became necessary for Eli-
zabeth to form a new plan of condtaR; and her
wisdom in forming it, was not greater than the
vigour with which The carried it on. The mea-
fures, most suitable to her natural temper, and
which she had hitherto pursued, were cautious
and safe ? those she now adopted, were enterprising
and hazardous. She preferred peace, but was
not afraid of war; and was capable, when com-
pelled by necessity, not only of defending herself
with spirit, but of attacking her enemies with a
boldness which averted danger from her own do-
minions. She immediately furnished the Hugo-
nots with a considerable supply in money. She

carried

carried on a private negotiation with Henry III. B o o K
who, though compelled to join the League, hated VII.
the leaders of it, and withed for their deflru&ion.
She openly undertook the proteEtion of the Dutch -53".
commonwealth, and sent a powerful army to its
affiffance. She endeavoured to form a general
confederacy of the Proteatant Princes, in opposition
to the Popish League. She determined to pro- Rero,,o
ceed with the utmost rigour against the Queen of PUaif M.-
Scots, whose fufferings and rights afforded her "in the
enemies a specious pretence for invading her do-
minions. She resolved to redouble her endea-
vours in order to effe& a closer union with Scot-
land, and to extend and perpetuate her influence
over the councils of that nation.

SHE found it no difficult matter to induce most

of the Scottilh courtiers to promote all her designs.
Gray, Sir John Maitland, who had been advanced
to the office of Secretary, which his brother for-
merly held, Sir Lewis Bellenden, the Justice Clerk,
who had succeeded Gray as the King's resident at
London, were the persons in whom she chiefly
confided. In order to dire& and quicken their
motions, she dispatched Sir Edward Wotton along May 29.
with Bellenden into Scotland. This man was gay,
well-bred, and entertaining; he excelled in all
the exercises for which James had a passion;
and amused the young King by relating the ad-
ventures he had met with, and the observations
he had made, during a long residence in foreign
countries; but under the veil of these superficial
qualities, he concealed a dangerous and intriguing
spirit. He soon grew into high favour with James,

K 3 and

B o o K and while he was fcemingly attentive only to p!ea.

VII. site and diversions, he acquired influence over

-" the public councils, to a degree which was in-

decent for a firanger to possess *.

Propor<sa NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable
,co Irnd. to the nation, than the proposal he made of a ftrit

alliance between the two kingdoms, in defence of
the Reformed Religion. The rapid and alarm-
ing progress of the Popiflh League seemed to call
on all Protestant Princes to unite for the prefer.

July~. vation of their common faith. James embraced

the overture with warmth, and a Convention of
estates empowered him to conclude such a treaty,
and engaged to ratify it in parliament t. The
alacrity with which James concurred in this mea-
sure must not be wholly ascribed either to his
own zeal, or to Wotton's address ; it was owing
in part to Elizabeth's liberality. As a mark of
her motherly affection for the young King, she
fettled on him an annual pension of 5000 pounds;
the fame Tum which her father had allotted her
before fle ascended the throne. This circum-
itance, which she took care to mention, rendered
a furn, which in that age was far from being in-
coniiderable, a very acceptable present to the
King, whose revenues, during a long minority,
had been almoff totally dimiqpated j.

Un,rnines BUT the chiefobject of Wotton's intrigues, was
Arran s
power, to ruin Arran. While a minion so odious to the

nation continued to govern the King, his assist-
ance could be of little advantage to Elizabeth.
And though Arran, ever since his interview with

* Mciv. 317. a- Spotf' . 359. 1 Cald. iii. 505.

Hunfdane,

Liunfdane, had apearecd extremely for her inte- B o o
rcf, she could place no great confidence in a man, VII.
whole conduct was so capricious and irregular, tg-
and \;ho, notwithstanding his protefations to the
contrary, fill continued a secret correspondence
both with I-lary and with the Duke of Guise.
The banished Lords were attached to England
romrn alction, as well as principle, and were t!he
only perions among the Scots whom, in any dan-
gerous c::igency, the could thoroughly trust. Be-
fore Bel!cnden left London, they had been fum-
mnoned thither, under colour of vindicating them-
ielves from his accuiations, but, in reality, to
concert with him the most proper measures for re-
storing them to their country. Wotton pursued
this p3 1, and endeavoured to ripen it for exe-
cution ; and it was greatly facilitated by an event
neither uncommon nor considerable. Sir John
Forster, and Ker of Fernihcrft, the Englilh and
Scottish wardens of the middle marches, having
mnet, accord:ng to the cuitom of the .borders,
about nidiinnmc-r, a fray arofc, and Lord Ruffel,
the Earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to be
killed. This fcuolie was purely accidental, but
Elizabetli chose to confider it as a dcfign formed
by I.r, ra thie int;igntion of Arran, to involve
the tv o kingdoms in war. She iniied that both
c t'.he1 i S;culd be delivered up to her; and though'
Jame> 'l l ded that demand, he was obliged to con-
sic Aiian in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen.
D'ri;ig his ablence from court, Wotton and his A^1ms ht

baninled

: ,.,cires carried on th.;ir intrigues without inter- nobleo
r'otir.n. By their advice, the banished nobles

K 4 clneavoiureJ

B o OK endeavoured to accommodate their differences

VII. with Lord John and Lord Claud, the Duke of

o Chatelherault's two sons, whom Morton's vio-

1585.
oa. 16. lence had driven out of the kingdom. Their

common fufferings, and common interest, induced
both parties to bury in oblivion the ancient dif-
cord which had subsisted between the houses of
Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabeth's per-
mifion, they returned in a body to the borders
of Scotland. Arran, who had again recovered
favour, insisted on putting the kingdom in a pof-
ture of defence. But Gray, Belienden, and Mait-
land secretly thwarted all his measures. Some
ncceffary orders they prevented from being issued;
others they rendered ineffeaual, by the manner of
execution; and all of them were obeyed slowly, and
with reluctance *.

WoTTro's fertile brain was, at the fame time,

big with another and more dangerous plot. He
had contrived to seize the King, and to carry him
by force into England. But the design was hap.
pily discovered; and, in order to avoid the pu-
nifhment his treachery merited, he departed with-
out taking leave t.

They rcurn MEANWHILE the banished Lords hastened the
into Scot.
and, and execution of their enterprise 3 and as their friends
are r'o,.. and vaTals were now ready to join them, they en-
.ig. tered Scotland. Wherever they came, they were

welcomed as the deliverers of their country, and
the molt fervent prayers were addressed to Heaven
for the success of their arms. They advanced,
without losing a moment, towards Stirling, at the
head of 10,000 men. The King, though he had

* Spotfw. 340. - Melv. 335.

assembled

assembled an army superior in number, could not B oo oi
venture to meet them in the field, with troops VII.
whose loyalty was extremely dubious, and who, at
best, were far from being hearty in the cause; nor
was either the town or caffle provided for a siege.
The gates, however, of both were ihut, and the
nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. That fame Nov. ,
night they surprised the town, or more probably
it was betrayed into their hands ; and Arran, who
had undertaken to defend it, was obliged to save
himself by a precipitate flight. Next morning
they invested the caffle, in which there were not
provisions for twenty-four hours; and James was
necessitated immediately to hearken to terms of
accommodation. They were not so elated with
success, as to urge extravagant demands, nor was
the King unwilling to make every reasonable con-
cession. They obtained a pardon in the most
ample form, of all the offences they had com-
mitted; the principal forts in the kingdom were,
by way of security, put into their hands; Craw-
ford, Montrose, and Colonel Stewart were re-
moved from the King's presence; and a parlia-
ment was called, to establish tranquillity in the
nation *.

THOUGH a great majority in this parliament A Parlia-

confifled of the confederate nobles, and their ad- ^nt.,
herents, they were far from discovering a vindic-
tive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an a&t, re-
storing them to their ancient honours and estates,
and ratifying the pardon granted by the King,
they seemed willing to forget all past errors in the

* Cald. iii. 795* Sadmini-

1 o o K adminiffration, and spared James the mortifica-

VII. tion of feeing his Miniffers branded with any
L-, public note of infamy. Arran, alone, deprived

of all his honours, stripped of his borrowed spoils,
and declared an enemy to his country by public
proclamation, funk back into obscurity, and muff,
henceforth, be mentioned by his primitive title of
Captain James Stewart. As he had been, during
his unmerited prosperity, the objec of the hatred
and indignation of his countrymen, they beheld
his f dl without pity, nor did all his fufferings mi-
tigate their refcntment in the least degree.

conhaf. TriE Cliigy were the only body of men who

obtained no redress of their grievances by this re-
volution. The confederate nobles had, all along,
affected to be considered as guardians of the privi-
leges and discipline of the Church. In all their
manifeilos they had declared their resolution to
reftoic these, and by that popular pretence had
gained many friends. It was now natural to ex-
pe& some fruit of these promikes, and some re-
turns of gratitude towards many of the molt emi-
r.ehit preachers who had fuffered in their cause, and
\ho demanded the repeal of the laws passed the
preceding year. The King, however, was re-
iblute to maintain these laws in ft.ll authority;
and as the nobles were extremely iflicitous not to
disgust him, by insisting on any diligreeable re-
quest, the claims of the Church in this, as well as
ini many former instances, \wre sacrificed to the
interest of the laity. The Ministers gave verit to
their indignation in tame pulp:t, and their impa-
tienLe under the difa, pointment broke out in some

exprcfiions,

expressions, extremely difrefpecaful even towards B o o o
the King himself*. VII.

THE Archbishop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the ,''.

effecs of their anger. The Provincial Synod of 6
Fife summoned him to appear, and to answer for
his contempt of the decrees of former Assemblies,
in presuming to exercise the funRion of a Bishop.
And though he refused to acknowledge the jurif-
dicion of the court, and appealed from it to the
King, a sentence of excommunication, equally in-
decent and irregular, was pronounced againt him,
Adamson, with no less indecency, thundered his
archiepiscopal excommunication against Melvil,
and some other of his opponents.

SooN after, a General Assembly was held, in Aprilt,

which the King, with some difficulty, obtained an
aA, permitting the name and office of a Bishop
fill to continue in the Church. The power of
the order, however, was considerably retrenched.
The exercise of discipline, and the infpe&ion of
the life and dotrine of the Clergy, were com-
mitted to Prefbyteries, in which Bishops should
be allowed no other pre-eminence, but that of
presiding as perpetual moderators. They them-
selves were declared to be fubje&, in the fame
manner as other pafftors, to the jurifdiclion of the
General Assembly. And as the discussion of the
Archbifhop's appeal might have kindled unusual
heats in the Assembly, that affair was terminated
by a compromise. He renounced any claim of
fopremacy over the Church, and promised to de-

* Spotfxy. 3*}3.

mean

1 o o K mean himself suitably to the character of a Bithop,

VII. as described by St. Paul. The Assembly, with-

86
o out examining the foundations of the sentence of

"excommunication, declared that it should be held
of no effec, and restored him to all the privileges
which he enjoyed before it was pronounced.
Notwithstanding the extraordinary tenderness
shewn for the honour of the synod, and the deli-
cacy and refpedt with which its jurlfdi&ion was
treated, several members were ib zealous as to
protest against this decision *.

A leaeue THE court of Scotland was now filled with per-
with Eng-
and con. sons so warmly attached to Elizabeth, that the
ludedd. league between the two kingdoms, which had been

proposed last year, met with no interruption, but
from D'Efneval the French envoy. James him-
self first offered to renew the negotiation. Eliza-
beth did not fuffer such a favourable opportunity

uly s. to flip, and instantly dispatched Randolph to con-

elude a treaty, which she so much desired. The
danger to which the Protestant religion was ex-
posed, by the late combination of the Popish
powers for its destruction, and the neceflity of a
ftri& confederacy among those who had embraced
the Reformation, in order to obftrua their per-
nicious designs, were mentioned as the founda-
tion of the league. The chief articles in it were,
that both parties should bind themselves to defend
the Evangelic Religion ; that the league fiould
be offenfive and defensive against all who shall
endeavour to disturb the exercise of religion in

* Cald. iii. 89.. Spotfw, 346- either

either kingdom ; that if one of the two parties be B o o K
invaded, the other, notwithstanding any former VII.
alliance, thould not, diretly or indirectly, assist '
the invader; that if England be invaded in any 6
part remote from Scotland, James thould assist
the Queen with 2000 horse and 5ooo foot; that
if the enemy landed or approached within sixty
miles of Scotland, the King should take the field
with his whole forces, in the fame manner as he
would do in defence of his own kingdom. Eli-
zabeth, in return, undertook to ad in defence of
Scotland, if it should be invaded. At the fame
time, she assured the King that no step should be
taken, which might derogate in any degree from
his pretensions to the English Crown*. Eliza-
beth expressed great fatisfaton with a treaty, which
rendered Scotland an useful ally, instead of a dan-
gerous neighbour, and afforded her a degree of
security on that fide, which all her anceffors had
aimed at, but none of them had been able to ob-
tain. Zeal for religion, together with the bless-
ings of peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed
during a considerable period, had so far abated
the violence of national antipathy, that the King's
conduct was universally acceptable to his own
people t.

THE acquittal of Archibald Douglas, at this

time, exposed James to much and deserved cen-
sure. This man was deeply engaged in the con-
fpiracy against the life of the King his father. Both
Morton and Binny one of his own servants, who
fuffered for that crime, had accused him of being

* Spotfw 3f'i. Camd. r13. present

B o o r present at the murder *. He had escaped punish-

VII. ment by flying into England, and James had
Soften required Elizabeth to deliver up a person so

unworthy of her proteaion. lie now obtained a
licence, from the King himfulf, to return into '
Scotland; and after undergoing a mock-trial,
calculated to conceal rather than to detca his
guilt, he was not only taken into favour by the
King, but sent back to the court of 1 ngland,
with the honourable characer of hii, :.;ni fiador.
James was now of such an age, that ihs youth and
inexperience cannot be pleaded in eacufe for this
indecent tranfac.ion. It must be impumcd ta the
exceyive facility of his temper, which often led
him to gratify his courtiers at the expence of his
own dignity and reputation [.

if" of a- NOT long after, the inconfi;era:e afiTeion of

bir)ton s
conpi y the Engli'll Catholics towards Mary, and their
aza nftEu .

i i-

z.bth. implacanoe rcienr'"H.t g1ainit Elizabeth, gave

rife to a confpi:a-y vn Sch proved fatal to the
one Qeen, le;: an inc'.ioie frain on the reputa-
tion of the other, and preclntcd a lpeEtacle to
Europe, of which th've had been hilicrto no ex-
ample in the hiforv cf n anl;ind.

DocTOR Gii7o-d, Gilbert Giford, and IIodg-

Ern, p:i'fts ed. .. . in the fmiiiary at Rheims,
had adopted an cxtravagant and enthufiafic no-
tion, :.mI the Bull o Pius '. againfi Lliz:beth,
was JiLc.ied iminedia::Iy by the IHoly Chot.
This .U!d c pin'o they inllillcd into Savage, an
oriccr in te S anifi ar.t'y, noted for his firious
7eal *u.c duii,,:g cou!- age; and pciiidid hin that

*

. .-. * .i, , o

0 XJ .

, , a)t^,. 51-'. Call. ii. 917.

no service could be so acceptable to Heaven, as B o o

K

to take away the life of an excommunicated He- VII.
retic. Savage, eager to obtain the Crown of '
martyrdom, bound himfnelf by a solemn vow, to A.iI1-6.
. kill Elizabeth. Ballard, a trafficking priest, had
at that time come over to Paris, and solicited
Mendoza, the Spanish ambassador there, to pro-
cure an invasion of England, while the affairs of
the league were so prc4perous, and the kingdom
left naked by sending so many of the Queen's
best troops into the Netherlands. Paget and the
English exiles demonidrated the fruitlefnhefs of
such an attempt, unless Elizabeth were first cut
off, or the invaders fccured of a powerful con-
currence on their landing. If it could be hoped
that either of there events would happen, effectual
aid was promised; and in the mean time Ballard arm ,i,
was sent back to renew his intrigues.

HE communicated his designs to Anthony Ba-

Lington, a young gentleman in Dcrbyfhire, of a
plentiful fortune, and many amiable qualities, who
having contraSted, during his residence in France,
a familiarity with the Archbilhop of Glasgow,
had been recommended by him to the Queen of
Scots. He concurred with Paget, in considering
the death of Elizabeth as a necefTary preli-
minary to any invaSion. Ballard gave him hopes
that an end would soon be put to her days, and
imparted to him Savage's vow, who was now in
London waiting for an opportunity to afrike the
blow. But Babington thought the attempt ct
too much importance, to rely on a single hand
fr tihe execution of it, and propo' d that five re-.

6 f:ilte

B,o o t solute gentlemen should be joined with Savage,

VII. in an enterprise, the success of which was the
Sfoundation of all their hopes. He offered to find

i out persons willing to undertake the service;

whose honour, secrecy, and courage they might
safely trust. He accordingly opened the matter
to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salisbury, Charles
Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage, John
Travers, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock, Hen-
ry Dun, John Jones, and Robert Polly, all of
them, except Polly, whose bustling forward zeal
introduced him into their society, gentlemen of
good families, united together in the bonds of
private friendlhip, strengthened by the more
powerful tie of religious zeal. Many consult-

jine. ations were held; their plan of operations was at

last fettled; and their different parts assigned.

Thercheme Babington himself was appointed to rescue the
rpirators. Queen of Scots; Salisbury, with some others,

"undertook to excite several counties to take arms;
the murder of the Queen, the most dangerous
and important service of all, fell to Tichbourne
and Savage, with four associates. And so totally
had their bigoted prejudices extinguilhed the prin-
ciples of honour, and the sentiments of humanity
suitable to their rank, that, without scruple or
compunaion, they undertook an action which is
viewed with horror, even when committed by the
meanest and most profligate of mankind. This at-
tempt, on the contrary, appeared to them no lets
honourable than it was desperate; and in order to
perpetuate the memory of it, they had a pidure
drawn containing the portraits of the fix affaffins,

with

wvith that of Babington in the middle, and a mot- B o K
to intimating that they were jointly embarked in VII.
some hazardous design. $586.

1586.

THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton Diicovered

and imprudent instance of vanity, seem to have yWafalir..
thought a discovery scarce possible, and neither
diffrufied the fidelity of their companions, nor
doubted the success of their undertaking. But
while they believed that their machinations were
carried on with the most profound and impene-
trable secrecy, every step they took was fully
known to Walsingham. Polly was one of his
spies, and had entered into the conspiracy with
no other design than to betray his associates. Gil-
bert Gifford too, having been sent over to Eng-
land to quicken the motions of the conspirators,
had been gained by Walsingham, and gave him
sure intelligence of all their projeas. That-vi-
gilant minister immediately imparted the disco-
veries which he had made to Elizabeth; and with-
out communicating the matter to any other of
the Counsellors, they agreed, in order to under-
fRand the plot more perfealy, to wait till it was
ripened into some form, and brought near the
point of execution.

AT lass, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and Thy are

criminal to expose her own life, and to tempt pinin.
Providence any farther. Ballard, the prime mov- Auguf 4.
er in the whole conspiracy, was arrested. His as-
fociates, disconcerted and struck with astonish-
ment, endeavoured to save themselves by flight.
But, within a few days, all of them, except
Windsor, were seized in different places of the

VOL. II. L kingdom,

B o o K kingdom, and committed to the Tower. Though

VII. they had undertaken the part, they wanted the
-"-.- firm and determined spirit of affafins; and, in.

fluenced by fear or by hope, discovered all they
knew. The indignation of the people, and their
impatience to revenge such an execrable combi-
nation against the life of their Sovereign, hasten-
ed their trial, and all of them fuffered the death

Sept. 1o. of traitors *.
Mary is ac- THUS far Elizabeth's conduct may be pro-
beingan nounced both prudent and laudable, nor can she
int'ho-. be accused of violating any law of humanity, or
fpiracy. of taking any precautions beyond what were ne-

ceffary for her own safety. But a tragical scene
followed, with regard to which posterity will pass
a very different judgment.

THE frantic zeal of a few raflh young men ac-

counts fufficiently for all the wild and wicked de-
signs which they had formed. But this was not
the light in which Elizabeth and her Ministers
chose to place the conspiracy. They represented
Babington and his associates to be instruments
employed by the Queen of Scots, the real though
secret author of so many attempts against the life
of Elizabeth, and the peace of her kingdoms.
They produced letters, which they ascribed to
her, in support of this charge. There, as they
gave out, had come into their hands by the fol-
lowing singular and mysterious method of con-
veyance. Gifford, on his return into England,
had been intrufted by some of the exiles with

* Camd. 515. State Trials, Vol. i. rIo.

9 letters

letters to Mary; but in order to make a trial of B o o K
his fidelity and address, they were only blank VII.
papers made up in that form. These being safe-
ly delivered by him, he was afterwards employed
without farther fcrupIe. Walsingham having
found means to gain this man, he, by his per-
miffon, and the connivance of Paulet, bribed a
tradesman in the neighbourhood of Chartley,
whither Mary had been conveyed, who deposited
the letters in a hole in the wall of the caffle, co-
vered with a loose stone. Thence they were tak-
en by the Queen, and in the fame manner her
answers returned. All thefi were carried to Wal-
fingham, opened by him, decyphered, sealed
again so dexterously that the fraud could not be
perceived, and then tranfinitted to the persons to
whom they were directed. Two letters to Ba-
bington, with several to Mendoza, Paget, Engle-
field, and the Englilh fugitives; were procured
by this artifice. It was given out, that in there
letters Mary approved of the conspiracy, and even
of the affamination; that (he directed them to
proceed with the utmost circumfpedion, and not
to take arms till foreign auxiliaries were ready to
join them; that the recommended the Earl of
Arundel, his brothers, and the young Earl of
Northumberland, as proper perfobns to conduct
and to add reputation to their enterprise ; that the
advised them, if possible, to excite at the fame
time some commotion in Ireland ; and above all,
besought them to concert with care the means of
her escape, suggesting to them several expedients
for that purpose.

L 2 ALL

B o o0 ALL these circumitances were opened at the

VII. trial of the conspirators. And while the nation

was under the influence of those terrors which the

i586.
Theindig. association had raised, and the late danger had
hn Eingi, augmented, they were believed without hesitation

hat 'herc or inquiry, and spread a general alarm. Mary's

(oui. zeal for her religion was well known; and in that

age, examples of the violent and sanguinary fpi-
rit which it inspired were numerous. All the ca-
bals against the peace of the kingdom for many
years had been carried on in her name; and it
now appears evidently, said the English, that the
safety of the one Queen is incompatible with that
of the other. Why then, added they, should
the tranquillity of England be sacrificed for the
fake of a stranger ? Why is a life so dear to the
nation exposed to the repeated assaults of an ex-
afperated rival ? The cafe supposed in the affo-
ciation has now happened, the sacred person of
our Sovereign has been threatened, and why
should not an injured people execute thatjuft re-
venge which they had vowed ?

Elieabeth NO sentiments could be more agreeable than
'olvsto there to Elizabeth and her Ministers. They them-
the utmon2 selves had at first propagated them among the
t2tremit.eS
against her. people, and they now served both as an apology

and a motive for their proceeding to such extre-
mities against the Scottish Queen as they had
long meditated. The more injuries Elizabeth
heaped on Mary, the more the feared and hated
that unhappy Queen, and came at last to be per-
fuaded that there could be no other security for
her own life, but the death of her rival. Bur-

leigh

leigh and Walsingham had promoted so zealously B o o i.
all her measures with regard to Scottish affairs ; VII.
and had aced, with so litle reserve, in opposition
to Mary, that they had reason to dread the mos I5 6.
violent efeTs of her resentment, if ever ihe
should mount the throne of England; and there-
fore they endeavoured to hinder an event so fatal
to themfclves, by confirming their Miftrefs's fear
and hatred of the Scottish Queen.

MEANWHILE, Mary was guarded with unusual nerdo-

*meffics, pa*

vigilance, and great care was taken to keep her mpecs, pac.
ignorant of the discovery of the conspiracy. Sir fizead,
Thomas Gorges was at laRi sent from court to ac-
quaint her both of it, and of the imputation with
which she was loaded as accessary to that crime;
and he surprised her with the accountjuft as she
had got on horseback to ride out along with her
keepers. She was 2truck with astonishment, and
would have returned to her apartment, but flh
was not permitted; and in her absence, her pril
vate closet was broke open, her cabinet and pa-
pers were seized, sealed, and sent up to court.
Her principal domeffics too were arrested, and
committed to different keepers. Naue and Curle,
her two'fecretaries, the one a native of France,
the other of Scotland, were carried prisoners to
London. All the money in her custody, amount-
ing to little more than 2000 pounds, was secured,
And after leading her about, for some days, from
one gentleman's house to another, she was con-
veyed to Fotheringay, a firong castle in Nor.
$hamptonflhire *.

* Camd. 517.

L 3 No

B o o K No farther evidence could now be expc6ecd a-
VII. gainft Mary, and nothing remained but to decide
* ', what should be her 'fate. With regard to this,
Deliberates Elizabeth, and those Miniffters in whom the chiefly
Conerdig confided, seem to have taken their resolution; but
of proceed- there was still great variety of fentinmnrs among

her other Counsellors. Some thought it fufficient
to difinifs all Mary's attendants, and to keep her
under such close refcraint, as would cut off all pof-
fibility of correiponding with the enemies of the
kingdom ; and as her confiitution, broken by
long confiement, and her lfpirit dejeiced vwith so
many cares, could not long lupport luch an addi-
tional load, the Qjeen and nation would soon be
delivered from all their fears. But though it
night be easy to fccure Mary's own person, it
was impossible to diminiih the reverence which
the Roman Cdtholics had for her name, or to ex-
tinguifh the compafion with whichi th-ey viewed
her fufferings ; while these coiintinuecd, infuriec-
tions and invasions would never be wanting for
her relief, and the only effect of any new rigour
would be to render them more freauent and
dangerous. For this reason the expedient was
rejeaed.

De'erminh A PUBLIC and legal trial, though the mots un-
'' tr 'e exampled, was judged the most unexceptionable

method of proceeding and it had, at the fame
time, a semblance of justice, accompanied with
an air of dignity. It was in vain to search the
ancient records for any statu:e or precedent to
justify such an uncommon fep, as the trial of a
foreign Prince, who hId not ei-r.t:ed the kingdom

i i-t

in arms, but had fled thither f'ir refuge. The B o o K
proceedings against her were founded on the act v II.
of last Parliament, and by applying it in this
manner, the intention of thoie who had framed
that severe itatute became more apparent *.

ELIZABETH resolved that no circumflance of

pomp or solemnity ffiould be wanting, which
could render this tranfadtion such as became the
dignity of the person to be tried. She appoint-
ed, by a commission under the great feal, forty
persons, the most illustrious in the kingdom by
their birth or offices, together with five of the
judges, to hear and decide this great cause. Ma-
ny difficulties were started by the lawyers about
the name and title by which Mary should be ar-
raigned; and while the efiuntials of justice were
so grossly violated, the empty forms of it were
the objeats of their care. They at length agreed
that she thould be flyled " Mary, daughter and
" heir of James V. late King of Scots, common-
" ly called QOeen of Scots, and Dowager of
" France 1."

AFTER the many indignities which fthe had late-

ly fuffered, Mary could no longer doubt but that
her deflruCion was determined. She expeced,
every moment, to end her days by poison, or by
some of those secret means usually employed
against captive Princes. And left the malice of
her enemies, at the fame time that it deprived her
of life, should endeavour likewise to blast her re-
putation, she wrote to the Duke of Guise, and

* Camrd. 519. Jolhn. Hit. 113.

" Strype, vil. 362,

L 4 vindi-

B o o K vindicated herfeif, in the strongest terms, fromr

V II. the imputation of encouraging or of being accef-
i;86. fary to the conspiracy for afaninatinng Elizabeth*.

In the solitude of her prison, the flrange reiblu-
tion of bringing her to a public trial had not
reached her ears, nor did the idea of any thing so
unprecedented, and so repugnant to regal Ma-
jeity, once enter into her thoughts.

'Th- trial at ON the eleventh of OGober, the Commiflioners

oy-"' appointed by Elizabeth arrived at Fothcringay.

Next morning tI'v delivered a letter from her to
Mary, in which, after the bitterciL reproaches and
accusations, fne informed her, that regard to her
own safety had, at lafL, rendered it necessary to
make a public inquiry into her condu&t, and
therefore required her, as fle had lived so long
under the protrcSion of the laws of England, to
submit now to the trial, which they ordained to

iary re- be taken of her crimes. Mary, though surprised
o pehad. at this meifage, was neither appalled at the dan-

ger, nor unmindful of her own dignity. She pro-
tefied, in the mos: solemn manner, that fe was
innocent of the crime laid to her charge, and had
never countenanced any attempt against the life
of the Queen of England; but, at the fame time,
refused to acknowledge the jurifdiiaion of her
commifioners. " I came into the kingdom,"
said she, " an independent Sovereign, to implore
" the Qjeen's aifiance, not to fubje& myself to
" her au:hority. Nor is my spirit so broken by
" its past misfortunes, or so intimidated by pre-

L' tent dangers, as to sloop to any thing unbe-

* Jebb, ii. 283.

" coming

C{ coming the Iva:etfy of a crowned hctd, or that BoOK
" will ditfrace the anceRors from vwhom I am VI1.
"c descended, and the son to whomn I thall leave

5 "

"c my throne. If I inuft be tried, Princes alone
" can be my Peers. The QC en of England's
" subjects, however noble the>r birth may be,
"( are of a rak;i inferior to mine. Ever since my
"( arriva:i in t::s L'.rdo-.n, I h.iae been conEned
" as a priinr.er. Iut laws never alorded me any
" protcc:io:. Let t:'"r n t now be perverted,
' in order t take away my life."
THE Coinini:fonners C.' loi,'d ar.umnen i and

intrcaties to overco ne Mary's rcio'urion. They
even threa'tcncd to ,roce>d accorid : to the forms
of law, and to paiG !entec;,e a:.inil: her on ac-
count of her (oiitumacy in refuiwng to pl,'ad ; she
perfilled, however, ifor two d cys to decline their
jurilliaion. An argument ufid by Ilatton, the
Vice-Chamberlain, at 1lft pievail'd. He told
her, that, by avoiding a trial, she injured her own
reputation, and dcpiived herself of the only op.
portunity of fet.in g hlr innocence in a clear liht;
and that nothing would be more . gr-cable to
them, or more acceptable to the Qeen their
Miftrcfs, than to be convinced, by undoubted
evidence, that she had been unjufly leaded wvith
foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible niould iimpofe Concento

on the unwary Qeen, or that thc, unaln'Cied, at do" .
that time, by any finend or counillor, floidul not
be able to dete&t and elude all the arti:ices of 1ii-
zabeth's ablest Miniilers. In a situation equally
melancholy, and under circumftarnces nearly si-

r $lilar,

B o o K milar, her Grandson, Charles I. refused, with the

VII. utmost firmnels, to acknowledge the usurped ju-
' rifdiaion of the High Court of Juff ice; and pof-
1586" terity has approved his condut, as suitable to the

dignity of a King. If Mary vnas less constant in
her resolution, it mu~ be imnputed fo!ely to her
anxious desire of vindicating her own honour.

ca
i s. AT her appearance before the Judges, who were

seated in the great hall of the caffle, where they
received her with much ceremnony, she took care
to protefl, that, by condescending to hear and to
give an aniwer to the accufat'ons which thould be
offered againfr her, she neithc: sianowledged the
jurifdicion of the court, ,nor admitted of the va-
lidity and justice of thoic aces by which they pre-
tended to try her.

THe Chancellor, by a co'.:ntcr-protcfiation, en-

deavoured to vindicate tie authority of the court.

Theaccu- T:;a: tle Queen's Attorney and Solicitor open-
faticn a.
gaiif ther. ed the charge againf her, with all the circum-

stances of the late conspiracy. Copies of her let-
ters to Mendoza, Babington, Englefield, and Paget
were produced. Babington's confcfion, those of
Ballard, Savage, and the other conspirators, to-
gether with the declarations of Nauc and Curie
her secretaries, were read, and tl,e whole ranged
in the moR specious order, which the art of the
lawyers could devise, and heightened by every co-
lour their eloquence could add.

MARY listened to their harangues attentively,

and without emotion. But at the mention of the
Earl of Arundel's name, who was then confined
in the Tower on suspicion of being acceflary to

the

the conspiracy, the broke out into this tender and B o K
generous exclamation : " Alas! how much has VII.
" the noble House of Howard fuffered for my '586

" fake!"

WHEN the Queen's counsel had finished, Mary uer de.
flood up, and with great magnanimity, and equal
presence of mind, began her defence. She be-
wailed the unhappiness of her own situation, that
after a captivity of nineteen years, during which
Ihe had fuffered treatment no less cruel than
unmerited, she was at last loaded with an ac-
cufation, which tenced not only to rob her of
her right of succession, and to deprive her of
life itself, but to tranfinit her name with in-
famy to future ages: That, without regarding
the sacred rights of Sovereignty, she was now
fubjeaed to laws framed againflt private persons;
though an anointed Queen, commanded to ap-
pear before the tribunal of fubjeEts~ and, like a
common criminal, her honour exposed to the pe-
tulant tongues of lawyers, capable of wresting
her words, and of misrepresenting her actions :
That, even in this dishonourable situation, the
was denied the privileges usually granted to cri-
minals, and obliged to undertake her own de-
fence, without the presence of any friend with
whom to advise, without the aid of counsel, and
without the ufc of her own papers.

SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in

the accusation. She absolutely denied any corre-
fpondence with Babington: The nrme of Ballard
was not so much as known to her: Copies only
of her pretended letters to them were produced:

thorugh

B o o K though nothing less than her hand-writing or sub-

VII. scription was fbfiicient to convi.e her of such an
t- odious crime: No proof could be brought that

"86. the letters were dlcivered into her hands, or that

any answer was returned by her dirction : The
conicffions cf wretches condemned and executed
for such a de:-efible a&cion, were of little weight;
fear or hope might extort from them many things
inconsistent with truth, nor ought the honour of
a Q.cen to be ftainil by such vile tefirnony,
The declaration of her secretaries was not more
conciufive: Promises and threats might easily
overcome the resolution of t;wo f; angers ; in or-
der to screen themi:ives, they might throw the
blame on her; but they could discover nothing
to her prejudice, wikhout violating, in the first
place, their oath of fidelity; and their perjury,
in one infcance, rendered them unworthy of cre-
dit in another: The letters to the Spanifhl Am-
baffador were either nothing more than copies, or
contained only what was perfc&ly innocent: "I
" have often," ccntinued she, " nmade such es-
" forts for the recovery of my liberty, as are
"c natural to a human creatuir. And convinced,
cc by the ".-I experience of ob many years, that
" it was \.n to expex it from the jufice or ge-
" nerofly of the Queen of England, I have fre-
"c quentiy solicited foreign Princes, and called
C on a'l my friends to employ their whole in-
" tereu for my relief. I have, likewise, endea-
" vourcd to procure for the English Catholics
" iome mitigation of the rigour with which they
"( are now treated; and if I could hope, by my
" death, to deliver them from oppreflion, I am

" willing

<c willing to die for their fake. I wilth, how- BooK
" ever, to imitate the example of Efthcr, not of VII.
" Judith, and would rather make intercession for 586.
" my people, than flhed the blood of the meanefti
" creature, in order to five them. I have often
" checked the in:emperate zeal of my adherents,
" when either the severity of their own perse-
" cutions, or indign itian at the unheard-of in-
" juries which I have endured, were apt to pre-
" cipitate them into violent councils. I have
" even warned the Queen, of dangers to which
" these harsh proceedings expoftd herself. And
" worn out, as I now am, with cares and sus-
" ferings, the profped of a Crown is not so in-
" viting, that I ihould ruin my foul in order to
" obtain it. I am no flranger to the feelings of

" humanity, nor unacquainted with the duties of
" religion, and abhor the deteflable crime of
" affadfination, as equally repugnant to both.
" And, if ever I have given corefnt by my
" words, or even by my thoughts, to any at-
" tempt against the life of the Queen of Eng-
" land, far from declining the judgment of
" men, I shall not even pray for the mercy of
" God *."

Two different days did Mary appear before the
Judges, and in every part of her behaviour main-
tained the magnanimity of a Queen, tempered
with the gentleness and modefly of a woman.

THE Commifioners, by Elizabeth's express sentence a

command, adjourned, without pronouncing any nab.s.

* Camd. 520, &c.

sentence,

BOOK sentence, to the Star-Chamber in Weftminfler.

VII. When assembled in that place, Naue and Curie

6"

- were brought into court, and confirmed their

former declaration upon oath. And after review-
ing their whole proceedings, the Commissioners
unanimously declared Mary " To be accessary
"( to Babington's conspiracy, and to have ima-
"c gined diverse matters, tending to the hurt,
CC death, and deftrucion of Elizabeth, contrary
"c to the express words of the statute, made for
" the security of the Queen's life *."

irregulari. IT is no easy matter to determine whether the
ties in the . . . .
trial. injustice in appointing this trial, or the irregula-

rity in conduaing it, were greatest and most
flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim au-
thority over an independent Queen ? Was Mary
bound to comply with the laws of a foreign
kingdom? How could the fubjeas of another
Prince become her judges ? or if such an infuit
on royalty were allowed, ought not the common
forms of justice to have been obfcrved ? If the
testimony of Babington and his associates were
so explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare them
for a few weeks, and, by confronting them with
Mary, overwhelm her with the full conviction of
her crimes ? Naue and Curie were both alive,
wherefore did not they appear at Fotheringay,
and for what reason were they produced in the
Star-Chamber, where Mary was not present to
hear what they deposed ? Was this suspicious

* Camd. 525.

evidence

evidence enough to condemn a Queen ? Ought B o oi
the meanest criminal to have been found guilty VII.
upon such feeble and inconclusive proofs ? o/.

IT was not, however, on the evidence pro-

duced at her trial, that the sentence againfl Mary
was founded. That served as a pretence tojufli-
fy, but was not the cause of the violent steps
taken by Elizabeth and her Minifers towards her
deftruaion; and was employed to give some ap-
pearance of justice to what was the ofispring of
jealousy and fear. And the nation, blinded with
resentment against Mary, and solicitous to secure
the life of its own Sovereign from every danger,
observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and
attended to no defecs in the proof, but grasped
at suspicions and probabilities, as if they had
been irrefragable demonstrations.

THE parliament met a few days after sentence The par];a.

was pronounced against Mary. In that illustrious rmthe"
assembly more temper and discernment than are efntence,
to be found among the people, might have been
expefted. Both Lords and Commons, however,
were equally under the dominion of popular pre-
judices and paflions, and the fame excesses of
zeal or of fear, which prevailed in the nation,
are apparent in all their proceedings. They en-
tered with impatience upon an enquiry into the
conspiracy, and the danger which threatened the
Queen's life and the peace of the kingdom. All
the papers, which had been produced at Fothe-
ringay, were laid before them. And after many
violent inve&tives against the Queen of Scots,

both

B o OK both Houses, unanimously, ratified the proceed-

VII. in~s of the Conmiflioners by whom hr c had been

86. tried, and declared the sentence againfL her to be

a...,onn just and well f';unded. Not fatisicd xwith this,

C';.... they preJfnted a joint address to the Q'.:cn, be-

f1 e:ing hb r, ?..s lfe regarded her own iaicyir, the
preservation of the Protetfant religion, the wel-
lare and v. isles of her people, to publiflh the fen-
tcLce; and without farther delay to iniliJ on a
rival, no less irreclaimable than dangerous, the
puniflhment which fie had merited by so many
crimes. This requeff, dirated by fears unworthy
of that great AlTembly, was enforced by reasons
still more unworthy. They weie drawn Lot from
jufdice, but from conveniency. The mo1l rigorous
confinement, it was pretended, could not curb Ma-
ry's intriguing spirit; her address was found, by
long experience, to be an overmatch for the vi-
gilance and jealousy of all her keepers: The feve-
reft penal laws could not relfrain her adherents,
who, while they believed her person to be sacred,
would despise any danger to which themselves
alone were expofcd: Several foreign Princes were
ready to second their attempts, and waited only a
proper opportunity for invading the kingdom, and
asserting the Scottish Queen's title to the Crown.
Her life, for these reasons, was incompatible with
Elizabeth's safety, and if the were spared out of
a salic clemency, the Queen's person, the re-
ligion and liberties of the kingdom, could not
be one moment secure. Necessity required that
ihe should be sacrificed in order to preserve

these;

thee ; and to prove this sacrifice to be no lets juii B oo or
than neceiTary, several examples in hitory were VII.
produced, and many texts of scripture quo:'d, but

86.

both the one and the other were nmifappiicd, and
diftorred from their true mcaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable zEl;1-'h's

to Elizabeth than an addrcfs in this slain. It ex- tnon.,
tricated her out of a situation extremely cmbar-
rafling; and without depriving her of the power
of sparing, it enabled her to puniLh her rival with
less appearance of blame. If Ihe chie the for-
mer, the whole honour would redound to her own
clemency. If the determined on the latter, what-
ever was rigorous might now seem to be extorted
by the folicitations of her people, rather than to
flow from her own inclination. Her anfiver, how-
ever, was in a flyle which ihe often utfed, ambi-
guous and evasive, under the appearance of open-
nets and candour; full of such profemfons of re-
gard for her people, as served to heighten their
loyalty; of tfch complaints of Mary's ingrati-
tude, as were calculated to excite their indig-
nation ; and of such insinuations that her own life
was in danger, as could not fail to keep alive their
fears. In the end, the besought them to save her
the infamy and the pain of delivering up a Queen,
her nearest kinlwoman, to punifhmentr and to
confider whether it might not frill be polible to
provide for the public security, without forcing
her to imbrue her hands in royal blood.

THE true meaningof this reply was easily under-
flood. The Lords and Commons renewed their
former request, with additional imFortunity, which

VOL. II, M was

B o o K was far from being either unexpeaed or offen-

VII. live. Elizabeth did not return any answer more
Seex:piici -; and havino obtained such a public fanc-

tion of her proceedings, there was no longer any
reason for protracing this kcene of dimirulation}
theie was even floae danger that her feigned dif-
ficulties might at lalP be treated as real ones; she
therefore adjourned the parliament, and reserved
in her own hands the sole difpolal of her rival's
fate :"

France in- Ar.L the Princes in Europe obfcrved the pro-
e°
r ceedings against Mary with affonilhient and hor-
lehalfof ror; and even Henry III. notwihhilanding his

known aversion to the house of Guiie, was obligcd
to interpose in her behalf, and to appear in de-
fence of the common rights of royalty. Aube-
spine his resident Ambalthdor, and Bellievre, who
was sent with an extraordinary commission to the
fame purpose, interceded for Mary with great ap-

Nov. i. pearance of warmth. They employed all the

arguments which the cause naturally suggested;
they pleaded from juilice, from generosity, and
humanity; they intermingled reproaches and
threats. But to all thefte Elizabeth continued
deaf and inexorable; and having received some
intimation of Henry's real unconcern about the
fate of the Scottish Queen, and knowing his
antipathy to all the race of Guise, the trusted,
that thcfe loud rcmonftrancos would be followed
by no violent refentiimcnt t.

Jarnes en- SHE paid no greater regard to the folicitationsof
deav0to s t)
sav~ hin:0- the Scottish King, which, as they were urged with

.

Camd. cz6. D'Ewes, 373. - Camdl. 53'.

more

-·

tnore sincerity, merited more attention. Though B o o K
her commiflioners had been extremely careful to VII.
sooth James, by publishing a declaration that their

i 86.

sentence against Mary did, in no degree, derogate
from his honour, or invalidate any title which he
formerly poffeffed; he beheld the indignities to
which his mother had been exposed with filial con-
cern, and with the sentiments which became a
King. The pride of the Scottish nation was
routed, by the insult offered to the blood of their
Monarchs, and called upon him to employ the
most vigorous efforts, in order to prevent or to
revenge the Queen's death.

AT firit, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth

would venture upon an action so unprecedented,
which tended so visibly to render the persons of
Princes less sacred in the eyes of the people, and
which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at
other times, she was so remarkably jealous. But
as soon as the extraordinary steps which fihe took
discovered her intention, he dispatched Sir Wil-
liam Keith to London; who, together with
Douglas his Ambassador in ordinary, remon-
ftrated, in the strongest terms, against the in-
jury done to an independent Queen, in fubjeat-
ing her to be tried like a private person, and by
laws to which ihe owed no obedience; and be-
fought Elizabeth not to add to this injury, by
fuffering a sentence unjust in itself, as well as
dishonourable to the King of Scots, to be put into
execution *.

* See Appendix, No. XIII.

M 2 ELIZA-

B o o K ELIZABETH returning no answer to these re,

VII. monifrances of his ambassador, James wrote to
-^' her with his own hand, complaining in the bitterest
I 86. terms of her condut, not without threats that

both his duty and his honour would oblige him to
renounce her friendship, and to a& as became a
ton when called to revenge his mother's wrongs*.
At the fame time he assembled the nobles, who
promised to ifand by him in so good a cause. He
appointed ambassadors to France, Spain, and Den-
mark, in order to implore the aid of these courts;
and took other steps towards executing his threats
with vigour. The high strain of his letter en-
raged Elizabeth to such a degree, that ihe was
ready to dismiss his ambassadors without any reply.
But his preparations alarmed and embarrassed her
Miniflers, and at their intreaty she returned a soft
and evasive answer, promiling to listen to any
overture from the King, that tended to his mo-
ther's safety; and to suspend the execution of the
sentence, till the arrival of new ambassadors from
Scotland t.

Decem. 6. MEANWHILE, fie commanded the sentence
The fen-
tce"'- against Mary to be published, and forgot not to
gain Ma ry inform the people, that this was extorted from her

by the repeated intreaty of both houses of Parlia-
ment. At the fame time the dispatched Lord
Buckhurft and Beale to acquaint Mary with the
sentence, and how importunately the nation de-
manded the execution of it; and though the had
not hitherto yielded to these folicitations, the ad-

* Birch. Mem. i. 52. 1- Spotfw. 251. Cald. iv. 5.

vised

vised her to prepare for an event which might be- B o o K
come neceflary. for securing the Proteflant reli- VII.
gion, as well as quieting the minds of the people.
Mary received the meflage not only without fymp-
,toms of fear, but with exprefions of triumph.
" No wonder, said lhe, the English should now
" thirst for the blood of a foreign Prince, they
" have often offered violence to their own Mo-
" narchs. But after lo many tfucrings, death
" comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I am
" proud to think th e my life is esteemed of im-
" portance to the Catholic religion, and as a
"( martyr for it I am now willing to die *."

AFTER the publication of the sentence, Mary she ;s treat.

was stripped of every remaining mark of royalty. ,mo'r'i.
The canopy of frate in her apartment was pulled gsoT.
down; Paulet entered her chamber, and approach-
ed her person without any ceremony; and even ap-
peared covered in her presence. Shocked with
these indignities, and offended at this gross fa-
miliarity, to which flhe had never been accuf-
tomed, Mary once more complained to Elizabeth ; Decrr. 19.
and at the fame time, as her last request, intreated
that she would permit her servants to carry her
dead body into France, to be laid among her an-
ceftors, in hallowed ground; that some of her
domeftics might be present at her death, to beai
witners of her innocence, and firm adlheence to
the Catholic faith; that all her fervar~ts might
be fuffered to leave the kingdom, and to enjoy
those finall legacies which the should bellow on
them, as testimonies of her affection ; and that,

* Camd. 5z8. Jebb, 291.

M 3 In

B o o K in the mean time, her almoner, or rome other

VII. Catholic Pries, might be allowed to attend her,
L "" and to afIift her in preparing fbor an eternal world.

5 She beibught her, in the name of Jesus, by the

foul and memory of Henry VII. their common
progenitor, by their near consanguinity, and the
royal dignity with which they were both inverted,
to gratify her in these particulars, and to indulge
her so far as to signify her conmpliance by a letter
under her own hand. VWhether Mary's letter vas
ever delivered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No
answer was returned, and no regard paid to her
requests. She was offered a Proteflant Bilhop or
Dean to attend her. Them the rejected, and with-
out any clergyman to direEt her devotions, Ihe pre-
pared, in great tranquillity, for the approach of
death, which fle now believed to be at no great
distance *.

1587" JAMES, without losing a moment, fcnt new am-
e s his baffadors to London. Thefre were the MaKter of
fvlicita

.m

iu'h r b-' Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil. In order to remove

ST,. Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Mater

would become bound that no conspiracy should be
undertaken against her person, or the peace of the
kingdom, with Mary's consent ; and for the faith-
ful performance of this, would deliver iome of
the mofo considerable of the Scottish nobles as
hoftages'. If this were not thought fiiufcient, they
proposed that Mary ihould resign all her rights
and precenlons to her son, from whom nothing
injuoions to the Protestant religion, or inconfift-
cnt with Elizabeth's safety, could be feared. Ths

SC3;md. 18 Jebb, ii 2. g-

0ormer proposal Elizabeth rejeted as insecure; B o oK
the latter, as dangerous. The Ambatliadors were VII.
then inftru&ed to tallk in a higher tone; and Mi.1- '
vil execured the comnmifflin with fidity and with
zeal. But Gray, with his usual perfidy, deceived
his Master, who trufled him with a nego:iation of
lb much importance, and betra: .d the Q:een
whom he was em loved to five. He encouraged
and urged Elizabeth to execut:e thefentence agaminf
her rival, I-ie often repcat. d tLe old proverbial
sentence, " The dead cannot bite." And what-
ever should happen, he undertook to pacify the
King's rage, or at 1kac to prevent any violent es-
feds of his resentment *.

ELIZADETH, meanwhile, discovered all the fymp- E!iz.b,t'i

toms of the most violent agitation and disquietude ,,ii, l
of mind. She thunned society, she was often found t".,
ini a melancholy and mufng porfure, and repeat-
ing, with much emphasis, theire sentences which the
borrowed from so;ne of the devices then in vogue;
Aitfer aut feri; ne fe;iar', fri. Much, no doubt,
of this apparent uncalnelfn mufl be imputed to
diflimulation ; it was impofible, however, that a
Princess, naturally lo cautious as Elizabeth, sho::!d
venture on an action, which might expose her nme-
mory to infamy, and her life and kingdom to dan-
ger, without refle&ing deeply, and helitating long.
The people waited her determination in suspense
and anxiety; and left their fear or their zeal thould
[fbfide, rumours of danger were artfully invented,
and propagated with the utmost industry ; Aube-
spine, the French Ambassador, was accufdd of

* Spotfw. 352. Murdin, 56S. See Append. No. XIV.

M 4 having

B o o Kc having suborned an affaflin to murder the Qjcen.

VII. The Spanith fleet was said by frome to be already
'-"'' arrived at Milford-haven. Ochers affirmed that

587" the Duke of Guile had landed with a firong army

in Sussex. Now, it was reported that the Northern
Counties were up in arms; next day, that the
Scots had entered England with all their forces;
and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was on foot
for seizing the Queen, and burning the city. The
panic grew every clay more violent 3 and the peo-
ple, astonished and enraged, called for the execu-
tion of the sentence against Mary, as the only
thing which could restore tranquillity to the king-
dom *

warrn n'¢or WHILE these sentiments prevailcd among her
c .... '7. fubjeAs, Elizabeth thought fne l<ight safely ven-
rb:urry I. ture to strike the blow, which ihe had so long me-

ditated. She commanded Davison, one of the fe-
cretaries of slate, to bring to her the fatal warrant;
and her behaviour, on that occalion, plainly lhewed
that it is not to humanity that we must subscribe
her forbearance hitherto. At the very momentflhe
was subscribing the writ which gave up a woman,
a Queen, and her own nearefb relation, into the
hands of the executioner, the was capable ofjeft.
ing. " Go, says he to Davison, and tell Walfing-
ham what I have now done, though I am afraid he
will die for grief when he hears it." Her chief
anxiety was now to secure the advantages which
would arise from Mary's death, without appearing
to have given her consent to a deed so infamous.
SLh often hinted to Paulet and Druiy, as well as

* Camd. 5:3, 534.

to some other courtiers, that now was the time to B oo K
discover the sincerity of their concern for her safe- VII.
tv, and that flhe expeaed their zeal would extricate „
her out of her present perplexity. But they were
wife enough to seem not to underitand her mean-
ing. Even after the warrant was signed, ihe com-
manded a letter to be written to Paulet, in less
ambiguous terms, complaining of his remifnhefs
.in sparing so long the life of her capital enemy,
and begging him to remember at last what was in-
cumbent on him as an affe&ionate fubjet, and to
deliver his Sovereign from continual fear and dan-
ger, by shortening the days of his prisoner. Paulet,
though rigorous and harsh, and often brutal in the
discharge of what he thought his duty, as Mary's
keeper, was nevertheless a man of honour and in-
tegrity. He rejeAed the proposal with disdain;
and lamenting that he should ever have been deem-
ed capable of acting the part of an affaffin, he de-
clared that the Queerr might dispose of his life at
her pleasure, but he would never stain his own ho-
nour, nor leave ap'everlafting mark of infamy on
his posterity, lif lending his hand to perpetrate so
foul a crime/ On the receipt of this answer, Eli-
sabeth became extremely peevish; and calling him
a dainty and precise fellow, who would promise
much, but perform nothing, the proposed to em-
ploy one Wingfield, who had both courage and
inclination to strike the blow *. But Davison re-
monfarating against this method, as no less dan-
gerous than dithonourable, the again declared her
intention that the sentence pronounced by the com-

* Biogr. Britan. Article Daw/son.
c miffoners

B OO K miffioners should be executed according to lawI

VII. and as she had already signed the warrant, the
57'7" begged that no farther application might be made

to her on that head, By this the privy counsellors
thought themselves fufficiently authorised to pro-
ceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by zeal
for the Queen's safety, or instigated, as is more
probable, by the apprehension of the danger to
which they would themselves be exposed, if the
life of the QuOeen of Scots were spared, they as-
fembled in the Council Chamber, and by a let-
ter under all their hands, empowered the Earls
of Shrewsbury and Kent, together with the High
Sheriff of the county, to fee the sentence put in

execution ÷.

Mary's be. ON Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls
hcr'dfath, arrived at Fotheringay, and demanded access to

the Queen, read in her presence the warrant for
execution, and required her to prepare to die next
morning. Mary heard them to the end without
emotion, and crossing herfelfin the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
" That foul," said she, " is not worthy the joys of
Heaven, which repines because the body must
endure the stroke of the executioner; and though
I did not expect that the Queen of England would
set the first example of violating the sacred person
of a Sovereign Prince, I willingly submit to that
which Providence has decreed to be my lot." And
laying her hand on a Bible, which happened to
be near her, flhe solemnly proteffed that the was
innocent of that conspiracy which Babington had

9 Camd. 534. Strype, iii. 361. 364.

carried

carried on against Elizabeth's life *. She then B o o i.
mentioned the requests contained in her letter to VII.
Elizabeth, but obtained no fatisfatory answer. '--'--
She entreated with particular earneflnefs, that now 1587*
in her last moments, her Almoner might be sus-
fered to attend her, and that the might enjoy the
consolation of those pious in'titutions prescribed
by her religion. Even this favour, which is ufu-
ally granted to the vilest criminal, was absolutely
denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were

bathed in tears, and though overawed by the pre-
fence of the two Earls, with difficulty fupprefied
their anguish; but no sooner did Kent and Shrews-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their Miffrefs,
and burst out into the most passionate expressions
of tenderness and sorrow. Mary, however, not
only retained perse&2 composure of mind, but en-
deavoured to moderate their excessive grief. And
fallingon her knees, with all her domeftics round
her, the thanked Heaven that her fufferings were
now so near an end, and prayed that she might
be enabled to endure what still remained with de-
cency and with fortitude. The greater part of
the evening she employed in fettling her worldly
affairs. She wrote her testament with her own
hand. Her money, her jewels, and her clothes,
the difiributed among her servants, according to
their rank or merit. She wrote a short letter to
the King of France, and another to the Duke of
Guise, full of tender but magnanimous sentiments,
and recommended her foul to their prayers, and

* Jebb, ii. 301,

J not only with ease, but with cheerfulness; she

187* drank to every one of her servants, and asked their

forgiveness, if ever she had failed in any part of
her duty towards them. At her wonted time the
went to bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early
in the morning the retired into her closet, and em-
ployed a considerable time in devotion. At eight
o'clock, the High Sheriff and his officers entered
her chamber, and found her fill kneeling at the
altar. She immediately started up, and with a ma,
jeftic mien, and a countenance undismayed, and
even cheerful, advanced towards the place of ex-
ecution, leaning on two of Paulet's attendants.
She was dressed in a mourning habit, but with an
elegance and splendour which she had long laid
aside, except on a few festival days. An Agnus Dei
hung by a pomander chain at her neck; her beads
at her girdle; and in her hand she carried a cru-
cifix of ivory. At the bottom of the stairs the two
Earls, attended by several gentlemen from the
neighbouring counties, received her; and there Sir
Andrew Melvil, the Master of her Houfhold, who
had been secluded, for some weeks, from her pre-
fence, was permitted to take his la.t farewelt. A.
the fight of a Miffrefs whom he tenderly loved, in
such a situation, he melted into tears; and as he
was bewailing her condition, and complaining of
his own hard fate in being appointed to carry the
account of such a mournful event into Scotland,
Mary replied, " Weep not, good Melvil, there is
at present greater cause for rejoicing. Thou shalt

this

this day fee Mary Stuart delivered from all her B o o K
care<, and such an end put to her tedious fuffer- VII.
ings, as the has long expekced. Bear witness that
I die constant in my rei;gion; firm in my fidelity

7

towards Scotland; and unchanged in my affection
to France. Commend me to my son. Tell him
I have done nothing injurious to his kinrgdom, to
his honour, or to his rights; and God forgive all
those who have thirtled, without cause, for my
blood."

WVITH much difficulty, and after many intrea-

ties, she prevailed on the two Earls to allow Mel-
vil, together with three of her men servants, and
two of her maids, to attend her to the fcatrold. It
was erected in the fame hall where she had been
tried, raised a little above the floor, and covered,
as well as a chair, the cushion, and block, with
black cloth. Mary mounted the fleps with ala-
crity, beheld all this apparatus of death with an
unaltered countenance, and signing herself with
the crols, the fat down in the chair. Beale read the
warrant for execution with a loud voice, to which
(he listened with a careless air, and like one occu-
pied in other thoughts. Then the Dean of Pe-
terborough began a devout discourse, suitable to
her present condition, and offered up prayers to
Heaven in her behalf; but she declared that the
could not in confcicnce hearken to one, nor join
with the other ; and falling on her knees, repeated
a Latin prayer. When the Dean had fiiniihed his
devotions, ihe, with an audible voice, and in the
English tongue, recommended unto God the as-
flicted slate of the Church, and prayed for profpe-

rity

B o o K rity to her son, and for a long life and peaceable

VII. reign to Elizabeth. She declared that she hoped
-- for mercy only through the death of Christ, at the
15 7. foot of whose image the now willingly shed her

blood; and lifting up, and kiifing the crucifix, ihe
thus addressed it, " As thy arms, O Jesus, were
extended ,'n the Cross; so with the outifretched
arms of thy mercy receive me, and forgive my
fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off

her veil, and upper garments; and one of the ex-
ecutioners rudely endeavouring to assist, fle gently
checked him, and said, with a simile, that flbe had
not been accustomed to undress before so many
fpe&ators, nor to be served by such valets. With
calm but undaunted fortitude, she laid her neck
on the block; and while one executioner held her
hands, the other, at the second stroke, cut off her
head, which falling out of its attire, discovered her
hair already grown quite grey with cares and for-
rows. The executioner held it up still ilreaming
with blood, and the Dean crying out, C" So perish
all Queen Elizabeth's enemies," the Earl of Kent
alone answered Amen. The reft of the fpeaators
continued silent, and drowned in tears; being in-
capable, at that moment, of any other sentiments
but those of pity or admiration *.

Sentiments SuCH was the tragical death of Mary Queen of
rof o.i'a"'n Scots, after a life of forty-four years and two
concernng
her. months, almost nineteen years of which she passed

in captivity. The political parties which were
formed in the kingdom, during her reign, have

* Camd. 534. Spotfw. 355. Jebb, ii. 300. Strype, iii. 383.

sub-

subsisted, under various denominations, ever since B o o
that time. The rancour, with which they were at VII.
irft animated, hath descended to succeeding ages,
and their prejudices, as well as their rage, have
' been perpetuated, and even augmented. Among

Historians, who were under the dominion of all.
these passions, and who have either ascribed to her
every virtuous and amiable quality, or have im-
puted to her all the vices, of which the human
heart is susceptible, we search in vain for Mary's
real chara&er. She neither merited the exag-
gerated praises of the one, nor the undiftinguifhing
censure of the other.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost Her chz.

elegance of external form, she added those accom-
plifhments, which render their impression irrefifti-
ble. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and ca-
pable of speaking and of writing with equal ease
and dignity. Sudden, however, and violent in all
her attachments; because her heart was warm and
unfufpicious. Impatient of contradiction; because
the had been accustomed from her infancy to be
treated as a Queen. No (tranger, on some occa-
fions, to dissimulation; which, in that perfidious
court where she received her education, was rec-
koned among the necessary arts of government.
Not insensible of flattery, or unconscious of that
pleasure, with which almost every woman beholds
the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities which we love, not with the talents
that we admire; she was an agreeable woman ra-
ther than an illustrious Queen. The vivacity of
her spirit not fufficiently tempered with found

judg-

B o o K judgment, and the warmth of her heart, which

VII. was not, at all times, under the refraint of
'"v' discretion, betrayed her both into errors, and
1587" into crimes. To fay that she was always unfor-

tunate, will not account for that long and almost
uninterrupted succession of calamities which be-
fel her; we must likewise add that she was often
imprudent. Her passion for Darnly was rash,
youthful, and excerlive. And though the fud-
den transition to the opposite extreme was the
natural effect of her ill-requited love, and of his
ingratitude, insolence, and brutality; yet nei-
ther these, nor Bothwell's artful address and im-
portant services, can justify her attachment to
that nobleman. Even the manners of the age,
licentious as they were, are no apology for this
unhappy pafflion; nor can they induce us to look
on that tragical and infamous scene which fol-
lowed upon it with less abhorrence. Humanity
will draw a veil over this part of her charaater
which it cannot approve, and may, perhaps,
prompt some to impute her adtions to her fitua-
tion, more than to her dispositions; and to la-
ment the unhappiness of the former, rather than
accuse the perverseness of the latter. Mary's sus-
ferings exceed, both in degree and in duration,
those tragical difireffes which fancy has feigned to
excite sorrow and commiseration ; and while we
survey them, we are apt altogether to forget her
frailties, we think of her faults with less indig-
nation, and approve of our tears, as if they were
thed for a person who had attained much nearer
to pure virtue.

WITH

WITH regard to the Queen's person, a circum- B o o Kc

stance not to be omitted in writing the hiflory of a VLI.
female reign, all cotemporary authors agree in as- ,
cribing to Mary the utmont beauty of countenance,
and elegance of ihape, of which the human form
is capable. iHer hair was black, though, accord-
ing to the fashion of that age, she frequently wore
borrowed locks, and of different colours. Her
eyes were a dark grey ; her complexion was ex-
quifitely fine; and her hands and arms remarkably
delicate, both as to shape and colour. Her stature
was of an height that role to the majcttic. She
danced, ihe walked, and rode with equal grace.
Her taffte for mulic was iuft, and the both sung and
played upon the lute with uncommon skill. To-
wards the end of her life the began to grow fat;
and her long cotnfiriement, and the coldncf of the
houses in which ihe had been imprisoned, brought
on a rheumatifim, which deprived her of the use of
her limbs. No man, sa.ys Brantome, ever beheld
her person without admiration and love, or will
read her hifrory without sorrow.

NONE of her women were fuffcred to come near
her dead body, which was carried into a room ad-
joining to the place of execution, where it lay, for
fame days, covered with a coarse cloth torn from a
billiard table. The block, the fc 'ffold, the aprons
of the executioners, and every thing fiained with
her blood, were reduced to alhes. Not long afcer,
Elizabeth appointed her body to be buried in the
Cathedral of Peterborough with royal Inagnifi-
cence. But this vulgar artifice was enmployed in
vain; the pageantry of a pompous funeral did

VOL. II. N not

B oo oK not efface the memory of those injuries, which

VII. laid Mary in her grave. James, soon after his
.-.7- accession to the English throne, ordered her body

I87" to be removed to Weftminfter-abbey, and to be

deposited among the Monarchs of England.

lizabeth ELIZABETH affe&ed to receive the accounts of
Lment'Ma. Mary's death with the most violent emotions of

ry's death. surprise and of concern. Sighs, tears, lamenta-

tions and mourning, were all employed to display
the reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident
marks of dissimulation and artifice may be traced
through every period of Elizabeth's proceedings
against the life of the Scottish Queen. The com-
mission for bringing Mary to a public trial was
seemingly extorted from her by the intreaties of
her privy counsellors. She delayed publiihing
the sentence against her till she was twice solicit-
ed by both Houses of Parliament. Nor did she
sign the warrant for execution without the utmost
apparent reluatance. One scene more of the bold-
eft and mofft solemn deceit remained to be exhi-
bited. She undertook to make the world believe
that Mary had been put to death without her
knowledge, and against her will. And Davison,
who neither fufpe&ed her intention, nor his own
danger, was her infirument in carrying on this
artifice, and fell a victim to it.
' IT was his duty, as Secretary of Sate, to lay
before her the warrant for execution, in order to
be signed; and, by her command, he carried it
to the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that
the had charged him not to communicate what
the had done to any person, nor to fuffer the war-

rant

rant to go out of his hands, without her express B o o K
permiflion; that, in contempt of this order, he VII.
had not only revealed the matter to several of her

17

Ministers, but had, in concert with them, affem-
bled her Privy Counsellors, by whom, without
her consent or knowledge, the warrant was issued,
and the Earls of Shrewlbury and Kent impowered
to put it in execution. Though Davison denied
all this, and with circumstances which bear the
strongest marks of truth and credibility; though
it can scarce be conceived that her Privy Council,
composed of the persons in whom the most con-
sided, of her Ministers and favourites, would as-
femble within the walls of her palace, and ven-
ture to transact a matter of so much importance,
without her privity, and contrary to her inclina-
tion; yet so far did she carry her diflimulation,
that, with all the signs of displeasure and of rage,
the banished most of her Counsellors out of her
presence; and treated Burleigh, in particular, so
harshly, and with such marks of disgust, that he
gave up himself for loft, and in the deepest as-
fliction wrote to the Queen, begging leave to re-
sign all his places, that he might retire to his own
estate. Davison she instantly deprived of his of-
fice, and committed him a close priboner to the
Tower. He was soon after brought to a solemn March.
trial in the Star Chamber; condemned to pay a
fine of o,0ooo pounds, and to be imprisoned du-
ring the Queen's pleasure. He languiflhed feve-
ral years in confinement, and never recovered
any degree of favour or of power. As her jea-
lousy and fear had bereaved tlhe Queen of Scots

N 2 - of

B o o K of life, in order to palliate this part of her con-

VII. dua, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing the
S7 reputation and happiness of one of the most vir-

tuous and able men in her kingdom *.

Elizabeth THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better *
codeavours
,- (oth name, furnished Elizabeth, however, with an apo-
James. logy to the King of Scots. As the profpe&t of

his mother's danger had excited the King's filial
care and concern, the account of her death filled
him with grief and resentment. His fubjeas felt
the dishonour done to him, and to the nation.
In order to sooth both, Elizabeth infltantly dif-
patched Robert Carey, one of Lord Hunfdane's
ions, with a letter expressing her extreme afflic-
tioni on account of that miserable accident, which,
as she pretended, had happened far contrary to her
appointment, or intention. James would not per-
mit her messenger to enter Scotland; and with
some difficulty received a memorial he sent from
Berwick. It contained the tale concerning Da-
vifon, dressed up with all the circumstances which
tended to exculpate Elizabeth, and to throw the
whole blame on his rashness or treachery. Such
a defence gave little fatisfa&ion, and was confi-
dered as mockery added to insult; and many of
the nobles, as well as the King, breathed nothing
but revenge. Elizabeth was extremely solicitous
to pacify them, and neither wanted instruments
nor reasons to gain her end. Leicester wrote to
the King, and Walsingham to Secretary Maitland.
They represented the certain deffruaion to which
James would expose himself, if, with the forces of

* Camd. 536. Strype, iii. 370.

Scotland

Scotland alone, he should venture to attack a B o o K
kingdom so far superior in power; that the hitfory VII.
of past a~es, as well as his mother's aid expe- 1587.
rience, might convince him, that nothing could be
more dangerous, or deceitful, than dependaace on
foreign aid; that the King of France would never
wish to fee the British kingdoms un;ted under one
Monarch, nor contribute to invest a Prince ib
nearly allied to the House of Guise with such for-
midable power; that Philip might be a more ac-
tive ally, but would certainly prove a more dan-
gerous one, and, ui.der pretence of aftifling him,
would assert his own light to the Engluh Crown,
which he already began openly to claim ; that the
fame statute, on which the ferctence of death
against his mother had been founded, would jus-
tify the excluding him from the ficc-"mon to the
Crown; that the 11nglifh, naturally averse fiom
the dominion of ftranp;ers, would not fuil, if cx-
afperated by his hoPiilities, to apply it in that man-
ner; that Elizabeth was difoofed to repair the
wrongs which the mother had rt rered, by her tin-
dcrnels and afCcfrion towards the ion ; and that, by
engaging in a fruilefs war, he would deprive hiin-
felfof a noble inheritance, which, by culcivarig.i
her friendfnip, he nmuit infallibly obtain. ' YLfe
repreientations, added to the consciousness of lis
own weaknels, to the fiiallnels of his reve nucs, to
the mutinous spirit of dome of the nobles, to the
dubious fidelity of others, and to the influence ot
that faction which was entirely at Eliz ibi t'i's de-
votion, convinced James that a war with Er glaiid,
however just, would in the present juncture be al-

N 3 together

B o OK together impolitical. All these considerations in*

VII. duced him to stifle his resentment; to appear fa-

- tisfied with the punishment inflicted on Davison;
7. and to preserve all the femblances of friendship

with the English court *. In this manner did the
cloud which threatened such a florm pass away.
Mary's death, like that of a common criminal,
remained unavenged by any Prince; and what-
ever infamy Elizabeth might incur, she was ex-
posed to no new danger on that account.

Drgrac of MARY's death, however, proved fatal to the
ofe Gra Master of Gray, and loft him the King's favour,

which he had for some time poffefled. He was
become as odious to the nation as favourites, who
acquire power without merit, and exercise it
without discretion, usually are. The treacherous
part, which he had acAed during his late embassy,
was no fccret, and filled James, who at length
came to the knowledge of it, with afftonifhment.
The courtiers observed the symptoms of difgult
arising in the King's mind, his enemies seized the
opportunity, and Sir William Steward, in revenge
of the perfidy with which Gray had betrayed his

My 1o. brother Captain James, publicly accused him be-

fore a Convention of nobles, not only of having
contributed, by his advice and suggestions, to
take away the life of the Queen, but of holding
correspondence with Popish Princes, in order to
subvert the religion eftablithed in the kingdom.
Gray, unsupported by the King, deserted by all,
and conscious of his own guilt, made a feeble de-
fence. He was condemned to perpetual banifih-

# Spotfw. Strype, iii. 377.

pnent,

ment, a punishment very unequal to his crimes. B oo oK
But the King was unwilling to abandon one, whom VII.
he had once favoured so highly, to the rigour of 0
jufftice; and Lord Hamilton, his near relation, and
the other nobles who had lately returned from ex-
ile, in gratitude for the zeal with which he had
served them, interceded warmly in his behalf.

HAVING thus accomplished the deftruftion of

one of his enemies, Captain James thought the
juncture favourable for prosecuting his revenge on
them all. He tingled out Secretary Maitland, the
most eminent both for abilities and enmity to him;
and offered to prove that he was no lef's accessary
than Gray to the Queen's death, and had even
formed a design of delivering up the King himfilf
into the hands of the English. But time and ab-
fence had, in a great measure, extinguished the
King's affection for a minion who so little deserved
it. All the courtiers combined against him as a
common enemy. And, inflead of gaining his
point, he had the mortification to fee the office
of Chancellor conferred upon Maitland, who, to-
gether with that dignity, enjoyed all the power
and influence of a prime minister.

IN the Assembly of the Church, which met this

year, the fame hatred to the order of Bishops, and
the fame jealousy and fear of their encroachments
appeared. But as the King was now of full age,
and a parliament was summoned on that occa-
sion, the Clergy remained satisfied with appoint-
ing some of their number to represent their
grievances to that court, from which great things
were expected.

N4 PRE-

B o o K PREVIOUs to this meeting of Parliament, James

VII. attempted a work worthy of a King. The deadly
-'--' feuds which fubfifled between many of the great
*t.K h,. families, and which were tranlifitred from one ge-

S",:,:,/0° neration to another, weakened the ftrc'ngth of the
*n*i.;o. kingdom , contributed, more than any other cir-

cumitalice, to preserve a fierce and ban barous spirit
among the nobles; and proved the occa'lon of
many dififters to themfeives, and to their coun-
try. After many preparatory negotiations, he in-
vited the contending parties to a royal entertain-
ment in the palace of Holy-rood- house;, and pardy
by his authority, partly by his cntrcatics, obtained
their promise to bury their dihi; nlins in perpetual
oblivion. From thence he conducted them, in so-
lemn procession, through the streets of Edinburgh,
marching by pairs, each hand in hand with hIis ene-
my. A collation of wine and fivweet-nmeats was pre-
pared at the public Cross, and there they drank to
each o:her, with all the signs of reciprocal forgive-
ness, and uffucure friendship. The people, who
were present at a spectacle tb unusual, conceived
the most sanguine hopes of fkeing concord and
tranquillity established ia vevr v part of tm k)ig-
dom, and tertified their fatisaction by repeated
acclamatrons. Unhappily the e;e'cs of this re-
conciliation were not corrcfondcnt either to the
pious endeavours of the King, or the fond wishes
of the people.

THE first care of the parliament w as the security

of the Protefrant religion. All the laws paifed in
its favour, since the Reformation, were ratified;
and a new and severe one was enalted against semi-

nary

nary Priests and Jesuits, whose restless induf~ry in B o o K
making profelytes brought many of them into VII.
Scotland about this time. Two acts of this par-

I587*

liament deserve more particular notice, on account
of the consequences with which they were followed.

THE one refpeted the lands of the Church. As onera annexatiort

thle public revenues were not iubfcient for defray- of Church-
ing the King's ordinary charges; as the admini- Ia.,
firation of the government became more compli-
cated and more expensive ; as James was natu-
rally profuse, and a itranger to cc'conomy; it wvas
necessary, on all theie accounts, to provide some
fund proportioned to his exigencies. But no con-
fiderable fum could be levied on the Commons,
who did not enjoy the benefit of an extrfive
commerce. The nobles were unaccutftoLned to
bear the burden of heavy taxes. And the reve-
nues of the Church were the only source whence
a proper supply could be diawn. Notwitbfland-
ing all the depredations of the lairy iince the Re-
formation, and the various devices which they
had employed tc, seize the Church lands, some
considerable portion of them remained fti'l unali-
enated, and were held either by the Biihops who
poffeffed the benefices, or were granted to laymen
during pieafure. All thefre lands were, in this par-
liament, annexed, by one general law *, to the
Crown, and the King was impowered to apply the
rents of them to his own ule. The tithes alone
were reserved for the maintenance of the persons
who served for the cure, and the principal mrnfion-
house, with a few acres of land, by way of glebe,

* Parl. Ii JaE, VI. c. 29. allot-

B OO K allotted for his residence. By this great acceflion

VII. of property, it is natural to conclude that the King

„ muff have acquired a vast increase of power, and

the influence of the nobles have fuffered a propor-
tional diminution. The very reverse of this seems,
however, to have been the cafe. Almost all grants
of Church-lands, prior to this aft, were thereby
confirmed; and titles, which were formerly rec-
koned precarious, derived from thence the fancdion
of parliamentary authority. James was likewise
authorised, during a limited time, to make new
alienations; and such was the facility of histern-
per, ever ready to yield to the feolicitations of his
servants, and to gratify their molt extravagant de-
mands, that not only during the time limited, but
throughout his 'who\e reign, he was conftinually
employed in beftowing, and his parliament in ra-
tifying grants of this kind to his nobles; hence
little advantage accrued to the Crown from that
which might have been so valuable an addition to
its revenues. The Biihops, however, were great
fufferers by the law. But at this junaure neither
the King nor his Miniffers were feolicitous about
the interests of an order of men, odious to the
people, and persecuted by the Clergy. Their ene-
mies promoted the law with the utmost zeal. The
profpe& of sharing in their spoils induced all par-
ties to consent to it; and after a flep so fatal to
the wealth and power of the dignified Clergy, it
was no difficult matter to introduce that change
in the government of the church which soon after
took place *.

* Spotfw. 365. THE

THE change which the other Statute produced B o OK.

in the civil constitution was no less remarkable. VII.
Under the Feudal system, every Freeholder or vas- 587
fal of the Crown had a right to be present in par- Leffr Ba-
liament. These Freeholders were, originally, few d,, toari-
in number, butpoffeffed of great and extensive pro- "iamc ly
perty. By degrees, these vast poffetfions were di- r,nvs.
vided by the proprietors themselves, or parcelled
out by the Prince, or split by other accidents. The
number of Freeholders became greater, and their
condition more unequal: betides the ancient Ba-
rons, who preserved their estates and their power
unimpaired, there arose another order, whole rights
were the fame, though their wealth and influence
were far inferior. But, in those rude ages when
the art of government was extremely imperfe&t,
when parliaments were seldom assembled, and de-
liberated on matters little interefiing to a martial
people, few of the Lesser Barons took their feats,
and the whole parliamentary jurifdiation was ex-
ercifed by the Greater Barons, together with the
Ecclesiastical order. James I. fond of imitating the
forms of the English constitution, to which he had
been long accustomed, and desirous of providing a
counterpoise to the power of the great nobles, pro-
cured an act in the year 1427, dispensing with the
personal attendance of the Lesser Barons, and im-
powering those in each county to chufe two Com-
milfioners to represent them in Parliament. This
law, like many other regulations ofthatwife Prince,
produced little effe6t. All the King's vassals con-
tinued, as formerly, poffeffed of a right to be pre-
fen; in Parliament, and, unless in some extraordi-

nary

'-"--J condlitution had undeorone a <»reat change. The
a5387 ariftocratical power of the nobles had been much

increaied, and the in!il cnce of tre Fccleliai4hcal
order, which the Crown uiiually employed to check
their ufurpations, and to balance their authority,
had dimirifhed in proportion. Many of the Ab-
bies and Priors had been erc(ted into temporal
peerages; and the Protefiant Bilhops, an indigent
race of men, and odious to the nation, were far
from poffefring the weight and credit which their
predecessors derived from the exorbitant wealth,
and the superstitious reverence of the people. In
this situation, the King had recourse to the expe-
dient employed by James I. and obtained aVw re-
viving the fiatute of 1427 , and from that time the
Commons of Scotland have lent their reprefenta-
tivte to parliament. An ac-, which tended fb vi-
fiily to abridge their authority, did not pass with-
out opposition from many of the nobles. But as
the King had a right to summon the Lesser Barons
to attend in person, others were apprehensive of
feeing the house filled with a multitude of his de-
pendants, and conTented the more willingly to a
law which laid them under the refriction of ap-
pearing only by their representatives.

I88.3 THE year Ij588 began with an universal expeca-
The ap tion throughout all Europe, that it was to be dif-
preach of
thespnihn tinguifhed by wonderful events and revolutions.
armado. Several ailrologers, according to the accounts of

cotemporary hifiorians, had prediced this; and the
ficuation of affairs in the two principal kingdoms of

Europe

Europe was such, that a sagacious observer, with- B o o K
out any supernatural intelligence, might have ha- VII.
zarded the prediction, and have foreseen the ap-
proach of iome grand crisis. In France, it was evi-
dent from the aitonifi~ing progress of the league,
conducted by a leader whole ambition was reifrain-
ed by no scruples, and whose genius had hitherto
surmounted all diiEculies ; as well as from the ti-
mid, variable, and impolitic councils of Henry III.
that either that Monarch mufl fubmnt to abandon
the throne, of which he was unwoi thy; or by obme
sudden and daring blow, cut off his formidable
rival. Accordingly, in the beginning of the year,
the Duke of Guile drove his Master out of his ca-
pital city, and forced him to conclude a peace,
which left him only the fhci:dow of royalty ; and
before the year expired, he himielf fell a victim to
Henry's fears, and to his own security. In Spain,
the operations were such as promised something
still more uncommon. During three years, Philip
had employed all the power of his European do-
minions, and exhausted the treasures of the Indies,
in vast preparations for war. A fleet, the greatest
that had ever appeared in the ocean, was ready to
fail from Lisbon, and a numerous land army was
assembled to embark on board of it. Its defti-
nation was still unknown, though many circum-
stances made it probable that the blow was aimed,
in the first place, against England. Elizabeth
had long given iecret aid to the revolted provinces
in the Low Countries, and now openly afforded
them her protection. A numerous body of her
troops was in their service; the Earl of Leicefecr

commanded

B o o K commanded their armies; she had great sway in
VII. the civil government of the Republic; and some

88. of its most considerable towns were in her poffeffion,

Her fleets had insulted the coasts of Spain, in.
tercepted the Galleons from the Weft Indies,
and threatened the colonies there. Roused by so
many injuries, allured by views of ambition, and
animated by a superstitious zeal for propagating
the Romish Religion, Philip resolved not only to
invade, but to conquer England, to which his
descent from the house of Lancalter, and the do-
nation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in his own
opinion, a doble title.

eodU& of ELIZABETH saw the danger approach, and pre-
thatoccca- pared to encounter it with the utmost intrepidity.

The measures for the defence of her kingdom were
concerted and carried on, with the wisdom and vi-
gour which distinguished her reign. Her chief
care was to secure the friendship of the King of
Scots. She had treated the Queen his mother with
a rigour unknown among Princes; ihe had often
used himself harshly, and with contempt; and
though he had hitherto prudently suppressed his
resentment of these injuries, ihe did not believe it
to be altogether extinguithed, and was afraid that,
in her present situation, it might burst out with a
fatal violence. Philip, sensible how much an al-
liance with Scotland would facilitate his enter.
prise, courted James with the utmost assiduity. He
excited him to revenge his Mother's wrong; he
flattered him with the hopes of sharing his con-
quests ; and offered him in marriage his daughter
the Infanta Isabella. At the fame time, Scotland

swarmed

swarmed with priests, his emissaries, who seduced B oo oK
some of the nobles to Popery, and corrupted VII.
others with bribes and promises. Huntly, Errol, '
Crawford, were the heads of a fation, which
openly espoused the interest of Spain. Lord Max-
well, arriving from that court, began to assemble
his followers, and to take arms, that he might be
ready to join the Spaniards. In order to coun-
terbalance all there, Elizabeth made the warmest
profeffions of friendship to the King ; and Afhby,
her Ambassador, entertained him with magni-
ficent hopes and promises. He assured him that
his right of fuccemfion to the Crown should be
publicly acknowledged in England; that he ihould
be created a Duke in that kingdom; that he should
be admitted to some share in the government;
and receive a considerable pension annually.
James, it is probable, was too well acquainted
with Elizabeth's arts, to rely entirely on these pro-
mises. But he underfwood his own interest in the
present junaure, and pursued it with much freadi-
ness. He rejected an alliance with Spain, as dan-
gerous. He refused to admit into his presence an
ambassador from the Pope. He seized Colonel
Semple, an agent of the Prince of Parma. He
drove many of the trafficking Priests out of the
kingdom. He marched suddenly to Dumfries,
dispersed Maxwell's followers, and took him pri-
foner. In a Convention of the nobles he declared
his resolution to adhere inviolably to the league
with England; and, without listening to the fug-
geftions of revenge, determined to ac in concert
with Elizabeth, against the common enemy of
the Protestant faith. He put the kingdom in a

4 posture

B o o K posture of defence, and levied troops to obftrue

VII. the landing of the Spaniards. He offered to

fend an army to Elizabeth's assistance, and told
her ambassador, that he expeced no other favour
from the King of Spain, but that which Poly-
phemus had promised to Ulysses, that when he
had devoured all his companions, he would make
him his last morsel *.

A national THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was
covenant in
~~erece of not inferior to that of the King ; and the extraor-
Re igon. dinary danger, with which they were threatened,

fuggefred to them an extraordinary expedient for
their security. A bond was framed for the main-
tenance of true Religion, and the defence of the
King's person and government, in opposition to
all enemies, foreign and domestic. This contained
a confeffion of the Protestant faith, a particular re-
nunciation of the errors of Popery, and the most
solemn promises, in the name, and through the
firength of God, of adhering to each other in sup-
porting the former, and contending against the
latter, to the utmost of their power 1. The King,
the Nobles, the Clergy, and the people subscribed
with equal alacrity. Strange or uncommon as
such a combination may now appear, many cir-
cumftances contributed, at that time, to recom-
mend it, and to render the idea familiar to the
Scots. When roused by any extraordinary event,
or alarmed by any public danger, the people of
Israel were accufLomed to bind themflcves, by aso-
lemn Covenant, to adhere to that Religion, which
the Almighty had ,-.ablified among them; this the

* Camd. 544. Jo;;nIt. i39. Spotfw. 369.
t Dunlop's Colled. of ConfeT, Vol. ii. 108.

2 Scots

Scots considered as a sacred precedent, which it B OOK
became them to imitate. In that age no con- VII.
fiderable enterprise was undertaken in Scotlan.d, 15 .
without a bond of mutual defence, which all con-
cerned reckoned necessary for their security. The
form of this religious confederacy is plainly bor-
rowed from those political ones, of which So many
instances have occurred ; the articles, stipulations,
and peculiar modes of expression, are exatlv the
fame in both. Almost all the considerable Popi!h
Princes were then joined in a league for extirpat-
ing the Reform:d Religion, and nothing could
be more natu;a'l, or seemed noi c eficacious, than
to enter into a ,ounter-aiTociation, in order to op-
pose the progrcl. of that formidable conspiracy.
To these caufs did the Covenant, \which is be-
come so famous in hifory, owe its origin. It
was renewed ai irFerent times during the re:gn
of James ". I; x,..s revived with great folernni:y,
though with con.derable alterations, in the year
1638. It was a ',pted by the Engiifh in the year
i643, and c;iio!ced by the civil and ec:clfiaftical
authority of both kingdoms. The political pur-
poles to which it was then made fubcervient, and
the violent and unconflitutional mealures which
it was thern employed to promote, it is not our
province to explain. But at the jun cure in
which it ;.as dirR introduced, we may pronounce
it to Iave been a prudent and laudable de ice for
the defence of tvhe religion and liberties of the na-
don; nor were the terms In which it was con-

* C.c. iv. I20

B oo oK ceived, other than might have been expeaed from

VII. men alarmed with the impending danger of Po-

88" pery, and threatened with an invasion by the most

5 * bigoted and most powerful Prince in Europe.

PHILIP'S eagerness to conquer England did not

inspire him either with the vigour or dispatch ne-
ceffary to ensure the success of so mighty an enter-
prise. His fleet, which ought to have failed in
April, did not enter the English channel till the
middle of July. It hovered many days on the
coast, in expetation of being joined by the Prince
of Parma, who was blocked up in the ports of

de a'ma- Slanders by a Dutch Squadron. Continual di'-

afters pur(ued the Spaniards durcg \ht tim;
successive storms and battles, which are well
known, conspired with their own ill condua to
to disappoint their enterprise. And, by the bless-
ing of Providence, which watched with remark-
able care over the Protestant Religion and the
liberties of Britain, the English valour scattered
and destroyed the Armado, on which they had ar-
rogantly befllowed the name of Invincible. After
being driven out of the Engliflh eas, they were
forced to fleer their course towards Spain, round
Scotland and Ireland. Many of them fuffered
shipwreck on there dangerous and unknown coasts.
Though James kept his fubjeEts under arms, to
watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to pre-
vent their landing in an hostile manner, he re-
ceived with great humanity 700 who were forced
ashore by a tempest, and after supplying them
with necessaries, permitted them to return into
their own country.

ON the retreat ofthe Spaniards, Elizabeth sent B oo K

an ambassador to congratulate with James, and to VII.
compliment him on the firmness and generosity
he had discovered during a conjunture so dan-
gerous. But none of Afhby's promises were any
longer remembered; that Minister was even ac-
cufed of having exceeded his powers, by there
two liberal offers; and conscious of his own false-
hood, or ashamed of being disowned by his court,
he withdrew secretly out of Scotland *.

PHILIP, convinced by fatal experience of his 1589.

own rashness in attempting the conquest of Enri- P:'v'',o-
land, by a naval armament, equipped at so great Scot.nd.
a distance, and fubjeaed, in all its operations, to
the delays, and dangers, and uncertainties, arising
from seas and winds, resolved to make his attack
in another form, and to adopt the plan which the
Princes of Lorrain had long meditated, of invad-
ing England through Scotland. A body of his
troops, he imagined, might be easily wasted over
from the Low Countries to that kingdom, and if
they could once obtain footing, or procure assist-
ance there, the frontier of England was open and
defenceless, and the northern counties full of Ro-
man Catholics, who would receive them with open
arms. Mean while, a descent might be threat-
ened on the southern coast, which would divide
the English army, diftrat their councils, and
throw the whole kingdom into terrible convulsions.
In order to prepare the way for the execution of
this design, he remitted a considerable fum of

* Johnit. 134. Camd. 548.

0 2 money

B o o money to Bruce, a seminary priest in Scotland, and

VII. employed him, together with Hay, Creighton, and
CS9 Tyrie, Scottilh Jesuits, to gain over as many per-

popih no-: sons of diftlintion as possible to his interest. Zeal
reuainft for Popery, and the artful insinuations of there
,te Kmig. emissaries, induced several of the nobles to favour

a measure which tended so manifef~ly to the de-
lfruction of their country. Huntly, though the
King had lately married him to the daughter of
his favourite the Duke of Lennox, continued
warmly attached to the Romish Church. Craw-
ford and Errol were animated with the zeal of new
converts. They all engaged in a correspondence
with the Prince of Parma, and, in their letters to
him, offered their service to the King of Spain,
and undertook, with the aid of 6000 men, to ren-
der him master of Scotland, "aid to bring so ma-
ny of their vassals into the field, that" he should
be able to enter England with a numerous aimy.
Francis Stewart, grandson of James V. whom the
King had created Earl of Bothwell, though in-
fluenced by no motive of religion, for he cil ad-'
hered to the Proteirant faith, wvas prompted
rherely by caprice, and the reftleffnefs of his na-
ture, to join this treasonable correspondence.

reb. 17. ALL these letters were intercepted in England.

Elizabeth, alarmed at the danger which threat-
ened her own kingdom, sent th'em immediately to
the King, and reproaching him with his former
lenity toward the Popilh party, called upon him
tf check this formidable conspiracy by a pxroper
severity. But James, though firmly attached to the
Protestant relbgion, though profoundly versed in

?the

the theological controverfics between the Re- B oo
formers and the C.aurch of Pom,-, tho:igh he had VII.
employed himself, at that early period of life, in 158"
writing a Conmentary on tae Revelations, in T rii},i
which he proved the Pope to be Antichiil[, ,la,;t,,2
had neverthelef! adopted, already, thife maxims toIo .'
concerning the treatment of the Roman Catholics,
to which he adhered through the left of his life.
TheRoman Catholics were at that tifme a powerful
and active party in England ; they were far from
being an inconfidn:"rble flaion in his own king-
dom. The Pope r..d King of Sai;n were ready
to take part in all their mai;c:::, ions, and to fe-
coWd every hlort of their bigotry. The oppo-
fjion of !ioch a bod.y to his ficceffon to to e Crown
of England, added -o thle a.'ertinefs of the Eng-
lifl from the government of firangers, iright
create him many diiculties. In order to avoid
these, he thought it necefiarv to sooth rather than
to irritate the roman Catholics, and to reconcile
them to his fucceliion, by the hopes of gentler
treatment, and some mitigation of the rigour of
thoie lawu, which were now in force againi1 them.
This attempt to ,tin one party by promiies of in-
dulgence and als of clemenc/, while he adhered
with all the obfrinacy of a diifputant to the doc-
trines and tenets of the other, h is given an air of
n.,itery, and even of contradi&ion, to this part of
the King's charatcr. The Papifis, with the cre-
dulity of a sea struggling to obain power, be-
lieved hit heart to be wholly theirs; and the Pro-
teftants, with the jealousy inseparable from those
who are already in poffrenon, viewed every at of

0 3 lenity

B o o K lenity as a mark of indifference, or a symptom of

VII. apoftacy. And in order to please both, James
1589. often aimed at an excessive refinement, mingled

with diltimulation, in which he imagined the per.

- fecion of government and of king-craft to consist.

Sre* ity His behaviour on this occaflon was agreeable

to .

uiac to these general maxims. 'Notwithftanding the

folicitations of the Queen of England, enforced
by the zealous remonftrances of his own Clergy,
a short imprisonment was the only punishment
he infliaed on Huntly and his associates. Buthe
soon had reason to repent an a&t of clemency so
inconsistent with the dignity of government. The
first use which the conCpiratXoSs made of tzhX
liberty, was to assemble their followers, and, un-
der pretence of removing Chancellor Maitland,
an able Minister, but warmly devoted to the Eng-
lifh interest, from the King's councils and pre-
fence, they attempted to seize James himself.
This attempt being defeated, partly by Mait-
land's vigilance, and partly by their own ill con-
duct, they were forced to retire to the North,
where they openly ere&ed the flandard of Rebel-
lion. But as the King's gouemenitwas notge-
nerally unpopular, or his ministers odious, their
own vassals joined them slowly, and discovered no
zeal in the cause. And the King, in person, ad-
vancing against them with such forces as he could
suddenly levy, they durst not rely so much on the
fidelity of the troops, which, though superior in
number, followed them with reluaance, as to ha.
zard a battle; but fuffering them to disperse, they
surrendered to the King, and threw themselves on

8 his

his mercy. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, and Both- B o o K
well, were all brought to a public trial. Repeated VII.
acs of treason were easily proved againlt them. 1589.
The King, however, did not permit any sentence
to be pronounced; and, after keeping them a few
months in confinement, he took occasion, amidst
the public festivity and rejoicings at the approach
of his marriage, to set them at liberty *.

As James was the only descendant of the an- The King'S

cient Monarchs of Scotland, in the direct line; nh'An
as all hopes of uniting the crowns of the two mak.
kingdoms would have expired with him; as the
Earl of Arran, the presumptive heir to the throne,
was lunatic; the King's marriage was, on all
these accounts, an event which the nation wished
for with the utmost ardour. He himself was no
less desirous of accompliihing it; and had made
overtures, for that purpose, to the eldest daughter
of Frederick II. King of Denmark. But Eliza-
beth, jealous of every thing that would render the
acceflion of the house of Stewart more acceptable
to the English, endeavoured to perplex James,
in the fame manner she had done Mary, and em-
ployed as many artifices to defeat or to retard his
marriage. His ministers, gained by bribes and
promises, seconded her intention ; and though fe-
veral dicerent ambassadors were sent from Scot-
land to Denmark, they produced powers so li-
mited, or inifited on conditions so extravagant,
tlhat Frederick could not believe the King to be in
ear::eft; and fufpeJting that there was some design

* Spotw,. 373. Cald. iv. 103.

04 :r

So o K to deceive or amuse him, gave 'is daughter in
VII. marriage to the Duke of "run'wick. Not li-

89. couraged by this dii,:ppointment, hnich he im-

puted ent:rcly to the coduac of his own ministers,
James made addrefies to the Princess Anne, Fre-
derick's iecond daughter. And though Eliza-
beth endeavoured to dicvrt him from this, by re-
commending Catherine the King of Navarre's
fler, as a more advantageous match ; though
ihe prevailed on the privy council of Scotland to
declare against the alliarce vi h D0 r; iar', he per-
firled in his choice. Ar

. ;'n of o-.':co':-

ing the obstinacy of h:s c· :; : i.. ` 'rs, in any
other manner, h' fe:'e'~y encL t^',c' the ci :zens
of Edinburgh to. take arms. ' ,y threc:ened to
tear in pieces the Chancet' )r, whom the' aLcuied
as the tc;fon whole art;ices had hi:L *ro diihp-
pointed the wishes of the King, a: d tl'e eype&t-
ations of his cpople. In co-'eqft i ce of this, the
Earl Marfina vwas sent i,,to Denmat-k at the head
of a fpilendid embafiy. He received ai,:pie povwers
and inflructions, dra' n with the King's, cwn hand.
The marriage articles were quickly agreed upon,
and the young Queen set fail towarcds Scotland.
James made great preparations for her reccption,
and waited her landing with all the impatience of
a lover; nwhen the unwelcome account arrived,
that a violent tempef had arisen, which drove
back her fleet to Norway, in a condition so fhrt-
tered, that there was litdle hope of its putting
a~gain to sea before the spring. This unexpected
d i hppointment he felt v ith the utmofi fcnfbility,
He inftartly fitted out some £rlps, and, without

coFmrmu-

communicating his intention to any of his coun- B o oK
cil, failed in person, attended by the Chancellor, VII.
several noblemen, and a train of 300 persons, in

. -- .

quest of his bride. He arrived safely in a finall oi. 2.

* harbour near Upflo, where the Queen then re-

sided. There the marriage was solemnized. And Nov.24.
as it would have been raih to trufl those boisterous
seas in,the winter season, James accepted the in-
vitation of the court of Denmark, and repairing
to Copenhagen, passed several months there,
amidst continual feasting and amusements; in
which both the QOeen and himself had great
delight *.

No event in the King's life appears to be a

wider deviation from his general charaCter, than
this sudden sally. His son Charles I. was capable
of that excessive admiration of the other sex, which
arises from great sensibility of heart, heightened
by elegance of taste; and the romantic air of his
joutrey to Spain suited such a disposition. But
James was not susceptible of any refined gal-
lantry, and always expressed that contempt for
the female character which a pedantic erudition,
unacquainted with politeness, is apt to inspire.
He was fretted, however, at the many obstacles
which had been laid in his way. He was anxious
to secure the political advantages which he ex-
pe&ted from marriage; and fearing that a delay
might afford Elizabeth, and his own ministers,
an opportunity of thwarting him by new intrigues,
he suddenly took, the resolution of preventing

* Melvil, 352. Spotfw. 377."

B o o R them, by a voyage from which he expedted to
VII. return in a few weeks. The nation seemed to
C-7' applaud his conduc, and to be pleased with this

5 89 appearance of amorous ardour in a young Prince.

Notwithitanding his absence so long beyond the'
time he expected, the nobles, the clergy and the
people, vied with one another in loyalty and obe-
dience; and no period in the King's reign was
more remarkable for tranquillity, or more free
from any eruption of those faCtions, which so often
disturbed the kingdom.

# BOOK VIII.

THE

HIST ORY

OF

SCOTLAND.

BOOK VIII.

O N the first of May the King and Queen ar- Boo

rived at Leitb, and were received by their VIII.

fubjeas, with every possible expression of joy. '
The solemnity of the Queen's coronation was I590.
conduted with great magnificence; but to low and qea
had the order of Bishops fallen, in the opinion of ntuan .
the public, that none of them were present on
that occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Prefby-
terian Minister of great reputation, set the Crown
on her head, administered the sacred unaion, and
performed the other customary ceremonies.

THE zeal and success with which many of the

clergy had contributed towards preserving peace

and

B o o K and older in the kingdom, during his absence, re-
VIII. eracid Jamnes, in a great degree, to their per-
-- sons, and even to the Presbyterian form of go-

A',4. vernment. In presence of an assembly, which

met this year, he made high encomiums on the
discipline as well as the dotrine of the church,
promised to adhere inviolably to both, and per-
mitted the assembly to frame such aas as gra-
dually abolithed all the .remains of episcopal ju.
rifdiction, and paved the way for a full and legal
establishment of the Presbyterian model *.

I591. AN event happened soon after, which afforded

the Clergy no small triumph. Archbishop Adam-
son, their ancient enemy, having fallen under the
*King's displeasure, having been deprived of the
revenues of his fee in consequence of the a6 of
annexation, and being oppressed with age, with
poverty, and diseases, made the meanest submission
to the clergy, and delivered to the assembly a
formal recantation of all his opinions concerning
Church government, which had been matter, of
offence to the Prefbyterians. Such a confeffion,
from the most learned peribn of thie order, was
considered as a testimony which the force of
truth had extorted from an adversary t.

Difordersin MEANWHILE, ,the King's excefflive clemency
the king-
dom. towards offenders multiplied crimes of all kinds,

* and encouraged such aas of violence, as brought
his government under contempt, and proved fatal
-to many of his fubje&s. The history of several
years, about this time, is filled with accounts of

* Cald. iv. 204. j Spotfw. 385. Cald. iv. 214.

the

the deadly quarreTs between the reatr fartilies, B 6' 8 i-
and of murders and affaffinations pSetpetrated ins V'II.
the tioft audacious mariner, and wit'h circum-[ ' "v9'
stances of the utmost barbarity. All the defet&s
'in the feuidal ariffocracy were now felt mire fen-'
sibly, tha'd at any other period in the hifrory of
Scotland, and inivetfal liencf ancV an~srch~ pre-
vailed to a degree scarce confiflenr s~ith tHe pre-
servation of society. While the Kitr,'too'gentle
to punift,' or too feeble to a& with' 'igdt6r; fif-'
fered all these enormities to pass with imnputrity.

BUT though James connived at real crimes, An attmpt

witchcraft, which is combnonfly an imaginary one, well's a-
engrossed his attention, and thofe,fufpeed of it, ; th'
felt the whole weight of his authority. 1Many per-
sons, neither extremely old nor wret'chedly poor,
which were usually held tso be certain indications
of this crime, but masters of families, arid' ma-
trons of a decent ran'k, and in the middle age of
.life, were seized and tortured; ahd though their
confeftions contained the inoft abl'urd and incre-
dible circumstances, the Kings prejudices, those
of the clergy and of .the people, conspired in be-
lieving their extravagancies, without hesitation,
and in punishing their persons without mercy.
Some of these unhappy fufferers accused Bothwell
of having consulted them, in order to know the
time of the King's death, and having employed
their art, to raise the storms, which had endanger-
ed the Queen's life, and had detained James so
long in Denmark. Upon this evidence, that
nobleman was committed to prison. His turbu-
bulent and haughty spirit could neither submit to

the

B o o K the restraint, nor brook such an indignity. Ha-
VIII. ving gained his keepers, he made his escape, and
-Y-' imputing the accusation to the artifices of his
1591. enemy, the Chancellor, assembled his followers,

under pretence of driving him from the King's
councils. Being favoured by some of the King's
attendants, he was admitted by a secret passage,
under cloud of night, into the court of the palace
of Holy-rood-houfe. He advanced diredly to-
wards the royal apartment, but happily, before
he entered, the alarm was taken, and the doors

Dc. *7, fihut. While he attempted to burst open some of

them, and to set fire to others, the citizens of
Edinburgh had time to run to their arms, and he
escaped with the utmost difficulty; owing his
safety to the darkness of the night, and the pre-
cipitancy with which he fled *.

i592. HE retired towards the North, and the King

having unadvisedly given a commiflion to the
Earl of Huntly, to pursue him and his followers,
with fire and sword, he, under colour of execut-
ing that commission, gratified his private revenge,
and surrounded the house of the Earl of Murray,

Fb. s. burnt it to the ground, and flew Murray himself.

The murder of a young nobleman of such pro-
mifing virtues, and the heir of the Regent Mur-
ray, the darling of the people, excited universal
indignation. The citizens of Edinburgh rose in
a tumultuous manner; and though they were re-
firained, by the care of the magistrates, from any
ad of violence, they threw aside all respect for the

* Melv. 38S. Spotfw. 386.

King

King and his ministers, and openly insulted and B oo K
threatened both. While this mutinous spirit con- VIII.
tinued, James thought it prudent to withdraw "
from the city, and fixed his residence for some time 1592.
at Glasgow. There Huntly surrendered himself
to justice; and, notwithltanding the attrociouf-
ness of his crime, and the clamours of the people,.
the power of the Chancellor, with whom he was
now closely confederated, and the King's regard
for the memory of the Duke of Lennox, whole
daughter he had married, not only proteAed him
from the sentence which such an odious a&ion
merited, but exempted him even from the forma-
lity of a public trial *.

A STEP of much importance was taken, soon Preflyte-

rian Church

after, with regard. to the government of the goerment
church. The Clergy had long complained of \bs
the encroachments made upon their privileges and
jurifdi&ion by the acds of the parliament 1584,
and though these laws had now loft much of their
force, they resolved to petition the parliament,
which was approaching, to repeal them in form.
The jun&ure for pushing such a measure was well
chosen. The King had loft much of the public
favour, by his lenity towards the Popish fa&ion,
and still more by his remissness in pursuing the
murderers of the Earl of Murray. The Chan-
cellor had not only a powerful party of the
courtiers combined against him, but was become
odious to the people, who imputed to him every
false step in the King's condua. Bothwell still
lurked in the kingdom, and being secretly sup-

* Spotfw. 387.

ported

B o o K ported by all the enemies of Maitland's admini-
VIII. ftration, was ready, every moment, to renew his
'm-' audacious enterprises. James, for all there rea-

1592. sons, was extremely willing to indulge the Clergy

in their request, and not only consented to a law,
whereby the ads 1584 were rescinded or explained,
but he carried his complaisance fill further, and
permitted the parliament to establish the Pref-
byterian government, its General Assemblies,
Provincial synods, Prefbyteries, and Kirk fefflons,
with all the different branches of their discipline
and jurifdiRion, in the molt ample manner. All
the zeal and authority of the Clergy, even under
the adminiffration of Regents, from whom they
might have expeted the most partial favour, could
not obtain the fantion of law, in confirmation of
their mode of Eccklefiaftical government. No
Prince was ever less disposed than James to ap-
prove a system, whose republican genius inspired
a pairion for liberty, so repugnant to his exalted
notions of royal prerogative. Nor could any
aversion be more inveterate than his, to the au-
fiere and uncomplying charaaer of the Prefbyte¶
rian Clergy in that age I who, more eminent for
zeal than for policy, often contradiced his opi-
nions, and censured his condu&, with a freedom
equally offenfiye to his dogmatism as aTheologian,
and to his pride as a King. His situation, how-
ever, obliged him frequently to conceal, or to dif-
femble his sentiments; and as he often disgusted
his fubjefts, by indulging the Popilh faction more
than they approved, he endeavoured to atone for
this, by concessions to the Presbyterian Clergy,

more

more liberal than he himself would otherwise have B o o K
chosen to grant *. ViII.

IN this parliament, Bothwell, and all his adhe- I59

rents, were attainted. But he soon made a new
*attempt to seize the King at Falkland; and
James, betrayed by some of his courtiers, and
feebly defended by others, who wished well to
Bothwell, as the Chancellor's avowed enemy,
owed his safety to the fidelity and vigilance of
Sir Robert Melvil, and to the irresolution of
Bothwell's associates -.

SCARCELY was this danger over, when the na- A new con-

fpiracy of

tion was alarmed with the discovery of a new and tne Popl
more formidable conspiracy. George Ker, the Loras.
Lord Newbottle's brother, being seized as he was
ready to set fail for Spain, many suspicious papers
were found in his cuffody, and among these,
several blanks signed by the Earls of Angus,
IHundy, and Errol. By this extraordinary pre-
caution, they hoped to escape any danger of dif-
covery. But Ker's resolution thrinking when
torture was threatened, he confeffed that he was
employed by these noblemen, to carry on a nego-
tiation with the King of Spain; that the blanks
subscribed with their names were to be filled up
by Crichton and Tyrie ; that they were infrru&ed
to offer the faithful service of the three Earls to
that Monarch; and to solicit him to land a body
of his.troops, either in Galloway, or at the mouth
of Clyde, with which they undertook, in the first
place, to establish the Roman Catholic Religion

* Cald. iv. 248. 252. Spotfw. 388. - Mely. 402.
VOL. II. P in

B oo K in Scotland, and then to invade England with
VIII. the whole forces of the kingdom. Sir David
- QGrarnham of Fintry, and Barclay of Ladyland,

whom he accused of being privy to the confpi-
racy, were taken into custody, and confirmed all
the circumitances of his confefilon *.

I59Q. THE nation having been kept for some time in
7reJ fthe continual terror and agitation by so many fucceflive
people, conspiracies, the discovery of this new danger com-

pleted the panic. All ranks of men, as if the
enemy had already been at their gates, thought
themselves called upon to stand forth in defence
of their country. The Miniffers of Edinburgh,
without waiting for any warrant from the King,
who happened at that time to be absent from the
capital, and without having received any legal
commiflion, assembled a considerable number of
Peers and Barons, in order to provide an instant
remedy against the impending danger. They
seized the Earl of Angus, and committed him to
the caffle; they examined Ker; an.d prepared a
remonflrance to be laid before the King, concern-
ing the slate of the nation; and the neceflity of
prosecuting the copfpirators with becoming vi-

rdinpso- gour. James, though jealous of every encroach-
ceedings of
the King ment on his prerogative, and offended with sub.
against
them. jeRs, who, instead of petitioning, seemed to pre-

scribe to him, found it necessary, during the vio-
lence of the ferment, not only to adopt their plan,
but even to declare that no consideration ihould
ever induce him to pardon those who had been

* Rymer, xvi. 190.

guilty

guilty of so odious a treason. He summoned the B o o K
Earls of Huntly and Errol to surrender them- VIII.
selves to juflice. Graham of Fintry, whom his --V- 1593.
peers pronounced to be guilty of treaoln, he com- Jan, s.
manded to be publicly beheaded; and nmarching
into the North at the head of an army, the two
Earls, together with Angus, who had escaped out
of prison, retired to the mountains. He placed
garrisons in the caffles which belonged to chim ;
compelled their vassals, and the Barons in the ad-
jacent counties, to subscribe a bond containing
profeffions of their loyalty towards him, and of
their firm adherence to the Protestant faith; and,
the better to secure the tranquillity of that part of
the kingdom, constituted the Earls of Athol and
Marshal his Lieutenants there*.

HAVING finished this expedition, James return- n"arch ,g.
ed to Ediaburgh, where he found Lord Borrough, ,i^6 11
an extraordinary ambafTador from the court of totreat

thfn vith

England. Elizabeth, alarmed at the discovery rgour.
of a conspiracy which mie considered as no less
formidable to her own kingdom than to Scot-
land, reproached James with his former remiss-
ness, and urged him, as he regarded the'prefer-
vation of the Protestant religion, or the dignity
of his own Crown, to punish this repeated treason
with rigour; and if he could nor apprehend the
persons, at least to confiscate the eflates, of such
audacious rebels. She weakened however the
force of these requests, by interceding at the frne
time in behalf of Bothwell, whom, according to
her usual policy in nourishing a tacdous fuirit

* Spotfw. 301. Cald. iv. 291.

P 2 among

B o o K among the Scottish nobles, she had taken under
VIII. her protetioh. James absolutely refused to listen

to any interceflion in favour of one, who had so

1593. often, and with so much outrage, insulted both

his government and his person. With regard to
the popish conspirators, he declared his resolution
to prosecute them with vigour ; but that he might
be the better able to do so, he demanded a small
ium of money from Elizabeth, which she, dif-
truitful perhaps of the manner in which he might
apply it, fhewed no inclination to grant. The
zeal, however, and importunity of his own sub-
je&s obliged him to call a parliament, in order
to pass an a& of attainder against the three Earls.
But before it met, Ker made his escape out of
prison, and, on pretence that legal evidence of
their guilt could not be produced, nothing was
concluded against them. The King himself was
universally futpeAed of having contrived this ar-
tifice, on purpose to elude the requests of the
Queen of England, and to disappoint the withes of
his own people. And therefore, in order to sooth
the Clergy, who exclaimed loudly against his
condut, he gave way to the palling of an a&,
which ordained those who obstinately contemned
the censures of the Church to be declared out-
laws *.

Bothwell WHILE the terror excited by the Popifl con-
furp.ifes
the King. fpiracy poffeffed the nation, the court had been

divided by two rival facions, which contended
for the chief direAion of affairs. At the head of
one, was the Chancellor, in whom the King re-

* Cald. iv. 343. Spottfwv 393. Par!. 13 Jac. VI. c. 164.

posed

Posed entire confidence. For that very reason, B o OK
perhaps, he had fallen early under the Queen's VIII.
displeasure. The Duke of Lennox, the Earl of
Athol, Lord Ochiltree, and all the name of
Stewart espoused her quarrel, and widened the
breach. And James, fond no less of domestic
tranquillity, than of public peace, advised his
favourite to retire, for some time, in hopes that
the Queen's resentment would subside. But as
he stood in need, in the present jun1ture, of the
afliftance of an able Minister, he had recalled him
to court. In order to prevent him from recover-
ing his former power, the Stewarts had recourse to
an expedient no less illegal than desperate. Having
combined with Bothwell, who was of the fame
surname, they brought him back secretly into July 24.
Scotland; and seizing the gates of the palace, in-
troduced him into the royal sapartment with a nu-
merous train of armed followers. James, though
deserted by all his courtiers, and incapable of re-
fiftance, discovered more indignation than fear,
and reproaching them for their treachery, called
on the Earl to finish his treafons, by piercing his
Sovereign to the heart. But Bothwell fell on his
knees, and implored pardon. The King was not
in a condition to refuse his demands. And a few
days after he signed a capitulation with this fuc-
cefsful traitor, to whom he was really a priibner,
whereby he bound himself to grant him a remif-
sion for all past offences, and to procure the rati-
fication of it in parliament; and in the mean
time to difinifs the Chancellor, the matter of Gla-
mis, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, from

P 3 his

B o K his councils and presence. Bothwell, on his part,
VIII. consented to remove f-om court, though he left
C"` " there as many of his associates as he thought sus-

ficient to prevent the return of the adverse fa&tion.

H rc-vers BUT it was now no easy matter to keep the
Sept. 7. King under the fame kind of bondage, to which

he had been often fu!hjct during his minority.
He discovered so much impatience to (hake off
his fetters, that those who imposed, durst not
continue, the reitraint. They permitted him to
call a Convention of the nobles at Stirling, and
to repair thither himself. 'All Bothwell's ene-
mies, and all who were desirous of gaining the
King's favour by appearing to be so, obeyed the
summons. Thc3 pronounced the insult offered
to the King's perfjn and authority to be high trea-
son, andt declared him absolved from any obli-
gation to obfer,.e conditions extorted by force,
and which violated so eflfitially h.is royal prero-
gative. James, however, fti 1 proffred him a
pardon, provided he would sue for it as an aft of
mercy, and prom'fe to retire out of the kingdom.
These conditions Bothweil rejcaed with disdain,
and betaking himself once more to arms, at-
tempted to fu'-pnfe the King; but finding him
on his guard, fled to the bc ders *.

Sufpeaed of THE King's ar\our againit Bothwell, compared
favo,0ri ng
the Popish with his flow and evasive proceedings against the

or.' Popith Lords, occasioned a general disgust among

his fubjecis; and was imputed either to an ex-
ceffive attachment to the perfo,.s of those con-
Ipirators, or to a secret partiality towards their

* Cald.iv. 326. Spotfw. 395.

cpinionsi

opinions; both which gave rife to no unreason- B o o K
able fears. The Clergy, as the immediate guar- VIII.
dians of the Protestant Religion, thought. them- -''
feives bound, in such a junaure, to take extraor- se,. s.
* dinary fleps for its preservation. And the pro-

vincial synod of Fife happening to meet at that
time,-a motion was made to excommunicate all
concerned in the late conspiracy, as obstinate and
irreclaimable Papifts. And though none of the
conspirators resided within the bounds of the fy-
nod, or were fubje& to its jurifdition, such was
the zeal of the members, that, overlooking this
-irregularity, they pronounced against them the
sentence of excommunication, to which the act of
last parliament added new terrors. And left this
:hould be imputed to a few men, and accounted
the at of a finall part of the church, deputies
were appointed to attend the adjacent synods, and
to defile their approbation and concurrence.

AN event happened, a few weeks after, which H;s lenity

inicreafcd the people's suspicions of the King. As them.
he was marching on an expedition against the bor- oa. 7.
derers, the three Earls coming suddenly into his
presence, offered to submit themselves to a legal
trial; and James, without committing them to
cuflody, appointed a day for that purpose. The
conspirators prepared to appear with a formidable
train of their friends and vassals. But, in the mean
tirrie, the Clergy, together with many Peers and
Barons, assembling at Edinburgh, remonstrated
against the King's extreme indulgence with great
b.oldness, and demanded of him, according to the
regular course ofjuftice, to commit to sure custody,
perlbns charged with the highet ats of treason, who

P 4 could

B o o K could not be brought to a legal trial, until they
VIII. were absolved from the censures of the Church;

Sand to call a Convention of estates, to deliberate

593. concerning the method of proceeding against them.

At the fame time they offered to accompany him
in arms to the place of trial, left such audacious
and powerful criminals thould overawe juflice,
and diatate to the judges to whom they pretended
to submit. James, though extremely offended
both with the irregularity of their proceedings,
and the presumption of their demands, found it
expedient to put off the day of trial, and to call
a Convention of eflates, in order to quiet the fears
and jealousies of the people. By being humoured
in this point, their fufpiclons began gradually to
abate, and the Chancellor managed the Conven-
tion so artfully, that he himself, together with a
few other members, was impowered to pronounce

Nov. 2. a final sentence upon the conspirators. After much

deliberation, they ordained, that the three Earls,
and their associates, should be exempted from all
further inquiry or prosecution, on account of their
correpondence with Spain; that, before the first
day of February, they should either submit to the
Church, and publicly renounce the errors of Po-
pery, or remove out of the kingdom ; that, be-
fore the firit of January, they should declare which
of these alternatives they would embrace; that
they thould find surety for their peaceable de-
meanor for the future; and that if they failed to
signify their choice in due time, they fhoula lose
the benefit of this a&t of abolition, and remain
exposed to all the pains of law *.

* Cald. iv. 330. Spotfw. 397.

By this lenity towards the conspirators, James B oo oK
incurred much reproach, and gained no advantage. VIII.
Devoted to the Popish superstition, submissive to
all the dictates of their priests, and buoyed up
*with hbpes and promises of foreign aid, the three
Earls refused to accept of the conditions, and
continued their treasonable correspondence with
the court of Spain. A Convention of estates pro- Jan. is.
nounced them to have forfeited the benefit of the
articles which were offered; and the King re-
quired them, by proclamation, to surrender them-
selves to justice. The presence of the English.
ambassador contributed, perhaps, to the vigour
of these proceedings. Elizabeth, ever attentive
to James's motions, and imputing his reluctance
to punish the Popish Lords to a secret approba-
tion of their designs, had sent to Lord Zouche to
represent, once more, the danger to which he ex-
posed himself, by this false moderation; and to
require him to exercise that rigour, which their
crimes, as well as the posture of affairs, rendered
necelFary. And though the steps now taken by
the King silenced all complaints on that head, yet
Zouche, forgetful of his character as an ambaffa-
dor, entered into private negotiations with such of
the Scottish nobles as disapproved of the King's
measures, and held almost an open correspondence
with Bothwell, who, according to the usual arti-
fice of malecontents, pretended much solicitude
for reforming the disorders of the commonwealth;
and covered his own ambition with the Ipecious
veil of zeal against those Counsellors who restrain-
ed the King from pursuing the avowed enemies
of the Protestant faith. Zouche encouraged him,

in

B o o K in the name of his Mifrtrefs, to take arms againi~
VIII. his Sovereign.

9 MEANWHILE, the King and the Clergy were

A new at- filled with mutual diflruft of each other. They
Bothweil',. were jealous, perhaps, to excess, that his affec-'

tions leaned too much towards the Popish fa6tion;
he fufpeaed them, without good reason, of
prompting Bothwell to rebellion, and even of
fupplyinghim with money for that purpose. Little
instigation, indeed, was wanting to rouse such a
turbulent spirit as Bothwell's, to any daring en-
terprife. He appeared suddenly within a mile of
Edinburgh, at the head of 400 horse. The pre-
tences, by which he endeavoured to justify this
infurre&ion, were extremely popular ; zeal for re-
ligion, enmity to Popery, concern for the King's
honour, and for the liberties of the nation. James
was totally unprovided for his own defence; he
had no infantry, and was accompanied only with
a few horsemen of Lord Home's train. In this
extremity, he implored the aid of the citizens of
Edinburgh, and, in order to encourage them to
a& with zeal, he promifcd to proceed against the
Popish Lords with the utmost rigour of law.
Animated by their Minifers, they ran cheerfully
to their arms, and advanced, with the King at
their head, against Bothwell; but he, notwith-
fianding his success in putting to flight Lord
Home, who had raflly charged him with a far
inferior number of cavalry, retired to Dalkeith
without daring to attack the King. His followers
abandoned him soon after, and discouraged byfo
many fucceflive disappointments, could never as-
terwards be brought to venture into the field.

9 He

He betook himself to his usual lurking-places in B oo o
the North of England; but Elizabeth, in com- VIII.
pliance with the King's remonftrances, obliged
him to quit that retreat . 594

No sooner was the King delivered from one Fresh dan-

g-rs from

danger, than he was called to attend to another. erPopina

Lcrvs.

The Popish Lords, in consequence of their nego- April 3.
tiations with Spain, received, in the spring, a
supply of money from Philip. What bold designs
this might inspire, it was no easy matter to con-
je&ure. From men under the dominion of bi-
gotry, and whom indulgence could not reclaim,
the most desperate actions were to be dreaded.
The assembly of the Church immediately took the
alarm; remonfirated against them with more bit-
ternefs than ever; and unanimously ratified the
sentence of excommunication, pronounced by the
synod of Fife. James himself, provoked by their
obstinacy and ingratitude, and afraid that his long
forbearance would not only be generally difpleaf-
ing to his own fubje&s, but give rife to unfavour-
able suspicions among the English, exerted himself
with unusual vigour. He called a parliament; junes.
laid before it all the circumfftances and aggrava-
tions of the conspiracy; and though there were
but few members present, and several of there
conne&ed with the conspirators by blood or friend-
Ihip, he prevailed on them, by his influence and
importunity, to pronounce the most rigorous fen-
tence the law can infli&. They were declared
to be guilty of high treason, and their estates and
honours forfeited. At the fame time, statutes,

* Spotfw. 403. Cald. iv. 359.

more

B o o K more severe than ever, were enacted against the
VIII. profeffors of the Popith Religion.
'~" How to put this sentence in execution, wasa
I594*
attle of matter of great difficulty. Three powerful Ba-
Glenlivat. tons, cantoned in a part of the country almost in-

accessible, surrounded with numerous vassals, and
supported by aid from a foreign Prince, were
more than an overmatch for a Scottish Monarch.
No intreaty could prevail on Elizabeth to advance
the money, necessary for defraying the expencesof
an expedition against them. To attack them in
person, with his own forces alone, might expose
him both to disgrace and to danger. He had re-
course to the only expedient which remained in
such a situation, for aiding the impotence of So-
vereign authority; he delegated his authority to
the Earl of Argyll and Lord Forbes, the leaders
of two clans at enmity with the conspirators; and
gave them a commiflion to invade their lands,
and to seize the castles which belonged to them.
Bothwell, notwithffanding all his high pretensions
of zeal for the Protestant Religion, having now
entered into a close confederacy with them, the
danger became every day more urging. Argyll,
solicited by the King, and roused by the Clergy,
took the field at the head of 7000 men. Huntly
and Errol met him at Glenlivat, with an army far
inferior in number, but composed chiefly of
gentlemen of the low countries, mounted on horse-
back, and who brought along with them a train

oa. 3. of field-pieces. They encountered each other

with all the fury, which hereditary enmity and
ancient rivalfhip add to undisciplined courage,

? But

But the Highlanders, disconcerted by the first Boo 0K
discharge of the cannon, to which they were little VIII,
accustomed, and unable to resist the impression of
cavalry, were soon put to flight. And Argyll, a
gallant young man of eighteen, was carried by his
friends out of the field, weeping with indignation
at their disgrace, and calling on them to fland, and
to vindicate the honour of their name*.

On the first intelligence of this defeat, James,
though obliged to pawn his jewels in order to raise
money t, assembled a small body of troops, and
marched towards the North. He was joined by
the Irvines, Keiths, Leflys, Forbefes, and other
clans at enmity with Huntly and Errol, who hav-
ing loft several of their principal followers atGlen-
livat, and others refusing to bear arms against the
King in person, were obliged to retire to the moun-
tains. James wasted their lands; put garrisons in
some of their castles; burnt others; and left the
Duke of Lennox as his Lieutenant in that part of
the kingdom, with a body of men fufficient to re-
strain them from gathering to any head there, or
from infesting the low country. Reduced at last to
extreme diffrefs by the rigour of the season, and the
desertion of their followers, they obtained the King's
permiflion to go beyond seas, and gave security that
they thould neither return without his licence, nor opih
engage in any new intrigues against the Protestant Lords drien
Religion, or'the peace of the kingdom J. kingdom.

By their exile, tranquillity was re-effablifhed in

the North of Scotland; and the firmness and vi-

*Cald. iv. 408. -t Birch, Mem. i. 186.
t Spotfw. 404. Cald. 373, &c.

gour,

B o OK gour, which James had displayed in his lass pro-
VIII. ceedings against them, regained him, in a great

degree, the confidence of his Protestant fubje&s.

TheRonan But he funk, in the fame proportion, and for the

oin 'rd fame reason, in the efleem of the Roman Catholics.

aganf They had aferted his mother's right to the Crown

of England with so much warmth, that they could
not, with any decency, rejec his. And the indul-
gence, with which he affeated to treat the pro.
feffors of that religion, inspired them with such
hopes, that they viewed his accession to the throne
as no undesirable event. But the rigour with which
the King pursued the conspirators, and thefevere
statutes against Popery to which he had given his
consent, convinced them that these hopes were vi-
fionary; and they began to look about in quest of
some new succenTor, whose rights they might op-
pose to his. The English Papifts turned theireyes
towards the Earl of Essex, whose generous mind,
though firmly established in the Protestant faith,
abhorred the severities inflicted in that age on ac-
count of religious opinions. Those of the fame
seC, who were in exile, formed a bolder scheme,
and one more suitable to their situation. They
advanced the claim of the Infanta of Spain; and
Parsons the Jesuit published a book, in which, by
false quotations from history, by fabulous genea-
logies, and absurd arguments, intermingled with
bitter invectives against the King of Scots, he en-
deavoured to prove the Infanta's title to the Eng-
lifh Crown to be preferable to his. And Philip,
though involved already in a war both with France
and England, and scarce able to defend there-

mains

rtain's of the Burgundian Provinces'againft the B oo oK
Dutch commonwealth, easily grasped at this airy VIII.
projec. The dread of a Spanish Pretender to the l
Crown, and the opposition which the Papifts began
*to form against the King's succession, contributed
not a little to remove the prejudices of the Pro-
teitants, and to prepare the way for that event.

BOTHWELL, whose name has been so often men- Bothwell

forced to fly

tioned as the disturber of the King's tranquillity ino spin.
and of the peace of the kingdom, was now in a
wretched condition. Abandoned by the Queen of
England, on account of his confederacy with the
Popilh Lords; excommunicated by the Church for
the fame reason; and deserted, in his distress, by
his own followers; he was obliged to fly for safety
to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where,
after renouncing the Protestant faith, he led many
years an obscure and indigent life, remarkable only
for a low and infamous debauchery. The King,
though extremely ready to sacrifice the firongeft re-
fentment to the slightest acknowledgments, could
never be softened by his submission, nor be induced
to listen to any intercession in his behalf*.

THIs year the King loft Chancellor Maitland,
an able Minifrer, on whom he had long devolved
the whole weight of public affairs. As James
loved him while alive, he wrote, in honour of his
memory, a copy of verses, which, when com-
pared with the compositions of that age, are far
from being inelegant t.

SooN after his death, a considerable change A.chngein

the aomi-

was made in the administration. At that time, niftion.

* Winw. Mem. i. Spotfw. 4.10. t Id. 41l.

the

B o iK the annual charges of government far exceeded
VIII. the King's revenues. The Queen was fond of
.-- expensive amufcments. James himself was a
1595* stranger to ceconomy. It became necessary, for

all these reasons, to levy the public revenues with.
greater order and rigour, and to husband them
with more care. This important trust was com-
mitted to eight gentlemen of the law*, who,
from their number, were called Ofiavians. The
powers vefied in them were ample, and almof1
unlimited. The King bound himself neither to
add to their number, nor to supply any vacancy
that might happen, without their consent: And
knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed
that no alienation of his revenue, no grant of a
pension, or order on the treasury, should be held
valid, unless it were ratified by the subscription of
five of the commissioners; all their a&s and
decisions were declared to be of equal force
with the sentence of judges in civil courts; and
in consequence of them, and without any other
warrant, any person might be arrested, or their
goods seized. Such extensive jurifdi&ion, toge-
ther with the absolute disposal of the public mo-
ney, drew the whole executive part of the go-
vernment into their hands. United among them-
selves, they gradually undermined the reft of
the King's Ministers, and seized on every lu-
crative or honourable office. The ancient servants

* Alexander Seaton President of the Selfion, Walter Stewart

Commendator of Blantyre Lond Privy Seal, David Carnegy,
John Lindsay, James Elphinglton, Thomas Hamilton, John
Skene Clerk Regiflter, anJ Petel Young Elemofynar.

of the Crown repined at being obliged to quit B oo i
their ifations to new men. The favourites and VIII.
young courtiers murmured at feeing the King's '59'
liberality stinted by their prescriptions. And the
. Clergy exclaimed against some of them as known
apostates to Popery, and fufpeEted others of fe-
cretly favouring it. They retained their power,
however, notwithifanding this general combina-
tion against them; and they owed it entirely to
the order and ceconomy which they introduced
into the administration of the finances, by which
the necessary expences of government were more
easily defrayed than in any other period of the
King's reign *,

THE rumour of vast preparations which Philip violenee of

was said to be carrying on at this time, filled both againf tht
England and Scotland with the dread of a new in- Popif
vafion. James took proper measures for the de-
fence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy
the zeal of the Clergy, whole suspicions of the
King's sincerity began to revive; and as he had
permitted the wives of the banilhed Peers to levy
the'rents of their estates, and to live in their
houses, they charged him with rendering the a&t
of forfeiture ineffecual, by supporting the avow-
ed enemies of the Protestant faith. The assembly March 14.
of the Church took under consideration the state
of the kingdom, and having appointed a day of
public farting, they solemnly renewed the Co-
venant, by which the nation was bound to adhere
to the Protestant faith, and to defend it against
all aggressors. A committee, confifling of the

* Spotfw. 413. 435.

VOL. II. moflt

B o OK most eminent Clergymen, and of many Barons
VIII. and gentlemen of diftination, waited on the King,
L ~ and laid before him a plan for the security of the
1596" kingdom, and the preservation of religion. They

urged him to appropriate the estates of the ba- ,
nifhed Lords as a fund for the maintenance of
soldiers, to take the ftrideft precautions for pre-
venting the return of such turbulent subjects into
the country; and to pursue all who were sus-
peaed of being their adherents with the utmost
rigour.

The King's NOTHING could be more repugnant to the
remiffnds .
with regard King's schemes, or more disagreeable to his in-
to them. clinatiori, than these propositions. Averse, through

his whole life, to any course where he expeded
opposition or danger; and fond of attaining his
ends with the charater of moderation, and by
the arts of policy, he observed with concern the
prejudices against him which were growing among
the Roman Catholics, and resolved to make some
atonement for that part of his conduct which had
drawn on him their indignation. Elizabeth was
now well advanced in years; her life had lately
been in danger; if any Popish competitor thould
arise to dispute his right of fuccelfion, a faaion so
powerful as that of the banished Lords might be
extremely formidable; and any division among
his own fubjefts might prove fatal at a juncure
which would require their united and most vigo-
rous efforts. Instead, therefore, of the additional
severities which the Assembly proposed, James
had thoughts of mitigating the punishment which
they already fuffered. And as they were fur-

rounded,

rounded, during their residence in foreign parts, B oo K.
by Philip's emissaries ; as resentment might dif- VIII.
pore them to listen more favourably than ever to I
their suggestions; as despair might drive them to
. fill more atrocious aaions; he resolved to recall

them, under certain conditions, into their native
country. Encouraged by these sentiments of the
King in their favour, of which they did not want
intelligence, and wearied already of the dependant
and anxious life of exiles, they ventured to re-
turn secretly into Scotland. Soon after, they
presented a petition to the King, begging his per-
milfion to reside at their own houses, and offering
to give security for their peaceable and dutiful
behaviour. James called a Convention of efiates
to deliberate on a matter offuch importance, and
by their advice he granted the petition.

So soon as they were informed of this, the mem- The rah
bers of a committee, appointed by the last affem- o "edings
bly, met at Edinburgh, and with all the preci- chlegyand
pitancy of fear, and of zeal, took such resolutions
as they thought necessary for the safety of the
kingdom. They wrote circular letters to all the
PreDbyteries in Scotland; they warned them of
the approaching danger; they exhorted them to
ifir up their people to the defence of their jufi
rights; they commanded them to publish, in all
their pulpits, the act of excommunicating the
Popish Lords; and enjoined them to lay all those
who were fufpeaed of favouring Popery under
the fame censure by a summary sentence, and
without observing the usual formalities of trial.
And as the danger seemed too pressing to wait for

Q2 the

B o o K the stated meetings of the judicatories of the
VIII. Church, they made choice of the most eminent
'C6 clergymen in different corners of the kingdom,

appointed them to reside constantly at Edinburgh,
and to meet every day with the Ministers of that
city, under the name of the Standing Council of the
Church, and vested in this body the supreme au-
thority, by enjoining it, in imitation of the an-
cient Roman form, to take care that the Church
thould receive no detriment.

THESE proceedings, no less unconflitutional

than unprecedented, were manifest encroachments
on the royal prerogative, and bold steps towards
open rebellion. The King's condu&, however,
justified in some degree such excesses. His lenity
towards the Papifts, so repugnant to the princi-
ples of that age; his pardoning the conspirators,
notwithstanding repeated promises to the contrary;
the refpeft he paid to Lady Huntly, who was at-
tached to the Romith religion no less than her
husband ; his committing the care of his daugh-
ter, the Princess Elizabeth, to Lady Levingflon,
who was infe&ed with the fame superstition; the
contempt with which he talked, on all occasions,
both of the chara&er of Miniffers, and of their
fun&ion ; were circumstances which might have
filled minds, not prone by nature to jealousy,
with some suspicions; and might have precipitated
into rash councils those who were far removed
from intemperate zeal. But, however powerful
the motives might be which influenced the Clergy,
or however laudable the end they had in view,
they condu&ted their measures with no address,

I and

and even with little prudence. James discovered B o o K
a firong inclination to avoid a rupture with the YIII.
Church, and jealous as he was of his prerogative, 5r
would willingly have made many conceflions for

, the fake of peace. By his command, some of the

.Privy Counsellors had an interview with the more
moderate among the Clergy, and inquired whe-
ther 1Huntly and his associates might not, upon
making proper acknowledgments, be again re-
ceived into tile bosom of the Church, and be ex-
empted from any further punishment on account
of their past apoltacy and treafons. They replied,
that though the gate of mercy flood always open
for those who repented and returned, yet as these
noblemen had been guilty of idolatry, a crime
deserving death both by the law of God and of
man, the civil magistrate could not legally grant
them a pardon; and even though the Church
ihould absolve them, it was his duty to inflic pu-
nifhment upon them. This inflexibility in those
who were reckoned the most compliant of the or-
der, filled the King with indignation, which the
imprudence and obitinacy of a private Clergyman
heightened into rage.

MR. DAVID BLACK, Minister at St. Andrew's, Sea,;o.j roo~rne

discoursing in one of his sermons, according to aughtby
custom, concerning the state of the nation, as- Bhak.
firmed that the King had permitted the Popish
Lords to return into Scotland, and by that ation
had discovered the treachery of his own heart;
that all Kings were the Devil's children; that
Satan had now the guidance of the court; that
she Qieen of England was an atheist; that the

0Q3 judges

B oo oK judges were miscreants and bribers; the nobility
VIII. godless and degenerate; the Privy Counsellors
596 cormorants, and men of no religion; and in his

prayer for the Queen, he used these words, we

Nov. 10. muff pray for her for fafhion-fake, but we have no r
efpo fe hbi cause, ihe will never do us good. James com-
defence. manded him to be summoned before the Privy

Council to answer for such seditious expressions;
and the Clergy, instead of abandoning him to the
punilhment which such a petulant and criminal at-
tack on his superiors deserved, were so imprudent
as to espouse his cause, as if it had been the com-
mon one of the whole order. The controversy
concerning the immunities of the pulpit, and the
rights of the Clergy to testify against vices of
every kind, which had been agitated in 1584, was
now revived. It was pretended that, with regard
to their sacred funcion, Ministers were fubje& to
the Church alone; that it belonged only to their
ecclesiastical superiors to judge of the truth or
falsehood of doacrines delivered in the pulpit;
that if, upon any pretence whatever, the King
usurped this jurifdidion, the Church would, from
that moment, fink under servitude to the civil
magifirate ; that, instead of reproving vice with
that honest boldness which had often been of ad-
vantage to individuals, and salutary to the king-
dom, the Clergy would learn to flatter the pas-
fions of the Prince, and to connive at the vices
of others; that the King's eagerness to punish the
indiscretion of a Protestant Minister, while he was
ib ready to pardon the crimes of Popith confpi-
rators, called on them to fland on their guard,

and

and that now was the time to contend for their B o o K
privileges, and to prevent any encroachment on VIII.
those rights, of which the Church had been in 1
poffefion ever since the Reformation. Influenced

. by these considerations, the Council of the Church

enjoined Black to decline the jurifdition of the
Privy Council. And he, proud of such an op-
portunity to display his zeal, presented a paper to
that purpose, and with the utmost firmness refused
to plead, or to answer the questions which were
put to him. In order to add greater weight to
these proceedings, the Council of the Church
transmitted the declinature to all the Prefbyteries
throughout the kingdom, and commanded every
Minister to subscribe it in testimony of his appro-
bation.

JAMES defended his rights with no less vigour
than they were attacked. Sensible of the con-
tempt under which his authority must fall, if the
Clergy should be permitted publicly, and with
impunity, to calumniate his Ministers, and even
to censure himself; and knowing, by former ex-
amples, what unequal reparation for such offences
he might expect from the judicatories of the
Church, he urged on the inquiry into Black's con-
du&f, and issued a proclamation, commanding
the Members of the Council of the Church to
leave Edinburgh, and to return to their own pa-
rifhes. Black, instead of submitting, renewed
his declinature; and the Council, in defiance of
the proclamation, declared, that as they met by
the authority of the Church, obedience to it was
a duty still more sacred than that which they owed

..4 to

B o o K to the King himself. The Privy Council, not-
VIII. withstanding Black's refuting to plead, proceeded

- l in the trial; and, after a solemn inquiry, pro-
'596 nounced him guilty of the crimes of which he had

been accused; but referred it to the King to ap-
point what punishment he ihould fuffer.

MEAN while, many endeavours were used to

bring matters to accommodation. Almost every
day produced some new scheme of reconcile-
ment; but through the King's fickleness, the ob-
flinacy of the Clergy, or the intrigues of the
courtiers, they all proved ineffecual. Both par-
ties appealed to the people, and by reciprocal and
exaggerated accusations, endeavoured to render
each other odious. Insolence, sedition, treason,
were the crimes with which James charged the
Clergy; while they made the pulpits resound with
complaints of his excessive lenity towards Papifts,
and of the no less excessive rigour with which he
oppressed the established Church. Exasperated
by their bold invectives, he, at last, sentenced
Black to retire beyond the river Spey, and to re-
fide there during his pleasure; and once more
commanding the members of the standing Coun-
cil to depart from Edinburgh, he required all the
Ministers in the kingdom to subscribe a bond, ob-
liging themselves to submit, in the fame .manner
as other fubjets, to the jurifdi&ion of the civil
courts in matters of a civil nature.

A"mult" TuIs decisive measure excited all the violent
xdinburgh, passions which possess disappointed faAions; and

deeds no less violent immediately followed. These
inuft be imputed in part to the artifices of some

cour-

courtiers, who expected to reap advantage from B o oc
the calamities of their country, or who hoped to VIII.
lessen the authority of the O&tavians, by engaging I59
them in hostilities with the church. On one hand,
Ithey informed the King that the citizens of Edin-
burgh were under arms every night, and had plant-
ed a strong guard round the houses of their mi-
niffers. James, in order to put a stop to this ima-
ginary insult on his government, ifiued a procla-
mation, commanding twenty-four of the principal
citizens to leave the town within fix hours. On the
other hand, they wrote to the Ministers, advising
them to look to their own safety, as Huntly had
been secretly admitted to an interview with the
King, and had been the author of the severe pro-
clamation against the citizens of Edinburgh*.
They doubted no more of the truth of this intel-
ligence, than the King had done of that which he
received, and fell as blindly into the snare. The
letter came to their hands just as one of their num-
ber was going to mount the pulpit. They resolved
that he should acquaint the people of their danger: Decem.,7.
and he painted it with all the strong colours which
men naturally employ in describing any dreadful
and inflant calamity. When the sermon was over,
he desired the nobles and gentlemen to alTemble

* Though matters were indufirioufly aggravated by persons,

. who wilhed both parties to pursue violent measures; neither of

these reports were altogether defcitute of foundation. As their
Ministers were supposed to be in danger, some of the more
zealous citizens had determined to defend them, by force of
arms. Birch. Mem. ii. z50o. Huntly had been privately in
Edinburgh, where he had an interview, if not with the King,
atlealt with some of his Ministers. Birch. Ibid. 230.

596"* they promised and vowed to stand by the Church;

they drew up a petition to the King, craving the
redress of those grievances, of which the Clergy
complained, and beseeching him to deliver them
from all future apprehensions of danger, by re-
moving such of his Counsellors as were known to
be enemies of the Protestant Religion. Two Peers,
two Gentlemen, two Burgesses, and two Ministers,
were appointed to present it. The King happen-

adanger. ed to be in the great hall of the Tolbooth, where

the court of feflion was fitting. The manner in
which the petition was delivered, as well as its
contents, offended him. He gave an haughty re-
ply; the petitioners insisted with warmth; and a
promiscuous multitude pressing into the room,
James retired abruptly into another apartment, and
commanded the gates to be shut behind him. The
deputies returned to the multitude, who were itill
assembled, and to whom a minister had been read-
ing, in their absence, the story of Haman. When
they reported that the King had refufed'to liten
to their petitions, the Church was filled in a mo-
ment with noise, threatenings, execrations, and
all the outrage and confusion of a popular tumult.
Some called for their arms, some to bring out the
wicked Haman; others cried, The sword of the
Lord and of Gideon; and rushing out with the
most furious impetuosity, surrounded the Tol-
booth, threatening the King himself, and demand-
ing some of his Counsellors whom they named,
that they might tear them in pieces. The ma-

giftrates

giltrates of the city, partly by authority, partly Bo o o
by force, endeavoured to quell the tumult; the VIII.
King attempted to soothe the malecontents, by
promising to receive their petitions, when present-
\ed in a regular manner; the Ministers, sensible

of their own rashness in kindling such a flame, fe-
conded both; and the rage of the populace, sub-
siding as suddenly as it had risen, they all dispersed,
and the King returned to the palace; happy in
having escaped from an infurre&tion, which,
though the inflantaneous and unconcerted effe&t
of popular fury, had exposed his life to imminent
danger, and was considered by him as an unpar-
donable affront to his authority *.

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the male-

contents assembled, in order to prepare their peti-
tion. The punishment of the Popish Lords; the
removal of those Counsellors who were fufpe&ed
of favouring their persons or opinions; the repeal
of all the late aas of council, subversive of the
authority of the Church; together with an at
approving the proceedings of the flanding coun-
cil; were the chief of their demands. But the
King's indignation was still so high, that the de-
puties, chosen for this purpose, durst not venture
that night to present requests which could not fail
of kindling his rage anew. Before next morning,
James, with all his attendants, withdrew to Lin- He leave
lithgow; the session, and other courts of justice, Edibrgh
were required to leave a city where it was no long- witghain
.er consistent either with their safety, or their dig- thecitizens.
city, to remain ; and the noblemen and barons

' Spotfw. 417, &c. Cald. v. 54, &c. Birch. Mem. ii. 235.

were

B3 o o K were commanded to return to their own houses,
VIII. and not to reassemble without the King's permif-
Sfion. The vigour, with which the King ac&ed,

struck a damp upon the spirits of his adversaries.
The citizens, sensible how much they would fuffen
by his absence, and the removal of the courts of
justice, repented already of their conduC. The
Ministers alone resolved to maintain the contest.
They endeavoured to prevent the nobles from dif-
perfing; they inflamed the people by violent in-
veaives against the King; they laboured to pro-
cure subscriptions to an association for their mu-
tual defence; and conscious what lustre and
power the junction of some of the greater nobles
would add to their cause, the Ministers of Edin-
burgh wrote to Lord Hamilton, that the people,
moved by the word of God, and provoked by the
injuries offered to the Church, had taken arms;
that many of the nobles had determined to pro-
tea the Proteltant Religion, which owed ts eRa-
blifhment to the piety and valour of their ancef-
tors; that they wanted only a leader to unite them,
and to inspire them with vigour; that his zeal for
the good cause, no less than his noble birth, en-
titled him to that honour: They conjured him,
therefore, not to disappoint their hopes and wishes,
nor to refuse the fuffering Church that aid which
the so much needed. Lord Hamilton, instead of
complying with their desire, carried the letter di-
realy to the King, whom this new insult irritated
to such a degree, that he commanded the magif-
trates of Edinburgh instantly to seize their Mi-
pifters, as manifest incendiaries, and encouragers

of

of rebellion. The magistrates, in order to regain B oo K
the King's favour, were preparing to obey: and VIII.
the Ministers, who saw no other hope of safety,
fled towards England *.

THIS unfuccefsful infurreAion, instead of over- The King

humbles th

turning, eftablilhed the King's authority. Those powerofti
concerned in it were confounded and dispersed. Jhan" '
And the reft of his subjects, in order to avoid sus-
picion, or to gain his favour, contended who
thould be moflt forward to execute his vengeance.
A Convention of estates being called, pronounced
the late infurre&ion to be high treason; ordained
every Miniffer to subscribe a declaration of his
submission to the King's jurifdiftion, in all mat-
ters civil and criminal; impowered magistrates to
commit, initantly, to prison any Minister, who,
in his sermons, thould utter any indecent reflec-
tions on the King's conduca; prohibited any Ec-
clefiaftical judicatory to meet without the King's
license; commanded that no person should be
ele&ed a magifitrate of Edinburgh, for the future,
without the King's approbation; and that, in the
mean time, the present magiffrates should either
discover and infli& condign puniihment on the au-
thors of the late tumult, or the city itself should
be fubjeaed to all the penalties of that treasonable
aftion t.

ARMED with the authority of there decrees, ASr;dge
James resolved to crush entirely the mutinous fpi- leges of th
ritof his subjects. As the Clergy had, hitherto, de- icgh.o
rived their chief credit and strength from the fa-
vour and zeal of the citizens of Edinburgh, his first

* Spotfw.45l. Cald.v. Iz6, "t Cald. v. 147.

care

B o oK care was to humble them. Though the magiffrates
VIII. submitted to him in the molt abject terms; though

they vindicated themselves, and their fellow-citi-
zens, from the mofi difiant intention of violating
his royal person or authority; though, after thei
ftri&eft scrutiny, no circumstances that could fix
on them the suspicion of premeditated rebellion
had been discovered; though many of the nobles,
and such of the clergy as still retained any degree
of favour, interceded in their behalf; neither ac-
knowledgments, nor intercefions, were of the

Feb. s. least avail*. The King continued inexorable, the

city was declared to have forfeited its privileges as
a corporation, and to be liable to all the penalties
of treason. The capital of the kingdom, de-
prived of magifftrates, deserted by its miniffters,
abandoned by the courts ofjuffice, and proscribed
by the King, remained in desolation and despair.
The courtiers even threatened to rare the city to
the foundation, and to ere&t a pillar whvere it
stood, as an everlasting monument of the King's
vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants.
At last, in compliance with Elizabeth, who inter-
posed in their favour, and moved by the continual

Mar*ca. folicitations of the nobles, James absolved the ci-

- tizens from the penalties of law, but at the fame

time he stripped them of their most important pri-
vileges; they were neither allowed to< eleft their
own Magifftrates, nor their own Miniffters; many
new burdens were imposed on them; and a great
fum of money was exacted by way of peace-of-
fering t.

* Cald. v. 149. t" Spotfw. 434' 444-

JAMES

JAMES was, mean while, equally assiduous, and B o oK
no less fuccefsful, in circumscribing the jurifdi&ion VIII.
of the Church. Experience had discovered that to 1597.
attempt this, by acts of parliament, and sentences New regu-
of privy council, was both ineffecual and odious. regard to
He had recourse now to an expedient more artful, the Church.
and better calculated for obtaining his end. The
Ecclesiastical judicatories were composed of many
members; the majority of the clergy were extreme-
ly indigent, and unprovided of legal stipend; the
ninifters in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh,
notwithstanding the parity effabliflhed by the Pref-
byterian government, had assumed a leading in
the Church, which filled their brethren with envy;
every numerous body of men is susceptible of fud-
den and strong impressions, and liable to be influ-
enced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by thefre
considerations, James thought it possible to gain
the Clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to
subdue. Proper agents were set to work all over
the kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats were
employed; the ufurpations of the brethren near
the capital were aggravated; thejealoufy of their
power, which was growing in the distant pro-
vinces, was augmented; and two different Gene-
ral Assemblies were held, in both which, not-
withitanding the zeal and boldness wherewith a
few leading Clergymen defended the privileges of
the Church, a majority declared in favour of those
measures which were agreeable to the King. Ma-
ny practices, which had continued since the Re-
formation, were condemned; many points of dif-
cipline, which had hitherto been reckoned sacred

9 and

B o Oa and uncontroverted, were given up; the license,
VIII. with which ministers discoursed of political mat-

ters, was restrained; the freedom with which they

!97. inveighed against particular persons, censured;

sentences of summary excommunication declared&
unlawful; the convoking a General Assembly,
without the King's permilfion, prohibited; and
the right of nominating ministers to the principal
towns, vested in the Crown. Thus, the Clergy
themselves surrendered privileges, which it would
have been dangerous to invade, and voluntarily
submitted to a yoke more intolerable than any
James would have ventured to impose by force;
while those who continued to oppose his measures,
instead of their former popular topic of the King's
violent encroachments on a jurifdi6tion which
did not belong to him, were obliged to turn
their outcries against the corruptions of their own
order *.

Popish By the authority of these assemblies, the Popilh
Lords par-
doned. Earls were allowed to make a public recantation

of their errors; were absolved from the sentence
of excommunication; and received into the bo-
fom of the Church. But, not many years after,
they relapsed into their former errors, were again
reconciled to the church of Rome, and by their
apofftacy joftified, in some degree, the fears and
scruples of the Clergy with regard to their ab-
solution.

THE Ministers of Edinburgh owed to the inter-

ceflion of these assemblies the liberty of returning

* Spotfw. 433. Cald. v. 189. 233.

to their charges in the city. But this liberty was B o K
clogged in such a manner as greatly abridged their VIII.
power. The city was divided into diftina pa-
rifhfles; the number of Ministers doubled; per-
sons on whole fidelity the King could rely were
fixed in the new parishes; and these circumfiances,
added to the authority of the late decrees of the
Church, contributed to confirm that absolute do-
minion in Ecclesiastical affairs, which James pof-
sessed during the remainder of his rei',n.

THE King was so intent on new modelling the

Church, that the other tranfa&tions of this period
scarce deserve to be remembered. The Oftavi-
ans, envied by the other courtiers, and splitting
into facions among themselves, resigned their
commission; and the adminiftratron of the reve-
nue returning into its former channel, both the
King and the nation were deprived of the benefit
of their regular and frugal oeconomy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament Dec. 19.
was held in order to refto'e Huntly, and his as-
fociates, to their estates and honours, by repealing
the a& of forfeiture passed against them. The au-
thority of this supreme court was likewise employed
to introduce a farther innovation into the Church;
but, conformable to the system which the King had
now adopted, the motion for this purpose took
its rife from the Clergy themselves. As the a& Eccliaftic
of general annexation, and that establishing the rfoi inpor-
Presbyterian government, had reduced the few ulment.
Bilhops, who still survived, to poverty and con-
tempt as those who poffeffed the Abbeys and
Priories,. were mere laymen, and many of them

VoL.. II. R temporal

B o OK temporal Peers, few or none of the Ecclesiastical
VIII. order 'remained to vote in parliament, and by
b""98 means of that, the influence of the Crown was

considerably diminished there, and a proper ba-
lance to the power and number of the nobles was,
wanting. But the prejudices the nation had con-
ceived against the name and charater of Biihops
were so violent, that James was obliged, with the
utmost care, to avoid the appearance of a design
to revive that order. He prevailed therefore on
the conmniffion appointed by last Assembly to
complain to the parliament, that the Church was
the only body in the kingdom destitute of its re-
prefentatives in that supreme court, where it to
nearly concerned every order to have fgme, who
were bound to defend its rights; and to crave
that a competent number of the Clergy ihould be
admitted, according to antient custom, to a feat
there. In compliance with their request, an a&t
was palfed, by which those Ministers, on whom
the King should confer the vacant Bifhoprics and
Abbeys, were intitled to a vote in parliament;
and that the Clergy might conceive no jealousy
on any encroachment on their privileges, it was
remitted to the General Assembly, to determine
what spiritual jurifdidion or authority in the go-
vernment of the Church there persons ihould
potffcs *.

THE King, however, found it no easy matter to

obtain the concurrence of the Ecclesiastical judi-
catories, in which the ad of parliament met with a
fierce opposition. Though the Clergy perceived

* Spotfw. 450. Parl. I5th Jac. VI. c. 235.

how much luffre this new privilege would reflect B o oK
upon their order though they were not insensible VIII.
of the great accession of personal power and dig- 1598.
nity, which many of them waould acquire, by be-
ing admitted into the supreme council of the na-
tion, their abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme;
and to that they sacrificed every consideration of
interest or ambition. All the King's profefions of
regard for the present constitution of the Church
did not convince them of his sincerity; all the
devices that could be invented for restraining and
circumscribing the jurifdi6tion of those who were
to be raised to this new honour, did not diminish
their jealousy and fear. Their own experience
had taught them, with what insinuating progress
the hierarchy advances, and though admitted at
firit with moderate authority, and under specious
.pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion.
" Varnish over this scheme, said one of the lead-
ing Clergymen, with what colours you please;
deck the intruder with the utmost art; under all
this disguise, I fee the horns of his mitre." The
fame sentiments prevailed among many of his
brethren, and induced them to reject power and
honours, with as much zeal as ever those of their
order courted them. Many,; however, were al-
lured by the hopes of preferment ; the King him-
self and his Ministers employed the fame arts,
which they had tried so fuccefsfully last year; and
after long debates, and much oppoficion, the Ge- March 7,
neral Assembly declared that it was lawful for Mi-
nifters to accept of a feat in parliament; that it
would be highly beneficial to tie Church, to have

R a its

I"* that of the Ecclefiaftics, who were anciently
1598* called to parliament, ihould be chosen from

among the Clergy for that purpose. The manner
of their election, together with the powers to be
- vested in them, were left undecided for the present,

and furnilhed matter of future deliberation *

1S99. As the profpet of succeeding to the Crown of
a~eros" England drew nearer, James multiplied precau.
w'h ue- tions in order to render it certain. As he was
a pany in allied to many of the Princes of Germany by his
England· marriage, he sent ambassadors extraordinary to

their several courts, in order to explain thejuft-
ness of his title to the English throne, and to de.
fire their amfiftance, if any competitor should arise
to dispute his undoubted rights. These Princes
readily acknowledged the equity of his claim;
but the aid they could afford him was distant and
feeble. At the fame time, Edward Bruce, a66ot
of Kinlofs, his ambassador at the English court,
solicited Elizabeth, with the utmost warmth, to
recognize his title by some public deed, and to
deliver her own fubjeAs from the calamities
which are occasioned by an uncertain or disputed
fuccelifon. But age had strengthened all the pas-
lions which had hitherto induced Elizabeth to
keep this great question obscure and undecided,
and a general and evasive answer was all that
James could obtain. As no impression could be
made on the Queen, the ambassador was com-
manded to found the disposition of her fubjets,

* Spotfw. 450o. Cald. v. 278.

and to try what progress he could make in gaining B oo o
them. Bruce poffeffed all the talents of fecrefy, VIII.
judgment, and address, requisite for condu&ing 'n '
a negotiation no less delicate than important.
A Miniffer of this character was intitled to the
confidence of the English. Many of the highest
rank unbofomed themselves to him without re-
serve, and gave him repeated assurances of their
resolution to assert his maRfer's right, in oppo-
fition to every pretender *. And as several pam-
phlets were dispersed, at this time, in England,
containing objeaions to his title, James employed
some learned men in his kingdom to answer these
cavillers, and to explain the advantages which
would result to both kingdoms by the union of
the Crowns. These books were eagerly read, and
contributed not a little to recorcile the English to
that event, A book publilhed this year by the
King himself, produced an effet still more fa-
vourable, It was intitled Bafilicon Doron, and
contained precepts concerning the art of govern-
ment, addressed to Prince Henry his son. Not-
withstanding the great alterations and refinements
in national taste since that time, we muff allow
this to be no contemptible performance, and not
to be inferior to the works of molt cotemporary
writers, either in purity of style or justness of
composition. Even the vain parade of erudition
with which it abounds, and which now disgusts
us, raised the admiration of that age; and as it
was filled with those general rules which fpecu-
htive authors deliver for rendering a nation happy,

* Johnft. 242.

R 3 and

B oo oK and of which James could discourse with great
VIII. plausibility, though often incapable of putting
''T *' them in pratice, the English conceived an high

599 opinion of his abilities, and expected an increase

of national honour and prosperity, under a PrincC
so profoundly ikilled in politics, and who gave
such a specimen both of his wisdom and of his love
to his people .

THE Queen of England's sentiments concern.

ing James, were very different from these of her
fubjeas. His 'exceflive indulgence towards the
Popish Lords; the facility with which he pardoned
their repeated treafons; his refloring Beaton, the
Popish Archbishop of Glasgow, who had fled out
of Scotland at the time of the Reformation, to the
poffeflion of the temporalities of that benefice;
the appointing him his Ambassador at the court of
France; the applause he bellowed, in the Bafili-
con Doron, on those who adhered to the Queen
his mother, Elizabeth considered as so many indi-
cations of a mind alienated from the Protestant
religion; and fufpeted that he would soon revolt
from the profeffion of it. These suspicions seemed
to be fully confirmed, by a discovery which came

Accufehim from the Master of Gray, who resided at that time
of corre-
Ionding- in Italy, and who, rather than fulfer his intriguing

,pthe spirit to be idle, demeaned himself so far as to ad

as a spy for the English court. He conveyed to
Elizabeth the copy of a letter, written by James
to Pope Clement VIII. in which the King, after
many expreflions of regard for that pontiff, and of
gratitude for his favours, declared his firm refo-

* Camd. Spotfwv. 457. lution

lutton to treat the Roman Catholics with indul- B oo oK
gence; and, in order to render the intercourse VIII.
between the court of Rome and Scotland more 1599 I599.
frequent and familiar, he solicited the Pope to
'promote Drummond, Bishop of Vaifon, a Scots-
man, to the dignity of a Cardinal *. Elizabeth,
who had received by another channel f, some im-
perfea intelligence of this correspondence, was
filled with just surprise, and immediately dif-
patched Bowes into -Scotland, to inquire more
fully into the truth of the matter, and to reproach
James for an acion to unbecoming a Protestant
prince. He was no less astonished at the accu-
fation, and with a confidence,. which nothing but
the consciousness of innocence could inspire, as-
firmed the whole to be a mere calumny, and the
letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on pur-
pole to bring his sincerity in Religion to be sus-
pecded. Elphingfton the Secretary of State de-
nied the matter with equal folemniry. It came
to be known by a very singular accident, which
happened some years after, that the information
which Elizabeth had received was well founded,
though at the fame time the King's declarations
of his own innocence were perfealy consistent
with truth. Cardinal Bellarmine, in a reply
which he published to a controversial treatise, of
which the King was the author, accused him of
having abandoned the favourable sentiments which
he had once entertained of the Roman Catholic
religion, and as a proof of this, quoted his letter
to Clement VIII. It was impossible, any longer,

* Cald. 333. t Winw, Mem. vol. i. 37. 52.

R 4 to

B o oK to believe this to be a fi&ion ; and it was a mat,
VIII. ter too delicate to be passed over without ftriat
1599. inquiry. James immediately examined Elphing-

fton, and his confeffion unravelled the whole
mystery. He acknowledged that he had fhuffled,
in this letter among other papers, which he laid
before the King to be signed, who fufpe6ting no
such deceit, subscribed it together with the reft,
and without knowing what it contained; that he
had no other motive, however, to this aftion,
but zeal for his Majefty's service; and, by flat,
tering the Roman Catholics with hopes of in-
dulgence under the King's government, he ima,
gined that he was paving the way for his more
easy accession to the Englifli throne. The Privy
Council of England entertained very different fen-
timents of the Secretary's conduA. In their opi-
nion, not only the King's reputation had beeri
exposed to reproach, but his life to danger, by
this rash impoffture; they even imputed the gun.
powder treason to the rage and disappointment of
the Papifts, upon finding that the hopes which
this letter inspired were fruflrated. The Secretary
was sent a prisoner into Scotland, to be tried for
high creafon. His peers found him guilty, but, by
the Queen's intercefflion, he obtained a pardon*.

AccoRpiNG to the account of other historians,

James himself was no flranger to this correspond-
ence with the Pope; and, if we believe them, El-
phingfton being intimidated by the threats of the
English council, and deceived by the artifices of
the Earl of Dunbar, concealed some circum-

*Spots. 456. 507. Johnit. 448.

flance9

stances in his narrative of this tranfaaion,. and B o o K
falfified others; and at the expence of his own VIII.
fame, and with the danger of his life, endeavour-
ed to draw a veil over this part of his matter's
condua *.

BUT whether we impute the writing of this letter James at

great pains

to the Secretary's officious zeal, or to the King's to gain the
command, itis certain, that, about this time, James cocs.
was at the utmost pains to gain the friendship of
the Roman Catholic princes, as a necessary pre-
caution towards facilitating his accession to the
English throne. Lord Home, who was himself
a Papist, was entrusted with a secret commission
to the Pope ; the Archbishop of Glasgow was
an active instrument with those of his own reli-
gion ,. The Pope expressed such favourable fen-
timents both of the King, and of his right to the
Crown of England, that James thought himself
bound, some years after, to acknowledge the
obligation in a public manner §. Sir James Lind-
fay made great progress in gaining the Engliflh
Papifts to acknowledge his Majefty's title. Of
all these intrigues Elizabeth received obscure
hints from different quarters. The more imper-
sealy ihe knew, the more violently the fufpeced
the King's designs; and the natural jealousy of
her temper increasing with age, ihe observed his
condu& with greater solicitude than ever.

TIE questions with regard to the eletion and I600.

power of the representatives of the Church, were ,'rch .
finally decided this year, by the General Assembly, tion8 with

the Church.

* Cald. vol. v. 322. yi. 147. -- Winw. Mem. vol. ii. 57.
ICald. vol. vi. 147. § Ibid. voL v. 604. which

B o o K which met at Montrose.* That place was chosen
VIII. as most convenient for the ministers of the north,
Samong whom the King's influence chiefly lay.

And although great numbers resorted from the
northern provinces, and the King employed his
whole interest, and the authority of his own pre-
fence, to gain a majority, the following regula-
tions were with difficulty agreed on. That the
General Assembly shall recommend fix persons to
every vacant benefice, which gave a title to a feat
in parliament, out of whom the King fiould no-
minate one s that the person so eleaed, after ob-
taining his feat in parliament, shall neither pro-
pose, nor consent to any thing there, that may
affec the interest of the church, without special
infiructions to that purpose; that he shall be an-
fwerable for his conduct to every General Affem-
bly; and submit to its censure, without appeal,
upon pain of infamy and excommunication; that
he flall discharge the duties of a Paffor, in aparti-
cular congregation; that he shall not usurp any
ecclesiastical jurifdition, superior to that of his
other brethren; that if the Church inflit on him
the censure of deprivation, he ihall thereby for-
feit his feat in Parliament; that he shall annually
resign his commifion to the General Affenibly,
which may be restored to him, or not, as the As-
fembly, with the King's approbation, shall judge
most expedient' for the good of the Church*.
Nothing could be more repugnant to the idea of
episcopal government, than there regulations. It
was not in consequence of rights derived from

* Spot. w. 4.

4 Cald, vol. v. 368.

their

their office, but of powers conferred by a corn- B oo oK
miflion, that the ecclesiastical persons were to be VIII.
admitted to a feat in Parliament; they were the
representatives, not the superiors of the clergy.
Destitute of all spiritual authority, even their civil
jurifdi&ion was temporary. James, however, flat-
tered himself that they would soon be able to shake
off there fetters, and gradually acquire all the
privileges which belonged to the episcopal order.
The clergy dreaded the fame thing. And he con-
tended for, and they opposed, the nomination of
these commissioners, not so much on account of
the powers then vefied in them, as of those to
which it was believed they would soon attain *.

DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an Gowrie,'

unusual tranquillity. The clergy, after many ccnflfiacy.
Itruggles, were brought under great fubje&tion;
the Popith earls were restored to their estates and
honours,' by the authority of Parliament, and
with the consent of the church; the reft of the
nobles were at peace among themselves, and obe-
dient to the royal authority; when, in the midflt
of this security, the King's life was exposed to the
utmoft'danger, by a conspiracy altogether unex-
peced, and almost inexplicable. The authors of
it were John Ruthven, Earl of Gowrie, and his
brother Alexander, the sons of that Earl who
was beheaded in the year 1584. Nature had
adorned both these young men, especially the el-
der brother, with many accomplithments, to
which education had added its most elegant im-
provements. More learned, than is usual among
persons of their rank; more religious, than is

* Spots. 454.

common

B oo io common at their age of life; generous, brave,
VIII. popular; their countrymen, far from thinking
' ' them capable of any atrocious crime, conceived

the most sanguine hopes of their early virtues.
Notwithstanding all these noble qualities, some
unknown motive engaged them in a conspiracy,
which, if we adhere to the account commonly re-
ceived, mutt be transmitted to posterity, as one
of the most wicked, as well as one of the worst con-
certed, of which history makes any mention.

ON the fifth of August, as the King, who re.

sided during the hunting season in his Palace of
Falkland, was going out to his sport early in the
morning, he was accosted by Mr. Alexander
Ruthven, who, with an air of great importance,
told the King, that the evening before he had met
an unknown man, of a suspicious afpet, walking
alone in a by-path, near his brother's house at
Perth; and on searching him, had found, under
his cloak, a pot filled with a vast quantity of so,
reign gold ; that he had immediately seized both
him and his treasure, and, without communicating
the matter to any person, had kept him confined
and bound in a solitary house; and that he thought
it his duty to impart such a singular event, first of
all to his Majesty. James immediately fufpe&ed
this unknown person to be a trafficking priest, sup-
plied with foreign coin, in order to excite new
commotions in the kingdom ; and resolved to im-
power the Magistrates of Perth to call the person
before them, and inquire into all the circumstances
of the story. Ruthven violently opposed this re-
solution, and with many arguments urged the King
to ride direAly to Perth, and to examine the mat-

ter

ter with his own eyes. Meanwhile the chace be- B oo oK
gan; and James, notwithstanding his passion for VIII.
that amusement, could not help ruminating on the I600.
firangenefs of the tale, and on Ruthven's importu-
nity. At last, he called him, and promised, when
the sport was over, to set out for Perth. The
chace, however, continued long; and Ruthven,
who all the while kept close by the King, was still
calling on him to make haste. At the death of
the buck he would not allow James to flay till a
fresh horse was brought him; and observing the
Duke of Lennox and the.Earl of Mar preparing
to accompany the King, he intreated him to coun-
termand them. This James refused; and though
Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well as the
apparent perturbation in his whole behaviour,
raised some furpicions in his mind; yet his own
curiosity, andRuthven's folicitations, prevailed on
him to set out for Perth. When within a mile of
the town, Ruthven rode forward to inform his bro-
ther of the King's arrival, though he had already
dispatched two messengers for that purpose. At a
little distance from the town, the Earl, attended by
several of the citizens, met the King, who had
only twenty persons in his train. No preparations
were made for the King's entertainment; the Earl
appeared pensive and embarrassed, and was at no
pains to atone, by his courtesy or hospitality, for
the bad fare with which he treated his guests. When
the King's repast was over, his attendants were led
to dine in another room, and he being left almost
alone, Ruthven whispered him, that now was the
time to go to the chamber where the unknown
person was kept. James commanded him to bring

8 Sir

B o K Sir Thomas Erikine along with them; but, instead
VIII. of that, Ruthven ordered him not to follow: And
L.-'--a conducing the King up a stair-case, and then

through several apartments, the doors of which he
locked behind him, led him at last into a finall
fludy, in which there flood a man clad in ar-
mour, with a sword and dagger by his fide. The
King, who expected to have found one disarmed
and bound, started at the fight, and inquired if
this was the person; but Ruthven snatching the
dagger from the girdle of the man in armour, and
holding it to the King's breaff, " Remember, said
" he, how unjustly my father fuffered by your
" command; you are now my prisoner; submit
" to my disposal without refillance, or outcry;
" or this dagger shall instantly avenge his blood."
James expoftulated with Ruthven, intreated, and
flattered him. The man whom he found in the
study flood, all the while, trembling, and dismay-
ed, without courage either to aid the King, or to
second his aggressor. Ruthven protefied, that if
the King raised no outcry, his life flhould be safe;
and, moved by some unknown reason, retired in
order to call his brother, leaving to the man in
armour the care of the King, whom he bound by
oath not to make any noise during his absence.

WHILE the King was in this dangerous fitua-

tion, his attendants growing impatient to know
whither he had retired, one of Gowrie's attend-
ants entered the room hastily, and told them that
the King hadjuft rode away towards Falkland. All
of them rushed out into the street; and the Earl,
in the utmost hurry, called for their horses. But
by this time his brother had returned to the King,

and

and swearing that now there was no remedy, he B oo oK
behoved to die, offered to bind his hands. Un- VIII.
armed as James was, he scorned to submit to that '- '

16oo.

indignity; and closing with the affaffin, a fierce
struggle ensued. The man in armour stood, as
formerly, amazed and motionless; and the King
dragging Ruthven towards a window, which du-
ring his absence he had persuaded the person with
whom he was left to open, cried, with a wild and
affrighted voice, ,c Treason ! Treason ! Help ! I
am murdered!" His attendants heard, and knew
the voice; and saw, at the window, a hand which
grasped the King's neck with violence. They
flew with precipitation to his assistance. Lennox
and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the
principal flair-cafe, where they found all the doors
ihut, which they battered with the utmost fury,
endeavouring to burst them open. But Sir John'
Ramsey, entering by a back-flair, which led to
the apartment where the King was, found the
door open; and rushing upon Ruthven, who was
still firuggling with the King, struck him twice
with his dagger, and thrust him towards the stair-
cafe, where Sir Thomas Erskine and Sir Hugh
Herries met, and killed him; he crying with his
last breath, " Alas ! I am not to blame for this
aclion." During this fcuffle, the man who had
been concealed in the fludy escaped unobserved,
Together with Ramsey, Erikine, and Herries one
Wilson, a footman, entered the room where the
King was, and before they had time to shut the
door, Gowrie rushed in with a drawn sword in each
hand, followed by seven of his attendants well arm-
ed, and with a loud voice threatened them all with

a instant

B o K instant death. They immediately thrust the King
VIII. into the little study, and ihutting the door upon
1' "' him, encountered the Earl. Notwithflanding the
16oo. inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey pierced

Gowrie through the heart, and he fell down dead
without uttering a word; his followers having re-
ceived several wounds, immediately fled. Three
of the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the
cbnfliA. A dreadful noise continued still at the
opposite door, where many persons laboured in
vain to force a passage; and the King being as-
sured that they were Lennox, Mar, and his other
friends, it was opened on the inside. They ran to
the King, whom they unexpectedly found safe,
with transports of congratulation ; and he, falling
on his knees, with all his attendants around him,
offered solemn thanks to God for such a wonderful
deliverance. The danger, however, was not yet
over. The inhabitants of the town, whose Pro-
voft Gowrie was, and by whom he was extremely
beloved, hearing the fate of the two brothers, ran
to their arms, and surrounded the house, threaten-
ing revenge, with many insolent and opprobrious
speeches against the King. James endeavoured to
pacify the enraged multitude, by speaking to them
from the window; he admitted their magif'rates
into the house; related to them the whole cir-
cumftances of the fat ; and, their fury subsiding
by degrees, they dispersed. On searching the
Earl's pockets, for papers, that might discover his
designs and accomplices, nothing was found but a
small parchment bag, full of magical charaters
and words of enchantment j and if we may believe

the

dt{e account of the conspiracy published by the B oo it
King, "while these were about him, the wound of VIII.
" which he died, bled not; but as soon as they C'..-
"' were taken away, the blood gufhlled out in great
" abundance." After all the dangerous adven-
tures 6f this busy day, the King returned in the
evening to Falkland, having committed the dead
bodies of the two brothers to the custody of the
Magistrates of Perth.

NOTWITHSTANDING the minute detail which the Thrmoi;v

King gave of all the circumftiances of this confpi- P te o-
racy against his life, the motives which induced the ea-ly '
two brothers to attempt an aaion so detestable, the
end they had in view, and the accomplices on
whose aid they depended, were altogether unknown.
The words of Ruthven to the King gave some
grounds to think that the desire of revenging their
father's death had instigated them to this attempt.
But, whatever injuries their father had fuffered, it
is scarce probable that they could impute them to
the King, whose youth and fubje&ion, at that
time, to the violence of a faction, exempted him
from being the obje& of resentment, on account
of aaions which were not done by his command.
James had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs
which the father had fuffered, by benefits to his
children ; and Gowrie himself, sensible of his fa-
vouracknowledged it with the warmest expreflions
of gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being
convi&ted of assisting him in this assault on the
King's servants, were executed at Perth ; but they
could give no light into the motives which had
prompted their matter to an a&ion so repugnant to

VoL. II. S these

B oo oK these acknowledgments. Diligent search was made
VIII. for the person concealed in the fltudy, and from him
i6co. great discoveries were expeced. But Andrew Hen-

derfon the Earl's ifeward, who, upon a promise of
pardon, confeffed himself to be the man, was as
much a stranger to his matter's design as the reft;
and though placed in the fiudy by Gowrie's com-
mand, he did not even know for what end that fta-
tion had been assigned him. The whole tranfa&ion
remained as impenetrably dark as ever; and the
two brothers, it was concluded, had concerted their
scheme without either confident or accomplice,
with unexampled secrecy as well as wickedness.

Sprot's dir.- AN accident, no less fitrange than the other cir-
coi,,ng cumitances of the ifory, and which happened nine
'I. years after, discovered that this opinion, however

plausible, was ill-founded ; and that the two bro-
thers had not carried on their machinations all
alone. One Spror, a notary, having whispered
among several persons that he knew some secrets
relating to Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy council
thought the matter worthy of their attention, and
ordered him to be seized. His confeffion was
partly voluntary, and partly forced from him by
.torture. According to his account, Logan of
Reflalrig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, but
of dissolute morals, was privy to all Gowrie's in-
tentions, and an accomplice in his crimes. Mr.
Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviews with
him, in order to concert the plan of their opera-
tions; the Earl had corresponded with him to the
fame purpose; and one Bour, Logan's confident,
was trusted with the secret, and carried the letters

between

between them. Both Logan and Bour were now B oo iK
dead. But Sprot affirmed that he had read letters VIII.
written both by Gowrne and Logan, on that occa-
sion; and, in confirmation of his testimony, severaL
of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fatal to him-
self had prompted Sprot to .teal from among
Bour's papers, were produced *. These were
compared, by the privy council, with papers of
Logan's hand-writing, and the resemblance was
manifest. Persons of undoubted credit, and well
qualified to judge of the matter, examined them,
and swore to their authenticity. Death itfelfdid
not exempt Logan from prosecution, his bones
were dug up and tried for High Treason, and by
a sentence, equally odious and illegal f, his lands
were forfeited, and his poiterity declared infamous.

Sprot

4 Logan's letters were five in number. One to four, another
to Gowrie, and three of them without ,ny direaion ; nor could
Sprot discover the name of the person to whom they were writ-
ten. Logan gives him the appellation of Right Honourable.
It appears from this, however, and from other words in the
letter, Crom. 95. that there were several persons privy to the
conspiracy. The date of the firfi letter is July 18th. Mr. Ruth-
ven had communicated the matter to Logan only five days be-
fore. Ibid. It appears from the original summons of For-
faulture againift Logan's heirs, that Bour, though he had let-
ters addressed to him with regard to a conspiracy equally
dangerous and important, was so illiterate t. t h" could not
read. " Jacobus Bour, literarum prorfus gnarus, diai Geor-
" gii opera in legendis omnibus fcriptis ad eum missis, vel
" pertinentibus, utebatur." Thib is altogether fitrange; and.
nothing but the capricious charaer of Logan can account for
his chufing such a confident.

t By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of High

Treason might be tried even after death. This praaice was

S z adopt-

B o o K Sprot was condemned to be hanged sot mifprifioil
VIII. of treason. He adhered to his confeffion to the
'r~' lalt, and having promised, on the fcaffold, to give

the fpeftators a sign in confirmation of the truth of

adopted by the Scots, without any limitation, Parl. 1540. c.
69. But the unlimited exercise of this power was soon conceiv.
ed to be dangerous; and the Crown was laid tnder proper re-
ftridions, by an ad A. D. 1542. which has never been printed.
The words of it are, " And because the said Lords, (i.e. the
Lords of Articles) think the said ad (viz. in 1540) too general,
and prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, therefore statutes
and ordains that the said adl ihall have no place in time coming,
but againift the heirs of them that notoriously commit or ihall
commit lefe majesty against the King's person, againit the
realm for averting the fame, and againff them that shall happen
to betray the King's army allenarly, and being notourly known
in their time and the heirs of these persons to be called and
judged within five years after the decease of the said persons
committers of the said crimes ; and the said time being bypalt,
the said heirs never to be pursued for the fame." The fen-
tence against Logan violated this flatute in two particulars.
He was not notourly known during his life to bean accomplice
in the crime for which he was tried; and his heir was called iu
question more than five years after his death. It is remarkable
that this statute seems not to have been attended to in thepar-
liament which forfeited Logan. Another singular circumstance
deserves notice. As it is a maxim of juflice that no person
can be tried in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of
their forms, and often absurd in their devices for preserving
them, they contrived that, in any process against a dead per-
son, his corpse or bones flhall be presented at the bar. Exam-
ples of this occur frequently in the Scottish history. After the
battle of Corrichie, the dead body of the Earl of Huntly was
presented in parliament, before sentence offorfaufure war
pronounced againift him. For the fame reason the bodies of
Gowrie and his brother were preserved, in order that they
might be produced in parliament. Logan's bones, in com-
pliance with the fame rule, were dug up. Mackenz. Crim.
Law, Book i. Tit. 6. 5 zz.

wvhat he had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands B oo o.
after he was thrown off the ladder by the execu- VIII.
tioner *. iy 1600,

* It appears that Archbishop Spotfwood was present at the

execution of Sprot, Cram. 1 15. and yet he seems to have given'
po credit to his discoveries. The manner in which he speaks of
\him is remarkable, " Whether or not I should mention the ar-
f' raignment and execution of George Sprot, who fuffered at
si Edinburgh, I am doubtful. His confeffion, though volun·
" tary and constant, carrying (mali probability. The man de-
t' posed, &c. It seemed to be a very fition, and a mere in-
C' vention of the man's own brain, for neither did he shew the
" letter, nor could any wife man think that Gowrie, who went
"' about the treason so secretly, would have communicated the
" matter to such a man as Logan was known to be." p. 508.
Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which
Logan had been tried, and of the proof brought of the authen-
ticity of his letters. He hiinfelf was probably present in par-
liament at the trial. The Earl of Dunbar, of whom he always
speaks with the highest refpe&, was the person who direted the
process against Logan. Such a peremptory declaration againlt
the truth of Sprot's evidence, notwithstanding all these circum-
stances, is surprising. Sir Thomas Hamilton, the King's advo-
cate at that time, and afterwards Earl of Hadington, repre-
fents the proof produced at Logan's trial as extremely convin-
cing; and in an original letter of his to the King the 21ft of
June 1609. (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after mentioning the man-
Ier in which the trial had been conducted, he thus goes on :

"( When the probation of the summons was referred to the

Lords of Articles votes, they found uniformly, all in one
yoice, the said summons to be fp clearly proved, that they
seemed to contend who mfould be able modt zealously to express
the fatisfa&ion of his heart, not only by the most pithy words,
but by tears of joy ; diverse of the best rank confefling, that
that whereof they doubted at their entry into the house war
now so manifest, that they behoved to esteem them traitors
who should any longer refuse to declare their assured resolution
pfthe truth of that treafon."

S s BUT

B o o K BUT though it be thus unexpetedly discovered
VIII. that Gowrle did not aa without associates, little

/o additional light is thrown, by this discovery, on

the motives and intention of his condu&. It ap-
pears almost incredible that two young men
of such diftiriguifhed virtue, ihould revolt all at
once, from their duty, and attempt a crime so
atrocious, as the murder of their Sovereign. It
appears fil! more improbable, that they ihould
have concerced their undertaking with so little
foresight and prudence, If they intended that the
deed should have remained concealed they could
not have cho'en a more improper scene for execut-
ing it than their own house, If they intended
that Ilcnderfon should have ftrucli the blow,
they could not have pitched on a man more defti-
tute of the courage that must direct the hand of
an affaffin nor could they expect that he, un-
solicited, and unacquainted with their purpose,
would venture on such a desperate action. If
Ruthven meant to stab the King with his own
hand, why did he withdraw the dagger, after it
was pointed at his brealt ? How could he leave
the King, after such a plain declaration of his in-
tention ? Was it not preposterous to commit him
to the keeping of such a timid and false associate,
as Henderson ? For what purpose did he waste
time, in binding the hands of an unarmed man,
whom he might easily have dispatched with his
sword ? Had providence permitted them to em-
brue their hands in the blood of their Sovereign,
,vhat advantage could have accrued to them
by his death ? and what claims or pretensions
potAd they have opposed to the rights of his chil-

dren?

dren*? Inevitable and inflant vengeance, to- B

6 oK

gether with perpetual infamy, were the only con- VIII.
sequences they could expect to follow such a

ioo.

crime.

ON the other hand, it is impoflible to believe

that the King had formed any design against the
life of the two brothers. They had not incurred
his indignation, by any crime; and were, in no
degree, the objects of his jcaloufy or hatred -j-;

nor

* It has been asserted, that, in consequence of the King's

death, the Earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the Crown
of England, as the son of Dorothea Stewart daughter of Lord
Methven by Margaret of England, who, after her divorce from
the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third husband.
Burnet Iifit. of his own Times. But this aflertion is ill-founded.
It appears, from undoubted evidence, that Lord Methven had
only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its infancy,
and Dorothea Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queen
Margaret, but of Janet Stewart. Lord Methven's second
wife, a daughter of John Earl of Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329.
And though Gowrie had really been descended from the
blood-royal of England, the King at that time had a son
and a daughter; and besides them, Lady Arabella Stewart,
daughter of Charles Earl of Lennox, had a preferable title to
the Crown of England.

t Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood,

imputes the death of the two brothers to a cause not mention-
ed by any of our hiforians. " Out of Scotland we hear that
there is no good agreement, but rather an open diffidence be-
twixt the King and his wife, and many are of opinion that
the discovery of foine affection between her and the Earl cf
Gowrie's brother (who was killed with him) was the treeft
cause and motive of that tragedy." Winw. Mem. vol. i. 274.
Whether the following passages in Nicholfon's letter be any
confirmation of that suspicion, is submitted to the reader. [a
his letter Sept. 22, 1602, he mentions the return of Gowrie's
twoyounger brothers into Scotland, and adds, " "'he coming

S 4 in

B o o nor was he of a spirit to sanguinary, o.r so no.tc4.
VIII. for rash and desperate valour, as to have attempt.
*' ed to murder them in their own house, where they

were surrounded with many domeflics, he only
with a slender and unarmed train; where they
could call to their assistance the inhabitants of a
city, at the devotion of their family, while he was
at a diffance from all aid; and least of all would
he have chosen for his associates, in such an enter-
prize, the Earl of Mar, and the Duke of Len-
nox, the former conneEted in close friendlhip with
the house of Gowrie, and the latter married to
one of the Earl's filters.

A conjee- WHICHSOEVER of these opposite fyfiems we em-r
turCCO t-h
erningthe brace; whether we impute the intention of murder
ntntion.f to Gowrie, or to the King; insuperable difficulties
trors. arise, and we are involved in darkness, myfftery,

and contradicions. Perhaps the source of the
whole conspiracy ought to be searched for deeper,
and by deriving it from a more remote cause, we
may discover it to be less criminal.

in of these two, and the Queen of Scots dealing with them,
and sending away and furnifling Mrs. Beatrix [their fifRerJ
with such information as Sir Thomas Erikine has given, hath
bred great suspicion in the King of Scots that they comenot
in but upon some dangerous plot." In another letter, January
1, 1603. " The day of writing my last, Mrs. Beatrix Ruth-
ven was brought by the Lady Paisley, and Mrs. of Angus, as
one of their gentlewomein into the court ip the evening, and
G(owed in a chamber prepared for her by the Queen's direftion,
vhere the Queen had much time and conference with her.
01 this the King got notice, and fhewed his dislike thereof to
the Oueen, gently reproving her for it, and examining quiet-
ly of he Queen's servants of the fame, and of qther matters
thereunto belonging, with fach discretion and secrecy as re.
quires fu£> a matter.

To keep the King of Scots in continual depend- B oo ro
ance, was one great objea of Elizabeth's policy. VIII.
In order to this, the sometimes soothed him; and -
sometimes bribed his Ministers and favourites; i6oo.
and when the failed of attaining her end by these
means, she encouraged the Clergy to render any
administration she diftru~fed unpopular, by decry-
ing it, or stirred up some facion of the nobles to
oppose, and to overturn it. They, un:cquainted
with the arts of undermining a Minifcry by in-
trigues, had recourse to the ruder praciceof ren-
dering themselves matters of the King's person,
that they might thereby obtain the direcions of
his councils. Those nobles, who seized the King
at the Raid of Ruthven, were instigated, and sup-
ported by her. Bothwell, in all his wild attempts,
enjoyed her prote&ion, and found a retreat in her
dominions. The connexions which James had
been forming of late with the Roman Catholic
princes, his secret negotiations in England with
her fubje&s, and the maxims by which he govern-
ed his own kingdom, all contributed to excite her
jealousy. She dreaded some great revolution in
Scotland to be approaching, and it was her intereftl
to prevent it. The Earl of Gowrfe was one of the
nott powerful of the Scottifn nobles, and descend-
ed from anceflors warmly attached to the English
interest. He had adopted the fame system, and
believed the welfare of his country to be infe-
parably connet&ed with the fubfitence of the alli-
ance between the two kingdoms. During his re-
fidence at Paris, he had contra&ced an intimate
friendlhip with Sir Henry Neville the Queen's

ambassador

B o o K ambassador there, and was recommended by him
VIII. to his court, as a person of whom great use might
.^.',-' be made *. Elizabeth received him, as he passed

through England, witn distinguished marks of re-
fpedt and favour. From all these circumstances,
a suspicion may arise, that the plan of the con-
fpiracy against the King was formed at that time,
in concert with her. Such a suspicion prevailed
in that age, and from the letters of Nicholson,
Elizabeth's agent in Scotland, it appears not to
be destitute of foundation. An English ship was
observed hovering, for some time, in the mouth
of the frith of Forth. The Earl's two younger
brothers fled into England, after the ill success
of the conspiracy, and were proteaed by Eliza-
beth. And James himself, though he prudently
concealed it, took great umbrage at her behavi-
our. None, however, of Elizabeth's intrigues
in Scotland tended to hurt the King's person, but
only to circumscribe his authority, and to thwart
his schemes. His life was the surest safe-guard
of her own, and restrained the Popish pretenders
to her Crown, and their abettors, from desperate
attempts, to which their impatience and bigotry
might, otherwise, have urged them on. To
have encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sovereign,
would, on her part, have been an a& of the ut-
most imprudence. Nor does this seem to have
been the intention of the two brothers. Mr.
Ruthven, first of all, endeavoured to decoy the
King to Perth, without any attendants. When
there proved more numerous than was expected,

* Winw. i. 156.

the Earl employed a stratagem in order to separate B o o i
them. from'the King, by pretending that he had VIII.
rode away towards Falkland, and by calling hastily '
for their horses, that they might follow him. But
ihutting James up, mean while, in a diffant cor-
ner of the house, and by attempting to bind his
hands, their design seems to have been rather to
seize, than to affaffinate him. And though Gowrie
had not colle&ed his followers, so as to have been
able to detain him long a prisoner, in that part of
the kingdom, by open force, he might soon have
been conveyed aboard the English ship, which
waited perhaps to receive him, and he might have
been landed at Faft-Caftle, a house of Logan's,
in which, according to many obscure hints in his
letters, some rendezvous of the conspirators was
to be held. Amidst the surprise and terror, into
which the King muff have been thrown by the
violence offered to him, it was extremely natural
*for him to conclude that his life was fought. It

·was the interest of all his followers to confirm him
in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order
to add to the importance and merit of their own
services. And thus his fear, and their vanity,
aided by the credulity and wonder which the con-
templation of any great and tragical event, when
not fully underitood, is apt to inspire, augmented
the whole tranfa&ion. On the other hand, the ex-
travagance and improbability of the circumstances,
which were added, detra&ed from the credit of
those which really happened; and even furnished
pretences for calling in question the truth of the
ivhole cor.fpiracy,

B 0 o oK THE account of what had happened at Perth
VIII. reached Edinburgh next morning. The privy
-'- council commanded the Ministers of that city in-
Many di0- ftantly to assemble their people; and after relating
eieve the to them the circumitances of the conspiracy form-
acCOUnt
publifhtd by ed against the King's life, to return public thanks
hc Kiag. to God, for the proteclion which he had so visibly

afforded him. But as the first accounts tranf-
mitted to Edinburgh, written in a hurry, and
while the circumstances of the conspiracy were
but imperfecTly known, and the paftions which it
excited firongly felt, were indiftint, exaggerated,
and contradi&ory, the Ministers laid hold of thisi
and though they offered to give public thanks to
God for the King's safety, ;hey refused to enter
into any detail of particulars, or to utter from the
chair of truth, what appeared to be fill dubious
and uncertain.

A FEW days after, the King returned to Edin-

burgh; and though Galloway, the Minister of his
own Chapel, made an harangue to the people at
the public cross, in which he recited all the cir-
cumftances of the cpnfpiracy; though James him-
self, in their hearing, confirmed his account;
though he commanded a narrative of the whole
tranfaRion to be published; the Ministers of that
city, as well as many of their brethrep, still con-
tinued incredulous and unconvinced, Their high
esteem of Gowrie, theirjealoufy of every part of
the King's condu&, added to some false and many
improbable circumstances in the narrative, not
only led them to fufpeQ the whole, but gave their
suspicions an air of credibility. But at length,

5 ths

the King, partly by arguments, partly by threats, B o o K
prevailed on all of them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, VIII,
to own that they were convinced of the truth of ' ''
the conspiracy. He could be brought no further
than to declare, that he reverenced the King's ac-
count of the tranfa&ion, but could not fay that he
himself was persuaded of the truth of it. The
scruples or obatinacy of a single man would have
been little regarded, but as the fame spirit of in-
credulity began to spread among the people, the
example of one, in so high reputation for integrity
and abilities, was extremely dangerous. The King
was at the utmost pains to' convince and to gain
Bruce, but finding it impoflible to remove his
doubts, he deprived him of his benefice, and after
repeated delays, and many attempts towards a re-
concilement, banifled him the kingdom *.

THE proceedings of parliament were not retard- Proceedings

of parlia.

ed by any scruples of this fort. The dead bodies mentagaimn
of the two brothers were produced there, accordinge aoci0.'
to law; an indictment for High Treason was pre-
ferred against them; witnesses were examined;
and, by an unanimous sentence, their estates and
honours were forfeited; the punishment due to
Traitors was inflicted on their dead bodies; and,
as if the punishment hitherto in use did not ex-
press fufficient detestation of their crimes, the par-
liament enacted that the surname of Ruthven
ihould be abolished; and in order to preserve the
memory of the King's miraculous escape, and to
declare the sense which the nation had of the di-

* Spotfw. 461, &c. Cald. v. 389, &c.

vine

B o oK vine goodness, to all future ages, appointed the
VIII. fifth of August to be observed, annually, as a day

SLof public thanksgiving *.

1600.

T

o THOUGH

* A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the King

published a discourse of their 'vile and unnatural col/piracy againfI
his life. In the year 1713, George Earl of Cromertie pubiifh.
ed an " Hifiorical account of the conspiracy by the Earl of
" Gowrie, and Robert Logan ofReftalrig, againf King James
" VI." He seems not to have seen the account which the
King himself had given of that matter, and borriows the
whole historical part from Spotfwood, and other authors; but
he has extraced from the public records the depositions of the
witnesses produced by the King's Council, in order to make
good the charge against the two brothers, and Logan their at-
fociate. From these two treatises our knowledge of all the
material circumitanccs of the conspiracy is derived. The evi-
dence which they contain, one would expe& to be authentic
and decisive. An account of a fad, till recent, publiihed by
royal authority, and the original depositions of persons exa-
mined in presence of the highest court in the nation, ought to
convey a degree of evidence seldom attained in historical re-
lations, and to exclude all remaining doubt and uncertainty.
But as every thing with regard to this tranfadion is dark and
problematical, the King's account and the depositions of the
witnesses not only vary, but contradia each other in so many
circumstances, that much room is lill left for hesitation and
blitorical scepticism. The testimony of Henderson is the fullest
and most important, but in several particulars the King's ac-
count and his are contraditory. I. According to the King's
account, while Mr. Ruthven was holding the dagger at his
breast, " the fellow in the study stood quaking and trembling."
Disc. 17. But Henderson says that he himself wrested the
dagger out of Mr. Ruthven's hands. Disc. 53. Crom. 5o.
Henderson likewise boasted to his wife, that he had that day
twice saved the King from being stabbed. Disc.54. Crom. 53.
II. The King asserts that Henderson opened the window du-
ring Mr. Ruthven's absence. Disc. 23. Henderson deposes
that he was only attempting to open it when Mr. Ruthven

9 returned,

THOUGH Gowrje's conspiracy occasioned a fud- B o o K

den and a great alarm, it was followed by no confe- VIII.
quences of importance; and having been concerted 60
by the two brothers, either without any associates, rffex's con.

fpiracy a-

or gai ft Eli-

returned, and that during the struggle between the King and.
him, he opened it. Disc. 53, 54. Crom. 51, 52. III. If we
may believe the King, the fellow in the study flood, during
the firuggle, behind the King's back, inaative and trembling
all the time. Disc. 27. But Henderion affirms, that he
fnhatched away the garter with which Mr. Ruthven attempted
to bind the King; that he pulled back Ruthven's hand, while
he was endeavouring to fltop the King's mouth, and that he
opened the window. Disc. 54. Crom. 52. 1V. By the King's
account, Mr. Ruthven left him in the fludy, and went away
in order to meet with his brother, and the Earl came up the
flairs for the fame purpose. Dire. 23. Henderson deposes,
that when Mr. Ruthven left the King, " he believes that he
did not pass from the door." Crom. 5x. It is apparent both
from the situation of the house, and from other circumfiances,
that there could not poflibly have been any interview between
the brothers at this time. Disc. 23.

Henderson was twice examined, first at Falkland before the

privy council in August, and next at Edinburgh before the
parliament in November. Not to mention some lesser vari-
ations between these depositions, we ihall point out two which
are remarkable. In his first deposition Mr. Henderson relates
the most material circumstance of the whole in these words:
" Mr. Ruthven pulled out the deponent's dagger, and
" held the fame to his Majefly's breafi, saying, remember
" you of my father's murder ; you /ball no'w die for it, and
" minting to his Highnefs's heart, with the dagger, the
" deponent threw the fame out of Mr. Ruthven's hands, and
" swore that as God shall judge his foul, that if Mr. Ruth-
" ven had retained the dagger in his hand, the space a mall
" may go fix steps, he would have firicken the King to the
" hilts with it." Disc. 52. But at his second examination
lie varied from this in two material circumitances. Firt,
the words which he at that timne put in Mr. Ruthven's mouth

while

B o K or with such as were unknown, and chose to rermain
VIII. so, the danger was over, as soon as discovered. But

"' not long after, a conspiracy broke out in England

x60x.

while he held the dagger at the King's breast are, " Sir, yjo
" m»: bie my prijfner ; remember on myfather's death." Se:
condly, when he threatened him with death, it was only to
deter him from making any hoife, " Hold youi tongue, or iy
" Chrir you fall die." z. In his first deposition, the words
of Mr. Ruthven, when he returned to the chamber where
he had left the King, are, " There is no rem:dy, by God yo
" mufl die." But in his second deposition, " By God there
" is no remedy, and offered to bind his Majefty's hands."
Crom. 5 . The material wordsyou muB die are omitted. The
first deposition seems plainly to intimate that it was Ruthven's
intention to murder the King. The second would lead us to
conclude that he had no other design than to detain him as a
prisoner.

There are likewise some remarkable contraditions in the

teilimonies of the other witnesses. I. In the discourse pub.
lifhed by authority, it is insinuated that the tumult of the
inhabitants was raised againit the King, and that it required
some art to pacify them. Disc. 32. The Duke ofLennox
confirms this in his deposition. Crom. 44. An Aft of privy-
Council summoning the Magifirates of Perth to answer for that
riot is still extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of the baillies
of the town, depofcs, that he himfelfraifed the people, and
that they took arms in order to assist the King. Crom. 66.
z. Henderson deposes, that he gave an evasive answer to Mr.
John Moncrief, who enquired where he had been that morn-
ing, because the Earl had commanded him not to let any
man know that he had been at Falkland. Disc. 54. Mon-
cries deposes to the fame purpose. Crom. 64. And yet
George Hay, afterwards Lord Kinnoul, and Chancellor of
Scotland, and Peter Hay, depose, that the Earl; in their
presence, asked Henderson, " Whom he found with the
King at Falkland ?" Crom. 70, 7I. Which question
seems to prove that he did not aim at keeping that journey a
secret.

against

against Elizabeth, which, though the first danger B oo c
was instantly dispelled, produced tragical effe&s, VIII.
that rendered the close of that Queen's reign dif- i6o_.
mial and unhappy. As James was deeply interest-
ed in that event, it merits our particular notice.

THE court of England was, at this time, divided

between two powerful fa&ions, which conteided
for the supreme dire&ion of affairs. The leader
of the one was Robert D'Evreux, Earl of Essex
Sir Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Bur-
leigh, was at the head of the other. The former
was te -nof. accomplithed and the moit popular
of all the English nobles; brave, generous, as-
fable; though impetuous, yet willing to listen to
the counsels of those whom he loved; an avowed,
but not an implacable enemy; a friend no less
constant than warm; incapable of disguising his
own sentiments, or of misrepresenting those of
others; better fitted for a camp than for a court;
and of a genius that qualified him for the firlt
place in the adminifiration, with a spirit which
scorned the second as below his merit, He was
soon distinguished by the Queen, who, with a pro-
fusion uncommon to her, conferred on him, even
in his earliest youth, the highest honours. Nor
did this diminilh the esteem and affe&ion of his
countrymen; but, by a rare felicity, he was at
once the favourite of his Sovereign, and the dan--
ling of the people. Cecil, on the other hand,
educated in a court, and trained under a father
deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty, infinua-
ting, industrious; and though poffeffed of talents
which fitted him for the highest offices, he did

VOL. II. T not

B o

o K not rely upon his merit alone for attaining theiti,

VIII. but availed himself of every advantage, which his
i6oi. own address, or the mistakes of others, afforded

him. Two such men were formed to be rivals and
enemies. Essex despised the arts of Cecil as low
and base. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity ap-
peared to be presumption and folly. All the mi-
litary men, except Raleigh, favoured Essex. Most
of the courtiers adhered to Cecil, whose manners
more nearly resembled their own.

Hs corre- As Elizabeth advanced in years, the firuggle be-
ipondencc tween there fa&ions became more violent. Essex,
Scottih in order to strengthen himself, had early courted
in'. the friendship of the King of Scots, for whose

right of fuiccefion he was a zealous advocate, and
held a close correspondence both with him and
with his principal Ministers. Cecil, devoted to
the Queen alone, role daily to new honours by the
afilduity of his services, and the patience with
which he expe&ed the reward of them. While
the Earl's high spirit and impetuosity sometimes
exposed him to checks from a Mistress, who,
though partial in her affe&ion toward him, could
not easily bear contradi&ion, and conferred fa-
vours often unwillingly, and always slowly. His
own folicitations, however, seconded maliciously
by his enemies, who wished to remove him at a
distance from court, advanced him to the com-
mand of the army employed in Ireland againit
Tyronne, and to the office of Lord Lieutenant of
that kingdom, with a commission almost unlimit-
ed. His success in that expedition did not equal
either his own promises, or the expe&ations of

I Eli-

Elizabeth. The Queen, peevith from her difap- B o

o K

pointment, and exasperated against Essex by the VIII.
artifices of his enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, r
full of accusations and reproaches. These, his
impatient spirit could not bear, and, in the first:
transports of his resentment, he proposed to carry
over a part of his army into England, and, by
driving his enemies from the Queen's presence, to
reinflate himself in favour, and in power. But
upon more mature thoughts, he abandoned this
rash defign,' and setting fail with a few officers,
devoted to his peribn, landed in England, and
poffed direaly to court. Elizabeth received him
without any symptom either of affection or of dif-
pleasure. By proper compliances and acknow-
ledgments, he might have regained his former as-
cendant over the Queen. But he thoight himself
too deeply injured to submit to these, Elizabeth,
on the other hand, determined to subdue his
haughty temper ; and though her severity drew
from him the most humble letters, the confined
him to the Lord Keeper's house, and appointed
commissioners to try him, both for his conducT
duridg 'his government of Ireland, and for leaving
tha8%.ingdom without her permission. By their
sentence, he was suspended from all his offices, ex-
cept that of Master of the horse, and continued
a prisoner during the Queen's pleasure. Satisfied
with having mortified his pride thus far, Elizabeth
did not fuffer the sentence to be recorded, and
soon after allowed him to retire to his own house.
During these tranfa&ions, which occupied several
months, Essex flucuated between the allegiance

T 2 he

B OOK he owed to his Sovereign, and the desire of revenge;
VII. and sometimes leaned to the one, and fometimesto
-""-' the other. In one of the intervals when the latter
i06o. prevailed, he sent a messenger into Scotland to en-

courage the King to assert his own right to the
fucceifion by force of arms, and to promise that,
besides the assistance of the Earl and all his friends
in England, Lord Mountjcy, now Lord Lieute-
nant of Ireland, would join him with 5000 men

j,m,,', from that kingdom. But James did not chufe to
Ca"d',o hazard the losing a kingdom, which was just ready

to fall into his hands, by a premature attempt to
seize it. Mountjoy, too, declined the enterprise,
and Essex adopted more dutiful schemes; all
thoughts of ambition appearing to be totally es-
faced out of his mind.

The wild THIs moderation, which was merely the effe& of
wtmrnpts of
e' x. disgust and disappointment, was not of long conti-

nuance. And the Queen, having not only refused
to renew a lucrative grant which she had formerly
bestowed, but to admit him into her presence,
that new injury drove a temper, naturally impa-
tient, and now much fretted, to absolute despair.
His friends, instead of ioothing his rage, or re-
straining his impetuosity, added to both bqheir
imprudent and interested zeal. After many anxious
consultations, he determined to attempt to redress
his wrongs by violence. And conscious how un-
popular Iiuch an enterprise would be, if it appeared
to proceed from motives of private revenge alone,
he endeavoured to give it the semblance of public
utility, by mingling the King of Scotland's inte-
reft with his own. He wrote to James, that the

faction

facion which now predominated in the English B o o K
court had resolved to support the pretensions of VIII.
the Infanta of Spain to the crown; that the places I60o.
of the greatest importance in the kingdom were
put into the hands of his avowed enemies; and
that unless he sent ambassadors, without delay, to
insist on the immediate declaration of his right of
succession, their measures were so well concerted,
that all his hopes would be desperate. James, who
knew how disagreeable such a proposal would be
to the Queen of England, was not willing rashly to
expose himself to her displeasure. But Efiex, blind-
ed by resentment, and impatient for revenge, aban-
doned himself to there paftions, and aded like a
man guided by frenzy or despair. With two orthree
hundredfollowers incompletely armed, he attempt-
ed to assault a throne the beflt eftablithed in Europe.
Sallying at their head out of his own house, he call-
ed on the citizens of London, if they either valued
his life, or wished to preserve the kingdom from the
dominion of the Spaniards, to take arms, and to fol-
low his standard. I-Ie advanced towards the palace
with an intention to drive Cecil and his faction out
of the Queen's presence, and to obtain a declara-
tion of the Scottish King's right of fuccefflion *.
But, though almost adored by the citizens, not a
man would join him in this wild enterprise. Di-
spirited by their indifference, deserted by some of
his own attendants, and almost surrounded by the
troops, which marched under different leaders into
the city, he retreated to his own house; and with-
out any bold effort, suitable to his present condi-

* Birch. Merm. ii. 477.

T 3 tion,

B o o K tion, or worthy of his former reputation for cou-
VIII. rage, he surrendered to his enemies.
165oi. As soon as James heard of Effex's ill success, he

appointed the Earl of Mar, and the Abbot of Kin-
loss, to repair as his Ambassadors to the Court of
England. The former of these was the person by
whose means Essex had carried on his correspond.
ence with the King. He was a passionate admirer
of the Earl's charater, and disposed to attempt
every thing that could contribute to his safety,
Bruce, united in a close friendship with Mar, was
ready to second him with equal zeal. Nor was the
purpose of the embWffy \eis friend\y to 'Siex, than
the choice of his Ambassadors; they were com-
manded to solicit, in the warmest manner, for the
Earl's life, and if they found that the King, by
a'vowing his friends, could either promote their de-
signs, or contribute to their safety, they wereim-
powered to lay aside all disguise, and to promise
that he would put himself at their head, and claim
what was due to him by force of arms *. But be-
fore the Ambassadors could reach London, Essex

His death. had fuffered the punishment he meritedby hsttea-

son. Perhaps the fear of their interposing, in or-
der to obtain his pardon, hastened his death. Eli-
zabeth continued, for ibme time, irresolute con-
cerning his fate, and could not bring herfelfto
consign into the hands of the executioner, a man,
who had once poffeffed her favour so entirely,
without a painful firuggle between her resentment
against his late mifconducl, and her ancient as-
feQion towards him. The distress to which he was

* Johnft. 289. Birch. Mem. ii. 510.

now reduced, tended naturally to soften the for- B o o K
mer, while it revived the latter with new tender- VIII.
ness; and the intercession of one faithful friend, 7
who had interest with the Queen, might perhaps
have saved his life, and have procured him a remif-
sion, which, of herself, lhe was ashamed to grant.
But this generous nobleman had at that time no
such friend. And Elizabeth, solicited incessantly
by her Miniffers, and offended with the haughti-
pefs'of Essex, who, as mhe imagined, scorned to
sue for pardon, at last commanded the sentence to
be put in execution. No sooner was the blow
jtruck, than she repented of her own rashness, and
bewailed his death with the deepest sorrow. James
always considered him as one who had fallen a
martyr to his service, and after his accession to the
English throne, restored his son to his honours, as
well as all his associates in the conspiracy, and
distinguished them with his favour *.

THE Scottiih Ambassadors, finding that they Jamescon.

had arrived too late to execute the chief business $""',
committed to their charge, not only concealed Eg!Bad.
that part of their infiruaions with the utmolt
care; but congratulated the Queen, in their
Mafter's name, on her happy escape from such
an audacious conspiracy. Elizabeth, though ni
firanger to the King's correspondence with Essex,
or to that nobleman's intentions of asserting
James's right to the Crown, was not willing that
these thould be known to the people, and, for
that reason, received the congratulations of the
Scottilh Ambassadors with all poflible marks of

C Camd. Spotfw. 464.

T 4 credit

B1 o K credit and good will and in order to sooth James,
VII. and to preserve the appearances of union between
^ the two courts, increased the subsidy which the

paid him annually. The Ambassadors relidedfor
some time in England, and were employed, with
great success, in renewing and extending the in-
trigues, which Bruce had formerly entered into
with the English nobles. As Elizabeth advarced
in years, the English turned their eyes more and
more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent
each other in courting the favour of their future
Monarch. Assurances of attachment, profffions
of regard, and. promises of support, were offered
to James from every corner of the kingdom.
Cecil himself, perceiving what hopes Essex had
founded on the friendship of the Scottish King,
and what advantages he might have derived froi
it, thought it prudent to fland no longer at a
distance from a Prince, who might so fobon be:
come his marter. But being sensible at the fame
time how dangerous such an intercourse might
prove, under a Mistress naturally jealous, and
whose jealousy grew ftron or with old age; though
he entered into a correspondence with him, he
carried it on with all the secrecy and caution ne-
ceffary in his situation, and peculiar to his charac-
ter. And James having gained the man whole
pppofition and influence he had hitherto chiefly
dreaded, waited, in perfe&t security, till that event
thould happen, which would open his way to the
throne of England. It was, with some difficulty,
that he reltrained, within proper bounds, his ad-
herents in that kingdom, who, labouring to di.

ftinguith

ftinguilh themselves by that officious zeal, with B oo oK
which a Prince, who has a near profpe& of mount- VIII.
ing the throne, is always served, urged him to
allow a motion to be made in parliament for de-
claring his right of fucceftion to the Crown.
James prudently discouraged that design; but it
was with no small fatisfation that he observed the
al'cendant he was acquiring in a court, whose dic-
tates he had been so long obliged to obey; and
which had either prescribed or thwarted every flep
he had taken during the whole course of his reign*.

NOTWITHSTANDING the violent struggles of the 1602.

political fa&ions which divided the court, and the Attempts
frequent revolutions which had happened there, the High-
since the King first took the reins of government "lders.
into his own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual
tranquillity, being undisturbed by any foreign
enemy, and free from any interline commotion of
long continuance. During this period, James
endeavoured to civilize the Highlands and the
Isles, a part of his dominions almost totally ne-
\1tset by forrmer Monarchs, though the reform-
ation of it was an obje¢t highly worthy of their
care. The long peace with England had afforded
an opportunity of subduing the licentious spirit of
the borderers, and of restraining their depreda-
tions, often no lets ruinous to their countrymen,
than to their enemies. The inhabitants of the
Low Country began, gradually, to forget the use
of arms, and to become attentive to the arts of
peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their na-
tural fierceness, averse from labour, and inured

* Spotfw. 467. 471. Birch. Mem. ii. 5i4.

B o oK rapine, infested their more indufirious neigh-
VIII. bours, by their continual incursions. James, be-
60s. ing solicitous not only to repress their inroads,

but to render them useful fubjeAs *, had at dif-
ferent times ena&ed many wife laws extremely
conducive to these ends. All landlords, or chiefs
of Clans, were enjoined to permit no persons to
reside in their estates, who could not find fufficient
surety for their good behaviour; they were re-
quired to make a lift of all suspicious persons un,
der their jurifdiaion, to bind themselves to de-
liver them to justice, and to indemnify those
who ihould fuffer by their robberies; and, in or-
der to ascertain the faithful performance of these
articles, the chiefs themselves were obliged to
give hostages to the King, or to put pledges in
his hands. Three towns,.which might serve as a
retreat for the industrious, and a nursery for arts
and commerce, were appointed to be built in
different parts of the Highlands; one in Cantire,
another in Lochaba-, and a third in the isle of
Lewis; and in order to draw the inhabitants
thither, all the privileges of Royal Boroughs were
to be conferred upon them. Finding it, how-
ever, to be no easy matter to inspire the inhabit-
ants of those countries with the love of indufiry,
a resolution was taken to plant among them co-
lonies of people from the more industrious coun-
ties. The first experiment was made in the Ile
of Lewis; and as it was advantageously situ-
ated for the fishing trade, a source from which
Scotland ought naturally to derive great wealth,

* Basil. Dor. 139.

the colony transported thither was drawn out of B o o r
Fife, the inhabitants of which were well skilled VIII.
in that branch of commerce. But before they -0..
had remained there long endugh to manifest the
good effeas of this institution, the islanders, en-
raged at feeing their country occupied by those in-
truders, took arms, and surprising them in the
night-time, murdered some of them, and compel-
led the reft to abandon the settlement, TheKing's
attention being soon after turned to other objeas,
we hear no more of this salutary project. Though
James did not pursue the design with that steady
application and perseverance, without which it is
impossible to change the manners of a whole peo-
ple, he had the glory, however, not only of having
first conceived the thoughts, but of having first
pointed out the proper method of introducing the
civil arts of life into that part of the Illand .

AFTER having long enjoyed a good Rate of lif"t,'
health, the effe& of a found conifitution, and the ail"deah.
reward of uncommon regularity and temperance,
Elizabeth began this wvinter to feel her vigour de-
crease, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old
age. Having removed on a very stormy day from
Weltminfter to Richmond, whither she was impa-
tient to retire, her complaints increased. She had 1603.
no formed fever; her pulse was good; but the eat J""uay,.
little, and could not sleep. Her distemper seemed
to proceed from a deep melancholy, which ap-
peared both in her countenance and behaviour.
She delighted in solitude, she fat conflantly in the
dark; and was often drowned in tears.

*Parl. 1587. 1594. I597. Spotfw. 468.

B o o K No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known,
VIII. than persons of all ranks, and of all different feels

Sand parties, redoubled their applications to the
6o03. King of Scots, and vied with each other, in pro-

fetfions of attachment to his person, and in pro-
roifes of submission to his government. Even
some of her own servants, weary of the length of
her reign, fond of novelty, impatient to get rid of
the burthen of gratitude for past benefits, and ex-
peting to share in the liberality of a new Prince,
began to desert her. And crowds of people hur-
ried towards Scotland, eager to pre-occupy the
favour of the successor, or afraid of being too late
in paying homage to him.

MEANWHILE, the Queen's disease increased,

and her melancholy appeared to be fettled and
incurable. Various conjectures were formed
concerning the causes of a disorder, from which
fle seemed to be exempted by the natural cheer-
fulness of her temper. Some imputed it to her be-
ing forced, contrary to inclination, to pardon the
Earl of Tyronne, whose rebellion had for many
years created her so much trouble. Others ima-
gined that it arose from observing the ingrati-
tude of her courtiers, and the levity of her peo-
ple, who beheld her health declining with most
indecent indifference, and looked forward to the
accefion of the Scottish King, with an impa-
tience which they could not conceal. The molt
common opinion, at that time, and perhaps the
rmoft probable, was that it flowed from grief for
the Earl of Essex. She retained an extraordinary
regard for the memory of that unfortunate noble-

mani

Aian; and though the often complained of his B o o K
obiftinacy, seldom mentioned his name without VIII.
tears *. An accident happened soon after her re- '

o3

tiring to Richmond, which revived her affection
with new tenderness, and embittered her sorrows.
The Counters of Nottingham, being on her death-
bed, desired to fee the Queen, in order to reveal
something to her, without discovering which, she
could not die in peace. When the Queen came
into her chamber, ihe told her, that while Essex
lay under sentence of death, he was desirous of
imploring pardon in the manner which the Queen
herself had prescribed, by returning a ring, which
during the height of his favour the had given him,
with a promise that if, in any future distress, he
sent that back to her as a token, it should intitle
him to her protecion; that Lady Scroop was the
person he intended to employ in order to present
it; that, by a mistake, it was put into her hands
infteaa of Lady Scroop's; and that she having
communicated the matter to her husband, one of
Effex's most implacable enemies, he had forbid
her either to carry the ring to the Queen, or to
return it to the Earl. The Counters, having thus
disclosed her secret, begged the Queen's forgive-
ness; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the ma,
lice of the Earl's enemies, and how unjufitly the
had fufpeded him of inflexible obiftinacy, replied,
" God may forgive you, but I never can;" and
left the room in great emotion '. From that

moment,

* Birch. Mem. ii. 505.
- This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was firP publiihed by

Olborne, Mem. of Eliz. p. 23; is confirmed by the testimony

of

B o o K moment, her spirit funk entirely; the could scarce
VIII. taste food; she refused all the medicines prescribed
-o3 by her physicians; declaring that the wilhed to

die, and would live no longer. No intreaty could
prevail on her to go to bed; she fat on cushions,
during ten days and nights, pensive and silent,
holding her finger almost continually in her
mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the
ground. The only thing to which fhie seemed to
give any attention, were the ads of devotion, per-
formed in her apartment, by the Archbiflop of
Canterbury; and in there fihe joined with great
appearance of fervour. Wasted, at last, as well
by anguish of mind, as by long abiftinence, the
expired, without a struggle, on Thursday the

of de Maurier, Mem. 260, and by the traditional evidence of
Lady Elizabeth Spelman publiflhed by Dr. Birch, Negoc. 106.
Camden mentions the QuOeen's grief for Effex's death as one of
the causes of her melancholy. Some original papers remain
which prove that this was commonly believed at the time.
Birch. Mem. ii. 506. Essex, however, had been beheaded
two years before her death, and there seems to have been no
other reason, but that which we have afligned, why her for-
row thould revive with so much violence at so great a distance
of time. As the death of the Counters of Nottingham hap-
pened about a fortnight before the Queen's death, the coin-
cidence of there events, togetl'er with the other evidence men-
tioned, adds so much probability to the flory related by Of-
borne, as will entitle it to a place in hiffory. The only ob-
jetion to the account we have given of Elizabeth's attachment
to Essex, arises from her great age. At the age of 68, the
amorous passions are commonly abundantly cool, and the vi-
olence of all the passions, except one, is much abated. But
the force of this objetion is entirely removed by an Author
who has illufeated many pah'ages in the English Hiifory, and
adorned more. Catalogue of Royal and Noble Authors,
Article Essex. 24th

24th day of March, in the 7oth year of her age, B o o K
and in the 45th of her reign *. VIII.

FOREIGNERS often accuse the English of indif- r 1603.

ference and disrespeCt towards their Princes. But Her cha-.
without reason

; no people are more grateful than racr.

they to those Monarchs who merit their gratitude.
The names of Edward III. and Henry V. are men-
tioned by the English of this age, with the fame
warmth, as they were by those who shared in the
blessings and splendour of their reigns. The me-
mory of Elizabeth is still adored in England.
And the historians of that kingdom, after cele-
brating her love of her people; her sagacity in
discerning their true interest; her steadiness in
pursuing it; her wisdom in the choice of her Mi-
nifters; the glory Ihe acquired by arms; the tran-
quillity the secured to her fubjeAs; and the in-
crease of fame, of riches, and of commerce, which
were the fruits of all there; justly rank her
among the moss illustrious Princes. Even the de-
fecs in her character, they observe, were not of a
kind pernicious to her people. Her excellive fru-
gality was not accompanied with the love of hoard-
ing; and though it prevented some great under-
takings, and rendered the success of others in-
complete, it introduced aeconomy into her admi-
nifiration, and exempted the nation from many
burdens, which a Monarch, more profuse or more
enterprising, must have imposed. Her slowness
in rewarding her servants sometimes discouraged
useful merit; but it prevented the undeferving

* Camd. Birch. Mem. ii. 506. Birch. Negoc. 206.

Strype, iv. 373. .from

B o o K from acquiring power and wealth, to which they
VIII. had no title. Her extreme jealousy of those

/o Princes, who pretended to dispute her right to

the Crown, led her to take such precautions, as
tended no less to the public safety, than to her
own; and to court the affections of her people, as
the firmest support of her throne. Such is the
pidure the English draw of this great Queen.

WHOEVER undertakes to write the History of

Scotland finds himself obliged, frequently, to
view her in a very different, and in a less amiable
light. Her authority in that kingdom, during
the greater part of her reign, was little inferior
to that which the poffeffed in her own. But this
authority, acquired at first by a service of great
importance to the nation, the exercised in a man-
ner extremely pernicious to its happiness. By
her industry in fomenting the rage of the two
contending fations; by supplying the one with
partial aid; by feeding the other with false hopes;
by balancing their power so artfully, that each of
them was able to distress, and neither of them to
subdue the other; ihe rendered Scotland long the
feat of discord, confusion, and bloodshed: And
her craft and intrigues, effecting what the valour
of her ancefftors could not accomplish, reduced
that kingdom to a fltate of dependance on Eng-
land. The maxims of policy, often little confo-
nant to those of morality, may, perhaps, jus-
tify this conduct. But no apology can be offered
for her behaviour to Queen Mary; a scene of
difimulation without necessity; and of severity
beyond example. In almost all her other aaions,

4 Eliza.

Elizabeth is the object of our highest admi; -*:c'n; 1 o o K,
in this we must allow t' at the not only laid afilc VIII.
the magnanimity which became a Queen, but the

---

feelings natural to a woman.

THOUGt Elizabeth would never permit the J',^pr"

quefftion concerning the right of succession to -he '~"eo Logiand.
Crown to be determined in parliament; nor de-
clare her own sentiments concerning a point
which she wished to remain an impenetrable myf-
tery; she had, however, formed no design of ex-
cluding the Scottish King from an inheritance to
which his title was undoubted. A short time be-
fore her death, ihe broke the silence, which she
had so long preserved on that fubjea, and told
Cecil and the Lord Admiral, " That her throne
was the throne of Kings; that she would have no
mean person to ascend it, and that her Cousin the
King of Scots mhould be her fucceffor." This the
confirmed on her death-bed. And as soon as mhe
breathed her last, the lords of the Privy Council
proclaimed James King of England. All the in-
trigues carried on by foreigners, in favour of the
Infanta, all the cabals formed within the kingdom,
to support the titles of Lady Arabella and the
Earl of Hartford, disappeared in a moment; the
nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient hof-
tilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the
dominion of strangers, testified their fatisfation
with louder acclamations than were usual at the
accession of their native princes. Amidit this
tumult of joy, a motion made by a few patriots,
who proposed to prescribe some conditions to the
successor, and to exac from him the redress of

Vol. II. U some

B o o K some grievances, before they called him to the
VIII. throne, was scarce heard; and Cecil, by iRifling
^^ ' it, added to his stock of merit with his new rnafer.
16o3. Sir Charles Percy, brother of the Earl of North-

umberland, and Thomas Somerset, the Earl of
Worcefter's son, were dispatched to Scotland,
with a letter to the King, signed by all the Peers
and Privy Counsellors then in London; inform-
ing him of the Queen's death, of his accefflon to
the throne, of their care to recognize his title,
and of the universal applause with which the
public proclamation of it had been attended. They
made the utmost haste to deliver this welcome
message; but were prevented by the zeal of Sir
Robert Carey, Lord Hunfdane's youngest son,
who setting out a few hours after Elizabeth's death,
arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night, just as
the King had gone to bed. He was immediately
admitted into the royal apartment, and kneeling
by the King's bed, acquainted him with the death
of Elizabeth, saluted him king of England, Scot-
land, France, and Ireland, and as a token of the
truth of the intelligence which he brought, pre-
fented him a ring, which his fifler Lady Scroop
had taken from the Queen's finger after her death.
James heard him with a decent composure. But
as Carey was only a private messenger, the in-
formation he brought was not made public, and
the King kept his apartment till the arrival of
Percy and Somerset. Then his titles were so-
lemnly proclaimed; and his own subjects expressed
no less joy, than the English, at this increase of
his dignity. As his presence was absolutely ne-

6 ceffary

ceffary in England, where the people were ex- B oo K
tremely impatient to fee their new Sovereign, he VIII.
prepared to set out for that kingdom without delay.
He appointed his Queen to follow him within a
few weeks. He committed the government of
Scotland to his Privy Council. He intrufted the
care of his children to different noblemen. On
the Sunday before his departure, he repaired
to the Church of St. Giles, and after hearing a
sermon, in which the Preacher displayed the great-
ness of the divine goodness in raising him to the
throne of such a powerful kingdom without op-
position or bloodfled, and exhorted him to express
his gratitude, by promoting, to the utmost, the
happiness and prosperity of his fubjeAs; the King
role up, and addressing himself to the people,
made many profeflions of unalterable affetion to-
wards them; promised frequently to visit Scot-
land, assured them that his Scottish fubjeds,
notwithstanding his absence, should feel that he
was their native Prince, no less than when he
resided among them; and might still trust that
his ears ihould be always open to their petitions,
which he wbuld answer with the alacrity and love
of a parent. His words were often interrupted
by the tears of the whole audience; who, though
they exulted at the King's prosperity, were melted
into sorrow by these tender declarations *.

ON the fifth of April he began his journey, with Takes pot.

fefin of

a splendid, but not a numerous train; and next the throne.
day he entered Berwick. Wherever he came, im-
mense multitudes were assembled to welcome him;

Spotfw. 476.

U antd

B o o K and the principal persons in the different counties
VIII. through which he passed, displayed all their wealth
1603* and magnificence in entertainments prepared for

him at their houses. Elizabeth had reigned so long
in England, that most of her fubjecls remembered
no other court but hers , and their notions of the
manners and decorums suitable to a prince were
formed upon what they had observed there. It
was natural to apply this standard to the behavi-
our and actions of their new Monarch, and to
compare him, at first fight, with the Queen, on
whose throne he was to be placed. James, whole
manners were extremely different from hers, sus-
fered by the comparison. He had not that flow-
ing affability, by which Elizabeth captivated the
hearts of her people; and, though easy among a
few whom he loved, his indolence could not bear
the fatigue of rendering himself agreeable to a
mixed multitude, HIe was no ds aX kranger to
that dignity with which Elizabeth tempered her
familiarity. And, instead of that well-judged fru-
gality with which ihe conferred titles of honour,
he bellowed them with an uvndltingu2u1ed pmt-
fusion, that rendered them no longer marks of
distinction, or rewards of merit. But these were
the refletions of the few alone; the multitude
continued their acclamations; and, amidflt these,
James entered London on the 7th of May, and
took peaceable poffcffion of the throne of England.

Conciul~on. THus were united two kingdoms, divided from

the earliest accounts of time, but destined, by their
situation, to form one great monarchy. And by
this junation of its whole native force, Great B·i-

tain

tain hath risen to an eminence and authority in B o o oK
Europe, which England and Scotland could never VIII.
have attained. 1603.

THE Scots had so long considered their Mo- A oiwof
narchs as next heirs to the English throne, that Ltiors in
they had full leisure to reflet on all the confe- theconlti-

tution of

quences of their being advanced to that dignity. Scotland

since the

But, dazzled with the glory of giving a Sovereign accemon oE
to their powerful enemy, relying on the partiality Ja"i~e VI.
of their native Prince, and in full expectation of
iharing liberally in the wealth and honours he
would now be able to beffow, they atcctended licttle
to the molt obvious consequences of that great
event, and rejoiced at his accession to the throne
of England, as if it had been no less beneficial to
the kingdom, than honourable to the King. They
soon had reason, however, to adopt very different
sentiments; and from that period we may date
a total alteration in the political conflitution of
Scotland.

THE feudal Aristocracy, which had been sub-
verted in most nations of Europe by the policy of
their Princes, or had been undermined by the
progress of commerce, still subsisted with full
force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed
gradually to augment the power of the Scottish
nobles; and even the Reformation, which in
every other country where it prevailed added to
the authority of the Monarch, had increased their
wealth and influence. A King pofTeffed of a fimall
revenue, with a prerogative extremely limited,
and unsupported by a standing army, could not
ercife much authority over such potent fubjecds.

VU3 H

" to execute them, but from the voluntary fubmif-

sion of the nobles. But though this produced a
species of government feeble and irregular beyond
example; though Scotland, under the name, and
with all the outward ensigns of a Monarchy, was
really fubjeA to an Aristocracy, the people were
not altogether unhappy; and even in this wild
form of a constitution, there were principles,
which tended to their security and advantage.
The King, checked and overawed by the nobles,
durst venture upon no at of arbitrary power.
The nobles, jealous of the King, whose claims
and pretensions were many, though his power
was finall, were afraid of irritating their depend-
ants by unreasonable exa&ions, and tempered the
rigour of arifftocratical tyranny, with a mildness
and equality to a hich it is naturally a firanger.
And while the military genius of the feudal go-
vernment remained in vigour, the vassals both of
the Crown and of the Barons were not only free
from opprefion, but courted by their superiors,
whose power and importance were founded on their
attachment and love.

BUT, by his accession to the throne of Eng-

land, James acquired such an immense accession
of wealth, of power, and of splendour, that the
nobles, astonished and intimidated, thought it vain
to struggle for privileges which they were now
unable to defend. Nor was it from fear alone
that they submitted to the yoke; James, partial
to his countrymen, and willing that they should

partake

partake in his good fortune, loaded them with B oo oK
riches and honours; and the hope of his favour VIII.
concurred with the dread of his power, in taming v-
their fierce and independent spirits. The will of
the Prince became .the supreme law in Scotland;
and the nobles ifrove, with emulation, who should
most implicitly obey commands, which they had
formerly been accustomed to contemn. Satisfied
with having fubjeled the nobles to the Crown,
the King left them in full poffeflion of their an-
cient jurifdi&ion over their own vassals. The
extensive rights, vested in a feudal Chief, became
in their hands dreadful instruments of oppression,
and the military ideas, on which these rights were
founded, being gradually loft or disregarded,
nothing remained to corret or to mitigate the
rigour with which they were exercised. The
nobles, exhaulting their fortunes by the expence
of frequent attendance upon the English court,
and by attempts to imitate the manners and luxury
of their more wealthy neighbours, multiplied ex-
acions upon the people, who durst scarce utter
complaints which they knew would never reach
the ear of their Sovereign, nor move him to grant
them any redress. And, from the union of the
Crowns to the revolution in i688, Scotland was
placed in a political situation, of all others the
most singular, and the most unhappy; fubjeaed
at once to the absolute will of a Monarch, and to
the oppressive jurifdiaion of an Ariffocracy, it
fuffered all the miseries peculiar to both there
forms of government. Its Kings were despotic;
its nobles were slaves and tyrants and the people
groaned under the rigorous domination of both.

U 4 DURING

B o O K DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made
VIII. one effort to ihake off the yoke, and to regain their
' '~ ancient independency. Afcer the death of James,

the Scottish nation was no longer viewed by our
Monarchs with any paiidal affection. CharksI,
educated among the English, discovered no pe-
culiar attachment to the kingdom of which he was
a native. And the nobles, perceiving the sceptre
to be now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a
Prince with whom they had little connexion, and
over whole councils they had little influence, no
longer submitted with the fame implicit obedience.
Provoked by some encroachments of the King on
their order, and apprehensive of others, the re-
mains of their ancient spirit began to appear.
They complained and remonstrated. And the
people being, at the fame time, violently dif-
gufted at the innovations in Religion, the nobles
secretly heightened this disgust; and their arti-
fices, together with the ill-condua of the court,
raised such a spirit, that the whole nation took
arms agalnft their Sovereign, with an union and
animosity of which there had formerly been no ex-
ample. Charles brought agaihft them the forces
of England, and notwithitanding their own union,
and the zeal of the people, the nobles mutt
have funk in the struggle. But the difaffeaion,
which was growing among his English fubjets,
prevented the Kirg from acing with vigour. A
civil war broke out in both kingdoms. And after
many battles and revolutions, which are well known,
the Scottish nobles, who first began the war, were
involved in the fame ruin with the throne. At
the Restoration, Charles II. regained full pbffeffioin

of

of the royal prerogative in Scotland; and the B o ao
nobles, whose estates were wasted, or their spirit VIII.
broken, by the calamities to which they had been '--'
exposed, were less able and less willing than ever
to resist the power of the Crown. During this
reign, and that of James VII. the ditates of the
Monarch were received in Scotland with molt ab-
je& submission. The poverty to which many of
the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
slaves, and more intolerable tyrants, than ever. The
people, always negleaed, were now odious, and
loaded with every injury, on account of their ac-
tachment to refigious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by their Princes.

THE Revolution introduced other maxims into
the government of Scotland. To increase the au-
thority of the Prince, or to secure the privileges of
the nobles, had hitherto been almost the sole obje&
of our laws. The tights of the people were scarce
ever mentioned, were disregarded, or unknown.
Attention began, henceforward, to be paid to the
welfare of the people. By the claim of right, their
liberties were secured. And the number of their
representatives being increased, they gradually ac-
quired new weight and consideration in parlia-
ment. As they came to enjoy more security and
greater power, their minds began to open, and
to form more extensive plans of commerce, of
industry, and of police. But the ariftocratical
spirit, which still predominated, together with
mnany other accidents, retarded the improvement
and happiness of the nation.

ANOTHER great event completed what the Re-

yolution had begun. The political power of the

nobles,

B oo oK nobles, already broken by the union of the two
VIII. Crowns, was almost annihilated by the union of

v ' the two kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as

formerly, of the supreme assembly of the nation,
iniftead of bearing the most considerable sway
there, the Scottish nobles are admitted into theBri-
ti(h parliament by their representatives only, and
form but an inconsiderable part of one of those
bodies in which the legislative authority is veiled.
They themselves are excluded absolutely from the
house of Commons, and even their eldest sons are
not permitted to represent their countrymen in
that augult assembly. Nor have their feudal pri-
vileges remained, to compensate for this extinc.
tion of their political authority. As commerce
advanced in its progress, and government attained
nearer to perfeaion, these were insensibly circum-
fcribed, and at last, by laws no less salutary to
the public, than fatal to the nobles, they have
been almost totally abolished. As the nobles
were deprived of power, the people acquired li-
berty. Exempted from burdens, to which they
were formerly fubje&, screened from oppression,
to which they had been long exposed, and
adopted into a constitution, whole genius and
laws were more liberal than their own, they have
extended their commerce, refined their manners,
made improvements in the elegancies of life, and
cultivated the arts and sciences.

THIS survey of the political state of Scotland,

in which events and their causes have been men-
tioned rather than developed, enables us to point
out three .eras, from each of which we may date
some great alteration in one or other of the three

different

different members of which the supreme legifla- B oo xo
tive assembly in our constitution is composed. At VIII.
the Accefiaon, the Kings of Scotland, once the moit *L:'
limited, became, in an instant, the most absolute
Princes in Europe, and exercised a despotic autho-
rity, which their Parliaments were unable to con-
troul, or their nobles to resist. At the Union, the
feudal aristocracy, which had subsisted so many
ages, and with power so exorbitant, was over-
turned, and the Scottish nobles voluntarily furren-
dered rights and pre-eminences, peculiar to their
order, and reduced themselves to a condition,
which is no longer the terror and envy of other
fubje&s. Since the Union, the Commons, an-
ciently negleced by their Kings, and despised by
the nobles, have emerged into dignity; and, be-
ing admitted to a participation of all the privi-
leges which the English had purchased at the
expence of so much blood, must now be effeemed
a body not less considerable in the one kingdom,
than they have long been in the other.

THE church felt the effecs of the absolute power
which the King acquired by his accelion; and its
revolutions, too, are worthy of notice. James, du-
ring the latter years of his adminifiration in Scot-
land, revived the name and office of Bishops. But
they poffeffed no ecclesiastical jurifdition or pre-
eminence; their revenues were inconsiderable, and
they were scarce distinguished by any thing but
by their feat in parliament, and by being the ob-
jet of the clergy's jealousy, and the people's ha-
tred. The King, delighted with the splendour and
authority which the English Bishops enjoyed, and

eager

B o oK eager to effee& an union in ecclesiastical policy,
VIII. which he had, in vain, attempted in the civil go-
Svernment, resolved to bring both Churches to an

exa&t conformity with each other. Three Scots-
men were consecrated Bishops at London. From
them, their brethren were commanded to receive
orders. Ceremonies unknown in Scotland were
imposed. And though the Clergy, less obsequious
than the nobles, boldly opposed these innovations,
James, lonig praftifed and well-flkilled in the arts
of managing them, obtained at length their com-
pliance. But Charles I. a superstitious Prince,
unacquainted with the genius of the Scots, im-
prudent and precipitant in all the measures he
pursued in that kingdom, pressing too eagerly the
reception of the Englilh liturgy, and indiscreetly
attempting a resumption of Church lands, kindled
the flames of civil war; and the people being left
at liberty to indulge their own wishes, the Epif-
copal church was overturned, and the Prefbvte-
rian government and discipline were re-established
with new vigour. Together with monarchy, Epif-
copacy was restored in Scotland. A form of go-
vernment, so odious to the people, required force
to uphold it, and though the whole rigour of
authority, and all the barbarity of persecution were
employed in its support, the aversion of the nation
was insurmountable, and it subsisted with dif-
ficulty. At the Revolution, the inclinations of the
people were thought worthy the attention of the
legislature, the Presbyterian government was
again established, and, being ratified by the Union,
is still maintained in the kingdom.

NoR

SNoR did the influence of the Accession extend B oo K
to the civil and ecclesiastical confitutions alone; VIII.
the genius of the nation, its taste and spirit, '
things of a nature fill more delicate, were fen-
lbly affeaed by that event. When learning re-
vived in the fifteenth and sixteenth cerkuries, all
the modern languages were in a fate equally
barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour, and
even of perspicuity. No author thought of writ-
ing in languages so ill adapted to express and
embelliflh his sentiments, or of ereting a work
for immortality, with such rude and perishing ma-
terials. And as the spirit, which prevailed at
that time, did not owe its rife to any original
effort of the human mind, but was excited by ad-
miration of the ancients, their compositions were
efveemed not only the standards of taste and of
sentiment, but of style; and even the languages
in which they wrote were thought to be peculiar
and almost consecrated to learning and the muses.
Not only the manner of the ancients was imi-
tated, but their language copied: and, extrava-
gant as the attempt may appear, to write in a dead
tongue, in which men were not accustomed to
think, and which they could not speak, or even
pronounce, the success of it was astonishing. As
they formed their flyle upon the purest models;
as they were uninfeted with those barbarifms,
which the inaccuracy of familiar conversation,
the affeftation of courts, intercourse with ifran-
gers, and a thousand other causes introduce into
living languages; many moderns have attained
to a degree of elegance in their Latin compo-

fitions,

B o K fitions, which the Romans themselves scarce pof-
VIII. sessed beyond the limits of the Augustan age.

While this was almost the only species of compo-
fition, and all authors, by using one common
language, could be brought to a nearer compa-
rifon, the Scottish writers were not inferior to
those of any other nation. The happy genius
of Buchanan, equally formed to excel in prose
and in verse, more various, more original, and
more elegant, than that of almost any other
modern who writes in Latin, reflects, with re-
gard to this particular, the greatest lustre on his
country.

BUT the labour attending the ifudy of a dead

tongue was irksome; the unequal return for their
induffry which authors met with, who could be
read and admired only within the narrow circle
of the learned, was mortifying; and men, in-
stead of wasting half their lives in learning the
language of the Romans, began to refine and to
polish their own. The modern tongues were
found to be susceptible of beauties and graces,
which, if not equal to those of the ancient ones,
were at least more attainable. And the Italians
having first set the example, Latin was no longer
used in the works of talte; it was confined to
books of science; and the politer nations have
banished it even from these. The Scots, we
may presume, would have no cause to regret
this change in the public taste, and would
fill have been able to maintain some equality
with other nations, in their pursuit of literary
honour. The English and Scottilh languages,

derived

derived from the fame sources, were, at the end B o o t
of the sixteenth century, in a state nearly similar, VIII.
differing from one another somewhat in ortho- '
graphy, though .not only the words, but the
idioms were much the fame. The letters of fe-
vera\ Scottiih itatefmen of that age are not infe-
rior in elegance, or in purity, to those of the
English Ministers with whom they corresponded.
James himself was master of a flyle far from con-
temptible ; and, by his example and encourage-
ment, the Scpttifih language might have kept
pace with the English in refinement. Scotland
might have had a series of authors in its own, as
well as in the Latin language, to boast of; and the
improvements in taste, in the arts, and in the fci-
ences, which spread over the other polilhed na-
tions of Europe, would not have been unknown
there.

BUTr, at the very time when other nations were
beginning to drop the use of Latin in works of
taste, and to make trial of the strength and com-
pass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to
be a kingdom. The transports of joy, which the
Accession at first occasioned, were soon over:
and the Scots, being at once deprived of all the
objecs that refine or animate a people, of the
presence of their Prince, of the concourse of
nobles, of the splendour and elegance of a court,
an universal deje6tion of spirit seems to have
seized the nation. The Court being withdrawn,
no domestic standard of propriety and corre&E-
ness of speech remained; the few compositions

that

'-' ' ried in the least from that, was condemned as

barbarous; whereas, if the two.nations had con-
tinued distinct, each might have retained idi-
oms and forms of speech peculiar to itfelfi
and these, rendered fashionable by the example
of a court, and supported by the authority of
writers of reputation, would have been considered
in the fame light with the varieties occafiontd
by the different dialeas in the Greek tongue,
would have been marked as beauties; and, in
many cafes, used promiscuously by the authors of
both nations. But, by the Accetfion, the Eng-
lifh naturally became the sole judges and law-
givers in language, and rejected as folecifms, every
form of speech to which their ear was not accuf-
' tomed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercourse
between the two nations was inconsiderable *, and

* A remarkable proof of the little intercourse between the

Engliih and Scots before the union of the Crowns, is to
be found in two curious papers, one published by Haynes,
the other by Strype. In the year 1567, Elizabeth com-
manded the Bishop of London to take a survey of all the
fitrangers within the cities of London and Westminster. By
this report, which is very minute, it appears that the whole
number of Scots at that time was 58. Haynes 455. A survey
of the fame kind was made by 3ir Thomas Row, Lord Mayor,
A. D. 1568. The number of Scots had then' increased
to 88. Strype, iv. Supplement, No.I. On the acceflion
of James, a considerable number of Scots, especially of the
higher rank, resorted to England; but it was not till the
Union that the intercourse between the two kingdoms became
great.

a ancient

ancient prejudices were fitll to violent as to prevent B o oK
imitation, possess the means of refining their own VIII.
tongue according to the purity of the Englih
standard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed
into it from every different source. The Clergy
of Scotland, in that age, were more eminent for
piety than for learning; and though there did not
arise many authors among them, yet being in pof-
fefion of the privilege of discoursing publicly to
the people, and their sermons being too long, and
perhaps too frequent, such hasty produtions
could not be elegant, and many slovenly and in-
corred modes of expression may be traced back
to that original. The pleadings of lawyers were
equally loose and inaccurate, and that profeffion
having furnished more authors, and the matters
of which they treat mingling daily in common
discourse and business, many of those vicious
forms of speech, which are denominated Scotti-
cifins, have been by them introduced into the lan-
guage. Nor did either the language or public
taste receive any improvement in parliament,
where a more liberal and more correct eloquence
might have beer expeded. All business was
tranfa&ted there by the Lords of Articles, and
they were so servilely devoted to the court, that
few debates arose, and none were conduced with
the spirit and vigour natural to a popular assembly.

THUS, during the whole seventeenth century,
the English were gradually refining their language,
and their taste; in Scotland the former was much
debated, and the latter almofl entirely loft. In the

VoL. II. X begin-

B o oK beginning of that period, both nations were
VIII. emerging out of barbarity; but the difiance be-

- tween them, which was then inconsiderable, be-

came, before the end of it, immense. Even as-
ter science had once dawned upon them, the Scots
seemed to be sinking back into ignorance and ob-
fcurity; and, aStive and intelligent as they natu-
rally are, they continued, while other nations were
eager in the pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a
tlate of languor and ftupefadion. This, however,
must be imputed" to the unhappiness of their poli-
tical situation, not to any defe& of genius; for
no sooner was the one removed in any degree,
than the other began to display itself. The at
abolishing the power of the Lords of Articles, and
other salutary laws passed at the Revolution, hav-
ing introduced freedom of debate into the Scot-
tifh Parliament, eloquence, with all the arts that
accompany or perfea it, became immediate ob-
jects of attention; and the example of Fletcher of
Salton alone is fufficient to shew that the Scots
were still capable of generous sentiments, and,
notwithstanding some peculiar idioms, were able
to express themselves with energy, and with ele-
gance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the

two nations, and rendered them one people, the
diftincions which had subsisted for many ages
gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear; the
fame manners prevail in both parts of the island;
the fame authors are read and admired; the fame
entertainments are frequented by the elegant and

polite;

polite; and the fame standard of taste, and of pu- B oo K
rity in language, is established. And the Scots, VIII.
after being placed during a whole century, in a
lituation no less fatal to the liberty than to the
taste and genius of the nation, were at once put
in poffeftion of privileges more valuable than those
which their ancestors had formerly enjoyed; and
every obftruation that had retarded their pursuit,
or prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was
totally removed.

APPEN-

# APPENDIX

A P PE N D I X1

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 210i o.)

A MEMOR IA L of certayi points meet

for refjoring the realm of S c o T L AN D
to the antient weale.

IMPRIMIS, it is to be noted, that the best worldly feli- 5thAugoa,

city that Scotland can have, is either to continue in a 1559,Cot-
perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to Co

b. .

be made one monarchy with England, as they both make folt.r7From
but one island, divided from the reft of the world, a copy in

IF the first is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace feriid'

with England, then must it necessarily be provided, that
Scotland be not so fubje& to the appointments of France,
asis presently, which, being an antient endmy to England,
feeketh always to make Scotland an instrument, to exer-
cife, thereby, their malice upon England, and to make
a foot-stool thereof to look over England as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland Ihall come into the hands

of a mere Scottish man in blood, then may there be hope
of such accord; but as long as it is at the commandment
of the French, there is no hope to have accord long be-
twixt these two realms.

THIEREFORE feeing it is at the French King's com-

mandment by reason of his wife, it is to be considered for
the weale of Scotland, that until (he have children, and
during her absence out of the realm, the next hei.s to
the crown, being the house of the Hamiltons, thould have
regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown be imposed
nor wasted ; and, on the other fide, the nobility and com-
monalty ought to force that the laws and the old customs
of the realm be not altered, neither that the country be not
impoveriLhed by taxes, empreft, or new imposts, after the

X 3 man-

manner of France; for provision wherein, both by the lawv
of God and man, the French king and his wife may be
moved to reform their mifgovernance of the land.

AND for this purpose, it were good that the. nobility

and commons joined with the next heir of the crown, to
seek due reformation of such great abuses as tend to the
ruin of their country, which muff be done before the
French grow too firong and insolent.

FIRST, That it may be provided, by consent of the

three eltates of the land, that the land may be free from all
idolatry like as England is; for juflification whereof, if
any free general council may be had where the Pope of
Rome have not the feat of judgment, they may offer to
lhew their cause to be moss agreeable to Chrifft's religion.

NEXT, to provide that Scotland might be governed, in

all rules and officers, by the antient blood of the realm,
without either captains, lieutenants, or soldiers, as all
other Princes govern their countries, and especially that
the forts might be in the hands of mere Scottish men.

THIRDLY, that they might never be occasioned to

enter into wars against England, except England thould
give the first cause to Scotland.

FOUR'HLY, that no nobleman of Scotland ftould re-

ceive pension of France, except it were whilst he did serve
in France, for otherwise thereby the French would shortly
corrupt many, and betray their own country.

FIFTHLY, that no office, abbey, living, or commodity,

be given to any but mere Scottish men, by the assent of
the three estates of the realm.

SIXTH, that there be a councel in Scotland appointed

in the queen's absence, to govern the whole realm, and in
those cafes not to be direaed by the French.

SEVENTHLY, that it be by the said three estates ap-

pointed how the queen's revenue of the realm shall be ex-
pended, how much the queen thall have for her portion
and estate during her absence, how much thall be limited
to the governance and defence of the realm, how much
yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

IN these and such like points if the French king and

the queen be found unwilling, and will withfland these
provisions for the weale of the land, then hath the three
estates of the realm authority, forthwith, to intimate to
the said king and queen their humble requests; and if the
fame be not effe&ually granted, then humbly they may

com*,

tbmmit the governance thereof to the next heir of' the
Crown, binding the fame also to observe the laws and an-
tient rights of the realm.

FINALLY, If the queen shall be unwilling to this, as it is

likely (he will, in refpedl of the greedy and tyrannous as-
fe&tion of France, then it is apparent that Almighty
God is pleased to transfer from her the rule of the king-
dom for the weale of it, and this time muff be used with
great circumfpea1ion, to avoid the deceipcs and tromperies
of the French.

AND then may the realm of Scotland confider, being
once made free, what means may be devised by God's
goodness, to accord the two realms, to endure for time
to come at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whose
hands the hearts of all princes be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. 220.)

A letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus di-

reted.

To my loving friend James. Be this delivered

at London.

I TNDERSTAND by the las~ letter I received from yow, zoth Ja.

that discoursing with zour countrymen upon the mat- nuary

ter of Scotland, and commoditevs may enfew to that 1559-60.

Cott. Lib,

realm, hereafter giffze presently affil ws with zour forces, ca.. B. ir.
ze find a nombre of the contrary advife,doubting that we fall From the
not at length be found trusty friends, nor mean to conty- nriginal in

his own

new in conitant ametye, albeit we promise, but only for hand.
avoyding the present danger make zow to serve our turne,
and after being delivered, becum enemies as of before. For
prose quhareof, they alledge things have past betwixt ws
heretofore, and a few prefumptiones tending to the fam
end, all grounded upon mistrust; quhilks, at the first ficht,
have some thewe of apparance, gif men wey not the circum-
flances of the matter; but gif they will confer the tyme
past with the present, confider the nature of this caus,
and estate of our contrye, I doubt not but jugement fal be
able to banish mistrust. And firif, I wad with ze ihould
examyne the causes off the old inmitye betwixt the
realms of England and Scotland, and quhat moved our

X 4 anceflours

anceffours to enter into ligue with the Frenche; quhilks
by our Pcoreys and regiftres off antiquiteys appear to be
thde'e. The princes of England, some tyme, alledging a
certain kynde of foveraintye over this realm; some tyme
upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our bor-
dourares, and semblable occasions, mony tymes enterpri-
fed the conquest of ws, and fa far furth preift it by force
off armes, that we wer dryven to great extramiteys, by
iofs of our princes, our noblemen, and a good part of our
cuntrey,fathat experience taught ws that our owne strength
was fcarfe fufficient to withstand the force of England.
The Frenche zour auncient enemies, considering well how
nature had fa placed ws in a island with zow, that na na-
tion was able fa to annoye England as we being enemyes,
foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending by that
meane to detourne zour armyes from the invasion off
France, and occupy zow in the defence of zour countny
at hame, offering for that effect to beftowe some charges
upon ws, and for compassing off theyr purpos, choyfed a
tyme to propone the matter, quhen the frefche memory of
injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa depely pren-
ted on our hartes, that all our myndes were occupied how
to be revenged, and arme ourfelfes with the powar off a
forayne prince againfi zour enterprises thereafter.

THIS wes the beginningoffour confederacy withFrance.

At quhilk tyme, our cronicles maks mention, that some off
the wyfeft foresaw the perril, and small frute should re-
dound to us thereof at lenth : zit had affecaion fa blinded
jugement, that the advise of the maift part overcame the
best. The maift part of all querells betwixt ws since
that tyme, at leafi quhen the provocation came on our
fyde, hes ever fallen out by theyr procurement rather
than any one caus offour felfes : and quhenfaever we brack
the peace, it come partly by theyr intyfements, partly to
eschew the conquest intended by that realm. But now hes
God's providence fa altered the cafe, zea changed it to
the plat contrary, that now hes the Frenfche taken zour
place, and wes off very jugement, becum defyrous to have
zow in theyr rowme. Our eyes are opened, we espy how
uncareful they have been of our weile at all tymes, how
they made ws ever to serve theyr turne, drew us in maift
dangerous weys for theyr commodite, and nevertheless
wad not ifyck, oft tymes, againfi the natour of the ligue,
to contrak peace, leaving ws in weyr. We fae that their

support,

support, off late zeres, wes not grantit for any affection
they bare to ws, for pytie they had off our estate, for re-
compenfe of the lyke friendship fchawin to theym in tyme
off theyr afflitiones, but for ambition, and infaciable cu-
pidite to reygne, and to mak Scotland ane accessary to the
crown of France. This was na friendly office, but mer-
cenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion of
theyr deserving ; a hale realm for the defence of a part.
We fee theym manifefily attempt the thing we fufpeAed
offzow; we feared ze ment the conquell off Scotland,
and they are planely fallen to that work; we hated zow
for doubt we had ze ment evill towards ws, and fall we
love theym, quhilks bearing the name off frends, go about
to bring ws in maift vile servitude ? Gif by zour frendly
support at this tyme, ze fall declare that not only fute ze
not the ruyne of our country, but will preserve the liber-
tie thereof from conquest by firangeares, fall not the oc-
cafion off all inimite with zow, and ligue with tbeym,
be taken away ? The causes being removed, how fall the
effeaes remane? The fear of conquest made us to hate
zow and love theym, the cais changed, quhen we fee they m
planely attempt conquest, and zow fchaw ws friendship,
fall we not hate theym, and favour zow ? Gif we have
fchawne la great conflance, continuing fa mony zeares in
amity with theym, off quhome we had fa small commo-
dite, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that off all
nations may do ws greatest plefour ?

BUT ze will fay, this matter may be reconcyled, and

then frends as off before. I think weill peace is the end
of all weyr, but off this ze may be assured, we will never
fa far trufi that reconciliation, that we wil be content to
forgo the ametye of England, nor do any thing may bring
ws in suspicion with zow. Giff we wold, at any tyme
to please theym, break with zow, should we not, befydes
the loffe off eflimation and discrediting off ourfelfes, per-
petually expone our common weill to a maift manifest dan-
ger, and becum a pray to theyr tyranny ? Quhais aid
could we implore, being destitute of zour friendship, gif
they off new wald attempt theyr formar enterprise ? Quhat
nation myght help ws giff they wald, or wald giff they
might? and it is lyke eneuch, thay will not flick hereaf-
ter to tak theyr tyme off ws, quhen difplefour and grudge
hes taken depe rute on baith fydes, feeing ambition has fa
impyrit ower theyr reason, that before we had ever done

any

any thing myght offend theym, but by the contrary plea.
fed theym by right and wrang, they did not flick to at.
tempte the subversion of our hale slate. I wald ze (hould
not efteeme ws fa barayne of jugement, that we cannot
foresee our awne perril; or fa foolifche, that we will not
fludy by all gode means to entertayne that thing may be
our fafetye; quhilk confiftes in all the relaying of zour
friendships. I pray zow confider in lyke cafe, when, in the
days of zour princes off maift noble memory king Henry
the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes were opened
off amytye betwixt baith realms; was not at all tymes the
difference of religion the onley flay they were not em-
braced ? Did not the craft of our clergy and power of
theyr adherents subvert the devises of the better fort?
But now has God off his mercy removed that block furth
off the way; now is not theyr praftice lyke to tak place
any mare, when we ar comme to a conformity off doc-
trine, and profes the fame religion with zow, quhilk I
take to be the ftrayteft not off amitye can be devised. Giff
it may be alledged, that some of our countrymen, atony
tyme, violated theyr promis ? giff ze liss to way the cir-
cumftances, ze fall fynd the promis is rather brought on
by neceflite, after a great overthraw off our men, then
comme off fre will, and tending ever to our great in-
commodite and decay off our haill state, at leift fa taken.
But in this cafe, fall the preservation of our libertie be
infeperably joined with the keping off promeffe, and the
violation of our fayth cast ws in maifi miserable fervi-
tude. Sa that giff neyther the fear off God, reverence of
man, religion, othe, promise, nor warldly honeflye wes
fufficient to bynd us, yet fall the zeale of our native
countrey, the maintenance off our own eflate, the safety
of our wyffes and childrene from slavery, compell ws to
kepe promifle. I am assured, it is trewly and sincerely
ment on our part to continew in perpetual ametye with
zow; it fall be uttered by our proceedings. Giff ze be
as defyrous of it as we ar, assurances may be devyfed,
quharby all partyes will be out of doubte. There be
gode meanes to do it, fit infiruments for the purpos, tyme
serves weill, the inhabitants of baith realms wish it, God
hes wrought in the peoples harte's on bayth parties a cer-
taine fiill agreement upon it, never did, at any tyme, so
mony things concurre at ones to knyt it up, the difpo-
fition of a few, quhais harts are in Godis hands, may mak

Up the hale. I hope he quha hes begun his work, and
mainteyned it quhile now, by the expeacation of man,
fall perfyte it.

I PRAY zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in confulta-

tion, quhether ze fall support ws or no. Seyng the mater
fpeaketh for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the de-
fence off our caus, giff ze have any refpe6t for zour awne
weill. Their preparatives in France, and levying of men
in Germany, (quheyroffI am lately advertised) ar not al-
togydder ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark they shote at;
they feke our realme, but for ane entrey to zours. Giff
they ihould dire6tly fchaw hoftilite to zow, they knaw
zo wald mak redy for theyme, therefor they do, by in-
direst meanes, to blind zow, the thing, they dare not as
sit planely attempte. They feme to invade us to th' end
that having assembled theyr hayle forces fa nere zour
bordours, they may unlok it to attack zow: It is ane of
theyr aid fetches, making a fchew to one place, to lyght
on ane other. Remember how covertly zour places about'
Boulougne were affaizeit, and carryed away, ze being in
peace as now. How the enterprise of Calais was fynely
dissembled, I think ze have not fa lone forgotten. Be-
ware of the third, prevent theyr policy by prudence.
Giff ze fe not the lyke disposition presently in theym, ze
fe nathing. It is a grosse ignorance to mifknaw, what all
nations planely fpeks off. Tak hede ze zay not hereafter,
" Had I wift;" ane uncomely sentence to procede off a
wyfe man's mouth. That is onwares chanced on to zow,
quhilk zow commonly wiffed, that this countrey myght
be divorfed from the Frenfche, and is fa comme to pats as
was maift expedient for zow. For giff by your intyfe-
ment we had taken the mater in hand, ze myght have
fufpe6ed we would have been untrufty frends, and na
langer continued ftedfafte, then perril had appeared. But
now, quhen off our self, we have conceyved the hatered,
provoked by private injuries, and that theyr evil dealing
with ws hes deserved our inimitye, let no man dobte but
they fall fynde ws ennemyes in ernest, that fa ungent-
ly hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais hands
we can look for nathing but all extremitye, giff ever
they may get the upper hand, Let not this occasion,
fa happely offered, escape zow: giff ze do, neglecting the
present opportunitie, and hoping to have ever gode luk
comme fleaping upon zow, it is to be feared zour erremye

6 waxe

waxe to great, and fa firang, that afterwards quhen zd
wald, ze fall not be able to put him down ; and then, to
zour smart, after the tyme, ze will acknowledge zour
error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat harme cometh
of oversight, and trufling to zour enemyes promeffe. We
offer zow the occasion, quheyrby zour former losses may
be repayred. Qihilk gif ze let over flyde, fuffering ws
to be overrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall flay the
Frenlche, that they fall not invade zow in zour own
boundes, sick it is their lust to reygne, that they can nei-
ther be content with theyr fortune present, nor reift and be
satisfied when they have gode luck, but will flill follow
on, having in theyr awne brayne conceaved the image of
fa great a conquefl, quhat think ye fal be the end? Is
ther any of fa small jugement, that he doth not foresee
already, that theyr hail force fall then be bent against
zow?

IT fall not be amis, to confider in quhat care the

Frenfche be presently. Theyr efiate is not always fa
calme at hame as every man thinketh. And trewly it
wes not theyr great redines for weyr made theym to tak
this mater on hand, at this tyme, but rather a vayne trufi
in theyr awne policy, thinking to have found na resist-
ance, their opinion hes deceaved theym, and that makes
them now amafed. The eflates off the empire (as I
heare) has futed restitution off the' Imperial towns Metz,
Toull, and Verdun, quhilk may grow to some befynesi
and all thing is not a calme within theyr awne countrey,
the less fit they be presently for weyr, the mare opportune
effeme ye the time for zow. Giff the lyke occasion were
offered to the Frenfche against zow, wey, how gladly
would they embrace it. Are ze not efchamed of zour
sleuth, to spare theym that hes already compassed zour
deftruaion, giff theym wer able ? Confider with zour
Telf quhilks is to be choyfed ? To weyr againlt them out
with zour realme or within ? Giff quhill ze fleape, we
fal be overthrowne, then fall they not fayle to fute zow in
zour awne countrey, and use ws as a forte ifole to overloke
zow. But some will fay, perhaps, they meane it not.
It is foly to think they wald not giff they wer able, quhen
before hand they flick not to giff zour armes, and ufurpe
the ifyle ofzour crown. Then quhat difference there is to
camp within zowr awne bounds or without, it is manifest.
Giff twa armyes should camp with in zowr country, but a

moneth i

snoneth; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit ihould
zowr lorfe be greatar, nor all the charge ze will nede to
bePtow on our support will draw to, befydes the difho-
nour.

LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not
for particular refpeds weill affeded to the caus, move zow
to fubtrad zour helping hand, by alleging things not ap-
parent, for that they be possible. It is not, I grant, un-
possible that we may receave conditiones of peace j but I
(ee little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer ws fik as
will remove all miftrufi, and giff we wald have accepted
others, the mater had bene lang or now compounded.
Let zow not be moved for that they terme ws rebelles,
and diffames ourjuft querell with the name of conspiracy
againat our foverayne. It is hir hyenes right we mane-
tayne. It is the liberty off hir realme we fludy to pre-
serve, with the hazard of our lyves. We are not (God
knaweth) comme to this poynt for wantones, as
men impatient of rewli, or willing to fchake of the
zoke of government, but ar drawne to it by necef-
site, to avoyde the tyranny of flrangeares, feaking to
defraude ws of lawful government. Giff we should
fuffer ftrangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably in all
the firenthes of our realme, fortify the fe portes, and
maift important places, as ane entre to a plain conquest,
now in the minoritie of our foverane, beyng furth of the
realme, should we not be thought oncareful off the com-
mon weill, berrayares of our native countrey, and evill
fubjeAfs to hir majete ? Quhat other opinion could fche
have off ws ? Might ihe not juitly hereafter call ws to
accompt, as negligent minifteres ? Giff firangeares should
be thus fuffered to broke the chefe offices, beare the hail
rewll, alter and pervert our lawes and liberty at theyr pie-
four; myght not the people esteem our noblemen unwor-
thy the place of counfalours ! We mean na wyfe to fulb-
prak our obedience from our foverane, to defraud hir hye-
nes off her dew reverence, rents and revenues off hir
crown. We feke nathing but that Scotland may remane,
as of before, a fre realme, rewlit by hir hyenes and hir
minifferes borne men of the fam; and that the fucceflion of
the crown may remane with the lawful blode.

I WALD not ze fould not fa lyttd effeme the friendship

of Scotland, that ze juged it not worthy to be embraced.
it fall be na small commodite for zow to be delivered off

the

the anoyance of so neir a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye may
more trouble zow, then off any other nation albeit twyfs
as puissant, not lyeng dry marche with zow. Befydes that
ze fall not nede to feare the invasion off any prince lacky-
ing the commodite to invade zow by land, on our land.
Confider quhat superfluous charge ze beftowe on the for-
tification and keping of Barwick ; quhilk ze may reduce
to a mean fowme, having ws to frendes. The realme of
Ireland being of natour a gode and fertill countrey, by
reason off the continewalld unquietnes and lak of policy,
ze knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow then great ad-
vantage; and giff it were peaceable may be very commo-
dious. For pacification quhayroff, it is notonknowne to
zo'v quhat service we ar abill to do. Refuse not theyr
commoditeys, besides mony ma quhen they ar offred.
Quhilks albeit I ifudy not to amplify and dilate, yet is na
other countrey able to offer zow the lyke, and are the
rather to be embraced, for that zour aunceftors, by all
meanes, maift erneftly futed our amity, and yet it was
not theyr hap to come by it. The mater hes almaift
carryed me beyond the boundes of a lattre, quharfor I will
leave to trouble zow after I have geven you this note. I
wald wifs that ze, and they that arlearned, fould rede the
twa former orations of Demosthenes, called Olynthiacae,
and confidere qubhat counfall that wyfe oratour gave to
the Athenians, his countrymen, in a lyke cafe; quhilk
hes so great affinite with this cause of ours, that every
\word therof myght be applyed to our purpos. There may
ze learne of him quhat advise is to be followed, when
zour nyghtbours hous is on fyre; Thus I bid zow heartily
fareweill. From Sant Andrews, the 20th of January,
3559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 228.)

Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir Wil-

liam Cecil, from the camp before Leith, 29th
of April, I560.

An Original T WILL only, for this time, discharge myfelfof my
Oite laper1 promise to the earl of Huntly, who so defyreth to
od~fc. be recommended to you, as one, who with all his heart

favoureth this cause, to the uttermost of his power. Half
the words that come out of his mouth were able to per-
fuade an unexperienced man to speak farther in his be-

half,

half, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your ho-
nour to judge of him, as of a man not unknown to you,
and will myself always measure my thoughts, as he shall
deserve to be spoken of. With much difficulty, and great
persuasion, he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords
to join with them in this ation; whatfomever he can in-
vent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promised to
do with solemn proteflation, and many words; he truss-
eth to adjoin many to this cause; and faith surely that no
man (hall lie where he taketh part. He hath this day sub-
fcribed a bond between England and this nation; he
faith, that there was never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. I. p. 242.)

Randolph to Cecil, ioth August 1560. From

Edinburgh.

SINCE the 29th of July, at what time I wrote last AnOriginad

to your honour, I have heard of nothing worth the ot'Pape

reporting. At this present it may please you to know, that
the most part of the nobles are here arrived, as your ho-
nour (hall receive their names in writing. The earl of
Huntly excufeth himself by an infirmity in his leg. His
lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington, chosen
speaker of the parliament, or harangue maker as there men
term it. The firRf day of their fitting in parliament will
be on Thursday next. Hitherto as many as have been
present of the lords have communed and devised of certain
heads then to be propounded, as, who shall be sent into
France, who into England. It is much easier to find them
than the other. It feemeth almost to be resolved upon
that for England the Mafler of Maxwell, and laird of
Lidington. For France, Pitarrow and the Justice Clerk.
Albo they have cnnfulted whom they think meeteft to
name for the XXIV. of the which the XII. counsellors
must be chosen. They intend very ihortly to fend away
Dingwall the herald into France, with the names of those
they (hall chufe; and also to require the king and queen's
consent unto this parliament. They have devised how to
have the contract with England confirmed by authority
of parliament; how also to have the articles of the agree-
ment between them and their king and queen ratified.

These

These things yet have only been had in communication.
For the confirmation of the contra& with England I
have no doubt; for that I hear many men very like the
fame, as the Earl of Athol, the Earl of Sutherland, the
L. Glamis, who dined yeflerday with L. James. The
Lord James requefied me this present day to bring the
contrat unto him. I intend also, this day, to speak un-
to the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for that he pro-
miled in my hearing to subscribe, and then presently
would have done it, if the contra& could have been had.
For the more assurance againif all inconvenients, I would,
besides that, that I trust it shall be ratified in parliament,
that every nobleman in Scotland had put his hand and
set his feal, which may always remain as a notable monu-
ment, tho' the a5 of parliament be hereafter difannulled.
If it might, thertfore, fland with your advice, that the
lords might be written unto, now that they are here pre-
sent to that effea, or that I might receive from your Honr.
some earnest charge to travel herein, I doubt not but it
would serve to good purpose. If it might be also known
with what substantial and effeAious words or charge you
desire to have it confirmed, I think no great difficulty
would be made. The Earl Marshal has oft been moved to
subscribe, he uleth mo delays then men judged he would.
His son told me yeflerday, that he would (peak with me
at leirure, so did also Drumlanrick; I know not to what
purpose: I have caused L. James to be the earnefter with
the L. Marshal, for his authority's fake, when of late
it was in consultation by what means it might be wrought,
that the amity between these two realms might be
perpetual; and among diverse men's opinion, one laid
that he knew of no other, but by making them both
one, and that in hope of that mo things were done,
than would otherwise have ever been granted; the earl
of Argyll advised him earnefily to flick unto that, that he
had promised, that it flould pass his power and all the
crafty knaves of his counsel (I am bold to use unto your
H. his own words), to break so godly a purpose.
This talk liked well the affifters, howsomever it
pleased him to whom it was spoken unto. The barons,
who in time past have been of the parliament, had
yesterday a convention among themselves in the church,
in very honest and quiet fort; they thought it good to
sequire to be restored unto their ancient liberty, to have

5 voice

tdoice in parliament. They presented that day a bill
Unto the lords to that effe6c, a copy whereof shall be
sent as soon as it can be had. It was answered unto
gently and taken in good part. It was referred unto the
lords of the articles, when they are chosen to resolVe
thereupon. --- Here follows a lolrg paragraph concern-
ing the fort!fications of Dunbar, &c. -- This present
morning, viz. the 9th, I understood, that the lords
intended to be at the parliament, which caused me some-
what to flay my letter, to fee what I could hear or learn
worth the reporting unto your Hon'. The lords, at ten
of the clock, assembled themselves at the palace, where
the duke lieth; from whence they departed towards the
Tolbooth, as they were in dignity. Each one being set
in his feat, in such order as your H. thall receive them
in this scroll. The crown, the mace, the sword, were
laid in the queen's feat. Silence being commanded, the
L. of Lidington began his oration. He excused his in-
fufficiency to occupy that place. He made a brief dif-
course of things pafi, and of what necessity men were
forced unto for the defence of their country, what remedy
and support it pleased God to fend them in the time of thtir
neceflity, how much he were bound heartily to acknow-
ledge it, and to requite it. He took away the persuasion
that was in many men's mind that lay back, that misdeem-
ed other things to be meant than was attempted. He ad-
rifed all estates to lay all particulars apart, and to bend them-
selves wholly to the true service of God ahd of their coun-
try. He willed them to remember in what slate it had been
of long time for lack of government, and exercise ofjuftice.
In the end, he exhorted them to mutual amity and hearty
friendship, and to live with one another as members all
of one body.-He prayed God long to maintain this peace
and amity with all princes, especially betwixt the realms
of England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so ended.
The clerk of regifler immediately flood up, and asked
them to what matter they would proceed : It was thought
hleceffary, that the articles of the peace mhould be confirmed
with the common consent, for that it was thought necef-
fary to fend them away with speed into France, and to re-
ceive the'ratification of them as soon as might be. The
articles being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day
was appointed to have certain of the nobles subscribe unto
them, and to put their seals, to be lent away by a

VoL. II. Y herald,

herald, who shall also bring the ratification again with
him. The barons, of whom I have above written, re-
quired an answer to their request, somewhat was said
unto the contrary. The barons alleged for them cuffom
and authority. It was in.the end resolved, that there ihould
be chosen fix to join with the lords of the articles, and
that if they, after good advisement, thould find it right
and necessary for the commonwealth, it thould be ratified
at this parliament for a perpetual law. The lords proceed-
ed immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the
articles. The order is, that the lords spiritual chufe the
temporal, and the temporal the spiritual, and the burgesses
their own. There were chosen as in this other paper I
have written. This being done, the lords departed and
accompanied the duke, all as far as the Bow (which is
the gate going out of the high fAreet), and many down
into the palace where he lieth. The town all in armour,
the trumpets founding, and other music such as they
have. Thus much I report unto your honour of that I
did both hear and fee. Other folemnities have not been
used saving in times long past the lords have had parlia-
ment robes, which are now with them wholly out of use.

THE names of as many earls and lords spiritual and

temporal as are assembled at this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Earls. Lords. Lords Spiritual.

Arran. Erskine. St. Andrews.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dunkell.
Athole. Lindsey. Athens.
Crawford. Somervill. The bishop of the Isles.
Caffils. Cathcart. Abbots and Priors, I
Marshall. Hume. know not how many.
Morton. Livingflon.
Glencairn. Innermeth.
Sutherland. Boyd.
Cathnefs. Ogilvy.
Rothes. Fleming.
Monteith. Glamis.

Gray.
Ochiltree.
Gordon.

The Lords of the Articles.

Spiritual. Temporal.

Athens. The Duke,
Isles. Argyll.
Lord James. Marfball.
Arbroath. Athole.
Newbottle. Morton.
Lindoris. Glencairn.
Cowpar. Ruthven.
Kinross. Erskine.
Kilwinning. Boyd. Lindsay.

So that with the Subprior
is 36. Barons elected to be

of the Articles.

. Maxwell.

Tillibardine.
Cunninghamhead.
Lochenvar.
Pittarrow.
Lundy.
Ten Provofis of the

chief towns, which
also are of the Ar-
ticles.

of St. Andrews, the whole

IT were too long for me to rehearse particularly the

disposition, and chiefly the affections of these men, that are
at this time chosen lords of the articles. May it satisfy
your Honr. for this time to know that, by the common
opinion of men, there was not a fubiftantialler or more sus-
ficient number of all forts of men chofeo in Scotland these
many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of goo4
toenfue. This present morning, viz. the ioth, the L.
of Lidington made me privy unto your letter; he intend-
eth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some
hard points there are. He himself is determined not
to go into France. He allegeth many reasons, but
fpeaketh least of that, that moveth him mofft, which is
the example of the last, that went on a more grateful
message than he shall carry, and stood on other terms
with their prince than he doth, and yet your honour
knoweth what the whole world judgeth.

Petition of the Lesser Barons to the Parliament,

held Aug. i560.

M Y lords, unto your lordlhips, humbly means and

shows, we the barons and freeholders of this

realm, your brethren in Chrift,That whereas the causes of
true religion, and common vwll of this realm, are, in this
present parliament, to be treated, ordered, and eftabiilhed,

Y 2 to Inriofed In

Randolph's
letter to Ce..
(ii, j~tb
Aug. 1560.

to the glory of God, and maintenance of the common-
wealth; and we being the greatest number in proportion,
where the said causes concern, and has been, and yet are
ready to bear the greatest part of the charges thereuntil,
as well in peace as in war, both with our bodies and
with our goods; and feeing there is no place where we
may do better service now than in general councils and
parliaments, in giving our befl advice and reason, vote
and councell for the furtherance thereof, for the mainte-
nance of virtue, and punishment of vice, as use and custom
had been of old by ancient ads of parliament observed
in this realm ; and whereby we understand that we ought
to be heard to reason and vote in all causes concerning
the commonwealth, as well in councils as in parliaments;
otherwise we think that whatfomever ordinances and fla-
tutes be made concerning us and our estate, we not being
required and fuffered to reason and vote at the making
thereof, that the fame thould not oblige us to stand there.
to. Therefore it will please your lordfhips to take con-
fideration thereof, and of the charge born, and to be born
by us, since we are willing to serve truly to the common
well of this realm, after our eflate, that ye will, in this
present parliament, and all counfells, where the common
well of the realm is to be treated, take our advice, coun-
fell and vote, so that, without the fame, your lordfhips
would fuffer nothing to be passed and concluded in par-
liament or councils aforesaid ; and that all a&s of par-
liament made, in times palt, concerning us for our place
and estate, and in our favour, be at this present parlia-
ment confirmed, approved and ratified, and aft of par-
liament made thereupon. And your lordfhips answer
humbly beseeches.

Of the success of this petition, the fsllwing account is given

by Randolph; Lett. to Cecil, 19 Aug. 1560. The mat-
ters concluded and palt by common consent on Saturday
laif, in such solemn fort as the first day that they affem.
bled, are there. First, that the barons according to an
old at of parliament, made in the time of James I. in
the year of God 1427, thall have free voice in parlia-
ment, this at passed without any contradi-tion.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 252.)

A letter of Thomas Randolph, the English refi-

dent, to the right worshipful SirWilliam Cecil,
knt. principal secretary to the queen's majesty.

I HAVE received your honour's letters of the first of this 9 Aug.

month, written at Ofyes in Essex; and also a letter '56" cort.

unto the lord James, from his kinsman St. Come out of so. 3»..
France, in this they agree both that the queen of Scotland
is nothing changed of her purpose in home coming. I
assure your honour that will be a flout adventure for a
sick crafed woman, that may be doubted as well what may
happen unto her upon the seas, as also how heartily she
may be received vwhen the cometh to land of a great num-
ber, who are utterly persuaded that she intendeth their
utter ruin, come when ihe will ; the preparance is very
small whensoever that she arrive, scarcely any man can be
persuaded that (he hath any such thought in her head. I
have shown your honour's letters unto the lord James, lord
Morton, lord Lidington ; they with, as your honour doth,
that the might be ifayed yet for a space, and if it were
not for their obedience fake, some of them care not tho'
they never law her face. They travel what they can to
prevent the wicked devices of these mischievous purposes
of her ministers, but i fear that that will always be found
that filij hujus feculi, they do what they can to fland with
the religion, and to maintain amity with their neighbours;
they have also need to look unto themselves, for their ha-
zard is great, and that they fee there is no remedy nor
safety for themselves, but to repose themselves upon the
queen's majefly, our fovereign's favours and support,
Friends abroad they have none, nor many in whom they
may truss at home. There are in mind thortly to try what
they may be assured at of the queen's majesty, and what
they may assuredly perform of that they intend to offer for
their parties. This the queen of Scotland above all other
things doubteth ; this the Iceketh by all means to pre-
vent; and hath caused St. Come, in her n me, earnefily
to write to charge him that no such things be attempted
before her coming home ; for that it is said, that they too
already arrived here out of England for the purpose, what
epmbl!ant fomeyer the noblemen do make, that they are

Y 3 grieved

grieved with their queen's refusal, that cometh far from
their hearts. They intend to expoltulate with me here-
upon. I have my answer ready enough for them. If she
thrust all Englishmen out of this country, I doubt not
but there will be rome of her own that will bear us Come
kindness. Of me (he shall be quit, So Coon as it pleafeth
the queen's majesty my mistress no longer to use my ser-
vice in this place. By such talk, as I have of late had with
the lord James and lord of Lidington, I perceive that
they are of mind that immediately of the next convention,
I (hall repair towards you with their determinations, and
resolutions, in all purplfes, wherein your honour's advice
is earnefily required, and (hortly looked for. Whatfom-
ever I desire myself, I know my will ought to be fubje&
unto the queen my fovereign's pleasure, but to content
myself, would God I were so happy as to serve her majesty
in as mean a fiate as ever poor gentleman did, to be quit
of this place ; not that 1 do in my heart wax weary of
her majefty's service, but because my time and years re-
quire some place of more repose and quietness than I find
in this country. I doubt also my infufficience when other
troubles in this country arise, or ought (hall be required
of me to the advancement of her majeffy's service, that
either my will is n< t able to compass, or my credit fuffi.
cient to work to that effect, as perchance flhall be looked
for at my hands. As your honour hath been a means of
my continuance in this room, so I trust that I shall find
that continual favour at your hands, that so soon as itflhall
fland with the queen's majefty's pleasure, I may give this
place unto some far worthier than I am myself, and in the
mean season, have my course directed by your good ad.
vice how I may by my contrivance do some such service,
as may be agreeable to her majefty's will and pleasure.

THESE fekv words, I am bold to write unto your ho-

nour of myself. For the reft, where that is wished that
the lords will stoutly continue yet for one month, I assure
your honour that there is yet nothing omitted of their old
and accustomed manner of doing, and feeing that they
have brought that unto this point, and (hould now pre-
vail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I FIND not that they are purposed to to leave the mat-

ter. I doubt more her money than I do her fair words;
and yet can I not conceive what great things can be
wrought with forty thousand crowns, and treasure of her

own

Own here I know there is no sure or ready means to get
it. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothing at this time
unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to satisfy your
desire, in knowledge of the present state of things here.
Whatfomever cometh of that, he findeth it ever best, that
the come not; but if the do come, to let her know, at
the firfi, what the shall find, which is due obedience,
and willing service, if she embrace Christ, and desire to
live in peace with her neighbours. By such letters as you
have lafi received, your honour somewhat underitandeth
of Mr. Knox himself, and also of others, what is deter-
mined, he himself to abide the uttermost, and other never
to leave him until God have taken his life, and thus to-
gether with what comfort fomever it will please you to
give him by your letters, that the queen's majefly doth not
utterly condemn him, or at the least in that point, that he
is so fore charged with by his own queen, that her majefly
will not allow her doing. I doubt not but it will be a
great comfort unto him, and will content many others ;
his daily prayer is for the maintenance of unity with Eng-
land, and that God will never fuffer men to be so ungrate,
as by any persuasion to run headlong unto the deflruaion
of them, that have Caved their lives, and reflored their
country to liberty. I leave farther, at this time, to trouble
your honour, desiring God to fend such an amity between
these two realms that God may be glorified to them of this
world.-At Edenburgh the 9th of August, 1561.

No. VI. (Vol. I. p. 262.)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to Qieen Mary.

To the right excellent, right high and mighty princesse,

our right dear and well-beloved filer and cousin the
queen of Scotland.

p IG H T excellent, right high, and mighty princesse, i6th of

our right dear and right well-beloved sifter and cou- Aug. 'S61.

fin, we greet you well. The Lord of St. Cofme brought Pe uof. a
to us your letters, dated the 8th of this present .t Ab- Copy.
bevile, whereby ye signify, that although by the answer
brought to you by Monsieur Doyzell, ye might have had
occasion to have entered into some doubt of our amity, yet

Y 4 after

after certain purposes paffired betwixt you and our ambaf-
fador, you would assure us of your good meaning to live
with us in amity, and for your purpose therein ye require
us to give credit to the said St. Cofme. We have there-
unto thought good to answer as followeth. The fame
St. Cofme hath made like declaration unto us on your part,
for your excuse in not ratifying the treaty, as yourself
made to our ambassador, and we have briefly answered to
every the fame points, as he can thew you: and if he
shall not so do, yet leafs in the mean season you might be
induced to think that your reasons has satisfied us, fomer-
ally we assure you, that to our requefls your answer can-
not be reputed for a fatisfaEtion. For we require no be.
nefit of you, but that youwill perform your promise where-
tunto you are bound by your feal and your hand, for the
refusal whereof we fee no reason alledged can serve. Nei-
ther covet we any thing, but that which is in your own
power as queen of Scotland, that which yourself in words
and speech doth confers, that which your late hufband's
our good brother's ambassadors and you concluded, that
which your own nobility and people were made privy un-
to, that which indeed made peace and quietness betwixt us,
yea that, without which no perfe&t amity can continue
betwixt us, as if it be indifferently weighed, we doubt
not but ye will perceive, allow and accomplish. Never.
thelefs, perceiving by the report of the bringer, that you
mean furthwith upon your coming home, to follow herein
the advice of your council in Scotland, we are content to
uhfpend our conceipt of all unkindness, and do assure you
that we be fully resolved, upon this being performed, to
unite a faure band of amity, and to live in neighbourhood
with you as quietly, friendly, yea as assuredly in the knot
of friendship, as we bq in the knot of nature and blood.
And herein we be so earnefitly determined, that the world
ihould fee if the contrary ihould follow (which God for-
bid), the very occasion to be in you and not in us; as the
story witneffeth the like of the king your father, our uncle,
with whom our father fought to have knit a perpetual
bond by inviting to come in this realm to York, of which
matter we know there remain with us, and we think
with you, sundry witnesses of our father's earnest good
meaning, and of the error whereunto divers evil council-
lors induced your father; or finally where it feemeth that
report had been made unto you, that we had sent our

admiral

admiral to the seas with our navy to impeache your pas-
Cage, both your servants- do well understand how false
that is, knowing for a truth that we have not any more
than two or three small barks upon the seas, to apprehend
certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and almost com-
pelled, by the earnest complaint of the ambassador of
our good brother the king of Spain, made of certain Scot-
tilhmen haunting our seas as pirates, under pretence of
letters of marque, of which matter also we earnefitly require
you, at your coming to your realme, to have some good
consideration, and the rather for refpe6l that ought to be
betwixt your realme and the countries of us, of France,
of Spain, and of the house of Burgundy. And so, right
excellent, right high and mighty princess, we recommend
as to you with most earnest request, not to negle6c there
our friendly and sisterly offers of friendship, which, before
God, we mean and intend to accomplish. Given under
our signet at Heyningham the 1 6th of August, in the third
year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 295.)

A letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir

William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to
the queen's majesty.

O F late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had ,5th of

nothing worth the writing unto your honour.-Be- May, = sh

fore his coming we had so little to hint upon, that we fro the
did nothing but pass our time in feasts, banquetting, Original.
masking, and running at the ring, and such like. He
brought with him such a number of letters, and such abund-
ance of news, that, for the space of three days, we gave
ourselves to nothing else but to reading of writings, and
hearing of tales, many so truly reported, that they might
be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris
narrationibus. Among all his tidings, for the mofi as-
sured, I fend this unto your honour as an undoubted truth,
which is, that the cardinal of Lorraine, at his being with
the emperor, moved a marriage between his youngest son,
the duke of Afiruche, and this queen; wherein he hath
sofar travailed, that it hath already come unto this point,
that if she find it good, the said Duke will out of hand fend

hither

hither his embaffador, and farther proceed to the confumrn
mation hereof, with as convenient speed as may be; and
to the intent her mind may be the better known, la Croch
is sent unto her with this message from the cardinal, who
hath promised unto the emperor, to have word again be-
fore the end of May; and for this cause la Croch is ready
for his departure, and his letters writing both day and
night. This queen being before advertized of his toward-
ness, by many means hath lought far off, to know my
lord of Murray's mind herein, but would never so plainly
deal with him, that he could learn what her meaning is,
or how she is bent. She u:eth no man's council, but only
this man's that lass arrived and assuredly until the L. of
Lidington's return, she will do what flie can to keep
that secret; and because resolution in his absence cannot be
taken the will, for this time, return la Croch with request,
to have longer time to devize ; and after, with the most
speed she can, the fully purpofeth to advertize him, I mean,
her uncle the cardinal, of her mind. Of this matter the
L. of Lidington is made privy. I know not whether by
some intelligence that he had before his departure, or since
his arrival in France, divers letters have passed between
her grace and him, whereof as much as it imported not
greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some,
as much as was written in sypher, is kept untothemfelves.
Whether also the L. of Lidington hath had conference
with the Spanish ambassador in England of this matter,
or any like, I leave it unto your honour's good means,
to get true knowledge thereof. Guesses or furmizes in
so grave matters, I would be loth to write for verities.
This also your honour may take for truth, that the em-
peror hath offered with his son, for this queen's dower,
the county of Tyroll, which is said to be worth 30,000
franks by year. Of this matter also the rhingrave wrote
a letter unto this queen, out of France not long since.
This is all that presently I can write unto your honour
hereof; as I can come by farther knowledge, your honour
thall be informed.

I HAVE received your honour's writings by the Scot-

tifh man that last came into these parts; he brought also
letters unto this queen from the L. of Lidington; their
date was old, and contained only the news of France,
I perceive divers ways, that Newhaven is forre closed,
but I am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know

they

they will fay as much as they dare do, I will not fay as
the proverb doth, ' canis timidus fortius latrat.' From
hence I do assure them, what means fomever they make,
or how pitiful fomever there mone be, they are like to re-
ceive but small comfort for all their long allie. We
stand daily in doubt what friendship we Thall need our-
self, except we put better order unto our misruled papiffts,
than yet we do, or know how to bring to pass that we
may be void of their comber.

TO-MORROW, the x5th of this instant, the queen de-

parteth of this town, towards Edenborough. If my hap
be good, you (hall thoroughly hear some merry tidings
of the Bp. of St. Andrews; upon Wednesday next he
lhall be arraigned, and five other priests, for their mailing
at Ealter lait. Thus most humbly I take my leave; at
St. Andrews the i5th of May, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 304.)

Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir

William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to
the queen's majesty.

M AY it please your honour, the 7th of this instant, »othof

Rowlet, this queen's secretary, arrived here; he April,r563,

reporteth very honefily of his good usage, he brought frorinhee
with him many letters unto the queen that came out of Original in
France, full of lamentation and sorrow. She received his own
from the queen mother two letters, the one contained hand
only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the
fiate of France as then it was, as in what fort things were
accorded, and what farther was intended for the appealing
of the discords there, not mistrusting but that if reafoo
could not be had at the Queen of England's hands, but
that the realm of France ihould find, her ready and will-
ing to support and defend the right thereof, as by friend-
ihip and old alliance between the two realms the is
bound.

How well these words do agree with her doings, your

honour can well confider, and by her writings in this fort
unto this queen, (which I assure your honour is true) you
may assuredly know, that nothing (hall be left undone

of

of her part, that may move debate or controverfie be-
tween this queen and our sovereign.

IT was much muled at by the queen herself, how this

new kindness came about, that at this time Ihe received
two long letters written all with her own hand, saying, all
the time since her return the never received half so many
lines, as were in one of the letters, which I can myself
teflify by the queen's own saying, and other good affu-
rance, where hitherto I have not been deceived. I can
also farther assure your honour, that this queen hath fayed
that the knoweth now, that the friendllip of the queen's
majefly my sovereign may fland her more in flead, than
that of her good mother in France, and as the is defir-
ous of them both, so will the not lose the one for the
other. I may also farther assure your honour, that what-
fomever the occasion is, this queen hath somewhat in her
heart that will burst out in time, which will manifest that
some unkindness hath passed between them, that will not
be easy forgotten. In talk Ibmetimes with myself, the faith
that the queen mother might iave used the matter other-
wife than the hath done, and doth much doubt what shall
be the success of her great desire to govern alone, in all
things to have her will. Seeing then that presently they
sand in such terms one with the other, I tho't it better
to confirm her in that mind (this queen I mean), than
to speak any word that might cause her to conceive bet.
ter of the other. And yet I am assured the (hall receive
as friendly letters, and as many good words from this
queen, as the other did write unto her. Whether the
queen mother will speak any thing unto the L. of Ly-
dington of that purpose she did write unto this queen
of, I know not; but if the do, I think it hard if your ho-
nour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or I per-
chance by fume means here. It may, perchance, be writ-
ten only by that queen, to try what answer this queen
will give, or underfiand what mind the beareth unto the
queen's majefly our sovereign. The queen knoweth now
that the earl Bothwdll is sent for to London. She cau-
fed a gentleman of hers to enquire the cause; I Infwered
that I knew none other, but that his takers were in con-
troverfy who took him, and that it thould be judged
there. I know that file thinketh much that he is not sent
into Scotland. It is yet greatly doubted that if he were
here, he would be reserved for an evil instrument. If

the

the Lord of Lidington have not been plain with your ho-
nour herein, he is in the wrong to those who are his
friends here, but most of all to himself. There comes
a vulture in this realm, if ever that man come again into
credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 3i3.)

The oration made by William Maitland of Le-

thington, younger secretary for the time, in the
parliament holden by our sovereign the king's
mother, queen of this realm for the time, the
time of the restitution of Umquile Matthew
Earl of Lenox.

MY Lords, and others here convened. Albeit, be

that it has pleased her Majesty most graciously to

utter unto you, by her own mouth, ye may have fuffi-
ciently conceived the cause of this your present assembly;
yet having her majefty's commandment to supply my

ord Chancellor's place, being presently as ye fee de-
cealed, I am willed to express the fame somewhat more
at large.

NOTOUR it is, how in her highnefs's minority, a pro-
cess of forfaultour was decreed againfi my Lord of Len-
nox, for certain offences alledged committed by him,
specified in the dome and cenfement of Parliament gi-
ven thereupon; by reason whereof he has this long time
been exiled, and absent forth of his native country; how
grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared
by divers his suites, sundry ways brought unto her Ma-
jefiy's knowledge, not only containing moss humble and
due submission, but always bearing witness of his good
devotion to her Majesty, his natural princess, and earnest
affeaion he had to her Highness most humble service, if
it should please her Majefiy of her clemency to make him
able to enjoy the benefit of a subject ; many refpeds
might have moved her Highness favourably to incline to
his request, as the anciency of his house, and the fir-
name he bears, the honour he has to appertain to her
Majesty by affinity, by reason of my lady Margaret her
Highnefs's aunt, and divers other his good confidera-
tions, as also the effeauous tequeft of her good fifler the

Queen's

Queen's Majefly of England, whose earnest commendation
was not of least moment, besides that of her own natu.
ral, her Majefly has a certain inclination to pity the de.
cay of noble houses, and as we heard, by her own report,
has a great deal more pleasure to be the infirument of
the uphold, maintenance, and advancement of the antient
blood, than to have matter minifired of the decay or
overthrow of any good race. Upon this occasion, her
majesty the more tenderly looked upon his request, and
her good sifter the Queen of England's favourable letter,
written for recommendation of his cause, in consideration
whereof not only has the granted unto him her letter of
restitution, by way of grace, but also licensed him to pur-
sue, by way of reduAtion, the remedies provided by the
law for such as think themselves grieved by any judgment,
unorderly led, and to have the process reversed; for exa-
mination whereof, it has pleased her Majesty presently to
assemble you the three efiates of this her realme, by
whose advice, deliberation, and decision at her Majefty's
mind, to proceed forward upon his complaints, as the
merits of the cause, laws of the realme, and pra6tice ob-
served io such cafes, will bear out. The fum of all your
proceedings at this time, being by that we have heard, thus
as it were pointed out, I might here end, if the matter
we have in hand give me not occasion to fay a few more
words, not far different from the fame fubje&, wherein
I would extend the circumfiances more largely. If I
feared not to offend her Highness, whose presence and
modest nature abhors long speaking and adulation, and
so will compel me to speak such things, as may seem to
tend to any good and perfe&t point; and left it thould
be compted to me, as that I were oblivious, if I should
omit to put you in remembrance, in what part we may ac-
cept this, and the like demonfirations of her gentill na-
ture; whose gracious behaviour towards all her fubjeds,
in general, may serve for a good proof of that felicity,
we may look for under her happy government, so long
as it shall please God to grant her unto us ; for a good
harmony to be had in the common weill, the offices be-
tween the prince and the subjects mufft be reciproque;
as by her majefly's prudence we enjoy this present peace
with all foreign nations, and quietness among yourselves,
in such fort, that I think jufily it may be affirmed Scot.
land, in no man's age, that presently lives, was in greater

tranh

tranquillity; so is it the duty of all us her loving fubjeas
to acknowledge the fame as a moif high benefit, proceed-
ing from the good government of her Majesty, declaring
ourselves thankful for the fame, and rendering to her Ma-
jeflly such due obedience, as a juff prince may look for
at the hands of faithful and obedient fubjeas. I mean
no forced nor unwilling obedience, which I know her
nature does detest, but such as proceeds from the con-
templation of her modest kind of regiment, will for love
and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good proof
have we all in general had of her Majefly's benignity
these three years, that (he has lived in the government
over you, and many of you have largely tasted of her large
liberality and frank dealing; on the other part her high-
ness has had large appearance of your dutiful obedience,
so it becomes you to continue, as we have begun, in con-
fideration of the many notable examples of her clemency
above others her good qualities, and to abhor and detest
all false bruites and rumours, which are the most pestilent
evils that can be in any common weill, and the lowers and
inventors thereof. Then may we he well assured to have
of her an moit gracious princesse, and she molt faithful and
loving fubjeas; and so both the head and the members,
being encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of
the politic bodies, whereof 1 made mention before, as
the glory thereof (hall partly appertain to her Majesty,
so (hall no small praise and unspeakable commodity re-
dound therethrough to you all universally her fubjets.,

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 324.)

The perils and troubles that may presently ensue,

andin time to come follow, to the Queen's ma-
jefty of England, and state of this realrp, up-
on the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the
Lord Darley.

FIRST, the minds of such as be affeaed to the Queen

of Scots, either for herself or for the opinion of

her pretence to this crown, or for the desire to have
change of the forme of religion in this realm, or for the
difcontentation they have of the Queen's majesty, or her
facceflion, or of the fucceflion of any other beside the

Queen

Queen of Scotts, shall be, by this marriage, erefted1
comforted, and induced to devise and labour how to bring
their desires to pass; and to make some efftimate what
persons those are, to the intent the quantity of the dan-
ger may be weighed ; the fame may be compafled in those
forts either within the realme or without.

THE firfi are such as are specially devoted to the Queen

of Scotts, or to the Lord Darley, by bond of blood and al-
liance; as first, all the house of Lorrain and Guile for het
part, and the Earl of Lennox and his wife, all such in
Scotland as be of their blood, and have received difplea-
fures by the Duke of Chatelherault and the Hamiltons.
The second are all manner of persons, both in this realme
and other countries, that are devoted to the authority of
Rome, and mislike, of the religion now received; and
in there two forts are the fubfitance of them comprehended,
that (hall take comfort in this marriage.

NEXT therefore to be considered what perils and trou.

bles there kind of men thall intend to this realm.

FIRsT, the general scope and mark of all their desires

is, and always shall be, to bring the Queen of Scotts to
have the royal crown of this realm; and therefore,
though the devifees may vary amongst themlelves for the
compafling hereof, according to the accidents of the times5
and according to the impediments which they (hall find by
means of the Queen's majefty's acions and governments,
yet all their purposes, drifts, devises, and pradices, shall
wholly and only tend to make the Queen of Scotts queen of
this realm, and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof; and
in their proceedings, there are two manners to be confider-
ed, whereof the one is far worse than the other; the one
is intended by them, that either from malicious blind-
ness in religion, or for natural affe6rion to the Queen of
Scotts, or the Lord Darley, do persuade themselves that the
said Qu'een of Scotts hath presently more right to the crown
than our sovereign lady the queen, of which fort be all
their kindred on both sides, and all such as are devoted to
popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or else-
where; the other is meant by them, which, with less
malice are persuaded that the Queen of Scotts hath only
right to be the next heir to succeed the queen's majesty
and her issue, of which fort few are without the realm,
but here within, and yet of them, not so many as are of
the contrary, and from there two forts shall the peril de-

vifes

tifes and pra&ices proceed. From the first, which ima-
gine the queen of Scots to have perpetually right, are to
be looked for these perils. First, is it to be doubted the
devil will inse&t ome of them to imagine the hurt of the
life of our dear sovereign lady, by such means as the de-
vil ihall suggest to them, although it is to be assuredly
hoped, that Almighty God will, as he hath hitherto, gra-
cioufly proteat and preserve her from such dangers ? Se-
condly, there will be attempted, by persuasions, by bruits,
by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds of good
fubjeeas from the queen's majesty, and to conciliate them
to the queen of Scotts, and on this behalf the frontiers
and the north will be much solicited and labored. Third-
ly, there will be attempted causes of some tumults and
rebellions, especially in the north towards Scotland, fqhas
thereupon may follow some open enterprise set by vio-
lence. Fourthly, there will be, by the said queen's coun-
cil and friends, a new league made with France, or Spain,
that ihall be offenfive to this realm, and a furtherance
to their title. And as it is also very likely, that they will
set a foot as many pratices as they can, both upon the
frontiers and in Ireland, to occasion the queen's majesty
to increase and continue her charge thereby, to retain her
from being mighty or potent, and for the attempting of
all these things, many devises will be imagined, from
time to time, and no negligence will therein appear.

FROM the second fort, which mean no other favour to

the queen of Scotts, but that the should succeed in title
to the queen's majesty, is not much to be feared, but that
they will content themselves to fee not only the queen's
majefly not to marry, and so to impeach it, but to hope,
that the queen of Scotts shall have iflue, which they will
think to be more pleafable to all men, because thereby the
crowns of England and Scotland (hall be united in one,
and thereby the occasion of war (hall cease ; with which
persuasion many people may be seduced, and abused to
incline themselves to the part of the queen of Scotts.

THE remedies against these perils.

VO. II. , A Du-

A Duplicat.

40. of June A fumrnmary of the consultation and advice given
Li'ciltt. by the lords and others of the privy council,
R. io. fol. Collected out of the sundry and several speeches
*90. of the said counsellors.

Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroller,
Lord Treasurer, Mr.Vice Chamberlain,

Earls o

Derby, Mr. Secretary,

Earls of Bedford, Cave,

Leiceffer, Peter,

Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain,

Queflions propounded were there two.

I. THIRST, what perils might ensue to the Queen's

F7 majesty, or this realm, of the marriage betwixt

the Queen of Scotts, and the Lord Darnley.

2. What were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy

the fame.

To the FirfR.

The perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced

by rome counsellors into only one.

I. Firff, that by this marriage, the Queen of Scotts,

(being not married) a great number in this realm not of
the worst fubjets might be alienated in their minds from
their natural duties to her majefly, to depend upon the
success of this marriage of Scotland, as a mean to establish
the fuccefllion of both the crowns in the issue of the fame
marriage, and so favour all devises and praaices, that
ihould tend to the advancement of the queen of Scots.

2. Secondly, that considering the chief foundation of

them, which furthered the marriage of the Lord Darnley,
was laid upon the trufi of such as were papifts, as the
only means left to restore the religion of Rome, it was
plainly to be seen, that both in this realm and Scotland,
the papifts would most favour, maintain, and fortify this
marriage of the Lord Darnley, and would, for furtherance
of fa6tion in religion, devifl all means and prahlices that

t could

'ould be within this realm, to diflurb the eflate of the
queen's majesty, and the peace of the realm, and confe-
quently to atchieve their purposes by force, rather than
fail. By some other, these perils having indeed many
'branches, were reduced, though somewhat otherwise, iil-
to two forts, and there were in nature such as they could
not be easily fevered the one from the other, but were
knit and lincked together, naturally for maintaining the
one with the other. The first of there fort of perils was
that, by this marriage with the Lord Darnley, there was a
plain intention to further the pretended title of the queen
of Scotts, not only to succeed the Queen's majeffy, as in
her best amity the had profeffed, but that to occupy the
queen's estate, as when she was in power, Lhe did mani-
feftly declare.

TIE second was, that hereby the Romish religion

thould be erected, and increased daily in this realm, and
there two were thus knit together, that the furtherance
and maintenance of the title flaid, in furthering of the
religion of Rome within this realm ; and in like manner
the furtherance of the fame religion flood by the title, for
otherwise the title had no foundation.

Proves-of the first.) And to prove that the intention to

advance the title to disturb the queen's majefly, must
needs ensue, was considered that always the intention and
will of any person is most manifest, when their power is
greatest, and contrary when power is small, then the in-
tention and will of every person is covered and less seen.
So as when the queen of Scotts power was greatest, by
her marriage with the dauphin of France, being after-
wards French king, it manifestly appeared of what mind
flhe, and all her friends were, using then manifefily all
the means that could be devised to impeach and difpoffefs
the queen's majesty, first by writing and pubhlfhing her-
self in all countries queen of England; by granting char-
ters, patents, and commissions, with that style, and with
the arms of England, both the French and Scotts, which
charters remain still undefaced ; and to prosecute it with
effe6t, it is known what preparations of war were made,
and sent into Scotland ; and what other forces were affem-
bled in foreign countries; yea, in what manner a thameful
peace was made by the French with king Philip to em-
ploy all the forces of Fiance to pursue all the matters by
force which by God's providence, and the queen's ma-

z
2 jeliy

jefly contrary power, were repelled; and afterwards, by
her hufband's death, her fortune and power being chan-
ged, the intention began to hide itself, and although by
the Scottiih queen's commiffaries an accord was made at
Edenbrough, to reform all those titles, and claims, and
pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillations,
the ratification of that treaty hath been deferred. And
so now, as soon as she shall feel her power, fihe will let
the fame again abroad, and by considering of such errors
as were committed in the first, her friends and allies will
amend the fame, and proceed fubitantially to her purpose.
By some it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater
of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a fubjectof
this realm, than with the mightiest prince abroad; for
by this, he being of this realm, and having for the cause
of religion, and other refpeAts, made a party here, should
ericreafe by force with diminution of the power of the
realm, in that whatsoever power he could make by the
faation of the papist, and other discontented persons here,
should be as it were deduaed out of the power of this
realm ; and by the marriage of a firanger, she could not
be assured of any part here; so as by this marriage she
should have a portion of her own power to serve her turn,
and a small portion of adversaries at home in our own
bowels, always seem more dangerous than treble the like
abroad ; whereof the examples are in our own stories
many, that foreign powers never prevailed in this realm,
but with the help of some at home. It was also remerm.
bered, that feeing now before this attempt of marriage, it
is found, and manifefily seen, that in every corner of the
realm, the faAion that most favoureth the Scottish title,
is grown flout and bold, yea seen manifestly in this court,
both in hall and chamber, it could not be but (except
good heed were speedily given to it) by this marriage,
and by the practice of the fautors thereof, the fame sac-
tion would shortly encreafe, and grow so great and danger.
ous, as the redress thereof would be almost desperate. And
to this purpose it was remembered, how of late in per-
using of the Iubftance of the justices of the peace, in all
the countries of the realm, scantily a third was found fully
allured to be trufled in the matter of religion, upon which
only firing the Queen of Scotts title doth hang, and rome
doubt might be, that the friends of the Earl of Lennox,
and his had more knowledge hereof than was thought, and

thereby

thereby made avant now in Scotland, and their Farty was
to great in England as the Queen's majefly durst not at-
tempt to contrary his marriage. And in this fort, was
the fum of the perils declared, being notwithflanding more
largely and plainly set out, and made so apparent by many
sure arguments, as no one of the council could deny
them to be but many, and very dangerous.

Second Question,

THE question of this consultation was what were meet

to be done to avoid these perils, or else to divert the
force thereof from hurting the realm; wherein there were
a great number of particular devises propounded, and yet
the more part of them was reduced by some into three
heads.

1. THE first thought necessary by all persons, as the

only thing of the most moment and efficacy, to remedy
all these perils, and many others, and such as without it,
no other remedy could be found fufficient, and that was
to obtain that the queen's majesty would marry, and make
therein no long delay.

2. THE second was to advance, establish, and fortify

indeed the profeffion of religion, both in Scotland and in
England, and to diminilh, weaken, and feeble the con-
trary,

3. THE third was, to proceed on sundry things, either

to disappoint and break this intended marriage, or, at the
leafs, thereby to procure the fame not to be so hurtful to
this realm, as otherwise it will be.

THE firfit of there three hath no particular rights in it,

but an earnest and unfeigned desire and suite, with all
humbleness, by prayer to Almighty God, and advice and
council to the queen's majesty, that she would differ no
more time from marriage, whereby the good fubje&s of
the realm might flay their hearts, to depend upon her
majesty, and the issue of her body, without which no surety
can be devised to ascertain any person of continuance of
their families or pofterities, to enjoy that which otherwifg
ifould come to them.

SECOND, concerning the matters of religion, wherein

both truth and policy were joined together, had these:
particulars.

Z3 FIRST,

FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion, ir

the realm, have taken occasion to comfort and increase.
their fatlion, both in England, Scotland, and abroad, with
a rumour and expeacation that the religion (hall be shortly
changed in this realm, by means that the bilhops, by
the queen's majesty commandment, have of late dealt
ftreightly with some persons of good religion, because they,
had forborn to wear certain apparel, and such like things,
being more of form and accidents, than of any fubfiance,
for that it is well known that her majesty had no meaning
to comfort the adversaries, but only to maintain anr ni-
formity as well in things external, as in the fubitance,
nor yet hath any intention to riake any change of the re-
ligion, as it is established by laws. It was thought by
all men very necessary, for the suppressing of the pride and
arrogancy of the adversaries, indirecaly hereby to notify,
by her (pecial letters to the two archbifhops, that her
former, commandment was only to retain an uniformity,
and not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge of
her majesty, in the change of any part of religion, but that
she did determine firmly to maintain the form of her reli-
gion, as it was efiablifhed, and to punish such as did
therein violate her laws. And in there points, iome also
wilhed that it might please her archbifhops, that if they,
should fee that the adversaries continued in taking occa-
sion to fortify their faaion, that in that cafe they should,
Use a moderation therein, until the next parliament, at
which time, some good, uniform, and decent order might:
be devised, and eltablifhed, for such ceremonies, so as
both uniformity and gravity might be retained amongst
the clergy.

THE second means was, that the quondam bishops,

and others, which had refused to acknowledge the queen's
majefly's power over them, according to the law, and
were of late dispersed in the plague time to sundry places,
abroad, where it is known they cease not to advance their
fa&ion, might be returned 'to the tower, or some other
prison, where they might not have such liberty to seduce
and inveigle the queen's majefty's fubjec6s, as they daily.
do.

THE third means was, that where the bishops do com-

plain that they dare not execute the ecclesiastical laws, to
the furtherance of religion, for fear of the premunire.
Wherewith the judges and lawyers of the realm, being not

i" * - *

belf affeaed in religion, do threaten them, and in mary
cafes lett not to pinch and deface them, that upon such
cafes opened, some convenient authority might be given
them, from the queen's majesty, to continue during her
pleasure.

THE fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudi-
cious and unlawful books in English brought from beyond
seas, and are boldly received, read, and kept, and efpe-
cially in the north, seducing of great numbers of good
fubjeas, the like boldness whereof was never fuffered in
any other princefs's time, that some fitreight order might be
given to avoid the fame, and that it might be considered
by the judges, what manner of crime the fame is, to
maintain such books, made dire&ly against her majeliy's
authority, and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to
the laws of the realm.

THE fifth was, that where a great number of monks,

fryars, and such lewd persons are fled out of Scotland,
and do serve in England, especially in the North, as curates
of churches, and all such of them as are not found honest
and conformable, may be banished out of the realm, for
that it appeareth they do low sedition in the realm, in
many places, and now will increase their doings.

THE sixth, where sundry having ecclesiastical livings,

are on the other fide the sea, and from thence maintain
sedition in the realm ; that livings may be better befiowed,
to. the commodity of the realm, upon good fubjeas.

THE seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having

no small authority in this realm in governance of all pro-
perty of the realm, might be sworn to the queen's ma-
jefty, according to the laws of the realm, and so thereby
they should for conscience fake maintain the queen's ma-
jefly's authority.

THE particulars of the third intention, to break and

avoid this marriage, or to divert the perils.

FIRST to break this marriage, considering nothing can,

likely do it, but force, or fear of force, it is thought by.
some that these means following might occasion the bieach
of the marriage.

1. THAT the earl of Bedford repair to his charge..
2. THAT the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. THAT the garrison be there increased.

Z 4. THia

4. THAT all the wardens put their frontiers in order

with speed, to be ready at an hour's warning.

5. THAT some noble person, as the Duke of Norfolk,

or the earl of Salop, or such other, be sent into York-
ihire, to be lieutenant-general in the North. ''

6. THAT preparations be made of a power, to be in

readiness to serve, either at Berwick, or to invade Scot:
land.

7. THAT presently lady Lennox be committed to

some place, where she may be kept from giving or re'
ceiving of intelligence.
* 9. THAT the earl of Lennox and his son may be sent
for, and required to be sent home by the queen' of Scots,
according to the treaty; and if they (hall not come, then
to denounce to the queen of Scots the breach of the treal
ty, and thereupon to enter with hoffility; by which pro-
ceeding, hope is conceived (Co the fame be done in deeds
and not in (hews) that the marriage will be avoided, ot
at the least that it may be qualified from many perils; and
whatsoever is to be done herein, is to be executed with
speed, whilflt he has a party in Scotland that favoureth
not the marriage, and before any league made by the
queen of Scots with France or Spain.

SOME other allows well of all these proceedings, saving

of proceeding to hostility, but all do agree in the reft,
and also to these particularities following.

to. THAT the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his fon's

refusing, (hould be seized, and bestowed in gift or custody,
as (hall please her majesty, upon good fubjeas.

I1. THAT all manifest favourers of the earl, in the

North, or elsewhere, be enquired for, and that they be,
by sundry means, well looked to.

12. THAT enquiry be made in the North, who have

the flewardfhip of the queen's majefty's lands there, and
that no person, deserving mifiruft, be fuffered to havd
governance or rule of any of her fubjeAs or lands in the
North, but only to retain their fees, and more trusty
person have rule of the fame people's lands.

13. THAT all frequent passages into this realm, to and

from Scotland, be rectrained to all Scottish men, saving
such as have fafe-condua, or be especially recommended
from Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm. '

14. THAT some intelligence be used with such in

Scot-

Scotland, as favour not the marriage, and they comforted
from time to time.

15. THAT the queen's majefty's houfhold, chamber,

and pensioners, be better seen unto, to avoid broad and
uncomely speech used by sundry against the state of the'
realm.

16. THAT the younger son of the earl of Lennox, Mr.
Charles, be remembered to some place where he may be
forth coming.

17. THAT considering the fa5tion and title of the queen

of Scotts, hath now of long time received great favour,
and conitinued, by the queen's majefty's favour herein to
the queen of Scotts and her miniflers, and the lady Ca-
tharine, whom the said queen of Scotts accompted as a
competor unto her in pretence of title, it may please the
queen's majelfy, by some exterior ad, to flew some re-
mission of her displeasure to the lady, and to the earl of
Hartford, that the queen of Scotts thereby may find some
change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceed-
ing therein.

18. TIHAT whosoever flhall be lieutenant in the North,

Sir Ralph Sadler may accompany him.

19. THAT with speed the realm of Ireland may be
committed to a new governor.

20. FINALLY, that these advices being considered by

her majeffy,'it may please her to choose which of them
ihe liketh, and to put them in execution in deeds, and
not to pals them over in consultations and speeches.

FOR it is to be 'alfured, that her adversaries will use
all means to put their intention in execution. Some by
praftice, some by force, when time shall serve, and no
time can serve so well the queen's majesty to interrupt the
perils, as now at the firlf, before the queen of Scotts pur-
poses be fully fettled.

No. XI. (Vol. I. p. 335.)

Randolph to the earl of Leiceffer, from Edin-

burgh the 3xft of July 1565.

AY it please your lordlhip, I have received your Cott. I;,.

j lordfhip's letter by my servant, fufficient testimony Cal. B. 9.
of your lordfhip's favour towards me, whereof I think ol.o 6.

S

. .. y nal.

my self always so assured, that what other miihap foever'
befal rpe, I have enough to comfort myself with ; though
I have not at this time received neither according to the
need I fiand, nor the neceflity of the service that I am
employed in, I will rather pass it, as I may with pa-
tience, than trouble your lordship to be further futer for
me, when there is so little hope that any good will be
done for me. I doubt not but your lordship hath heard
by such information as I have given from hence, what
the present state of this country is, how this queen is now
become a married wife, and her husband, the felf-fameday
of his marriage, made a king.

• In their desires, hitherto,

they have found so much to their contentment, that if the
reft succeed and prosper accordingly, they may think them-
selves much happier, than there is appearance that they
shall be, so many discontented minds, Co much mifliking
of the fubje6ts to have these matters thus ordered, and in
this fort to be brought to pass; I never heard of any
marriage, Co little hope, so little comfort as men do talk,
was never seen, at any time, when men ihould moat have
%hewed themselves to rejoice, if that consideration of her
own honour and well of her country had been had as ap-
pertained in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear,
the overthrow of religion, the breach of amitie with the
queen's majefly, and the destruction of as many of the no-'
bility as she hath mifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch
a quarrel unto. To fee all these inconveniencys approach-
ing, there are a good number that may sooner lament
with themselves, and complain to their neighbours, than
be able to find remedie to help them, Come attempt with
all the force they have, but are too weak to do any good,
what is required otherways, or what means there is made
your lordship knoweth; what will be answered, or what
will be done, therein, we are in great doubt, and though
your intent be never so good unto us, yet do we so much
fear your delay, that our ruin shall prevent your support
when council is once taken. Nothing so needful, as speedy
execution. Upon the queen's majesty, we wholly de-
pend, in her majefly's hands it standeth to save our lives,
or to fuffer us to perifhi; greater honour her majePfy can-
not have, than in that which lyeth in her majefty's power
to do for us; the sums are not great, the numbers of men,
are not many that we desire; many will daily be found, tho'
(his will be Come charge; men grow dayly, though, at:

th4

this time, I think her majefly shall loose but few; her
friends here being once taken away, where will her ma-
jefly find the like; I speak least of that which I think
ip moilt earnestly intended by this queen, and her husband,
when by him it was lately said, that he cared more for
the papifts in England, than he did for the protefiants in
Scotland ; if therefore, his hopes be To great in the papif*s
of England what may your lordship believe that he think-
eth of the protestants there; for his birth, for his nurri-
tour, for the honour he hath to be of kine to the queen
(ny mistress, if in preferring those that are the queen's ma-
jelfies wor8f fubjeds to those that are her best, he declarethl
what mind he beareth to the queen's majesties self, any
man may fay it is slenderly rewarded, and his duty evil
forgotten; he would now seem td be indifferent to both
the religions, ihe to use her mass, and he to come some-
aimes to the preaching; they were married with all the.
folemnities of the popish time, saving that he heard not
the mars; his speech and talk argueth his mind, and yet
would he fain seem to the world that he were of some re-
ligion; his words, to all men, against whom he conceiv-
eth any displeasure how unjust soever it be, so proud and
(pitfull, that rather he feemeth a monarch of the world,
than he that, not long since, we have seen and known
the lord Darnley; he looketh now for reverence of many
that have little will to give it him; and some there are
that do give it, that think him little worth of it. All ho-
nour that may be attributed unto any man by a wife, he
hath it wholly and fully; all praises that may be spoken of
him, he lacketh not from herself; all dignities that lhe
can indue him with, which are already given and grant-
ed; no man pleafeth her that contenteth not him; and
what may 1 fay more, ihe hath given over to him her
whole will, to be ruled and guided as himself best liketh;
(he can as much prevail with him, in any thing that is
against his will, as your lordship may with me to persuade
that I should hang myself; this last dignity out of hand
to have been proclaimed king, fbe would have it deferred
untill it were agreed by parlianment, or he had been him-
self 21 years of age, that things done in his name might
have the better authority. He would, in no cafe, have
it deferred one day, and either then or never i whereupon
this doubt is risen amongit our men of law whether fihe be-
ing c!ad with a husband, and her husband not twenty-

one

one years, any thing without parliament can be of
strength, that is done between them; upon Saturday at
afternoon, these matters were long in debating. And be-
fore they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night,
by three heralds, at found of the trumpet he was proclaim-
ed king. This was the night before the marriage; this
day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that
were in the toun, were present at the proclaiming of him
again, where no man said so much as Amen, saving his fa-
ther, that cried out aloud God save his queen. The man-
uier of the marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the
morning between five and fix, she was conveyed by divers
of her nobles to the chapell ; the had upon her back the
great mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourn-
ing hood, not unlike unto that, which ihe wore the doul.
full day of the burial of her husband: The was led into
the chapell, by the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there
was ihe left untill her husband came, who also was con-
veyed by the fame lords, the miniffer priests, two, do
there receive them, the bands are asked the third time, and
an infirument taken by a Notour that no man said against
them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might not
proceed. The words were spoken, the rings which were
three, the middle a rich diamond, were put upon her fin-
ger ; they kneel together, and many prayers said over
them, ihe tarrieth out the mars, and he taketh a kiss, and
leaveth her there, and went to her chamber, whither with-
in a space The followeth; and being required, according
to the solemnity, to caff off her cares and leave aside thole
forrowfull garments, and give herself to a more pleasant
life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe for manner
fake than grief of heart, lhe fuffered them that flood
by, every man that could approach, to take out a pin,
and so being committed to her ladies, changed her gar-
ments, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the world, that
it was not lust that moved them to marry, but only the
necessity of her country, not, if God will, long to leave it
deflitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given
of all things to make the worit, would that it ihould be
believed, that they knew each other before that they came
there; I would not your lordship ihould so believe it, the
likelihoods are so great to the contrary, that if it were
possible to fee such an aA done, I would not believe it.
After the marriage followeth commonly great cheer and

dancing:

*dancing: to their dinner they were conveyed by the whole
nobility; the trumpets found; a largess cried; mony
thrown about the house in great abundance, to such as
were happy to get any part ; they dine both at one table,
(he upon the upper hand, there serve her there earls Athole
Sewer, Morton Carver, Craufoord Cup-bearer; there serve
him in like offices, earls Eglington, Caffels, and .Glen-
cairn; after dinner they danced a while, and then retired
themselves till the hour of supper; and as they dined so
do they sup, some dancing there was, and so they go to
bed ; of all this I have written to your lordship I am not
Oculatis testis, to this, but of the verity your lordship
ihall not need to doubt, howsoever I came by it; I was
sent for to have been at the supper, but like a currish or
uncourtly carle I refused to be there; and yet that which
your lordship may think might move me much, to have
had the fight of my mistress, of whom these eighteen days
by juff account I got not a fight, I am-my lord taken by
all that fort as a very evil person, which ip my heart I
*do well allow, and like of myself the better, for yet can
I not find either honeff or good that liketh their doings.
I leave at this time further to trouble your lordship, crav-
ing pardon for my long silence, I have more ado thlan I
am able to discharge, I walk now more abroad by night
than by day, and the day too little to discharge myself of
that which I conceive, or receive in the night. As your
lord(hip, I am sure, is partaken of such letters as I write
to Mr. Secretary, so that I truif that he (hall be to this,
to save me of a little labour, to write the fame again, most
humbly I take my leave at Edinburgh, the last day of
July 1565.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 339.)

Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable

Sir William Cecil knt. her majefty's principal
secretary, and one of her highnefs's privy
council.

AFTER my hearty commendations, this day at noon ad of Sept.

captain Brickwell came hither, who brought with s56s.

him the queen's majefty's letters containing her full re- fpr Oefic
solution, and pleasure for all things he had in charge to Original.
give information of, saving that for the aid of the lords

of

of the congregation, there is nothing determined, or it
the least expressed in the fame letters, and for that pur.
pose received I, this morning, a letter subscribed by the
duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others, craving
to be holpen with 300 harquebufyers out of this garri.
son, for their better defence. And albeit, 1 know right
well the goodness of their cause, and the queen's majefly
our fovereign's good will, and care towards them; and
do also underifand that it were very requilite to have them
holpen, for that now their cause is to be in this manner
decided, and that it now flandeth upon their utter over-
throw and undoing, since the queen's part is at the least
5000, and they not much above ooo1000; besides, that the
queen hath harquebufyers, and they have none, and do
yet want the power that the earl of Arguyle should
bring to them, who is not yet joined with theirs; I have
thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means tso
learn her majefty's pleasure in this behalf, what, and
how, I thall answer them, or otherwise deal in this mat-
ter, sow at this their extreme necessity. For, on the one
fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow,
and the miserable subversion of religion there; and, oi
the other fide, to adventure so great and weighty a mat-
ter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few soldiers, for a small
time) without good warraunte, and thereby to bring, per-
adventure, upon our heads some wilful warrs, and in the
mean time to leave the place unfurnished, (having in the
whole but 800) without any grant of new supply for the
fame; and by that means also, to leave the marches here
the more fubjea to invasion, while in the mean season
stew helps are preparing; to this know not I what to fay
or how to do. And so much more I marvel thereof, as
that having Co many times written touching this matter,
no resolute determination cometh. And so between the
writing, and looking for answer, the occasion cannot past,
but muff needs proceed and have success. God turn it to
his glory; but surely all mens reason hath great cause to
fear it. Such a push it is now come unto, as this little
supply would do much good to advance God's honour, to
continue her majefty's great and careful memory of them,
and to preserve a great many noblemen and gentlemen.
If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your good
will and affection that way I do nothing mistrust, and
herein (hall take such good advice as by any means I can.

I received from these lords two papers inclosed, the effeca
whereof thall appear unto you. For those matters that

,

captain Brickwell brought, I (hall answer you by my
next, and herewith fend you two letters fromt Mr. Ran-
dolph, both received this day. By him you thall hear
that the protestants are retired from Edenborough, fur-
ther off. So I hope your resolution for their aid shall
come in time, if it come with speed, for that they will
not now so presently need them; and so with my hearty
thanks commit you to God. From Berwick, this 2d of
Sept. 1565.

No. 13. (Vol. I. p. 339.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

U PON the advertisements lately received from you, iuSept.

with such other things as came also from the lord s56s.

Scrope and Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole mat- PaperOtfice
ter well considered, we have thus determined. We will,
with all the speed that we can, fend to you 30001. to be
thus used. If you thall certainly underifand that the earl
of Murray hath such want of money, as the imprefting to
him of 1oo0 1. might fland him in stead for the help to
defend himself, you {hall presently let him secretly to un-
derifand, that you will, as of yourself, let him have so
much, and so we will that you let him have, in the most
secret fort that you can, when the said fum (hall come to
you, or if you can, by any good means, advance him
some part there beforehand.

THE other 2ooo0001. you shall cause to be kept whole,

unspent, if it be not that you (hall fee necessary cause to
imprest some part thereof to the now numbers of the
600 footmen and 1oo horsemen; or to the casting out of
wages of such workmen, as by sickness, or otherwise,
ought to be discharged. And where we perceive, by
your sundry letters, the earnest request of the said earl of
Murray and his associates, that they might have, at the
least, 300 of our soldiers, to aid them. And that you also
write, that tho' we would not command you to give them
aid, yet if we would but wink at your doing herein, and
Sfeem to blame you for attempting such things, as you
with the help of others lhould bring about, you doubt

not

not but things would do well; you shall underifand for
a truth, that we have no intention, for many refpe&ts, to
maintain any other princes fubjeats, to take arms againfi
their sovereign ; neither would we willingly do any thing
to give occasion to make wars betwixt us and that prince,
- which has caused us to forbear, hitherto, tb give you any
power to let them be aided with any men. But now,
considering we take it, that they are pursued, notwith-
flanding their humble submission, and offer to be ordered
and tried by law and justice, which being refused to them,
they are retired to Domfrefe, a place near our weft
marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves, and
adding thereunto the good intention that presently the
French king pretendeth, by sending one of his to join
with some one of ours, and jointly to treat with that
queen,' and to induce her to forbear this manner of vio-
lent and rigorous proceeding against her fubjec~s, foi
which purpose, the French ambassador here with us has
lately written to that queen, whereof answer is daily
looked for, to the intent in the mean time the said lords
should not be oppressed and ruined, for lack of some help
to defend them, we are content and do authorize, if you
ihall fee it necessary for their defence, to let them (as of
your own adventure, and without notifying that you have
any direction therein from us) to have the number of 300
soldiers, to be taken either in whole bands, or to be
drawn out of all your bands, as you {hall fee cause. And
to cover the matter the better, you {hall fend these num.
bers to Carlisle, as to be laid there in garrison, to defend
that march, now in this time that such powers are on the
other part drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence
as you (hall fee cause to dired of, the fame numbers or
any of them may most covertly repair to the said lords,
when you (hall expressly advertize, that you fend them that
aid only for their defence, and not therewith to make war
against the queen, or to do any thing that may offend her
person, wherein you (hall so precisely deal with them, that
they may perceive your care to be such as if it Ihould
otherwise appear, your danger ihould be so great, as all
the friends you have could not be able to save you towards
us. And so we assure you our conscience moveth us to
charge you, so to proceed with them; for otherwise than
to preserve them from ruin, we do not yield to give them
'aid of money or men : And yet we would not that either

6tdthefe were known to be our a&, but rather to be co*
vered with your own desire and attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 350.)

Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb.

1565-6.

M Y humble duty considered ; what to write of the An Ori.

present state of the country I am so uncertain, by "ina"l

reason of the daily alterations of mens minds, that it
maketh me much flower than otberwife I would. Within
these few days, there was some good hope, that this queen
would have fhewed some favour towards the lords, and
that Robert Melvin (hould have returned unto them with
comfort, upon some conditions. Since that time, there
are come out of France Clernau by land, and Thorneton
by sea; the one from the cardinal, the other from the
bilhop of Glasgow. Since whose arrival neither can there
be good word gotten, nor appearance of any good in-
tended them, except that they be able to perfwade the
queen's majesty our sovereign to make her heir apparent
to the croun of England. I write of this nothing less
than I know, that (he hath spoken. And by all means
that she thinketh the best doth travaile to bring it to pals.
There is a band lately devised, in which the late pope, the
emperor, the king ot Spain, the duke of Savoy, with di-
vers princes of Italy, and the queen mother fufpeded to
be of the fame confederacy to maintain papistry through-
out Chriftiandom ; this band was Cent out of France by
Thorneton, and is subscribed by this queen, the copy
thereof remaining with her, and the principal to be re-
turned very (hortlie as I hear by Mr. Stephen Willfon, a
fit minister for such a devilish devise ; if the coppie here-
of may be gotten, that (hall be sent as I conveniently may.
Monsieur Rambollet came to this toun upon Monday, he
spoke that night to the queen and her husband, but not
leng; the next day he had long conferences with them
both, but nothing came to the knowledge of any whereof
they intreated. I cannot speak with any that hath any
hope that there will be any good done for the lords by'
him, though it is said that he hath very good will to do so
to the uttermost of his power. He is lodged near to the
court, and liveth upon the queen's charges. Upon Sun-

VoL. II. A a day

day the order is given, whereat means made to many to
be present that day at the mars. Upon Candlemas day
there carried their candles, with the queen, her husband,
the earl of Lennox, and earl Athol; divers other lords
have been called together and required to be at the mals
that day, some have promised, as Caflels, Mongomerie,
Seton, Cathnefs. Others have refused, as Fleming, Le-
vingiton, Lindsay, Huntley and Bothel; and of them all
Bothel is the stoutest, but worik thought of; it was
moved in council that mars (hould have been in St. Giles
church, which I believe was rather to tempt men's minds,
than intended indeed : She was of late minded again to
fend Robert Melvin to negotiate with such as ihe truffteth
in amongst the queen's majefty's fubjeas, of whose good
willis this way I trust that the bruit is greater than the
truth, but in there matters, her majesty is too wife not
in time to be ware, and provide for the worst; ome in
that country are thought to be privie unto the bands and
confederacie of which I have written, where of lam sure
there is lome things, tho' perchance of all I have not
heard the truth ; in this court divers quarles, contentions,
and debates; nothing so much fought as to maintain mif-
chief and disorder. David yet retaineth flill his place,
not without heart grief to many, that fee their sovereign
guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly
refused to do any good to my lord of Argyll, and it is
said that (hall be the first voyage that the will make after
the is delivered of being with child; the bruit is common
that ihe is, but hardly believed of many, and of this, I
can assure you, that there have of late appeared some to-
kens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 359.)

Part of a letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr.

Tho. Randolph to the lords of the council of
England from Barwick, 27th of March, 1566.
An Original in the Cotton Library, Caligula B.

o0. fol. 372.

May it please your Honours,

7trhMarch, TT E A R I N G of so maynie matters as we do, and
1566. J-- fyndinge such varietie in the reports, we have

myche ado to decerne the veritie: which maketh us the

flower

flower and loother to put any thing in wryting, to the
entente we wold not that your honours, and by you the
queen's majeftie, our fovereigne, should not be advertiled
but of the verie trothe as we can poelible. To this end
we thought good to fend up captain Carewe, who was in
Edinbourge at the tyme of the last attemptate, who spoke
there with diverse, and after that with the queen's self
and her husband conforme to that, which we have learned
by others, and know by this reporte, we fend the fame,
confirmed by the parties self, that were there present and
affyfiters unto these that were executors of the a6te.

Tals we fynde for certain, that the queen's husband

being entered into a vehement suspicion of David, that by
hym some thynge was committed, which was most agaynfle
to the queen's honour, and not to be borne of his perte,
fyrfie communicated his mynde to George Doglas, who
fynding his sorrows To great fought all the means he
coulde to put Come remedie to his griefs; and communi-
cating the fame unto my lord Ruthen by the king's com-
mandment, no other waye coulde be found then that
David thould be taken out of the waye. Wherein he
was so earnest and daylye preffcd the fame, that no refte
could be had untyll it was put in execution. To this
that was found good, that the lord Morton, and lord Lind-
faye should be made privie to th' intente that theie might
have their friends at hande, yf neade required ; which
caused them to affimble Co mayny, as theie thought sus-
ficient againlt the tyme, that this determination of theirs
thould be put in executione; which was determined the
ixth of this inftante 3 daies afore the parliament should
begyne, at which time the fayde lords were aflured that
the erles Argyle, M )rraye, Rothes and their complyces
Jholde have been forfeited, yf the king could not be per-
fuaded through this means to be their friends ; who for
the defyre he had that this intent should take effea th'
one waye, was content to yielde, without all difficultie
to t'other, with this condition, that theie flhould give
their consents, that he might have the ciowne matrimo-
nial. He was Co impatient to fee these things he saw, and
were daylye brought to his eares, that he dayly pressed
the said lord Ruthen, that there might be no longer de-
lay; and to the intent that myght manifefie unto the wcr'd,
that he approved the ade, was content to be at the doing
of that himself.

UPON

Aaz2

UPON Saturdaye at night neire unto viin of the clock

the king conveyeth himself, the lord Ruthen, George
Duglars, and two others, throwe his own chamber by
the privy stayers up to the queen's chamber going to
which there is a cabinet about xil foot square; in the
fame a little low reposing bed and a table, at the which
theyr were fitting at supper the queene, the lady Ar-
gile, and David with his capp upon his head. Into the
cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen, who
willed David to come forth, saying, that was no place
for him. The queen said, that it was her will. Her
howfband anfwerede, that yt was again(} her honour.
The lord Ruthen said, that he thould lerne better his
deutie, anJ offering to have taken him by the arm, David
took the queen by the blychtes of her gown and put
himself behind the queen who wolde gladlee have saved
him: But the king having loosed his hand, and hold-
ing her in his arms, David was thrust out of the cabi-
net throw the bed chamber into the chamber of pre-
sens, whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who in-
tending that night to have reserved hym, and the next day
to hang him, Co mane being about him, that bore him
evil will, one thrust him into the boddie with a dagger,
and after hym a gieat many others, Co that he had in his
bodie above wonds. It is told for certayne, that
the king's own dagger was left flicking in him. Whea.
ther he stuck him or not we cannot be here certayn. He
was not flayne in the queen's prefens, as was said, but
going down the flayres out of the chamber of prefens.

THERE remayned a long tyme with the queen her hows.

band and the lord Ruthen. She made, as we here, great
interceflion, that he fhold have no harm. She blamed
greatlee her howfband that was thee aalor of To foul a
deed. It is said, that he did answer, that David had
more companie of her boddie than he for the space of two
months; and therefore for her honour and his own con-
tentment he gave his consent that he (hould be taken
away. " It is not," (faythe the) " the woman's part to leek
" the hufband," and therefore in that the fault was his
own. He said that when he came, the either wold not
or made herself sick. " Well," faythe the, " you hate
*' taken your last of me and your farewell." Then were
pity, fayth the Lord Ruthen, he is your majefty's hus-
band and muff yield dutie to each other. " Why may

' 1

t' I not," faythe the, " leave him as well as your wife
" did her husband ?" Other have done the like. The lord
Ruthen said that she was lawfully divorced from her hus-
band, and for no such cause as the king found himself
greve. Befydes this man was mean, baile, enemieto the
nobility, shame to her, and deflruition to herself and
country. " Well," faith the, " that shall be dear blude
" to Tome of you, yf his be fpylt." God forbid, fayth
the lord Ruthen; for the more your grace fhowe yourself
offended, the world will judge the worse.

HER husband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself conti-

nually weepeth. The lord Ruthen being ill at ease and
weak calleth for a drink, and faythe, " This I must do
" with your majesties pardon," and perfuadeth her in
the best fort he could, that she would pacify herself. No-
thing that could be said, could please her.

IN this mean time there role a nombre in the court;

to pacify which there went down the lord Ruthen, who
went fitrayt to the erles Huntly, Bothweil and Atholl to
quiet them, and to assure them from ihe king that no-
thing was intend against them. These notwithfianding
taking fear, when theie heard that my lord Murray
wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Hunt-
ly and Bothwell both get out of a window and so depart.
Atholl had leave of the king with Fl)fh and Glandores
(who was lately called Deyfley the person of Owne) to
go where they wold, and bring concordie out of the court
by the lord of Lidington. Theie went that night to such
places, where they thought themselves in most fauftie.

BEFORE the king least talk with the queen, in the her-

ing of the lord Riithen (he was contents that he flhould lie
with her that night. We know not how he * * himself,
but came not at her, and excused hymfelf to his friends,
that he was so fleepie, that he could .ot wake in due
season.

THERE were in this companie two that came in with
the king; the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide, whom
the queen fayth would have firoken her with a dagger, and
one Patrick Balentine, brother to the justice clerk, who
also her grace fayth, offered a dag against her belly with
the cock down. We have been earnefilv in hand with
the lord Ruthen to know the varitie; but he affoureth us
of the contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber
the lord Robert, Arthur Arfkin, one or two others.

Aa They

They at the firfl offering to make a defence, the lord Ruth.
yen drawd his darger, and 4 mo weapons then, that were
not drawn nor seen in her prefens, as we are by this lord
afn'ured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight

to Dunbar Castle, whither resorted unto the lords Huntley
and Bothwell: That the earl of Morton and lord Ruth-
ven find themselves left by the king for all his fair pro.
mites, bonds, and subscriptions. That he had protested
before the council, that he was never consenting to the
death of David, and that it is fore against his will: " That
" of the great substance David had there is much spoken,
'' some fay in gold to the value of I mL. His apparel
" was very good, as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hose.
" His chamber well furni(hed, arm ,ur, dagger, pyfto.
" letts, harquebufes, 22 swords. Of all this nothing
" fpoyld or lacked saving 2 or 3 dagger. He had the
"* custody of all the queen's letters, which all were deli-
" vered unlooked upon. We hear of a juill, that he had
" hanging about his neck of some price, that cannot be
(' heard of. He had upon his back, when he was flayn,
" a night gown of damask furred, with a fatten doublet,
»' a hose of ruilet velvet."J

No. XVI. (Vol. I. p. 368.)

Part of a Letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. 16,

1565-6,

-- I CANNOT tell what mifliking of late there hath

j been between her grace and her husband, he

preifth earnefily for the matrimonial crown, which Ihe
is loth hastily to grant ; but willing to keep fomewhatin
store, until ihe know how well he is worth to enjoy such
a sovereignty : and therefore it is thought that the par.
liament for a time (hall be deferred, but hereof 1 can
write no certainty.

From Mr, Randolph's letter to secretary Cecil,

4 April, T- - HE juflice-clerk in hard terms, more for his bro-
,I6s pa- J ther's cause than any desert, and as far as I can hear
,o m the' the king of all other in worst, for neither hath the queen
Orlginl, S0o4

good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that
wds againfl her will, nor the people that he hath denied
so manifest a matter, being proved to be done by his com-
mandment, and now himself to be the accuser and pur-
suer of them that did as he willed them. This Scott, that
was executed, and Murray that was yesterday arreigned,
were both accused by him. It is written to me, for cer-
tain, by one, that upon Monday last spoke with the
queen, that /he is determined that the house of Lennox
(ha]l be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl
continueth sick, fore troubled in mind; he ftaith in the
abby, his son hath been once with him, and he once
with the queen, since the came to the caftl'e. The queen
hath now seen all the covenants and bands that pafled be-
tween the king and the lords, and now findeth that his
declaration, before her and council, of his innocency of
the death of David was false; and grievously offended
that, by their means, he should seek to come to the
crown matrimonial.

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Ber-

wick, 2$ April, 1566.

- r'T HERE is continually very much speech of the

.l dilcord between the queen and her husband,

so for that, that is commonly said and believed of him-
self, that Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to sue
for a divorce between them. It is very certain that Ma-
levafier had not spoken with him within there three days.
He is neither accompanied nor looked upon of any noble-
man: attended upon by certain of his own servants, and
fix or seven of the guard ; at liberty to do, and go where
and what he will, there have no hope yet among them-
selves of quietness.

- DAVID's brother named Joseph, who came this
way with Malevafier, unknown to any man here, is be.
come secretary in his brother's place.

No. XVII.

Aa 4

No. XVI[. (Vol. I. p. 372.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d Auguff, xi66.
T HE queen and her husband agree after the old man-

ner, or rather worse. She eateth but very feldorn

with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him, nor
]oveth any such as love him. He is so far out of her
books, as at 1ri4 going out of the Cafile of Edinburgh,
to remove abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It cannot
for modesty, nor with the honour of a queen, be reported
what flhe said of him. One Hickman, an Englifli mer-
chant there, having a water spaniel which was very good,
gave him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards, for the
pleasure, which he saw the king have in such kind of
dogs, gave him to the king. The queen thereupon fell
marvellously out with Melvill, and called him dissembler
and flatterer, and said the could not truss one, who
would give any thing to such one as the loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, Aug. 8.

T H E disagreement between the queen and her hus-

band continueth, or rather increafeth. Robert

Melvill drawing homewards, within twelve miles of
Edinburgh, could not tell where to find the queen; sith
which time the is come to Edinburgh, and had not twelve
horses attending on her. There was not then, nor that
I can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman
in her company. The king her husband is gone toDum,
fermling, and paffeth his time as well as he may; having
at his farewell, such countenance as would make a hus-
band heavy at the heart.

Sir John Foffer to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick,
T HE queen hath her husband in small efiimation,

and the earl of Lennox came not in the queen'.

f ght since the death of Davy.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, I Ith Dec,

T HE earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the am-

baffadors, and all things for the christening are at

his lordfhip's appointment, and the fame is scarcely well
liked of the nobility, as is said. The king and queen
is presently at Craigmillar, but in little greater familia-
rity than he was all the while pas*.

Advertisements out of Scotland from the earl of

Bedford.

T HAT the king and the queen agreed well together Auguf,

two days, after her coming from - , and after 15l6, Paper

my lord of Murray's coming to Edinburgh, some new office,from,
discord has happened. The queen hath declared to my the original.
lord of Murray that the king bears him evil will, and
has said to her, that he is determined to kill him, find-
ing fault that the doth bear him so much company : and
in like manner hath willed my lord of Murray to fpiere
it at the king, which he did a few nights since in the
queen's presence, and in the hearing of divers. The
king confeffed, that reports were made to him, that
my lord of Murray was not his frieni, which made)')m
speak that thing he repented; and the queen affirmed,
that the king had spoken such words unto her, and con-
sessed before the whole house, that the could not be con-
tent that either he or any other thould be unfriend to my
lord of Murray. My lord of Murray enquired the fame
ifoutly, and used his speech very modefily, in the mean
time the king departed very grieved ; he cannot bear that
the queen should use familiarity either with man or wo-
man, and especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and
Marre, who keep most company with her. My lord of
Murray and Bothwell have been at evil words for the L.
of Ledington, before the queen, for he and Sir James Bal-
foure had new come from Ledington, with his answer up-
on such heads or articles as Bothwell and he should agree
upon, which being reported to the laid earl in the queen's
presence, made answer, that ere he parted with such
jands as was desired, he thould part with 1his life. My

lord

lord of Murray said Pfoutly to him, that twenty as honet
men as he should lore their lives ere he reafte Leding-
ton. The queen fpakenothing, but heard both; in thefre
terms they parted, and since, that I hear of, have not met.
The queen after her hunting came to Edinburgh, and
carryeth the prince thence to Stirling with her. This
last Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Ruth-
ven's, who confeffed that he was in the cabinet, but not
of council of the fa&. The queen hath also opened to
my lord of Murray, that money was lent from the pope,
how much it was, and by whom, and for what purpose
it was brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. I. p. 389.)

Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20,

1569. A copy interlined by Cecil. It contains
an answer to a complaining letter of Mary's
upon the imprisoning of the Bishop of Ross.

- A FTER this [i. e. Mary's landing in Scotland]

Show patiently did I bear with many vain de-

lays in not ratifying the treaty accorded by your own com-
miffioners, whereby I received no small unkindness, be.
sides the manifold causes of fulpicion that I might not
hereafter trufi to any writings. Then followed a hard
manner of dealing with me, to entice my fubje& and near
kinsman, the lord Darnly, under colour of private suits
for land, to come into the realm, to proceed in treaty of
marriage with him without my knowledge, yea to con-
clude the fame without my assent or liking. And how
many unkind parts accompanied that fact, by receiving of
my fubjedts that were base runnegates and offenders at
home, and enhancing them to places of credit against my
will with many such like, I will leave for that the re-
membrance of the fame cannot but be noyfome to you,
And yet all there did I as it were suppress and overcome
with my natural inclination of love towards you; and
did afterwards gladly, as you know, chrifften your fen,
the child of my said kinsman, that had before so unloyally
offended me, both in marriage of you, and in other un-
dutiful usages towards me his sovereign. How friendly
also dealt I by messages to reconcile him, being your hus.

band,

band, to you, when others nourished discord betwixt
you, who as it seemed had more power to work their pur-
poses, being evil to you both, than I had to do you good,
in refpeC of the evil I had received. Well I will over-
pa(s your hard accidents that followed for lack of follow-
ing my council. And then in your mofil extremity, when
you was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of your life from
your notorious evil willers, how far from my mind was
the remembrance of any former unkindness you had fhewed
me. Nay how void was I of refpe& to the designs which
the world had seen attempted by you to my crown, and
the security that might have ensued to my slate by your
death, when I finding your calamity to be great, that
you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft your
life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threatened
some as were irritated against you, that I only may fay
it, even I was the ptinc'\pa\ cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 408.)

Letter of Q. Elizabeth to Q. of Scotts. Thus

marked on the back with Cecil's hand.-Copia.
Literarum RegiLe Majeftatis ad Reginam Scotorum.
ViIi0. Aprilis.

M" ADAME, vous ayant trop molefte par M. de PAperoict.

Crocq, je n'euffe eu si peu de consideration de vous

fafcher de cette lettre, si les liens de charite vers les ruinez,
et les pieres des miferables ne m'y contraignaffent. Je en-
tens que un edit a ete divulgue de par vous, madame, que
ung chafcun, que veult justifier que ons efle les meurtriers
de votre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viennent a le faire
le xIime de ce mois. La quelle chose, comme c'eft plus
honorable et neceffaire, qui en tel cas fe pourra faire, ne
y eltant cacbh quelque miftere ou fineffe, ainfi le pere et
amis du mort gentelhomme m'ont humblement requis,
que je vous priaffe de prolongue le jour, pource qu'ile
cognoiffent que les iniques fe font combines par force de
faire ceque par droi& ils ne pourront pas faire; partant,
je ne puis mais finon pour l'amour de vous meme, a qui il
touche le plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de
vous exhorter le leur conceder cette requefie, laquelle, si
Jle les feroit ni' vous tourneroit grandement en foupcon,

de

de plus que j'efpere ne penfez, et que ne voudriez volon-
tiers ouyr. Pour l'amour de Dieu, madame, ufez de telle
fincerite & prudence en ce cas qui vos touche de si pres,
que tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comme in-
nocente d'ung crime si enorme, chose que si ne ifites, feriez
dignement efbloye hors de rancz de princesses, & non fans
cause faite opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela vous
avienne, je vous fouhaiterois une sepulture honorable,
qu'une vie maculee ; vous voiez madame, que je vous traite
comme ma fille, et vous promets, que si j'en euffe, ne luy
fouhaiterois mieulz, que je vous desire, comme le Seigneur
Dieu me porte tefmoignage, a qui je prie de bon cteur de
vous inspirer a faire ce qui vous lera plus a honneur, et
a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordialles
recommendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plus
de bien, qui vous pourra en ce monde avenir. De Weft.
ce 8 jour de Janvier * en haste.

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. 423.)

A letter from England concerning the murder of

king Henry Darnley.

E.os Mor- AVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark,
tnhies. r

. I tho't good to write a few words unto you. I have

BndnleB. recd. some writs from you; and some I have seen lately
No. 25. sent others from you, as namely to the earl of Bedford of

the 16th of May. I have participat the contents thereof to
such as I thought meet, this mekle I can assure you; the
intelligence given hither by the French was untrue, for
there was not one papist nor proteflant which did not con-
sent that justice fhou'd be done, be the queen my fovns. aid
and support, againff such as had committed that abomin-
able ill murder in your country ; but to fay truth, the lack
and coldness did not rife from such as were called to coun-
cil, but from such as should give life and execution
thereunto. And further, I assure you, I never knew no
matter of efiate proponed which had so many favourers of
all forts of nations as this had : yea, Ican fay unto you,
no man promoted the matter with greater affedion, than

* A mirtake in the date correaed with Cecil's hand VIIIO,

Aprilis,.

the Spanilh ambassador. Arid sure I am that no man dare
openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that whoso-
ever is guilty of this murder, handfafted with advoutre,
is unworthy to live. I ihall not need to tell you, which
be our letts, and flayes from all good things here. You
are acquainted with them as well as I. Neds I must con-
fess, that howsoever we omit occasions of benefit, ho-
nour, and surety ; it behoveth your whole nobility, and
namely such as before, and after the murder, were deemed
to allow of Bodwell, to prosecute with sword and jufiice
the punilhment of those abominable aAs, though we lend
you but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both
honourable and honeit, be well known to me, and fun-
dry others here, to be justifiable in all their actions and
doings; yet think not the contrary but your whole nation
is blemilhed and infamit by these doings which lately passed
among 'ou. What we (hall do I know not, neither do I
write unto you alfuredly, for we be fubje6 unto many muta-
tions, and yet 1 think we (hall either aid you, or conti-
nue in the defence and safeguard of your prince, so as it
appear to us that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not
to ruin the fortune of France, which will be your own
deftrudion, if you be unadvised. I know not one, no not
one of any quality or estate in this country, which does
allow of the queen your sovereign, but would gladly the
world were rid of her, so as the fame were done without
farther slander, that is to fay by ordinary justice. This
I fend the 23d of May.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 434.)

Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton

to Cecil, IIth of July, 1567, from Berwick.

-C IR, your letter of the 6th of July, I received the An Org;i-

aJ loth at Berwick. I am sorry to fee that the nal.

queen's majelty's disposition altereth not towards the PaperOffice.
lords, for when all is done, it is they which muf ftland
her more in flead, than the queen her cousin, and will
be better instruments to work some benefite and quiet-
ness to her majefly and her realm, than the queen of Scot-
land which is void of good fame.

A let-

A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil

from Faftcaftle, 12th of July, 1567.

PaperOfice. LdIR, as you might perceive by my letter of the Ilth

SJuy, I lodged at Faftcaflle that night, accompanyed

with the lord Hume, the lord of Ledington, and James',
Melvin, where I was intreated very well, according to the
slate of that place, which is fitter to lodge prisoners than
folks at liberty, as it is very little, Co it is very fitrong.
By the conference I have had with the lord of Ledington
I find the lords his associates and he hath left nothing un-
thought of, which may be either to thir danger, or work
them surety, wherein they do not forget what good and
harme France may do them, and likewise they confider
the fame of England ; but as farr as I can perceive, to
be plain with yow, they find more perril to grow unto
them through the queens majeflys dealing than either they
do by the French, or by any contrary faction amongeft
themselves, for they assure themselves the queen will leave
them in the bryers if they run her fortoun, and though
they do acknowledge great benefit as well to them, as to
the realm of England by her majefly's doings at Leith,
whereof they fay mutually her majesty and both the realms
have received great fruit: yet upon other accidents which
have chanced since, they have observed such things in her
majefty's doings, as have ended to the danger of such as
The hath dealt withal, to the overthrow of your own design-
ments, and little to the surety of any party: and upon these
considerations and discourses at length, methinketh I find
a disposition in them, that'either they mind to make their
bargain with France, or else to deal neither wirth France
nor yow, but to do what they shall think meet for their
iflate and surety, and to use their remedy as occasions shall
move them i meaning neither to irritate France nor Eng-
land, untill such time as they have made their bargain as-
furedly with one of yow ; for they think it convenient to
proceed with yow both for a while pari paffu, for that
was my lord of Ledington's terms. I do perceave they
take the matter very unkindly, that no better answer is
made to the letter, which the lords did fend to her majefly,
and likewise that they hear nothing from yow to their fa-
tisfalAion, I have answered as well as I can, and have al-
ledged their own proceedings so obfcurly with the queen,

and

and theiruncertainty hath occationed this that is yet hap-
pened, and therefore her Majesty hath sent me to the end
1 may inform her throughly of the slate of the matters, and
upon the declaration of their minds and intents to such
purposes as shall be by me proposed on their majestys be-
half unto them, they flhall be reasonably and resolutely an-
fwered. At these things the lord of Ledington (miled and
lhook his head, and said it were better for us yow would
tel us alone, than neither to do us nor yourselves good, as
I fear me in the end that will prove; S' if there be any
truth in Ledington, la Crocq is gone to procure Ram-
boilet is coming hither or a man of like quality, and to
deliver them of their queen for ever, who shall lead her life
in France in a abby reclufed, the prince at the French
devotion, the realm governed by a council of their elec-
tion of the Scottiih nation, the forts committed to the
custody of such as shall be chosen amongit themselves, as
yet I find no great likelihood that I ihall have access to the
queen, it is objedted they may not so displease the French
king, unless they were sure to find the queen of England
a good friend; and when they once by my access to the
queen have offended the French, then they fay yow will
make your profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the
queen's liberty, which was the firft.head that I proposed,
they said that thereby they did perceive that the queen
wants their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it
was but folly to tlk of them the liberty going before ;
but said they, if you will do us no good, do us no harm,
and we will provide for our selves. In the end they said,
we ihould refuse our own commodity, before they con-
cluded with any other, which I thould hear of at my
coming to Edin'

, by my neGt I hope to fend yow the

band concluded by Hamiltons, Argyll, Huntiy, and that
facion, not so much to the prejudice of the lords of Edin',
as that which was sent into France; thus having no more
leasure but compelled to leap on horseback with the lords
to go to Edinr, I humbly take my leave of from Falf-
cafile the 12th of July 1567.

To Sir Nicolas Throgmorton being in Scotland;

By the queen, the i4th July 1567.

RUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though
we think that the causes will often charge upon va-

riety of accidents, yet we think for sundry refpeds, not
amiss, that as yow (hall deal with the lords having charge
of the young prince for the committing of him into our
realm, so (hall yow also do well, in treaty with the queen,
to offer her that where her realmn appeareth to be fubjea
to sundry troubles from time to time, and thereby (as itis
manifefi) her son cannot be free, if the [hall be contented
that her son may enjoy fuerty and quietness, within this
our realm, being so near as (he knows it is; we shall not
faill to yield her as good fuerry therein for her child, as
can be devised for any that might be our child born of
our own body, and shall be glad to {hew to her therein
the trew effe6t of nature ; and herein (he may be by yow
remembered how much good may ensue to her son to be
nourithed and acquainted with our country; and there-
fore all things considered, this rccafion for her child,
were rather to be fought by her and the friends of him,
than offered by us; and to this end, we mean that yow
shall so deal with her, both to stay her indeed from in-
clining to the French praaice, which is to us notorious,
to convey her and the prince into France, and also to
avoid any julf offence, that (he might hereafter Conceive,
if the (hould hear that we should deal with the lords for
the prince.

Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth,

i4th July 1567, from Edinburgh.

Anorigmnal. TT may please your majesty to be advertised, I did figni-
PaperOffice. 1 fie unto Mr. Secretary by my letters of the xIth and

12th of July, the day of mine entry into Scotland, the
causes of my flay, my lodging at Faftcaflle, a place of the
lord Hume's, where I was met by the said lord and by the
lord Lidingdon, and what had passed in conference be-
twixt us, whileft I was at the said Faficaftle. Since
which time, accompanyed with the lords aforesaid, and
with 400 horses by their appointment for my better con.

du8,

du&, I came to Edin' the 12th of this present. The r 3th
being Sunday appointed for a folemne communion in this
town, and also a folemne fast being published, I could
hot have conference with the lords which he assembled
within this town as I desired, that is to fay the earls of
Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of Liding-
tdh, Sir James Balfour captain of the caffle, Mr. James
M'G'i\, and the president of the fefion.

NEVERTHELESS I made means by the Idrd of Liding-

ton that they would use no protra6te of time in mine au-
dience, so did I likewise to the earle of Morton, whonr I
met by chance; I was answered by them both, that albeit
the day were destined to sacred exercises, such as were
there of the council would consult upon any moyen touch-
ing my access unto them and my conference with them,
and said also, that in the afternoon either they Would come
to me, or Ilhould hear from them. About 4 of the clock
in the afternoon, the said 13th day, the lord of Liding-
ton came to my lodgings, and declared unto me on the
behalf of the lords and others, that they required me to
have patience, though they had defferred my conference with
them, .which was grounded principally upon the absence
of the earles of Mar and Glencairn, the lords Semple,
Crighton, and others of the council, saying also that they
did confider the matters which I wason your behalf
to treate with them of, were of great importance, as they
could not satisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor
give me answer without the advice of the lords, and others
their associates; the lord of Lidington also said unto me,
that where he perceived, by his private conference with'
me in my journey hitherwards, that I pressed greatly to
have speedy access to the queen their sovereign, he per-
ceived, by the lords and others which were here, that in
that matter there was great difficulty for many refpeas, but
specially because they had refused to the French ambaffa-
dor the like access, which being granted unto me, might
greatly offend the French, a matter which -they desired
and intended to eschew ; for they did not find by your mha-
jefly's dealings with them hitherto, that it behoved them to
irritate the French king, and to loose his favour and good
intelligence with him : I answered, that as to their refusal
made unto the French ambassador, monsieur de Ville
Roye was dispatched forth of France before there acci-
dents here happened, and his special errand was to impeach

VOL. II. B b the

the queen's marriage with the earle of Bothel (for Co In*
deed since my coming hither I learned his commission
tended to that end, and to make offer to the queen of an-
other marriage), and as to monsieur de Crocq, he could
have no order forth of France concerning these matters
since they happened I and therefore they might very well
hold them fufpeated to have conference with the queeg
least they might treate of matters in this time without inm
flru6ions, and so rather do harm then good ; but your wta-
jefty being advertized of all things which had chanced, had
sent me hither to treat with them, for the well of the realm,
for the conservation of their honors and credit, and for
their surety; and I might boldly fay unto him, thatyour
majesty had better deserved than the French had. He
said, for his own part, he was much bound unto your ma-
jefly, and had always found great favour and courtesy in
England, but to be plain with you, Sir, fayed he, there is
not many of this assembly that have found so great obliga.
tion at the queen your sovereigns hands, as at the French
kings, for the earles of Morton and Glencairn be theonly
persons which took benefit by the queens majestys aid at
Leith, the reft of the noblemen were not in the action;
and we think, said he, the queens majesty your sovereign,
by the opinion of her own council, and all the world, took
as great benefit by that charge as the realm of Scotland,
or any particular person; and not to talk with yow asan
ambassador, but with Sir Nicolas Throgmorton, my lord
Morton, and such as were in pain for the death of Davie,
found but cold favour of the queens majeflys hands, when
they were banished forth of their own country; but I
would all our whole company were as well willing to ac.
complifh the queen your sovereign intents and desires as
I am; for mine own part, I am but one, and that of the
meanest fort, and they be many noblemen and such as
have great interest in the matter, mary yow shall be assured
I will imploy m self to imploy my credit, and all that I
may do, to fatisfie the queen your mistress, as much as
lyeth in me, and for your own part you have a great
many friends in this aflembly, with many other good
words. But for conclusion I muff take this for an answer
to flay untill the other lords were come, and thereupon I
thought meet to advertize your majefly what hath passed,
and how far forth I have proceeded i your expectation
being great to hear from hence.

AND now to advertize your majefly of the state of all

things, as I have learned since my coming hither, it may
please your majesty to understand as followeth.

THE queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the

castle of Lochleven, guarded by the lord Linfay and Loch-
leven the owner of the houle ; for the lord Ruthven is im-
ployed in another commission, because he began to show
great favour to the queen, and to give her intelligence.
She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys, 4 or 5 gentlewomen,
and 2 chamberers, whereof one is a French woman. The
earle of Buchan, the earl of Murray's brother, hath also
liberty to come to her at his pleasure; the lords aforesaid,
which have her in guard, doe keep her very fitraitly, and
as far as I can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their
order from there men, because that the queen will not by
any means be induced to lend her authority to prosecute
the murder, nor will not cqonent by any perfwafion to
abandon the lord Bothell for her husband, but avoweth
constantly that the will live and die with him; and faith
that if it were put to her choice to relinquihi her crown
and kingdom, or the lord Bothell, the would leave b*'
kingdom and dignity, to go as a fimpie damfell v'th
him, and that the will never consent that he ihai' fare
worse or have more harm than herself.

AND as far as I can perceive, the principal cae of her

detention is, for that these lords do fee the Veen being
q,( Ca (etest affEiotn towards the earle Botyll as the is,
and being put at, as they ihould be conlled to be in
continuall arms, and to have occasion of .tany battles, he
being with manifest evidence notoriouy dete&ed to be
the principall murderer, and the lord' meaning profecu-
tion ofjuftice againfi him accordingto his merits.

THE lords mean also a divorcE betwixt the queen and

him, as a marriage not to be fidfered for many refpeas,
wkAi~ck faation. c.annot take place if the queen be at li-
berty, and have power in het hands.

THEY do not also forget their ow, perill, conjoin'd

with the danger of the prince, but as far as I can per-
ceave, they intend not either to touch the queen in fuerty
or in honor, for they do fpedk of her with refpet and re-
verence, and do affirm, S I do learn, that the condi-
tions aforesaid accomrr'hed, they will both put her to
liberty, and restore Ler to her eflate.

Bb 2 THESE

THESE lords have for the guard of their town 450 Harr

qubufhers which be in every good order, for the enter-
tainment of which companys, untill all matters be com-.
pounded, they did sue unto your majesty, to aid them with
huch fum of money as hath been mentioned to Mr. Se-
cretary by the lord of Lydington's writing, amounting as
1 perceive to ten or twelve thoufadid crowns of the

THEY were lately advertized that the French King

doth mind to fend hither monfietar de la Chapell des Ur-
fine, a knight of the French ord'er, and always well affec-
tionate to the house of Guyfe, and howsoever la Forest,
Villaroy, and du Crocq have used language in the queens
favour and to these lords disadvantage there, to your ma-
jetlly ; la Crocq doth carry With him such matter as (hall
be little to the queen's advantage; so as it is thought the
French King, upon his coming to his presence, will ra-
ther fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen; for they
have their party so well made, as the French will rather
anake their profit by them, than any other way.

HEREWITH I fend your majefly the last bond agreed
(, and signed by the Hamiltons, the earl of Argyll,
H'tly, and sundry others at Dumbarton.

"NVERTHELESS, since my coming to this town, the

Hamiits have Cent unto me a gentleman of their fur-
name n-ned Robert Hamilton, with a letter from the
bishop of St. Andrews and the abbot of Arbroth, the
copy wharev I fend your majesty and mine answer unto
them, referrin to the bearer the declaration of some
things, as thef.eid by him unto me.

THE earle of trgyll hath, in like manner, sent an-

other unto me witta letter and credit, I have used him
as I did the others, tio copy of both which letters I fend
your majesty also. Tit lord Harrys hath also Cent unto
me but not written, and ,have returned unto him in like
fort.

AGAINST the z th day of ibis month there is a generall

assembly of all the :hurches, faires, and boroughs towns
of this realm, namelj of such as be contented to repair to
there lords to this town, wvhere it is thought the whole
fRate of this matter will be haideled, and I fear me much
to the queen's disadvantage anda anger ; unless the lord of
Lidingtorr and some others which 'e best affe6ed unto her
do provide some remedy ; for I perc.ave the great num-
ber) and in manner all, but chiefly the common people,

which

which have atfifed in there doings, do greatly dishonour
the tueen, and mind seriously either her deprivation, or
her deffruion ; I used the best means I can (considering
the furie of the world here) to prorogue this assembly, for
that appeareth to me to be the best remedy : I may not
speak of dissolution of it, for that may not be abiden, and
i should thereby bring myself into great hatred and peril.
The chiefefl of the lords which be here present at this time
dare not (how so much lenity to the queen as I think they
could be contented, for fear of the rage of the people.
The women be most furious and impudent against the
queen, and yet the men be mad enough; so as a firanger
over bufie may soon be made a sacrifice amongit them.

THERE was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with

their adherents would put their force into the fields against
the 24th of this month, but I do not find that intent lo
true, as the common bruit goeth.

THE earle of Argyll is in the highlands, where there

is trouble among his own countrymen.

The earle of Lennox is by these lords much desired

here, and I do believe your majesty may so use him, and
dire& him, as he shall be able to promote your purpose
with these men.

THE earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be income

patible.- I do find amongst the Hamiltons, Argyll and
the company two strange and sundry hurmours.

HAMILTONS do make show of the liberty of the queen,

and prosecute that with great earneflnefs, because they
would have these lords destroy her, rather than £he (hould
be recovered from them by violence; another time they
seem to desire her liberty, and Bothwell's destruction,
because they would compass a marriage betwixt the queen
and the lord of Arbroth.

The earle of Argyll doth affect her liberty, and Both-

well's deftrution, because he would marry the queen to
his brother.

ANn yet neither of them, notwithstanding thcir open

concurance (as appeareth by their bond), doth discover
their minds to each other, nor mind one end ; Knox is
not here, but in the weft parts, he and the reft of the
minifiers will be here at the great aflembly, who& aufte-
rity against the queen I fear as much as any man's.

BY fuome conference which I had with fume of this

councill, me thinketh that they have intelligence that there

Bby is

is a disposition in the queen of Scotland to leave this realm,
and to retire herself into either England or into France,
but moss willingly into England, for such ---and mifl
likeings as she knoweth hath been, and is meant untoher
in France, leaving the regiment either to a number of
persons deleagued, and authorized by her, or to some one
or more.

AND it please your majefly, I think it not amiss to put

yow in remembrance, that in cafe the said queen comn
into England by your allowance, without the French
king's consent, (he (hall loose her dowery in France, and
have little or nothing from hence to entertain her; and
in care (he do go into France with the king's content-
mnent, ihe may be an infirument (if (he can recover fa-
vour, as time will help to cancell her disgrace) either by
tmatching with some husband of good quality, or by some
other devise, to work new unquietness to her own con-
try, and so consequently to your majefty's.

THEREFORE it may please your majesty to confider of

this matter, and to let me know your pleasure with con-
venient speed, how I (hall answer the fame, if it be
propounded unto me, either by the queen, or by the coun-
cill, as a piece of the end and composition. For I am sure,
-of late, (he hath seemed very desirous to have the matter
brought to pass, that lhe might go into England, retain-
ing her eflate and jurifdition in herself, though she do
not exercise it; and likewise I understand that some of
this council which be least affected to her safety do think
there is no other way to save her. Thus Almighty God
preserve your majefly in health, honour, and all felicity;
at Edin' the x4th July 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth the

i8th of July I5674 from Edinburgh.

An original. T T may please your majefly, yow might perceave by my
PiperOf. j letters of the x6th, how far 1 had proceeded with these
ice. lords, and what was their answer; since which time I

have spoken particularly with the earle Morton, the lord
of Lidington, and Sir James Balfour captain of this cafile,
at whose hands I cannot perceave that as yet access to the
queen to Lochleven will be granted me, slaying themselves
still by the absence of the lords and others their associates,
which (they fay) they look for within two days; and for

that

that I find, by likelihood and apparent presumptions, that
mine access to the queen will hardly be granted, I have
thought good not to defer this dispatch untill I have a re-
solute answer in that manner.

MAY it therefore please your majesty, to understand Ro-

bert Melvin returned from the queen in Lochlevin, to this
town the 6th of July, and brought a letter from her writ-
ten of her own hand to thele lords, which doth contain as
I underfiand matter as followeth-A request unto them
to have consideration of her health, and if they will not
put her to liberty, to change the place of restraint to the
castle of Stirling, to the end the might have the comfort
and company of her son, and if they will not change her
from Lochleven, the required to have some other gentle-
women about her, naming none.

To have her Apothecary, to have Come modest minister.

- To have an imbroiderer to draw forth such work as
the would be occupied about, and to have a varlet of the
chamber.-Touching the government of the realm the
maketh two offers, which are but generally touched in
her letter, the particularitys be not specified, but referred
to Robert Melvin's credit, the one is to commit it only
and wholly to the earle of Murray, the other is to the lords
whose names ensue, assisted with such others as they thall
call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault,
the earls of Morton, Murray, Marr, and Glencairn.

Snu hath written unto them that I might have access
unto her.-She requireth further, that if they will not
treat her and regard her as their queen, yet to use her as
the king their fovereign's daughter (whom many of them
knew) and as their prince's mother.-She will by no means
yield to abandon Bothell for her huiband, nor relinquith
him; which matter will do her most harm of all, and
hardeneth these lords to great severity agaipit her.

SHE yieldeth in words to the prosecution of the mur-

der.

I HAVE the means to let her know that your majesty

hath lent me hither for her relief.

I HAVE also perfwaded her to conform herself to re-

nounce Bothell for her husband, and to be contented to
fuffer a divorce to pass betwixt them; the hath sent me
word that the will in no ways consent unto that, but ra-
ther die; grounding herself upon this reason taking her-
self to be seven weeks gone with child, by repouncing

B b 4 Bothell,

Bothell, she should acknowledge herself to be with child
of a bastard, and to have forfeited her honour, which
she will not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her to
save her own life and her child, to choose the least hard
condition.

MR. Knox arrived here in this town the 6th of this

month, with whom I have had some conference, and
with Mr. Craig also, the other minister of this town.

I HAVE perfwaded with them to preach and perfwad

lenity, 1 find them both very austere in this conference,
what they shall do hereafter I know not, they are fur-
nifhed with many arguments, some forth of the scripture,
some forth of hiflories, some grounded (as they fay) upon
the laws of this realm, some upon pra&ices used in this
realm, and some upon the conditions and oth made by
their prince at her coronation.

THE bilhop of Galloway, uncle to the earle of Huntley,

hath Cent hither to these lords, that his nephew the earle
and some others of that fide may, at Linlithgow or at
Stirling, have some communication with some appointed
on this fide, assuring them that there is a good difpofi-
tion in the lords of the other party to concurre with these,
affurlng further that they will not dissent for triffles or
unnecessary things, and (as I am given to undertand)
they can be pleated the queen's restraint be continued, un-
till the murder be pursued in all persons, whereby the
separation of the queen and Bothell is implyed, the pre.
servation of the prince, the security for all men, and a
good order taken for the governance of the realm in tran-
quillity.

CAPTAIN Clerk, which hath To long served in Den-

mark and served at Newhaven, did the 16thof this month
(accompanyed with one of his soldiers, or rather the soldier
as the greater fame goeth) kill one XWilfon a seaman, and
such a one as had great estimation with these lords both
for his skill, his hardynefs, honesty, and willingness in
this altion ; whereupon Clerk hath retired himself; their
quarrel was about the (hip which took Blacketer, which
Thip was appointed by these lords to go to the north of
Scotland tO impeach the passage of the earle Bothell, in
cafe he went either to the isles, or to any other place; by
the death of this man this enrerprize was dashed.

THE bishop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and

doth desire tp speak with the lord of Lidington. *

THE abbot of Iilwinning hath sent for Sir James Bal-

four, captain of the catle, to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majesty in my lafr, the Hamiltoqa

now find no matter to difever these lords and them afun-
der, but would concur in all things (yea in any extremi-
ty againit the queen) so as that they might be assured the
prince of Scotland were crouned king, and Ihould die
without issue, that the earle of Lenox's son living should
not inherit the croun of this realm, as next heir to his
nephew.

AND although the lords and councelors speak reverent.

ly, mildly, and charitably of their queen, so as I cannot
gather by their speech any intention to cruelty or violence,
yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen is in very
great peril of her life, by reason that the people affem-
bled at this convention do mind vehemently the deftruc-
rtoa of her.

IT is a public speech amongst all the people, and

amongst all estates, (saving of the counsellors) that their
queen hath no more liberty nor priviledge to commit mur-
der nor adultery, than any other private person, neither
by God's laws, nor by the laws of the realm.

THE earl of Bothwell, and all his adherents and afb'o

ciates, be put to the horn by the ordinary juflice of this
town, named the lords of the feflion; and commandment
given to all ihirriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend *
him, and all other his followers and receiptors-The earl
of Bothell's porter, and one of his other servitors of his
chamber, being apprehended, have confeffed such sundry
circumitances, as it appeareth evidently, that he the said
earl was one of the principal executors of the murder, in
his own person accompanyed with sundry others, of which
number I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three
of them, that is to fay, two of the Ormiltons of Tivot-
dall, and one Hayborn of Bolton; the lords would be
glad that none of the murderers (hould have any favour
or receipt in England, and hereof their desire is, that the
officers upon the border may be warned; Bothell doth still
remain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fle-
ming, which have been there, have .utterly abandoned
him, and do repair hitherwards.-The intelligence doth
grow daily betwixt these lords, and those which held of;
and notwithstanding these lords have sent an hundred and
fifty harqubuflers to Stiiling, to keep- the town and pa(-

sage

sage from futptize; and (o have they done in like man.
ner to St. Johnston, which be the two passages from the
north, and weft to this town, I do understand the captain
of Dunbar is much busied in fortifying that place, Ido
mervile the carriages be not impeached otherwise than
they be.

OF late this queen hath written a letter to the captain

of the said castle, which hath been furprized; and there-
by matter is discovered which mnalteth little to the queen's

advantage. THuS, having none other matter worthy your maje.
fly's knowledge, I beseech God to prosper your majesty
with long life, perfect health, and prosperous felicity.
At Edinburgh the 18th of July, 1567.

Letter of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right

honourable the earl of Leicester, knt. of the or-
der, ahd One of the lords of her majefty's moit
honourable Privy Council.

«4th of Ju. B Y my former dispatches sent to her majesty, and Mr.
I, i5s6.

.

J Secretary, since the i2th of July, your lordship

Papr office, might have perceived the itate of this country, and to
Original. what end these matters be like to come: so as not to

trouble your lordship with many words; this queen is like
very flortly to be deprived of her royal edtate, ter son to
be crowned king, and she detained in prison within this
realm, and the lame to be governed, in the young king's
name, by a councel, consisting of certain of the nobility,
and other wife men of this realm; so as it is easy to be
seen that the power and ability to do any thing to the
commodity of the queen's majesty, and the realm of Eng-
land, will chiefly, and in manner wholly, reft in the
hands of there lords, and others their associates, assembled
at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's majesty will still per.
sift in her former opinion towards the queen of Scot-
land, (unto whom ibe shall be able to do no good) then
I do plainly fee that these lords and all their accomplices
will become as good French, as the French king can wifb,
to all intents and purposes. And as for the Hamiltons,
the earls of Arguile, Huntlye, and that faction, they be
already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth little
devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this
is the slate of things so come to pals of this country, that

France

France has Scotland now as much conjoined unto them,
to all purposes, as ever it was; and what an instrument,
the young prince will prove, to unquiet England, I report
me to your lordihips wisdoms, and therefore considering
the weight of the matter, and all the circumstances, I
truss your lordthips will well bethink you in time, (for 'tis
high time) how to advise her majesty, to leave nothing un-
done that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her
poffeffion, or, at the least, to be at her devotion. And
amongst other things, that I can imagine, for the first
degree nothing is more meet to bring this to effec, than
to allure this company here aflembled, to bear her majesty
their favour. Some talk hath palled between the lord of
Liddington and me, in certain conferences, about this
matter. By him I find, that when her majesty hall have
won these men to her devotion, the principal point that
will make them conformable to deliver their prince into
England, will reft upon the queeh, and the realmsn en-
abling him to the succession of the crown of England,
for fault of issue of the queen's majefty's body, some other
things will also be required, as the charge of the said prince .
and his train to be at the charge of England. I do well
perceive that these men will never be brought to 'deliver
their prince into England, without the former condition,
for the fucceflion of England ; for (faith Liddingtoh) that
taking place, the prince ihall be as dear to the people of
England as to the people of Scotland; and the one will
be as careful of his preservation as the other. Otherwise,
he faith, all things considered, it will be reported that the
Scottifhmen have put their prince to be kept in safety, as
those which commit the iheep to be kept by the wolves.
So as for conclusion, your lordfhips may perceive here
will be the scope of this matter. As unto the delivering
of him upon hostages, he fayeth, let no man think, that
the condition of the fuccefiion not being accomplished,
the nobility and the gentry will never consent to leave
themselves destitute of their fovereign,upon any hofiages,
neither upon any promises, nor likelihood of good to if'ue
in time to come. It were not good for yourselves (faith
he) that the matter were so handled ; for then you flould
adventure all your goods in one ship, which might have
a dangerous effe&t, considering the unwillingness of the
queen your sovereign to consent to establishing any fuc-
effor to the crown. And then, how untnete were it, that

A. her

her .majesty having in her poffefflon already all such per.
sons as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown,
to have our prince also in her custody. For so there
might follow, without good capitulations, a firange and
dangerous issue, tho' the queen your mistress do think
that such imaginations could not proceed but from busy
heads, as you have uttered unto us on her behalf. What
is come to pals since my last dispatch, and how far forth
things are proceeded, I refer your lordihip to be informed
by my letters sent unto her majesty, at this time. And
so I pray Almighty God, preserve your lordship in much
honour and felicity. At Edinburgh this 24th of July,
1567.

It may please your good lordship to make my lord

Stuard partner of this letter.

The Queen to Sir Nicholas Throgmorton.

By the Queen.

th Aug. T'RUSTY and right well beloved, we greet you
1567. well, for as much as we do confider that you have

now a long time remained in those parts, without expe-
dition in the charge committed unto you, we think it not
meet feeing there hath not followed the good acceptation
and fruit of our well meaning towards that state, which
good reason would have required, that you ihould conti.
nue there any longer, our pleasure, therefore, is, that you
thall, immediately upon the receipt hereof, fend your ser-
vant Middlemore unto the lords and estates of that realm,
that are assembled together, willing him to declare unto
them, that it cannot but seem very ifrange unto us, that
you having been sent from us, of such good intent, to deal
with them, in matters tending so much to their own
quiet, and to the benefit of the whole eflate of their coun-
try, they have so far forgotten themselves, and so flight,
ly regarded us and our good meaning, not only in delay-
ing to hear you, and deferring your access to the queen
their sovereign, but also, which is strangest of all, in not
vouchsafing to make any answer unto us. And altho'
these dealings be such, indeed, as were not to be looked
for at their hands, yet do we find their usage and pro.

i weeding

teedling toward their Soveraign and queen, to overpass
all the reft in so firange a degree, as we for our part, and
we suppose the whole world besides, cannot but think
them to have therein gone so far beyond the duty of sub-
jests, as muds needs remain to their perpetual tauche for
ever. And therefore ye ihall fay, that we have tho't good,
without consuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you
to our presence, requiring them to grant you lifcence and
pafport so to do, which when you ihall have obtained, we
will that you make your repair hither, unto us, with as
convenient speed as you may. Given, dc.

Indorfed 6th Augufi, 1567.

Throgmorton to the right honourable Sir Wil-

liam Cecil, knight, one of her majefty's privy
tomed and p\incipal fCecetary, give these.

SI R,
WI HAT I have learned, since the arrival of my thA Aug.
VY lord of Murray, and Mons. de Linnerd, you '567.

Paper Offive

ihall underhand by my letter to her majeftty, at this time. foro obe
The French do, in their negotiations, as they do in their Origina!,
drink, put water to their wine. As I am able to fee into
their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart how
the queen sleep, whether she live or die, whether she be
at liberty or in prizon. The mark they thoot at, is, to
renew their old league; and can be as well contented to
take it of this little king, (howsoever his title be) and the
fameby the order of these lords, as otherwise. Lyneroll
came but yesterday, and methinketh he will not tarry
long; you may guess how the French will seek to dif-
please these lords, when they changed the coming of La
Chapelle des Ourfins for this man, because they doubted
that de la Chapelle should not be grateful to them,
being a papist. Sir, to speak more plainly to you, than
I will do otherwise, me thinketh the earl of Murray
will run the course that those men do, and be par-
taker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more bit-
terly against the tragedy, and the players therein, than
he, so little like he bath to horrible fins. I hear an ink-
ling that Ledington is to go into France, which I do as
much mislike, as any thing, for our purpose. I can assure
you the whole protcftants of France will live and die in

thefl

these men? quarrels; and, where there is bruit amongif
you, that aid (bould be sent to the adverse party, and
that Martigues should come hither with some force;
Mons. Baudelot hath assured me of his honour, that in.
stead of Martigues coming against them, he will come
with as good a force to succour them : and if that be
sent under meaner conduct, Robert Stuart shall come witl
as many to fortify them. But the constable hath affired
these lords, that the king meaneth no way to offend them.
Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and speed
you to further it, for I am here now to no purpose, un-
less it be to kindle these lords more against us. Thus I
do humbly take my leave of you, from Edenburgh the
12th of August, 1567. Yours to use and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throckmorton,.

TRUSTY and well-beloved we greet you well,

We have, within there two days, received three

sundry letters of yours, of the aoth, 22d, and 23d, Of
this month, having not before those received any (even
days before; and do find, by these your letters, that you
have very diligently and largely advertised us of all the
hasty and peremptory proceedings there i which as we
nothing like, so we trust in time to fee them wax colder,
and to receive some reformation. For we cannot per-
ceive, that they with whom you have dealt can answer the
doubts moved by the Hamiltons, who howsoever they may
be carried for their private refpeas, yet those things which
they move, will be allowed by all reasonable persons. For
if they may not, being noblemen of the realm, be fuffered
to hear the queen their sovereign declare her mind con-
cerning the reports which are made of her, by such as
keep her in captivity, how should they believe the reports,
or obey them, which do report it ? and therefore our
meaning is, you shall let the Hamiltons plainly under-
stand, that we do well allow of their proceedings, (as far
forth as the fame doth concern the queen their fovereiga
for her relief) and in such things as (hall appear reason.
able for us therein to do, for the queen our sifter, we
will be ready to perform the fame. And where it is so
required, that upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope

should

should deal with the lord Herris to impart their meanings
to us, and ours to them, we are well pleased therewith,
and we require yod to advertize the lord Scroope hereof
by your letters, and to will him to £hew himlelf favour-
able to them in their acions, that rmay appear plainly to
tend to the relief of the queen, and maintenance of her
authority. And as we willed our fearetary to write unto
you, that upon your message done to the ear) of Murray,
you might return, so our meaning is you shall. And if
these our letters shall meet you on the way, yet we will
have you advertise both the lord Scroope, and the Ha.-
miltons, of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. I567.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 373.)

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the archbishop of

St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbrothe.

AFTER my good commendations to your good lord- s3th Aug.

(hips, this shall be to advertize you, that the queen's Is67.

majeify my sovereign having sent me hither her ambaffa- PaperOf icey
dor to the queen her fiifer your sovereign, to communi- which Sir
cate unto her such matter as she thought meet, confider- Nicholas
ing the good amity and intelligence betwixt them, who queen.
being detained in captivity (as your lordfhips know) con-
trary to the duty of all good fubjeds, for the enlargement
of whose person, and the restitution of her to her dignity,
her majesty gave me in charge to treat with there lords
aflembled at Edenburgh, offering them all reasonable con-
ditions and means as might be, for the safeguard of the
young prince, the punishment of the late horrible murder,
the dissolution of the marriage betwixt the queen and the
earl of Bodwell, and laIlly for their own sureties. In the
negotiation of which matters I have (as your lordfhips
well know) spent a long time to no purpose, not being
able to prevail in any thing with those lords, to the queen
my fovereign's fatisfaaion. Of which strange proceed-
ings towards her majesty, and undutiful behaviour towards
their sovereign, I have advertised the queen's majesty; she
(not being minded to bear this indignity) hath given me
in charge to declare her further pleasure unto them, in
such fort as they may well perceive her majesty doth difal-

low

low of their proceedings, and thereupon hath revoked mie
And further hath given me in charge to communicate the
fame unto your lordfhips, requiring you to let me know,
before my departure hence, (which thall be, God willing,
as soon as I have received answer from you) what you
and your confederate1 will assuredly do, to set the queen
your sovereign at liberty, and to restore her to her former
dignity by force or otherwise; feeing there lords have re-
fused all other mediation, to the end the queen's majefly
my sovereign may concur with your lordfhips in this ho-
nourable enterprize.

AND in cafe, through the dispersion of your associates,

your lordfhips can neither communicate this matter
amongfl you, nor receive resolution of them all by that
time, it may please you to fend me the opinions of so
many of you as may confer together, within two or three
days, so as I may have your answer here in this town by
Monday or Tuesday next at the farthest, being the I9th
of this August ; for I intend (God willing) to depart to-
wards England, upon Wednesday following. Thus I
most humbly take my leave of your lordfhips at Eden-
burgh, the I3th of Aug. 1567.

Indorfed the i3th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord Herrys,

24th Aug. Y OUR good lordlhip's letter of the 13th of August
1*67rfice I have received the 19th of the fame. For answer
from a copy whereunto it may like your lordship to understand, that I
which Sir will signify unto you plainly, how far forth I am already
Nicholas
sent to thoroughly infiruaced of the queen's majeftymy fovereign's
feeretary pleasure concerning the detention of the queen your so-
Cecil. vereign, and concerning her relief.

TIo the finft her majesty hath given in charge, to use all

kinds of persuasion in her name, to move these lords affem-
bled at Edenburgh to desist from this violent and undutiful
behaviour, which they used toward their sovereign. And
in this part, besides the shew of many reasons, and fun-
dry persuasions of amicable treaty with them, her maje.
fly hath willed me to use some plain and severe speech un-
to them, tending so far forth, as if they would not be bet-
ter advised, and reform there their outrageous proceedings
exercised againfi their sovereign, that then they might

' be

be assured her majeffy neither would nor could indure
such an indignity to be done to the queen, her good cou-
fin and neighbour.

ANDn notwithitanding these my proceedings with them,

they have made proof to be little moved thereby, for as
yet neither will they consent to the enlargement, neither
fuffer me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me, it
is fuperfiuous to treat any more with them after this
manner. Whereupon I have advertiied the queen's ma-
jelly my sovereign, expeaing daily her majefty's further
order; and as I (hall be advertised thereof, to will not
fail to signify the fame to your good lordlhip; and in the
mean time will advertise her majesty alfu, what your lord-
fIip hath written unto me. Thus with my due com-
mendations to your good lordihip, I commit the fame to
almighty God, reffing always to do you the pleasure and
service that I can lawfully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of August, 1567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 450.)

Account of lord Herreis's Behaviour in the Par-

liament held December 15, 1567.

T HE lord Herrys made a notable harangue, in the Paperoffce.

name of the duke and himself their friends and ad-

herents, (the duke himCelf, the earl of Caffilles, and the
abbot of Kilwinning being also present) to perluade the
union of the whole realm in one mind. Wherein he did
not spare to set forth solemnly the great praise that part of
this nobility did deserve, which in the beginning took
meanes for punishment of the earl Bothwell, as also feeing
the queen's inordinat affetion to that wicked man, and
that lhe could not be induced by their persuasion to leave
him, that in fequefiring her person within Lochlevin,
they did the duty of noolemen. That their honourable
doings, which had not spared to hazard their lives and
lands, to avenge their native country from the slanderous
reports that were spoken of it among other nations, had
well deserved that all their brethren ihould join with them
in so good a cause. TIhat he and thev, in whose names
he did speak, would willingly, and without any compul.
iion, enter tnemfelves in the fame yoke, and put their

Vol.. I." C c lives

lives and lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our
cause. And if the queen herself were in Scotland, ac-
companied with 20,000 men, they will be of the fame
mind, and fight in our quarrel. He hoped the remainder
noblemen of their party, Huntley, Arguile, and others,
which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would come
to the fame conformity, whereunto he would alfoearneft.
ly move them. And if they will remain obstinate, and
refuse to qualify themselves, then will the duke, he, and
their friends, join with us to corre& them, that other-
wife will not reform themselves. So plausible an oration,
and more advantageous for our party, none ofourfelves
could have made. He did not forget to term my lord re-
gent, by the name of regent, (there was no mention at all
of the earl of Murray) and to call him grace at every word,
when his speeches were diredted to him, accompanying
all his words with low courtesies after this manner.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 472.)

Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil,

8th Aug. 1568, from Bolton.

Anoriginal. - UT surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not
Pl4eroffice. only to favour the form, but also the chief ar-

ticle of the religion of the gospel, namely justification by
faith only : and she heareth the faults of papistry re-
vealed, by preaching or otherwise, with contented ears,
and with gentle and weak replys, and she doth not seem
to like the worse of religion throw me.

Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil,

21 Sept. 1568, from Bolton.

--- TT came to this queen's ears of late that she was

L bruited to be lately turned to the religion of the

gofpell, to the great disliking of the papifts hereabouts,
which thing she herself confeffed unto me, and yesterday,
openly in the great chamber, when the assembly was full,
and some papifts present, ihe took occasion to speak of
religion, and then openly she profeffed herself to be of the
papist religion, and took upon her to patronize the fame,
more earnefily than she had done a great while afore, al,

tho'

tho' her defences and arguments were so weak, that the
effe~ of her speech was only to flhew her zeal; and after-
wards to me alone, when I mifliked to fee her become
so confidently backward in religion, Why, said the, would
ybt have me to lore France and Spain, and all my friends
in other places, by seeming to change my religion, and
yet I am not assured the queen my good fifer will be
my assured friend, to the fatisfation of my honour and
expedcation.

No. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 474.)

Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

R IGHT trusty and right well beloved cousin, we paperoffice.

greet you well. Where we hear fay, that certain From acopy

reports are made in sundry parts of Scotland, that what- correaed by
oever Rwould fall out now upon the hearing of the queen cail.
of Scotts cause, in any proof to convince or to acquit the
said queen concerning the horrible murder of her late hus-
band our cousin, we have determined to reffore her to her
kingdom and government, we do so much mislike hereof,
as we cannot indure the fame to receive any credit: and
therefore we have thought good to assure you, that the
fame is untruly devised by the authors to our dishonour.
For as we have been always certified from our said fifler,
both by her letters and messages, that the is by no means
guilty or participant of that murder, which we wish to be
true, so surely if the lhould be found juffly to be guilty
thereof as hath been reported of her, whereof we would
be very sorry, then, indeed, it ihould behove us to con-
fider otherwise of her cause than to satisfy her desire in re-
flitution, of her to the government of that Kingdom.
And so we would have you and all others think, that
thould be disposed to conceive honourably of us and 9ur

actions. Indorfed 20 Sept. 1568.

No. XXVL

Cc 2

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 481.)

Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, the 9th of O.ober

1568, from York.

Anoriin~al. ---. i/ Y lord's grace of Norfolk sending for me to
Paper office. Bolton, to attend upon him here Thursday

last, I made my repair hither accordingly, meaning to.
flay here until Monday next; as touching the matters of
the commission, that his grace and the reft have from her
highness, his gra'e hath imparted unto me of all things
thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto passed,
and altho' the matters be too weighty for my weak capa-
city, to presume to utter any opinion of mine own there-
of, yet I fee that my lord Herris for his pare laboureth a
reconciliation, to be had without the extremity of odious
accusations; my lord of Ledington also faith tome, that
he could with there matters to be ended in dulce maner, so
that it might be done with safety; of the reft you cani
conceive, by the advertisements and writings, sent up by
our commiflioners.

A letter from the bilhop of Ro{s to the queen of

Scots, from York, OQtober r568.

Cott. lib. T" LEIS your majefly I conferred at length with A.
Calig. C. a. j ane great part of a night, who aflurit me that he
a copy. had reasoned with B. this Saturday C. on the field, who

determinate to him that it was the D. determinit pur.
pose not to end your cause at this time, but to-hold the
fame in fufpence, and did that was in her power, to make
the E. pursue extremity, to the eflect F. and his adhe.
rents might utter all they could to your dishonour, to
the effet to cause you come in disdain with the hail sub-
jedts of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to
attempt any thing to her disadvantage. And to this effc&
is all her intention, and when they have produced all they
can against you, D: will not appoint tlte matter inflantly,
but transport )ou up in the country, and retain you there
till she think time to shew you favour, which is not likely
to be hatlily, because of your uncles in France, and the

7 feaa

kfar ihe has ds yourself to be her unfrlend. And there-
fore their counsel is, that ye write an writing to the D.
meaning that ye are informit that your fubjec& which has
offendic you.-This in tffe6l tnat your majefly hearing
the estate of your affairs as they proceed in York, was
informed that her majesty was informed of you, that you
could not gudely remit your fubjecs in such fort as they
might credit you hereafter, which was a great cause of the
flay of this controversy to be ended. And therefore per-
fuading her D effeaually not to trust any who had made
such narration. But like as ye had rend-red you in her
hands, as mofi tender to you of any living, so prayit her
take na opinion ot you, but that ye wauld use her coun-
fell in all your affairs, and wald prefer her friendship to
all others, as well uncles as others, and assure her to keep
that thing ye wald promise to your fubjeats by her advice,
And ifD. difecredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her
in that point be removing within her realm in secret and
quiet manner, where her G. pleased, until the time her
G. were fully satisfied, and all occasion of difciedit re-
moved from her. So that in the mean time your realm
were holden in quietness, and your true fubje5ts restored
and maintained in their own eflate, and sic other things
tending to this effe&.. . And affirms that they believe
that this may be occasion to cause her credit you that ye
offer so far; and it may come that within two or three
months she may become better-minded to your grace,
for now ihe is not well minded, and will not Ihew you
any pleasure for the causes foresaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand; the

following key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethi'ngton.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commiflioners.
F, The earl of Murray.

No. XXVI.I

Cc 3

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 492.)

Deliberation of Secretary Cecil's concerning

Scotland, Dec. 21, 1568.

Paper office. T-fHE bell way for England, but not the eafiefl, that

I the queen of Scots might remain deprived of her
crown, and the state continue as it is.

TH E second way for England profitable, and not so hard.

- That the queen of Scotts might be induced, by some
perfwafions, to agree that her son might continue king,
because he is crowned, and herself to remain also queen;
and that the government of the realm might be committed
to such persons as the queen of England Lhould name,
so as for the nomination of them it might be ordered,
that a convenient number of persons of Scotland Lhould be
firfi named to the queen of England, indifferently for the
queen of Scots, and for her son, that is to fay the one
half by the queen of Scots, and the other by the earle
of Lennox and lady Lennox, parents to the child ; and
out of those, the queen's majefly of England to make
choice for all the officers of the realm, that are, by the
laws of Scotland, disposable by the king or queen of the
land.

THAT untill this may be done by the queen's majesty,

the government remain in the hands of the earle of Mur-
ray as it is, providing he (hall not dispose of any offices or
perpetuals to continue any longer but to these offered of
the premises.

THAT a parliament be summoned in Scotland by fe.

veral commandments, both of the queen of Scots and of
the young king.

---THAT hostages be delivered unto England on the

young king's behalf, to the number of twelve persons
of the earle of Murray's part as the queen of Scots ihall
name; and likewise on the queen's behalf to the like num-
ber as the earle of Murray ihall name; the fame not to be
any that have by inheritance or office cause to be in this
parliament, to remain from the beginning of the summons
of that parliament, untill three months after that parlia.
ment; which hostages shall be pledges, that the fiiends
Qs either part £hall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this

pats

parliament it be concluded, that the ordinance which the
queen of England (hall devise for the government of the
realm (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland,
nor contrary to the laws of Scotland for any man's inhe-
ritance, as the fame was before the parliament at Edinr. the
Decemr. 1567) thall be eltablifhed to be kept and obeyed,
tnder pain of high treason for the breakers thereof.

--THAT by the fame parliament also be established

all executions and judgments given against any person to
the death of the late king.

-- THAT by the fame parliament, a remission be

made universally from the queen of Scots to any her
contrarys, and also from every one fubjet to another,
saving that restitution be made of lands and houses, and
all other things heritable, that have been by either fide
taken from them which were the owners thereof at the
committing of the queen of Scotts to Lochlevin.

THAT by the fame parliament it be declared who shall
be successors to the crown next after the Q" of Scots and
her ifrue ; or elle, that such right of the D. of Chatelhe-
rault had, at the marriage of the Q. of Scots with the
lord Darnley, may be conserved and not prejudiced.

THAT the Q. of Scots may have leave of the queen's

majesty of England, twelve months after the said parlia-
ment, and that the thall not depart out of England, with-
out special licence of the queen's majesty.

THAT the young king hball be nourished and brought

up in England, till he be years of age.

IT is to be considered, that in this cause the compofi-

tion between the queen and her fubje6ts may be made with
certain articles, outwardly to be seen to the world for her
honour, as though all the parts should come of her, and
yet for the surety of contrarys, that certain betwixt her
and the queen's majesty are to be concluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 494.)

The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan.

1568-9.

WE greet you well, we mean not, at this point, Paper ofice,

by any writing, to renew that which it hath

pleased God to make grievous to us and forryfull to yow ;
but forbearing the fame as unmeet at this point, having

Cc 4 occa-

occasion to command you in our service, and yow also
whileft you are to serve us. We require yow to con-
fider of this that followeth with like consideration and
diligence, as hitherto yow have accuflumare in our ser-
vise; at the time of our last Ltters written to yow the
fourteenth of this month for removing of the queen of
Scots, we had underitanding out of Scotland or certain
writtings lent by her from thence into Scotland, amongst
the which one is found to contain great and manifcfi un-
truths touching us and others allo, as shall and may
plainly appear unto yow by the copy of the fame, which
likewise we lend yow, and becaule at the fame timewe were
advertised, that it (hould be thortly proclaimed in Scotland,
though then it was not, we thought good first to remove
the queen, before we would difciole the fame, and then
expect the ilTue thereof; and now, this day, by letters frno
our cousin of Hunfdon we are ascertained, that since that
time the fame matters contained m the writ;ng, are pub-
lifled in diverse parts of rcotland, whereupon we have
thought it very meet, for the discharge of our honor, and
to confound the fallehood contained in that writing, not
only to hive the fame reproved by open proclamation
upon our frontiers, the copy whereof we do herewith
fend yow, but also in convenient fort to charge that queen
therewith, so as (he may be moved to declare the authors
thereof, and persuaders of her to write in such flandcrous
fort such untruths of us; and in the mean leafon, we have
here flayed her commissioners, knowing no other whora
we may more probably presume to be parties hereunto,
than they, untill the queen ihall name some other, and
acquit them; who being generally charged, without ex-
pressing to them any particularity, do use all manner of
speeches to discharge them'elves; wherefore our pleasure
is, that ye shall, after ye have well perused the copy
of this writing sent to yow, speedily declare unto her,
that we have good understanding given us of diverse let-
ters and writtings, sent by her into Scotland, signed by
her own hand, amongst which, one such writing is sent
with her commandment exprefly as now 'it is already
published, as we are much troubled in mind that a prin-
cess as (he is having a cause in our hands to implicated
with difficulties and calamirys, should either conceave in
her own mind, or allow of them that (hould devise fucit
fAlse, untrue, and improbable matter& against us, arn aut

honor,

honor, and specially to have the aventure to have the Tame
being krown so untrue to be publithed; and you (hall
also fay, because we will not think so ill of her, as that it
thould proceed of her self, but rather (le hath been coun-
felled thereunto, or by abuse made to think some part
thereof to be true, we require her, even as ihe may look
for ony favour at our hands, that the will diiburden her-
self as much as truly (he may herein, and name them
which have been the authors and perfwaders thereof,
and so she ihall make as great amends to us as the cafe
may require ; after you have thus far proceeded, and had
some answer of her, whether she shall deny the writ-
ing absolutely, or name any that have been the advisers
thereof, you shall fay unto her that we have flayed her
commifllioners here, untill we may have some answer here-
of, because we cannot but impute to them some part of
this evil dealing, untill by her answer the authors may
be known; and as loon as you can have dire6t answers
from her, we pray you to return us the fame; for as the
cafe flandeth, we cannot but be much difquieted with it,
having our honour so deeply touched contrary to any in-
tention in us, and for any thing we know in our judg-
ment, the earl of Murray and others named in the fame
writing void of thought for the matters, to them therein
imputed ; you may impart to the queen of Scots either
the contents of the slanderous letter, or shew her the
copy to read it, and you may also impart this matter to
the lord Scroop, to join with you there as you shall think
meet.

Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from

Wetherby the 28th January, x568.

-I WILL suppress my own grieffs, and pars them Anor;itnal.

L over with silence, for the present learning of your Pper office.

majefly-and for this queen's answer to the coppie of her
supposed letter sent unto Scotland, I mufft add this unto
my brother's letter, Sent unto Mr. Secretary yefternight
late; in process of time, (he did not deny but that the
firif lines contained in the fame copie, was agreeable to
a letter that (he had Cent unto Scotland, which touched
my lord of Murray's promise to deliver her son into your
majefty's hands, and to avoid that the fame thould not be

done

done without her consent, made her, (he faith, to write
in that behalf; she faith also, that (he wrote that they
should cause a proclamation to be made to flir her people
to defend my lord of Murray's intent and purpose, for
delivering of her said son, and impunge his rebellious go.
vernment, as she termed it, but (he utterly denyeth to
have written any of the other slanderous part of the laid
letter touching your majetly; she said also, that (he sus-
peaed that a Frenchman, now in Scotldnd, might be the
author of Come Scotch letters devised in her name, but she
would not allow me to write this for any part of her ain
fwer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 503.)

Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honour"

able the Lord of Liddington.

toth of Ju- y OU R letter of the 3d of July, I have received the

, 1569. 1 i5th of the fame. For answer whereunto you shall
From re underfland, that friends here to my lord regent and you

oi inal do wish such a concurrence in all doings, as in matter and

circumitances there arise no dissension, or at the leaf,
no more nor other than the difference of countries doth
necessarily require. We here do think convenient that as
few delays be used as may be, for the consummation of the
matter in hand, which principally to advance, your al-
lowance, prosecution, and speedy promotion in Scotland,
is most requisite, for you are so wife, and well acquainted
with the slate of the world, and with all our humours, as
you know that Come do allow and difal:ow for reafoh, Come
for refpe& of multitude, Come for refpe& of persons, and
so the cause is to.go forward as men do like to let it for-
ward. You are not to seek that some will use cautions,
faome neutra ity, some de'ays, and Come will plainly im-
punge it. And yet.all and every of these forts will alter
their doings, when they (hall fee the regent and his fa-
vourers accord with the belf and greatest part there, and
agree with the wisest and itrongeft party here. Tho' the,
matter has taken its bgminning here, upon deep and weighty
considerations, for the well of both the princes and their
realms, as well presently, as in time to come, yet it is
thought moss expedient, that the regent and realm of

Scot.

Scotland, by you, should propose the matter to the queen
our sovereign, if you like to use convenience, good order,
or be disposed to leave but a fecar, and no wound of the
hurts palt. I would be glad that this my letter (hould
come to your hands before the convention, whereat it
seems your queen's restoration and marriage to the duke
ofNortolk should be propounded, either to wynne in them
both allowance or rejecTion. To which proceedings, be-
cause you pray me to write frankly, I fay and reason thus,
me thinketh you use a preposterous order, to demand the
consent of such persons, in such matters, as their minds
to a good end hath rather been felt or prepared, and
therefote there mufft needs follow either a universal re-
fufal, or factious division arnongif you, whereby a bloufter-
ing intelligence muff needs come to queen Elizabeth of
the intended marriage from thence, which ought to have
been secretly and advisedly propounded unto her high-
ness; hereby you fee then the meaning is, by this dealing,
her majesty Ihall be made inexorable and so bring the
mater to such passe, as this which flhould have wrought
surety, quietness, and a flay to both queens and their
realms, thall augment your calamity, and throw us your
best friends into divorle with you, and into unhappy divi.
sion amongst ourfclves; for you may not conjecture that
the matter is now in delberation, but expedteth good
occasion for executing; sure I am you do not judge so
flanderly of the managing this matter, as to think we
have not calt the worst, or to enter therein so far with.
out the afliitance of the nobility, the ablest, the wifeit,
and the mightiest of this realm except queen Elizabeth:
from whom it hath been concealed untill you, as the fittefl
minifler, might propound it to her, on the behalf of the
regent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far marter
Woddes defamations do carry them of queen Elizabeth's
affe6tions, and master fecretary's, to aflift the regent and
to suppress the queen of S:ots, I know not, nor is it not
material; but I do afliredly think, that her majefly will
prefer her surety, the tranquillity of her reign, and the
conservation of her people, before any device, which may
proceed from vain discourse, or imperfections of passions,
and inconsiderate affecions. And as for Mr. Secretary,
you are not to learn, that as he liketh not to go too fast
afore, so he coveteth not to tarry too far behind, and fpe-
pially when the reliques be of no great value or power.

, If

If I could as well assure you of his magnanimity, and
conflancy, as of his present conformity, I would fay con-
fidently, you mny repose as well of him in this matter,
as of the duke of Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pem-
broke, Leicefler, Bedford, Shrewsbury, and the reft of the
nobility; all which do embrace and protefte the ac-
complifhment of this cafe. I have, according to your ad-
vice, written presently to my lord Regent, with the fame
seal and care of his well doing that I owe to him, whom
I love and honour. Mr. Secretary hath assured unto
him the queen of Scotland's favour and good opinion,
wherewith he feemeth to be well fatisfy'd. If your cre-
dit be, as I truss, haflen your coming hither, for it is
very ne efllry that you were ht-e pielently. Q Elizabeth
both doth write to my lord Regent in such fort, as he may
perceive Mr. Wood's difcouilts of her majefly's affection
to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than he
conjedureth of him, the effect of which her majefly's let-
ter you shall understand, by my o0 d Leicefter's letter unto
you at this dispatch. At the ourt, 20th July, I569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p. 504.)

Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L. IB

probably Lord Burleigh.

,g. - EC AUS E I fee that great advantage is taken
l-art. Lib. D on small occasions, and that the mention of the
SB 9 marriage betwixt the queen my fovereion's mother, and

the D. of Norfolk, hath this while pift been very frequent
in both the realms, and then I my!elf to be spoken of as
a motioner, which I perceive is at the last come to her
majefty's ears; I will, for fatis(a6tion of her highness,
and the discharge of my duty towards her majfPty, mani-
fest unto you my interest, and medling in that matter,
from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is preju.
dicial to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king
my sovereign, this his realm, and me. What conferrences
was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that
were with me within the realm of England, I am not able
to declare; but I am no wife forgetful of any thing that
pafled betwixt him and me, either at that time, or since.
And to t1e end her Majefly may understand how I have

been

been dealt with, in this matter, I am compelled to touch
some circumfiances, before there was any mention of her
marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the commimfion-
ers, I found very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and
others her highnefs's commifflioners, in the beginning of
the cause, as in the making of the others to proceed iin-
cerely, and so further. During which time, I entered
into general speech, flicking at our just defence in the
matters that were objedted against us, by the laid queen's
commifiioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but
summary cognition in the cause of controversy, with a
small declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day
the lord Lithington's secretary rode with the duke to
Howard, what purpose they had 1 cannot fay, but that
aight Lithington returning, and entering in conferrence
with me upon the f(ate of our acion, I was advised by
him to pass to the duke, and require familiar conferrence,
by the which I might have some feeling to what issue our
matters would tend. According to which advice, having
gotten time and place convenient in the gallery of the house
where the duke was lodged, after renewing of our firfi
acquaintance made at Berwick, the time before the as-
size of Leith, and some speeches passed betwixt us; he
began to fay to me, how he in England had favour and
credit, and I in Scotland had will and friendship of many,
it was to be thought there could be none more fit inftru-
ments, to travel tor the continuance of the amity betwixt
the realms, than we two. And so that discourse upon the
present state of both, and how I was entered in that a~ion
tending so far to the queen's dishonour, I was willed by
him to confider how matters flood in this, what honour
I had received of the queen, and what inrconveniencies her
defimation in the matters laid to her charge might breed
to her poflerity. Her refpe6t was not little to the crown
of England, there was but one heir. The Hamiltons my
unfriends, had the next refpea, and that I ihould efteemn
the issue of her body would be the more affetionate to
me and mine, than. any other that coul'd attain to that
crown. And so it thould be meeteft, that fle affirmed her
dimiffion made in Lochlevin, and we to abffra6t the let-
ters of her hand write, that Ihe flould not be defamed in
England. My reply to that was, how the matter had paffled
in parliament, and the letters seen to many, so that the
abitrading of the fame could not then fecuare her to any

purpose,

purpose, and yet thould we, in that doing, bring the ig/
nlominy upon us. Affirming it would not be fair for us
that way to proceed, feeing the queen's majefly of Eng-
land was not made privy to the matter as she ought to be,
to be in refpe&t we were purposely come in England for
that end, and for the - of the grants of our caufle The
duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle mat,
ters well enough at the court. After this, on the occa-
sion of certain articles, that were required to be resolved
on, before we entered on the very declaration of the very
ground of our acTion, we came up to the court; where
some new commiflioners were adjoined to the formers and
the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the parlia-
ment house at Weftminfier, in presence of which com-
miflioners of the said queen, and - through the -
rebuking of the queen of England's own commiflioners,
we uttered the whole of the acion, and produced such
evidences, letters, and probations, as we had, which might
move the queen's majefly to think well of our cause.
Whereupon expe6ting her highness declaration, and feeing
no great likelihood of the fame to be suddenly given, but
daily motions then made to come to an accord with the said
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean sea-
son, flanding in hazard and danger, we were put to the ut.
termoft point off our wit, to imagine whereunto the mat-
ters would tend, tho' albeit we had left nothing undone
for juftfiication of our causes, yet appeared no end, 'but
continual motions made to come to Come accord with the
queen, and restore her to whole or half reign. I had no
other answer to give them, but that I should neither do
against conscience or honour in that matter. Notwith-
flanding feeing this my plain answer wrought no end, nor
dispatch to us, and that I was informed that the duke be-
gan to mislike of me, and to speak of me, as that I had

Probably reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her ---
Adulrertr. and murderer, I was advised to pals to him, and give

him good words and to purge myself of the things ob-
jedted to me, that I should not open the sudden entry of his
evil grace, nor have him to our enemy----confider-
ing his greatness. It being therewithal whispered, and
fhewed to me, that if 1 departed, he flanding discontented
and not satisfied, I might peradventure find such trouble
in.my way, as my throat might be cut before I came to
Berrick. And therefore since it might well enough ap-

3 pear

pear to her marriage, I should not put him in utter despair,
that my good will could not be had therein. So few days
before my departing I came to the park in Hampton court,
where the duke and I met together, and there I declared
unto him that it was come to my ears, how Come mil-
report should be made of me to him, as that I thould
speak irreverently and rathly of the Caid queen my fove-
reign's mother,*fuch words as before expressed, that he
might ---- thereby my affection to be so alienate from Probably
her, as that I could not love her, nor be content of her fuypea.
preferment, howbeit he might perfwade himself of the con-
trary, for as the once was the person in the world that I
loved best, having that honour to be so near unto her, and
having received such advancement and honour by her, I
was not so ungrate or so unnatural ever to with her body
harm, or to speak of her as was untruly reported of
me, (howsoever the truth was in the self) and as to the
preservation of her son, now my Covereign, had moved
me to enter into this cause, and that her own prefling was
the occasion of that was uttered to her - whenfbever Probably
God thould move her heart to repent of her bypast beha- diihY2our.
viour and life, and after her known repentance, that the
thould be separate from that ungodly and unlawful mar-
riage that she was entered in, and then after were joined
with such a godly and honourable a personage, as were
affecioned to the true religion, and whom we might trust,
I could find in my heart to love her, and to thew her as
great pleasure, favour, and good will, as ever I did in my
life; and in cafe, he ihould be that personage, there was
none whom I could better like of, the queen - in -
of England being made privy to the matter, and ihe allow-
ing thereof, which being done, I ihould labour in all things
that I could, to her honour and pleasure, that were not
prejudicial to the king my fovereign's estate, and prayed
him not to think otherwise of me, for my affeaion was
rather buried and hidden within me, awaiting until God
dhould dire& her to know herself, than utterly alienated
and abftraded from her; which he seemed to accept in
very good part, saying, Earl of Murray thou thinks of me
that thing, whereunto I will make none in England or Scot-
land privy, and thou halt Norfolk's life in thy hands.
So departing, I came to my lodging, and by the way,
and all night, I was in continual thought and agitation
of mind, how to behave myself in that weighty matter,

. first,

first, imagining whereunto this thould tend, if it were at.
tempted without the queen s majesty of England's know.
ledge and good will, this realm and I myself in particu-
lar having received such favour and comfort at her high-
nefs's hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietness,
since God pofiffed her mjei-ty with her crown. And on
the other part, ieeing the duke had disclosed him to me,
protefiing, none other were or thould be privy to our
speech, I tho't I could not find in my heart to utter any
thing that might endanger him ; moved to the uttermost
with these cogitations, and all desire of sleep then remov-
ed, I prayed God to fend me some good relief and out-
gate, to my discharge, and fatisfadtion of my troubled
mind, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or with.
in a day or two thereafter, I entered in conversation with
my lord of Leicester, in his chamber at the court, where
he began to find thange with me, that in the matter I
made so difficult to him, ifanding so precisely on confer-
rence, and how when I had in my communication with
the duke, come so far - and there he made some dif.
course with me, about that which was talke betwixt us, I

Probably perceiving that the duke had - - the matter to my lord

icj/ced. of Leicester, and thinking me thereby dlicharged at the

duke's hands, therefore 1 repeated the fame communi-
cation in every point to my lord of Leicester, who desired
me to shew the fame to the queen's majefly, which I re-
fused to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her
highness any thing, that he as one - by her m.jefty,
and for many benefits received at her highnifs's hands is
obliged to wish her well, ihould make declaration of the
fame to her majefiy, as I understand by some speech of
her highness to me, he did. This my declaration to the
duke was the only cause, that flaid the violence and trouble
prepared for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways un-
derfitand. The fame declaration I was obliged to re.
new since in writings of --- ent to my servant John
Wood. The fum whereof, I trufi, he (hewed the auke,
and' something also I wrote to himself, for it was tho't this
ihould redeem some time, that the duke f(ould not faud-
denly declare him our enemy, for his greatness wasoft
laid before me, and what friendship he had of the chief of
the nobility in England, so that it might appear to the
queen's majesty of England--fo cold towards us, and doing
nothing publkkly that might seem favourable for us, we

had

had some cause to fufpe& that her highness should not be
contrarious to the marriage when it ihould be proposed to
her. The sharp message sent by her majefly with the lord
Boyd, who had the like commiflion from the duke tending
so far to the laid queen's preferment, as it were proposing
one manner of conditions from both, gave us to think that
her highness had been foreleen in the duke's design, and
that she might be induced to allow thereof. But howbeit
it was deviled in England, that the lord of Lechington
ihould come as from me, and break the matter to her
highness, as her majefly in a letter declared that she
looked for his coming, yet that devise proceeded never of
me, nor the noblemen at the convention could no wife ac-
cord to his sending, nor allow of the matter motioned, but
altogether mifliked it, as bringing with the fame great in-
conveniencies to the surety and quietness of this whole isle;
for our proceedings have declared our mifliking and difal-
lowance of the purpose from the beginning, and if we had
pleased he was ready for the journey. And in likewise
it was devised to give content, that the - between Probably
the said queen and Bothwell, should be fuffered to pro- divorce.
ceed in this realm, as it was desired by the laid lord Boyd,
by reason we could not understand what was the queen's
majeffy's pleasure, and allowance in that behalf -----
And whereas ye mean, that her highness was not made
privy of any such intention, the fault was not in me. The
first motion being declared, as I have written, to my lord
of Leicefler, and by him imparted to her majesty, so far
as I could perceive by some speech of her highnefs's to me,
before my departing. Thus I have plainly declared how I
have been dealt withal for this marriage, and how jus ne-
ceflity moved me not to require diredly, that which the
duke appeared so - unto. And for my threatnings,
to assent to the fame, I have exprefied the manner; the
persons that laid the matter before me, were of my own
company. But the duke since hath spoken, that it was
his writing which saved my life at that time. In con-
clufion I pray you persuade her majefly, that lhe let no
speeches nor any other thing passed and objected to my
prejudice, move her majesty to alter her favour-towards
me, or any ways to doubt of my assured constancy to-
wards her highness, for in any thing which may tend

VOL. II. Dd to

to her honour and surety, I will, while I live, bef1or
myself, and all that will do for me, notwithstanding mj
hazard or danger, as proof should declare, when her ma
jefty finds time to employ me.

APPE N D I X

TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 9.)

William Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of
Leicester, March 20th, 1570, from Ledington.

T HE great desolation threatned to this whole realm, An Ori~g.

be the divisions thereof in dangerous factions, doth nal.

press me to frame my letters to your lordihip, in other
fort, then were behovefull for me, if I had no other
refped, but only to maintain my private credit; therefore
I am driven to furnish them with matter, which I know
not tobe plausible, whereupon my mifconitruing my mean-
ing, rome there may take occasion of offence, thinking
that I rather utter my own passions, than go about to in-
form your lordship truly of the state; but I truss my plain
bea'ing Yna'll 'ear record to the incerity of my meaning ;
to make the fame sensible, I will lay before your lordfhip's
eys, th¼ep)t of this country; which firi is divided into
two fations, the one pretending the maintenance of the
king's reign, the other affedging the queen to have been
cruelly dealt withall, and unjustly deprived of her state;
the former is comptfed of a good number of nobility, gen-
tlemen, and principal burroughs of the realme, who (hall
"have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in hand, the queen's
majeIfy your fovereign's allowance and prote&ion ; the
other hath in it some most principall of the nobility, and
therewithall, good numbers of the inferior fort, through-
out the whole realm, which also look assuredly that all
kings do allow their quarrel and will aid them according-
ly. What consequence this division will draw after it, I
leave it to your lordfhip's consideration; there is fallen out
another division, accidentally, by my lord regent's death,
which is like to change the Rfate of the other two factions,
to encreafe the one, and diminish the other, which is

D d 2 grounded

grounded upon the regiment of the realm. Some nunil
her of noblemen aspire to the government, pretending
right thereto by reason of the queen's demiflion of the
croun, and her commission granted at that time for the
regiment during the king's minority; another faction doth
altogether repine againfi that division, thinking it neither
fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the meanest fort
amongst the earls, /hall presume to challenge to themselves
a rule over the whole realme, the next of the blood, the
firif in rank, the greatest alway both for the antientry of
their houses, degree, and forces, being negleckted; this
order they think preposterous, that the meaner fort shall
be placed in public fun&ion to command, and the greater
ihall continue as private men to obey; besides that, they
think if the commiflion had in the beginning been valew-
able, (which the most part will not grant) yet can it not
be extended to the present, for that the conditions there-
unto annexed are ceased, and so the effea of the whole
void ; the latter part of this division hath many preten-
ces, for besides the queen's fa&ion, which is wholly on
that fide, a great number of these that have heretofore pro-
sessed the king's obedience, do favour the fame, and will
not yield to the government of the other, whose preferment
for refpeas they mislike, when the queen's facion shall
be increased, with a part of the king's, and there not of
least substance, and yow may judge what is like to ensue;
an other incident is like to move men to enter in further
discourses, it is given out here in Scotland that the queen's
majefly is letting forth Come forces towards the border,
which ihall enter this realm, to countenance these, that as-
pire to the regiment, and suppress the contrary faction,
and bruits are spread, that the fame shall be here out of
band ; these that think themselves of equal force with their
contrary faaion at home, or rather an overmatch to them,
yet not able to encounter with the forces of another prince,
rather than yield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take ad.
vice of neceflity, and evil councillors, and seek also the
maintenance of some foreign prince, whereby her majesty
(altho no further inconvenient were to be feared) muff be
driven to exceflive charges, and it would appear there
were a conspiracy of all the elements at one time to set
us together by the ears, for now when the rumour of
your forces coming towards the border is spread abroad,
even at the fame time is arrived at Dumbarton, a galzeon

with

with a messenger sent exprefly from the king of France,
to that part of the nobility that favours the queen, to
learn the slate of the country, and what support they lack
or desire, either for furtherance of her affairs, or for their
own safety; assuredly this message will be well received,
and fuffered accordingly, this is the present slate of Scot-
land. Now, if your lordihip would also know my opinion,
how to choice the best, as the cafe flandeth; I will in
that also fatisfie your lordship, I am required from them to
deal plainly, and your lordship shall judge whether I do to
or not ; for I think it plain dealing, when I simply utter
my judgment, and go not about to disguise my intents.
I trust the queen's majesty hath a desire to retain at her
devotion the realme of Scotland, which the hath gone
about to purchase, with beftowing great charges, and
the loss of some of her people; this desire is honourable
for her highness, profitable for both the countrys, and.
of none to be dirallowed; specially if it be (as I take it) to
have the amity of the whole realm, for it is not a portion
of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove commo-
dious for her to suit the friendship of a faction of Scotland,
for in so doing, in gaining the best, (he may lose the
more, and the fame would bring all her acions with us
in suspicion, if ihe ihould go about to nourish faaions

Samong, whch meaning I am sure never "entered into

her majefty's heart; then if it be the friendship of the
whole the doth demand, let her not, for pleasure of one
pert, go about to overthrow the remnant, which will not
be so faifable, as rome may give her to underfand ; but
rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the
whole Cfate, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all
by good means to an uniformity, so ihall ihe give us all oc-
cafion to think well of her doings, that the tendeth our
wealth, and provokes us universally to with unto her ma-
jefly a most prosperous continuance; by the contrary, if,
for the pleasure of a few, (he will fend forces to suppress
thefre whom they mislike, and so consequently offend ma-
ny ; men be not so faint hearted, but they have courage
to provide for their own safety, and not only will embrace
the means partly offered, but will also procure further, at
the hand of other princes. This for mine own part,
I do abhor, and protefi I desire never to fee forces of
strangers to set foot within this land, yet I know not what
point necessity -may drive men into, as if men in the middle

D.d 3 of

of the sea were in a flhip, which suddenly should be set on
fire, the fear of burning would make them leap into the
lea, and Coon after the fear of the water would drive them
to cleive again to the fired (hip, so for avoiding present
evil, men will many times be inforced to have recourfeto
another, no lers dangerous. Trulf me forces will not
bring forth any good fruit to her majefly's behove, it
must be some way of treaty shall serve the turn, wherein
by my former letters your lordship doth know already
what is my judgment; you fee how plainly I do write,
without consideration in what part my letters may betak-
en, yet my hope is that such as will favourably interpret
them, shall think that I mean as well to her majesty, and
that realme, as there that will utter other language. I
with the continuance of the amity betwixt the two coun-
trys, without other refpe,-, and will not conceal from her
majefly any thing, to my knowledge, tending to the pre-
judice thereof ; if I (hall perceave her majefly taking frank
dealings in evil part, I (hall from thenceforth forbear;
in the mean season I will not cease to trowble your lord-
ship, as I ihall have occasion to write, and so I take my
leave of your lordship,

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 9.)

Letter of queen Elisabeth to the earle of Suffeks,

July 2d, 170.

Calderw. T" IGHT truity and well beloved couTin we greet you
M.s. t-;r. IJ well, this day we have received your letters of 28
tory vol, a,
p 189.2' the last month, with all other letters, sent from Scot-

land, and mentioned in your letters, whereunto answer is
desired to be given before the tenth of this month; which
is a very short time, the weightiness of the matters, and
the difiance of the places considered; nevertheless we
have, as the shortness could fuffer it, resolved to give this
answer following, which we will that yow, by warrand
hereof shall caule to be given in our name to the earl of
Lennox and the reft of the noblemen conveened with him.
WVhere it is by them, in their letters, and writings al-
ledged, that for lack of our resolute answer, concerning the
cltablifhing of the regiment of the realm, under their young
Iing, great inconveniencies have happened, and therefore

3 '

^

they have deferred now at their last convention to deter-
mine of the famine, who shall have the place of govern-
our, until the 21ft this month, before which time they
require to have our adviCe, in what person or persons the
government of that realm shall be eflablifhed, we accept
very thankfull the goodwill and reputation they have of
us, in yielding so frankly to require and follow our advise
in a matter, that toucheth the slate of their king, their
selves, and realm so near, wherein as we perceive, that by
our former forbearing to intermeddle therein, they have
taken some discomfort, as though that we would not have
regard to their state and surety, Co on the other part, they
of their wisdoms ought to think, that it might be by the
whole world evil interpreted in us to appoint them a form
of government, or a governour by name, for that howfo-
ever we should mean well if we should do so, yet it could
not be without some jealousy in the heads of the estate, no-
bility, and communityof that realm, that the government
thereof should be by me specially named, and ordained;
so as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet mifliking most
that they should take any discomfort by our forbearing to,
show our mind therein, we have thought in this fort for to
proceed, considering with ourselves how now that realm
had been a good space of time ruled in the name of their
king, and by reason of his bale age, governed heretofore
by a very careful and honourable person, the earle of Mur-
ray, untill that by a mischievous person, (an evil exam-
ple) he was murdered, whereby great disorder and con-
fusion of necessity had, and will more follow, if determin-
ation be not made of some other special person, or per-
sons, to take the charge of governor, or superior ruler
fpeciall, for administration of law and justice, we cannot
but very well allow the desire of these lords to have some
special governor to be chosen ; and therefore being well
afllured, that their own underfianding of all others is
best to confider the state of that realm, and to discern
the abilities and qualities of every person meet and ca-
pable for such a charge, we shall better fatisfie ourselves,
whom they by their common conTent shall first choose,
and appoint to that purpose, then of any to be by us afore-
hand uncertainly named, and that because they shall per-
ceave that we have care of the person of their king, who
by nearness of blood, and in refped of his (0 young years,
Ought to be very tender and dear to us, we (hall not bide

Dd 4 our

our opinion from them, but if they shall all accord to name
his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox to be
governor alone, or jointly with others, (whom we hear to
be in the mean time by their common consent appointed
lieutenant-general) reason moveth us to think that none
can be chosen in that whole realm, that shall more desire
the preservation of the king, and be more meet to have
the government for his safety, being next to him in blood
of any nobleman of that realm, or elsewhere; and yet
hereby, we do not mean to prefcrive to them this choice,
except they shall of themselves fully and freely allow
thereof; furthermore we would have them well assured,
that whatsoever reports of devises, are, or stall be spread
or invented, that we have already yielded our mnwd 4.
alter the slate of the king or government of that realm,
the fame are without just cause or ground by us given,
for as we have already advertized them, that although we
have yielded to hear, which in honour we could not re-
fuse, what the queen of Scots on her part shall fay and
offer, not only for her own assurance, but for the wealth
of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be,
that (hall be offered, we mean not to break the order of
Iaw and juflice, by advancing her cause, or prejudging
her contrary, before we flhall deliberately and assuredly
fee, upon the hearing of the whole, some place necef-
fary, and jufi cause to do ; and therefore finding that
realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by Jaws of
that realm, and thereof invefited by coronation and other
folemnities used and requisite and generally to received be
the whole eltates, we mean not by yielding to hear the
complaints or informations of the queen against her son,
to do any aa whereby to make conclusion of governments,
but as we have found it, so to fuffer the fame to continue,
yea not to fuffer it to be altered by any means that we
may impefhe, as to our honour it doth belong, as by your
late a&ions hath manifestly appeared,untill by fomejufiice,
and clear cause, we shall be diredly induced otherwise to
declare our opinion; and this we would have them to
know to be our determination and course that we mean
to hold, whereon we trust they for their king may fee
how plainly and honourably we mean to proceed, and
how little cause they have to doubt of us, whatsoever to
the contrary they have or shall hear; and on the other
part, we pray them of their wisdoms to think how unho.

nourable,

aourable, and contrary to all human order it were for us,
when the queen of Scotland doth so many ways require
to hear her cause, and doth offer to be ordered be us in
the fame, as well for matters betwixt ourselves and her,
as betwixt herself and her son and his party of that realm,
against which offers no reason could move us to refuse to
give ear, that we should aforehand openly and direcily, be-
fore the causes be heard and considered, as it were, give a
judgment or sentence either for ourselves or for them
whom Ihe maketh to be her contraries. Finally ye (hall
admonish them, that they do not, by misconceiving our
good meaning towards them, or by indirect assertions of
their adversary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken
their own cause, in such fort, that our good. meaning to-
wards them /hall not take such effeca towards them, as
they (hall desire, or themselves have need of. All this
our answer ye (hall cause be given them, and let them
know, that for the Thortnefs of time, this being the end
of the second of this month, we neither could make any
longer declaration of our mind, nor yet write any several
letters, as if time might have served we would have done.
aJuly, 1570.

No. III, (Vol. II. p. 9.)

The bilhop of Ross to secretary Lidington from

Chattifworth.

tH AV E received your letters dated the 26th of May, jSth Juna

here at Chattilfworth, the to of January, but on 15°o.
e receipt thereof I had written to you at length, like as

the queen did with my lord Levingfton, by the which you
will be resolved of many points contained in your said
letter. I writ to you that I received your letter and cre-
dit from Thomas Cowy at London, and sent to Leicester
to know the queen of England's mind whether if you
thould come here or not. He sent me word, that the will
no ways have you come as one of the commiflioners,
because (he is yet offended with you; and therefore it
appears good that ye come not hither, but remain where
you are, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may best
advance the queen's affairs, for I perceive your weill and
?afety depends thereonl in refpea of the great feid and

enni.

ennimity born against you by your Scots people, and the
great heirship taken of your father's landis; both were sure
demonfirations of their malice. Yet I am encouraged by
your flout and deliberate mind. Assure yourself no dili-
gence shall be omitted to procure supports forth off all
parts where it may be had. We will not refuse the aid
neither of Papiff, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice ; and
to this end, during this treaty, let all things be well pre-
pared. And feeing my lord Seaton is desirous to go into
Slanders, the queen thinks it very necessary that he so do,
for the duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the
king of Spain to give support, and I am sure that there
he (hall have aid both of Slanders and the pope, for it
abides only on the coming of some men of countenance,
to procure and receive the fame. He mufi needs tarry
there, on the preparations thereof, during the treaty,
which will be a great furtherance to the fame here. The
queen has already written to the duke D'Alva for this
effeEt, advertizing of his coming ; there is certain sums
of money coming for support of the Englishmen, as I wrote
to you befbre from the pope. Wfiereupon I wou(d (
had a general commiflion to deal for them, and receive
such sums as (hall be given. The means shall be found
to cause you be anfuerit of the sums you writ for, to be
difpoint upon the furnishing of the castle of Edenburgh,
so being some honest and true man were sent to Slanders
to receive it, as laid is, which I would you prepared and
sent. Orders thall be taken for the metals as you writ of.
We have proponit your avyce in entering to treat with the
queen of England, for retiring of her forces puntyoally
for lack of aid. Your answers to the Englishmen aretho't
very good, but above all keep you weil out of their hands,
in that care, eftote prudentes ficut ferpentes. You may
take experience with the hard dealing with me, how ye
would be used if ye were here, and yet I am not forth of
danger, being in medio nationis prave ; always no fear,
with God's grace, shall make me shrink from her majefly's
service. Since the queen of England has refused that you
come here, it appears to me quod nondum eft ftdata ma.
litia amorreorum, &c. and therefore if Athol or Cathenes
might by any means be procured to come, they were the
moss fit for the purpose, Rothes were also meet, if he and
I were not both of one firname; so the treaty would get
the less credit either in Scotland or here, Therefore avys,

and

and fend the best may serve the turn, and fail not Robert
Meivil come with them, whoever comes, for so is the
queen's pleasure; in my ]aft packet, with James Fogo,
to you, in the beginning of May, I sent a letter of the
queen's own hand-writing to him, which I truss ye re-
ceived. I am sorry ye come not for the great relief I hoped
to have had by your presence, for you could well have
handled the queen of England, after her humour, as you
were wont to do. The ret I refer to your good wisdom,
praying God to fend you health. From Chattifworth
the a5th of January.

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 30.)

The declaration of John Cais to the lords of

Grange and Lethington zoungare upon the 8th
day of Ot. 1571.

WHereas you desire to know the queen's majefty's

pleasure, what the will do for appeasing of thele

controversies, and therewith has offered yourselves to be
at her commandment, touching the common tranquility
of the whole isle, and the amity of both realms; her plea-
sure is in this behalf, that ye should leave off the main-
tenance of this civil discord, and give your obedience to
the king, whom the will maintain to the utmost of her
power.

AND in this doing, she will deal with the regent and

the king's party, to receive you into favour, upon rea-
fonable conditions for security of life and livings.

ALso the says that the queen of Scotts, for that ihe

has praaifed with the pope and other princes, and also
with her own fubjeas in England, great and dangerous
treafons against the ifate of her own country, and also to
the deftrulion of her own perfdn, that the thall never
bear authority, nor have liberty while ihe lives.

IF ye refuse these gentle offers, now offered unto you,

the will presently aid the king's party, with men, am-
munition, and all necessary things, to be had againif you.

WHEREUPON her majefly requires your answer with

speed, without any delay.

No. V.

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 40.)

Articles sent by Knox to the general Affemblyh

August Sth, 1572.

Calderw.

" IR S T, desiring a new a& to be made ratifying all

MS. His-

. things concerning the king and his obedience that

tory, Vol. were enacted of before without any change, and that the
*' 56' ministers who have contraveend the former aas be cori

reeted as accordeth.

THAT fute be made to the Regent's grace and nobility

maintaining the king's cause, that whatsoever proceedeth
in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk be not
prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they especially of the
ministers, that have been robbed of their poffeflions within
the kirk during the time of the troubles, or otherwibe
dung and injured, may be reffored.

To lute at the regent, that no gift of any bifloprick

or other benefice be given to any person, contrary to the
tenor of the a£s made in the time of the firfi regent of
good memory, and they that are given contrar the said
ads, or to any unqualified person, may be revoked and
made null be an adt of secret council, and that all bilhop-
ricks, To vacand may be presented, and qualified persons
nominat thereunto, withinl' year after the vaking thereof,
according to the order taken in Leith be the commission.
ers of the nobility and of the kirk in the month of January
last, and in special to complain upon the giving of bishop-
rick of Ross to the lord Methven.

THAT no pentions of benefices, great or small, be

given be simple donation of any lord regent, without
consent of the poffefior of the said benefices having tittle
thereto, and the admillion of the superintendent or com-
mifflioners of the province where this benefice lyeth, or of
the bishops lawfully eleAted according to the said order
taken at Leith ; and desire an at of council to be made
thereupon, until the next parliament, wherein the famine
may be specially inatcd, with inhibition to the lords of
feflion to give any letters or decreets, upon such simple
gifts of benefices or pentions not being given in manner
above rehearsed, and that the kirk presently assembled
declare all such gifts null to far as lyeth in their power,

THAT the first form of presentation to benefices, which

were in the sirs and second regent's time be not changed
as now it is commonly; but that this clause be contained
in the presentation, that if the persons presented make
not refidance, or be slanderous or found unworthy either
in life or doarine be the judgment of the kirk (to which
alwife he shall be fubjea) or meet to be transported to
another room at the fight of the kirk, the said prefenta-
tion and all that shall fall thereupon thall be null and of
no force nor effea; and this to have place also in the no-
mination of the bishops.

THAT an ad be made in this assembly that all things

done in prejudice of the kirk's assumption of the third,
either by papifts or others; by giving of fews, liferents,
or taks, or any otherwise difponing the said aflumed
thirds, be declared null with a solemn protestation the
whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

THAT an a& be made decerning and ordaining all bi-

thops, admitted to the order of the kirk now received, to
give account of their whole rents, and intromiflions there-
with once in the year, as the kirk shall appoint, for such
causes as the kirk may easily confider the fame to be most
expedient and neceffar.

ANENT the jurifdi&ion of the kirk, that the fame be

determined in this assembly, because this article hath been
Jong postponed to make fute to the regent and council for
remedy against meifengers and excommunicate persons.

Lasr that orders be taken anent the procurers of the

kirk, who procure againfit ministers and ministry, and for
futting ofjuftice of the kirk's aaions in the session.

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 46.)

Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the

peace concluded the 23d Feb. 1572.

BE it known to all men, by there presents, that I

Henry Killegrewe, Efq; ambassador for the queen's

majefly of England. Forasmuch as, at the earnest motion
and solicitation being made to me, on her highnefs's be-
half, there is accord and pacification of the publick troubles
and civil war within this realm of Scotland agreed and con-
cluded, and the fame favourably extended towards theright

9 honour-

honourable George earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and Baid-
zenuch, and the lord John Hamilton, (on to the duke's
Grace of Chaftellarault, and commendatour of the abbyof
Abirbrothock, for the surety of their lives, livings, honours,
and goods of them, their kinsfolks, friends, servants, and
partakers, now properly depending on them ; in treating
of the which said pacification, the murders of the late earl
of Murray uncle, and the'earl of Levenax grandfather,
late regent to the king's majesty of Scotland his realm and
lieges, as also an article touching the discharge for the
fruEtis or moveable goods, which the laid persons have
taken fra perfonis profeffing the king's obedience, be for
the damages done or committed by them, since the I5th
day of Junij, I567, and before the penult day of July
last by passed, by reason of the common cause or any thing
depending thereupon, being thought by the king's commi-
faries matteris of such wecht and importance, as the king's
present regent could not conveniently, of himself, remit
or discharge the fame. Yet in refpea of the necessity of
the present pacification, and for the weil of the king, and
common quietness of this realm and lieges, it is accorded,
that the matters of remission of the said murderers, and
of the discharge of the said frutis, moveable goods, and
other damages, moved by the persons desiring the laid re-
missions and discharge to the queen's majesty my fove-
reign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and habi-
tation to the king of Scots. And whatsoever her majesty
shall advise and councel touching the said remiflion and
discharge, the laid lord regent, for the well of the king
and universal quietness of the realm of Scotland, (hall
perform, observe, and fulfil the fame. And in likewise,
the laid earl Huntly, and commendatour of Abirbro-
thock, being urged to have delivered pledges and hostages
for observation of the conditions of the laid accord and
pacification, hath required me in place thereof, in her
majefly's name, by virtue of my commission, to promise
for them that they shall truly and faithfully observe and
keep the laid pacification, and all articles and conditions
thereof, for their parts, and that it would please her ma-
jefty to interpose herself, as surety and cautioner for them
to th't effeQ&, to the king's majesty of Scotland their so-
vereign and his said regent, which I have done and pro-
inife to do, by virtue ot his majefly's commiflion, as by
thi. honourable and plain dealing of the laid earl and lord,

their

their intention to peace well appears, the fame being most
agreeable to the mind of the queen's majesty my fove-
reign, which so long by her miniflers hath travelled for
the said pacification, and in the end, at her motion and
solicitation, the fame is accorded, knowing her majefly's
delire, that the fame may continue unviolate, and that
the noblemen and others now returning to the king's obe-
dience shall have fufficient surety for their lives, livings,
honours and goods. Therefore in her majefty's name,
and by virtue of my commission, I promise to the afore-
said earl Huntly and commendator of Abirbrothock, that
by her majeflty's good means, the said remission and dif-
charge ihall be purchased and obtained to them, their kin-
folks, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly de-
pending upon them (the persons specified in the first ab-
ftinence always excepted), as also that the (aid pacification
(hall be truly observed to them, and that her majefly (hall
interpose herself as confervatrix thereof, and endeavour
herself to cause the fame to be truly and sincerely kept in
all points and articles thereof accordingly. In witness
whereof, I have to this present subscribed with my hand,
and sealed the fame with mine own feat the x3th day of
Feb. Anno Domini 1572. And this to be performed by
me, betwixt the date hereof, and the parliament which
shall be appointed for their restitution, or at the furthest
before the end of the said parliament. Sic fubfcribitur.

The bishop of Glafgow's note concerning the

queen of Scotland's dowry.

T H E queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for iss,

her dowry, besides other pofleflions, the dukedom cor. tit,.

of Turene, which was solemnly contra6ted and given to cai5g 8. 4.
her by the king and estates of parliament; which dukedom
the poffeffed peacefully till 1567, and then, upon the pa-
cification betwixt the king and Mons. his brother, to aug-
ment whose appenage this dutchy was given, to which the
queen of Scotland yielded upon account of princes, who
*were her near relations, provided the equivalent which
was promised her thould be faithfully performed. So
that year, after a great many follicitations, in lieu of that
dutchy, flie had granted her the county of Vermaudaife
with the lands and bailiwicks of Seulcy and Vetry; tho'

'tis

'tis known that county, and the other lands were not of
equal value with Turene, but was promised to have an
addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an equal value.
Upon this letters patent were granted, which were con-
firmed in the courts of parliament, chamber of accompts,
court of aids, chamber of the treasury, and others necef-
fary; upon which (he entered into pofeflion of that county,
&c. Afterwards, by a valuation of the commiflioners of
the chamber of accompts, it was found that the revenue
of that county, &c. did not amount to those of Turene,
by 3000 livres. But inflead of making up this deficiency
according to juffice, some of the privycouncil, viz. M. de
Cheverney, the presidents of Bellievre, Nicocholay and
St. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwithstanding of
her aforesaid losses, did fell and alienate the lands of Sen-
lis, and the dutchy of Eflaimpes, to Madam de Montpen-
fier, from whom the king received money; of which sale
the counsellors aforesaid obliged themselves to be guaran-
tees, which hath hindered the aforesaid queen to have
julfice done her. So that Madam de Monpenfier hath
been put in poffetfion of these lands of Senlis, contrary to
all the declaration, protefiation, and assurances of the
king of France to queen Mary's ambassadors. So that the
queen of Scotland is difpoffeffed of her dowry, contrary
to all equity, without any regard to her quality.

No. VII. (Vol. II. p. 503.)

A letter from the Lord of Lochlevin to the Regent

Mortoun.

g3 March T T will please your grace, I receive your grace's let-
f5oo7' . ter, and has considered the fame. The parson of
Archives, Camfey was here at me before the receit thereof, direaed
Bund. B. fra my lord of Mar, and the maiter anent my last written,

o. 19. which was the answer of the writing that the matter

sent to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring me to
come to Sterling to confer with them. I had given my
answer before the receit of your grace's letter, that I be.
huiffit to be befyd San& Androis, at ane friends tryst,
which I might not omit: I underifand by my said cousin,
that the king's majcfly is to write to divers of the nobility
to come there, anent your lordlhip's trial, and that he

had written before his departure to my lord Monthrois.
I understand, likewise, he will write to your grace to
come there for the fame effedt, which I tho't good to
make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your
grace, for the love of God almighty, to look upon the
befll, and not to sleep in security, but to turn you with
unfeigned heart to God, and to confider with yourself, that
when the king's majefly was very young, God made him
the infirument to divest his mother from her authority,
who was natural princess, for offending of his Divine Ma-
jefty, and that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame
is aslargely in you, except to that your grace condescend-
ed not to the detrudtion of your wife. For as to har-
lotry and ambition, I think your grace has as far offended
God, and far more in avaritioufnefs, which vycis God
never left unplagued, except speedy repentance, which I
pray God grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace
can never have the love of God nor man. I pray your
grace flatter not yourself; for if your grace believes that
ye have the good will of them that are the king's good
willers ye deceive yourself; for surely I fee perfealy that
your own particulars are not contented, lat by the reft,
and that moat principally for your hard dealing. I pray
your grace, beir with me that I am thus hamlie, for cer-
tainly it proceeds from no grudge, but from the very as.
fedlion of my heart towards your grace, which has con-
tinued since we were acquainted. And now I fee, because
the matter flands in your grace's handling with the king's
majesty, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with hinm
now, I fee not how ye shall meet hereafter; pray I your
grace to call to God, and look on the best, and cast from
your grace both your vices, to wit, ambition and avari-
tioufnefs. I am riding this day to Sand Androis, and
trust to return on Wednesday at the farthest, If your
grace will command me in any offices that are honest,
that I may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, adver,
tifeofyour grace's mind, and (hall do to my power and
knowledge, and this with my heartlie, &c. &c,

To our trusty cousin the lord Lochjeven.

From the rT RUSTY cousin, after our most hearty commenda.

rigina .

J tions, we received your letter of the 3d of March,

ton's Ar- and as we take your plainness therein in good part, as pro.
chives, ceeding from a friend and kin(man, in whose good as-

nnd. B. feaQion towards us we never doub ed, Co ye may not think

it firange that we purge ourself so far of your accusation,
as in conscience we find not ourself to have offended
in. As touching our offence to God, we intend not to
excuse it, but to submit us to his mercy; for ambition
surely we think none can justly accule us; for in our
private efltate we could, and can live as well contented, as
any of our degree in Scotland, without further aspiring,
The bearing to the charge of the government of the realm,
indeed, mon lead us, or any other that Thall occupy that
place, not simply to refpe& ourself, but his majeity's rowme
which we supply, and therein not transcending the bounds
of measure, as, we trust, it fnall not be found we have
done, it ought not to be attributed to any ambition in us.
For as Coon as ever his majefly shall think himself ready
and able for his own government, none flall more wil-
lingly agree and advance the fame nor I, since I think
never to set my face against him, whole honour, safety,
and preservation has been Co dear unto me, nor Iwill
never believe to find otherwise at his hand than favour,
although all the unfriends I have in the earth were about
him, to persuade him to the contrary. As we write unto
you, our friendly dealing and confidence in the house of
Mar is not thankfully acquit; as we trufi yourself con-
fiders; but because the ambassadors of England, my lord
of Angus, the chancellor, treasurer, and Come noblemen
rides weft this day to fee the king, we pray you heartily
address yourfe f to be there as soon as ye can, and as ye
shall find the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized
thereof, with your own advice, by Alexr. Hay, whpm
we have tho't good to fend wellft, feeing my lord of Angus,
from Sterling rides to Douglas. And to we commit you
in the proteLcion of God. At Holyrood house, the 4th
of March, 1577.

FOR the avariciousness laid to our charge, indeed it lies

not in us so liberally to deal the king's geare, as to fatis.
fy all cravers, nor never flall any Ifvereign and native

born

born prince, let be any officer, eschew the dildains of
such, as thinks them judges to their own reward; in ma-
ny causes I doubt not to find the afliflance of my friends,
but where my aaions (hall appear unhoneft, I will not
crave their aflifiance, but let me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 97.)

The copy of the king of France his directions sent

to Scotland with Seineur de la Motte Fenelon.
Translated out of the French.

F I R S T, on their majefly's mofl christian part, he Calaerw.

shall make the most honourable salutation and visit- MS. His-

ing to the most serene king of Scotland, their good bro- tr'., 'V4zo
ther and little (on, that in him is poffable.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and such

like as they have written to him with their hands, and to
show exprefly the perfea friendship and singular affec-
tion, that their majeflys bear to him, and to bring back
the answer.

To take heed to the things which touch near the most

serene king,'to the effed that his person may be in no
danger, but that it may be mofi surely preserved.

AND that he be not hindered in the honest liberty that

he ought to have, and that no greater, or ftraiter guards
be about him than he had before.

AND such like, that he be not impeached in the au-

thority, that God hath given to him of king and prince
sovereign above his fubjeas, to the effeA he may as
freely ordain and command in his affairs, and in the
affairs of his country, with his ordinary council, as he
was used to do of before.

THAT his nobility, barons, and commonality of his

country may have their free liberty to resort to his serene
majefly without suspicion of greater guards or more armed
men about his person than the use was, that they be not
affraid and hindered to resort; and further that the seg-
nieur de la Motte Fenelon fall liberally and freely speak
to the said serene king and council, requiring the re efta-
blithing of that that may or hath been changed or al-
tered.

Ee z ANn.

AND that he may know if the principalls of the nobi.

lity, and other men of good behaviour of the towns anA
commonality of the contry conveens, and are content with
the form of government presently with the said serene
king, to the end that if there be any miscontent he may
travaile to agree them together, and that he return not
without the certainty of the famine.

AND if he may understand that there be any who have

not used them so reverently towards the said serene king
their sovereign lord, as the duty of their obedience re.
quired, that be may pray on this behalf of his majesty
most christian the said serene king his good brother, giving
him councill wholly to forget the fame, and exhorting
them to do their duty towards his majesty, in time coming,
in all refpets with the obedience and true fubjedlidn they
ought him.

AND if the said seigneur de la Motte, perceves the said

serene king to be in any manner constrained of his person,
authority, liberty, and disposition of his affairs, than he
used to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, oras
the sovereignty of a prince does require, that he use all
moyen lawful and honest to place him in the famine, and
that he imploy as much as the credit of his most chriftiati
majesty may do toward the nobility, and fubje6ts of that
contry, and as much as may his name, with the name
of his crown towards the Scottish nation, the which he
loves and confides in as much as they were proper French.

men.

AND that he wittnefs to the said serene king, and his

efiates, of his consent, and to all the nobility and princi-
pall personages of the contry, that his most Christian ta-
jeftie will continue on his part in the most ancient alli-
ance and confederacy, which he hath had with the laid fe-
rene king his good brother, praying his nobility and con-
try, with his principall fubjedts, to persevere in the famine,
in all good underflanding and friendfhip.with him; the
which, on his part, he shall do, observing the famine
nmofi inviolable.

FyRTHER his most christian majesty underfianding

that the serene king his good brother was contented with
the duke of Lenox, and his fervife, the said fignieur De
la Motte had charged to pray his serene majesty that he
might remaine beside him to his contentment, believing
that he ihould more willing intertain the points of love

and

ind confederace, betwixt their majestys and their contrys,
because he was a good fubjeft to them both; and if he
might not remain, without some alteration of the tranqui-
lity of his eflate, that he might retire hamn to his own
house in the said contry, in furenes, or if he pleased to
return to France that he might surely- and if it pleases
his serene majefly, to cause cease and flay the impeach-
ments, that are made of new upon the frontiers, to the
effe6t that the natural Frenchmen may enter as freely into
the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

AND that there may be no purpose of diffamation, nor

no speech but honourable of the mofi Chriflian king, in
that contry, but such like as is spoken mofi honourably
of the serene king of Scotland in France.

HE had another head to propone, which he concealed

till a little before his departure, to wit, that the queen,
the king's mother, was content to receive her fun in affo-
ciation of the kingdom.

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. I15.)

Lord Hunfdane to Sir Francis Walsingham, the

i4th of August, 1584, from Berwick.

SIR,

A CCORDING to my former letters, touching my Calderw.

meeting with the earl of Arran upon Wednesday tory,Vol. 3.

lafit, there came hither to me from the earle, the jufftice p. 374.
clerk, and Sir William Stuart, captain of Dumbarton,
both of the king's privie council, to treat with me about
the order of our meeting, referring wholly to me to ap-
point the hour, and the number we (hould meet withal ;
so as we concluded the place to be Foulden, the hour to
be ten o'clock, and the number with ourselves to be 13 of
a fide; and the reft of our troops to ifand each of them a
mile from the town ; the one on the one fide, the other
on the other fide, so as our troops were two miles asunder;
I was not many horsemen, but I supplied it with footmen,
where I had 1oo thot on horse, but they were very near
500 horse well appointed: According to which appoint-
ment, we met yesterday, and after some congratulations,
the earle fell in the like protestations of his good will and
readiness to serve the queen's majesty, before any prince

Ee 3 in

in the world, next his sovereign, as he had done hereto-
fore by his letters, and rather more ; with such earnest
vows, as unless he be worse than a devil, her majefly may
dispose of him at her pleasure ; this being ended, I en-
tered w ith him touching the cause I had to deal with him,
and so near as I could, left nothing unrehearsed, that I had
to charge the king or him with any unkind dealing toward
her majelty, according to my inftruations, which without
any delay he answered presently, as ye shall perceive by
the said answers, sent herewith ; but I replying unto him,
he amplified them with many moe circumfitances, but to
this effect. Then I dealt with him touching the point
of her majefly's fatisfation, for the uttering such practices
as has been lately set on foot for the disquieting of her
majefly and her estate, who thereof made sundry discourses,
what marriages have been offered to his majesty by fundrie
princes, and by what means the earle has fought to divert
them, and for what causes; the one, for that be marriage
with Spain or France, he must also alter his religion,
which as he is sure the king will never doe, so will he
never fuffer him to hearken unto it, so long as he has
any credit with him ; he denys not but the king has been
dealt withal be practices to deal againit her majesty, which
he has so far denied and refused to enter into, as they
have left dealing therein, but whatsoever the king or he
knoweth therein there (hall be nothing hidden from her
majesty, as her majesty (hall know very shortly ; surely it
seems by his speeches, that if the king would have yielded
thereunto there had been no small company of French in
Scotland ere now to disquiet her majesty.- This be-
ing ended, I dealt with him earnefitly for the itay of this
parliament, which now approacheth ; or at the least that
there may be nothing done therein, to the prejudice of
there noblemen and others now in England, for the for-
faulting of their livings and goods ; hereupon he made a
long discourse to me, first ot the earl of Angus dealing
about the earl of Morton, then of his going out, notwith-
handing of fundrie gracious offers the king had made him,
then of the road of Ruthven, how that presently after they
had the kling's majesty in their hands, they imprisoned
himfclf, dealt with the king for putting of the duke out
of the realme, the king refused so to do, they told him
p'ainly that if he would not he should have the earle of
Arran's head in a dish; the king asked what offence the

earl

earl had made ? and they answered it muff be so, and
Ihould be so; hereupon, for the safeguard of Arran's life,
the king was content to fend away the duke, and vet Ar-
ran afterwards fundre times in danger of his life; I alled-
ged unto him the king's letter to the queen's majesty, and
his aAs in council, that they had done nothing but for
his fervife, and with his good liking and contentment,
who answered me he durst do no otherwise, nor could not
do any thing but that which pleased them, with such a
number of other their dealings with the king whileft he was
in their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad
if they were true; I said the king might have let the queens
majefty's ambassador have known his mind secretly, and
her majesty would have relieved him ; he answered, that
the king was not ignorant that the apprehensions in that
manner, proceeded from Mr. Bow's praaice, and thereby
durst not impart so much to ·him, and yet the king was
content, and did give remission to as many as would ac-
knowledge their faults, and ask remiflion, and such as
would not, he thought fit to banish, to try their further
loyalty, in which time they conspired the king's recond
apprehension, and the killing of the earle, and others,
and seduced the ministers to their faaion, and yet not
satisfied with these conspiracies and treasonable dealings
(as he terms them), are entered into a third, being in Eng-
land under hermajefiy's protection, to dishonour her ma-
jelly as far as in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king
conceave some unkindness in her majesty, for harbouring
of them; I wrote to yow what the conspiracy was, the
taking of the king, the killing of the earle of Arran, and
some others, the taking of the cafile of Edin'. and bring-
ing home the earles, to take the charge of the king ; all
which (says he) is by Drummond confeffed, and by the
provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and the con-
Itable of the castle thereupon fled; the earl brought Drum-
mond with him as far as Langton, where he lay, to have
confeffed the conspiracy before me, but having at his light-
ing received a blow on his leg with a horse, so as he could
bring him no further, I replied that I thought verily they
would not work any such pradices in refpe& of the
queen's majesty, abiding within her realme, and if there
be any such pracices, they have proceeded from others,
and they not privie unto them : and that if it be not ap-
parently proved against them, that it will be thought to

Ee 4 be

*be rome praaice to aggravate the fault, and to make them
the more odious to the king. He answered me, that it
should be proved lo fufficiently, that they should not be
able with truth to deny it, for their own hands is to be
showed to part of it, and therefore concluded, that if
her majesty should so press the king for them at this time,
that would rather hinder this matter of the amitty, nor
further it, and that since they seek chiefly his life, he could
not, in any reason, seek to do them any good; and besides
he assured me, that if he would, he dare not, this last
anatter being fallen out as it is; and surely if this matter
had not fallen out, I would not have doubted the reftor-
ing of the earl of Mar very shortly, if her majesty would
have employed me therein, but for the earl of Angus, I
perceive the king is persuaded that both he, and the reft
of the Douglaffes, have conceived so mortall an hatred
against him and the earl of Arran, about the death of the
earl of Morton, as if they were at horie, to-morrow next,
they would not leave to praftice and confpiie the death of
them both, and therefore a hard matter to do any thing
for hm : finally, he concluded and required me to assure
her majesty from the king, that there (hall nothing be hid
from her, nor any thing left undone that may fatisfie her
majesty with reason, and that the king thall never do any
thirig, nor consent to have any thing done in her prejudice,
so long as he had any credit with him, or authority un-
der him. Having this far proceeded, te desired to Thew
me his commiflion, which is under the great feal, to him-
self only, which is as large as may be, and yet fundrie of
the privie council there with him, but not one in com-
mission, nor present, nor near us all this time having
spent almofi five hours in these matters; he presented to
me the mailer of Gray, who delivered to me a letter from
the king in his commendation, whom I perceive the
king means to fend to her majefly, and therefore requires
a fafe-conduCt for his passage, which I pray yow procure,
and to lend it to soon as you may. I let him underfand of
the lord Seaton's negociation with the French king. He
swore to me, that Seaton was but a knave, and that it
was partly against his will, that he should be sent thither.
But his commiflion and inftru6tion being of no great im-
portance, he yielded the sooner; and if Seaton has gone
beyond his intru6tions, which Arran drew himself, he
vwll make Seaton fmiart for it. Touching William New-

9 gate,

gate, and Mark Golgan, he protelted he never heard of
any such; he says there was a little poor foul, with a black
beard, come thither a begging, who laid he was an ene-
my to Desmond, to whom he gave a croun, but never
heard of him since, and for any Scots man going into
Ireland, he says there is no such matter; if there be,
there may be some few ralkals that he knows not of; and
touching the coming of any Jesuits into Scotland, he says
it is but the slanderous devise of the kings enemys, and
such as would have the world believe the king were ready
to revolt in religion, who the world Ihall well fee will
continue as constant therein, as what prince soever pro-
sessed it molf; and the earle himself dos protest to me,
that to his knowledge, he never saw a jesuit in his life,
and did assure me if there was any in Scotland, they
thould not do so much harm in Scotland, as their ministers
would do, if they preach such doarine as they did in
Scotland; and touching one Ballenden, of whom 1 wrote
to yow, I heard from Mr. Colvill, the earle avows con-
flantly that he knows not, nor hath not heard es any such
man, but he would enquire at the juflice clerk, and would
inform me what he could learn of that; thus I have made
yow as short a discourse as I can of so many matters, to
)owg AkDcoUiet) UoPn, 'Ut the e ale the principal points
of all our talk, so near as I can remember it, and for
this time I commit yow to the Almighty. At Berwick
the x4th of Auguff, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have
my son Robert Carrie to come to him.
Ipray yow know her majefty's pleasure.

Arran's Answers to the grieffs or articles proponed
to the lord Hunfdane, set down in another form.

AS to the strait and severe persecution of all such, as

have been noted to have been well affeaed to the

queen's majesty, it cannot appear they were either for
that cause punifled, or hardly dealt with, since his ma,
jerfy of late has been so careful and diligent to choice out
good inifruments to deal betwixt her majesty and him,
as his majesty has done in eleating of your lordship and
me; besides that in all their accusations, their good will

and

and affeaion born to her majesty was, at no time, laid
to their charge, but capital ations of treason many way
tried now be the whole three estates, and more than ma-
nifeft to the world.

As for his majesty inhibiting, by publick proclamation,

such as were banished, not to repair in England; the
bruits and whisperings that came to his majefly's eats, of
their conspiracies and treafons, which since fyn the ac-
complifhed, so far as in them lay, moved his majesty to
inhibit them to repair to any place, so near his majefly's
realm, left they hould have attempted there things, which
ihortly they did attempt, being farther off, and more dif-
tant both by sea and land.

As for reception of jesuits, and others, her majefly's

fugitives, and not delivering them according to his pro-
mise, as your lordship propones, his majety would be mole
glad that so it might fall out by your lordfhip's traviles,
that no fugitive of either realme ihould be received of ei-
therand when so Ihall be, it Ihall not fail on his majefty's
part, albeit in every deed this time bygone his majefly has
been confitrained to receipt her majelty's mean rebells and
fugitives, contrar his good naturall, since her majesty
hath receipt, in effea, the whole and greatest rebells
and traitors his majesty in his own blood ever had; as
for the agreement with his majefty's mother anent their
association, his majeity has commanded me,in pretenceof
your lordfhip's servant, to assure her majefly and your lord-
thip, in his majefty's name, that it is altogether false, and
an untruth, nor any such like maccer done yet.

His majesty has also commanded me to assure your

lordship, that it is also false and untrue, that his majeffy
has, by any means diredt or indirect, sent any message to
the pope, or received any from him ; or that his majefly
has dealt with Spain or any foreigners, to harm her ma-
jefly or her realm, which his majelty could have no ho-
nour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I hope
in God it Ihall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majefly's

miniffers, sent unto his majesty, his majefly used none
of them so; and if his majesty had, fufficient cause was
given by them, as some of their own writs do vet teffify;
as I more particularly showed your lordship at Foulden at
our late meeting.

No. X.

No. X. (Vol. II. p. Ig9.)

Letter of Q. Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

Madame ma bonne Seur,

M 'Affeurant que vous avez eu communication d'une Cott.Lib.
~jy lettre de Gray que vofitre homme Semer me livra Col. R.
hier foubz le nom de mon filz y recongnoiffant quasi de i47.
mot a la mot less mefmes raifons que le dit Gray m'efcrivit An original.
en chifre eftant dernierement pres de vous defmnontrant la
fuffifance & bonne intention du personage je vous prieray
feulement fuivant ce que si devant je vous ay tant inftan-
tement importune que vous me permettiez de.claircir li-
brement & ouvertement ce point de I'affociation d'entre
moy & mon filz & me deffier les mains pour proceder avec
hui comme je jugeray eftre requis pour son bien & le
mien. Et j'entreprendz quoi que l'on vous die & puiffe
en rapporter de faire mentir ce petit bruillon qui perfuadd
par aucuns de vos minifires a enterpris cette separation
entre moy & mon enfant, & pour y commencer je vous
fupplie m'oaroyer qui je puiffe parler a ce justice clerk
qui vous a este nouvellement envoy6 pour mander par luy
a mon filz mon intention fur cela, ce qui je me promis que
ne ma refuferez, quant ce ne feroit que pour demontrer
en effea la bbnne intention que vous m'avez affeurde
avoir a l'accord & entretien de naturel devoir entre la mere
& I'enfant qui dit en bonnes termes eftre empefche pour
vous me tenant captive en un desert ce que vous ne pourrez
miex defmentir & faire paroitre voffre bon defir a notre
union que me donnant les moyens d'y proceder, & non
m'en retenir & empefcher comme aucune de vos minis-
tres pretendent a fin de laiffer toujours lieu a leur mauvais
& finifires pracliques entre nous. La lettre porte que l'af-
fociation n'eft pas paffee, auffi ne luy ai-je jamais dit, bien-
que mon filz avoit acceptS; & que nous en avions convenu
ensemble, comme I'a6te figne de fa main, & ces lettres
tant a moy, que en France en font soy, ayant donne ce
meme temoignage de fa bouche propre a plufieursambaffa-
deurs & perfonne de credit, s'excufant de ne I'ofer faire
publier par craint de vous feulement, demandant forces
pour vous resister d'avant de ce declarer si ouvertement
eitant journellement persuade au contraire par vos minis-

tres

tres qui luy prometoyent avecque une entreireaYorck
le faire declarer votre heretier. Au surplus Madame quand
morn enfant feroit fe malheureux que de s'opiniatrer en
certe extreme impiete & ingratitude vers moy, je ne puis
penfer que vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince dela
Chretient6 le voulifliez eu cela applaudir ou meintenir
pour luy fayre acquerir ma malediction ains que plutos
intrswiendretz pour luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop
juste & evidant devant Dieu & les hommes. Helas &en.
cores ne luy vouloier j'en ofter, mays donner avec droit
ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du toutcommifea
rous, & fidelemnent a;tcs fill vous pleft que je ne en foye
pis qu'aupravant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevaledef-
~ant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & la
plus grande affhilion qui me fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir la
perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplie de me mander en cas
cu'it persfite en ettte m'efconnpiffance de son devoir, que
de luy ou d' moy il vous plaift advouer pour legittime roy
ou royne d'Ecoffe, & si vous aves agreable de pourfuivre
avec moy a part la traite commence entre nous de quoyje
wous requiers fans plus attendre de response de ce nu
gouverne enfant vous en requerrant avec aruant d'affec-
tion que je sens mon cceuroppreffe d'ennuy. PourDieu
fuvenez vous de la promeffe que m'avez faites de me
prendre en votre proteAion me raportant de tout a vous,
& fur ce prian. Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de touts
ros enn-mys & difflimulez amys, comme je le desire de me
consoler & de me venger de ceulz qui pourchaffent un tel
malheur entre la mere & l'enfant. Je cefferay de vous
troubler, mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quelque
consolation de vous & de Dieu encore un coup je le sup.
plie de vous garder de tout peril. Futhbcry xii Mars.

Votre fidelemrent voue fieaur

& obeiffate confine, MARIE Q

A Ia reyne d'Angletterre

madame ma bonne fciur
& coufit.e.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. 130.)

A Testament by Q. Mary.

N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revs, Cott. bI

Mr. Crawford late regius profefifr of church history L..me. .
in the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper,
according to him, is written by Naue, Mary's fecre-
tary, the reft with the queen's own hand. What is
marked " is in the queen's hand.

COnfiderant par ma condition prelente l'eRat de vie

humaine, si incertain, que perfonne ne s'en peuff,

au doibt affeurer, finnon foubs la grande et infinie mi-
fericordede Dieu. Et mevoulant prevaloir d'icellecontre
Cous Ies dangers et accidens, qui me pourroient in opine-
ment furvenir en cette captivite, mefines a cause des grandes
et longues maladies, ou j'ay etc detenu6 jufques a present;.
j'ay advifd tandis que j'ay la commodit6, ou raison en ju-
gement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut de mon ame, en-
terrement de mon corps et disposition de mon bien, efiat,
& affaires, par ce present mon teflament et ordonnance dc
mon dernier volonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife St. Esprit.

Premierement, me recongnoilfant indigne pechereffe avec
plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfa&ion par
toutes les adverfites que j'ay fouffert; dont je la loue fa
bont. Et m'appuyazt fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Re-
dempteur Jesus Christ. Je recommei.de mon ame a la be-
noifte et individue Trinite, et aux prieres de la glorieufe
Vierge Marie, et de tous les anges fainas & faindes de
paradis, efperant par leur merites et interceflion, eftre ayde6
a obtenir de eitre faicte participante avec eulx de felicite
eternelle. Et pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net et
entier defpouillant des a present tout ressentiment des in-
jures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres offenfes, qui me
pourroient avoir e(e1 fades durant ma vie, par mes fubjets
rebelles et aultres ennemis; J'en retriet la vengeance a
Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mefme affe.ion,
que je luy requiers pardon a mes faultes, et a tous ceuls
et celles que je puis avoir offenf6 de faids onu de parolles.

Je

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The two following paragraphs
contain direttions concerning the place and circumfiance of her

burial.] Pour ne cortrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et conferva-
tion de l'Eglife catholique, apoftolique et Romaine, en la
quelle je veulx vivre et mourir, si le prince d'Efcoffe mon
filz y pueft etre reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture,
qu'il a prise a mon tres grand regret en l'herefie de Calvin
entre mes rebelles, je le laiffe feul et unique heritier de
mon royaume d'Efcoffe, de droiA que je pretende jufle-
rnent en la couronne d'Angleterre et pays qui en depen-
dent, et generallement de tous et chacun mes meubles et
immeubles qui refteront apres ma mort, et execution de
ce present tefiament.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dite

herefie, Je cede, tranfporte, et faiae don " de touts et
" chacuns mes droi6ts, que je pretende & puis pretendre
" a la couronne d'Angleterre, et aultres droias, feig.
"* neuries, ou royaulmes en dependantz, au roy catholique,
" ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira, avefques advis, con-
"* fentement de fa faintet6; tant pour le voyr aujourhuy
" le feul feurs appui de la religion catholique, que pour
" reconnoiffance de gratuites faveurs que moy, et les miens
" recommandez par moy, ont avons receu de luy en ma
" plus grande neceffite ; et refguard auffi au droi6 que
" luy mefme peut pretendre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays,
"je le fupplie qu'en recompence il preign alliance, de la
" maifon de Lorraine, et si il ce pleut de celle de GuiTe,
" pour memoire de la race de laquelle je fuis sortie au
" cofte de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que
" mon feul enfant, lequel eftant Catholique j'ay tousjours
" voue pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de l'accep-
" ter, ou faillant une de es niepces mariee comme fafille.

" Je layfle mon filz a la protedcion du roy, de prince,

" et dues de Lorrayne et de Guite, et du Mayne, aux
" quelz je recommende et Ton eftat en Efcoffe, et mon
" droidt en Angleterre, si ii eft catholique, et quelle le
" parlie de cefte royne."

Je fautz don au "' comptc de Lenox" de comte de Le-

nox tenu par feu son pere, et commande mon filtz, comme
mon heretier et fucceffeur, d'obeyr en ceft en droit a mon
volonti.

Je veulx et ordonne toutes les fommes et deniers, qui' fe
troveront par moys deues, tien mis cause de droi&t eftre
faits "a Lohliven" etre promptement payee et acquittes,
et tout tort et griefs repares per lefdits executeurs defquelz
J'en charge la conscience. Oultre, &c. [Follsw two or
Itbre paragraphs concerning particular legacys, and then is
added] Said au manoir de Sheffield en Angleterre le jour
de - Mil cinq cens foixant & dix sept.

After a large blank page follows in the queen's hand.

" Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, au Claude
" Hamilton lequel fe montrera le plus fidelle vers moy, et
" plus conflant en religion, au jugement de -- Ducs
" de Lorraine et de Guyfe, ou je le rapport fur ce de ceulx
" a que j'auray donnay Ie charge de trayter avefque eux
" de par moy et ceulx, a condition de ce marrier ou allier
" en la dite mayfon ou par leur advis."

Follow near two pages of particular legacys.

" Etl~e remets ma tante de Lenox au droit quelle peut
" pretendre a )a conte d'Angous avant I'acort fait par mon
Sommandxment e mnte ma dite tante de Lenox et le
" comte de Morton, veu quil a este fait & par le feu roy
" non Mary et moy, fur la promeffe de fa fidelle assist-
" ance, si luy et moy encourions dangier et befoing d'ayde,
" ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fecretement au les nos en-
" nemis rebelles, qu' at'emtprient contre fa vie, et pour
" ceft effe6t pris les armes, et ont port6 les bannieres def-
"ploieEs, contre nous, je revoque aufli toute autre don
" que je luy ay fait de conte de Morton fur promeffes
" de fes bons services a advenir, et entends que la dite
" Contd foit reunie a la couronne, si ell fe trouve y par-
" teni, comme fes trahons tant en la mort de mon feu
" Mary, que en mon baniffement, et pouifuit de la mien
" ne l'ont merite. Et defends a mon filz de ce jamays fer-'
" vire de luy pour de luy pour la hayne qu'll aye a fes pa-
" rents, la quelle je crains ne s'eftende jufques a luy, le
" connoiffant du tout affedionnE aux ennemis de mon
" croite en ce royaume, du quel il eft penconnaire.

" Je recommende mon nepveu Francois Stuart a monr

" filz, et luy commande detenir pres de luy et s'enfervit,
"' etje luy laifli le bien du conte de Boduel son oncle,

" eo

"€ en refpe&t qu'il eft de mon fang, mon lieuf, et ma
" eith laiffe en lutelle par son pere.

"t Je declare que mon frere bastard Robert Abbe de St.

'* Croix na' en que par circonvention Orkenay, et que le
"t ne fut jamays mon intention, comme il apret par la re-
"* vocation que j'ay fayte depuys, et ete aufii faite d'avant
t" la afge de xxv. ans, ce que j'aimois deliberer si ij ne
"' m'euffent prenner par prison de fe de defayre aulx eftats
"je veulx done que Orkenay foit reune a la couronne
*' comme une de plus neceffaires pour mon filz, & fans
"' mayfon ne pourra etre bien tenue.

" Le filles de Morra ne parvient acceffl heriter, ains

" revient la conte a la Couronne, si il luy pleft luy don.
" ner fa ou tfi1e en marriafge, et i1 noame'e a fenne
«" ligne."

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 142.)

A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen

of Scots.

April-- "ILEASE your majefly, I received your letter of the

arl. Lib. date the izth of Nov. and in like manner has seen
to. 26.. some part of the contents of one other of the fame date,

direced to Mons. de Movifir, ambassador for his majesty
the most Christian king, both which are agreeable to your
princely dignity, as by the one your highness desires to
know the true cause of my b'antiment', an2 o^ens untams
all favour if I should be innocent of the heinous fafls com-
mitted in the person of your husband of good memory, so
by the other the said ambassador is wilet to declare unto
me, if your hufband's murder could be laid justly against
me, that you could not follicit in mycaufe, neither yet for
any person that was participant of that execrable fadt,
but would seek the revenge thereof, when you ,hould
have any means to do it; your majefly's offer, if I be in-
nocent of that crime, is mofi favourable, and your de-
fire to know the truth of the fame is mofl equitable; and
therefore that I ihould with all my simplicity, sincerity and
truth answer thereunto is most reasonable, to the end that
your princely dignity may be my help, if my innocence

Ihall fufficiently appear, and procure my condemnation,
if I be culpable in any matter, except in the knowledgeof

the

the evil disposed minds of the most part of your nobility
againit your said husband, and not revealing of it, which I
am assured was fufficiently known to himself, and to all that
had judgment never Co litrle in that realm ; which also I
was confrained to understand, as he, that was specially
employed betwixt the earl Morton, and a good number
f your nobility, that they might with all humility inter-
cede at your majefty's hand for his relief, in such matters
as are more specially contained in the declaration follow-
ing, which I am constrained for my own justification, by
this letter to c ll to your niajefty's remembrance, Not-
withanding that I am allured, to my grief, the reading
thereof will not finally offend your princely mind. It
may please your majcfly to remember, that in the year of
God 1566, the said earl of Morton, with divers other
nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your majeffy,
and banilhed your realm f r insolent murder committed
in your majiety's own chamber, which they alleged was
done by command of your husband, who notwithstanding
affirmed that he was compJll d by them to subscribe the
warrant given for that effect, howsoever the truth of that
matter remains amdngft them : it appertains not to me
at this time to be curious; true it is that I was one of that
number, that heavily offended againfR your majefly, and
passed in France the time of our banishment, at the desire
of the reft, to huobly pray your brother the Most Chris-
tian king to intercede that our offences might be par-
doned, and your majefly's clemency extended toward us,
albeit divers of no tmall reputation, in that realm, was
ds the opinion, that the said sac merited neither to be re-
quifite for, nor yet pardoned. Always such was the care-
ful mind of his majetly towards the quietness of that realm,
that the dealing in that cause was committed to Monfr.
de Movilir, who was direced at that time to go into Scot-
land, to congratulate the happy birth of your Ton, whom
Almighty God of his goodness may long preserve in happy
eftare and perpetual felicity ; the careful travail of the said
de Movifir was Co effeaual, and your majefty's mind to
inclined to mercy, that within short space thereafter, I
was permitted to repair in Scotland, to deal with earls
Murray, Athol, Bodvel. Arguile, and secretary Ledington,
in the name and behalf of the said earl Morton, lords Re-
yen, Lindsay, and remanent complefiu, that they might
make offer in the names of the said earl, of any matter that

Vol. II. F f might

might satisfy your majefty's wrath, and procure your cle-
mency to be extended in their favours; at my coming to
them, after I had opened the effea of my message, they
declared that the marriage betwixt you and your husband
had been the occasion already of great evil in that realm,
and if your husband should be fuffered to follow the ap-
petite and mind of such as was about him, that kind of
dealing might produce with time worse effeths; for help-
ing of such inconvenience that might fall out by that kind
of dealing, they had thought it convenient to join them-
selves in league and band with some other noblemen, re-
solved to obey your majesty as their natural sovereign, and
have nothing to do with your hufband's command whatfo.
ever, if the said earl would for himself enter into that band
and confederacy with them, they could be content to
humbly request and travel by all means with your majesty
for his pardon, but before they could any farther proceed,
they desired to know the said earl's mind herein; when I
had anifwered, that he nor his friends, at my departure,
could not know that any such like matter would be pro-
ponit, and therefore was not inftru&ed what to answer
therein, they difired that I should return fufficiently in-
firuAed in this matter to Sterling, before the baptism of
your son, whom God might preserve; this message was
faithfully delivered to me at NewcaflHe in England, where
the said earl then remained, in prelence of his friends and
company, where they all condefcended to have no far-
ther dealing with your hufbard, and to enter into the
said band. With this deliberation I returned to Ster-
ling, where at the requefi of the Moit Christian King and
the queen's majesty of England by their ambassadors pre-
sent, your majelty's gracious pardon was granted unto them
all, under condition always that they thould remain banish-
-ed forth of the realm, the space of two years, and farther
during your majefty's pleasure, which limitation was after
mitigated at the humble request of your own nobility, so
that immediately after the said earl of Morton repaired in-
to Scotland to Quhittingaime, where the earl of Bodvell
and secretary Ledington come to him; what speech passed
there amongst them, as God shall be my judge, I knew
nothing at that time, but at their departure I was requeflt
ed by the said earl Morton to accompany the earl Bod-
veil and secretary to Edenburgh, and to return with such
answer as they should obtain of your majesty, which be,

ing

Ing given to me by the said persons, as God shall be my
judge, was no other than these words, " Schaw to the
" earl Morton that the queen will hear tio speech of that
" matter appointed unto him ;" when I crafit that the
answer might be made more sensible, secretary Ledington
said, that the earl would fufficiently underifand it, albeit
few or none at that time underfiand what pafled amongst
them. It is known to all men, als veill be railling let-
ters passed betwixt the said earl and Ledington when they
become in divers far'ions, as also ane buck sett furtht by
the ministers wherein they affirm that the earl of Mor-
ton has confeffed to them, before his death, that the earl
Bodvell come to Quhittingaime to prepon the calling
away off the king your husband, to the which propofi-
tion the laid earl of Morton affirms that he could give no
answer unto such time he might know your majefly's
mind therein, which he never received. As to the abo-
minable murder, it is known too by the depositions of
many persons that were executed to the death for the com-
mitting thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and
at the command of such of the nobility, as had fubfcri-
vit band for that effedt; by this unpleasant declaration,
the most part thereof known to yourself, and the re-
mainder may be understood by the aforesaid witnesses that
was examined in torture, and that are extant in the custody
of the ordinary judges, in Scotland, my innocency to
far as may concern any fad does appear fufficiently to your
majefly. And as for my dealing aforesaid, I can be no other-
wife charged therein, but as what would accuse the vessel
that preserves the vine from harm, for the intemperancy
of such as immoderately use the fame, As for the fpe-
cial cause of my banishment, I think the fame has pro-
ceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to ac-
cufe the earl of Morton of so much matter as they alledge
himself to have confeffed before he died, and would not
be induced, for loss of reputation, to perform any part
thereof. If this be the occasion of my trouble, as I sup-
pose it is, what punishment I should deserve, I remit me
to your majefiy's better judgment, who well knows how
careful ever ilk gentleman ihould be of his fame, reputa-
tion and honour, and how far ever ilk man thould abhor
the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would
have been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being to
near of his kin, notwithflanding all the injuries I was

Ffa con,-

constrained to receive at his hand all the time of his gow
vernment, and for no other cause, but for fhewing of par-
ticular friendship to particular friends in the time of the
last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now to accuse
him in any matter being dead, and more sorry that being
on ])fs, be such kind of dealing obtained that name of
Ingrate. Always for my own part I have been banished
my native country those three years and four months, liv-
ing in anxiety of mind, my hoHl guds in Ecotland, which
were not fnIall, intermittit and deponit upon, and has
continually since the time I was relieved out of my lait
troubles at the desire of Monfr. de Movifir, attended to
know your majefty's pleasure, and to wait upon what
service it ihould please your majesty for to command, Up-
on the 8th of April inft. your good friend secretary Wal-
finghame has declared unto me, that her highness tho't
it expedient that I (hould retire myself where I pleased, I
declared unto him I had no means whereby I might perform
that desire, till such time as I thould receive it from your
majefly. Neither knew I where it would please your high-
ness to direa me, until such time as I should have received
further information from you. Upon this occasion, and
partly by permission, I have taken the hardrefs to write
this present letter, whereby your majesty may underfland
any part of my troubles palt, and fitrait present. As to
my intention future, I will never deny that I am fully re-
solved to spend the reft of my days in your majefty's ser-
vice, and the king your fon's, wheresoever I hall be dire6-
ed by your majesty, and for the better performing there-
of, if so (hall be her majefty's pleasure, to recommend
the tryal of my innocency, and examination of the verity
of the preceding narration, to the king your son, with
request that I may be pardoned for such offences as con-
cerned your majefty's service, and var common to all men
the time of his les aige and perdonit to all, except to me,
I ihould be the bearer thereof myself, and be direAed in
whatsoever service it should please your majesty for to
command. Most humble I beseech your majesty to con-
fider hereof, and to be so gracious as to give order, that
I may have means to serve your majesty according to the
sincerity of my meaning, and so expeding your majefly's
answer, after the kissing your hand with all humility, I
take leave from London.

No. XIII.

No. XIII. (Vol. II. p. 163.)

Letter from the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald

Douglas his ambassador in England, October,
1586.

R ESERVE up yourself na langer in the earnest dealing Cot. Lib.

for my mother, for ye have done it too long; and coli c.9.

think not that any your travellis can do goode if hir lyse in the king's
be taking, for then adeu with my dealing with thaime that hand.
are the special infitrumentis thairof; and theirfore, gif ye
looke for the contineuance of my favour towartis you, fpair
na pains nor plainnes in this cace, but redde my letter
wrettin to Williame Keith, and conform yourself quhollie
to the contentis thairof, and in this requeift let me reap
the fruiais of your great credit there, ather now or
never. Fairwcll. OAober, 1586.

Letter to fir William Keith, ambassador in Eng-

land, probably from secretary Maitland. Nov.
27, 1586.

BY your letters sent by this bearer, (albeit concerning A copy in

no pleasant fubjedt) his majefly conceives well of the collea.

your earnestness and fidelity in your negotiations, as also Dick. Vol.
of Mr. Archibald's ativity and diligence, whom you so A. fol. 19.
greatly praise and recommend. I wish the issue corre-
Ipond to his Majefly's opinion, your care and travell,
and his great diligence as you write. His majefiy takes
this rigorous proceeding againfi his mother deeply in
heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both in honour
and otherwise. His highnefles actions and behaviour utter
plainly not only how far nature prevails, but also how he
apprehends of the sequel of that process, and of what mo-
ment he efleems it. There is ambaffade thortly to be
dire6ted, wherein will be employed an earl and two coun-
fellors, on whose answer will depend the continuance or
dissolution of the amity and good intelligence between
the princes of this isle. In the mean season, if farther ex-
trrmity be used, and his lajefty's suit and request disdain-
cd, his highness will think himself dishonoured and con-

Fs 3 temned,

temned far besides his expectation and deserts. Ye may
perceive his majefty's difpo(ition by his letter to you,
which you shall impart to Mr. Archibald, and both deal
according thereto. I need not to recommend to your care,
concerning your mafter's service both in weill and in ho-
nour. As you and your colleague shall behave yourself
in this behalf, so for my own part, will I interpret your
affeation to your master. I am glad of that I hear of
yourself, and I do fully credit that you write of Mr. Archi-
bald, whole friends here make great account of his pro-
sessed devotion to the queen, besides the duty he owes
to the king's majesty her son. Farther I am constrained
to remit to next occasion, having scarce time to scribble
there few lines (which of themselves may bear witness of
my haste). Wishing you a prosperous issue of your nego.
ciation, I commit you, &c. Halyrudhoufe, Novr. 27tb,
J586.

THE people, and all estates here are so far moved by

the rigorous proceedings against the queen, that his ma.
jefly, and all that have credit are importuned, and may
not go abroad for exclamation against them, and impre.
cations against the queen of England.

No. XIV. (Vol. II, p. I67.)

To the king's majesty, from Mr, Archibald

Douglas.

isS6. T LEASE your majefly, I received your letter of the
from the - date the 28th of September, the 5th of O&ober,
the colle,. which was the fame day that I direied Wim. Murray to-
of fr A, wards your highness; by such letters as he carried, and

. fo'l 324. others of several dates, your majesty may perceive that I

had omitted nothing so far as my travel might reach un-
to, anent the performing of the two chief points contained
the laid letter befor the receit thereof, which by thefle
presents I must repeat for answering of the faidis. As to
the firfi, so far as may concern the interceding for the
queen your majefly's mother her life, I have divers times
and in every audience travelled with this queen in that
matter, specially to know wfat her full determination
must be in that point, and could never bring her to any
further answer, but that this proceeding against her by or-

4 e4

Aer ofjuffice was no less agairht her mind, than againfl
their will that loved her belt : as towards her life she could
give no answer thereunto, untill such time as the law hath
declared whether she was innocent or guilty. Herewithall
it was her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it was a
number of the aflociants that earnestly prefled her that the
law might proceed againfi her, giving reafo'ns that so long
as {he was fuffered to deal in matters, so long would
never this realm be in quiet, neither her life, neither this
flare in aflurance, and in the end they used this proteffa-
tion that if {he would not in this matter follow their ad-
vice, that they should remain without all blame whatfo-
ever (hould fall out; whereupon (he had granted them
liberty to proceed, left such as had made the requefft,
might hereafter have charged herself with inconvenience
if any ihould happen.

ANn by myself I know this her speech to be true, be-
cause both papist and protestant has behaved them, as it
hath been her pleasure to declare, but upon divers re-
fpeAs, the one to avoid suspicion that otherwise was con-
ceived against them, the other upon zeal, and care that they
will be known to have for preservation of their fovereign's
life and slate in this perilous time, upon consideration
whereof, I have been confirained to enter, into some deal-
ing with both, wherewith I made her majesty acquainted;
the protefitants, and such as in other matters will be known
to bear no small favour unto your majefty's service, hath
prayed that they may be excused from any dealing in the
contrary of that, which by their oath they have avowed,
and by their speech to their sovereign requested for, and
that before my coming in this country; if they should
now otherwise do, it would produce no better effedt but to
make them fubjed to the accusation of their sovereign,
when it thould please her to do it, of their inconstancy,
in giving councell whereby they might incur the danger
of ill councellors and be consequent worthy of puniihment.
Such of the papifts, as I did deal with, went immediate-
ly, and told her majesty what I had spoken to them, who
albeit ihe understood the matter of before, sent f,,r me
and declared to me my own speech that I had uttered to
them, willing me for the weil of my maifter's service to
abitain from dealing with such, as were not yet fuffi-
ciently moved to think of my master as she did. I craved
leave of her majesty, that I might inform them of your

Ss f4 ma-

majcfy's late behaviour towards her, and the slate of this
realm, whereunto with some difficulty she gave her con-
sent. At my late departu:e from court, which was upon
the 5th of this inflant, and the day after that the lords of
this grand jury had taken their leaves of her majelly to go
northward to Fothringham, it was her pleasure to pro-
mile to have further [peech in this matter at the returning
of the f&id lords, and to give full an!wer according to your
majefly's contentment to the remainder matters, that I
had proponit in name of your majesty. As to the 2d
part concerning the association, and desire that the pro-
rmife made to the master of Gray concerning your majefty's
title may be fulfilled; it appears by the laid letter, that
the very point, whereupon the question that may bring
your majefiy's title in douht hath not been rightly at the
writing of the laid letter confi Iered, which I take to have
proceeded so, lack of reading of the at of parliamenti
wherein is fulfiled all the promise made by the queen to
the said mafttr, and nothing may now cauie any doubt to
arise against xour said title, except that an opinion ihould.
be conceived by there lords of this parliament that are so
vehement at this time against the queLn your majefty's
mother, that ycur majesty is, or may be proved hereafter
assenting to her proceedings, and foire tnat love your ma-
jefty's iervice were of that opinion that too earnest request
might move a ground, whereupon suspicions might grow
in men so ill aflfcQed in that matter, which I tho't might
be helped by obtaining of a declaration in parliament of
your majefly's innocence at this time, and by reason that
good nature and ptrblic honeftv would confirain you to in-
tercede for the queen your n other, which would carry with
itself, without any fa, ther, some suspicion that might move
ill affected men to doubt. In my former letters I humbly
craved of y< ur majesty that lon:e learned men in the laws,
might be moved to advise with the words of the affocig-
tion, and the mitigation contained in the ad of parlia-
ment, and withall to advise what suspicious effects your
majtefy's requeff might work in there choleric men at this
time, and how their minds might be best moved to re-
ceive reason ; and upon all there considerations they might
have formed the words of a declarator of your majefty's
innocence to be obtained in this parliament, and failing
thereof, the very words of a proteffation for the fame es-
ife that might bel serve for your majefly's service, and

for

for my better information. Albeit this was my simple
opinion, I (hall be contented to follow any dire&ion it
flall please your majefly to give; I have already opened
the fubItance hereof to the queen of this realm, who
seems not to be offended herewith, and hath granted li-
berty to deal therein with such of the parliament as may
remain in any doubt of mind. This being the fum of
toy proceedings in this matter, besides the remainder,
contained in other letters of several dates, I am confirained
to lay the whole open before your majesty, and to
humbly pray that full information may be sent unto me
what further to do herein, in this middle time, while I
shall receive more ample direaion I thall proceed and be
doing according to such dirtAion as I have already re-
ceived. And To, most gracious sovereign, wishing unto
your majefly all happy success in your affairs, I humbly
take my leave from London, 16th of Octr this 1586.
Your majefty's mofi humble fubjea and obedc servant.

A memorial for his majesty by the master of

Gray.

IT will please your majefly, I have tho't meeter to set rz 'n.

down all things as they occur, and all advertisements r156. An

as they ecme to my ears, then jointly in a lettre. Oiginal

I CAME: to Vare the 24th of Decr, and sent to Wr. hand in the

Keith, and Mr. Archibald Douglas to advertise the q:ieen coliett. of
of it, lik as they did at their audience. She promiied the r A. Dick.
queen your majefly's mother's life flhould be spared till foi. is.
we were heard.. The 27th they came to Vare to me,
the which day Sir Robr. came to Vare, where they fhewed
us how far they had .already gone in their negociation,
but for that the discourse of it is set down in our general
letter, I remit me to it, only this far I will tefrify unto
your majesty that Wmm. (eith hath used himself right ho-
peftly and jufly till our coming, refpe-Ting all circum-
flances, and chiefly his colleague his dealing, which in-
deed is not better than your majefly knows already.

The 29th day of Decr. we came to London, where

we were no ways friendly received, nor after the honest
fort it had pleased your majefly ure her ambassadors, never
man sent to welcome or convey us. The fame day we
underflood of Mr. de Bellievre his leave taking, and for

that

that the cufiorn permitted not we sent our excuses by Mr.
Ge orge Young.

THE lif day of Jany. Wm. Keith and his colleague

according to the custom sent to crave our audience, We
received the answer contained in the general letter, and
could nbt have answer till the 6th day, what was done
that day your majefly has it in the general, yet we was
inot out of expectation at that time, albeit we received
hard answers.

THE 8th day we speak with the earl ofLeicefler, where

our conference was, as is set down in the general. I re-
marked this, that he that day said plainly the detaining
of the queen of Scotland prisoner was for that she pre-
tended a succession to this crown. Judge then by this,
what is tho't of your Majesty as ye shall hear a little
after.

THE 9th day we speak with the French ambassador,

whom we find very plain in making to us a wife discourse
of all his proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we thank-
ed him in your majefty's name and opened such things as
we had to treat with this queen, save the last point, as
more largely set down by our general.

IT is tho't here, and some friends of your majefty's ad-

vised me, that Bellievre his negotiation was not effeaual,
and that the resident was not privy to it, as indeed I
think is true, for since Bellievre his petrting, there isatalk
of this Chafteauneuf his servants taken with his whole
papers and pacquets, which he was sending in France for
that they charge him with a conspiracy of late against the
queen here her life. It is alledged his servant has con-
sessed the matter, but whom I shall trust I know not,
but till I fee proof I shall account him an honefi man,
for indeed so he appears, and one (without doubt) who
hath been very infltant in this matter. I shew him that the
queen and earl of Leicester had desired to speak with me
in private, and craved his opinion ; he gave it freely that
he tho't it meeteft, I shew him the reason why I commu-
nicate that to him, for that I had been fufpeated by fame
of her majefty's friends in France to have done evil offices
in her service, that he should he my witness that my earnest
dealing in this hiould be a fufficient testimony that all was
lyes, and that this knave Naue who now had betrayed her,
had in that done evil offices ; he desired me, feeing lhe saw
only with other folks eyes, that I (hould no ways impute

It to her, for the like she had done to himself by Naue his
persuasion. I answered he /hould be my witnel's in that.

THE 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, which

we got the Ioth day; at the firit, (he said a thing long
looked for should be welcome when it comes, I would
now fee your mafter's offers. I answered, no man makes
offers but for some cause; we would, and like your ma-
jelly, first know the cause to be extant for which we offer,
and likewise that it be extant till your majesty has heard
us. I think it be extant yet, but I will not promise for an
hour, but you think to shift in that fort. I answered we
mind not to shift, but to offer from our sovereign all things
rtjaz w3th reason may be; and in special, we offered as is
let down in our general, all was refused and tho't nothing.
She called on the three that were in the house, the earl
of Leicester, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very
despitefully repeated all our offers in presence of them all.
I opened the last part and said, Madam, for what refpe& is
it that men deal againit your person or effate for her cause ?
She answered, because they think she (hall succeed to me,
and for that (he is a papist; appearingly said I both the
causes may be removed, (he said the would be glad to un-
derltand it. If Madam, said I, all that te has of right
of succession were in the king our sovereign s person, were
not all hope of papifls removed ' She answered, I hope
To. Then Madam I think the queen his mother (hall
willingly demit all her rights in his person. She answered
she hath no right, for the is declared unable. Then I
said, if (he have no right, appearingly the hope ceases al-
ready, Co that it is not to be feared that any man attempt
for her. The queen answered, but the papifts allow not
our declaration ; then jet it fall, says I, in the king's per-
son by her assignation. The earl of Leicester anivered,
the is a prisoner, how can (he demit. I answered the de-
milfion is to her son, by the advice of all the friends hme
has in Europe, and in cafe, as God forbid, that any at-
tempt conttit the queen here away, who (hall party with
her to prove the demifllion or assignation to be ineffeAcual
her son being opposite party and having all the princes her
friends for him, having bonded for the efficacy of it with
his majesty of before. The queen made as (he could not
comprehend my meaning, and fir Robt. opened the matter
again, the yet made as tho' the understood not. So the
garl of Leicefier answered that our meaning was, that

ihe

the king (hould be put in his mother's place. Is it so, the
queen answered, then I put myself in a worse care than of
before; by God's paflion, that were to cut my own throat,
and for a durchy, or an eaildom to yourself, you or such
as you would cause fomne of your desperate knaves kill me.
No, by God, he flhall lne't be in that place. I answered
he c aves nothing of your majefly but only of his mother.
1 he earl of Leicefler anfAerd that were to make him
party to the queen my mithefs. 1 said, he will be far
more party, if he be in her place thro' her death. She
would stay no longer, but said flhe should not have a worse
in his mother's place. And said, tell your king what
good I have done for him in holding the crown on his
head since he was born, and that I mind to keep the league
that now flands between us, and if he break it shall be
a double fault, and with this minded to have bidden us
a farewell ; but we efchcuit. And I speak craving of her
that her life may be fparcd for 15 days; fte refused. Sir
Robt. craved for only cight days, (he said not for an hour;
and so geid her away. Your majefly fees we have deli-
vered all we had for offers, but all is for nothing, for (he
and her councel has laid a determination that they mind
to follow forth, and I fee it comes rather of her council
than herself, which I like the worse; for without doubt,
fir, it (hall cut off all friendship ye had here. Altho'it
were that once they had meaned well to your majesty, yet
remembring themselves, that they have medled with your
mother's blood, good faith they cannot hope great good of
yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry for; further your
majesty may perceive by this last discourse of that I pro-
ponit, if they had meaned well to your majesty, they had
used it otherwise than they have done, for reason has
bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind something
to speak in this matter, because we look thurly our letters
ihall be troucit by the way.

FoR that I fee private credit nor no means can alter

their determination, altho' the queen again and the earl of
Leicester has desired to speak with me in particular I
mind not to speak, nor (hall not; but al'uredly (iall let
all men fee that I in particular was no ways tyed to Eng-
land, but for the refpe6C of your majefty's service. So al-
beit, at this time, I could not effeauate that I desired,
yet my upright dealing in it (hall be manifefied to the
world. We are, God willing, then to crave audience,

where

Where we mind to use sharply our inflruaions, which hi-
therto we have used very calmly, for we can, for your ho-
nour's cause, fay no less for your majesty, than the French
ambassador has said for his master.

So I pray your majefly confider my upright dealing in
your service, and not the effet, for had it been double by
any I might have here had credit, but being I came only
for that cause I will not my credit shall serve here to any
further purpose. I pray God preserve your majesty and
fend you a true and sincere friendship. From London
this 12th of Jan. 1586.

I understand the queen is to fend one ofa her own to
your majesty.

To the right hon. my lord vice-chancellor and few-
cretary to his majesty, from the master of Gray.

M Y lord, I fend you there lines with this inclosed to 12th Jan.

his majeity, whereby y our lordihip shall understand '5s6, an

how matters goes here. And before all things I pray your the Coigieat
lordihip move his majesty to refpe& my diligence, and ofr r A.
not the effe& in this negotiation, for I swear if it had Dick. Vol.
been for the crown of England to myself I could do no A. . 79.
more, and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for
the world Thall fee that I loved England for his majefty's
service only. Ilook shortly to find your lordship friend as
ye maae promise, and by God I Ihall be to you if I can.
Waz. Xeith and I detired, js matters had gone well, to have
run a course that your lordship might have here been in
credit and others disappointed, but now I will do for you
as for myself; which is to care for no credit here, for in
conscience they mean not honestly to the king our fove-
reign, and if they may, he will go the get his mother is
gone or shortly to go, therefore my lord without all kind
of scruple I pray you to advise him the best is not this way.
They fay here, that it has been said by one who heard
it from you, that ye desired not the king and England to
agree, because it would rack the noblemen, and gave
an example of it by king James the fourt, I answered in
your name that I was assured you never had spoken it. Mr.
Archibald is the speaker of it, who I assure your lordship
has been a poison in this matter, for they lean very mickle
to his opinion. He cares not, he says, for at length the

king

king will be fain to deel this way, 4either by fair means ot
necessity, so that when he deals this course he is assured to
be welcome; to set down all that is past of the like pur-
poses, it would consume more paper than I have here, so
I defer it to meeting. There is a new conspiracy alledged
against the queen to have been intended, for the French
ambassador resident three of his men taken, but I think
in the end it shall prove nothing. Mr. Stafford who is
ambassador for this queen in France, is touched with it, his
brother is taken here, always it has done this harm in our
negotiation, that all this council would not move this
queen to meddle with the queen of Scotland's blood, till
this invention was found forth. I remit all other things
to the inclosed. We minded to have sent to his majesty
a discourse, which we have set down of all our proceed-
ings since our hither coming, but we are surely advertized
that the bearer is to be truffant by the way for our pac-
quets, so that we defer it till our own coming; this I have
put in a privy part beside the pacquet. We flhall I think
take leave on Fryday the i3th day, where we mind ex-
adtly to follow the rigour of our infiruAions, for it can.
not fland with the king's honour that we fay less then
the French ambassador, which was, le roy mon maiftre ne
peult moins faire que fe refentir. So that about the 24th
I think welhall, God willing, be at home, except thatfome
flay come which we look not for. The queen and the
earl of Leicester has desired to speak with me. I refused
save in presence of my colleagues, by reason I fee a deter.
mnination which particular credit cannot help, andI crave
no credit but for that cause. It will please your lordihip
retire the inclosed from his majefly and keep it. So after
my service commended to yourself and bedfellow, I com.
mit you to God. From London the 1zth of Jan. 1586.

To the king's majesty, from fir Robert Melvill.

aoth Jan, T'" T may please your majesty, since the direfaion of out
o586. An former letters, we had audience, and her majesty ap.
his own peared to take our overtures in good part in presence of
hand, inthe her council; albeit no offence would take place with them,
fr A. Dick. having taken resolution to proceed with extremity, not the
Vol. A. less it pleased her majesty to desire us to flay for two days
fol. 18I. on taking our leave, untill the had advised upon our pro-

pofitionsi

positions; since which time, her majesty is become more
hard by some letters (as we are informed) has come from
Scotland, making some hope to believe that your majesty
takes, not this matter to heart, as we know the contrary
in effect, and had of before removed the like opinion out
of her majefty's mind, which by sinister information was
credited, their reports has hindered our commiflion, and
abused this queen, fearing in like manner we shall be stay-
ed until answer come from Scotland by such person as
they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will be well
enough known to all men how heavily your majefly takes
these proceedings to heart, the truth is, that they have
by this occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like to
hinder our negotiation. As also Allynour Steward is to be
direded in their party, by our knowledge, who has awan-
tyt more of his credit, than I believe he may perform,
and we willed him to desist from this dealing, saying it
doesharm, and he is not meet for that purpose, remitting
to/wrma)elly's good direation to take order herein as we
\ha'e aniwera'o'e to your majety not to omit any point
we have in charge, as the truth is, the master of Grhaye
has behaved himself very rightly and discreetly in this
charge, and evil tayne with be divers in their parties who
were of before his friends. We have been behalding to
the menfirals who has born us best company, but has
not been troubled with others. 1Vylzeme Kethe hath
left nothing undone that he hath in charge. As for maf-
ter Archibald he has promised at all times to do his de-
woyr, wherein he shall find true report made to your ma-
jefty, craving pardon of your majesty that I have been so
tedious, after I have kifled your majefty's hand I hum-
bly take my leave. Praying God to grant your majefiy
many good days and happy, in whose protetion I commit
your majesty at London, the 20th of Jan. 1586.

SIR,
ALBEIT Maser George has not been in commiflion

he is not inferior in his service to .any of us, as well by
his good advice and diligent care he takes for the ad-
vancement of your service, wherein we have not been a
little furthered,

To the king's majefly, from the.mafler of Gray

and fir Robert Melvill.

nfl Jan. TLEASE it your majefly in the last audience we had;
^,S. "A j1. since our last advertisement, by Wmn. Murray, we
the collea. find her majesty at the resuming our offers something miti-
of fir A. gated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them, be-
Dick.1 io. fore we got our leave, at our reasoning, certain of the

council, namely my lord of Leicefier, fir Chriffopher Ha.
ton, my lord Hunfdon, and my lord Hawart being present
in the chamber, gave little flhare of any great contentment
to have her from her former refulution, now caffin in per-
plexiter what the should do, always we left her in that
state, and since have daily pressed conferrence with the
whole council, which to this hour we have not )et obtain-
ed. This day we have sent down to crave our leave,
The greatest hinder which our negotiation has found hi-
therto is a persuasion they have here that either your ma.
jefty deals superficially in this matter, or that with time
ye may be moved to digest it, which when with great dif-'
ficulty we had expugnit, we find an-w th.t certain letters
written to them of late from Scotland has found some
place of credit with them in our contrare. So that refolv-
ing now to clear them of that doubt by a special mcffage,
they have made choice of Sir Alexander Stewart to try
your highnefs's meaning in it, and to perfiiade yourmajeffy
to like of their proceedings, where from no terrnr we can
fay out unto him is able to divert him, he has given out
that he has credit with your majefly, and that he doubts
not to help this matter at your highnefs's hand. If he
come there that errar d, we think your majefly will not
oversee the great disgrace that his atterrpts thall give us
here, if he be not tane order with before that he be further
heard, and if so be that any other be direaed (as our
intelligence gives us there {hall) our humble suit is to
your majefly, that it may please your highners to hear of
us what we find here, and at what point we leave this
matter with ner majeflv, before that they find accidence,
the causes whereot remitting to our private letters. We
commit your majeftv for the present to God's eternal
protecton. From London this 2ift of Jan. 1586.

No. XV.

ADDITIONAL

APPENDIX.

I had nb opportunity of feeing several tf the following

papers, till those Iheets of the hif/ory, to which they re-
late, were printed of For this reason no references
are made to them there ; but I have supplied that dpfett
by marking the particular pafages in the hiflory which
they serve to illuflrate.

No. XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 419. Line I9.]

Account of the sentence of divorce between the

earl of Bothwell and lady Jean Gordon his wife.
From a manuscript belonging to Mr. David
Falconer, advocate. Fol. 455*

UPOUN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the richt

hon. Mr. Robert Maitland dean of Aberdene,

Mr. Edward Henryson dofaor in the laws, two of the
senators of the college of justice, Mr. Clement Little,
and Mr. Alexander Syme advocattis, commiffers of Edn's
compeered Mr. Henry Kinroffe, procurator for Jean Gour-
doune countes of Bothwell, constitute be her for purlew-
ing of ane proces of divorcement intendit by her contra
James erle Bothwel her huiband for adultry, commnitted be
him with Bessie Crawfurde the pursuers servant for the
time; and ficklyke, for the said erie, compeared Mr. Ed-
mond Hay, who ester he had pursued and craved the pur-
fuer's procurator's oath de calumnia, if he had just caus
to purfew the said acion, and obtained it, denyed the li-
bell, and the said Mr. Harrie took the morne, the last day
ofApryle, to prove the fame pro prima. The quhilkday,
having produced some witnetfes, he took the next day,
being the I of May, to do farther diligence. Upon the
qubilk i of May, he produced some moe witntffes, and

VoL.II.

. Gg e-

1~_1 ____ _1____1___ _ _ I~_

renounced farther probatioune. After quhilk, he desired
a term to be assigned -te-pronounce-fentence. To whom
the said commiffars assigned Satterday next, the 3 of May,
to pronounce sentence therein, fecundum alligata et pro.
bata, quilk accordingly was given that day in favour of
the purfewar.

AT the fame time there was another proces intendit be

the erl of Bothwell contra his lady, for to have theirmar-
rikge declared nul, as being contreaed againlt thecanons,
without a dispensation, and he and his lady being within
degrees defendand, vizferdis a kin, and that wyfe for ex-
peding of this proces, there was a commillioune" grantit
to the archbilhop of St. Androis to cognofce and determine
it, and Rot. bishop of Dunkeld, William bishop of Dun-
blane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glasgow, and
parson of Egel(hame, Mr. Alexander CrecAtoun,and M r.
George Cooke chancellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne
Manderfloune chanon in Dunbar and prebendar of Pel-
toune, or any an~of them. This cormniffione is datit
27 Aprile 1567, was prefenred to two of the faids corn-
minfioners, viz. Mr. And'. Crawfurd and Mr John Man-'
derfioune on Satterday 3 May, by Mr. Thomas Hepburne
parson of Auldhamftocks, procuratur for the erle of Both-
well, who accepted the delegatioune, aid gave out their
citation by precept, direaed, Decano Chrifianitatis de
Hadingtone, nec non vicano feu curato eccle. parochise de
Creichtoune, feu cuicunq; alteri cappeUano debite tequia-
tis, ser summoning, at the laid erles in(tance, both oithe
lady personally if the could be had, or otherways at the
parofche kerk of Creichtoune the time of service, orat her
dwelling place before witnesses, primo, fecundo, tertio et
peremptorie, unico tamen contextu protuplice edido.
And likeways to be witnesses in the laid matter, Alex.
bishop of Galloway, who did marry the said erie and his
lady, in Halerud-houfe kirkrin Feb. 1565, fir John Ban.
natyneof Auchnoule justice clerk, Mr. Robert Creich-
toun of Elliot the queen's advocate, Mr. David Chalmers
provost of Creichtoun and chancellor of Ross, Michael -
abbot of Melrofs, and to compear before the said judges
or any one of them in St. Geils kirk in Edr. on Monday
the 5 of May, be thamfelves, or their proeurators. Upon
the said 5 day, Mr. John Manderfloun, one of the judges
delegat only being present compeared the fame procurea-
tors for both the parties that were in the former procea,

x Mr,

MvIr. Edmund Hay ( articulatlie ) and Twowords
fume of the witnesses summoned produced, and received if1heparen
for proving of the fame. The said procurator renounced ble.
farder probatioune, and the judge assigned the morne, the
6th of May, ad publicandum produda, nempe depofi-
tiones ipforum teflium. The quhilk day, post publicatas
depftitiones preditdas, Mr. Hen. Kinroffe, procurator for
the lady instanter objecit objeaiones juris generaliter,
contra pro duam, infuper renunciavit ulteriori defenfioni;
proinde conclufa de confenru procuratorum hinc inde
caufa,judex praediEus ifatuit cralfinum diem pro termina,
ad pronunciandam fuam fentenmiam definituram, ex de-
du~ltis coram eo, in praefenti caufa et proceffa. Con-
form heteunto, on Wednesday the 7th of May, the said
judge gave out, his sentence in favour of the erie, declar-
ing the iMarriage to be, and to have been null from the
bewAng, in sepeEe o their contingence in blood, which
hindered their lawful marriage without a dispensation ob-
tained of befoir.

No. XXXII. [Vol. I. p. 471. Line 25.]

Queen Mary to Queen Elizabeth.

MA ATM,
Lthough the neceflity of my cause (which maketh me ctt. Lit.
to be importune to you) do make you to judge that ACoaolpy,

I am out of the way; yet such as have not my passion, p'obably a
nor the refpecs whereof you are persuaded, will think that Trannlation,
I do as my cause doth require. Madam, I have not accu-
fed sou, neither in words, nor in thought, to have used
yourself evil towards me. And I beheve, that you have
no want of good understanding, to keep you from per-
fwafion againit your natural good inclination. But in the
mean time I can't chufe (having my senses) but perceive
very evil furtherance in my matters, since my coming hi-
ther. I thought that I had fufficiently discoursed unto
you the difcommodities, which this delay bringeth unto
me. And especially that they think in this next month of
August, to hold a parliament against me and all my ser-
vants. And in the mean time, I am fatyed here, and yet
will you, that I should put myself forther into your coun-
try, (without feeing you) and remove me further from

G g mine

mine; and there do me this dithonour at the request of my
rebels, as to fend commissioners to hear them against me,
as you wold do to a mere fubjea, and not hear me by
mouth. Now, madam, I have promised you to come to
you, and having there made my moan and complaint of
there rebels, and they coming thither, not as poffeffors,
but as fubjeas, to answer. I would have besought you
to hear my justification of that which they have falfly let
furth against me, and if I could not purge myself thereof,
you might then discharge your hands of my causes, and
let me go for such as I am. But to do as you fay, if I
were culpable I would be better advised; but being not
so, I can't accept this dishonour at their hands, that be-
ing in poffeffion they will come and accuse me before your
commissioners, whereof I can't like: And feeing you think
it to be against your honour and confignage to do other-
wife, I beseech you that you will not be mine enemy, un-
till you may fee how I can discharge myself every way,
and to fuffer me to go into France, where I have adowry
to maintain me; or at least to go into Scotland, with
aflurance that if there come any strangers thither, Iwill
bind myself for their return without any prejudice to you,
or if it pleis you not to do thus, I protest that I will not
impute it to falfhood, If I receive firangers in my country,
without making you any other discharge for it. Do with
my body as you will, the honour or blame (hall be yours.
For I had rather die here, and that my faithful servants
may be succoured (tho' you would not so) by strangers,
than to fuffer them to be utterly undone, upon hope to
receive, in time to come, particular commodity. There
be many things to move me to fear that 1 shall have to
do, in this country, with others than with you. But for-
afmuch as nothing hath followed upon my last moan, I
hold my peace, happen what may hap. I have as lees to

adue I my fortune, as to seek it, and not find it. Further,
it pleased you to give license to my fabje&s to go and
come. This has been refused by my lord Scroop and
Mr. Knolls (as they fay) by your commandment, because
I would not depart hence to your charge, untill I had
answer of this letter, tho' I ihewed them that you required
my answer, upon the two points, contained in your let-
ter.

THE

THE one is to let you briefly understand, I am come
to you to make my moan to you, the which being heard,
1would declare unto you mine innocency, and then require
your aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan
and complaint to God, that I am not heard in my just
quarrel, and to appeal to other princes to have refpet
thereunto, as my cafe requireth; and to you, madam, first
of all, when you shall have examined your conscience be-
fore him, and have him for witness.- And the other,
which is to come further into your country, and not to
come to your presence, I will esteem that as no favour,
but will take it for the contrary, obeying it as a thing
forced. In the mean time, I beseech you, to return to
memy Lord Herries, for I can't be without him, having
none of my counfal here, and also to fuffer me, if it please
ou, withoaut further delay, to depart hence whitherfo-
ever it be out of this country. I am sure you will not de-
ny me this simple request for your honour's fake, feting
it doth not please you to use your natural goodness to-
wards me otherwise, and feeing that of mine own accord,
I am come hither, let me depart again, with yours. And
if God permit my causes to succeed well, I shall be
bound to you for it; and happening otherwise, vet I can't
blame you. As far my Lord Fleeming, feeing chat upon
my credit you have utffered him to go home to his house,
I warrant you he thall pass no further, but shall return
when it thall please you. In that you truss me, I will not
(o die for it) deceive you. But from Dumbarton I an- Perhapsfor.
fwer not, when my L. Fleeming shall be in the Tower.
For they which are within it, will not forbear to receive
succour, If I don't assure them of yours; no, tho' you
would charge me withal, for I have left them in charge,
to have more refpefl to my servants and to my estate, than
to my life. Good fifler, beof another mind, win the heart,
and all mhall be yours, and at your commandment. I
thought to satisfy you wholly, if I might have seen you.
Alas! do not as the serpent, that ftoppeth his hearing,
for I am no inchanver, but your filler, and natural cousin.
If Caesar had not dilfdained to hear or read the complaint
of an advertiser, he had not so died ; why thould princes
ears be flopped feeing that they are painted folong; Mean-
ing that they mtould hear all and be well advised, before
they answer. I am not of the nature of the basilisk, and
ls9 of the chamelion, to turn you to my likeness, and

G g 3

, tho'

tho' I should be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you
are fufficiently arm'd with conflancy and with justice,
which I require of God, who give you grace to ile it well
with long and happy life. From Carlisle, the 5th of July,
1568.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I. p. 473. Line ult.)

A letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop,

and fir F. Knollis, September 3d, 1568.

Cott. Lib. "/TY lords, pleafit your honourable lordlhips, I am
Cal. C.inl - informed by James Borthwick, lately come from
in his own the queen's majefly your foverane, that is fchawin to her
hand, highness, I fhuld have ridden in Crafurdmure, fen my

last cuming into this realm, upon the earl of Murray'sde.
pendants. And that I fuld have caufit, or been of coun-
fall to Scottifmen to have ridden in Ingland, to flay or
fpulzie her majefly's fubjets.

My lords, I thought it right needful because your lord-

ships is, be your foverane, commanded to attend upon the
queen's majesty my miflrefs, so having daily access in thir
matters, to declare upon the truth; humbly desiring that
your lordfliips will, for God's cause, certificate the queen
your foverane the fame.

As God lives, I have neither consented, nor any wife

bad knowledge of any Scottirman's riding in Engrand, to
do the fubjeds theres hurt in bodies or goods, fene the
siege of Leith; and as I understand it shall be fund true,
that gif ony sic open hurt be done, it is by the queen my
fovereign's difobedients, and that I have not ridden nor
hurt no Scottifhmnan, nor commanded no hurt to be done
to them, fen my coming from the queen's majesty of Eng-
land, it is well kend, for that never ane will complain
of me.

I HAVE done more good to Crawfurdmure nor ever the

earl of Murray has done, and will be loatheft to do them
any harm than he wi'l. Except the queen's majefly your
fover ign, command sic false reports to be tryit, quhereof
this is altogidder ,n inventit leafing, her grace fall be
trublit, and tyne the hearts of true men here, quhom of
ftc report fall be made, that baieth would serve hir, and
may, better than they unworthy liars.

My lords, I underfiand the queen's majesty your so-

vereign is not contented of this bruite, that there (hould
ony Frenchman come in this realm, with the duke of
Chattelherault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way the
counfall of their cuming, nor has no sic certainty thereof,
as I hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's majesty.
your sovereign. And gif I might as well fay it, as it is
true indeed, her gracefelf is all the wyitt, and the counfall
that will never let her take order with my maiftrefs cause.
For that our sovereign havand her majefty's promise, be
writing, of luff, friendship, and affifiance gif need had
to requirit, enterit that realm, upon the 16 day of Mi y,
fen that time the queen's majesty has commanded me di-
verse times to declare the would accept her cause, and
do for her, and to put her in peaceable pofleflion of this
realme, and when I required of her majesty, in my maif-
tress name, that her highness would either do for her, (as
herfpecial trust was (he wold) according to her former
promises, or otherwise give her counfal wold not consent,
(as I show her grace I sand diverse repugnant) then that
she would permit her to pars in France, or to some other
prince to seek support, or failing hereof, (quhilk was
agains all reason that (he would permit her to return in
her awin countrie, in sic fempil manner as (he came out
of it, and said to her majesty ane of thir, or her honour,
would not be refufit, fecand that the was corned in her
realm upon her writings and promiles of friendihip. And
ficklike, I said to her highness, gif my maiftrefs had the
like promise of her nobility and estates, as she had of
herself, I should have reprovit them highly, gif they had
not condefcendit to one of thir three, and so I fay, and
so I write, that in the warld it (hall be maift reprehend-
able, gif this promise taketh not other good effec, nor
yet it does. Notwithfranding, I get gud answer of thir
promises of friendship made to my sovereign, and to put
her grace in this her awin countrie peaceably, we have
fund the contrary working by Mr. Middlemore diredtit
from her highness to flay the army that cuifit down our
houres. And alfua, in the proceeding of this late preten-
dit parliament, promised twenty days before tLe time to
myself to have caused it been difchargit. And yet con-
trary to this promise, have they made their [retendit ian-
per of forfaulture of 31 men of guid reputat.on, b;fhops,

G g 4 abboit:s,

abbottis, and barronis, obedient fubjeds to your sovereign,
only for her cause.

THEY have also difponit, fen our fovereign's cause was

taken upon hand be the queen's majeffy of that realm, an
hundred thousand pound Scots worth of her awin true
fubje6ts geir, under the color of the law, groundit up.
on their false, treasonable, fiowin, authority.

THE murders, the oppreffions, the burnings, the ra.

vifhing of women, the deflru6tion of policy, both eccle.
fiaflical and temporal, in this mean time, as in my for-
mer writings I said it was lamentable to ony christian
man to hear of, except God gif grace, the profeflion of
thecvangile of Jesus Christ profeffit be your prince, coun-
fall and realme, be mair myndit, nor the auld inamity
tl at has stand betwixt the realms, many of my countrymen
will doubrin this article, and their proceedings puttis my
felt in Sand Thomas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the queen's majeflty of that realm,

unoo y quhais promise and honour my maiftrefs came there,
as I h.;Av said, will leave all the French writings, and
I rcncn phrases of writings, quhilks amongis them is over
meikle on baith the sides unfit, and plainly, according to
the auld true custom of Ingland and Scotland, quhereini
be a word promift truth was obferv'd, promise, in the
name of the eternal God, and upon the high honour of
that nobill and princely blude of the kings of Ingland4
quhereof the is defcendit, and presently wears the dia-
dem, that (he will put my maiftrefs in her awin country,
and cause her as queen thereof in her authority and
ftrcngrh to be obeyit, and to do the fame will appointan
certain day within two months at the farthest, as we
undertand this to be our weil, fua will we, or the maift
part of us all follow upon it, leaving the Frenchmen,
and their evil French phrases togidder. And therefore,
and for the true perpetual friendship of that realm, will
condition, and for our part, with the grace of Almighty
God, keep sic heads and conditions of agreement, as noble
and wife men can condescend upon, for the weill of this
haill island. As I have been partlings declaring to the
queen your fovcreign, quhilk I (hew to your lordfhips
felfis both in religion, in the punishment of the earl Both-
wile, for the queen's last hufband's slaughter, and for a
mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

DoVBT.

DOUBTLESS, my lords, without that, we may find sic

time and friendly working, as may gif us occasion baith
to forgette Middlemore and his late pretendit parliament,
we will turn the leaf, leaving our sovereign agains our
will to reft where (he is, under the promise of friendship.
As I have baith said, and will ever affirm, made be your
sovereign, quhilk was only cause of her graces coming
in that realme, and seek the help and moyen of French,
or Spani/h, till expulfe this treasonable and false pretendit
authority, quhilk means to reign above us.

My Lords, I desire your lordfhips confider, that it is

he, that maif desires the amity betwixt Ingland and Scot-
land to continue, and of a poor man best cause has, that
writ this.

My brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that inr

yourlordfhips communing with him, it appearit to him,
your mind was we (hold fuffer the earl of Murray to
work, altho' it were agains reason to us, and complain
thereof to the queen's majesty, and her highness wald fee
it reformit. My lords, her majefly will be over meikle
troublit to reform the wranges we have fuftainit already.
For I am sure, gif reason and juflice may have place, our
maifirefs, and we her fubjefts, have received express
wrang, far above two hundred thousand pounds sterling,
in the time of this unhappy government, feeing the re-
formation of fa great causes, comes, now a days, to flowlie
and the ungodly law of oblivion in sic matters Co meikle
praftis'd, I think, nowther for the queen's honour, nor
our weill, your lordfhips would fua mean, nor that it is
good to us to follow it. And that ye will give your so-
vereign sic advertisement thereof, as your good wisdoms
(hall find in this cause meet. It will be true and frind-
ful working for us, indeed, and nowther French phrases,
nor boasting, and finding little other effe6t, that will cause
us to hold away the Frenchmen. This is plainly written,
and I desire your lordfhip's plain answer, for in truth and
plainness langeft continues gud friendship, quhilk in this
matter I pray God may lang continue, and have your lord-
thips in his keeping. Off Dumfreis, the 3d day of Sep-
tember 1568.

Your lordflhips at my power

(p command leifully

fIERRIS.

Queen Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

568'. "T6R /rA DA ME ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vos

Cott. lib. lettres, d'une mefme dete; l'une, ou vous faites
Original. mention de l'excufe de Monfr. de Murra pour tenir son

pretendu parlement, qui me femble bien froid, pour obte-
nir plus de tollerance que je m'eftois perfuadee n'avoir par
voftre promeffe, quant a n'offer donner commiflion deve-
nir fans un parlement pour Ikur peu de nombre de noblefle
alors, je vous refpons, qu'ils n'ont que trois on quatre
d'avantage, qut euflfnt auffi bien dit leur opinion hors
de parlement, qui n'a efle tenu tant pour cette effect, mais
pour faire ce qu'expreffiment nous avions requis efire em-
pest hs, qui el[ Ia forfalture de mes fubjefts pour m'avoir
efits fidelle°, ce que je m'aflurois, jufques a heir, avoir eu
en promeffe de vous, par la lettre ccrite a mi lord Scrup
e Maiftre Knoleis vous induire a ire contre eulx, voire,
a les enfayre refentir; toutefois je vois que je l'ay mal
pris, j'en fuis plus marrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre
q 'il me montrerent, et leur parole, je P'ay si divulguement
aTrmuav que pour vengeance que j'en defiraffe, si non met-
tre difference entre leur faux deportemens, et les miens
finceres. Dans votte lettre aumfi date &u lo"' '~nout,
vous metties cecs mots. " I think your adverfeparty, up-
" on my sundry former advices, will hold no parliament
" at all; and if they do, it shall be only in form of an
" assembly, to accord whom to fend into this realm, and
" in what fort ; for otherwise, if they shall proceed in man-
" ner of a parliament, with any at of judgment against
" any person, I {hall not, in any wife, allow thereof; and
" if they shall be so overseen, then you may think the
" fame to-be of no other moment, than the former pro-
" cedures ; and by such their raih manner of proceeding,
" they thall most prejudice themselves ; and be assured to
" find me ready to condemn them, in their doings." Sur
qioy, j'ay contremand6 mes ferviteurs, les faiffant retirer,
fouffrant felon vofire commandement d'etre fauffement
nomm6s traitres, par ceulx, qui le font de vray; et en-
core d'etre provoques par efcarmons dies, et par prinfes de
mes gens et ckttres, et au contraire vous etes informee
que mes fubje6is ont evahis les voftres, Madame, qui a fait
ce rapport n'tfl pas homme de bien, car aird Serford et

son

son fils font et ont estes mes rebelles depuis le commence-
ment; enquires vous, s'ils n'eftoient a Donfris aveques
eulx, j'avois offri refpondre de fa frontiere, ce qui me fut
refuse, ce qui m endevroit asses defcharger, neanmoins,
pour vous faire preuve de ma fidelitY, et de leur falfit6, s'il
vous me fayte donner le nom des coulpables, et me forti-
fier, je commanderay mes fubjeas les pour fuivre, ou si
vous voules que ce foit les voftres, les miens leur ayde-
ront; je vous prie m'en rmander vofire volonte, au refie
mes fubje£ts fidelles feront refponfables a tout ce que leur
sera mis fu les contre vous, ni les voftres, ni les rebeile?,
defpuis que me confeillates les faire retirer. Quant aux
Frangois, j'efcrivis que l'on m'en fit nulle pourfuite, car
j'cfperois tant en vous, que je n'en aurois befoign,-je ne
fceu si te did aura en mes lettres, mais je vousjure devant
Dieu que je ne fcay chose du monde de leur venue, que
ce que m'en ayes manday, ni n'en ai oui de France mot
du monde, et ne le puis croire pour ceft occasion, et si ils
si font, c'eft fans mon fceu ni confentement, Pourquoy je
vous fupplie ne me condamner fans m'ouire, car je fuis
prest de tenir tout ce que j'ay offert a Mester Knoleis, et
vous assure que voftre amitY, qu'il vous pleft m'offrir, sera
rescue avant toutes les chofes du monde, quant France
fervit la pour presser leur retour a cefte condition, que
prenies mes affaires en mein, en foeur, et bonne ami,
comme ma France eft en vous; mais une cho!e feule me
rende confuse, j'ay tant d'enemis qu'ont votre creille, la-
quelle ne pouvant avoir par parolle, toutes mes actions vous
font defguifees, et fallement raportees, par quoi il m'eft
impossible de m'affurer de vous, pour les manternes qu'on
vous a fait, pour deftruire voftre bonne volontd de moy;
par quoy je defirerois bien avoir ce bi, n vous faire entendre
ma sincere et bonne affe6tion, laqu lie je ne puis si bien
defcrire, que mes enemis a tort ne la decolore Ma bonne
foeur, gagnes moy; envoyds moy querir, n'enzres en jea-
loulie pour faulx raports de celle que me dcfire que votre
bonne grace; je me remettray fur Mester Knoleis a qui je
me fuis librement defcouverte, et dpres vous avoir baifee
]es mains, je prierai Dieu vous donner en sant6, longue
et heureufe vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, je n'ef-
pere pertir, qu'avtques voftre bonne grace, quoyque les
menteurs mentent. Ce 26 d'Aouft,

No. XV.

No. XV. (Vol. II. p. 79. line 18.)

Letter of Walfingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3,

1580-.

SIR,

cot. Lib. T HA VE received from my lord lieutenant the copy of
Calig. C. 6. J your letter of the 25th of the last directed unto his

lordship, containing a report of your negotiation with the
king and his council, in your second audience, where-
with having made her majesty acquainted, Ihe seemed
somewhat to mislike, that you ihould so long defer to deal
for the enlargement of Empedocles. But I made answer in
your behalf, that I thought you were dire&ted by the ad-
vice of the said Empedocles friends, in the soliciting of
that cause, who knew what time was fittest for you to
take to deal therein, with moe effet, and best success,
with which answer, her majesty did in the end reft very
well satisfied, touching that point.

YOUR putting of us in hope that d'Aubigny might ea-

fily be won at her majefty's devotion, was at firfl inter.
preted to have been ironie spoke by you. But since it
feemeth you insist upon it, I could wish you were other-
wife persuaded of the man, or at least kept that opinion
to yourfelt, for considering the end and purpose of his
coming into Scotland, as may be many ways fufficiently
proved, was only to advance the queen's liberty, and re.
ception into that government, to overthrow religion, and
to procure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the
inclosed copy, which you may use to good purpose there,
shall partly give you some light; there is no man here can
be persuaded that he will change his purpose, for so (mall
advantage as he is likely to find by it, and therefore you
thall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that firing,
's I have already written to you. T'he prince of Orange
fed'J-ng, I fear will not be in time that it may do any
g.,d; for besides that there people are in themselves
P w in their resolutions, their own affairs are, at present,
i t. their slate so confused, and the prince's autho-
r ty r a , hdt he cannot so soon take order in it; and
yet for

t own part, I have not been negligent or care,

so in the matter, having, more than three weeks pass,

sent

sent one about it, from whom nevertheless I do yet hear
nothing. The letters, you desire should be written thi-
ther by the French miniiters, I have given order to Mr.
Killingrew to procure, who, I doubt not, will carefully
perform it, so that, I hope, I shall have them to fend you
by the next. And so I commit you to God. At White-
hall, the third of February 1580.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHA1M.

This letter is an original, and in fame parts of it wrote in

cyphers and explained by another hand. By Empedocles is
under/lood Morton. By Villenarius the king of Scots, D'du-
bigney is marked thus o I o

3 Feb. I580.

Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given,

and in time to be better manifefled, being now
thought meet to be in convenient fort used, and
laid against D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing
the king, the nobility, and that state.

FIRST, it hath been informed, by credible means, Cot.Lib.

that D'Aubigney was privy and acquainted with la Ca.c.a.

Nave the king's mother's secretary, coming into Scotland, Asis-.
and of his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the
king, to think and esteem it an evil president for princes,
that fubjeds might have power to deprive their lawful so-
vereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded,
by any mean, to defeat him, either of the present govern-
ment of that realm, or yet of the poffeffion of the crown
and inheritance thereof, but rather to assure the fame to
him: and that for the accomplishment of that assurance,
the king thould have been advised and drawn to have go-
verned, for some short time, as prince, calling D'Aubig-
ny to rule as governor of the prince, by commiflion from
the queen his mother, until the king's enemies were sup-
pressed; after which time, d'Aubigny should have power
given to establish and resign that kingdom to the king,

3 by

by his mother's voluntary consent, whereby all Such, as
had before been in action against the queen or her pu-
thority, might be brought to stand in the king's mercy,
And for that the king might live in more surety, D'Aubig-
ny mhould be declared both second person in succession of
that crown, and also lieutenant-general of Scotland, and
that d'Aubigny, before *his departure out of France, re-
ceived commission from the king's mother to the effects
remembered, or near the fame. That in this behalf he
had conference with the bishops of Glasgow, and Ross,
and with fir James Baford, with which persons, and with
the duke of Guise he had and hath frequent intelligence,
and by fir James Baford he was addviCed tao onset vwiftS
the lord John Hamilton before his repair into Scotland,
whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he sent one
John Hamilton to the said lord John to excuse him in
this part, alledging, that he did forbear to come to him,
left thereby he should marr or hinder greater effels to be
executed by him in Scotland,

THAT before his coming into that realm, the nobili·

ty and country were well quieted and united in good con-
cord, with great love betwixt the king and nobility, and
amongst the noblesse, but he hath both drawn the king
against sundry of the chiefeft of his nobility, that have
been mofi ready, and have expended their blood and.pof-
feflions to preserve relt.ion, and defend nte 'ing's per-
son, his government and eitate, and also hath given occa-
fions of great suspicions and offence to be engendered be-
twixt the king and his nobility, and especially with fLch
as have been in a&ion against the king's mather,, and<

.

authority, who by force and means of the said commission
and practice, mhould have been brought into most dan-
gerous condition; and who also may find themselves in no
small perill while he poffeffes the king's ear, abufeth
his presence, and holdeth such of the principal keys and
ports of his realm, as he presently enjoyeth.

THAT he hath drawn the king not only to forget the

great benefits done to him and his realme, by the queen's
majefly of England, but also to requite the fame with
sundry signs of great unthankfulnefs, and wounding
therewith the honour of her majesty, and thereby hath
adventured to flake the happy amity long time continued
betwixt those princes.

AND whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle

letters and good offers, to have passed, and been done be-
twixt them: In which refpedt, the king and council ha-
ving resolved to write to her majesty, for 'her highnefs'
better fatisfaaion in the late negotiation of Mr. Alexander
Hume of Northberwick, had given order to the king's fe-
cretary to frame that letter: Hfe minding to break the
bond of amity in funder, willed the secretary to be sure
that nothing should be inserted in that letter, whereby the
king should crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby
to cut off all loving courtesies betwixt them, as by the.
declaration of the said secretary may be better, learned,
and thereupon further approved.

THAT under the hope and encouragement qf,D'Aubig-

ny's prote&tion. Alexander King prefurmed w4ith that bold-
ness to make his lewd harangue, and by his means hath
hitherto escaped chastisement and coreeion, due for his
offence.

'THAT fir James Bafotd, condemngd of the slaughter ,

of the king's father, hath been, called into the realm by
Lennox, without the privity ps the king. And whereas
the said fir James found in a green velvet desk, late the
earl of Bothwell's, and saw and had in his hands the r
principal band of the conspirators in that murder, and can
bell declare and witness who were authors and executors i
of the fame; he is drawn by Lennox to suppress the truth,
and to accuse such as he himself knoweth to be innocenti
and as by order of law, will be so found, if they may
have due trial, which, contrary to all jufice, is by Len-
nox means denied.

This is the charge ogainfi D'Aubigny, mentioned in the

foregoing letter by Walfingbam ; but by Bafard they mean fir
James Balfour.

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. I19. Line 25.)

The Scottish queen's offers upon the effect of her

liberty propounded by her secretary ,Nawy, No-
vember 1584.

HE queen my mistress being once well assured of your Cot. Lib,
majefty's amity, Cauig. C. .

I. WILL A Copy.

1. WVILL declare openly that file will (as it is sincerely

her meaning) straitly to join unto your majesty, and to the
fame to yield and bear the chief honour and refpedt, be-
fore all other kings and princes in ChriRfendom.

2. She will swear, and protest solemnly, a sincere for-

getfulnefs of all wrongs which the may pretend to have
been done unto her in this realm, and will never, in any
fort or manner whatsoever, thew offence for the fame.

3. She will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own

particular name, as also for her heirs and others descend.
ing of her for ever, your majesty, for jut, true, and law-
ful queen of England.

4. AND consequently, will renounce, as well for her(lef,

as for her said heirs, all rights and pretences which Lhe
may claim to the crown of England, during your majefty's
life, and other prejudice.

5. SHE will revoke all ads and shews, by her hereto-

fore made, of pretence to this said crown to the prejudice
of your majesty, as may be the taking of the arms and
fiile of queen of England, by the commandment of king
Francis her late lord and husband.

6. She will renounce the pope's bull for so much as

may be expounded to turn in her favour, or for her be-
hoof, touching the deprivation of her majesty, and will
declare that the will never help and serve herself with
it.

7. SHE will not prosecute, during your majefly's life,

by open force or otherways, any publick declaration of
her right in the fucceflion of this realm, so as secret alfur-
ance be given unto her, or at the least publick promise,
that no deciding thereof shall be made in the prejudiceof
her, or of the king her son, during your majefty's life,
nor after your decease, until such time as they have been
heard thereupon, in publick, free, and general assembly
of the parliament of the said realm.

8. SHE will not praaife, directly or indirealy, with

any of your majefty's fubjeds, neither within nor out of
your realm, any thing tending to war, civil or foreign,
against your majesty and your eflate, be it under pretext
of religion, or for civil and politick government.

9. SHE will not maintain or support any of your sub-

jets declared rebels, and convided of treason againif
you.

10. SHu

to. SHS will enter into the association, which was

fhewed her at Wingfield for the surety of your majefty's
life, so as there be mended or right expricated some
clauses, which I will (hew to your Majesty, when I Jhall
have the copy thereof, as I have before time required.

II. SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes,

for any war 6r trouble against this state, and will renounce,
from this time, all enterprises made or to be made in her
favour for that refpe6l.

12. FUR'HERMORE, this realm being assailed by any

civil or foreign war, (he will take part with your majesty,
and will assist you in your defence with all her forces and
means, depending of herself and with all her friends of
Chriffendom.

13. AND to that effect, for the mutual defence and

maintenance of your majesty, and the two realms of this
isle, the will enter with your majesty in a league defen-
five, as shall be more particularly advised, and will per-
fwade as much as in her, the king her son to do the like.

THE leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm, and

especially the antient league between Franceafid Scotland,
in that which (hall not be against this present.

14. SHE will enter into a league offenfive, having good

assurance, or secret declaration and acknowledgement of
her right in the fucceflion of this crown, and promise,
that happening any breach betwixt France and this realm,
(which she prayeth God never to happen) the jufl value
of her dowry (hall be placed for her in lands of the revenue
of the crown.

15. FOR assurance of her promises and covenants, (he

doth offer to abide herself in this realm for a certain time,
(better hofrage can (he not give than her own person)
which, so as (he be kept in the liberty here before pro-
pounded, is not in cafe to escape secretly out of this coun-
try, in the sickly slate (he is in, and with the good order
which your majesty can take therein.

16. AND in cafe your majefly do agree to her full and

whole deliverance, to retire herself at her will out of this
realm, the said queen of Scots (he will give fufficient hof-
tage for such time as will be advised.

17. IF (he abide in this realm, the will promise not to

depart out of it, without your licence, so as it be pro-
miied unto her that her state, in such liberty as (hall be
accorded unto her, shall not be in any fort altered, untill

VoL. II. H h after

after tryall to have attempted against your life, or other
trouble of your efiate.

18. IF the go into Scotland, she will promise to alter

nothing there in the religion which is now used there, [he
being Luffered to have free exercise of hers, for her and
her houfhold, as it was at her return out of France; and
further, to pull out every root of new division between
the fubjeds, that none of the fubje8s of Scotland (hall
be sifted for his conscience, nor confitrained to go to the
service of the contrary religion.

19. SHE will grant a general abolition of all offences

done againlt her in Scotland, and things (hall remain there
as they are at this prelent, for the refpe6t, saving that
which hath been done againfi her honour, which the
meaneth to have revoked and annulled.

20. SHE will travel to fettle a sure and general recon-

ciliation between the nobility of the country, and to cause
to be appointed about the king her son, and in his coun-
cil, such as (hall be fit for the entertainment of the peace
and quiet of the country, and the amity of the realm.

21. SHE will do her best to content your majefly, in

favour of the Scots lords banithed and refuged hither,
upon their due fubmillion to their princes, and your ma.
jefty's promise to afflift the said queen and king of Scotland
againfi them, if they happen to fall into their former
faults.

22. SHE will proceed to the marriage of the king her

son, with the advice and good council of your majesty.

23. As she will pats nothing without the king her fen,

so doth (he desire that he intervene conjointly whih her in
this treaty, for the greater and perfef1er assurance there-
of; for otherwise any thing can hardly be ellablilbed to
be found and continue.

14. THE said Scotch queen trufteth, that the French

king, her good brother, according to the good affe&ion
which he hath always (hewed her, and hath been afresh
tefrified unto me by MonfT. de Mannifliere for this said
treaty, will very willingly intervene, and will assist her
for the surety of her promises.

25. AND to will the princes of the house of Lorrain,

following the will of the said king, will bind themselves
thereunto.

26. FOR other kings arid princes of Christendom, she

will assay to obtain the like of them, if for greater 0o-

lemnity

krhriity and approbation of the treaty it be found to be
heceffarv.

l7. Siti doth desire a speedy answer, arid final c»nclu-

flion of the premises; to the end to nieet in time with all
in conveniencies.

28. AND in the mean time, the more to flrengthen the

said treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, the
defireth that dentonftratioit be made of rome releafement
ds hkr captivity.

Objetions igainft the Scottish queen, under fe-
cretary Waifinghame's hand, Novembers 1584.
THE queen of Scots is ambitious, and flandeth ill

affelted to her majef{y, and therefore it cannot be

but that her liberty ihould bring peril unto her niajefty.

THAT her enlargement Will give comfort to papitfs, and

other ill affected fubjeds, and greatly advance the opi-
nion had of her title as successor.

THAT as long as (he shall be continued in her ma-

jefty's poffeffion, .she may serve as it were a gage of her
majef{y's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the dan-
ger the inay be thrown intoi in cafe any thing thould be
done in her favour, dare not attempt any thing in the of-
fence of her majefly.

November I What course were fit to be taken

o em e with the queen of Scots, either

1 $4. I to be enlarged or not.

THE course to be taken with the said queen may be Cott. tub.

considered of in three degrees ; either, Cal. 8.

I. To continue her under custody in that tfate (he

now is.

2. To restrain her of the present liberty the now hath.
3. Or to set her at liberty upon caution.
I. TOUCHING the firit, to continue her under cuffody

in that state the now is; it is to be considered, that the
princes that favour that queen, upon the complaint file
maketh of hard usage, are greatly moved with commifera-
tion towards her, and promise to do their endeavour for
her liberty, for which purpose her ministers solicit them
daily.

tif
» * ND
t a 2 AND

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, (he ac-

quainteth them with her offers made to her majefly, which
appeared to be no less profitable than reafanable for her
majeffy, so as the refusal and rejeCing giveth her friends
and favourers cause to think her hardly dealt withal, and
therefore may, with the better ground and reason, attempt
somewhat for the serting of her at liberty.

IT is also likely that the laid queen, upon this refusal,

finding her cafe delperate, will continue her pradice under
hand, both at home and abroad, not only for her de-
livery, but to attain to the present p ,ffefiion of this crown
upon her pretended title, as (he had hitherto done, as
appeareth, and is most manifest by letters and plots inter-
cepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of Scotland,
which hath proceeded altogether by her direclion, where-
by a gap is laid open for the malice of all her majefty's
enemies, so as it appeareth that this manner of keeping
her, v.ith such number of persons as ihe now hath, and
with liberty to write and receive letters (being duly con-
fidered), is offenfive to the princes, the laid queen's friends;
rather chargeable, than profitable to her majesty; and sub-
jea to all such praatices as may peril her majefly's per.
son or flare, without any provilion for her majefty's safe-
ty, and therefore no way to be liked of.

2. TOUCHING the second, to restrain her in a more

straighter degree of the liberty (he. hath hitherto enjoyed.

IT may at firfi fight, be thought a remedy very apt to

flop the course of the dangerous praaices fostered here-
tofore by her: For, true it is, that this remedy might prove
very profitable, if the realm of Scotland flood in that fort
devoted to her majesty, as few years past it did ; and if the
king of that realm were not likely, as well for the release
of his mother, as for the advancement of both their pre-
tended titles, to attempt somewhat against this realm and
her majefly, wherein he should neither lack foreign as-
fiftane, nor a party here within this realm: But the
king and that realm flanding affeaed as they do, this re-
firaint, instead of remedying, is likely to breed these in-
conveniencies following:

FIRST, it will increase the offence both in him, and in

the reft of the princes her friends that mifliked of her re-
firaint.

SECOND-

SECONDLY, It will give them juff cause to take some

way of redress.

LASTLY, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke

some desperate ill-difpofed person, all hope of her liberty
removed, to attempt somewhat against her majefty's own
person (a matter above all others to be weighed), which
inconveniency being duly considered, it will appear mani-
fefitly, that the refiraint, in a itraighter degree, is likely
to prove a remedy fubjedt to very hard events.

T'HE latter degree, whether it were fit to set the said

queen at liberty, miniftreth some cause of doubt, touching
the manner of the liberty, in what fort the fame is to be
performed, whether to be continued here within the realm,
or to be reffored into her own country.

BUT sift, this propofhion, before the particulariries be

weighed, is to be considered in generality.

FOR it is very hard for a well-affected fubje&, that ten-

dereth her majeity's surety, and weigheth either the nature
of the Scottith queen, being inclined to ambition and
revenge, or her former aflions, what pracices the hath
set on foot most dangerous for her majesty and this realm,
to allow of her liberty, being not made acquainted with
such causes, as time hath wrought, to make it less peri-
lous than it hath been, nor with such cautions as may, in
some fort, be deviied to prevent both her ambition and
malice; and therefore, to make this apparent,

IT is to be considered, that the danger that was in the

mother, is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth
the fame title she doth: Such as do asset her, both at
home and abroad, do affea him (and he is the more
dangerous for that he is unmarried, which may greatly
advance his fortune; and that he is a man, whereby he
may enter into acion in his own person); where file is re-
firained, he is at liberty; his own realm is now altoge-
ther at his devotion, and the party affected to this crown
abased; so as the matter duly considered, neither her li-
berty nor reflraint doth greatly alter the cafe for perils to-
wards her majesty, unless by such promises as may be made
by way of treaty with her, the danger likely to grow from
the king her son to be provided for.

BUT in this behalf it may be objealed, that so long as

the mother remains in her majefty's hands, the king will
attempt nothing for fear of his mother's peril.

Hh3 To

To this obje&ion it may be answered, firff, That they

hope that her majesty, being a prince ofjuftice, and in-
clined to mercy, will not puniih the mother for the fon's
offence, unless (he (hall be found, by good proof, culpable.
Secondarily, That men will not be over-haiy, confider-
ing in what predicament the king standeth touching his
expectation of this crown, to adviCe any thing that in
time future may be dangerous to the giver of such coun-
cil as may reach to his mother's peril.

AND lafly, the taking away of his mother, he being

firong in the field through both foreign assistance, and a
party here within the realm, will appear so weak a reme-
dy (which may rather exasperate both him, and her par-
ty, to proceed with more courage and heat to revenge, if
any such hard measure (hould be offered unto her), as they
will suppose for the realon above specified, that no fich
extremity will be used.

]T may also be obje6ted, that the letting of her at li-

berty will greatly encourage the papifts both at home and
abroad; but herein, if the provision be duly considered,
that may be made by parliament both here and there, they
ihall rather find cause of discomfort than otherwise,

THESE two doubts being resolved, and the perils that

was in the mother appearing most manifefily to be seen
in the son accompanied with more danger, with due con.
fideration had alto of such remedies as may be provided for
the preventing of the dangers, that her liberty may mi-
nifterjuft cause to doubt of; there will be good cause of
hope round, that the fame will rather breed benefit than

perils. Now it refteth, in what fort the laid liberty (hall be
performed; if it (hall be thought meet (he shall be con-
tinued within the realm with forme limitation, especially
in that place where (he now refideth, the country round
about being so infeaed in religion as it is, it is greatly to
be 1loubted that will very much iacreafe the corruption,
and falling away in that behalf. Betides, (he thould have
commodity, with much more ease, and speed, to entertain
praitices within this realm, than by being in her own
country.

IF abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland

pr France, then shall her majcfty lose the gages of her
safety, then (hall lhe be at hand to give advice in further-

ance

ance of such praaices, as have been laid for to stir trouble
in this realm, wherein the hath been a principal party.

FOR the first, it is answered before, that the refpe& of

any perils that may befal unto her, will in no fort restrain
her son. For the other, if it be considered what harm
her advice will work unto herself, in refpea of the vio-
lation of the treaty, and the provision that may be made
in parliament here, it is to be thought, thatihe will then
be well advised, before (he attempt any such matter, which
now ihe may do without perill. Besides such princes, as
have interposed their faith and promise for her, cannot
with honour assist her, wherein the French King will not
be found very forward, who, in most friendly lort, hath
lately rejetted all such requefis, propounded either by
her, or her fon's miniffirs, that might any way offend
her majeffy. And so to conclude, feeing the cause of her
grief (hall be taken away; the French king gratified,
who is a mediator for her, and will mislike, that, by any
Spanish pradice, the (hould be drawn to violate her faith,
that the reft of the princes (hall have no jufi cause of of-
fence, but rather to think honourably of her majesty con-
fidering the Scottish queen's carriage towards her, which
hath deserved no way any such favour; the noblemen of
Scotland thall be restored, who will be a good flay of
such counfells as may tend to the troubling of this realm,
efpecjally having so good a ground of warrant as the par-
liament to fland unto; the charges and perills which her
pratices might have bred to this realm (hall be avoided;
and liflly, the hope of the papifts (hall be taken away, by
such good provisions, as in both the realms may he made,
whereby the perills that might fall into her majefly's own
person, (a matter of all others to be weighed) shall be
avoided, when by the change that may grow by any such
wicked and ungodly pratice, they Ihall fee their cafe no
way relieved in point of religion.

Reasons to induce her majesty to proceed in the

treaty under Secretary Walfingham's hand.

THAT such plots as have of late years been devised cott. Lb.

(tending to the railing of trouble within this realm) cal. C. S.

have grown from the Scots queen's ministers, and favour-
ers, not without her allowance and seeking: Or,

H h 4 THAT

THAT the means used by the said ministers, to induce

princes to give ear to the said plots, is principally ground-
ed upon Come commiseration had of their restraint.

THAT the flay, why the said plots have not been put

in execution, hath proceeded, for that the said princes
have, for the most part, been entertained with home and
domeffick troubles.

THAT it is greatly to be doubted, that now their

realms begin to be quiet, that somewhat will be attempt-
ed in her favours by the said princes.

'THAT it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may be

attempted by rome of her fautors in an extraordinary fort,
to the perill of her majefly.

THAT for the preservation thereof, it tiat1 be conve-

nient for her majefly to proceed to the finiflhing of the
treaty, not long fithence begun between her and the laid
queen.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. 149. I. 27.)

A letter from Sir Amias Pawlet.

SIR,

Origin. Cal. I Did forbear, according to your diretion signified in
c.9. . your letters of the 4th of this present, to proceed to

the execution of the contents of Mr. Waade's letters un-
to you, for the dispersing of this lady's unnecessary ser-
vants, and for the feafing of her money, wherein I was
bold to write unto you my simple opinion (although in
vain as it now falleth out), by my letters of the 7th of
this inflant, which I doubt not are with you before this
time; but upon the receipt of your letters of the 5th
which came not unto my hands untill the 8th in the even-
ing, by reason, as did appear by indorfement, that they
had been miflaken, and were sent back to Windsor, after
they were entered into the way towards me, I confider-
ed, that being accompanied only by my own servants, it
might be thought that they would be intreated to fay as I
would command them, and therefore I thought good,
for my better discharge in there money matters, to crave
the affiflance of Mr. Richard Baggot, who repairing un-
to n e the next morning, we had access to this queen,
whom we found in her bed, troubled after the old man-

ner

ner with a defluxion, which was fallen down into the fide
of her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one of her
hands, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her
former praaifes, doubting left the would persist therein
by corrupting underhand some bad members of this state,
I was exprefly commanded to take her money into my
hands, and to reft answerable for it, when it fllhall be re-
quired: advising her to deliver the said money unto me
with quietness. After many denials, many exclamations,
and many bitter words against you (I fay nothing of her
railling against myself), with flat affirmation that her majefly
might have her body, but her heart {he ihould never have,
refusing to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my ser-
vants, and sent for barrs to break open the door, where-
upon she yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I
found there in the coffers, mentioned in Mr. Waade's re-
membrance, five rolls of canvas, containing five thousand
French crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one
had, in gold, one hundred and four pounds two thillinns,
and the other had three pounds in silver, which bag of fil-
ver was left with her, affirming that the had no more mo-
ney in this house, and that the was indebted to her ser-
vants for their wages. Mr. Waade's note maketh men- Curie can
tion of 3 rolls left in Curie's chamber, wherein, no doubt, tell you the
he was mifreckoned, which is evident as well by the teffi- truth ofthi
monies and oaths of diverse persons, as also by probable matter,
conje&ures; foas in truth we found only two rolls, every
of which containeth one thousand crowns, which was this
queen's guifte to Curie's wife at her marriage. There is
found in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a chain worth by
estimation one hundred pounds, and in money, in one
bag nine hundred pounds, in a second bag two hundred
fourscore and fix pounds eighteen shillings. All the fore-
said parcels of money are befiowed in bags, and sealed
by Mr. Richard Bagot, saving five hundred pounds of
Naw's money, which I reserve in my hands, for the use
of this houfhold, and may be repayed at London, where
her majesty (hall appoint, out of the money, received
lately by one of my servants, out of the Exchequer. I
feared left the people might have dispersed this money in
all this time, or have hidden the fame in some secret cor-
ners; for doubt whereof, I had caused all this queen's
family, from the highest to the lowest, to be guarded in
the several places where I found them, so as yff I had not

found

found the money, with quietness, I had been forced to
have search first all their lodgings, and then their own
persons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a fingu-
lar blessing, that that falleth out so well, fearing left a
contrary success might have moved faome hard conceits
in her majefly.

ToUCHING the dispersing of this queen's servants, I

trust 1 have done so much, as may fuflice to latisfy her
majesty for the time, wherein I could not take any absolute
course, until I heard again from you, partly because her
majefly, by Mr. Waade's letter, doth reter to your confi-
deration to return such as shall be discharged to their feve.
ral dwellings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, you
have forgotten to deliver your opinion; partly, for that as
yet, I have received no answer from you, of your resolution,
upon the view of the Scottish family tent unto you, what
persons you will appoint to be difmift; only this I have
done, I have befiowed all such, as are mentioned in this
bill inclosed, in three or four several rooms, as the fame
may fuffice to contain them, and that their meat and drink
shall be brought unto them by my servants. It may please
you, to advertise me by your next letters, in what fort,
and for what course, I shall make their paflports, as also,
if they shall Cay that they are unpaid of their wages, what

Ths lady I thall do therein. Yt is laid that they have been ac-
hath good cuftomed to be paid of their wages at Christmas, for the
eyat pre- whole year. Her majefly's charge will be somewhat di-
rent in the minifhed by the departure of this people, and my charge
French by this occasion, will be the more easy. But the persons,
do'sb hands. all Cave Baftian, are such filly and simple fouls, as there

was no great cause to fear their praclices, and upon this
ground, I was of opinion, in my former letters, that all
this difmifled train thould have followed their mistress,
until the next remove, and there to have been discharged
upon the sudden, for doubt that the (aid remove might be
delayed, yf she did fear, or expea any hard measure.

OTHERS shall excuse their foolish pity as they may, but

for my part, I renunce my part of the joys of heaven, yf
in any thing that I have said, written or done, I have
had any other refpe& than the furtherance of her ma.
jefty's service; and so I hall mofl earnestly pray you to as-
firm for me, as likewise for the not feafing of the money
by Mr. Manners, the other commiffioiers and myself. I
trutd Mr. Waade hath aniwered, in all humble duties, for

the

the whole company, that no one of us did so much as
think that our commifflion reaching only to the papers, we
might be bold to touch the money, so as there was no
speech of that all to my knowledge, and as you know I
was no commissioner in this search, but had my hands full
at Tyxall, discreet servants are'not hastily to deal in great
matters, without warrant, and especially where the cause
is such as the delay of it carried no danger.

YouR advertisement of that happy remove hath been

greatly comfortable unto me. I will not fay, in refpet
of myself, because my private interest hath no measure of
comparison with her majefty's safety, and with the quiet
of this realm. God grant a happy and speedy yffue to
these good and godly councels ; and so I commit you to
his merciful protection. Fro;n Chartley the loth of Sep-
tember 1586.

No. XV, (Vol. II. p. 174. line 25.)

Copy of a letter from the earls of Shrewsbury

and Kent, &c. touching their proceedings with
regard to the death of the Scottilh queen, to
her majefty's council.

T may please your honble good lordfhips to be adver-
tifed, that, on Saturday the 4th of this present, I Ro-

bert Beale came to the house of me the earl of Kent in the
county of - to whom your lordihips letter and message
was delivered, and her majefty's commiflion shewn; where-
upon I the earl forthwith lent precepts for the slaying of
such hues and crie as had troubled the country, requiring
the officers to make flay of all such persons, as flhould
bring any such warrants without names, as before had
been done, and to bring them to the next justice of peace,
to the intent that, upon their examination, the occasion
and causes of such seditious bruites might be bolted out
and known. It was also resolved that I the said earl of
Kent should, on the Monday following, come to Lylford
to Mr. Elmes, to be the nearer and readier to confer with
my lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robert
Beale came to Fotheringay, where after the communicat-
ing the commission, &c. unto us fir Amice Pawlet and fir
prue Drury, by reason that fir A. Pawlct was but late re-

covered

covered and not able to repair to the earl of Shrewsbury,
being-then at Orton, fix miles of; it was thought good
that we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale should go unto
him, which we did on -- morning; and together with
the delivery of her majefty's commission, and your lord-
fhip's letter imparted unto him what both the earl of Kent
and we thought meet to be done in the cause, praying
his lodfihip hither the day following, to confer with me
the said earl, concerning the fame; which his lordship
promised. And for the better colouring of the matter, I
the said earl of Shrewsbury sent to Mr. Beale, a justice of
peace of the county of Huntingdon next adjoining, to
whom I communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale
had under your lordihip's hands, for the slaying of the
hues and cries, requiring him to give notice thereof to
the town of Peterborough, and especially unto the justices
of peace of Huntingdonshire, and to cause the pursuers
and bringers of such warrants to be frayed, and brought
to the next juflice of peace; and to bring us word to So-
theringay castle on Wednesday morning what he had done,
and what he should in the mean time underf[and of the
authors of such bruites. Which like order, I also fir A-
mias Pawlet had taken on Monday morning in this town,
and other places adjoining. The fame night, the fheriff
of the county of Northampton upon the receit of your
lordfhip's letter came to Arundel, and letters were tent
to me the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewfbury's in-
tention and meeting here on Tuesday by noon; and other
letters were also sent with their lorofhips assent to fir
Edward Montagu, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. Tho. Bru-
denell, &c. to be here on Wednesday by eight of the
clock in the morning, at which time it was thought meet
that the execution should be. So upon Tuesday, we the
earls came hither, where the fheriff met us; and upon
conference between us it was resolved, that the care for
the sending for the surgeons, and other necessary provision
should be committed unto him against the time. And we
forthwith repaired unto her, and first in the pretence of
herself and her folks, to the intent that they might fee
and report hereafter that the was not otherwise proceeded
with than according to law, and the form of the statute
made in the 27th ) earof her majefty's reign, it was thought
convenient that her majefty's commission fnould be read
unto her, and afterwards the was by sundry speeches

willed

willed to prepare herself against the next morning. She
was also put in remembrance of her fault, the honourable
manner of proceeding with her, and the necessity that was
imposed upon her majefly to proceed to execution, for
that otherwise it was found that they could not both stand
together; and however, fithence the lord Buckhurft's his
being here new conspiracys were attempted, and so would
be still ; wherefore since she had now a good while since
warning, by the laid lord and Robert Beale, to think up-
on and prepare herself to die, we doubted not but that
lihe was, before this, fettled, and therefore would accept
this message in good part. And to the effe& that no chri-
ftian duty might be said to be omitted, that might be for
her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of her body
and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her that
if it would please her to confer with the bilhop and dean
of Peterborough, (he might; which dean, we had, for that
purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that
place. Hereto (he replied, crossing herself in the name of
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, saying that the
was ready to die in the catholic Roman faith, which her
ancefiors had profeffed, from which lie would not be re-
moved. And albeit we used many persuasions to the con-
trary, yet we prevailed nothing; and therefore, when
the demanded the admitance of her priest, we utterly de-
nied that unto her. Hereupon, (he demanded to under-
fland what answer we had touching her former petition to
her majesty, concerning her papers of accounts, and the
bellowing of her body. To the first we had none other
answer to ma)te, but that we thought if they were not
sent before, the fame might be in Mr. Waade's custody,
who was now in France, and feeing her papers could not
any wife pleasure her majesty, we doubted not but that the
fame would be delivered unto such as the liould appoint.
For, for our own parts, we undoubtedly thought that her
majefly would not make any profit of her things, and
.therefore (in our opinions) the might set down what the
would have done, and the fame should be imparted unto
her nmajefy, of whom both the and others might expedt
all courtesy. Touching her body, we knew not her ma-
jeftv's pleasure, and therefore could neither fay that her
petition thould be denyed, or granted. For the pradice of
Babington, the utterly denied it,and would have inferred it,
that her death was for her religion ; whereunto it was eft-

x foons

foons by us replied, that for many years the was not
touched for religion, nor (hould have been now, but
that this proceeding against her was for treason, in that
she was culpable of that horrible conspiracy for destroying
her majefly's person; which she again denied, adding fur.
ther, that albeit she for herself forgave them that were the
procurers of her death, yet she doubted not but that God
would take vengeance thereof. And being charged with
the depositions of Naue and Curie to prove it against her,
she replied, that Ihe accused none, but that hereafter when
(lhe (hall he dead, and they remain alive, it (hall be seen
how indifferently the had been dealt with, anJ what mea-
sure had been used unto her; and asked whether it had
been heard before this, that servants had been praAifed
to accuse thair mistress, and hereupon also required what
was become of them, and where they remained.

UPON our departure from her, for that it seemed by the

commiflion, that the charge of her was in the disposition
of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Drue
Drurie, to receive, for that night, the charge, which they
had before, and to cause the whole number of soldiers to
watch that night, and thdt her folks ihould be put up, and
take order that only four of them (hould be at the execu-
tion, remaining aloof of and guarded with certain persons
to as they (hould not come near unto her, which were
Melvil her steward, the physician, surgeon, and apothe-
cary.

WEDNESDAY morning, after that we the earls were re-

paired unto the castle, and the fheriff had prepared all
things in the hall for the execution, he was commanded
to go into her chamber, and to bring her down to the place
where were present, we which have signed this letter, Mr.
Henry Talbot, efq; fir Edward Montague, knt. his son
and heir apparent, and William Montague his brother,
fir Richard Knichtly, knt. Mr. Thomas Brudenel, Mr.
Beuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr. Forreft,
and Rayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean' of Peterbo-
rough, and others.

AT the ftairfold, the paused to speak to Melvil in our

hearing, which was to this effect, " Melvil, as thou haft
been an honefi servant to me, Co I pray thee continue to
my son, and commend me unto him. I have not impugn'd
his religion, nor the religion of others, but with him well.
And as I forgive all that have offended me in Scotland, to

I would

I would that he should also; and beseech God, that he
would fend him his HolySpirit, and illuminate him." Mel-
vill's answer was, that he would Ib do, and at that inflant
he would beseech God to aflilf him with his Spirit. Then
the demanded to speak with her pricft, which was denied
unto her, the rather for that the came with a superstitious
pair of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have
her women to help her, and upon her earnest request,
and saying that when other gentlewomen were executed,
the had read in chronicles that they had women allowed
unto them, it was permitted that the thould have two nam-
ed by herself, which were Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After
the came to the fcaffold, firif, in presence of them all, her
majeftie's commission was openly read ; and afterwards
Mr. Dean of Peterborough, according to a direation which
he had received, the night before, from us the earls, wou'd
have made a godly admonition to her, to repent and dye
well in the fear of God and charity to the world., But at
the firfi entry, she utterly refused it, saying that the was
catholique, and that it were a folly to move her, being
so resolutely minded, and that our prayers would little
avail her. Whereupon, to the intent it might appear that
we, and the whole assembly, had a christian desire to have
her die well, a godly prayer, conceiv'd by Mr. Dean, was
read and pronounced by us all. " That it would please Al-
mighty God to fend her his Holy Spirit and grace, and al-
so, if it were his will, to pardon all her offences, and of
his mercy to receive her into his heavenly and e erlatting
kingdom, and finally to bless her majesty, and confound
all her enemies ;" whereof Mr. Dean, minding to repair
up thortly, can Ihew your lordfhips a copy.

THIS done, the pronounced a prayer upon her knees

to this effed, " to beseech God to fend her his Holy
Spirit, and that the trusted to receive her salvation in his
blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom,
besought God to forgive her enemies, as she forgave
them; and to turn his wrath from this land, to bless the
queen's majeftie, that (he might serve him. Likewise to be
merciful to her son, to have compatlion of his church, and
altho' the was not worthy to be heard, yet the had a con-
fidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faints, to pray
unto her Saviour to receive her." After this (turning to-
wards her servants) the desired them to pray for her, that

her

her Saviour would receive her. Then, upon petition made
by the executioners, ihe pardoned them ; and said, ihe
was glad that the end of all her sorrows was so near. Then
she disliked the whinning and weeping of her women, fay.
ing, that they rather ought to thank God for her refolu-
tion, and killing them, willed them to depart from the
fcaffold, and farewell. And so resolutely kneeled down,
and having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down
her neck, whereupon the executioner proceeded. Her
servants were incontinently removed, and order taken that
none should approach unto her corps, but that it should
be embalmed by the surgeon appointed. And further her
crcffe, apparell, and other things are retained here, are
not yielded unto the executioner for inconveniences that
might follow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by such
as Cent him hither.

THIs hath been the manner of our dealings in this

service, whereof we have thought good to advertise your
lordfhips, as particularly as we could, for the time, and
further have thought good to signify unto your lordlhips
besides, that for the avoiding of all sinister and slanderous
reports that may be railed to the contrary, we have caused
a note thereof to be conceiv'd to the fame effea in writ-
ing, which we the said lords have subscribed, with the
hands of such other there the knights and gentlemen above
named that were present at the acion. And so beseech-
ing Almighty God long to bless her majefly with a most
prosperous reign, and to confound all his, and her ene-
mies, we take our leaves. From Fotheringay-Caftle, the
8th of February 1586, in haft.

Your lordfhips at commandment.

N. B. This, as well as several other papers in this Ap-

pendix, is taken from a colletion made by Mr.
Crawfurd of Drumfoy, hitroriographer to Queen
Anne, now in the library of the faculty of Advo-
cates. Mr. Crawfurd's tranferiber has omitted to
mention the book in the Cott. Lib. where it is to be
found.

No, XIX.

No. XIX. [Vol. II. p. 180. line 4.]

The objeC&ions against Mr. Davison, in the cause

of the late Scottish queen, mull concern things
done either, i. Before her trial at Fotheringay.
2. During that fetfion. 3. After the fame.

I. fE FORE her trial, he neither is, nor can be Cott. L:b

D charged to have had any hand at all in the cause cali'c,aj

of the laid queen, or done any thing whatsoever concern-
ing the fame, directly or indiretly.

2. DURING that feflion, he remained at court, where

the only interest he had therein, was as her majefty's fe-.
cretary, to receive the letters from the commiflioners, im-
part them to her highness, and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the laid commiflion-

ers, it is well known to all her council,

1. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting

whatsoever, in parliament, or council, concerning the
cause of the said queen, till the sending down of her ma-
jefty's warrant unto the commiflioners, by the lords and
others of her council.

2. THAT he was no party in signing the sentence, pas-,

ed against her.

3. THAT he never penned either the proclamation

publishing the fame, the warrant after her death, nor
any other letter, or thing whatsoever concerning the
fame. And,
. THAT the only thing which can be specially and truly
imputed to him, is the carrying up the laid warrant unto
her majesty to be signed. She sending a great counsellor
unto him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it
to the great real of England, by her own special direction
and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
I. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord trea-

surer, was delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with her
majefly's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when she

thould be pleased to call for it.
VOL. 11. Ii 2 THAT

2. THAT being in his hands, he retained it at the leafs

five or fix weeks ui presented, nor once offering to carry
it up, t.ll she lknt a great counsellor unto him for the
fame, and was sharply reprosed therefor by a great peer,
in her majefty's own presence.

3* THAT having signed it, she gave him an express

coml.n aidment to carry it to the leal, and being (ek to
fenj it immediately away unto the commilimoners, ac-
cording to the dirc6tion. Herself appointing the hall of
Fotheringay for the place of execution, mifliking the
court-yaid, in divers refpeals, and in conclusion abfo-
lutely forbad him to trouble her any further, or let her
hear any more hereof, till it was done. She, for her
part, having (as she said) performed all that, in law or
reason, could be required of her.

4. WHICH diretions notwithitanding, he kept the

warrant faled all that niht, and the greatest part of the
next day in his hands, brought it back with him to the
court, acquainted her majesty withal, and finding her
majeflty relolved to proceed therein, according to her for.
mer directions, and yet desirous to carry the matter so, as
ihe might throw the burthen from herself, he absolutely
rtlolved to quit his hands thereof.

5. AND hereupon went over unto the lord treafurer's

chamber, togetl er with Mr. vice-chamberlain Hatton,
and in his presence leftored the fame into the hands of
the said lord treafiurer, of whom he had before received
it, who from henceforth kept it, till himself and thereft
of the council sent it away.

WVHICH, in substance and truth, is all the part and in.

tercfl the laid Da\ ion had in this cause, whatsoever is,
or may be pretended to the contrary.

'FOUCHING the sending down thereof unto the com-

miffioners, that it was the general a6t of her majeify's
council (as is before mentioned) and not any private ad
of his, may appear by,

I. THEIR own confeffion. 2. Their own letters feat

down therewith to the commiflioners. 3. The teltimo-
nies of the lords and others to whom they were dire8ed.
As also, 4. of Mr. Beale, by whom they were Cent. 5. The
tenor of her mdjefty's first commiflion for their calling to
the lfar-chamber for the fame, and private appearance ard
fubmiflion afterward infliad thereof, before the lord chan-

cellor

cellor Bromley. 6. The confeffion of Mr. Attorney-
general in open court confirmed. 7, By the sentence it-
self upon record. 8. Besides a common aA of council,
containing an answer to be verbally delivered to the Scot-
tifh ambaflfdor then remaining here, avowing and jufti-
fying the fame.

Now where some fupp'ofe him to have given some ex-

traordinary furtherance thereunto, the contrary may evi-
dently appear by,

I. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of as-

fociation, being earnestly prefied thereunto by her ma-
jefty's self.

2. His excusing of himself from being used as a com-

missioner, in the examination of Babington and his cornm-
plices, and avoiding the fame byajourney to the Bath.

3. His being a mean to stay the commissioners from pro-

nouncing of the sentence at Fotheringay, and deferringit
till they ihould return to her majefty's presence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks un-

presented, without once offering to carry it up, till her
majesty sent exprefly for the fame to sign.

5. His deferring to fend it away after it was sealed un-

to the commiftioners, as he was specially commanded,
slaying it all that night, and the greatest part of the next
day in his hands.

6. AND finally, his restoring thereof into the hands

of the lord trealutrer, of whom he had before received
the fame.

WHICH are clear and evident proofs, that the said

Davison did nothing in this cause whaffoever, contrary
to the duty of the place he then held in her majefty's
service.

Cal. C. 9.

THIS seems to be an original. On the back is this title,

THE innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late

Scottish queen.

No. XX.

Ii 2

No. XX. [Vol. II. p. 280. line 27.]

Letter from o, Sir Robert Cecil, to his majesty

King James.

From the 3 /TOST worthy prince, the depending dangers up-
Original. ..'1- on your affecionates have been such, as hath in-
Jur. Ed',. firced silence in him, who is faithfully devoted to your
A. i. 34. person, and in due time of trial, will undergo all hazards
No. 4. of fortune, for the maintenance of the just regal rights,

that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations, is in.
vefied in your royal person. Fall not then, mofl noble
and renowned prince, from him, whore providence hath
in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an inflra-
ment of his glory, and the good of his people. Some
secrets, I find, have been revealed to your prejudice,
which must proceed from rome ambitious violent fpiriced
person near your maj-fiy in council and favour; no man
in particular will I acdufe, but I am sure it hath no foun-
dation from any, with whom, for your service, I have held
correspondence; otherwise, I had, long since, been dif-
abled from performance of those duties, that the thoughts
of my heart endeavoureth ; being only known to this wor-
thy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of
Christendom for his fidclity to your person and slate, and
to Mr. David Fowlis your mrft loyal servant, my firfitand
faithful correspondent ; and unto James Hudfone, whom
I have found in all things that concern you, most secret
and assured. It may, therefore, please your majefly, at
the humble rrotion of 9, which jargon I desire to be the
indorfement of your commands unto me, that, by some
token of your favour, he may understand in what terms
you regard his fidelity, secrecy and service. My paflion-
ate affetcion to your person (not as you are a king, but
as you are a good king, and have just title, after my so-
vereign, to he a great king) doth transport me to prefump-
tion. Condemn nor, moss noble prince, the motives of
care and love, altho' mixed with defects in judgment.

1. I, ther fore, sirs beseech yo r majesty, that for

the good of those wLo-n God, by divine Providence,
hath defiined to )o r ci gre, ibahe you will be pleased to

have

have an extraordinary care of all practicers or practices,
againit your person; for it is not to be doubted, but that
in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, fa&tion, or fear,
there are many that desire to have their sovereign in mino-
rity, whereby the sovereignty and slate might be swayed
by partiality of subalternate persons, rather than by true
rule of power and justice. Preserve your person, and
fear not the praatices of man upon the point of your right,
which will be preserved and maintained against all assaults
of competition whatever. Thus I leave the proteaion of
your perfbn, and royal posterity, to the Almighty God of
Heaven, who bless and preserve you and all yours, in all
regal happiness to his glory.

2. NEXT to the preservation of your person, is the

conversation and secret keeping of your councells, which,
as I have said, are often betrayed and discovered, either
out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent faftion, or
base conception, the which your majesty is to regard with
all circumfpeation, as a matter most dangerous to your
person and state, and the only means to ruin and destroy
all thole that stand faithfully devoted to your majefty's
service. Some particulars, and persons of this nature, I
miake no doubt have been discovered by the endeavours of
this nobleman, the bearer hereof, of whom your majesty
may be further informed.

3. THE gd point considerable is that your majesty, by

all means poffib'e, secure yourself of the good affection
of the French King and States, by the negotiation of some
faithful secret confident; the French naturally ditaffting
the union of the British islands under one monarch. In
Germany, I doubt not, but you have many allies and
friends, but by reason of their remote slate, they do not
so much importe this affair, which must be guided by a
quick and sudden motioq.

4. V17HEN God, by whose Providence, the period of

all persons and times is determined, thall call to his king-
dom of glory her majesty (although I do assuredly hope
that there will not be any question in competition, yet
for that 1 hold it not fitting to give any minute entrance
into a cause osso high a nature), I do humbly beseech your
majesty to design a secret, faitnful, and experienced con-
sident servant of yours, being of an approveidtfi-cy and
judgment, continually to be here resident, wh fe negocia-
tion, it were convenient your majesty flould fortifie, with

Ii 3 such

such secret truss and powers, as there may not need 14.
days respite, to post for authority, in a cause, that cannot
endure io hours respite, without varieties of danger. In
the which it is to be considered, that all such as pretend
leaf good to your eltablifhment, will not in public op-
pugn your title, but out of their cunning ambition will
leek to gain rime, by alledging their pretence of common
good to the slate, in propo, nding of good conditions for
difburthening the common weale, of divers hard laws,
heavy impositions, corruptions, oppreffions, &c. which is
a main point to lead the popular, who are much disgusted
with many particulars of this nature. It were therefore
convenient, that these motives, out of your majeflty's pro-
vidence, ihould be prevented, by your free offer in these
points following, viz.

I. THAT your majesty v.ould be pleased to abolilh

purveyors and purveyance, being a matter infinitely of-
fenfive to the common people, and the whole kingdom,
and not profitable to the prince.

3. THAT your maj-fty would be pleased to dissolve the

court of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and an-
cient families of this realm, by base matches, and evil
education of their chil'ren, by which no revenue of the
crown will be defrayed.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, ge-

nerally repined againit by the fubjeiS, in regard of their
uncertainty, being mary times altered from their true
meaning, by variety of interpretations.

4. 1 HAT your majesty will be pleased to admit free

outpjrt of the native commodities of this kingdom, now
often restrained by subalternate persons for private profit,
being most prejudicial to the commerce of all merchants,
and a plain dellrulion to the true industry and manufac-
ture of all kingdoms, and agiinft the profit cf the crown.

THESE, being by your majefty's confidents in the point

of time propounded, will afilredly confirm unto your ma-
jcflie the hearts and affcions of the whole kingdom, and
absolutely prevent all insinuations and devices of designed
patriots, that, out of pretext of common good, would
fecek to patronize th'mfelves in popular opinion and pow-
er, and thereby to derogate from your majefty's bounty
and free favour, by princely mcr't of your moderation,
judgment and justice.

You i

YouR majefly's favour, thus granted to the fubjea,
will no way impeach the profits of the crown but advance
them. The difproportionable gain of some chequer ofli-
cers, with the base and mercenary profits of the idle un-
necessary clerks and attendants, will only fuffer some de-
triment; but infinite will be the good unto the kingdom,
which will confirm unto your m.ijevty the universal love
and affetion of the people, and eitablihh your renown
in the higheR esteem to all posterity.

The Lord preserve your majefRie, and make you tri-
umphant over all your enemies.

My care over his person, whose letters pass in this pac-

quet, and will die before he leave to be yours, shall be no
less than of mine own life, and in like eficem I will hold
all your faithful confidents, notwithilanding I will hold
myself reserved from being known unto any of them, in
my particular devoted affe&ions unto your majefly, only
this extraordinary worthy man, whose associate 1 am in
his misfortune, doth know my heart, and we boih will
pray for you, and if we live you fhll find us together.

I BESEECH your majesty burn this letter, and the

others ; for altho' it be in an unusual hand, yet it may
be discovered.

Your majefly's most devoted

and humble servant,

0.

A CRITICAL

i 4

i ]

A

CRITICAL

DISSERTATION

CONCERNING

The Murder of King HENRY, and the Ge-
nuinenefs of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

IT is not my intention to engage in all the con-

troverfies to which the murder of King Henry,

or the letters from Mary to Bothwell, have given
rife; far less to appear as an adversary to any par-
ticular author, who hath treated of them. To re-
peat, and to expose all the ill-founded assertions
with regard to these points, which have flowed from
inattention, from prejudice, from partiality, from
malevolence, and from difhpnefly, would be no less
irksome to myself, than unacceptable to most of
my readers. All I propose, is to affiftf others in
forming some judgment concerning the faAs in
dispute, by stating the proofs produced on each
fide, with as much brevity as the cafe will admit,
and with the fame attention and impartiality
which I have endeavoured to exercise in examining
other controverted points in the Scottish hifftory.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two

different systems have been formed. The one sup-
..; ... poses

poles Bothwell to have contrived and executed
this crime. The other imputes it to the Earls of
Murray, Morton, and their party.

THE decision of many controverted facts in his-

tory, is a matter rather of curiosity than of use.
They Rand detached; and whatever we determine
with regard to them, tle fabric of the Cfory re-
mains untouched. But the fat under dispute in
this place is a fundamental and essential one, and
according to the opinion which an Historian
adopts with regard to it, he mult vary and dispose
the whole of his subsequent narration. An hiflo-
rical system may be tried in two different ways,
whether it be consistent with probability, and
whether it be supported by proper evidence.

THOSE who charge the King's murder upon

Bothwell, argue in the following manner; 'and
though their reasonings have been mentioned al-
ready in different places of the narrative, it is ne-
ceffary to repeat them here. Mary's love for
Darnly, fay they, was a sudden and youthful pas-
sion. The beauty ofhis perlbn was his chief merit.
His capricious temper soon railed in the Queen a
difgufI, which broke out on different occasions.
His engaging in the conspiracy against Rizio,
converted this disgust into an indignation, which
she was at no pains to conceal. This breach was
perhaps, in its own nature, irreparable; the King
certainly wanted that art and condescension which
alone could have repaired it. It widened every
day, and a deep and fettled hatred effaced all re-
mains of affeEtion. Bothwell observed this, and
was prompted by ambition, and perhaps by love,
to found on it a scheme, which proved fatal both
to the Queen and to himself. He had served Mary
at different times with fidelity and success. He
insinuated himself into her favour, by address and
by flattery. By degrees he gained her heart. In

i order

order to gratify his love, or at least his ambition,
it was necessary to get rid of the King. Mary had
rejeAed the proposal made to her for obtaining a
divorce. The King was equally hated by the
partisans of the house of Hamilton, a considerable
party in the kingdom; by Murray, one of the
most powerful and popular persons in this country;
by Morton and his associates, whom he had de-
ceived; and whom Bothwell had bound to his in-
terest by a recent favour. Among the people
Darnly was fallen under extreme contempt. He
expected, for all these reasons, that the murder of
the King would pass without any inquiry. And to
Mary's love, and to his own address and good for-
tune, he trusted for the accomplishment of the reft
of his wifhes.What Bothwell expe&ed really came
to pass. Mary, if not privy herself to the design,
connived at an ation which rid her of a man whom
the had such good reason to detest. A few months
after, she married the person who was both sus-
pe&ed and accused of committing the murder.

THosE who charge the guilt upon Murray and

his party reason in this manner. Murray, they fay,
was a man of boundless ambition. Notwithftand-
ing the illegitimacy of his birth, he had early
formed a design of ufurping the Crown. On the
Queen's return into Scotland, he insinuated 'anm-
felfinto her favour, and engrossed the whole power
into his own hands. He let himfelfagainft every
proposal of marriage which was made to her, left
his own chance of succeeding to the Crown flhould
be destroyed. He hated Darnly, and was no less
hated by him. In order to be revenged on him,
he entered into a sudden friendship with Bothwell,
his ancient and mortal enemy. He encouraged
him to perpetrate the crime, by giving him hopes
of marrying the Queen. All this was done with a
deign to throw upon the Queen herself the impu-
tation of being accessory to the murder, and under

that

that pretext, to destroy Bothwell, to depose and
imprison her, and to seize the sceptre which he
had wrefied out of her hands.

THE former of these fyltems has an air of proba-

bility, is consistent with itself, and solves appear-
ances. In the latter, some assertions are false, some
links are wanting in the chain, and effeas appear,
of which no fufficient cause is produced. Murray,
on the queen's return into Scotland, served her
with great fidelity, and by his prudent adminiffra-
tion rendered her so popular, and so powerful, as
enabled her with ease to quash a formidable infur-
refion raised by himself in the year 1565. What
motive could induce Murray to murder a Prince
without capacity, without followers, without in-
fluence over the nobles, whom the Queen, by her
negle6t, had reduced to the lowest flare of con-
tempt, and who, after a long disgrace, had re-
gained (accoro ng to the molt favourable fuppo-
fition) the precal ious pofflemion of her favour only
a few day, btdore his aeath ? It is difficult to con-
ceive what Murray had to fear from the King's
life. It is no easy matter to guess what he could
gain by his death. If vwe fu;ppole that the Queen
had no previous attachment to Bothwell, nothing
can appear more chimerical than a scheme to per-
fuade her to marry a man, whole wife was still
alive, and who was not only fiufpccted, but accused,
of murdering her former husband. But thatfuch
a scheme should really succeed is still more extra-
ordinary.-If Murray had instigated Bothwell to
commit the crime, or had himself been accessory
to thle com.mission of it, what hopes were there that
Bothwell would silently bear from a fellow-crimi-
nal all the periecutions which he fuffered, without
iver retorting upon him the accusation, or reveal-
ing the whole scene of iniquity ? An ancient and
deadly feud had fibfifted between Murray and
luthwell; the QOeen with dificulty had brought

them

them to some terms of agreement, But is it pro-
bable that Murray would chufe an enemy, to whom
he had been so lately reconciled, for his confident
in the commission of such an atrocious crime ? Or,
on the other hand, would it ever enter into the
imagination of a wife man, first to raise his rival
to supreme power, in hopes that afterwards he
thould find tome opportunity of depriving him of
that power ? The most adventrous politician never
hazarded such a dangerous experiment. The most
credulous folly never trusted such an uncertain
chance.

BUT however strong these general reasonings may

be, we must decide according to the particular evi-
dence produced. This we now proceed to examine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's mur-
der, appears, I. From the concurring testimony
of all the cotemporary historians. 2. From the
confeffion of those persons who fuffered for assist-
ing at the commission of the crime, and who enter
into a minute detail of all its circumstances. An-
derf. v. ii. i65. 3. From the acknowledgment
of Mary's own commifioners, who allow Both-
-well to have been one of those who were guilty of
this crime. Good. v. ii. 213. 4. From the ex-
press testimony of Lefly Bithop of Ross, to the
fame effe& with the former. Def. of Q. Mary's
Hon. And. ii. 76. Id. v. iii. p. 31. 5. Morton,
at his death, declared that Bothwell had solicited
him, at different times, to concur in the confpi-
racy formed against the life of the King; and that
he was informed by Archibald Douglas, one of
the conspirators, that Bothwell was present at the
murder. Crawf. Mem. App. 4. The letter from
Douglas to the Queen, published in the Appendix
to Vol. II. No. 12. confirms Morton's tefiimony.
6. Lord H-rries promises, in his own name, and
in the name of the nobles who adhered to the
Queen, that they would concur in punishing Bothwell

Bothwell as the murderer of the King. Append.
Vol. I. No. 23.

THE most dire& charge ever brought against

Murray is in there words of Bishop Lefly. " Is
<( it unknown," addressing himself to the Earl of
Murray, " what the Lord Herries said to your
" face openly, even at your own table, a few
C* days after the murder wvas committed ? Did he
< not charge you with the foreknowledge of the
" fame murder; did he not, nulla circutione ufus,
"c flatly and plainly burden you, that riding in
Cc Fife, and coming with one of your most assured
" and trusty servants the fame day whereon you
" departed from Edinburgh, said to him, among
" other talk, This night ere morning Lord
" Darnly shall lose his life ?" Defence of Q,
Mary, Anders. v. ii. 75. But the assertion ofa
man so heated with faction as Lefly, unless it were
supported by proper evidence, is of little weight.
The servant to whom Murray is said to iave
spoken these words, is not named; nor the man-
ner in which this secret conversation was brought
to light mentioned. Lord Herries was one of the
most zealous advocates for Mary, and it is re-
markable that, in all his negociation at the court
of England, he never once repeated this accusation
of Murray. In answering the challenge given
him by Lord Lindsay, Herries had a fair oppor-
tunity of mentioning Murray's knowledge of the
murder; but though he openly accuses of that
crime some of those who adhered to him, he in-
duftrioufly avoids any insinuation against Murray
himself. Keith, Pref. xii. Mary herself, in
conversation with Sir Francis Knolles, accused
Morton and Maitland of being privy to the mur-
der, but does not mention Murray. And. iv. 55.
When the Bishop of Ross and Lord Herries them-
selves appeared before the English council, Ja-
nuary Ii, 1569, they declared themselves ready,

in

in obedience to the Queen's command, to accuse
Murray and his associates of being accessory to
the murder, but " they being also required, whe-.
" ther they or any of them, as of themselves, would
" accuse the said earl in special, or any of his ad-
" herents, or thought them guilty thereof;" they
answered, " that they took God to witness that
<' none of them did ever know any thing of the
"C conspiracy of that murder, or were in council
" and foreknowledge thereof; neither who were
" devifers, inventors, and executors of the fame,
" till it was publicly discovered long thereafter
" by some of the affaffins, who fuffered death on
" that account." Good. v. ii. 308. These words
are taken out of a register kept by Ross and Her-
ries themselves, and seem to be a dire&t confuta-
tion of the bifhop's assertion. The bishop him-
self repeats the fame thing in frill stronger terms.
And. iii. 31.

THE Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Pro-

tefiation touching the murder of the King of Scots,
after mentioning the conference at Craigmillar
concerning a divorce, of which we have given an
account Vol. I. 330. add, " So after these pre-
" misses, the murder of the King following, we
" judge in our consciences, and hold for certain
" and truth, that the Earl of Murray and fecre-
" tary Lethington were authors, inventors, coun-
" fellors and caufers of the fame murder, in what
" manner, or by whatfomever persons the fame
" was executed ?" Anders. v. iv. I88. But,
I. This is nothing more than the private opinion
or personal affirmation of these two noblemen. 2.
The conclusion which they make has no connexion
with the premiffes on which they found it. Because
Murray proposed to obtain for the Queen a di-
vorce from her husband with her own consent, it
does not follow that therefore he committed the
murder without her knowledge. 3. Huntly and

Argyll

Argyll were at thlat time the leaders of that party
opposite to Murray, and animated with all the
rage of faction. 4. Both of them were Murray's
personal enemies. Huntly, on account of the treat-
ment which his family and clan had received fronm
that nobleman. Argyll was desirous of being di-
vorced from his wife, with whom he lived on no
good terms, Knox, 328. and by whom he had no
children. Crawf. Peer. 19. She was Murray's
sifter, and by his intereflt he had obftru&ed that
design. Keith, pI. These circumstances would
go far towards invalidating a positive testimony;
they more than counterbalance an indeterminate
suspicion. 5. It is altogether uncertain whether
IHuntly and Argyll ever subscribed this protefta-
tion. A copy of such a protestation as the Queen
thought would be of advantage to her cause, was
transmitted to them by her. Anders. v. iv. 186.
The protestation itself, published by Anderson, is
taken from an unfubfcribed copy with blanks for
the date and place of subscribing. On the book
of this copy is pasted a paper, which Cecil has
marked " Answer of the Earl of Murray to a wri-
•" ting of the Earls of Huntly and Argyll." An-
derf. 194, 195. But it can scarce be efteemeda
reply to the above-mentioned protestation. Mur-
ray's answer bears date at London, January 19,
1568. The Queen's letter, in which fIe inclosed
the copy of the protetlation, bears date at Bowton,
Jan. 5, I568. Now it is fc-rce to be supposed that
the copy could be sent into Scotland, be subscribed
by the two Earls, and be seen and answered by
Murray within so short a time. Murray's reply
seems intended only to prevent the impression
w ch the vague rnd uncertain accusations of his
en Tni m'rnit m 1 e

, his absence. Cecil had

go o

o 1o Qj en's letter into his

cu K

' . n if. .v

i 6. This naturally

Ie. '-

. . e letter itself, toge-

th< 4 \ . i

, ,. . 3 :itation, were inter-

cepted

cepted before they came to the hands of Huntly
and Argyll. Nor is this mere conjeture alone.
The letter to Huntly, in which the protestation
was inclosed, is to be found; Cott. Lib. Cal,
C; I. fol. 280, and is an original subscribed by
Mary, though not written with her own hand,
because fe seldom chose to write in the Eng-
lifh language. The protestation is in the fame
volume, fol. 282, and is manifefily written by
the fame person who wrote the Queen's letter.
This is a clear proof that both were inter-
cepted. So that .much has been founded on a
paper not subscribed by the two Earls, and pro-
bably never seen by them. Besides, this method
which the Queen took of sending a copy to the
two Earls, of what was proper for them to de-
clare with regard to a conference held in their own
presence, appears somewhat suspicious. It would
have been more natural, and not so liable to any
misinterpretation, to' have desired them to write
the most exact account, which they could recolled,
of what had passed in the conversation at Craig-
millar.

THE Queen's commissioners at the Conferences

in England accused Murray and his associates of
having murdered the King. Good. ii. 281. But
there accusations are nothing more than loose and
general affirmations, without descending to such
particular circumifances as either ascertain their
truth, or discover their falsehood. The fame ac-
cufation is repeated by the nobles assembled at
Dumbarton Sept. 1568. Good. ii. 359. And the
fame observation may be made concerning it.

ALL the Queen's advocates have endeavoured
to account for Murray's murdering of the King, by
supposing that it was done on purpose, that he
might have a pretence of disturbing the Queen's
adminiltration, and thereby rendering ineffeaual
her general Revocation of Crown lands, which

VOL. II. K k would

would have deprived him and his associates of the
best part of their estates. Lefley Def. of Mary's
Hon. p. 73. But whoever considers the limited
powers of a Scottish Monarch, will fee that such
a revocation could not be very formidable to the
nobles. Every king of Scotland began his reign
with ftch a revocation; and as often as it was re-
newed, the power of the nobles rendered it inef-
fe&ual. The best vindication of Murray and his
party from this accusation, is that which they pre-
fented to the Queen of England, and which hath
never hitherto been published.

vp~er Answers to the objebtions and alledgance of the Queen,

e. alledging the Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the

Earl of Morton, Marr, Glcncairn, Hunze, Ruth-
'yen, f&c. to have been moved to armour, for that
they abhorred and might not abide her revocation of
the alienation made of her property.

IT is answered, that is alledged but all appear-

ance, and it appears God has bereft the alledgance
of all wit and good remembrance, for thir reasons
following:

IMPRIMIS, as to my Lord Regent, he never had

occasion to grudge thereat, in relpeat the Queen
made him privy to the fame, and took resolution
with him for the execution thereof, letting his
Lordship know the would assuredly in the famine
except all things ihe had given to him, and ratefy
them in the next parliament as ihe did indeed;
and for that cause wished my Lord to leave behind
him Master John Wood, to attend upon the fame,
to whom she declared, that als well in that as in all
others her grants it ihould be provided, yea of free
will did promise and offer before ever he demand-
ed, as it came to pals without any lett or impedi-
ment, for all was ratified by her command, and
hand write, at the parliament, but any difficulty..

ITEM

ITrL as to my Lord of Morton, he could not

grudge thereat quha never had of her property
worth twenty dollars that ever I knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay,

.

ONLY my Lord of Marrt had ane little thing

of the property quilk alfua was gladly and liberally
confirmed to him, in the said parliament preceed-
ing a year; was never ane had any cause of mif-
content of that revocation, far less to have put
their lives and heritage to so open and manifeff ane
danger as they did for sic ane frivole cause.

GYF ever any did make evill countenance, and

show any miscontentment of the said revocation,
it was my Lord of Argyll in fpeciall, quha fpak
largely in the time of Parliament theiranents to
the Queen herself, and did complain of the mani-
felt corruption of ane act of parliament past upon
her Majefty's return, and fa did lett any revoca-,
tion at that time; but the armour for revenge of
the King's deid was not till twa months after, att
quhat time there was no occasion given thereof,
nor never a man had mind thereof.

HAVING thus examined the evidence which has

been produced against the Earls of Murray and
Bothwell; we ihall next proceed to inquire whe-
ther the Queen herself was accessory to the mur*
der of her husband,

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly

known, than strong suspicions arose, among some
of her fubjets, that Mary had given her consent
to the commirnion of that crime. And. ii. i56.
We are informed, by her own ambassador in
France, the Archbishop of Glasgow, that the fen-
timents of foreigners, on this head, were no less
unfavourable to her. Keith, Pref. ix. Many of
her nobles loudly accused her of that crime, and

K k 2 a great

a great part of the nation, by supporting them,
seem to have allowed the accufarion to be well
founded.

SOME crimes, however, are of such a nature,

that they scarce admit of a positive or dire& proof.
Deeds of darkness can seldom be brought per-
fedtlv to light. Where persons are accused not of
being Principals, but only of being Acceffaries to a
crime; not of having committed it themselves,
but only of giving consent to the commifflon of it
by others ; the proof becomes still more difficult:
and unless when some accomplice betrays the fe-
cret, a proof by circumstances, or presumptive
evidence, is all that can be attained. Even in
judicial trials, such evidence is sometimes held to
be fufficient for condemning criminals. The
degree of convi&ion which such evidence car-
ries along with it, is often not inferior to that
which arises from positive testimony; and a con-
curring series of circumfitances satisfies the under-
standing no less than the express declaration of
witnesses.

EVIDENCE of both these kinds has been pro-

duced against Mary. We shall first confider that
which is founded upon circumitances alone.

SOME of these suspicious circumstances preceded

the King's death; others were subsequent to it.
With regard to the former, we may observe that
the Queen's violent love of Darnly was soon con-
verted into an aversion to him no less violent; and
that his own ill conduct, and excesses of every
kind, were such, that if they did notjuffify, at least
they account for this sudden change of her indif-
position towards him. The rife and progress of
this domestic rupture, I have traced with great
care in the history, and to the proofs of it which
may be found in papers published by other au-
thors, I have added those contained in App. No.
XVI. and XVII. The Earls of Murray, Morton,
Bothwell, Argyll, and Huntly, considered the

scheme

scheme of procufing for the Queen a divorce from
her husband, as one of the most flattering propo.
fals they could make to her, and employed it as
the most powerful inducement to prevail on her
to consent to a measure which they had much at
heart, but from which they knew her to be ex-
tremely averse. And. iv. p. 2. I88, Du Croc,
the French ambassador, who was an eye-witness
of what he describes, not only represents her dif-
gust to Darnly to be extreme, but declares that
there could be no hopes of a reconcilement be-
tween them. " The Queen is in the hands ofphy- Dec. 12
ficians, and I do assure you is not at all well; and S"6'
do believe the principal part of her disease to con,
sift in deep grief and sorrow ; nor does it seem pof-
fible to make her forget the fame. Still the re-
peats these words, I could wish to be dead. You
know very well that the injury she has received is
exceeding great, and her majeffty will never forget
it-To speak my mind freely to you, I do not ex-
pec, upon several accounts, any good under-
standing between them [i. e. the King and Queen],
unless God effectually put to his hand.--His bad Dec. 23.
deportment is incurable; nor can there ever be
any good expe&ed from him, for several reasons,
which I might tell you was I present with you. I
cannot pretend to foretell how all may turn, but
I will fay, that matters cannot subsist long as they
are, without being accompanied with sundry bad
confequences." Keith, Pref. vii, Had" Henry
died a natural death, at this junture, it must have
been considered as a very fortunate event to the
Queen, and as a seasonable deliverance from a
husband who had become altogether odious to
her. Now as Henry was murdered a few weeks
afterwards, and as nothing had happened to render
the Queen's aversion to him less violent, the opi-
nion of those who confider Mary as the author of
ah event, which was rnmanifeftly so agreeable to her,
will appear perhaps to Tome of our readers to be

K k 3 neither

neither unnatural nor over-refined. If we add to
this, what has been observed in the history, that
in proportion to the increase of Mary's hatred of
her husband, Bothwell made progress in her fa-
vour, and that he became the object not only of
her confidence but her attachment, that opinion
acquires new strength, It is easy to observe many
advantages which might redound to Mary as well
as to Bothwell from the King's death; but ex-
cepting them, no person, and no party in the
kingdom could derive the least benefit from that
event. Bothwell, accordingly, murdered the King,
and it was, in that age, thought no violent impu-
tation on Mary's character, to suppose that ihe
had consented to the deed.

THE steps which the Queen took after her hus-

band's death add strength to that supposition. i.
Melvil, who was in Edinburgh at the time of the
King's death, asserts, that " every body fufpeaed
the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durst speak
freely to others, said plainly that it was He," p.
155. 2. Mary having iffueda proclamation, on
the 12th of February, offering a reward to any
person who should discover those who had mur-
dered her husband; And. i. 36. a paper in answer
to this was affixed to the gates of the Tolbooth,
February i 6, in which Bothwell was named as the
chief person guilty of that crime, and the Queen
herself was accused of having given her consent to
it. And. ii, i56. 3. Soon after, February 20,
the Earl of Lennox, the King's father, wrote to
Mary, conjuring her, by every motive, to prose-
cute the murderers with the utmost rigour. He
plainly declared his own suspicions of Bothwell,
and pointed out a method of proceeding against
him, and for discovering the other authors of that;
crime, no less obvious than equitable. He ad-
vised her to seize, and to commit to sure custody
pothwell himself, and those who were already
pr.med as his accomplices , to call an assembly of

" ' t h ;

the nobles; to issue a proclamation, inviting
Bothwell's accusers to appear; and if, on that
encouragement, no person appeared to accuse
them, to hold them as innocent, and to difnmifs
them without farther frial. And. i. 40. 4. Arch-
bishop Beatoun, her ambassador in France, in a
letter to Mary, March 9th, employs arguments
of the utmost weight to persuade her to prosecute
the murderers with the greatest severity. " I can
conclude nathing (says he) by quhat zour Majesty
writes to me zourfelf, that fen it has plefit God to
conserve zow to make a rigorous vengeance there-
of, that rather than it be not actually taine, it
appears to me better in this warld that ze had loft
life and all. I alk your Majeftie pardon that I
writ fa far, for I can heir nathing to zour prejudife,
but I man conftraindly writ the famin, that all "tf
may come to zour knawlege; for the better re-
mede may be put therto. Heir it is needfull that
ze forth shaw now rather than ever of before, the
greite vertue, magnanimitie, and conflance that
God has grantit zow, be quhais grace, i hope ze
fall overcome this most heavy envie and difplefir
of the committing thereof, and conserve that re-
putation in all godliness, ze have conquift of lang,
quhich can appear na wayis mair clearlie, than
that zow do tick justice that the baill world may ibV5
declare zour innocence, and give testimony for-
ever of thair treason that has committed (but fear "wabour
of God or man) so cruel and ungodlie a murther,
quhairof there is fa meikle ill spoken, that I am mn3lc
conftrainit to aflk zow mercy, that neither can I
or will I make the rehearsal therof, which is owr
odious. But alas! Madame, all over Europe
this day there is na purpose in head fa frequent as
of zour Majeftie, and of the present state of zour
realm, quhilk is in the most part interpretit finis-

K k 4 terly."

terly." Keith, Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, as ap.
pears from Append. Vol. I. No. XIX. urged the
fame thing in strong terms. 6. The circum-
stances of the cafe itself, no less than these folici-
tations and remonifrances, called for the utmost
vigour in her proceedings. Her husband had
been murdered in a cruel manner, almost in her
own presence. Her fubjeats were filled with the
utmofL horror at that crime. Bothwell, one of
her principil favourites, had been publicly accused
as the author of it. Refletions, extremely dif-
honourable to herself, had been thrown out. If
indignation, and the love of justice, did not
prompt her to pursue the murderers with ardour,
decency, at least, and concern for vindicating her
own character, should have induced her to avoid
any appearance of remissness or want of zeal.

BUT instead of this, Mary continued to discover,

in all her actions, the utmost partiality towards
Bothweil. On the i5th of February, five days after
the murder, the bestowed on him the reversion of
the superiority of the town of Leith, which in the
year i565 she had mortgaged to the citizens of
Edinburgh. This grant was of much importance,
as it gave him not only the command of the prin--
cipal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant
over the citizens of Edinburgh, whowere extremely
desirous of keeping poffeffion of it *. 2. Bothwell

being

* qopy from the original in ;he Charter-hboue of th city f Editn

burgh of an AJfgnation to the re'veriaon of the superiority of Leith
by .2yemn Mary, to the Ea, los Bothvwell.
Miria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probishomini-

bus faii ad quos prdfentesliters pervenerint falutem. Sciatis,
quod nos ad memoi am redacentcs muhiplcx bonum verum et
hdcde ferritium, non tantum quondam noftra chariffimse matri
]Mariae Rcginae regni noltri pro tempore in nofbra minoritate
fadum ct impenlum, verum etiam nobifmet ipfis, tam intra
partes Gallile quam ir.tsa hoc noltrum regnum, ad extentionemn

no~fri

being extremely desirous to obtain the command of
thecatlieof Edinburgh, the Queen, in order to pre-
vail on the Earl of Mar to surrender the government
of it, offered to commit the young Prince to his cuf-
tody. Mar consented; and she instantly appoint-
ed Bothwell governor of the castle. And. i. Pref.
64, Keith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the murder,
previous to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been
conducted with the utmost remissness. Buchanan
exclaims loudly against this. And. ii. 24. Norwas

noftri honoris et aucoritatis in punhitone furem, malefaaorum,
et tranfgrefforum infra idem, per nostrum confifum confangui-
neum et confiliarium Jacobum comitem Bothuile, dominum
Halis, Creighton et Liddifdaie, magnum admirallum regni
noftri, commiflionem et onerationem ad hunc effeaum haben-
tem, per quas ipfe fuum corpus et vitam in magno periculo po-
suit; ac etiam, in performatione et extentione noftri diati
fervitii, fuam hereditatem, supra fummam viginti millium
mercarum hujus noltri regni, alienavit ac lefit. Et nos cogi-
tantes quod, ex noitra principali honore et devoria diaum nof-
trum confifum confanguineum & confiliarium cum quodam ac-
cidente et gratitudine recompenfare ec gratificare incumbif qua
nos commode fibi concedere poterimus, unde ipfe magis habi-
lis omnibus affuturus temporibus effe poterit, et ad hujufmodi
performandum in omnibus caufis fen eventibus : In recompen-
fationem quorum praemifborum, ac pro diverfis aliis noftris ra-
tionabilibus caufis et confiderationibus nos moventibus, Feci-
mus, &c. diaum Jacobum cnmitem Bothui!e, &c. ac fuos haere-
des mafculos quofcunque nofros legittimos, &c. aflignatos in et
ad liceras reverfionis fadas, &c. per Symonem Preston de eodem
militen, prEpofitum, balivos, confules, et communitatem hu-
jus nofiri burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fiuccefforibus,
&c, nobis, noftrifque hercdibus, fuccefforibus, et alfignatis pro
redernptione, &c. fiperioritatis totius villa de Leith, &c. im-
pignoratae per nos ditis praepofito, &c. fob reverlione alienatae
continentis fuimmam decem millium mercarum monete pra-
fcriptse numerandam et calculandam in parochialii ecclesia de
Edinburgh, super premonitione quadriginta dierum, ut moris
eft, veluti in diftis reverfionis literis, &c. de data 8vo Otob.
1565, &c. (The reft is form, and contains a clause of absolute
warrandice) IN cUJUs REI TESTIMONIUM prefentibus mag-
num figillum nosfrum apponifecimus. Apud Edinburgh, de-
cimo quinto die menfis Februarii, anno Domini millefimo quina
genteiimo fexagefimo sexto, et regni noftri vicelimo quinto.

The great feal entire.

it without reason that he did so, as is evident from
a circumstance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house
when his master was murdered, and was dug up
alive out of the rubbish. Being examined on the
Monday after the King's death, " This deponar
fchew that Bonkle had the key of the cellare, and
the Queenis fervandis the keyis of her fhalmir.
Quhilk the Laird of Tillibardin hearing, said,
Hald thair, here is ane ground. Ester quhilk
words fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na farther
in the inquifition." And. iv. p. 2. 167. -lad
there been any intention to search into the bottom
of the matter, a circumstance of so much import-
ance merited the most careful enquiry. 4. Not-
withstanding Lennox's repeated folicitations, not-
withflanding the reafonahlenefs of his demands,
and the necessity of complying with them, in order
to encourage any accuser to appear against Both-
well, the not only refused to commit him to cuf-
tody, or even to remove him from her presence and
councils; And. i. 42. 48. but by the grants which
we have mentioned, and by other circumitances,
discovered an increase of attachment to him. 5.
She could not avoid bringing Bothwell to a public
ti ial; but Ihe permitted him to fit as a member in
that meeting of the Privy Council, which directed
his own trials and the trial itself was carried on
with such unnecessary precipitancy, and with fq
many other suspicious circumstances, as render his
acquittal rather an argument of his guilt than a
proof of his innocence. There circumitances have
all been mentioned at length, Vol. 1. p. 403, &c.
and therefore are not repeated in this place, 6.
Two days after the trial, Mary gave a public proof
of her regard for Bothwell, by appointing him to
carry the sceptre before her at the meeting of Par-
liament. Keith, 378. 7. In that parliament, she
granted him a ratification of all the vast poffeifions

5 and

and honours, which the had conferred upon him,
in which was contained an ample enumeration of
all the services he had performed. And. i. 117.
8. Though Melvil, who foresaw that her attach-
ment to Bothwell would at length induce her to
marry him, warned her of the infamy and danger
which would attend that action, fthe not only dif-
regarded this salutary admonition, but discovered
what had passed between them to Bothwell,
which exposed Melvil to his indignation. Melv,
i56. 9. Bothwell seized Mary as the return-
ed from Stirling, April 24. If he had done this
without her knowledge and consent, such an in-
fult could not have failed to have filled her with
the most violent indignatiop. But according to
the account of an old M S. " The friendly love
was so highly cont'rased between this great
princess, and her enormous fubjea, that there was
no end thereof (for it was confiantly esteemed by
all men that either of them loved other carnally)
so that the fuffered patiently to be led where the
lover lift, and all the way neither made obstacle,
impedement, clamour or resistance, as in such ac-
cidents use to be, or that she might have done by
her princely authority, being accompanied with
the noble Earl of Huntly, and Secretary Maitland
of Lethington," Keith, 383. Melvil who was
present, confirms this account, and tells us that
the officer, by whom he was seized, informed him
that nothing was done without the Queen's con-
feat. Melv. I58. 10. On the z2th of May, a
few days before her marriage, Mary declared that
Ihe was then at full liberty, and that though
Bothwell had offended her by seizing her person,
the was so much satisfied with his dutiful behaviour
since that time, and so indebted to him for palt
services, that she not only forgave that offence,
but resolved to promote him to higher honours.
And. i. 187. I1. Even after the confederate

nobles

nobles had driven Bothwell from the Queen's
presence, and though she saw that he was confider-
ed as the murderer of her former husband by so
great a part of her fubjets, her affection did not
in the least abate, and she continued to express the
most unalterable attachment to him. " I can
perceive (says Sir N. Throgmorton) that the ri-
gour with which the queen is kept, proceedeth
by order from these men, because that the Queen
will not by any means be induced to lend her
authority to prosecute the murder; nor will not
consent by any persuasion to abandon the Lord
Bothwell for her husband, but avoweth conflantly
that the will live and die with him; and faith that
if it were put to her choice to relinquilh her
crown and kingdom, or the Lord Bothwell, she
would leave her kingdom and dignity to go a
simple damsel with him, and that she will never
consent that he shall fare worse, or have more
harm than herfelf." App. p. 42. See alsop.44,
From this long enumeration of circumstances, we
may, without violence, draw the following con-
clutfon. Had Mary really been accessary to the
n,urd.r of her huiband; had Bothwell perpetrat-
ed the crirre wit'i her consent, or at her com-
mand; and had fne intended to stifle the evidence
agi'nft him, and to prevent the discovery of his
gu;'t, she could scarce have taken any other fleps
tman those she took, nor could her condut have
been more repugnant to all the maxims of pru-
dence and of decency.

THE positive evidence produced against Mary

may be clafTed under two heads.

i. THE depositions of some persons who were

employed in committing the murder, particularly
of Nicholas Hubert, who, in the writings of that
age, is called trench Paris. This person, who was
Bothwell's servant, and much trusted by him, was
twice examined, and the original of one of his de-
positions, and a copy of the other, are still extant.

It

It is pretended that both these are notorious forge-
ries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and'
naivete which it is almost impoflible to imitate;
they abound with a number of minute facts and
particularities, which the most dextrous forger
could not have easily afrembled, and connected
together with any appearance of probability;
and they are filled with circumstances, which can
scarce be supposed to have entered the imagina-
tion of any man, but one of Paris's profeffion and
chara&er. But, at the fame time, it must be
acknowledged that his depositions contain some
improbable circumstances. He seems to have
been a foolilh talkative fellow ; the fear of death,
the violence of torture, and the desire of pleasing
those in whole power he was, tempted him, per-
haps, to feign some circumstances, and to exag-
gerate others. To fay that some circumlfances
in an affidavit are improbable or false, is very
different from saying that the whole is forged.
I fufpet the former to be the cafe here; but I fee
no appearance of the latter. Be that as it will,
some of the most material fals in Paris's affida-
vits reft upon his tingle testimony; and for that
reason, I have not in the history, nor shall I in this
place, lay any stress upon them.

2. THE letters said to be written by Mary to

Bothwell. Thete have been frequently published.
The accident by which the Queen's enemies got
them into their poiieffion, is related Vol. I. 435.
When the authenticity of any ancient paper is du-
bious or contefled, it may be ascertained either
by external or internal evidence. Both these have
been produced in the present cafe.

I. EXTERNAL proofs of the genuineness of Ma-

ry's letters., i. Murray and the nobles who ad-
hered to him, affirm upon their word and honour,
that the letters were written with the Queen's own
hand, with which they were well acquainted. Good.

Good. ii. 64. 92. 2. The letters were publick!y
produced in the parliament of Scotland, Decem-
ber 1567, Good. ii. 360; and were so far confi-
dered as genuine, that they are mentioned, in the
act against Mary, asone chief argument of her guilt.
Good. ii. 66. 3. They were shewn privately to
the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Sussex, and Sir
Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's commiflioners at York.
In the account which they give of this rnatter to
their mistress, they seem to confider the letters
as genuine, and express no suspicion of any forge-
ry ; they particularly observe, " that the matter
contained in them is such that it could hardly be
invented and devised by any other than herself;
for that they discourse of some things, which were
unknown to any other than to herself and Both-
well; and as it is hard to counterfeit so many, so
the matter of them, and the manner how these
men came by them, is such, as it feemeth that
God, in whose fight murder and bloodshed of the
innocent is abominable, would not permit the
fame to be hid or concealed." Good. ii. 142.
They seem to have made such an impression on
the Duke of Norfolk, that in a subsequent letter
to Pembroke, Leiceter, and Cecil, he has there
words, ' If the matter shall be thought as de-
testable and manifeflt to you, as for ought we can
perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. ii. I54.
4. After the conferences at York and Westminster
were finished, Elizabeth resolved to call together
the Earls who were then at court, and to lay be-
fore them the whole proceedings against the Scot-
tifh Queen, particularly that " the letters and
writings exhibited by the Regent, as the Queen
of Scots letters and writings, should also be
ihewed, and conference [i. e. comparison] thereof
made in their fight, with the letters of the said
Queen's being extant, and heretofore written with
her own hand, and sent to the Queen's majeity;

whereby

whereby may be searched and examined what dif-
ference is betwixt them." Good. ii. 252. They
assembled accordingly, at Hampton Court, De-
cember 14 and 15, 1568; and, " The originals of
the letters supposed to be written with the Queen
of Scots own hand, were then also presently pro-
duced and perused; and being read, were duly
conferred and compared, for the manner of writ-
ing, and fashion of orthography, with sundry other
letters long since heretofore written, and sent by
the said Queen of Scots to the Queen's Majesty.
In collation whereof no difference was found,"
Good. ii. 256. 5. Mary having written an apo-
logetical letter for her conduct to the Countess of
Lennox, July o10, 1570 *, fte tranfinitted it to her

husband

* Mary's letter has never been publiihed, and ought to have

a place here, where evidence on all sides is fairly produced.
" Madam, if the wrang and false reportis of rebellis, enemies
weill knawin for traitouris to zow, and alace tomuche trufled of
me by zoure advice, had not so far flurred you aganis my inno-
cency, (and I must fay aganis all kyndnefs, that zow have not
onelie as it were condempnit me wrangfullie, bot so hated me,
as some wordis and opene deideis hes teftifeit to all the warlde,
a manyfeft miflyking in zow aganis zowr awn blude) I wo!d not
haveomittit thus lang my dewtie in wryting to zow exculing me
of those untrew reporties made of me. But hoping with Godis
grace and tyme to have my innocency knawin to zow, as I trait
it is already to the maifl pairt of all indifferent perfonis, I
thocht it belt not to trouble zow for a tyme till that such a mat-
ter is moved that tuichis us bayth, quhilk is the transporting
zoure littil Con, and my onelie child in this countrey. To the
quhilk albeit Ibe never fa willing, I wald be glaid to have zoure
advyfe therein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. i have born
him, and God knawis with quhat danger tohim and me boith;
and ofzow he is defcendit. So I meane not to forzet my dewtie
to zow, in fchewin herein any unkyndnels to zow, how unkyndhe
that ever ze have delt with me, bot will love zow as my awnt,
and refpeft zow as my moder in law. And gif ye ples to knaw
farther of my mynd in that and all uther thingis betwixt us, my
ambassador the bilhop of Ross fall be ready to confer with zow,
And so after my hairtlie commendationis, remitting me to my
faide ambassador, and zour better confideratioun, I commit zow
to the protetioun of Almyghty God, quhom I pray to preserve

zow

husband then in Scotland; and he returned to the
Counters the following answer: " Seeing you have
remittit to me, to answer the Queen the King's
mother's letters sent to you, what can I fay but
that I do not marvell to fee hir writ the belt can
for hirfelf, to feame to purge hir of that, quhairof
many bhfyde me are certainly perfuadit of the con-
trary, and I not only affurit by my awin knaw-
ledge, but by her handwrit, the confeffionis of men
gone to the death, and uther infallibil experience.
It wull be lange tyme that is hable to put a mat-
tir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak black quhyte,
or innocency to appear quhair the contrary is fa
weill knawin. The maift indifferent, I trust,
doubtis not of the equite of zour and my cause,
and of the just occafioun of our miflyking. Hir
richt dewtie to zow and me, being the parteis in-
terest, were hir trew confeffioun and unfeyned re-
pentance of that lamentable fat, odious for hir to
be reportit, and forrowfull for us to think of.
God is just, and will not in the end be abused;
but as he has manifested the trewth, so will he
puneife the iniquity." Lennox's Orig. Regift. of
Letters. In their public papers, the Queen's
enemies may be fufpeted of advancing what
would be moit subservient to their cause; not what
was agreeable to truth, or what flowed from their
own inward convi&ion. But in a private letter
to his own wife, Lennox had no occasion to dif-
femble; and it is plain, that he not only thought
the Queen guilty, but believed the authenticity of
her letters to Bothwell.

zow and my brother Charles, and caus zow to knaw my pairt
better nor ze do. From Chatifworth this x of July 1570.

To my Ladie Lennox Youre natural gude Nice

my moder in law. and lovynge dochter.

II. WITH

II. WITH regard to the internal proofs of the

genuinenefsof theQueen's letters to Bothwell, we
may obJerve, I. That whenever a paper is forged
with a particular intention, the eagerness of the
forger to establish the point in view, his solicitude
to cut off all doubts and cavils, and to avoid any
appearance of uncertainty, always prompt him to
use exprefflons the most explicit and full to his pur-
pose. The passages foisted into ancient authors by
Heretics in different ages ; the legendary miracles
of the Romish faints; the supposititious deeds in
their own favour produced by monasteries; the
false charters of homage mentioned Vol. I. p. 13.
are so many proofs of this assertion. No maxim
seems to be more certain than this, that a forger is
often apt to prove too much, but seldom falls into
the error of proving too little. The point which
the Queen's enemies had to establish, was, " that
as the Earl of Bothwell was chief executor of the
horrible and unworthy murder perpetrated, &c. so
was the of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, per-
fuader, and commander of the said murder to be
done." Good. ii. 207. But of this there are only
imperfe&t hints, obscure intimations, and dark ex-
preffions in the letters, which however convincing
evidence they might furnish, if found real letters,
bear no resemblance to that glare and superfluity of
evidence which forgeries commonly contain. All
the advocates for Mary's innocence in her own
age, contend that there is nothing in the letters
which can serve as a proof of her guilt. Lefly,
Blackwood, Turner, &c. abound wich pafTages to
this purpose; nor are the sentiments of those in
the present age different. " Yet fti'l it might
have been expeded (says her lareft defender) that:
some one or other of the points or articles of the
accusation should be made out clearly by the
proof. But nothing of that is to be fcen in the
present cafe. There is nothing in the letters tbha

VoL. II. * L I could

could plainly shew the writer to have been in the
foreknowledge, counsel, or device of any murder,
far less to have persuaded or commanded it; and
as little is there about maintaining orjuftifying
any murderers." Good. i. 76. How ill advised
were Mary's adversaries, to contra& so much guilt,
and to praaife so many artifices, in order to forge
letters, which are so ill contrived for establishing
the conclusion they had in view ? Had they been
so base as to have recourse to forgery, is it not
natural to think that they would have produced
something more explicit and decisive? 2. As it
is almost impoflible to invent a long narration con-
sifting of many circumstances, and to conned it in
such a manner with real faAs, that no mark of
fraud shall appear; for this reason skilful forgers
avoid any long detail of circumstances, especially
of foreign and superfluous ones, well knowing
that the more these are multiplied, the more are
the chances of detection increased. Now Mary's
letters, especially the firit, are filled with a mul-
tiplicity of circumstances, extremely natural in a
real correspondence, but altogether foreign to the
purpose of the Queen's enemies, and which it
would have been extreme folly to have inserted1
if they had been altogether imaginary, and with-
out foundation. 3. The truth and reality of fe-
veral circumstances in the letters, and these, too,
of no very public nature, are confirmed by un-
doubted collateral evidence. Lett. i. Good. ii.
p. I. The Queen is said to have met one of
Lennox's gentlemen, and to have some converfa-
tion with him. Thomas Crawford, who was the
person, appeared before Elizabeth's commilffion-
ers, and confirmed, upon oath, the truth of this

. circumstance. He likewise declared, that during

the Queen's flay at Glasgow, the King repeated to
him, every night, whatever had paf'ed through
the day, between her Majesty and him, and that

7 the

the account given of there conversations in the
firit letter, is nearly the fame with what the King
communicated to him. Good. ii. 245. Accord-
ing to the fame letter there was much discourse be-
tween the King and Queen concerning Mynto,
Hiegait, and Walcar. Good. ii. 8. o10, i-. What
this might be, was altogether unknown, till a let-
ter of Mary's, preserved in the Scottish college at
Paris, and published, Keith, Pref. vii. discovered
it to be an affair of so much importance as merited
all the attention the paid to it at that time. It
appears by a letter from the French ambassador,
that Mary was fubje& to a violent pain in her fide.
Keith, ibid. This circumfkance is mentioned,
Lett. i. p. 30. in amanner so natural as can scarce
belong to any but a genuine produdtion. If we
fliall itill think it probable to suppose that so many
real circumstances were artfully introduced into
the letters by the forgers, in order to give an air
of authenticity to their production ; it will scarce
be poflible to hold the fame opinion concerning the
following particular. Before the Queen began
her first letter to Bothwell, she, as usual among
those who write long letters containing a variety
of fubjecs, made notes or memorandums of the par-
ticulars the wished to remember; but as ihe fat up
writing during a great part of the night, and after
her attendants were asleep, her paper failed her,
and flhe continued her letter upon the fame fileer,
on which fie had formerly made her memoran-
dums. This flhe herself takes notice of, and makes
an apology for it: " It is late; I desire never to
cease from writing unto you, yet now, after the
killing of your hands, I will end my letter. Ex-
cure my evil writing, and read it twice over. Ex-
cufe that thing that is fcriblit, for I had na paper
zefterday, quhen I wrait that of the memorial."
Good. ii. 28. There memorandums still appear
in the middle of the letter; 'and what we have laid

L 1 2 seems

seems naturally to account for the manner how
they might find their way into a real letter. It is
scarce to be supposed, however, that any forget'
would think of placing memorandums in the
middle of a letter, where, at first fight, they make
to absurd and so unnatural an appearance. But if
any shall still carry their refinement so far, as to
suppose that the forgers were so artful as to throw
in this circumffance, in order to preserve the ap-
pearance of genuineness, they must at least allow
that the Queen's enemies, who employed these
forgers, could not be ignorant of the design and
meaning of these ihort notes and memorandums;
but we find them mistaking them so far as to ima-
gine that they were the credit of the bearer, i. e.
points concerning which the Queen had given him
verbal initruaions. Good. ii. 152. This they
cannot possibly be; for the Queen herself writes
with so much exaanefs concerning the different
points in the memorandums, that there was no
need of giving any credit or inltrutions to the
bearer concerning them. The memorandums are
indeed the contents of the letter. 5. Mary, men-
tioning her conversation with the King, about the
affair of Mynto, Hiegait, &c. says, " The morne
[i. e. to-morrow] I will fpeik to him upon that
point;" and then adds, "c As to the reft of Wille
Hiegait's, he confeffit it; but it was the morne
[i. e. the morning] after my cumming or he did
it." Good. ii. 9. This addition, which could not
have been made till after the conversation hap-
pened, seems either to have been inferred by the
Queen into the body of the letter, or, perhaps,
she having written it on the margin, it was taken
thence into the text. If we suppose the letter to
be a real one, and written at different times, as
it plainly bears, this circumstance appears to be
very natural; but no reason could have induced
a forger to have ventured upon such an anachro-

nifm,

nifm, for which there was no necefity. An addi-
tion perfectly similar to this made to a genuine
paper, may be found, Good. ii. 282.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the

advocates for her innocence have contended that
these letters were forged by her enemies, on pur-
pose to blast her reputation, and tojuftify their
own rebellion. It is not necessary to take notice
of the arguments which were produced, in her
own age, in support of this opinion; the obferv-
ations which we have already made, contain a
full reply to them. An author, who has inquired
into the affairs of that period with great induifry,
and who has acquired much knowledge of them,
has lately published (as he affirms) a demonftra-
tion of the forgery of Mary's letters. This de-
monftration he founds upon evidence both inter-
nal and external. With regard to the former, he
observes, that the French copy of the Queen's
letters is plainly a translation of Buchanan's Latin
copy; which Latin copy is only a translation of the
Scottish copy; and, by consequence, the assertion
of the Queen's enemies, that she wrote them origi-
nally in French, is altogether groundless, and the
whole letters are gross forgeries. I--e accounts for
this strange succession of translations, that fuppof-
ing that when the forgery was projected, no person
could be found capable of writing originally in the
French language letters which could pass for the
Queen's; for that reabon they were firlt composed
in Scotti(h; but unluckily the French interpreter,
it would seem, did not understand that language;
and therefore Buchanan translated them into La-
tin, and from his Latin they were rendered into
French. Good. i. 79, 8o.

IT is scarce necessary to observe that no proof

whatever is produced of any of the suppositions.
The manners of the Scots, in that age, when al-
moLt every man of rank spent a part of his youth

L1 3 in

in France, and the intercourse between the two
nations was great, render it altogether impro-
bable that so many complicated operations should
be necessary in order to procure a few letters to
be written in the French language.

BUT without infixfing farther on this, we may

observe that all this author's premises may be
granted, and yet his conclusion will not follow,
unless he likewise prove that the French letters,
as we now have them, are a true copy of those
which were produced by Murray and his party in
the Scottish parliament, and at York and Weft-
minster. But this he has not attempted; and if
we attend to the history of the letters, such an at-
tempt, it is obvious, mul have been unfiucceff-
ful. The letters were first published at the end
of Buchanan's Dete7ion. The fil ft edition of this
treatise was in Latin, in which language three of
the Queen's letters were fubioined to it;r this
Latin edition was printed A. D. 1571. Soon as-
ter a Scottish translation of it was published, and
at the end of it were printed, likewise in Scottish,
the three letters which had formerly appeared in
Latin, and five other letters in Scottish, which
were not in Lhe Latin edition. Next appeared a
French translation of the detecion, and of seven
of the letters ; this bears to have been printed at
Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem, 1572. The
name of the place, as well as the printer, is al-
lowed by all parties to be a maiifeft imposture.
Our author, from observing the day of the month,
on which the printing is said to have been finished,
has asserted that this edition was printed at Lon-
don , but no stress can be laid upon a date found
in a book, where every other ciicumltance with re-
gard to the printing is allowed to be false. Black-
wood, who (next to Lefly) was the best informed
of all Mary's advocates in that age, afErms that
the F1 rench edition of the dctecion was publifed

in

in France: " II [Buchanan] a depuis adjoufte a
cefte declamation un petit libelle du pretendu
mariage du Duc de Norfolk, et de la facon de son
proces, et la tout envoyc aux freres a la Rochelle,
lefquels voyants qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause,
1'ont traduit en Francois, et iceluy fut imprimec a
Edinbourg, c'eft a dire a la Rochelle, par Tho-
mas Waltem, non apofht et fait a plaifir. Mar-
tyre de Marie. Jebb. ii. 256." The author of
the Innocence de Marie goes farther, and names the
French translator of the Dete&tion. " Et icelui
premierement compose (comme il femble) par
George Buchanan Efcoifoys, er depujs traduwt en
langue Frangoife par un Hugonot, Poitevin (ad-
vocat de vocation) Camuz, soy difant gentilhom-
me, et un de plus remarquez fediteuz de France.
Jebb. i. 425. 443." The concurring testimony
of two cotemporary authors, whose residence in
France afforded them fufficient means of inform-
ation, muff outweigh a flight conjeture. This
French translator does not pretend to publish the
original French letters as written by the Queen
herself; he expressly declares that he translated
them from the Latin. Good. i. 103. Had our
author attended to all these circumstances, he
might have saved himself the labour of so many
criticisms to prove that the present French copy
of the letters is a translation from the Latin. The
French editor himself acknowledges it, and, so far
as I know, no person ever denied it.

WE may observe that the French translator

was so ignorant, as to affirm that Mary had written
these letters, partly in French, partly in Scottish.
Good. i. 103. Had this translation been pub-
lifhed at London by Cecil, or had it been made
by his direction, so gross an error would not have
been admitted into it. This error, however, was
owing to an odd circumstance. In the Scottish
translation of the Deteation, two or three fen-

L 1 4 tences

tences of the original French were prefixed to.
each letter, which breaking off with an &c. the
Scottish translation of the whole followed. This
method of printing translations was not uncom-
mon in that age. The French editor observing
this, foolishly concluded that the letters had been
written partly in French, partly in Scottish.

IF we carefully confider those few French fen-

tences of each letter, which itill remain, and ap-
ply to them that species of criticism, by which
our author has examined the whole, a clear proof
will arise, that there was a French copy not tranf-
lated fiom the Latin, but which was itself the ori-
ginal from' which both the Latin and Scottilh
have been translated. This minute criticifim
rruff necessarily be disagreeable to many readers;
but luckily a few sentences only are to be exa-
mined, which will render it extremely short.

IN the first letter, the French sentence prefixed

to it ends with these words, yfaifoit bon. It is plain
this expression, veu ce que peut un corps fans caur, is
by no means a translation of cum plane perinde ej/e
atque corpus fine corde. The whole sentence has a
spirit and elegance in the French, which neither
the Latin nor Scottish have retained. Jufques ala
dine is not a translation of totoprandii tempore; the
Scottish translation, qubile denner time, expresses the
sense of the French more properly; for anciently
guhile signified until as well as during. Je n'ay pas
tenu grand propos is not justly rendered neque contu-
lerim ferrmonem cum quoquam; the phrase used in the
French copy is one peculiar to that language, and
gives a more probable account of her behaviour
than the other. Jugeant bien qu'il n'y faifoit bon, is
not a translation of ut qui judicarent id non effe ex
Jtfu. The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends
with apprendre. It is evident that both the Latin
and Scottish translations have omited altogether
these words, et toutefois je ne puis apprendre. The

z French

French sentence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with
presenter. J'aye veillK plus tard la haut is plainly
no translation of diutius illic morata fun ; the sense
of the French is better expressed by the Scottish
I have walkit later there up. Again, Pour excuser
vofjre affaire is very different from ad excufandum
nofira negotia. The five remaining letters never
appeared in Latin; nor is there any proof of their
being ever translated into that language. Four
of them, however, are published in French. This
entirely overturns our author's hypothesis concern-
ing the necessity of a translation into Latin.

IN the Scottish edition of the Dete&ion the

whole fcnnet is printed in French as well as in
Scottish. It is not possible to believe that this
Scottish copy could be the original from which
the French was translated. The French consists
of verses which have both measure and rhyme,
and which, in many places, are far from being in-
elegant. The Scottish consists of an equal num-
ber of lines, but without measure or rhyme.
Now no man could ever think of a thing so ab-
surd and impra&icable, as to require one to tranf-
late a certain given number of lines in prose into
an equal number of verses, where both measure
and rhyme were to be observed. The Scottish,,
on the contrary, appears manifestly to be a tranf-
lation of the French; the phrases, the idioms,
and many of the words are French, and not ScOt-
tilh. Besides, the Scottish translator has, in fe-
veral iniftances, miffaken the sense of the French,
and in many more expresses the sense imper-
sealy. Had the sonnet been forged, this could
not have happened. The directors of the fraud
would have understood their own work. I
thall satisfy myself with one example, in which
there is a proof of both my assertions. Stanza
v1ii. ver. 9.

Pour

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fante et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivrej'ay envie.
For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the firit line is not a Scottiflh, but a

French phrase; the two other lines do not exprefi
the sense of the French, and the last is absolute
nonsense.

THE eighth ,letter was never translated into

French. It contains much refined mysticism about
devices, a folly of that age, of which Mary was
very fond, as appears from several other circum-
stances, particularly from a letter concerning im-
prefas by Drummond of Hawthornden. If Mary's
adversaries forged her letters, they were certainly
employed very idly when they produced this.

FROM these observations it seems to be evident

that there was a French copy of Mary's letters,
of which the Latin and Scottish were only tranf-
lations. Nothing now remains of this copy but
those few sentences which are prefixed to the
Scottish translation. The French editor laid hold
of these sentences, and tacked his own translation
to them, which, Ib far as it is his work, is a ser-
vile and a very wretched translation of Buchanan's
Latin; whereas, in those introJucory sentences,
we have discovered firong marks of their being
originals, and certain proofs that they are not
translated from the Latin.

IT is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin

and Scottish tranflarions with these sentences, that
the Scottish translator has more perfedtly attained
the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin.
And as it appears that the letters were very early
translated into Scottith, Good. ii. 76; it is pro-
bable that Buchanan made his translation not

from

from the French, but from this Scottish copy.
Were it necessary, several critical proofs of this
might be produced. One that has been already
mentioned seems decisive. Diutius illic morata
fum bears not the least resemblance toj'ay veil4l
plus tard la haut; but if, initead of Iwalkit [i. e.
watched] laiter there up, we suppose that Bu-
chanan read Iwaitit, &c. This mistake into which
he might so easily have fallen, accounts for the
error in his translation.

THESE criticinms, however minute, appear to

be well founded. But whatever opinion may be
formed concerning them, the other arguments,
with regard to the internal evidence, remain in
full force.

THE external proof of the forgery of the

Queen's letters, which our author has produced,
is extremely specious, but not more solid than that
which we have already examined. According
to Murray's diary, Mary set out from Edinburgh
to Glasgow, January 21, 1567 ; ihe arrived there
on the 23d ; left that place on the 27th; fthe, to-
gether with the King, reached Linlithgow on the
28th, frayed in that town only one night, and re-
turned to Edinburgh before the end of the month.
But, according to our author, the Queen did not
leave Edinburgh till Friday January 24th; as she
flayed a night at Callendar, she could not reach
Glasgow sooner than the evening of Saturday the
25th, and she returned to Linlithgow on Tuesday
the 28th. By consequence, the first letter, which
supposes the QVueen to have been at least four days
in Glasgow, as well as the second letter, which
bears date at Glasgow Saturday morning, whereas
she did not arrive there till the evening, must be
forgeries. That the Queen did not set out from
Edinburgh sooner than the 24th of January, is
evident (as he contends) from the public records,
which contain a Precept of a confirmation of a life-

rent

rent by James Boyd to Margaret Chalmers, grant-
ed by the Queen, on the 24th of January, at
Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of the Queen's
dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, appointing
James Inglis taylor to the Prince her son. That
the King and Queen had returned to Linlithgow
on the 28th, appears from a deed, in which they ap-
point Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palace there,
dated at Linlithgow January 28. Good. i. 118.

THIS has been represented to be not only a con-

vincing, but a legal proof of the forgery of the
letters said to be written by Mary; but how far it
falls short of this will appear from the following
considerations.

I. IT is evident, from a declaration or confeflfion

made by the Bilhop of Ross, that before the con-
ferences at York, which were opened in the be-
ginning of Odober 1568, Mary had, by an arti-
fice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of
those letters which her fubje&s accused her of
having written to Bothwell. Brown's trial of the
Duke of Norfolk, 31. 36. It is highly probable
that the Biihop of Ross had seen the letters before
he wrote the defence of Queen Mary's honour in
the year 1570. They were published to all the
world, together with Buchanan's Dete&ion, A. D.
1571. Now, if they had contained an error so
gross, and so obvious, at that time, to discovery,
as the supposing the Queen to have passed several
days at Glasgow, while ihe was really at Edin-
burgh; had they contained a letter dated at Glaf-
gow Saturday morning, though the did not arrive
there till the evening; is it possible that the her-
self, who knew her own motions, or the able and
zealous advocates who appeared for her in that
age, ihould not have published and exposed this
contradiction, and, by so doing, have blasted, at
once, the credit of fuch.an imposture ? In dif-
quiiitions which are naturally -bftrufe and intri-

cate,

cate, the ingenuity of the latest author may dif-
cover many things which have escaped the atten-
tion, or baffled the sagacity of those who have
formerly considered the fame subject. But when a
matter of fat lay so obvious to view, this circum-
stance of its being unobserved by the Queen her-
self, or by any of her adherents, is almost a de-
monftration that there is some mistake or fallacy
in our author's arguments. And so far are any,
either of our historians, or of Mary's defenders,
from calling in question the common account
concerning the time of the Queen's setting out to
Glasgow and her returning from it, that there is
not the least appearance of any difference among
them with regard to this point. But farther,

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which

our author rests the proof of his assertion, con-
cerning the Queen's motions, are not the originals
subscribed by the Queen, but copies only, or tranf-
lations of copies of those originals. It is not ne-
ceffary, nor would it be very easy to render this
intelligible to persons unacquainted with the forms
of law in Scotland ; but every Scotsman conver-
sant in bulinefs will understand me, when I fay
that the precept of confirmation of the life-rent
to Boyd is 6nly a Latin copy or note of a precept,
which was.fealed with the Privy-feal, on a war-
rant from the fignet-office, proceeding on a fig-
nature which bore date at Edinburgh the 24th
of January; and that the deed in favour of James
Inglis is the copy of a letter, sealed with the Privy-
feal, proceeding on a signature which bore date at
Edinburgh January 24. From all this we may
argue with some degree of reason, that a proof
founded on papers, which are so many removes
distant from the originals, cannot but be very
lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were ifiued

in the .name both of the King and Q~een; by

law,

law, the King's subscription was no lets requisite
to any paper than the Queen's ; and therefore un-
less the original signatures be produced, in order
to ascertain the particular day when each of them
signed, or to prove that it was signed only by
one of them, the legal proof arising from these
papers would be, that both the King and Queen
signed them at Edinburgh, on the 24th of Ja-
nuary.

4. THE dates of the warrants or precepts issued

by the sovereign, in that age, seem to have been
in a great measure arbitrary, and affixed at the
pleasure of the writer; and, of consequence,
there dates were seldom accurate, are often false,
and can never be relied upon. This abuse be-
came so frequent, and was found to be so per-
nicious, that an aft of parliament, A. D. 1592,
declared the fixing a false date to a signature to be
High Treason.

5. THERE frill remain, in the public records,

a great number of papers, which prove the ne,
ceffity of this law, as well as the weakness and'
fallacy of our author's arguments. And though
it be no easy matter, at the distance of two cen-
turies, to prove any particular date to be false,
yet surprising instances of this kind ihall be pro-
duced. Nothing is more certain from history,
than that the King was at Glasgow 24th January
1567; and yet the record of signatures from 1565
to 1582, Fol. i6th, contains the copy of a figna-
ture to Archibald Edmonfton, said to have been
subscribed by our Sovcrerigns, i. e. the King and
Queen, at Edinburgh, January 24, 1567 ; so
that if we were to trult implicitly the dates in the
records of that age, or to hold our author's argu-
ment to be good, it would prove that not only
the Queen, but the King too, was at Edinburgh
on the 24th of January.

IT appears from an original letter of the Bishop

of Ross, that on the 25th of OAtober 1566, Mary
lay at the point of death; Keith, App. 134; and
yet a deed is to be found in the public records,
which bears that it was signed by the Queen that
day. Privy-feal, lib. 35. fol. 89. Ouchterlony *.

BOTHWELL seized the Queen as ihe returned

from Stirling, April 24th, 1567, and (according
to her own account) carried her to Dunbar with
all diligence. And. i. 95. But our author, re-
lying on the dates of some papers which he found
in the records, supposes that Bothwell allowed
her to stop at Edinburgh, anct to tranfa&t business
there. Nothing can be more improbable than
this supposition. VWe may therefore rank the
date of the deed to Wright, Privy-feal, lib. 36.
fol. 43. and which is mentioned by our author,
vol. i. 124. among the infiances of the false dates
of papers which were issued in the ordinary course
of business in that age. Our author has mistaken
the date of the other paper to Forbes, ibid. it is
signed April x4th, not April 24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's

history, it is, that fhle remained at Dunbar from
the time that Bothwell carried her thither, till
the returned to Edinburgh along with him in the
beginning of May. Our author himself allows
that he resided twelve days there, vol. i. 367.
Now though there are deeds in the records which
bear that they were signed by the Queen at Dun-
bar during that time, yet there are others which

* N. B. In the former editions, another instance of the

fame nature with those which go before and follow was men-
tioned; but that, as has since been discovered, was founded
on a mistake of the person employed to search the records, and.
is therefore omitted in this edition. The reasoning, how-
ever, in the Dissertation flands fill in force, notwithtanding
this omillion.

bear

bear that they were signed at Edinburgh; e. i*
there is one at Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy-
feal, lib. 36. fol. 97. There are others said to
be signed at Dunbar on that day. Lib. 31.
Chart. No. 524. 526. Ib. lib. 32. No. '54.
j57. There are some signed at Dunbar April
28th. Others at Edinburgh April 3o0th, lib.
32. Chart. No. 492. Others at Dunbar May ift,
Id. Ibid. No. x58. These different charters
suppose the Queen to have made so many un-
known, improbable, and inconsistent journeys,
that they afford the clearest demonstration that
the dates in these records ought not to be de-
pended on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of

the charter said to be signed April 27th, which
happened that year to be a Sunday, which was
not, at that time, a day of business in Scotland,
as appears from the books of federunt, then kept
by the Lords of Session.

FROM this Ihort review of our author's proof

of the forgery of the letters to Bothwell, it is
evident that his arguments are far from amount-
ing to demonstration.

ANOTHER argument against the genuineness of

there letters is founded on the flyle and composition
which are said to be altogether unworthy of the
Queen, and unlike her real produ&ions.. It is
plain, both from the great accuracy of composition
in most of Mary's letters, and even from her soli-
citude to write them in a fair hand, that the valued
herfelfon those accomplishments, and was desirous
of being esteemed an elegant writer. But when ihe
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marksof
inaccuracy appear. A remarkable instance of this
may be found in a paper published, Good. ii. 301.
Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in the ut-
moit hurry; and yet under all the disadvantages of

a tranf.

a translation, they are not deftirute either of spirit
or of energy. The manner in which ihe expresses
her love to Bothwell has been pronounced indecent
and even mhocking. But Mary's temper led her to
warm expressions of her regard; those refinements
of delicacy, which now appear in all the commerce
between the sexes, were, in that age, but little
known, even among persons of the highest rank.
Among Lord Royflon's papers there is a series of
letters, from Mary to the Duke of Norfolk, co-
pied from the Harleian Library, P. 37. B. 9. fol.
88, in which Mary declares her love to that noble-
man in language, which would now be reckoned
extremely indelicate.

TH E sonnets and rome of Mary's letters to Both-

well were written before the murder of her hus-
band; some of them after that event, and before
her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are prior
to the death of her husband abound with the fond-
eft expressions of her love to Bothwell, and plainly
discover that their familiarity had been extremely
criminal. We find in them, too, some dark ex-
preffions, which her enemies employed to prove that
the was no firanger to the schemes which were
forming against her hufband's life. Of this kind
are the following passages, " Alace ! I nevir diffa-
vit ony body; bot I remit me altogidder to zour
will. Send me advertisement quhat I fall do, and
quhatfaever thing come thereof, I fall obey zow.
Advise tou with zourfelf, gifze can find out ony
mair secret inventioun by medicine, for he fuld tak
medicine and the bath at Craigmillar." Good, ii.
22. " See not hir quhais fenzeit teiris fuld not be
fa meikle praifit and eftemit, as the trew and faith-
full travellis quhilk 1 fuftene for to merit hir place.
For obtaining of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I
betrayis thame that may impefche me. God forgive
me," &c. Ibid. 27. " I have walkir later thair-

VoL. II. M m up,

up, than I wald have done, gif it had not been to
draw something out of him, quhilk this berer will
fchaw zow, quhilk is the fairest commodity that
can be offerit to excuse zour affairis." Ibid, 32.
From the letters posterior to the death of her hus-
band, it is evident that the scheme of Bothwell's
seizing Mary by force, and catrying her along with
him, was contrived in concert with herself, and
with her approbation *.

HAVING

* THAT letters of so much importance as those of Mary's to

Bothwell Ihould have been entirely loit, appears to many alto-
gether unaccountable. After being produced in England before
Elizabeth's commiflioners, they were delivered back by them to
the Earl of Murray. Good ii. 235. He seems to have kept
them in his poffeffion during life. After his death, they fell
into the hands of Lennox his successor, who restored them to
the Earl of Morton. Good. ii. 91. Though it be not neceffa-
rily conneAed with any of the questions which gave occasion
to this diflertation, it may perhaps satisfy the curiosity of some
of my readers to inform them, that, after a very diligent search,
which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's letters to Both-
well can be found in any of the public libraries in Great Bri-
tain. 'The only certain intelligence concerning them, since
the time of their being delivered to Morton, was communi-
cated by the accurate Lr. Birch.

EXTR AC of the letters of Robert Bowes, Eq; ambassador

from Qrueen Elizabeth to the King of Scotland, written to Sir
Francis Walsingham, secretary of ifate, from the original re-
gifter book of y\r. Bowes's letters, from 15th of August 158z,
to 28th September I583, in the poffeflion of Christopher Hun-
ter, M. D. of Durham.

182z, 8th November, from Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I have been borne in hand, That the coffer where-

in were the originals of letters between the Scottish Queen and
the Earl of Bothwell, had been delivered to sundry hands,
and thereby was at present wanting, and unknown where it
rested, yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of Plufcar-
dyne's means, that both the coffer and a'fo the writings are
come, and now remain with the Earl of Gowrie, who, I per-
ceive, will be hardly intreated to make delivery to her Ma-
jelly according to her Majellty's desire,

HAVING thus ifated the proof on both sides;

having examined at so great a length the different

systems

TrHIs time past Ihave expended in searching where the cos-

ser and writings were, wherein without the help of the Prior I
should have fbond great difficulty; now I will essay Gowrie;
and of my success you shall be mhcrtly advertised.

12th of November 1582, from Edinbiirgh

flECAUSE I had both learned, that the casket and letters

mentioned in my lai, before these were come to the poffeflion
of the Earl of Gowrie, and also found that no mean ithight pre-
vail to win the fame out of his hands without his own consent
and privity: in which behalf I had employed fit instruments,
that nevertheless profited nothing; therefore I attempted to
eir'ay himself, letting him know that the said caflct and letters
thould have been brought to her Majesty by the offer and
good means of good friends, promising to have delivered
them to her Majeity before they came into his harids and cuf-
tody, and knowing that he did bear the like affeaion, and was
ready to pleasure her Majesty in all thirigs, and chiefly in this
that had been thus far tendered to her 1Majesty, and which
thereby ihould be well accepted, and with princely thanks
and gratuity be requited to his comfort and contentinent; I
moved him that they might be

a present to be sent to her Ma-

jetly from him, and that I might cause the faie to be convey-
e] to her Majet!y, adding hereunto such words and arguments
as might both stir up a hope cf liberality, and also best ef-ea
the purpose. At the firift he was loth to agree that they were±
in his poffeflion; but 1 let him plainly know that I was certain-
ly informed that they were delivered to him by Sanders Jar-
din ; whereupon he ,refled to know who did so inform mej
enquiring whether the sons bs the earl of Morton had done it
or no. I did not otherwavs in plain terms deny or answer
thereunto, but that he might think that he had told me, as the
prior is ready to avouch, and well pleased that I shall give him
to be the author thereof after he had said [though] all the:e
letters were in his keeping (which he would neither grant nor
deny) yet he might not delivei- them to any person without the
consents and privities, as well of the King, that had interest
therein, as also of the reft Of the noblemen enterprifers of
the ation against the King's mother, and that would have
them kept as an evidence to warrant and make good that aci
tion. And albeit I replied, that their a&ion in that part touch-
ing the assignation of the crown to the King by his mother, had
teceived fisch establishment, confirmation, and strength, by aAs

Mm a of

fyitems with regard to the fa&s in controversy;
it may be expe&ed that I should now pronounce

sentence.

of parliament and other public authority and infiruments, as
neither ]hould that cafe be fuffered to come in debate or question,
nor such scrolls and papers ought to be Ihewed for the strength-
ening thereof, so as these might well be left and be rendered
to the hands of her MajeRfy, to whom they were destined be-
fore they fell in his keeping ; yet he would not be removed
or satisfied; concluding, after much reasonings, that the
Earl of Morton, nor any other that had the charge and keep-
ing thereof, durst at any time make delivery; and because it
was the firit time that I had moved him therein, and that he
would gladly both answer her Majefty's good expe&ation ia
him, and also perform his duty due to his sovereign and affo-
ciatesin the a&ion aforesaid ; therefore he would seek out the
said casket and letters, at his return to' his house, which he
thought thould be within a short time; and upon finding of
the fame, and better advice and consideration had of the
cause, he would give further answer. This resolution I have
received as to the thing; and for the present I could not bet-
ter, leaving him to give her Majelty such testimony of his
good will towards her, by his frank dealing herein, as she
may have caufc to confirm her higlneffes good opinion con-
ceived already of him, and be thereby drawn to greater good-
ness towards him. I shall still labour him both by myfelfand
also by all other means; but I greatly diftrufi the desired
success heriin.

24th of November 158z, from Edinburgh.

FOR the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the

hands of the Earl of Gvwrie, I have lately moved him eaineitly
therein, letting him know the purpose of theScottilh Queen,
both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels,
and also feeki'ng thereon to have them delivered to her or de-
fa:ed, and that the means which mhe will make in this behalf
* hall be so great and effeAual, as these writings cannot be
safely kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him that
hath the cuftodv thereof, neither shall he that is once known to
have them be fuffered to hold them in his hands. Herewith I
have -at large opened the perils likely to fall to that ation, and
the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is now
openly known to have the pofeflion of these writings, and I
have lettin him fee what surety it mhall bring to the said cause
and all the parties therein, and to himself, that these writings
may be with fe.recy and good order committed to the keeping
of her Majetty, that will have them ready vw'henfoever any ufe'

shall

sentence. In my opinion, there are only two con-
clulions, which can be drawn from the fa£s which
have been enumerated.

ONE,

shall be for them, and by her High nefles countenance defend
them and the parties from such wrongfull objeaions as shall
be laid against them, offering at length to him, that if he be
not fully satisfied herein, or doubt that the reft of the afib-
ciates shall not like of the delivery of them to her Majelty in
this good manner, and for the interest rehearsed, that I shall
readily, upon meeting and conference with them, procure
their assent in this part (a matter more easy to offer than to
perform) ; and, lastly, moving him that (for the secrecy and
benefit of the caufe,-and that her Majcfty's good opinion to-
wards himfelfmay be firmly fettled and confirmed by his ac-
ceptable forwardness herein) he would, without needless
fcrupol, frankly commit these writings to her Majefly's good
cufiody for the good uses received. After long debate he re-
solved, and said, that he would unfeignedly thew and do to
her Majesty all the pleasure that he might without offence
to the King his Sovereign, and prejudice to the associates in
the aftion, and therefore he would first make search and view
the said letters, and herein take advice what he might do, and
how far he might satisfy and content her Majesty; promising
thereon to give more resolute answer; and he concluded flatly,
that after he had found and seen the writings, that he might
not make delivery of them without the privity of the King.
Albeit I flood long with him against his resolution in this
point, to acquaint the King with this matter befote the letters
wvere in the hands of her Majesty, letting him fee that his
doings there should admit great danger to the cause; yet I
could not remove him from it. It may be that he meaneth
to put over the matter from himfelfto the King, upon fight
whereof I shall travel effetually to obtain the King's conient,
that the letters may be committed to her Majefty's keeping,
thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the King, in the
present love and affeaion that he beareth to her Highness,
than to win any thing at the hands of the associates in the
adion, whereof some principal of them now come and remanin
at the devotion of the King's mother; in this I shall Itill call
on Gowrie to search out the coffer, according to his promise ;
and as I (hall find him minded to do therein, so (hall I do my
best and whole' endeavour to effec the success to her Majefly's
best contentment.

24 December 1582, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I saw good opportunity offered torenew the mat-

ter to the Earl of Gowrie for recovery of the letters in the cos-

Mm 3 fcr

ONE, that Bothwell,. prompted by his ambition

or love, encouraged by the Queen's known aver-
sion ro her husband, and presuming on her attach-
ment to himself, struck the blow without having
concerted with her the manner or circumitances of
perpetrating that crime. That Mary, initead of
testifying much indignation at the deed, or disco-
vering any resentment against Bothwell, who was
accu1ed of having committed it, continued to load
him with marks of her regard, condu&ed his trial
in such a manner as rendered it impossible to dif-
cover his guilt, and soon after, in opposition to
a11 the maxims of decency or of prudence, volun-
tarily agreed to a marriage with him, w hich every
consideration hfiould have induced her to detest.
By this verdi&, Mary is not pronounced guilty of
having contrived the murder of her husband, or
even of having previously given her consent to his
death; but she is not acquitted of having disco-
vered her approbation of the deed, by her beha9
viour towards him who was the author of it.

THE other conclusion is that which Murray

and his adherents laboured to establish, ," That

ser in his hands, therefore I put him in mind thereof; where-
ppon he told me, that the Duke of Lennox hbd fought ear-
nefily to have had those letters, and that the king did knoew
where they were, so as they could not be delivered to her
Majefiy without the King's privity and consent, and he pre.
tended to be till willing to pleasure her Majesty in the fame,
so far as he may with his duty to the King and to the reft of
the aflbciates in that aftion ; but I greatly difitrul t9 effitt this
to her Majefly's pleasure, wherein, nevertheless, I Lhall do
my uttermost endeavours.

WHETHER James VI. who put the Earl of Gowrie to death,

A. D. 1584, and seized all his effe&s, took care to destroy hia
mother's letters, for whose honour he was at that time ex-
tremely zealous ; whether they have perilhed by some un.
known accident; or whether they may not fill remain un-
observed among the archives of some of our great families, it
is impossible to determine.

3 James,

James, fometymme Erle of Bothwile, .was the
chiefe executor of the horribill and unworthy
murder, perpetrat in the person of umquhile King
Henry of gude memory, fader to our Soveraine
Lord, and the Queenis lauchfull husband ; fa was
Jhe of the foreknowledge, counfall, devise, per-
fwadar and commander of the said murder to be
done." Good. ii. 207.

WHICH of these conclusions is most agreeable

to the evidence that has been produced, I leave
my readers to determine.

Mm 4 INDE X.

Mm4

# INDEX.

I N DE X.

N. B. The Numeral Letters refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Pages.

A

A DAMSON,' archbi{hop of St. Andrews, is excommuni.

cated by the synod of Fife, ii. I39. He excommuni-

cated his opponents, ib. is restored by the general assembly
upon conditions, 140. his mean fubmifflion to the general a1.
fembly ---- 204

Albany, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his nobles against his

brother K. James III. i. 57. is made prisoner, but escapes to
France, ibid, concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of England, 58.
procureLaffiltance to invade Scotland on mean conditions, ib.
returns to Scotland, and is reflored to favour, 59. cabals
again, but is forced to fly to France ibid. 60

--- Duke of, made Regent during the minority of K. James

V. i. 37. 63. after several unfuccefsful firuggles with the no-
bility, he is forced to retire to France - 63
Alenfon, Duke of, Q Elizabeth long amuses the court of France

by carrying on a treaty of marriage with him ii. 69

Allen, cardinal, publiihed a book proving the lawfulness of kill-

ing excommunicated Princes - ii. Iaz

Al'va, Duke of, his intrigues in favour of Q. Mary, ii. 27. 31.

43. is recalled from his government of the Netherlands 5I

Ambafzadors, their office - i. 87
Andrews, St. the archbi(hop of, remarkably cured of a dangerous

distemper, i. 135, 136. the motives of his opposition to the
Q Regent, 158. his great influence on the bench ofBifhops
and weight in Parliament, 163. governed the church with
great moderation, 165. persecutes the reformers, ibid. 166.
performs great service to the Congregation against the French,
221. is imprisoned for celebrating Mass, 301, ruins Q Ma-
ry's affairs by his imprudent conduat, 456, 457. is taken pri-
foner in Dumbarton Castle, and hanged - ii. 17

--- the caRtle of, demolithed -by the French i. I16
--- the prior of, promotes a treaty between the Q. Regent

and the Reformers, i. 178. is provoked to leave the court,
180. is one of the chief promoters of the reformation, 196.

some

some account, and a charater of him, ibid, 197. artful en-
deavours ulfed to undermine him, ibid, presumption of his in-
nocence of the designs charged on him, ibid. is sent by the
convention to invite the Queen to Scotland, 252z. is received
by her with confidence and affection, z5 3. reitrains the turbulent
spirit of the people against popery, z66, z67. is lfent to reftain
the licentious practices of the borderers, 272. executes his com.
miflion with vigour and prudence, 273. a conspiracy against
him discovered, 282z. is created Earl of Mar, 285. becomes

& obnoxious to the Earl of Huntley, ib. See Mar and Marray.
.dngus, Earl of, was the only man who afferred the independency

of his country, i. 23, z4. assumes the Regency during the
minority of K. James V. "7. 64. is unable to gain his affec-
tions, 64. is attainted and flies into England 65

---- Obtains leave to return into Scotland, ii. 92. surrenders

himself to K. James VI. 103. he with several others seize the
castle of Stirhng to oppose Arran, 10o6. they are forced tofly
into England at the approach of the King with an army, o107.
he is attainted and his estate forfeited, 115. is concerned in a
plot in favour of Spain, 209. is seized and committed prisoner
to the cafile of Edinbu'gh, 210. escapes and flies to the mouis
tains, 211. offers to submit to a trial, 215. fcntence is pro-
nounced againlt him, 216. he refuses to submit 217

A.njou, Duke of, a marriage proposed between him and Q Eli.

zabeth - ii. 25

,Anne, a Princess of Denmark, married to K. James VI, ii. zoo,

201. her arrival in Scotland and coronation, 203. heads a par-
ty that opposes the chancellor - 212, 213

Arehrbiiops, Bzf/ops, Dean and Chapters revived in Scotland dur-

ing the Kiug's minority, ii. 38, 39. this gives great offence to
many of the clergy, 39, 40. an aft of assembly againlt these
offices, 86, 87. Biflhops made fubjet to prefhyteries and affem-
blies, 139. a great firoke given to their authority, 185, 186.
None of them present at the Queen's coronation 203

Argyll, Eazl of, is appointed to carry the crown matrimonial to

the Dauphin of France, i, 163, 164. uses his interest with the
reformers to make a treaty with the Queen Regent, 178. lerves
her court in resentment of her treachery, 180. refuses to ac.
cede to a treaty with Murray the Regent, 496. is soon after
forced to submit, 497. a&s as lieutenant to the Queen after
the Regent's murder, ii. 6. is prevailed on to join the King's
party, 21. quarrels with Athole, 5;. confederates with him
agairft Morton, the Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid.
they remonfirate against him to the King, 58. they raise forces
against him, 64. negotiate a treaty with him by the mediation
of Q.Elizabe'h, 65 is promoted to the office of chancellor,
67. The King's authority delegated to him and Lord Forbes
against the popith Lords, 220 his forces are defeated in an
engagement with them -r- ibid. 2t2

Ariflocracy, 4 redominant in Scotland --, i. 255

.4rmado,

Armado, Spanish, preparations for it, ii. 188, 189. it is defeated

194

Arran, Earl, is appointed Regent during the minority of Q.Ma-

r), i. 97. his chara~fer, 98. consents to the schemes of England
which difguts the public, ioo. becomes suspicious of the Earl
of Lennox, 1Q2. is forced to renounce the friendship with Eng-
land and declare for France, 103 and to persecute the reformers.
104. publicly abjutes the doetrines of the reformers, lo5. is
contemned by one half and little trufed by the other part of the
nation, 1o6. heads the partisans of France and defenders of
popery, 107 attempts in vain to seize the murderers ofcardinal
Beatoun, 113. is forced to make a truce with the conspirators,
114. his eldett son is conditionally excluded all right of fuc
cession, 117. his mean concession to the court of France, 124,
iz5. ge's the title of Chatelherau!r, 125. is undermined by
the Q. Dowager, 132, 133. proposals and arguments for his
resignation, 134. he tonfents to it, 135. retracts by the inBou.
ence of the Archbithop of St. Andrews, 136. is atlaft prevail-
ed on and Qets advantageous terms, 137. See Chatelherault.
- eldef son of the Duke of Chatelheraulh, joins in an affl-
ciation with the reformers, i. 194. narrowly escapes intended
rain at the court of France, 195. is tull of resentment againli
the French on that account, ibid. 196. the Congregation so-
licit Q. Elizabeth to marry him, 244. his great imprudence
with regard to Q Mary, 274. discovers a conspiracy against
the Queen's favourite , 282. loses his reason, ii. 67, 68. is
inmprifoned by Morton - 68

.---- late Capt. Stewart, gets that title and estate, Ii. 80. is

appointed to conduct Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh,
ibid. tortures several of his servants cruelly, 8 . his infamous
plarriage with the Countess of March, 83, 84. his variance
with Lennox, 84. is frultrated in an attempt to rescue the King
at Ruthven, 9i. is confined prisoner to the castle of Stirling, 92.
regains his liberty and the King's regard, too. resumes his
power and arrogance, ibid. gets the Ruthven conspirators de.
clared guilty of high treason, 103. is detetled as author of a
perfecation againLt the clergy, 109. is gained over to Q. Eli-.
zabeth's intercit, I 14 gets several forfeited e/fates, I16. his
car uption and insolence, 122z. is made chancellor and has in-
limited power, ibid. 1 23. his venality is limited by his wife,
123. his monfitrous tyranny and oppreflion, ib. 124. his power
undermined by Wotron the English envoy, 134, 135, is con-
fined in the caflte of St. Andrews, but soon recovers favour,
135, 136. his interest sinks much, 138. is firipped of his ho-
nours and spoils, and reduced to his original flation ibid.

Artides, Lord of, their origin and uflinefs, i. 8l. by whom cho-

fen, 82, 83. the fubrequent variations and political use made
of this inflitution -- 83, 84

Arundel, Earl of, is appointed a commissioner to the Conference

at Wefiminiler -- i. 486

M~by

4/hb', ambaflador from Q. Elizabeth to Scotland, ii. 191. his

great promises to King Jdmes, ibid. his promises are soon for-
got, 195. he is ashamed and withdraws privately from Scot-
land - - - ibid.

,f/1Aination, the frequency of it in Scotland, how accounted for,

i. 363-365. several instances of it in France, 365, 366. a
stop put to it there and in Scotland, 366. several great men
approve of it, 367. prevailed greatly afterwards ii. 205

.4.embly of the church of Scotland, the first but feeble and irre.

gular, i. 25z. another afi ml ly, their demands from the con-
vention, z74, z25. two o er assemblies in vain solicit an aug-
mentation of their revenue', 293, 294. they address QMary
in high trains of complaints, 342. an assembly proceeds at
Glasgow notwithitanding the King's interdition, ii. 86, 87.
two assemblies yield many of the privileges of the church to
the King, 239, 240. declare it lawful for ministers to fit in
Parliament, 243, 244. See Clergy.

A.fociation, formed in defence ot u. Elizabeth against Q. Mary

ii. I!8

,Atbole, Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel with the Earl of Ar-

gyll, ii. 5;. joins with him in oppoiing Morton the Regent,
ib. dies soon after an entertainment at Morton's, 66. suspicions
of his being poisoned - ibid.

A.ubigne, Lord de, second faon of the Lord Lennox, arrives in

Scotland from France, ii. 70. becomes soon a great favourite
of K. James, ibid. high titles and posts beltowed on him, ib,
71. notes against him, Appendix, 461. See Lenox.

Iuflrian family, their origin and power i. 87, 88

B

B Abingteo, Anthony, nfome account of him, ii. 141. the rife

of his conspiracy against Q. Elizabeth, 142, 143. the names

and scheme of operations of his allbciates, ibid. 144. they
are betrayed, seized, and executed 14;, 146

Bacon, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the commissioners to the

confederates at Weftminfler - i. 486

Baliol, John, his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. 1o. is pre.

ferred by Ed. I. iz. soon forced by him to resign ibid.

Ballard, a trafficking priest, solicits an invasion of England from

Spain, ii. 143. joins in a conspiracy to murder QLElizdbeth, ib.
is discovered and taken into cufltody, 146. and execured ibid,

Barons, theirjurifdiaion very exter.five, i. zr. thedifference be-

tween the greater and lefl.r, whence, 78. three hundred of
them remonstrate against the conoufi of the Q: Dowager,
152. the lesser admitted by their representatives in Parliament,
ii. 187. petition of the lesser Barons to Parliament, Append.
325. See Nobles.

Baflicon poron, a book published by King James VI. flrength.

Lns his inteielt in England - ii. 245

9 Beatoun,

Beatovn, cardinal, made use of by K. James V. to mortify the no-

bles, i. 68, 69. his precenfions to the Regency on the death of
that Prince, 96. forges a testament of the late King, ib. his
views how disappointed, ib. his character, 97. opposes the
Earl of Arran, Regent, 100, 1ot. excites most of the nation
againlt the English, 1oz. seizes the young Queen and her mo-
ther, ib. cajols the earl (f Lennox, ib. obliges the Regent to
renounce England-and declare for France, 103. and to perse-
cute the reformers, 104. engroffes the chief direaion of as-
fairs, ro6. his double dealing with the Earl of Lennox resent-
ed, ib. 107. is murdered, I iz. his death fatal to the Catholics,
I 13. a vain attempt to revenge it, ib. II4. scandalous reports
concerning him - 147
Bedford, Earl of, comes as ambassador from Q.Elizabeth to wit-

ness the baptism of James VI. i. 387. his inRruaions, 388,
389. his letters to Sir W. Cecil, Appendix 349. 354. 360.

Eell/endon, Sir Lewis, jufice clerk, K. James's resident at Lon-

don, ii. 133. joins in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interefi in Scot-
land, ibid. is sent with her envoy into that country ibid.

Black, Mr. David, minister at S'. Andrews, his ridiculous and

fedirious expressions in the palpit, ii. 229, 230. being sup-
ported by the clergy, he declines thie civiljurifdition, 230. is
condemned by the privy council, 23x. is sentenced by the
King to reside beyond Spey - 23z

Blackader, captain, and three others, executed for the murder

of Darnly - - i. 435

Boethius, Hefcor, his history of Scotland, frome account of i. 5
/olton Ca/lle, Q. Mary confined a prisoner there i. 471
Bonot, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney i. 1So
Borderers, an attempt to restrain their licentious pra&ices, i. 272,

273. Q. Mary visits them, 377. a fcuffle there, in which the
English warden, &c. were made prisoners ii. 53

Bsrthwick, Lord, aflifts the Q. Regent in defending Leith, i. 213.
Bothwell, Earl of, intercepts a fum of money from England to

the Congregation, i. 21z. favours the Queen Regent, but re.
sides at his own house, 213. his refentmentagainftthe prior of
St. Andrews, zS2. is by him when Earl of Murray and Re.
gent summoned to a public trial, 326. prevents it by leaving
the kingdom, 327. a sentence of outlawry against him prevent-
ed by the Queen, ibid. is permitted to return, 336. escapes
with her after the murder of Rizio, 361. some account of his
former behaviour, 369, 370. commences a favourite of the
Queen, 370. she reconciles him to several Lords, with whom
he was at variance, ibid. 371. he increases in favour with.her,
373. circumfiances concurring in this, 374. he is wounded in
attempting to seize one of the borderers, 377. the Queen's ex-
traordinary regard for him on this occalion, ibid. to secure ad-
herents he obtains a pardon for Morton and his associates, 391.
proposes the ritforation of the popilh ecclefiaflical jurifdiation,
393. his views in this, ibid. 394. is fufpeied the author of

Darnly's

Darnly's murder, 40!. is charged with it by Lennox, 403. but
ifill favoured by the Queen, 404. appointed governor of Edin-
burgh Castle, ibid. his trial is hurried on, 40o. remarkable
partiality in his favour, 406. Lennox accuses him openly, 407.
comes to his trial with a great retinue, 408, 409. is acqutted
by a jury, 409. the trial universally censured, ibid. 410.
challenges any that would accuse him, 410. several ads of
Parliament passed in his favour, ibid. 411. he procures an as
in favour of the reformation, ibid. 41z. prevails on several of
the nobles to recommend him as a husband to the Queen, 413,
414, 4'5. seizes the Queen on a journey trom Stirling, and
carries her to Dunbar, 417, 418. his view in this, 418. ob-
tains a pardon under the great real, ib. 419. procures a di-
vorce from his wife, 419. carries the Queen to the cattle of
Edinburgh, ibid. is created Duke of Orkney, 420. and mar-
ried to the Queen, ibid. is not allowed the title of King, 421.
he watches the Queen very c'ofely, ibid. 422. endeavours to
get the Prince into his cultody, 422, 423. is alarmed with an
association of the nobles againlt the Queen and him, 424, 425.
carries the Queen to the caftie of Borthwick, 426. raises forces
againit the confederate Lords, ibid. he marches against them,
427. proposes a single combat, 428. this how prevented, 429.
takes his last farewell of the Queen, and is forced to fly, ibid.
sends for a caiker of letters from Q" Mary to him, 435. they
are intercepted by the Earl of Morton, ibid. his milerable
fate, 447, 448. refleAions on his conduA, 448. copy of his
divorce from Lady Jean Gordon, Appendix 93

Both'well, late Francis Stewart, created Earl ofBothwell, ii. 196.

is imprisoned for consulting witches, 205, zc26. escapes and
attempts to break into the King's presence, 206. retires to the
north, ibid. He and his adherents are attainted, 2c9. fails in
an attempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken under protedion of
Q. Elizabeth, who solicits for him, z 1. seizes the King's per.
son, z213. forces him to dismiss the chancellor, and his other
favourites, ibid. and to grant him a remifllion, ibid. his bold
and insolent behaviour afterwards, 214. is encouraged by the
English ambaflador, 217. makes another at'empt to come at
the King, 218. is repulsed and obliged to fly to the north of
England, ibid. is abandoned by Q. Elizabeth. and forced to
fly into Spain and Italy, 223. remains in indigent obscurity,
and is never afier reconciled to the King ibid.

---- Adam, bilhop of Orkney, performs the ceremony of mar-

riage of Q. Mary to the Earl of Bothwell i. 4to

Botbhwel/haugh. See Hamilton.
Boulogne, wrelled by the French out of the hands of the Englith,

i. 24. they consent to rellore it and its dependencies to the
French -- i16

Bowres, Envoy from Q: Elizabeth. accuses Lennox of diflurbing

the peace, ii. 74. is refused an audience, ibid. is ent to encou.

ragc

rage the corfpirators at Ruthven, 92. to inquire about K1ig
James's correspondence with the Pope 246, z17

Biyd, Lord, his ambitious views in the time of K. James tit.

tufitrated - i. 36
.- is prevailed on to join the King's party against Q. Mary,

ii. z2l joins the Ruthven conspirators -- 89

Brienne, Count de, comes an ambassador from F.ance to witness

the baptism of K. James VI. - i. 387

Bract, Robert, his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. to. his

grando n asserts his right, and vindicates the honour of his
country iz. he attempts to reduce the power of the nobles 46
- a priest, employed by the King of Spain to seduce the

Scotch nobles ii. 196

-- Mr. Robert, a prelbyterian miniflter, performs the cere-

mn ny of the coronation of K. Jame,'s Queen ii. 20o
- Elward, abbot of Kinlofs, acquits himself with address and

reputation as ambassador at the court of England, ii. 244, 24.
- Mr. Robert, a minister, his re'boution in refusing to publiflh

the King's account of Gowrie's conspiracy, ii. 269. is de-
prived and banished on that account - ibid.

Buchanan, George, his h ltory of Scotland, some account of i.

5. remarks on hii dialogue De jure Regis, Sit. alone accuses
Q. Mary of a criminal correspondence with Rizio, 35.6 ap-
proved of ass flination, 367. his partiality in overlooking an
a& of Parliament in favour of the reformation, 412 attends
the Regent into England when called on to arcufe QO Mary,
475. was o-e of the preceptors of K. James VI. ii. 56. com-
mended for his great g"nius -- 30Z

Surleigh. See Cecil
Barroughs, when filft represented in Parliament ii. azt

C

C AlS, John, a declaration of his in name of Q Elizabeth

to the Lords of Grange at Lethington, Appendix 4tt

Cabthnefi, Earl of, his protelt at the trial of Bothwell for the

murder of Darnly - i. 409

Calvin, the patron and reflorer of presbyterian church govern-

ment --- - . 2 19

Camden, some miflakes of his i. 388, 389. 415
Canongate, near Edinburgh, a Parliament held there ii. 19
Cardan, some account of him, i. 35, 136. his remarkable cure

of the bishop of St. Andrews - ibid.

Carey, Sir George, lent ambafbtdor from Q Elizabeth to en-

courape the confpirt"rs a: Ruthven ii. 92

<---- Robert frent by QElizabeth to sooth K. James after

the death of his mother, ii. 180. is not permitted to enter
Scotland, ibid. was the firfi that brounht K. James intelli-
gence of the death of (Q lizabeth - 290

Ca/ket of Ictrets fiop Q Many to Bothwell, seized by the Earl of

Mo;ton,

Morton, i. 4.3. her enemies avail themselves much of themr-

ibid. 436.

Caflsh, Earl of, joins the King's party ii. zt
Caf/elaau, the French ambassador, is employed to procure the con-

sent of his court to her marriage with Darnly, i. 318, 319. he

- endeavours to make up the differences between the Queen and

him, 373. his intercelfion in behalf of Q. Mary ii. iz8

Catherine of Medicis, assumes the government after the death of

Francis I. her son, i. 246. her harsh treatment of Q. Mary,
ibid. her views in behaving more friendly to her, 304, 305.
bends her whole endeavours to destroy the Protestants, ii. 25.
her artful condua with that view ibid. 26

Ceuil, 'his great capacity as a minister, i. z32. 256. is employed

to negotite a peace with France, ibid. over-reaches the French
ambassador in the treaty of Edinburgh, 256. is appointed a
commiflioner to the conference at Wellminfter, 486. is lent by
Q, Elizabeth with proposals to Q. Mary, ii. to. has an inter.
view with her, which excites Q. Elizabeth's jealousy, go. is
treated harlhly by Q Elizabeth for consenting to Q Mary's
death --- 179, I8o

- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads the party againht

Essex, ii. 273. his character, ibid. 274. his great affiduilt,
ibid. enters into a private correspondence with K. James,
z80. a let'er from him to his majesty, Appendix 116

Celibacy of the popish clergy, a chief engine of their policy, i. 144.

173

Charles V. Emperor, his great power, i. 87. and unlimited am-

bttion, 88, 89. is checked by Francis I. 89

- K. of France makes a league with Q. Elizabeth, ii. 31, 32
Chatelherault, Duke of, that title conferred on the Earl of Arran,

Regent of Scotland, i. 2z. his right of fuccefflion to the crown
of Scotland maintained, 158. enters a protellation to save his
right, 161. joins the deformers, in endeavouring to expel the
French army, 191. joins in association with them, 194. is
looked on as the head of the congregation, 195, 196. His pu.
fillanimity, 2zo. becomes obnoxious to Q.Mary, 274, his
jealouly of the prior of St. Andrews, 288. deprived of his
French pension, 304. is alarmed at the Earl of Lennox's re.
turn to Scotland, 313. an accommodation brought about by
the Queen's influence, ibid. adheres to Murray in opposing
the Queen's marriage, 338. is pardoned on his humble appli.
cation, but forced to reside in France, 341. his parifans
grumble at Murray's being advanced to the Regency, 4i\,
452. returns trom France and heads the Queen's adherents,
495. is made her lieutenant-general, ibid. His resolution wa-
vering, the Regent commits him prisoner to the caitle of Edin-
burgh, 496, 497. is set at liberty by Kilkaldy, and joins the
Queen's party, ii. 4. is proclaimed traitor by Lennox the new
Regent, 9. is reconciled to Morton the Regent, 46. articles
of a treaty between them, ibid. His death s5

Chunrh

,urc~r of Scotland, revolutions in it after the union of tzH

crowns, ii. 299, 300. See .d.embly, Clergy.

Church Lands annexed to the crown by Parhlament ii. 18'
Clans, the inflitution and natuieof - - i. 27, z$
Clergy, popish, theirgreat riches and power, i. 67. 141. were made

uie of by K. James V. to suppress the nobles, 68, 69s made a
considerable body in Parliament, 142. their great influenceover
the laity, 14.3. they ingrofled learning, ib. and held many of'
the chief employments, ibid. 144. their power increased by
celibacy, ibid. they seized the eflates of the intestate, 14q. and
tried all matrimonial and teflamentary causes, ibid. become
obnoxious to the laity, 146. their great corruLtor, whence,
ibid. these of Scotland particularly dffolute, 143. their weak
defence of their tenets, 148. try in vain to impose false mira-
cles, ib. 149. their impolitic condua to the reformers 167
--- reformed, try in vain to recover the revenues of the church,
i. 251, z52. 254. procure a demolition of all relics of popery»
254. a new regulation concerning their revenues, 275-280.
they are no gainers by it, z8o, their stipends, what in those
days, ibid. are offended atthe moderation of their leaders, 302.
occasion a tumult among the people, ibid. 303. more com-
plaints of their poverty, 314. 391. arejealous f Q.Mary, ib6
392. the small allowances appointed to support them all, 392.
their application for payment of their stipends of little effea,
451. frelh complaints of the deficiency of the funds for their
maintenance, 509. are put offwith fair words and promises,
ibid. 510. archbhihops, &c. introduced among them by Mor-
ton, ii. 39. their grievances under his adminnltration, 52, 53.
they approve of the Ruthven conspirators, 93. by favouring
them they provoke the King, 104. severe laws made againit
them, 10o8, 1o9. they of Edinbuigh fly into England, o109. as
do several others that were molt eminent, ibid. more vigorous
mneafures against them, I16. they obtain no redress on the re-
Iteration of the exiled Lords, 138. represent their grievances
to Parliament, 183. a maintenance provided for them by Par.
liament, 185, 186. they prevail to get Pretbyterian govern*
menteftablifhed by law, 207. their zeal against the Popilh Lords,
214, 215. 225. their rafn proceeoings, 225. 227. they erec
aftanding Council of t.ie Church, 228. vindicate one of their
inumber who declined the civil jurifdiAion, 230 231. their
flanding Council ordered to leave Edinbua gh, 231. tlis occa-
fions a violent tumult there, 13z, 233, 234. they use their ut-
most efforts to fpirnt the people, 230. are deserted and fly to
England, ibid. 237. their power greatly reduced, ibid. are
prevailed on to give up many of their privileges, 239. are re-
stored to a feat in parliament, 241. this violently opposed by
many of them, 243. but carried in their general Assembly, ib.
244. those entitled to this privilege are laid under many regu-
lations and refiridions, 250. they are brought under great sub.

VOL. IIU N n jedion,

je&ion, a21. the revolutions among them since the Union of
the Crowns - - - 299, 300

Clinton, Lord, appointed a commissioner at the conference at

WVeftminfler - - - i. 486

Cockburn, of Ormifton, receives a supply of money from the Enghikh
.to the congregation, i. 212z. is intercepted and robbed of it, ib.
Coin in Scotland, some account of, - i. 206. ii. 52
Commif.'aries appointed to try causes in place of the Spiritual

Court, i. 300. they are deprived of all authority 393

Confefjion of faith by the Reformers, contented to by Parliament

i. 240.

Congregation, the Proteflants diflinguifhed by that name, i. 174.

their leaders enter into an association, 179. are involved in dif-
ficulkies, 209. apply to Q Elizabeth for affiltance, 21o. mo-
ney sent them by her, intercepted, 21z . make a rash and defpe-
rate attempt on Leith, and are repulsed, ib. 213. are no less un.
fortunate in a second fkirmith, 213. are quite dispirited and re.
treat to Stirling, ibid. are joined by the body of the nobles,
216. their army dwindles away, ibid. are animated by Knox,
ibid. they apply again to Q.Elizabeth, ibid. their parties ha.
rafs the French, 22z . are aflifted by a fleet from England, 222.
conclude a treaty at Berwick, with the D. of Ncrfolk, 223,
224. the design and substance of this treaty, 224. negociate a
peace with France, 232. articles of the treaty, 233. they reap
advantages from it, 234, 235. See Reformation.

Covenant, national, framed in defence of the King and Govern-

ment, ii. 19z. the nature and reasonableness of it, ibid. 193.
the progress of it since - - 193

Courtef of Scotland, what - - i. 159
Craig, a minister, boldly testifies against Q Mary's marriage with

Bothwell - - - i. 420

Crawford, Capt. of Jordan Hill, surprises Dumbarton Cattle,

ii. 15, 16. the difficulties of that enterprise - 16

•-- L all of, one of the heads of the Spaniflh faction, ii. 191.

196. offers his service to the K. of Spain, 196. joins in re-
bellion againfl the King, 199. is forced to submit to him, ib.
and imprisoned a lhort time - - ibid.

Crichton Regent during the minority of K. James II. his barba-

rous policy - - - i. 52, 53

--- a jesuit, a plot againfi Q. Elizabeth discovered by his

means - - - - i. 117

Criminals, a remarkable inflance of the difficulty of bringing them

to juflice - - - i. 20, 21

Croc du, the French ambafljdor, refused to countenance Q. Ma-

ry's marriage with Bothwell, i. 421. attempts in vain a recon-
ciliation between the Queen and the confederate Lords, 427,
428. mediates a truce between the King and Queen's party
in Scotland - - - ii. 32

Crown marrimonial of Scotland granted by Parliament to the

Dauphia

fDauphin of France, i. i61. deputies appointed to carry it, bft
are prevented - 163, 164.

Cuningham, Robert, appears at the trial of Bothwell in name of

the Earl of Lennox, i. 408. demands a delay, which is refused ibid.

Curle, one of Q, Mary's secretaries, is seized and carried prisoner

to London, ii. 149. is produced ah evidence against her 158

D

DArnly, Henry, Lord, proposed as ahufband to .LMary, i.

309. his right of succession considered, ibid. 31o. is per-

mitted to visit the court of Scotland, 316. arrives there, and
quickly gains the Queen's heart, 317. his chara&er, 319. dif-
gulls several of the nobles, particularly Murray, ib. 320. cul-
tivates a familiarity with David Rizio, 32b. is despised on that
account, 32z. grows intolerably insolent and haughty, 329.
schemes to affaflinate Murray, 331. a plot to seize and fend
him to England prevented by the Queen, ibid. evidences of
this, 332, 333. his marriage with the Queen celebrated, 335*
is honoured with the title of King of Scotland, ibid. is im-
placable with refpe& to the exiled nobles, 346. lose· the Queen's
affe&ion by his untoward behaviour, 352. demands theLCrown
taiatrimonial, 353. becomes suspicious of Rizio's ill offices with
the Queen, ib. his resolution to be avenged of him encouraged
by the nobles, 355. articles agreed on between them for that
purpose, 357. heads the conspirators who perpetrate the mur-
der, 358. confines the Queen after it is committed, 359. pro-
hibits the meeting of the Parliament, ib. makes his efecape
with the Queen, 360, 361. her hatred to him increases, 368.
is negleaced by her and treated with little refpe& by the nobles,
372. resolves to leave Scotland, 374. his wayward and ca-
pricious behaviour, 375. he writes the reasons of his condut
to the Queen, ib. his itrange behaviour at the baptism of the
Prince, 388. a false reason alleged for this confuted, ibid.
389. retires to his father at G!afgow, 391. falls sick there,
394. conjeaures concerning his distemper, ib. is negleAed by
the Queen, 39. nhe afterwards visits and expresses affeAionfor
him, 396. he is prevailed on by her to come to Edinburgh, 399.
is lodged in a separate house, ibid. he is murdered there, ibid.
400. his charaaer, 400. a proclamation issued for discovering
the murderers, 401. a remiss enquiry made into it, 4z2-4tO.
Capt. Blackadder and three others executed on that account,
451. the confeffion of Morton the Regent at his death con-
cerning the murder, ii. 8z. paper of obje&ions of the Court
of England againit his marriage with Q. Mary, App. a differ-
tation concerning his murder, at the end of vol. ii.

Daaqid I. K. of Scotland, his profusion to the church i. 141
- II. troubles during his minority - i. 34
DOavi~n, Cent into Scotland by Q. Elizabeth, as a spy on the French

N az Ambaf.

Ambassador, ii. 96. is sent to gain Arran's interest to (QEl1l
zabeth, 114. this he soon accomplishes, ibid. brings the war-
rant for Q..Mary's death at Q.Elizabeth's desire, 168, 169.
is charged by her with disobeying her orders, 179. is imprison-
ed, tried, and fined, and loses all favour, ibid. objecions against
him in the cause of the late Scottilh Queen - App. 481.

DEft, Monsieur, is lent with a supply of forces to aflift the French

against the English in Scotland, i. 12z3, 124. his success there

124

Di/cipline, in the Church, the first book of, composed, i. 251Sh

why objected against in a convention of the States, ibid. an-
other attempt in favour of Church discipline frustrated ii. 85

Douglas,. the power and property of that family, i. 34. they

alpire to independency, 53. Will. Earl of, murdered by K.
James II. ibid. his son endcavours to relent it, 54. is forced
to fly into England - - ibid.

----- William, QMary committed a prisoner to his castle of

Lochleven - - - 434

*--- George, brother to the above, assists the Queen in mak-

ing her escape - - - 452, 453
--- Archibald, one of Darnly's murderers, ii. 141. under-

goes a mock trial for that crime and is acquitted, 142. is sent
Ambassador to England, ibid. letter from him to the Q.of
Scots, Appendix, 432. to the King - - 438

Drury, Sir William, enters Scotland with an army to support the

Queen's party, ii. 6. they join him and drive off the Queen's,
ibid. he procures a truce between the King and Queen's
parties, 32. comes with forces to affill Morton in besieging
the caflle of Edinburgh, 47. which is forced to surrender 48

-- Sir Drue, is appointed one of Q Mary's keepers ii. 20o
Dudley, Lord Robert, recommended by QElizabeth as a hus-

band to Q Mary, i. 305. why a favourite of Q. Elizabeth's,
ibid. is highly promoted by her, ibid. 306. his situation ex-
tremely delicate, 307. becomes suspicious of Cecil 308

Dumbarton Caltle, surprised and taken in the King's name by the

Regent - - - ii. 15. 17

Dury, a miniffer of Edinburgh, banished from his charge by K,

James for his free inveAives against the courtiers, ii. 87. as-
ter being reflored he is driven from it a second time for ap.
proving the Raid of Ruthven o 105

E

E Dinburgh, is taken and burnt by the English, i. oS8, 109.

a great fray there between the French and Scots, 128, 129.

is seized by the Reformers, 185. its inhabitants are terribly
alarmed by the French, 212. a treaty there with the French
and Englilh, 232, 233. a loan demanded of it by Q.Mary,
342. which is granted for the superiority of Leith, ibid. the
treaty of infilted on by Q Elizabeth, 389, 390. is poffeffed br

by the Queen's party, ii. 4. and fortified by them, 18. the
City and Castle hold out against the King's forces, 30. are re-
duced to great straits by famine, 3 I. are relieved by a truce, 32 .

- the citizens take up arms to promote the King's marriage, zoo.

they rife again and insult the King and his ministers on the
murder of the Earl of Murray, 206, 207. assist the King
against Huntley, 218. a violent tumult there on account of the
Clergy, 232--235. they are severely punilhed for it by the
King, 236-238. their ministers return to their charges, 240,
24.1. divided into parishes, and number of Miniffers increased,
241. they decline publilhing the account of Gowrie's confpi-
racy, 268. all except one who is banished, are persuaded by

* the King to do it - - - ibid. 269
.dward I. of England, destroyed the public archives of Scotland,

i. 4. is made umpire between Bruce and Baliol, 1I. his art to
acquire the superiority of Scotland, ibid. his wars with the
Scots under Robert Bruce - 12, 13.46

Eglinton, Earl of, is prevailed on to join the King's party, ii. 21
,htzabeth, her peaceable acceflion to the Crown of England, i.

164. supports the congregation in Scotland, z so, 21 . is sparing
in her supplies, zr I. resolves to support them on a second ap-
plication, 216. her good conduct in matters of importance,
z217. motives that determined her to affill them, ib. 219, 220.
her deliberate and resolute condudt, 222, 223. sends a lirong
fleet to their affiltance, 223. concludes a treaty with them, ib.
224. her right to the Crown of England asserted by Francis and
Mary, in France, 233. obtains advantageous terms for the Scots,
234. is solicited by the Parliament of Scotland, to marry the
Earl of Arran, 244. this the declines, 245. the feeds of her dif-
content with Q.Mary, 255, 256. her jealousy of the succession,
257. 260. her excessive vanity and jealousy of Mary's beauty,
260, z61. her diflimulation to her, 261. refuses her a fafe-con-
duc, 262. sends to congratulate her arrival in Scotland, 269.
refuses a conceflion made by Q.Mary, 270. her jealousy of her
right betrayed her into mean adtions, ibid. her resemblance to
Hen. VII. ibid. a personal interview with Q.Mary proposed,
293. she artfully declines it, ibid. her views in regard to Q.
Mary's marriage, 297, 298. assumes a disagreeable authority,
298. names one for a husband to Q.Mary, 305. the different
qualifications of her ministers and favourites, ib. 306. diffembles
with Q Mary about her marriage, 307-309. and likewise
with regard to L. Darnly, 310. affronts Q.Mary by her infinu.
ation concerning Lennox, 311. is perplexed about the marriage
of the Scottish Queen, 315, 316. permits Darnly to visit the
court of Scotland, 316. affeas to declare against Q. Mary's
marriage to him, 322, 323. her reasons for this conduct, 323,
324. her great diflimulation in that affair, 330. herharlhand
deceitful behaviour to Murray and his associates who had fled
to her 339. is firuck at hearing of the birth of James VI.
372. consents to fland godmother to him, ibid. the Parlia-

N n 3 ment

slent address her to fettle the fuccefflion, 379. this greatly em-
barraffes her, ib. 380, 381. she fooths and gains her Parlia-
mnent, 382. endeavours to accommodate her differepces with
Mary, 389. writes to her to delay the trial of Darnly's mur-
derers, 407. interposes in her behalf when a prisoner, 437. her
ambassador is refused access to Q.Mary, ibid. the offers assist-
ance to the other nobles, 438. her deliberations concerning the
disposal of Q. Mary on her arrival in England, 461, 462. re-
solves to detain her there, ib. 463. her motives to this con-
dua, lb. 464. sends her letters of condolence, and gives or-
ders to watch her condua, ib. 464, 465. (he gladly accepts
the office of umpire between her and her fubjeds, 465, 466.
receives a very pressing letter from Q. Mary, 469. her precau-
tions against her, 470. appoints commilioners to hear Q Mary
and her accusers, 476. her important situation on that occa-
Sion, ib. her views in this affair, 477, 478. receives the Re-
gent's demands, 481 . removes the Conference to Westminster,
483. her mean artifices to get the evidence of Q. Mary's guilt
from the Regent, 490. treats her with greater rigour, 491,
writes a harsh letter to Q" Mary, ib. she dismisses the Regent
without approving or condemning him, 493. but secretly sup-
ports his party, ib. makes proposals to the Regent in her fa-
your, 497. Norfolk's project concealed from her, 5co. dif-
covers and defeats a rebellion in Q. Mary's favour, 506, 597.
resolves to deliver her up to the Regent, 510o. her great con-
cern at his death, ii. I. continues to encourage fations in
Scotland, ;, 3. her political condua with regard to Lennox,
6-9. is excommunicated, and deprived of her kingdom, &c.
by the Pope, 8. supports the King's party in Scotland, and
pames Lennox to be Regent, 9. proposes a treaty of accommo-
dation between Q.Mary and her fubjeas, 1o. procures a cel-
fation of hostilities, lb. sends proposals to Q. Mary, II. her ar-
tifices in the conduc of this affair, ib. z. appoints commis-
fioners to frame a treaty, 13. finds a pretence to render their
meeting fruitless, i4. a marriage proposed between her and
theD. of Anjou, 25. declares openly against the Queen's party,
z9. concludes a treaty with France, 31. her motives for ne-
gotiating a peace between the two parties in Scotland, 42, 43.
is jealous of Cecil's interview with Q.Mary, 50. negotiates a
treaty between Morton and his adversaries, 65. her answer to
K. James's demand of a pocfflion of an estate in England, ib.
166. a marriage between her and the D. qs Alencon propofel,
69. interposes in behalf of Morton, 74. her measures in or-
der to save him, 76, 77. countenances the conspirators at
Iuthven, 92. is alarmed at a conspiracy against her, i I, 1 2.
the designs of Q. Mary's adherents against hgr, 113. endea-
yours to recover her interest in Scotland, and gains Arran to her
interet, 1 1 4. amufesQ_.IMary with a fruitless negotiation, 17".
a new confpirazy againit her, ibid. an association formed for
her defapce, I i, p~ . her suspicions of Q Mary, 1 gr , ler

' : *'

"

** '

.. ' * " 'jC

life endangered by a conspiracy, 2zg. this how discovered
and prevented, 126. occasions an extraordinary statute for her
preservation, ib. is in a dangerous situation from the progress
of the holy league, 131. endeavours to form a confederacy
of the Protestant Princes, ibid. 132. and to proceed with ri-
gour against Q.Mary, 133. advances her interest in Scotland,
and proposes a league with it, ibid. 134. fettles a pension upon
K. James, 134. concludes a treaty with Scotland, 140. account
of Babington's conspiracy against her, 142-146. her diffi-
mulation after Q.Mary's convi&ion, 16t, I62. her answer to
K. James's intercession for her, 164. her farther dissimulation
and anxiety, 167. signs the warrant for her execution, 168.
her speech to Davison on that occasion, ib. affeas to lament
Q.Mary's death, 178. several marks of her artifice in that as-
fair, ib. 179. the endeavours to sooth K. James, 180. pro-
vocations given by her to Spain, 189, 190. prepares to meet
its resentment, 190, 191. endeavours to lecure Scotland, ibid,
tries to prevent K. James's marriage, 199. solicits him to treat
conspirators against him with rigour, 21 . evades the decision
of K. James's light of Cucceion to the Crown of England, 244.
245. is difgufled at several of his proceedings, 246, 247.
discovers his correspondence, with thePope, ibid. frefih grounds
of her suspicion, 273. her condu& with regard to the Earl of
Essex, ibid.-279. her irresolution concerning his death, 279.
and great concern after it, ibid. receives ambassadors from K.
James with regard, and increases his subsidy, 286. her lall ill-
ners, 283. conjecures concerning the causes of her melancholy,
284-286. her death, 286. and characer, 287, 288, de-
clared the K. of Scots her successor, 289. some of her letters,
Appendix-327. 351. 362, 363. 368. 380. 382. 387. 406.

,lpbin]fon, secretary to K. James VI. deceives him into a corre-

Tpondence with the Pope, ii. z48. is tried and found guilty of
high treason, ib. and pardoned on the Queen's intercession, ib.

England, the English seize and detain King James I. of Scotland

long a prisoner, i. 34. the nobles there humbled, 38. had
early twohoufes of Parliament, 80. they invade Scotland, 108.
their depredations there, Ilo, 11 . a peace between England,
France, and Scotland, InI. invade Scotland again, I18. gain
a great victory, 119, 120. it proves of little advantage to
them, I z I. they force the Scots into a closer union with France,
122. conclude a peace, 126. an Englifih fleet arrives in Scot,
land to assist the congregation, zzz. a peace concluded be-
tween them, 223, a224. they enter Scotland and besiege the
French in Leith, 224. are several times repulsed, zz6. causes
of their bad success, ib. 227. articles of a treaty of peace,
235. they quit Scotland, 236. refleaions on the right offuc-
ceflion to their Crown, 257-260. the Parliament favours Q,
Mary's right of succession, 379. a league between England
and France, ii. 31. between England and Scotland, 140o. thp
national covenant adopted in England - 193

N n 4 Entails,

Entails, with what view introduced -- i. 22, 23
Epficopal government in the Chuich, some account of it, i. 248.

an attemp. to revive it, ii. 39. it is abolished by the Assembly,
86. juridi&lion aboliihed, 174. See Archbi/hops.

frrol, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spaniih faaion, ii. 191.

his offers of service to the K. of Spain, 196. appears in rebel-
lion, 198, is forced to submit to the King, 199. imprisoned
for a short time, ibid. joins in another conspiracy, zoq. is
summoned by the King to surrender, 210. offers to submit to
atrial, zi2 . sentence pronounced against him. - 216

Er/kine of Dun, is employed by the Queen Regent to deceive the

P oteftants, i. 175. his resentment of this usage ibid.

----Lord, governor of Edinburgh Caflle, a&s a neutral part

between the Queen Regent and the congregation, i. 214. re-
ceives the Queen Regent into the Castle, 226. is created Earl
of Mar, 289. See Mar.
.---- Alexander, has the chief direa!ons of the education of K.

James VI. ii. 56. admits some of the nobles to make com.
plaints to him against Morton the Regent, 58. is turned out
of Stirling Cafle by his nephew the Earl of Mar 6:

E/ineval, the French Envoy, endeavours to obitrua a treaty be.

tween England and Scotland - - ii 140

Fi.fx, Earl of, set up by the English papifts as a candidate for

the Crown, ii. 22z. heads a party in England, 273. his cha-
raaer, ibid. is greatly diftinguilhed by the Queen, ibid. 274.
favours the K. of Scots, 274. obtains the offices of Lord Lieui
tenant and Commander in Chief in Ireland, ibid. is unsuccess.
ful in that expedition, ibid. 27:, receives a harlh letter from
the Queen, 275. returns to England and is confined, ibid. is
tried and cenfuied, ibid. endeavours to spirit up King James,
276. his rash and frantic condua, 277. is again taken into
cultody, 278. his death, 279. his son and associates are reftored'
to their honours after the acceflion of K. James - ibid,

Europe, the slate of, at the beginning of the Sixteenth Century

i. 84

Excommunication, a terrible engine of the Popilh Clergy i. 148

F Elton, an Fnglifhman, fixes the Pope's excommunication of

Q.Elizabeih on the gates of the bilhop of London's pa.

lace - - - -

. ii. 8

fenelon, M. de la.Motte, sent by the French King to interpofe'

for K. James when confined by the Ruthven conspirators, ii.
96. is forced to return without success - ibid,

Feudal government, its origin, and ariflocratical genius, i. 15, 16.

s 8. causes which limited the power of feudal Monarchs, 17.
feudal vassals liable to few taxes, 18. a remarkable inflanceof
the feebleness of feudal government, 2o, as. the molt per.

feCa

fe& idea of the feudal system, how attained, 44 slate of it in
England, 77-79. and in Scotland - 79, go

Fife, a populous and powerful country much devoted to the con-

gregation, i. 22!. is destroyed and plundered by the French,
ib. the synod of, excommunicates the Archbiflhop of St. An-
drews for contumacy, ii. 139. they excommunicate the Popilh
Lords -- *-- 215

Forbes, Lord, with the Earl of Argyle, is sent against the Popiflt

Lords, ii. 220. are defeated by them ibid. 22z

Fora'nt, John de, his history of Scotland when wrote i. g
For/her, Sir John, warden of the English border, a feuffle be-

tween him and the Scots --- ii. 135

fotheringay Castle, Q. Mary's imprisonment, trial, and death

there ----- ii. 140-174

France, the consequences of the subversion of the feudal govern-

ment there, i. 85. a body of French arrive in Scotland to fp-
port the Catholics, I15. they reduce the castle of St. Andrews,
116. another party of them arrive there, 123, 124. their tranf-
a&ions there, ibid. 127. conclude a peace with England, I26.
their politic condua, z7, I28. they leave Scotland, 127.
their artifices in a treaty of marriage between the Dauphin and
the Q.of Scots, 1 57, 158. endeavonrs to expelthe French army
out of Scotland, 19o. another party of them arrive there and
fortify Leith, 198. they exasperate the people by their info-
lence, ibid. they are sent against the congregation, 220. they
destroy and plunder Fife, and are much harassed by parties of
the congregation, 221, 222z. are greatly alarmed by the arrival
of the English fleet, 222. they return to Leith greatly harassed
and exhautfed, 223. are besieged there by the English and the
congregation, 226. they gain several advantages, ibid.-22zz8.
their motives for concluding a peace, 230. negotiations for that
purpose, 231, 232. articlesof the treaty, 233, 234. theyleave
Scotland, 236. the French advise Q. Mary to moderate mea-
fures, 253. their proposals by an ambassador rejeaed, 254.
they agree to Q. Mary's marriage with Lord Darnly, 319.
the licentiousness of their morals - 397

.--King of, a copy of his direaions sent to Scotland, App. 419.
Francis 1. gives a check to the ambitious projeas of Charles V.

i. 89. his fidelity to the Scots, 1tI. his death 115

.----- II. comes to the crown of France, i. '93. his charac-
* ter, ibid. 245. is guided by the Duke of Guise and Cardinal

of Lorrain, ibid, be treats the Protefitants with great rigour,
a1. his death - --- 245

G Ifforas, Dodor and Gilbert, their notion concerning the

lawfulness of killing heretical excommunicated Princes,

- ii. r42. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q Elizabeth, ibid.

Gilbert being gained by Walsingham betrays his aflibiates, I45. is

is employed to carry on a foreign correspondence with QMa,
ry - -- 146, [47

Glamis, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for witchcraft i. 69
- Lord, chancellor, intimates the King's order to Morton

to surrender the Regency, ii. 59. is killed in a rencounter at
Stirling -- - 6
- the tutor of, joins the conspirators of Ruthven, ii. 89.
his bold speech to K. James, 91. he, with the other confpi-
rators, seize the Castle of Stirling and ereA their flandard, 106.
he is attainted, and his eflate forfeited 1 5

Glafgaw, bilhop of, a note of his concerning the Queen of

Scotland's dowry, Appendix - 4'1

Glencairn, Earl of, joins the Ruthven conspirators ii. 89
Glenlivat, the battle of - ii. zz2
Gordon, Sir John, a fcuffle in the fireets of Edinburgh between

him and Lord Ogilvy, i. 285. being confined for it, he makes
his escape, 286. when ordered by the QOeen to surrender
himself, he takes up arms against her, ib. 287. is defeated,
and, together with his brother, made prisoners, 290. he is
beheaded and his brother pardoned -- 29

i-- Lord, set at liberty - i. 336
--- Sir Adam, exerts himself for the Queen's interest in the

north, ii. 30. his charader and good condu& as a soldier

32, 33

Gowrie, Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize the King at Ruth-

ven, ii. 89. is vilited and pardoned by the King after his es-
cape, 99. becomes fufpeted, and is ordered for France, 106.
delays his voyage, and is taken into custody, ibid. he is tried

and executed 1- 07

- John and Alexander, sons of the above, their characer

and conspiracy, ii. 25z1. the surprising circumfiances of that
remarkable tranfa&ion, 252-256. several different conje-.
tures concerning it, 257-268. their dead bodies brought into
Parliament and condemned, 269. their estates and honours
forfeited, and name abolilhed for ever, ib. different accounts
of this affair publifled, but not satisfactory, 270-272. See
Ruthven.

Graham, Sir David, of Fintry, accused of a conspiracy with the'

popfhl Lords in favour of Spain, ii. 210o. is conviaed and be-
headed - - 211

Gray, mailer of, some account of him, ii. 120zo, 121. he becomes

a favourite of K. James VI. ib, is gained to Q. Elizabeth's
interest, 121, betrays Q. Mary, ibid. persuades K. James to
write a harth and undutiful letter to her, 129. joins with others
in promoting Q, Elizabeth's interest in Scotland, 133. his
treachery when sent to intercede for Q.Mary, 167. his base-
ness discovered, he is disgraced, 18z. his vain attempt against
secretary Maitland, 183. acts in Italy as a spy from the court
of England, 246. a memorial of his for his Majefly, Ap-
pendix, 441, 448. to the secretary of state 44;

SGuys,

Guise, duke of, his violent counsels with regard to the Scots, i.

193, 194. is murdered at the siege of Orleans 296

------ his intrigues against Q. Elizabeth, ii. 112, I13. is a

principal promoter of the holy league, 131. 189. drives the
French King out of his capital ---

- 189

H

H Addingtoun, seized and forfeited by the Englilh, i. z122. is

relieved by the French 124

Hamilton, the rife of that family, i. 36. arbitrary proceedings of

Morton the Regent against it, ii. 67, 68. See Chatelherault.

f --- of Bothwelhaugh, taken prisoner at the battle of Lang-

fide, i. 470. is tried and condemned for rebellion, ibid. ob-
tains a pardon from Murray the Regent, by the interceflion of
Knox, 471. an account of his murdering Murray, 511, 512.
makes his escape, 5 1 z. is received in triumph at Hamilton, ii. i.

---- Mr. Patrick, the firit who fuffered in Scotland for the

Protelfant religion - i. I64
Iartford, Earl of, invades Scotland with an Englilh army, i.

o08. burns Edinburgh and Leith, ib. og9. is made Duke of
Somerset, and protetorof England, 118. See Somerset.

Hatton, vice-chamberlain of England, the argument by which

he prevailed on Q. Mary to plead at her trial ii. 153

Henry II. of France, sends forces to aflift the Scots, i. 115. a mar-

riage proposed between his son the Dauphin and the young Q.
of Scots, 123, 124. excites the Scots to invade England, 153.
his infamous impolition on Q. Mary in the treaty of marriage,
157, 158. persuades his son and Q. Mary to aflume the titles
of King and Queen of England, 170. his death 191

,--- III. degenerates greatly on his accefflion to the crown of

France, ii, r30. enters into a private negotiation with Q. Eli-
zabeth, I 32, I33. interposes feebly in behalf of Q. Mary 162

,--- VIII. of England, by his system of reformation becomes

formidable both to Papifts and Protestants, i. 70. proposes an
interview with King James V. ib. is disappointed by him and
declares war against Scotland, 71, 72. invades it, but is forced
to retreat, ibid. his importance as to the balance of power in
Europe, 89. his influence in Scotland how obtained, 92. his
schemes with regard to it on the death of James V. 98. were
ill-conduaced by himself, and odious to the Scots, gg99. attempts
to gain the Regency by great promises, 103. invades Sctauid,
108. this being ill-conduaed turns to no account, lo9. re-
ceives and rewards the Earl of Lennox, ib. encourages the
murderers of Cardinal Beatoun, 1t4. his death and charac-
ter, 115. his inconsistent condlcl, 169, excluded the Scotch
line by his tefiament - 390

FIerries, Lord, joins Chatelherault in opposing the Regent, i.

495. comes to a treaty with him, 496. he and the Duke are
omrnmitted prifpners t9 the castle of Edinburgh, 497. intimates

the

the King's order to Morton to resign the Regency, ii . ae.
count of his behaviour in Parliament, Appendix, 385. a letter
from him to Lord Scroop and bir F. Knollis 454

IHickford, secretary to the Duke of Norfolk, betrays him by dif.

covering his intrigues with Q.Mary ii, 26-28

fHighlands and Ijles, an attempt to civilize them by King James

V'I. ii. 281. regulations for that purpose, 282. three towns
endued with the privileges of royal boroughs ordered to be
built there - - ibid.

.Jodgfon, a prieR of Rheims, maintained the lawfulness of kil-

ling heretical excommunicated Princes - ii, 142

Hosme, Lord, sent by K. James VI. with a secret embassy to the

Pope -- -- ii. 249

Jroaward, See Norfolk.
HJun/dane, Lord, governor of Berwick, his interview with Arran

ii. i14, II5

J~untley, Earl, though a catholic, joins the reformers in opposing

the French army, i. 191. aflilts them only with fair promises,
213, 214. his further concurrence with them, zz228. some ac.
count of that family, 283, 284. his enmity against the young
Queen's miniflers, ibid. his resentment inflamed by an accident,
285. appears in an open rebellion against the Queen, 288. his
plot against her miniffers dilappointed, ibid. breaks out into
open rebellion, 289, is trodden to death in a battle, 290. his
family prosecuted with the utmost rigour, 291. several anec-
dotes and conjeaures concerning his plot, ibid. 292. is at.
tainted by Parliament, 300. the attainder repealed, and the
family reitored to eitate and honours - 411
--- his attachment to Bothwell, 406. 413. refuses to submit

to the Regent, 496. is forced to do it, 497. ats as lieutenant
to the Queen after the Regent's murder, ii. 6. is proclaimeda
traitor by Lennox the new Regent, 9. receives some money
and promises of affiltance from Spain, ibid. to. agrees to a
treaty with Morton the Regent, 46. isone of the heads of the
Spanish faction, 191. engages to the Prince of Parma to serve
the King ot Spain, 196. is imprisoned for a short time, 198.
ereAs a flandard of rebellion, ibid. but forced to submit to the
King, ibid. is again imprisoned, 199. is soon set at liberty,
ibid. receives a commission from the King, 206. his barbarous
murder of the Earl of Murray, ibid. is fummored to surrender
to justice, 207. flies to the mountains, 211. offers tofubmit to
a trial, ar . sentence pronounced againlt him, 216. refuses to
submit, 217. makes another desperate attempt, but is forced
to fly - - -----. 218, 2;a

JAMES I. was detained long a prisoner in England, i. 34.

troubles in Scotland during that time, ibid. 35. was much
improved by an English education, 47, 48. his policy on his re-

turn

turn tb Scotland, 49. his charaaer, ibid. 50. suppresses the
power of the nobles, ibid. they being exalperated, conspire
againfi, and murder him - 51, 52

fames II. troubles in Scotland, during his minority, i. 35, 36.

his attempts against the nobles, 52, 53. murders the Earl of
Douglas, 53. procures several good laws to be passed, 54, 55.
reduces the power of the nobles, 5 . his death 16

--- III. the slate of Scotland during his minority, i. 36. his

impolitic condut, 56, 57. kills one of his brothers, and is
invaded by another, 57, 58. is greatly insulted by his nobles,
59. his despicable minions, ibid. was the first that appointed
a itanding guard to his person, 60. the nobles are provoked to
take arms against him, 61. is killed in a battle against them,
ibid. his charaaer - ibid. 6z
----- IV. his chara&er, i. 62,. is killed in a battle against the
Englilh at Flowden - 62, 63
---,-- V. his minority long and turbulent, i. 36. tranfafions

during that time, 63, 64. aflumes the government while very
young, 65,. his characAer, ibid. 66. his scheme for humbling
the nobles, 66-69. is diverted from it by the clergy, 7 1, 72.
takes arms for the defence of his kingdom, 72. his nobles re-
futing to follow him, throws him into a deep melancholy, 73-
75. which is increased by a surprising defeat of his forces, 75.
his death, ibid. refleaions on his conduct, ibid. 76. he refused
an alliance with CharJes V. Emperor - 91
---- VI. his birth, i. 371. his baptism, 387. the care of him
committed to the Earl of Mar, 404. is by him preserved from
falling into the hands of Bothwell, 422. is crowned, 441. the
nobles oppressed by Morton the Regent, turn their eyes to him
for redreCf, ii. 56. his education and dispositions, ibid. 57. he
becomes suspicious of the Regent's power, 57. discovers
early a great attachment to favourites, 70o. adopts two of dif-
ferent dilpofitions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with great folemni-
ty, 72. is by his favourites engaged in unpopular measures, 88,
89. is seized by a party of nobles at Ruthven, 90. and forced
to receive complaints against his favourites, ib. 91. diffembles
with them, and banishes Lennox, 92. is brought to Stirling and
Holyroodhoufe, 94. his concern for Lennox's death, and regard
for his memory, 95. receives the French ambassador with great
refpea, 96. makes his escape from the conspirators, ibid. 97.
resolves to treat them with moderation, 99. visits Gowrie and
grants him a pardon, ibid. renews his fondness for Arran, ib.
1oo. is by him persuaded to violent meafu es against the con-
fpirators, too. his adfwer to a haughty letter from Q.Elizabeth
on their behalf, 0lo. is by her interposition rendered more vio-
lent against them, ioz. is provoked by the clergy, 104. his
steps to humble them, 107. his profusion to Arran, I16. sends
a new favourite to England against the banilhed lords, Izo.
devolves toe whole regal authority on Arran, 122, 123. writes
an undutiful letter to his mother, 129. is threatened to be difin-

9 herited

Iherited by her, ibid. receives a pension from Q Elizabeth, 134;
is reconciled to the exiled lords, 136. becomes popular by con-
cluding a treaty with England, 140, 141. his scandalous beha-
viour with regard to Archd. Douglas,. ibid. 142. his endea-
vours to save his mother's life after her condemnation, 163, 164.
is greatly incensed at her death, 180. arguments used by the
English ministers to pacify him, ibid. 181. is forced to fifle
his resentment, 182. attempts to unite the nobles, 184, 185.
is courted both by Spain and England, 90o, 191. resolves vi-
goroufly to adhere to the latter, 191. takes several iteps with
that view, ibid. his skill in the popish controversy, 192. wrote
a commentary on the Revelations, ibid, his maxims with re-
gard to popery, ibid. 198. his excessive lenity to conspirators
against him, 198. resolves to marry the Princess of Denmark,
199. arts used to prevent it, ibid. the marriage is confummat4
ed in Nortvay, zci. passes several months in Denmark, ibid<
refleaions on his condu& there, ibid. 202. his arrival in Scot,
land with his Queen, 203. indulges the Prelbyterians, 204,
the ill consequences of his lenity, ibid. zo5. his zeal againit
witchcraft, z25. is solicited by Q. Elizabeth to treat the con.
fpirators against him with rigour, 211 I, z 12. is fufpe&ed of con-
niving with them, 21z. is surprised and seized by Bothwell,
ibid. z13. and forced to comply with his terms, 213. his lenity
to Bothwell abused, ibid. 216. is fufpeted of favouring the
popith Lords, ibid. is in new danger from them, 218. dele-
gates his authority to Argyle and Forbes against them, 22o,
goes in person against them, 221. wastes their lands and gar-
rifons their castles, ibid. his right of the fucceflion to the crown
of England opposed by the papifts, 222. his lenity to them in-
cenfes the clergy and people, 226, z27. is much provoked by
the obstinacy of the clergy, 229. gives orders against them, 232.
is much iniulted, and in great danger at Edinburgh, 232-2-35.
leaves Edinburgh and proceeds with severity against the citi-
zens, 235-239. acquires absolute dominion in ecclesiastical
affairs, z40, 241. strengthens his interest in parliament, by re-
storing the feats of the ecclefiaflics, 241-243. endeavours with
success to gain a party in England, 244. increases his reputation
by publishing his Bafilicon Doron, 245. is accused by Q.Eli-
zabeth of correlponding with the Pope, 247. this he denies,
and how accounted for, ibid. 248. other reports concerning
this, 248, 249. is at great pains to gain the Roman catholics,
249. his regulations with regard to the church, 250, z2I. the
mnyfterious affair of Gowrie's conspiracy, 251-273. his cau-
tious behaviour in regard to the Earl of Essex, 277. sends am-
bafladors to save him, 278. they arrive too late, z79. hereftores
his son and associates to their honours after his accefllion, ibid.
continues his intrigues in England, ibid. 280, 281. his interest
greatly firengthened there, ibid. endeavours to civilize the high-
lands and isles, 281, 282. is proclaimed King.in England after
the death of Q. Elizabeth, 289. is proclaimed likewise in Scot-

land,

land, 290. prepares for his journey to England, 291. enters
London, and takes poffeffion of the throne, 292. his charaaer
how different from that of Q. Elizabeth, ib. a letter from him
to Mr. Archibald Douglas, Appendix - 437

Inwernefi cafitle, refuses to surrender to Q. Mary, i. 288. it is

forced, and the governor punished - ibid. 289

Italy, the liberty of, how preserved - i. 86

K

K EITH, Sir William, sent to intercede for Q. Mary when

under sentence, ii. 163. letter from him to fecrecary Mait-

) land, Appendix - 437
Kent, Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence against Q.Mary exe-

cuted - -- ii. 70

Ker of Ferniherfi, ravages England on the murder of Murray the

Regent, ii. 2. his design, 5. has a fcuffle with the Englilh, 135

- Geo. brother to L. Newbottle, is discovered when ready to

fail to promote a plot in Spain, ii. 209. his scheme opened,
ibid. escapes out of prison - 212

Killigrew, Henry, his declaration on the peace, Appendix 413
Kings, feudal, the most limited of all Princes, i. 15. general

causes of this, 17. their revenues were but small, ib. 18. had
no flanding armies, 19. and jurifdiaion limited, 20. means
used to extend the royal authority, 39. their jurifdiAlion en-
larged, 41. the extraordinary influence of the Scottish Kings
in Parliament, 76. the reason of this -- ibid. 81

Kirkaldy of Grange, one of the murderers of Beatoun, is recalled

by the Q. Dowager, i. 55. his attainder reversed in Parlia-
ment, 300. offers to fight Bothwell in single combat, 42.8. his
interview with Q Mary, in name of the confederate Lords,
429. rescues Maitland from confinement, 506. labours to iup-
port the King's authority, and reflore harmony after the mur-
der of the Regent, ii. 3> 4. accedes to the Queen's party, 4.
provides for a siege by increasing his garrison and fortifying
Edinburgh, 18. proclaims Lennox's authority unlawful and
usurped, ibid. attempts in vain to prevent a meeting of the
Parliament, 19. forms a scheme for furpriling the King's
party, 22. is at first fuccefsful, but afterwards defeated, 23, 24.
comes near to an agreement with Mar the Regent, 36. a treaty
with Morton breaks it off, 43-45. fires upon Edinburgh from
the cattle, 45. is besieged by the Regent, assisted by the Eng-
lilh forces, 47. is forced by mutiny of the garrison to capitu-
late, 48. surrenders to Drury the English general, ibid. is by
order of Q Elizabeth delivered up to the Regent, 49. he and
his brother are executed - ibid. ;o

Knollys, Sir Francis, sent by Q. Elizabeth with letters of condo-

lence to Q Mary on her arrival in England, i. 464. some of
his letter, Appendix, .-- 386-388-393

Knox, John, a famous reformer, his charater, i. 130, after being

-some time abroad, heis recalled by the persecuted Protestants,

176.

176. inflames the multitude at Perth with rage against the Pa;
pills, ibid. his notion concerning the government of women
whence, 182, 183. his residence fixed in Edinburgh, I87. com-
plains of the lukewarmness of the reformers, o202. his opinion
to the convention of reformers that it is lawful to refifl and de-
prive tyrannical Princes, 205. animates and revives the de-
fponding Congregation, a 1, 216. complains of the neglef of
the reformers in providing maintenance for their preachers,
242. recommends the Geneva model of Church Governmentk
249. proposes fuperintendantsin the church, 250. composes the
first book of discipline, 25 I. renounces friendship with the Earl
of Murray for his moderation, z77. is tried for encouraging a
mutiny among the people, and acquitted, 303, 304. popiih
judges concur in this decision, ibid. is publicly accused by
Maitland of preaching seditious doArine concerning resistance,
215. characters of the two difputants, ib. approved of several
instances ofaffaffination, 367. agrees to some regulations con-
rerning the elecion of Bilhops, ii. 40. his death and charac-
ter, 41, 42. his eulogium by Morton the Regent, 42. articles
sent by him to the general assembly, Appendix 410

L

L Angfide, the battle of .-.- 457

Laureau, cardinal, is lent as a nuncio from the Pope with

a present to Q.Mary of Scotland, i. 383. is flopped at Paris*

384

League, holy, a confederacy of Roman catholics to called, ii. 131.

was universally agreed to by them all over Europe ibid.

Learning, the revival of, promotes the reformation i. 139
Leicefler, Earl of, appointed a commifflioner to the conference at

Weftminifer - . i. 486

Leitb, burnt by the Engliflh, i. zo9. fortified by the French, 198.

besieged by the English, zi5. Q Mary lands there from
France, 263. the superiority of it granted by her to Edinburgh,
342. is seized and fortified by Morton the Regent ii. 18

Lenox, Earl of, arrives in Scotland from France, i. ioz. is much

courted by cardinal Beatoun, ibid. his pretensions to the fuc.

[ cellion, how founded, lo5. resents Beatoun's deceitfulness to

him, o106. heads the reformers and the advocates for the Eng.
lifh alliance, 107. surprises the Regent and cardinal, ibid. is
outwitted by the cardinal, ibid. 108. continues alone in the
intereflt of England, ro9. is forced to fly to that court, where
he is tewarded, ibid. is married to a niece of K. Henry's, by
which he became father to a race of Kings, ibid. his claim
to the fuccefflion, 309. is imprisoned for a secret correspondence
with Q.Mary, 3 10o. is invited secretly by her to return to Scot.
land, ibid. arrives in Scotland, and is received with great fa.
miliarity by her, 312, 313, his forfeiture is repealed, and he is
reltored to his cftate and honours by the Parliament, 3'3. his

lady

lady sent priobner to the Tower of London, 32;. and treated
with rigour, 3 30. he infills on the prosecution of his son Darn*
ly's murderers, 403. charges Bothwell with it, ibid the prose-
cution is hurried, 405. he craves a delay, which isrefufed, 406,
407. he is left alone in it. ibid. solicits Q. Elizabeth's interest to
obtain a delay, 407. insists on it by proxy at the trial, but is
over.ruled, 408, 409. being apprehensive of danger he flies to-
wards England, 410. his counters accuses Q. Mary of the mur-
der to Q Elizabeth, 467. he appears at the conference at Weft.
minfler, and accules Q. Mary of the murder upon oath, 488.
returns to Scotland protected by an Englith army, ii. 6. is elec-
ed Regent, 9. his progress against the Queen's party, ibid. ap-
points commifllioners to frame a treaty with those of the Queen,
13. surprises Dumbarton cast!e, 15-17. joins the Farl of Mor-
ton at Leith, 18. holds a Parliament in the Canongate, 19.
another at Stirling, zz. he is surprised and killed there 23

Lenox, lord Aubigny, his character, ii. 71. joins with the King's

other new favourite to undermine Morton, ibid. renounces Po-
pery, 73. Q.Elizabeth demands him to be removed from the
privy council, 74. is accused by her ambassador, 78. Arran
tries in vain to supplant him, 84. is commanded by K. James
at the request of the nobles to leave the kingdom, 92. puts off
his departure on various pretences, 93, 94. returns unwillingly
to France, where he soon dies, 9). his memory vindicated and
much regarded by the King, 95. died a Protestant ibid.
--- Earl of, left as the King's lieutenant in the north after

dispersing the popthl Lords - ii. zz

Leslie, Norman, murders Cardinal Beatoun, i. x 2, I13. he and

his associates keep poffeffion of the castle of St. Andrew's, 113.
makes a truce with the Regent, 114, 115. are encouraged by
Hen. VIPi. ibid.

--- bilhop of Ross, is Cent by the Catholics in Scotland to

engage Q. Mary in their interelt, i. 252. his proposals to her
rejeced, ibid. zg3. his negotiations in England in favour of
Q. Mary, ii. 26. is confined long in the 'Tower, and after-
wards is banished England ------ 29

Lindsay, Lord, carries the proposal from the confederates to Q.,

Mary, that (he Ihould resign the government, i. 441- joins
the Ruthven conspirators --- ii. 89

Lochle'vin castle, Q. Mary committed a prisoner there, i< 434.

her escape from thence - 453
------ Lord, letters to and from him, Appendix 416
Logan of Riefalrig, an alleged accomplice in Gowrie's confpi-

racy, ii. 258, 259. is tried, and his estate forfeited long after
his death z 2s9, z6o

Lords confederate, associate againfi Bothwell and Q. Mary, i.

424. raise forces againit them, 421. publish the motives of
their conduct, 426. prevail on the Queen to surrender to them,
430. assume the title of Lords of the secret council and the
royal authority ----- 435

VOL. II, 0 o Lordi

Lords, popish, conspire against K. James, ii. 196. are treated by

him wilh great lenity, 198. form a new conspiracy, 2o9 the
King proceeds against them, 210o. more of his lenity to them,
214. fresh dangers from them, 218. they receive money from
Spain, 219. zeal of the clergy against them, ibid. are declared
guilty of treason and their estates forfeited, ibid. defeat the
King's army, 220, 221. are dispersed on the King's approach,
221. go abroad and give security to keep the peace, ibid. re-
turn to Scotland, and petition for leave to reside in their own
houses, 227. this granted by a convention of estates, ibid.
recant their errors and are absolved from excommunication,
240. relaple, and are again reconciled to the church of Rome,
ibid. are restored to their eflates and honours 241

Lorrain cardinal, gets some of the belf benefices in Scotland, i. 163
--- Princes of, their ambitious views, i. 168. instigate the

Dauphin and Q. Mary to take the titles of King and Queen
of England, 17o. resolve to invade England, ibid. and to
check the Reformation in Scotland, 171. the cardinal's great
influence over the young King, 193, 194. drives the Queen
Regent of Scotland to violent measures, 200. their violences
occasion a conspiracy againlt them, 231. are forced to with-
draw their troops from Scotland, ibid. they infuit the Scottilh
ambassador, 244. have great power over the young King and
Queen, 245. 246. are forced to contra& their views on the
death of the King - 247

Luther, a bold and principal promoter of the Reformation, i.

139. the rapid progress of his docrine - 140

M

M8 A OR John, hishifRory of Scotland, some accountof, i. q.

Maitland of L.ethington, secretary to Mary Queen Regent,

leaves her service and joins the Congregation, i. 214. his cha-
racer, ibid. 2t 5. is sent by them ambassador to Q Elizabeth,
216. sends them assurances of her proteaion, zzo. is sent by
Q. Mary to the court of England, 269. makes a concession to
Q. Elizabeth, ibid. 270. accompanies Q. Mary in a progress to
the north, 286. he is employed by Q. Mary todefire a erfonal
interview with Q. Elizabtth, 293. publicly accuses Knox of
preaching seditious docrine concerning refiflance, 315. inti-
mates to Q.Elizabeth the intention of Q. Mary to marry Darn-
ly, 322. prudently conceals herrefentment from Q. Elizabeth,
325. proposes moderate measures with regard to Q. Mary when
imprisoned, 439. attends the Regent when called on to accuse
her in England, 475. he disapproves of this measure, ibid. his
intrigue with the Duke of Norfolk, 480. 498, 499. is impri-
foned by the Regent, 505. is relieved by Kirkaldy, and secured
in the cafle, 506. proposes a coalition of the two parties after
the murder of the Regent, ii. 3. accedes to the Queen's party,
4. is deprived of his office of iecretary, and proclaimed traitor,

9. is

9. is attainted in a Parliament of the King's party, 19. agrees
with Mar, 36, 37. his views in refuting a reconciation with
Morton the Regent, 43, 44. rejects overtures of a treaty with
him, ibid. is besieged by him in the cattle of Edinburgh, 45. is
forced to capitulate and surrender to the English general ,8.
to avoid the Regent's resentment he dispatches himself, 50.
several of his letters, Appendix ii. 403. 437

Maitland, Sir John, is made secretary for Scotland, ii. i'3. con-

curs with others in promoting Q. Elizabeth's irerelt there,
ibid. attempts against him by Capt. J.mes Stewart, late Ar-
ran, 18z. they prove abortive, anid he is advanced to be chan-
cellor, 183. an attempt to remove him from that office, fruf-
trated, 98. his death, 223. a copy of verses in honour ot him
wrote by the King - ibid.

Mar, Earl of, that title conferred on the prior of St. Andrews,

i. 285. accompanies the Queen in a progress to the north, 286.
he and his associates narrowly escape ass ffin.'ion, 287, z88.
is created Earl of Murray, 289. See Murray
- the title is conferred on L. Erikine, 289. the person of

the young Prince put into his hands, 404. his resolution in
preserving him from Bothwell, 422. is chosen Regent, ii. 24.
labours to bring about a general peace, 36. is thwarted by
Morton and his associates, ibid. 37. dies of melancholy, 37.
his charaaer, ibid. his merit and integrity was acknowledged
by both parties - ibid.

-- the young Earl, being imposed on by Morton, turns out

his uncle from the caitle of Stirling, ii. 6z. joins the Ruthten
conspirators, 89, 9o. he with the others seize Stirling castle,
and erea their ltandard, 10o6. is attainted and his eflate for-
feited, I t 5 is pardoned, and restored to elfate and honours 137

March, tountefs of, her infamous marriage with the Earl of Ar-

ran - - ii. 83, 8,..

Mary of Guise, Q.Dowager of Scotland, takes a considerable

Ihare in the government, i. 122,. is much adcitied to the French
interest, ibid. projeas a marriage of her daughter to the Dau-
phin of France, 123. becomes inltrumental in promoting the
Reformation, 132. aspires to the office of Regent, ibid. 133.
promotes difaffeaion to the present one, and favours the retor-
mers, 133, 134. visits the court of France, 134. returns to
Scotland to take poffeffion of the Regency, 135, after rome op-
position (he obtains it, 137. confers several offices of trult upon
frangers, I o, 151. proposes to lay a tax upon land, I2z. is
forced to drop it, ibid. tries in vain to excite a war with Eng-
land, 153. the nobles vigorously oppose her measures, 154.
treats the reformers with great refpea, 15;. obtains a con-
cession from the Parliament in favour of the Dauphin, 161. her
artful management of the reformers, 162, i6i. beftows the va-
cant benefice· on foreigners, 163. (he alters her conduot totne
reformers, 167. remonftrances against the violent m afures of
the Princes of Lorrain, 172. is persuaded by them to perse-

0 o z cute

cute the reformers, 173. her ralh answer to their remonpfrane~,
ibid. 174. summons their preachers to appear before her, 174.
breaks a promise (he had made them, 175. marches with an
army againit them, '77, concludes a treaty with them, !78.
this (he again breaks, 179. her severity at Perth, ibid. her
schemes discovered, ibid. 180. (he goes to attack them, 18s.
has again recourse to negotiation, 182. (he is startled at their
demands and gets time to answer them, 183. violates another
treaty, 184. lores Perth and forced to abandon Stirling and
Edinburgh, the retires with precipitation to Dunbar, ibid. 185.
marches to attack the reformers at Edinburgh, 188. gains time
by her artifice, ib. 189. makes another treaty with them, 189.
her artifices to undermine the prior of St. Andrews, 197. the
absurdity of her scheme, ibid. 198. gets a reinforcement of
French troops, who fortify Leith, 198. fle ditregards a remon-
firance of the reformers, 199. is influenced by French coun-
fellors, and perfoaded to violent measures, zco. retires to Leith
on the approach of the reformers army, 2zo. her prudent and
artful condu& there, ib. her haughty and imperious anfiver to
a freth remonltrance from them, 203. is, by a convention of
them, deprived of her office of Regent, 205. the foundation of
this sentence, ibid. 206. foments differences among them, 209,
210. is deserted by her principal secretary, 214. sends French
troops against the reformers, zzo. retires into the cafile of
Edinburgh on the approach of the Englilh, 225. her deathand
charader, 229. repented of her violent measures, 230. listened
to the inftrualions of a reformed preacher ibid.

Mary Queen of England, her persecuting reign, i. 137, 138. her

death -- 64
- Queen of Scots, born, i. 95. a proposal to marry her to Ed.
VI. 98. (he is demanded by Henry VIII. 99. her marriage
to the Dauphin of France proposed, 123. a treaty for that
purpose concluded, Iz4, iz5. she is sent to be educated in
France, IzC. the fatal consequence of this, ibid. is imposed
on by the artifices of the French in the treaty of marriage, I57.
her marriage celebrated with great pomp, 158. they take the
title of King and Queen of England, 170. she makes concef-
fions to the Congregation, 232, Z33. declares Q. Elizabeth's
right to the crown of England, 235. she acquires an entire
ascendant over her husband, 24z. (he is overwhelmed with
great afflicion on his death, and retires to Rheims, 247. the is
invited by the convention to return to Scotland, 252. an emif-
fary from the catholics in Scotland proposed violent measures to
her, ibid. (he is determined to moderation by the French and
the prior of St. Andrews, ib. 253. is prevailed on to prepare
for her return to Scotland, z55. the origin of the discord be-
tween her and Q. Elizabeth, ibid. 256. her pretensions to the
crown of England, 257. is envied on account of her beauty,
260. demands a safe condut& from Q. Elizabeth, which is re-
fused, 26z. leaves France with great reluftance, ib. 265. Jands

2 at

at Leith, 263. is much affeted by the change of her titnation,
ib. several diladvantages attending her acceflion, ib.-z65.
some circumltances to her advantage, z65, 266. her accom.
plifhments us body and mind, ib. the servants of her chapel in-
fulted, 266, 267. procures the free ex rcife of her religion,
267. issues a proclamation in favour of the Protestants, 268.
employs them only in the administration, ibid. attempts to gain
Q.Elizabeth's favour, 269. makes a concession to her, 270.
which is rejected, 271. (he makes her public entry into Edin.
burgh, ib. an insult offered to her religion on that occasion, ib.
272. dilcourages the attempts of the papifts to gain her favour,
273. her aversion to the family of Hamilton, 274. makes a
progrcfs into the north, 286, 287. her ministers narrowly et-
cape aflilination, 287, 288. is refused access to the cafile ofIn-
vernefs, 288. when in the 'utmoft coniternation is relieved by
the Monros and other Clans, 288,289. her forces defeat Hunt-
ley's rebellion, z90o. he defres an interview with Q Eiizabeth,
293. negotiations concerning her marriage, 294. is iolicited by
different Princes, 295, 296. her deliberations concerning it,
Z96. is forced to bear the authoritative behaviour of Q. Eliza-
beth, 298, 299. to please her fubjef6s, determines againfi a so-
reign alliance, 299. determines not to ratify the treaty of Edin-
burgh, 300. fuwther negotiations for her marriage, 304. dif-
covers the views of Catharnne of Medicis, ibid. 305. Lo' d Ro.
bert Dudley recommended to her as a husband by Q. Eliza-
beth, 305. she is highly offended at this, 306, diffembles with
Q.Elizabeth, ib. 309. entertains thoughts of marrying Lor4
Darnly, 309. she recalls Lennox, 3 to, is affronted at a letter of
Q. Elizabeth's, 312. her indifference as to the reformed, and
teal for the catholic religion, 314. is taken with Darnly at first
fight, 317. is greatly moved at Q. Elizabeth's insulting crafti-
ness, ib. 318. negotiates with thecourt of Rome foradsfpenfa-
tion to marry Darnly, 318, and the content of the court of
France, 319. impoles on Randolph. but applies to Q .Eliza-
beth for consent to her marriage, 322, which the affeas to re,
ftfe, 323, in resentment the pr3pofes to fend an angry message
to Elizabeth, which Maltland prevents, 325. justifies her con.
duc to the Englifhambaffador, ib, 326. endeavours to get Mtr-
ray's consent, 327: courts the pope's protedion, and receives a
fublidy from him, 328. her great address in gainlng the consent
of her fubjeas, ,29. 330. prevents a plot against Darnly, 33I»
summons her vassals to take arms againli Murray, 332. and him
toappear before her,334. her marriage with Darnly celebrated,
335. she confers the title of King ot Scots upon him, ib. this
step censured, ib. her resentment agamnft the malecontents, 336.
she marches d.ainit them, 337. rejeds the inteicedfion ot Q,
Elizabeth in their beliait, Ib. continues her march against the
rebels, 338. her condutt and courage on that occasion, ib. 339.
drives them out of Scotland, 33<. her runner reit t'cnt
Sgainlt them, 340, 341. has recuurfe to several devices to raise

0 o money,

money, 34¶, 342. her profperlty promotes her religion, 343"
he deliberations concerning the exiled Lords, 345. deter-
mines to treat them with lenity, 347. is diverted from this
by her religion and French influence, 348, 349. this the source
of her after-mlfortunes, 350. her inrentoi. to reflore popery,
351. is disgusted with Dar ly's insolent behaviour, 352. her
familiarity with Rizio offin-ls the King, 355. vwndicated
from any criminal correspondence with Rizio, 316, 357. uses
her uimofl endeavours to prevent his murder, 159. (he is con-
fin d by tht conspirators, ibid. (he gains the King, and es-
capes from them, 360. is reconciled to the exiled nobles, 361.
her hatred to D. rnly increases, 368, 369. and favour for Both-
well commences, 3 9. extingurlhes some domestic feuds among
the noble>, 371 is aelivered of her son James VI. in the Castle
of Edinburgh, ibid. invites several foreign princes to his bap-
tifm, 372z. continues to treat Darnly with negle8, ibid. her
attachlent to Bothwell increases, 373. prevents Darnly's in-
tendeu flight, 375, 376 visits the borders, 377. an instance of
her regard for Bothwell on that occasion, ibid. how fherival'd
Q. E'izabeth, 378. her right of fucceflion favoured by the
English parliament, 379. she endeavours to avail herself of that
opS ortunity, 381 382. she takes an extraordinary itep in fa-
vour of popery, 383. receives a present from the pope, but
flop his nuncio atP ri', 384. endeavours to procure a better
fubfiflence for the reformed clergy, ibid. 385. her aversion to
the King excefllne, becomes melancholy, ibid. (he declines a
divorce from him, 386. goes to Stirling to celebrate her fon's
baptism, 387. is greatly offended at the King's behaviour on
that occasion, 388. restores the poprfh e-clefialticaljurifdiaion,
39 , 393. her negleA of the King during his sickness, 395.
the breach between them becomes irreparable, ibid. 396. (he
vlfits him at Giafgo.v, 396. the motives of her diffimnulation on
that occasion, ib. 397. prevails on him to come toEdinburgh,
399. her suspicious behaviour to him there, ibid. 400. issues a
proclamation for discovering his murderers, 401. is supposed to
have bten accessary to it, ibid. 402. is charged with itabroad,
as well as at home, 402. goes to visit her son at Stirling, 417.
is met on her return by Bothwell, who seizes and carries her to
Dunbar, ibid. 418. this supposed with her consent, ibid. is
conduted to Edinburgh, 419. and married to Bothwell, 420.
sends an aro ogy to the courts of France and England, 421.
her condua causes a general indignation agair ft her abroad,
4z3. is alarmed at a comb:nation of the nobles againfi her, 424.
(he publishes a manifeflo to vindicate her condut, 425. is con-
ducted to the caflle of Borthwick, 426. marches with Both-
well's forces aeainft the confederate Lords, 427. an attempt of
an accommodation proves vain, ibid. 428. is forced to fur-
render to the confeder tes, 430. is insulted by the soldiers and
mob, ;hid. 43 is carried to Edinburgh, where many abuses are
offered her, ib. is sent a prisoner to Loch:evin Laftle, 434. Q·.

Eilzabeth

Elizabeth interposes in her behalf, 436. the Englilh ambaffa.
dor is refused access to her, 437. various proposals among the
confederates concerning her, 438, 439. they oblige her to re-
sign the government, 439-441. different reasonings on this
measure, 442-445. is much moved with the freedom of
the Earl of Murray, 446. her party among the nobles be-
come dispirited, 448. her resignation of the Crown accepted
by the parliament, and her imprisonment declared lawful, 450.
her letters to Bothwell read, and she declared accessary to the
King's murder, ib. escapes from Lochlevin, 452, 453. ar-
rives at Hamilton, 45 3. is attended by mrny nobles and a nu-
merous army, 453, 454. an association signed in her defence,
454. her imprudence in hazarding a battle, 47,. her army
defeated by the confederates, ibid. her precipitate flight into
Galloway, 458. raflly determines to retire to England, 459.
goes thither againlt the advice of her attendants, ib. 460. ar-
rives at Carlisle, 461. writes to Q.Elizabeth, imploring her
good offices, ibid. receives letters of condolence from her, and
demands admittance into her presence, 464, 46q. this refused,
and why, 465. offers to submit her caule to QElizabeth, ibid.
is much deceiver in her expedation from this, 468. and offend-
ed on discovering the artifices of Q. Elizabeth, ib. 469. ear-
peftly solicits to be admitted into her presence, 469. the is car-
ried to Bolton Catle, 471. chagrined at finding herself a pri-
foner, 472. agrees to an inquiry into her condua, ibid. her
difflimulation with regard to religion, ib. commiflioners appoint-
ed to appear in her name, 475. her chief view in this affair,
476, 477. consents to moving the conference to Westminster,
483. ihe is carried to Tuthbury in Staffordfhire, 484. is much
offended at the regard flhewn the Regent, and recals her consent
to the conference, 485. the accusations againit her produced by
the Regent, 487. is accused likewise by the Earl of Lennox,
488,. her commiliioners refuse to answer, and dermand a per-
tonal interview, 488, 489. they protest against future proceed-
ings, 489. a suspicious circum(tance against her, ib. 4qo. her
commillioners withdraw from the meeting, 490. her resolute
answer to a harlh propolal of Q.Elizalbeth. 492. avoids any
farther progress in the inquiry, ibid. is enraged at the proceed-
ings, and proposes desperate measures, 493, 494. spreads chi-
mericalconjesures with that view, 494. proposes a divorce from
Bothwell, 498. is influenced by the D. of Norfolk's schemes,
ibid. exchanges many letters and love-tokens with him, 499.
consents to proposals from the English nobles, 50o. their views
in this tranlafion, 5oo--oz. a rebellion by her adherents
against Q. Elizabeth, 506. is removed to Coventry, 501!. Q.
Elizabeth thinks of delivering her up to the Regent, 5 to. this
projeAc how disappointed, ib. 5rt . accefhon ot several to her
party after the murder of the Regent, ii. 5, 6. they endeavour
to foment a war with England, ib. her authority proclaimed
at Linlithgow, 5. her parties defeated by the new Regent, 9,

0 04 , o

1o. she answers proposals by Q. Elizabeth, I . attempts ii
vain to get foreign assistance, ibid. I z. appoints commnifioners
to frame a treaty for her liberation, 13 this proving fruitless,
the is more firietly confined, 14. the invalidity of her refigna-
tion declared in a parliament held by her adherents, 19. aal of
parliament in England to curb her and her party, 24. lhe
looks for protefion from the King of Spain, 26. is denied the
privilege of an ambassador at the Court of England, 29. is
more close confined and watched, ib. proceedings againlf her
in England, 33. her nmtelet negleted by the E;cnch, 34. is
hurt by the Maffaere at Parin, 35, 36. her adnerenis divided
into two factions, 43. one of them joins with Morton the Re-
gent, 46. review of the charafters of her adherents ,ind oppo-
nents, 48, 49. her forlorn situation, 49. is carried to Buxton
Wells, 5o. loses several of her friends by death. 13 sends a
letter and presents to her son, 68. her meflenger, why dilmifed
without feting him, ibid. her uneafnef, at his confinement by
the Ruthven conspirators, 9;. complains to Q.Elizaetih of
her hard usage, ib. 96. and begs her interceilion for the King
her son, ibid. fhrogmoiton's conspiracy in her favour, IIl-
i 13 a fruit!efs negotiation with Q_ Elizabeth, 117. is alarimed
at an association in defence of Q bi)zabeth, I 19. is committed
to more severe keepers, 1 zo. betrayed by Lord GOay t',e Scotch
ambassador, 121, Izz. a flatute for the preservation of QEli-
zabeth, proves fatal to her, 1z6. is more rigorously treated,
327. her complaints to Q.Elizabeth disregarded, 28. is, by
the French ambaffador's minereft, removed to Tu:hbury, ilid.
is undutifully treated by the King her son. ibid. 129. her pas-
Lonate complaint to the French ambassador on that occasion,
129g. threatens to disinherit him, 130. several discoveries al.
leged against her, 146, 147. Ihe is guarded with unusual vi.
gilance, 149. her domeftbcs, papers, &c. are seized, ibid. &he
is conveyed to Fotheringay Cathle, ibid. deliberations concern-
ing the method of proceeding against her, 50o, I5 . is fufpi.
cious ofpoifon or private murder, i s , 1 52. vindicates herlelf to
the D. of Guise, ibid. the commiflioners for trying her arrive
at Fotheringay (,aftle, 12z. her spirited speech when refusing
to plead, ibid. 153 is at length prevailed on, 153. (he pro-
tests against the athority of the court, 154. the accusation
against her, ibid. her defence, 155!-57. her sentence, 158.
irregularities in her trial, 159. 'her sentence is confirmed by
parliament, ib. who demand the execution of it, 160. F.ance
ipterpofes feebly in her behalf, 162. the sentence against her
published, 164. the is treated with the utmolf rigour, 164.
her lait request to Q.Elizabeth, ibid. refuses the affillance of
a Proteltant EBihop or Dean, 166. artifices used to inflame
the people againfit her, i68, 169. her behaviour at her death,
170-174. fentirments of hiftoriahs concerning her, 174, 1-5.
her charaCter, 175, 176. her person deferibed, 177. is buried
firt at Peterborough, and afterwards in Weftminiter-Abbey,

. .ibid.

ibid. 173. letters from her, Append. 427. 451. 457. her
will, App. 429. obje&ions against her by Walsingham, App.
467. what coirfe to be taken with her, ibid. a Dissertation on
the genuineness of her letters to Bothwell. End of Vol. ii.

Maxwell, Lord, arrives from Spain, and prepares forces to join

the Spaniards, ii. 191. his followvers dispersed, he is taken
prisoner - - - - ibid.
fMelvil is sent by the French King to observe the motions of the

Queen Regent an' her adversaries, i. 192. sent to make up a
difference between Elizabeth and Mary, 312. brings about an
appearance of friendfhap between them, ib. is sent to inform
Q Elizabeth of the birth of K. James VI. 372. puts a letter in-
to the Queen's hand againlt her marriage with Bothwell, 416.
is forced to fly from court, ib. advises K. James to moderate
measures upon his escape from the Ruthven conspirators, ii. 99.
----- Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, his characer, ii. 54. zeal-

oufly oppoles episcopacy, ib. declines the civil jurildition in
ecclesiastical matters, 104. is forced to fly into England to
avoid perlecution - - - 1oS

.----- Sir Robert, sent by K. James to intercede with Q.Eliza-

beth for Q. Mary while under sentence, ii. 166. executes his
commiffixo with fidelity and zeal, I67. a memorial of his to
the King, Appendix - - - 446
--- Mafler of the household to Q. Mary, takes his last fare-

wel of her, ii. 172. her parting speech to him ibid. 173

)Mildmay, Sir Walter, flent by QElizabeth with proposals to

Q. Mary - - - ii. so, xx

Monluc, Bilhop of Valence, employed by the French to conclude

a peace with England and Scotland, i. 23 t, 232. terms agreed
to by him - - - 233-23j

Msontgomerj appointed Archbishop ofGlafgow. ii. 86. is refused

and excommunicated by the General Aflembly for his immoral
life - - - - ibid. 87

Montmorency, Conflable of France, endeavours to prevent the

Dauphin's marriage with Q Mary, i. 156. his prudent advice
to Henry II. 192. makes a slender appearance in favour of
Q: Mary - - - ii. 34

4Morton, Earl of, his irresolute condua as to the Reformation, i.

214. accompanies Q. Mary in a progress to the North, 286.
inltigates Darnly to be avenged of Rizio, 355, 356. takes the
diretion of that enterprise, 358. is admitted into the Queen's
presence, who promises him a pardon, 360. is forced to fly into
England, 362. obtains his pardon on Bothwell's intercession,
391. seizes a casket with letters from Q.Mary to Bothwell, 435.
he is, by Q. Elizabeth's inrerpofition, in favour with the King's
party, after the murder of the Regent, ii. 4. appointed one of
the commiflioners to treat with the Queen's party, 13. his de-
slands frustrate the meeting, ibid. 14. is entirely influenced
by the Court of England, 21. commands the King's forces at
Leith, 30. has several ikirmithes with the Queen's forces, ib.

closely

c'ofely befieges Edinburgh, and commits great cruelties, ib. a
iufpenfion procured by the English and French ambassadors, 32.
a coalition of parties prevented by him, 36, 37. he is chosen
Regent, 37. his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of Nor-
thumberland, 38. obtains the temporalities of the Archbishop.
ric of St. Andrews, 39. lab urs to procure a peace between
the two parties, 42. attempts in vnin to gain Maitland and
Kirkaldy, 43,44. makes a treaty with Chatelhetaultand Hunt-
ly, 45. gets poiTelfion of the Castle of Edinburgh, 48. his
severity to Kilkaldy and his brother, 49, 50. his adminiltra-
tion becomes odious, 5 1. his various methods of gratifying his
avarice, ibid. 52. connives at the dispute of the clergy, 54.
he irritates the nobles, 55. Argyll and Athol refute to an-
fwer his summons, ibid. makes a vain attempt against Lord
Claud Hamilton, 56. discovers the designs of the nobles against
him, and proposes to resign his office, 58, 59. his resignation
accepted by the King gives universal joy, 59, 60. obtains an
approbation of his conduct, and a pardon in ample form, 60.
continues to watch the motions of his adversaries, 61. is forced
to surrender the Call!e of Edinburgh, ib. resumes his authori-
ty, 62. rains the Caflle of Stirling, and a leat in the Privy
Council, 63. procures a meeting of the parliament at Stirling,
ibid. 64. his security ratified in it, 4.. forces are railed for
and against him, 6C. he is reconciled to his adversaries by the
intercellion of Q.Elizabeth, ibid. is fufpe61ed of foul play at
an entertainment at his own house, 66. his illegal proceedings
against the family of Hamilton, 67. the King's new favourites
undermine him, 71, 72. he endeavours to prevent them, 73.
QElizabeth ii terpofes in his favour, 74. is charged with being
accessary to the late King's death, 75. he is confined in differ-
ent prilons, 76. discourages an attempt to rescue him, ibid.
all his friends are turned out of office, 79. he is tried and
condemned, 81. his resolute calm behaviour and confeflion be-
fore and at his death, 81-83, his body is treated with igno-
miny - - - - 83

Murray, Earl of, late Prior of St. Andrews, goes with a handful

of men against Huntly, i. 290. by his great skill and courage
he gains a complete viEtory, ibid. his grant is confirmed by
parliament, 3co. cabals against him by LennoxandDarnly, 320o.
his aversion to Darnly and other Court favourites, 326. calls
Bothwell to fland a trial, ibid. his reasons for op1ofing Darn.
ly's marriage with the Queen, 327. he and his affocrates are
made the dupes of Q.Elizabeth's policy, 330. concerts to
seize Darnly and carry him to England, 331. this prevented by
the Queen, ibid. avoids affaflination intended him by Darnly,
ibid.-333. evidences of these plots, ibid. the Queen's vassals
are called to arms against him, 332. he is summoned to appear
before her, 334. is again summoned and outlawed on his non-
appearance, 336. is forced to fly with his aflociates into Argyle-
thi:e, 337. they are interceded for by Q. Elizabeth, ibid. are

pur.

sued by the Queen, and obliged to fly into England, 339*
they meet with unexpeaed ill-treatment from Q.Elizabeth, ib.
340. courts Rizio to intercede with the Queen for him, 346.
many of his old friends solicit for him, ib. 347. the Queen's
favour how intercepted, 348, 349. a Parliament is called to
attaintthem, 350, 35r. this how prevented, 352. heandhis
associates arrive at Edinburgh, 360. are graciously received by
the King and Queen, ib. are alarmed at the Queen's ercape,
but soon reconciled to her, 36I. he is appointed Regent du-
ring the minority of K. James VI. 441. his harsh behaviour in
a visit to theQueen, 446. the success of his wife adminifiration,
448. procures many of the Queen's party to join him, ibid.
449. gets the places of firength into his hands, 449. his office
of Regent confirmed by parliament, 450. his severe andhaughty
behaviour difgults several, 45 1, 452. his adherents in great con-
iternation at the Queen's efeape from Lochlevin, 454. his pru-
dentcondu& on that occasion, 455. defeats the Queen's army
at Langfide, 457. he improves this viaory, 470. his lenity
to the prisoners, ibid. he calls a parliament, 473. is called up-
on by Q Elizabeth to vindicate his condua, 474. he arrives
at York, 476. his views in this affair, 477. complaints of the
Queen's commifflioners against him, 478. he behaves with
great reserve on this occasion, 479. this part of his conduct
accounted for, ibid. 480. intrigues with the Duke of Norfolk,
480. his demands from the Engli(h commiflioners, 481, 482.
answers to the complaints of the Queen's commilioners without
touching on the murder, 482, 483. agrees to have the confer-
ence moved to Weftminfier, 483 is affe&ionately received by
Q. Elizabeth, which offends Q. Mary, 485. is prevailed on by
Elizabeth to accuse Mary of the murder, 487. produces his evi-
dences, 491. is dismissed by Q. Elizabeth without approving
or condemning his condua, 49z, 493. his party is secretly sup-
ported by her, 493. returns to icotland, and by his vigorous
conduct breaks the Queen's party, 495. he receives proposals
bo;h from Q.Elizabeth and QMary, 497. he disappoints Nor-
folk, 503, 504. an account of his murder, 5 11, 5 12. his cha-
rader, 512, 513. his death much lamented by Q.Elizabeth
and the King's party, ii. I. much anarchy the consequence of
it, 2. part of a letter of his, App. 396. his heir murdered by
the Eax! of Huntly - - - ii. zo6

N

NAuf, Secretary to Q.Mary, is Cent by her with a letter, and

presents to her son, ii. 68. why dismissed without feeing

him. ibid. is sent with offers of humble resignation to Q. Eli-
zabeth, 1 9. is seized and sent prisoner to London, 140. is
produced an evidence againlt her - - 158

Nervil discovers and prevents Parry's design to murder Q.Eliza-

beth - - - - ii. 126

Nobles

Nobles, their extensive power, i. zz, 23. become turbulent and

formidable, 24. their power greater in Scotland than in any
other kingdom, z2. the causes of this, 26-33. their power of
long duration, 38, 39. it becomes intolerable to the Princes,
ibid. they are humbled in France and England, ibid. but conti-
nue vigorous in Scotland, 39. discords among them encouraged,
4o. their jurifdiaion circumscribed, 41. are greatly mortified
by King James V. 66-69. are disappoint d in a scheme to thew
their resentment, 72. refuse to attend tne King into England,
73. they seize the revenues of the church, 241. refuse to part
with them to the reformed clergy, 242. a2S, 25z. dissensions
among them, z80, 281. a convention of them approve the
Queen's marriage to Darnly, 3z28. several of them recommend
Bothwell as a hulband to her, 413, 414. a strange combination
of them on this occasion. 414, 41 . a body of theim associate
against her and Bothwell, 424. their different views in this,
ibid. a party of them favours the Queen, 436. they are much
dispirited by the good condut of Murray, 448, 449. they are
much provoked by Morton the Regent, ii. 55. think of re.
dress from the King, 56. infuse suspicion of the Regent's
power into him, 57. a meeting of them by him, 58. a party
of them conspire against the King's favourites, 89. they seize
his person and drive them off, go90, ?x. their neglec of, and
ingratitude to the clergy, 138. the King attempts to reconcile
their feuds and unite them, 184. See Lords.

Norfolk, Duke of, appointed a commissioner to hear the cause be.

tween Queen Mary and her accusers, i. 476. forms a scheme
of mounting the throne of Scotland, 479, 480. intrigues with
the Regent and Maitland with that view, ibid. 481. he repre-
fents the demands of the Scots to Q. Elizabeth, 481, 482. his
farther negotiations with refpe& to Q Mary, 498, 499. en-
deavours to conceal his design from Q. Elizabeth, 499. is im.
posed on by the artifice of the Regent, ibid. 500, gets the
consent of many, of the Englilh nobles, 50o. his proje& ap.
proved at foreign courts, 5oz. is discovered and defeated by
Q.Elizabeth, 503, 504. flies to Norfolk, o50. he surrenders
on a second summons, and is sent prisoner to the Tower, ibid,
is set at liberty, and continues his intrighes with Q.Mary, ii.
26, is betrayed by his secretary, ibid. is seized with his de-
pendants, and accused by them, 28. is executed ibid.

Northumberland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in favour of Q.

Mary, i. 506. his scheme defeated, 507, 5o8. he is seized by

» the Regent, 50o9. is delivered up to the governor of Berwick,

and put to deatn at York - - ii. 38

Nottingham, Countess of, fuome account of the tranfadion con-

cerning the Earl ofEffex's ritg - - ii. 285

o

O Ctavians, their institution and extensive pdwers, il. 224.

they undermine the King's minifiers, ibid. become odious,

and a combination is formed against them, 225. being fplic
into faCtions, and envied by the courtiers, they resign their
commission - - - 241

Ogilie, Lord, has a fcuffle with Sir John Gordon in the fireets

of Edinburgh - - - i. 285

Olipbant, Maltter of, joins the Ruthven conspirators ii. 89
Orange, Prince of, sends an agent into Scotland, ii. 79. his in-

flru~tions, ibid. is affaffinated - - 131

D'Oi/el, commander of the French troops in Scotland, endeavours

to promote a war with England, i. 154. his design frustrated,
ibid. the number of troops under his command, 18o. initigates
the Queen Regent to violent measures against the Reformers,
ibid. is sent by Q. Mary to demand a fafe-condu& from Q.
Elizabeth, during her voyage to Scotland - 26z

P

P Afley, Abbot of, arrives in Scotland, i. roz. creates a sus-

plcion of the Earl of Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Regent,

103. is made Archbishop of St. Andrews - I16

Paris, the massacre of, ii. 34, 35. rejoicings of the Popish party

on account of it, 35. the coniternation and horror of the Pro-
teftants - - - ibid.

Parliament, the nature of their original conflitution, i. 76-79.

particularly thatof Scotland, 79-93, 236. a parliamentheld
on an extraordinary occasion, 236. a difiiculiy started and an-
fwered, 238. their proceedings with regard to religion, ibid.
239. condemn the Popish and approve the reformed doarines,
240. several other regulations of the fame tendency, ibid.
241. their validity called in question, 242. exceed their powers
243. their proceedings laid before the King and Queen, ibid.
244. a parliament in favour of Bothwell, 41o. passes an a& in
favour of the Reformation, ibid. 412. confirm the proceed-
ings of the confederates, 450. parliaments held both by the
King's and Queen's parties, ii. 19. another of the Qyeen's ad-
herents, ibid. attaint upwards of 200 of their opponents, 21,
a parliament at Stirling by theKing's party, 22. surprised by
the Queen's adherents, ibid. another at Stirling, 63, 64. one
at Edinburgh, 72. and on the King's being of age, 183, 184.
several new laws made there, 184. 187. the leffier Barons ad-
mitted into parliament - - - 187

Parry, Dodor, undertakes to murder Q.Elizabeth, ii. z25. is

encouraged by and gets absolution from the Pope, ibid. his
design how prevented, ibid. Ia6. is executed -. 126

Par/ons,

Parsons, a Jesuit, publishes a book in favour of the Infanta of

Spain's right of succession to the Crown of England ii. z22

PaJfuinades and Piaures, accusing BoLhwell of Darnly's murder,

i. 401, 402. 4 1. a law made against them - 411

Patten, William, his account of the Scottish ancient military

discipline - - - i. 120, 121

Pault, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q Mary's keepers, ii. 120.

his rigid severity to her, 127, 128. discovers her foreign cor-
refpondence, 147. his rude treatment of her, 165. refutes to
be concerned in privately affaffinating her, 269. a letter from
him, Appendix - - - 47Z

Pelle'v, Bishop of Amiens, is appointed to support the popilh in-

terIft in Scotland, i. zoo. drives the Queen Regent to violent
measures against the Protefiants - - ibid. 201

Perth, an infurreftion of the Reformers there against the Papifts,

i. 176, 177. its inhabitants are severely treated by the Queen
Regent, 179. a French garrison placed there, ibid. is besieged
and taken by the Protestants, 184. a great tumult there on ac-
count of Gowrie's conspiracy - - ii. 256

Philip II. of Spain, married to Mary Queen of England, i. 138.

reinforces his army with her troops, 153. his great power, ii.
131. joins in the holy league, ibid. resolves to invade and
conquer England, 190o. his preparations for it dilatory, 194.
his design frustrated, ibid. meditates an invasion of England
through Scotland, 195. intrigues with some Scottish Lords
with that view, 196. remits money to them - 219

Pinkey, the battle of - - - i. 19
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates Q. Elizabeth, deprives her of

her kingdom, and absolves her fubjeas - ii. 8

Polly, one of Babington's conspirators against Q. Elizabeth, ii.

144. discovers the plot - - - 145

Paltrot, a frantic zealot, affaflinates the Duke of Guise at the

siege of Orleans - - - i. 297

Pont, Mr. Robert, a minister, and one of the Lords of Seflion,

protests against laws oppressive to the Church - ii. IoS

Popery, where moil flourilhing, i. 140. what kind prevailed in

Scotland, 14i. was partly grafted on Heathenism, 186. is
much hurt by the congregation, 239. their docrines condemned
by Parliament, 240. the jurifdiAion of their courts abolilhed,
ibid. their worship prohibited, ibid. attempt in vain to gain
Queen Mary's favour, 273. the great influence of Popery, 349

Po'wer, the balance of, the great consequence of preserving it, ii.

8<, 86

Pref/yterian church government established in Scotland, i. 246.

is confirmed by King James VJ. - - 207

Proteflants, in France, violently prosecuted, i. 194, 195. are mo.

derate on Q Mary's arrival from France, 267. are employed
by her in the administration, 268. a fchemne for suppressing
them all over Europe, 348. a league formed for that purpose
ii, 131. Se Reformation.

R

R .Amnty, a favourite of K. James III. narrowly escapes the

fate of his associates, i. 59. is appointed t'aptain of the

King's guard, and created Earl of Bothwell, 60. See Bothwedl.

Randan, bieur de, employed by the French to negotiate a peace

with England and Scotland, i. 232. terms agreed on by him,

- 233, 234

Randolph, Tent to encourage the Congregation, i. ziz. con-

gratulates Q .Mary's arrival in Scotland, 269. urges the rati-
fication of the treaty of Edinburgh, ibid. is imposed on by
Q. Mary in the affair offer marriage with Darnly, 322. sent
into Scotland on the murder of Murray, ii. 2, 3. interposes
for Morton, 77, 78. flies from Scotland in the night, So. is
sent again there, and concludes a treaty with England, 144.
several of his letters, App. 318. 329. 331. 345. 353, 354* 3'9

Ratclif. See Sufix.
Reformation, its progress in Scotland, i. 129. account ofirs flrft

preachers, ibid. is much influenced by England, 130, 131.
two remarkable infiruments of promoting it, ibid. it makes
great progress, 137. causes contributing to promote it, 139.
its advantages over popery, 149. is favoured by the Q.Re-
gent, 155. an inflance of regard for it in Scotland, 156, 157.
the whole party not chargeable with Cardinal Beatoun's mur-
der, 165. a priest burnt for embracing it, ibid. 166. the re-
formers violently persecuted by the Archbilhop of St. Andrews,
ibid. are proteced by the Q Regent, 166. apply in vain to
the Popish clergy, 167, a pefiecution against them pushed on
by the French interell, 172, 173. the preachers summoned be-
fore the Regent, 174. they are deceived and declared out-laws
by her, 175. a riotous infurre&ion of them at Perth againti tle
Papifts, 176. prepare to defend themselves against the Q.een,
177, 178. concludea treaty with her which ihe presently breaks,
178, 179. they take arms againit the Queen, 180, i81. in-
sift on redrefing civil as well as religious grievances, 18. the
influence of the Reformat:on on liberty, ibid. they besiege and
take Perth, 184. they seize Stitling and Edinburgh, ibid. 185.
commit great violences on churches and monasteries, 185. their
condua how accounted for, ibid. 186. an inflance of their
moderation, 187. fix their residence at Edinburgh, ibid. the
Queen prepares to attack them, i8S. makes another treaty with
her, 189. are forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but allowed
the exercise of their religion, ibid. demand the expullion of
the French army, 190. are awareot their danger from France,
194. their party itrengthened, ibid. remooftrate against the
French fortifying Leith, 199. take arms in their own defence,
zoi. remonllrate again to the Regent, 2o3. are highly in-
cenfed at her hnperious answer, ibid. 204. by advice of a con-
vention deprive the Queen Dowager of the office of Regent,

I 205.

205. the foundations of this condu6l, ibid. 2o5. the growth'
of it encouraged by parliament, 450, 451. See Congregation.

Regalities, the ample jurifdiaion of - - i. 2z
Repledging, the privilege of, to whom belonging - i. zt
Revenge, encouraged both by cufltom and law - i. 40
Revenue, of the church, proceeding, of Parliament concerning

them * - - - - i. 24

Ridolphi, an agent for the Pope at London negotiates for QOMa-

ry, ii 26. his arguments with the D. of Norfolk 27, z8

Rizio, David, some account of him and his rife, i. 320, 321.

Ddrnly's conrexion with him, 322. his good offices courted
by Murray, 346. his great interest and familiarity with the
Queen, 353. incurs the hatred of Darnly, ibid. and of the
fiends of tne exiled Lords, 354. several concurring causes cf
this, ibid. 351. a combination formed to murder him, 355.
he is murdered in the Queen's palace - 358, 359

Romans invade Britain, i. z. give the earliest accounts of the

Scots - - - - ibid.

Roaf, Bilhop of, zealously promotes Queen Mary's interest at

London, ii. 27, 28. is confined to the Tower, and threatened
with copital punilhment, z8, 29. is set at liberty and banilhed
the kingdom, 29. some letters of his, Appendix 388, 409

.Ruay, a foreigner, made keeper of the great feal of Scotland, i.

150

Ruthwen, Lord, the murder of Rizio proposed to him by Darnly,

i. 355. heads the conspirators againfi him, 358. his part in
that tranfa&ion, ibid. 3 9. is admitted into the Queen's pre-
fence, who promises him a pardon, 360. did not repent of it
at his death - - -- 367

---- created E. of Gowrie, he and his associates seize the King,

and remonfirate against his favourites, ii. 90, 91. drive them
from him, ibid. their conduA approved in an assembly of the
lates. 93. the King efiapes from them, 97. by Arran's in-
fluence violent mealures aie determined against them, too. Q.
Elizabeth intercedes in their behalf, o101. are declared guilty
of high treason, 103. take refuge in foreign countries, ibid.
are harlhly treated by Q. Elizabeth, Izz. a reconciliation with
her breught about, 135, 136. return to Scotland, and are re-
conciled to the King, 136. their moderation on being restored
to their estates and honours, 138. their neglea of their friends
the Clergy - -- --- ibid.

---- that name abolished by Parliament, ii. 259. See Gowrie.
Ruathbven raid, what -- --- ii. 91

S Adler, Sir Ralph, appointed a commiifloncr to hear the cause

between Q. Mary and her accusers - i. 476

tadilands of Caouer, Lord St. John, Cent to ;ay the proceedings

of the congregation parliament before the King and Queea

ia

In France, i. 243. is coldly received and difmifred without a
ratification by them - - - 244

Savage, a Spanish officers his desperate refoltution to kill Q.Elit

zabeth - - - i*. 142, 143

Scotland, its ancient history fabulous, i. t. the origin of the Scots,

z. their history why remarkably obscure, 3. some account of
the writers of it, 4, 5. is divided into four periods, 5, 6. a re-
view of the third asra, 7. some account of the controversy con-
cerning its iandependency, ib.-z2. this the cause of great
animofities and much bloodshed, 13. the slate of Scotland when
Bruce began his reign, 14. it begins to have an influence on
the fate of diflant nations, 90, 91. influence as to the balance
of power, 91. ifate of Scotland at the birth of Qj Mary, 96.
is invaded by the English, and several places burnt and plun-
dered, io8, loq, much alienated from theEnglifh, n1o, Ill.
a peace concluded between England, France, and Scotland, I n.
tomputation of damages done by the English in Scotland, 1 1o0
I I1. a new breach with England, l16. is invaded by a great
English army, i18. the Scots are defeated with great flaugh-
ter, 119, 120o. their manner of fighting at that time, o20, Izar
a marriage agreed of their young Queen and the Dauphin of
France, 124, 1z5. they soon repent this step, 127. a fray at
Edinburgh occasions their utter aversion to the French,i z8,
129. this inflamed by another incident, 15o, 1 5 . they decline
a war with England, 153. fend representatives to witness Q.
Mary's marriage, 156; their care as to the marriage articles/
t17, 158. they refuse consent to the demands of the French,
159. four of their deputies fufpeted to be poisoned, 160.
'Which imuch increases the aversion, 161. grant the crown ma-
trimonial to the Dauphin, ibid. they apply to the English for
affi(lance against the French, 210, 216. an English fleet arrives
for that purpose, 222. conclude a peace with England and re-
ceive an English army, 223, 224. all parties agree in resenting
the French, 233. a treaty between England, France, and Scot-.
land, 231, 232. both Englilh and French armies leave Scot-
land, 236. they rejoice much at the death of the young King
of France, 247. fend to invite the Queen to Scotlandi, 25.
fejeA proposals of an ambassador from France, 253. 254. Rate
of Scotland on Q.Mary's return from France, 264. great
zeal of the nation against Popery, 267k the Scots brought into
contempt by Q Mary's condut, 423. in a miterable condition
after the murder of Murray the Regent, ii. zo2 slate of fauions
at that time in it, ib. z21. a league concluded between Scotland
and England, 140. a view of the revolutions of Scotland since
the acceflion of James VI. 293-3of. of the policy of the state,
293-299. and of the church, 299, 300. of the genius and
taste as to learning - - - 301-307

Scott of Buccleugh enters and ravages England after the murder

of Murray the Regent, ii, 2. the design of this 5

VOL, II. Pp Scroop,

Scroop, Lord, fe t to condole w;th, and watch Q.MV.ry on her

arrilv in England - - i. 264

S'ffn, Lord and court of, by whom first appointed, i. 43. the

i'refdent and one half of their number <,f the Clergy 144

S/ton Lord, allits the QueLn Regent in defending Leith i. 213
SlruSW/ry, Earl of, the charge o> Q(. Ma y's perlbn committed

to him, i 484, why removed so.n that oilice, ii. izo. is
appoinrtd .0o fee the sentence againtl her executed, 170. ]e.ter
from him and the Earl of Kent concerning her death, AS-
pendix - - - 475

Sinclair. EBPhop of Rors, a zealous Paipit, concurs as President

of the effion, in acquitting Knox of a charge of treason, i.

303

Somerset, Duke of, enters Scotland with a powerful army, i. I19.

is reduced to a very critical firnation, ibid. defeats the Scots
with great flwughter. ibid. this victory why of little advantage,
122 cabals againfi him at the court of England, force him to
return, ibid. is ruined by his enemies - 1z6

Spain, great warlike preparations there, ii. 199, 19o. See dr-

mado, the Infanta of, set up as candidate for the Crown of
E' gland ---- - - 222

Spanipl ambassador is ordered to leave England, for intriguing in

favour of Q. Mary - - ii. 29

Sprot, his dilcoveriss concerning Gowrie's consp.iracy, ii. 259-

261. is executed - -- 261

Stewart, James, prior of St. Andrews, is appointed to carry the

crown matrimonial to the Dauphin of france, i. 163, 164.
See St. Andrewus.

---- Efne, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in Scotland, ii. 70.

See Auligny.

---- Capt. James, his charadler, ii. 71. becomes a favourite

of King James, ibid. accuses Morton of the murder of the late
King, 75. is created Earl of Arran. See Arran.

--- Col. William, commander of the King's guard, contri-
- butes to his escape from the Ruthveu coufpirators, ii. 98.

seizes the Earl of Gowrie - - 106

----- Francis created Earl of Bothwell, ii. 196. joins in a

treafonalle correlpondence with the Popilh Lords, ibid. See
Bothvwell.

*---- all of that name combine in opposing the Chancellor,

ii. 213

Stirling seized by the Reformers, i. 185. a parliament there by

thiL King's party, i'. 22. is surprised by the Queen's adhe-
rents, and a great fray ensues - - ibid, 23

Strezzi, Leon, commands a body of French sent into Scotland,

i. 115, reduces and demolfhes the castle of S.. Andrews,
116. See France.

Surcefion, a remarkable statute concerning it - i. 117
Superintendents propafed in the Church of Scotland, i. 250. their

buinels - - - ibid.

6 Sfzx,

Su.ix, Earl of, one of the commiflioners to hear the cause betweeq

Q. Mary and her accusers, i. 476. assembles a powerful army
on the borders, ii. 3, 4. he and Scroop enter, and ravage
Scotland - - -

. 5

T

T AX upon land first proposed in Scotland - i. xSz

Throgmorton, Sir Nicholas, sent ambassador extraordinary

from Q. Elizabeth, to oppose Q.Mary's marriage with Darn-
ly, i. 324, 325 his interceflion for the exiled lords ts much
regarded, 346, 347. his enmity to Cecil, 347. is sent to ne-
gociate QN Mary's liberation, 437. is refused access to her by
the confederate% ibid. some letters of his, Appendix, 365,
366. 374. 378. 3?I. 383, 384.

---- Francis, is charged with a conspiracy against Q.Eliza-

beth, ii. I I. at firfi he denies, but afterwards confeffes it, ib.
II2. refle6tions on his confeflion, IIz, 113. is executed 114

Tichbourne designs to affaflinate Q. Elizabeth - ii. 144
TFreafon, persons guilty of it, tried after their death by the law of

Scotland - - ii. 259, z6o

U

V IL MO R ", a foreigner, made comptroller of Scotland,

i. 150o

Union of Scotland and England, the advantages of, ii. 298

W

ALL.ACE, Sir William, bravely asserted the liberty of
his country - - - i. st

tWalingham, secretary to Q Elizabeth, sent ambassador to King

James VI. ii. roz. returns without success, ibid. makes a
favourable report to her concerning James, ibid. interposes in
favour of Q.Mary, 119. discovers Babington's conspiracy,
145, why a determined and inveterate enemy to QMary,
149. a letter from him, Append. - - 460

KWar'wick, Earl of, succeeds Somerset in the government of Eng-

land - - - - i. z6

Weflminfler, the cons erences concerning QlMary there i. 483
Weflmorland, Earl of, attempts a rebel;ion in favour of Q. Mary,

i. 506. his schemes discovered and defeated, 508, 509. he
escapes to the Netherlands - - 509

JWhithorn, the prior of, imprisoned for celebrating Mass i. 3go
WYillox, a mirilter, declares for refifance and deprivation of ty-

rannical rulers, i. 205. is called to attend the Q.Dowager on
her death-bed - -- 230

Wtifart, George, his illegal execution, revenged i. Iz
farbhcraft, vigorously prosecuted in Scotland - ii. zog

Wotton,

Wilton, dean of Canterbury, employed to negociate a peace

with France - - i. 232

---- Sir Edward, lent by Q.Elizabeth into Scotland, ii. r53.

hischaraAer, ibid. soon gets into high favour with K. James,
ibid. 134. procures a league between the two kingdoms, ib.
undermines Arran's power, 134, 135. forms a plot on King
James, and forced to withdraw without taking leave, 135, 136

4 Y

y OR', the conferences there concerning Q.Mary i. 476

Z

7OUCHE, Lord, sent ambassador by Q Elizabeth, to re-

monfirate againlt K. James's lenity to the Popith lords.

ii. z27. his treachery on that occasion ---- ibid.

FINI 8.
