THE
H I STORY

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VO L. III.
*1

twA~~~~~~~~;

1~~~r

·· ~ ~ ~ ~ . R ~

r~Y ~ " Y~C
Y;0 11te,

THE
,HI STORY

OF THE'-

,R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
/
EMPER ,W CHARLES V.

..

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PFICIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HIATO

IIOGKIAPIH to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

A NEW EDITION.

VO L. III.

LONDON:

:Yrinted for W. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the
.. - Strand; and J. B A L.UR, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXXII.

# BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK V.
T H E account of the cruel manner in B °o° K

V.

which the Pope had been treated, filled --
.all Europe with astonishment or horror. Gen in-

To fee a Chritian Emperor, who, by poflefing ignti,.
that dignity, ought to have been the protector gainfthe
and advocate of the holy fee, lay violent hands on
him who represented Christ on earth, and detain
his sacred person in a rigorous captivity, was
confidered as an' impiety that merited the severest
vengeance, and which called for the immediate
interposition of every dutiful son of the church.
Francis and Henry, alarmed at the progress of
the Impetial aims in Italy, had, even before the.
taking dfRdnie, entered ito a closer alliance;
and, in orid to give fbte check to the Empe-

Vbi. III. B ror's

B ° ror's ambition, had agreed to make a vigorous
L -' diversion in the Low Countries. The force of

1527.

every motive, which had influenced them at that
time, was now increased; and to these were
added the desire of rescuing the Pope out of the
Emperor's hands, a measure no less political,
than it appeared to be pious. This, however,
rendered it necessary to abandon their designs on
the Low-Countries, and to make Italy the feat
of war, as it was by vigorous operations in that
country they might promise most certainly upon
deliveringRome, and setting Clement at liberty.
Francis being now sensible, that, in his system
with regard to the affairs of Italy, the spirit of
refinement had carried him too far; and that, by
an excess of remissness, he had allowed Charles
to attain advantages which he might easily have
prevented, was eager to make reparation for an
error, of which he was not often guilty, by an
ac&ivity more suitable to his temper. Henry
thought his interposition necessary, in order to
hinder the Emperor from becoming master of all
Italy, and acquiring by that means such fuperi-
ority of power, as would enable him, for the fu-
ture, to ditate without controul to the other
princes of Europe. Wolfey, whom Francis had
taken care to secure by flattery and presents, the
certain methods of gaining his favour, negleced
nothing that could incense his master against the
Emperor. Betides all these public confidera-
tions, Henry was influenced by one of a more

private

private nature; having begun, about this time, B o°V K
to form his great scheme of divorcing Catherine--
of Aragon, towards the execution of which he.
knew that the fan&ion of papal authority would
be necessary, he was desirous to acquire as much
merit as possible with Clement, by appearing to
be the chief instrument of his deliverance.

THE negociation, between princes thus dif- Confederac

posed, was not tedious. Wolfey himself con- ajlyi.,
duted it, on the part of his sovereign, with un-
bounded powers. Francis treated with him in
person at Amiens, where the Cardinal appeared,
and was received with royal magnificence. A
marriage between the duke of Orleans and the
princess Mary was agreed to as the bails of the
confederacy ; it was resolved that Italy'fhould be
the theatre of war; the trength of the army
which hould take the field, as well as the con-
tingent of troops or of money, which each prince
hould furniih, were fettled; and if the Empe-
ror did not accept of the proposals they were
jointly to make him, they bound themselves im-
mediately to declare war, and to begin hostilities.
Henry, who took every resolution with impe- Aug.t.
tuofity, entered so eagerly into this new alliance,
that, in order to give Francis the strongest proof
of his friendship and refpet, he formally re-
nounced the ancient claim of the English mo-
narchs to the crown of France, which had long
been the pride and ruin of the nation ; as a full
compensation for which, he accepted' a pension

B 2 of

B o O K of fifty thousand crowns, to be paid annually to

_ec-D himself and his successors .
25Z7.

he Flreo- THE Pope, being unable to fulfil the condi-
r their tions of his capitulation, ill remained a pri-

soner under the severe custody of Alarcon. The
Florentines no fboner heard of what had hap-
pened at Rome, than they ran to arms in a tu-
multuous manner; expelled the Cardinal di Cor-
tona, who governed their city in the Pope's
name; defaced the arms of the Medici; broke
in pieces the ftarues of Leo and Clement; and,
declaring themselves a free state, re-established
their ancient popular government. The Vene-
tians, taking advantage of the calamity of their
ally the Pope, seized Ravenna, and other places
belonging to the church, under pretext of keep-
ing them in depofite. The dukes of Urbino
and Farrara laid hold likewise on part of the
spoils of the unfortunate Pontiff, whom they
confidered as irretrievably ruinedb.
7he mpe- LANNOY, on the other hand, laboured to de-

tP'" rive some solid benefit from that unforeseen

event, which gave such splendor and superiority
to his matter's arms. For this purpose he march-
ed to Rome, tbgether with Moncada, and the
marquis del Guafto, at the head of all the troops
which they could aemble in the kingdom of

. Herbert, 83, &c. Rym. Fed. 14. 203.
· Guic. 1. 18. 453.

Naples.

Naples. The arrival of this reinforcement B 0 K

V.

brought new calamities on the unhappy citizens - -^
of Rome; for the soldiers envying the wealth of
their companions, imitated their licence, and
with the utmost rapacity gathered the gleanings,
which had escaped the avarice of the Spaniards
and Germans. There was not now any army in
Italy capable of making head against the Impe-
rialills; and nothing more was requisite to re-
duze Bologna, and the other towns in the eccle-
fiaftical late, than to have appeared before them.
But the soldiers having been so long accustomed,
under Bourbon, to an entire relaxation of dif-
cipline, and having tailed the sweets of living at
discretion in a great city, almost without the
controul of a superior, were become so impatient
of military subordination, and so averse to ser-
vice, that they refused to leave Rome, unless
all their arrears were paid; a condition which
they knew to be impollible. At the fame time,
they declared, that they would not obey any
other person than the prince of Orange, whom
the army had chosen general. Lannoy, finding
that it was no longer safe for him to remain
among licentious troops, who despised his dig-
nity, and hated his person, returned to Naples;
soon after the marquis del Guafto and Moncada
thought it prudent to quit Rome for the fame
reason. The prince of Orange, a general only
in name, and by the molt precarious of all te-
nures, the good-will of Ibldiers, whom fiLccel,

B 3 and

B o0 K and licence had rendered capricious, was obliged

V.
-v---' to pay more attention to their humours, than

1517' they did to his commands. Thus the Emperor,

instead of reaping any of the advantages which
he might have expected from the reduction of
Rome, had the mortification to fee the most
formidable body of troops that he had ever
brought into the field, continue in a state of in-
activity from which it was impoflible to rouse
them '.

rh F:icach T lrI gave the King of France and the Vene-
,ar-ce tians leisure to form new schemes, and to enter
oa .taly. into new engagements for delivering the Pope,

and preserving the liberties of Italy. The newly-
restored republick of Florence very imprudently
joined with them, and Lautrec, of whose abili-
lities the Italians entertained a much more fa-
vourable opinion than his own master, was, in
order to gratify them, appointed generalissimo
of the league. It was with the utmost reluc-
tance he undertook that office, being unwilling to
expose hirfelfa second time to the difficulties
and disgraces, which the negligence of the King,
or the malice of his favourites, might bring
upon him. The bel troops in France marched
under his command; and the King of England,
though he had not yet declared war against the
Emperor, advanced a considerable fum towards
carrying on the expedition. Lautrec's first

c Guic. 1. 8. 454.

operations

operations were prudent, vigorous, and success- o0 K
ful. By the affiltance of Andrew Doria, the -
ablest ifa-officer of that age, he rendered himself His'lcr'.
malter of Gtnoa, and re-eftabliflhed in that re- t:o.
publick the faction of the Fregofi, together with
the dominion of France. He obliged Alexandria
to surrender after a short siege, and reduced all
the country on that fide of the Teino. He too!
Pavia, which had so long refilled the arms of his
olvereign, by assault, and plundered it with that
cruelty, which the memory of the fatal difafler
that had befallen the French nation before its
walls naturally'infpired. All the Milanete, which
Antonio de Leyva defended with a fnall body
of troops, kept together, and supported by his
own address and industry, must have oon sub-
mitted to his power, if he had continued to
bend the force of his arms against that country.
But Lautrec durst not complete a conquest which
would have been so honourable to himself, and
of such advantage to the league. Francis knew
his confederates to be more desirous of circum-
scribing the Imperial power in Italy, than of ac-
quiring new territories for him; and was afraid,
that if Sforza were once re-eftabliihed in Milan,
they would second but coldly the attack which he
intended to make on the kingdom of Naples.
For this reason he inftru&ed Lautrec not to pulh
his operations with too much vigour in Lom-
bardy; and happily the importunities of the
Pope, and the solicitations of the Florentines,
the one for relief, and the other for proteion,

B 4 were

B o o K were To urgent as afforded him a decent pretext

V.
v_ to march forward, without yielding to the in-
';'7· treaties of the Venetians and Sforza, who insisted

on his laying siege to Milan".

Thie Eme- WHILE Lautrec advanced slowly towards Rome,
,rt e's the
Pnpe at the Emperor had time to deliberate concerning

the disposal of the Pope's person, who still re-
mained a prisoner in the castle of St. Angelo.
Notwithstanding the specious veil of religion,
with which he usually endeavoured to cover his
acions, Charles, in many inflances, appears to
have been but little under the influence of reli-
gious considerations, and had frequently, on this
occasion, expressed an inclination to transport the
Pope into Spain, that he might indulge his am-
bition with the fpeEtacle of the two most illuftri-
ous personages in Europe fuccefively prisoners
in his court. But the fear of giving new offence
to all Christendom, and of filling his own sub-
jeds with horror, obliged him to forego that fa-
tisfacion. The progress of the confederates
made it now necessary, either to set the Pope at
liberty, or to remove him to ome place of con-
finement more secure than the castle of St.
Angelo. Many considerations induced him to
prefer the former, particularly his want of the
money, requisite as well for recruiting his army,
as for paying off the vast arrears due to it. In

d Guic. 1. i8. 461. Bellay, 107, &c. Mauroc. iR.
Venet. lib. iii. 238. * Guic. I. 18. 457.

order

order to obtain this, he had assembled the Cortes B 10 K.
of Castile at Valladolid about the beginning of '-
the year, and having laid before them the fate of S 7.
his affairs, and represented the necessity of mak-
ing great preparations to resist the enemies,
whom envy at the success which had crowned his
arms would unite against him, he demanded a
large supply in the most prefing terms; but the
Cortes, as the nation was already exhausted by
extraordinary donatives, refused to load it with
any new burden, and in spite of all his endea-
vours to gain or to intimidate the members,
persised in this resolution'. No resource, there-
fore, remained, but the extorting from Clement,
by way of ransom, a fum sufficient for difcharg-
ing what was due to his troops, without which it
was vain to mention to them their leaving
Rome.

NOR was the Pope inactive on his part, or his

intrigues unsuccessful towards hastening such a
treaty. By flattery, and the appearance of un-
bounded confidence, he disarmed the resentment
of Cardinal Colonna, and wrought upon his va-
nity, which made him desirous of shewing the
world, that as his power had at first depressed
the Pope, it could now raise him to his former
dignity. By favours and promises he gained
Moroni, who, by one of those whimsical revo-

r Sandov. i. p. 814.

lutions

B o0 K lutions which occur so often in his life, and

V.
L-~... which so strongly display his characer, had now

15t7. recovered his credit and authority with the Impe-

rialifts. The address and influence of two such
men easily removed all the obstacles which re-
tarded an accommodation, and brought the
treaty for Clement's liberty to a conclusion, upon
conditions hard indeed, but not more intolerable
than a prince in his situation had reason to ex-
pet. He was obliged to advance, in ready mo-
ney, an hundred thouland crowns for the use of
the army; to pay the fame um at the diflance
of a fortnight; and, at the end of three months,
an hundred and fifty thousand more. He en-
gaged not to take part in the war against Charles,
either in Lombardy or in Naples; he granted
him a cruzado, and the tenth of ecclesiastical
revenues in Spain; and he not only gave host-
ages, but put the Emperor in poffefion of feve-
ral towns, as a security for the performance of
these articlesg. Having raised the first moiety
by a sale of ecclesiastical dignities and benefices,
and other expedients equally uncanonical, a day
was fixed for delivering him from imprisonment.
~, . But Clement, impatient to be free, after a tedi-

ous confinement of fix months, as well as full
of the suspicion and distrust natural to the unfor-
tunate, was o much afraid, that the Imperialists
might still throw in obltacles to put off his de-
liverance, that he disguiscd himself the preced-

t Guic. i. 18. 467, &c.

ing

ing night in the habit of a merchant, and Alar- B ° K
con having remitted somewhat of his vigilance -
upon the conclusion of the treaty, he made his 's''
escape undilcovered. He arrived before next
morning at Orvieto, without any attendance but
a single officer; and from thence wrote a letter
of thanks to Lautrec, as tile chicf instrument of
procuring him liberty h

DURING these transactions, the ambafladors of Overtufe,

France and England repaired to Spain, in confe- the'Empeor
quence of the treaty which Wolfey had con- ad le"ly.
eluded with the French King. The Emperor,
unwilling to draw on himself the united forces
of the two monarchs, discovered an inclination
to relax somewhat the rigour of the treaty of
Madrid, to which, hitherto, he had adhered in-
flexibly. He offered to accept of the two mil-
lions of crowns, which Francis had proposed to
pay as an equivalent for the dutchy of Burgundy,
and to set his sons at liberty, on condition that
he would recall his 'army out of Italy, and re-
store Genoa, together with the other conquests
which he had made in that country. With re-
gard to Sforza, he insisted that his fate should be
determined by the judges appointed to inquire
into his crimes. These propositions being made
to Henry, he transmitted them to his ally the
French King, whom it more nearly concerned

b Guic. 1. 18.467, &c. Jov. Vit. Colon. 169. Mauroc.
Hist. Venet. lib. iii. 252.

to

B 0 0 K to examine, and to answer them; and if Francis

V.

_--v-' had been sincerely solicitous, either to conclude
'57' peace, or preserve consistency in his own con-

du&, he ought intantly to have closed with
overtures which differed but little from the pro-
positions which he himself had formerly made'.
But his views were now much changed; his al-
liance with Henry; Lautrec's progress in Italy,
and the fuperioity of his army there above that
of the Emperor, hardly left him room to doubt
of the success of his enterprize against Naples.
Full of those sanguine hopes, he was at no loss
to find pretexts for rejecting or evading what the
Emperor had proposed. Under the appearance
of Sympathy with Sforza, for whose intereits he
had not hitherto discovered much iolicitude, he
again demanded the full and unconditional re-
establishment of that unfortunate prince in his
dorninions. Under colour of its being impru-
dent to rely on the Emperor's sincerity, he in-
sifted that his sons Ihould be set at liberty before
the French troops left Italy, or surrendered Ge-
noa. The unreasonableness of these demands,
as well as the reproachful insinuation with which
they were accompanied, irritated Charles to such
a degree, that he could hardly liften to them with
patience; and repenting of his moderation,
which had made so little impreflion on his ene-
mies, declared that he would not depart in the
fina!llef ar:iclc from the conditions which he had

Recucil des Traitez, 2. 249.

now

nbw offered. Upon this the French and English B °o° K
ambassadors, for Henry had been drawn unac .
countably to concur with Francis in there Isl7e
Otrange propofltions, demanded and obtained
their audience of leave .

NEXT day, two heralds, who had accompa-

nied the ambasSadors of purpose, though they Janury 2s.
had hitherto concealed their charater, having
aftumed the ensigns of their office, appeared in
the Emperor's court, and being admitted into
his presence, they, in the name of their refpedive
masters, and with all the folemnities customary
on such occasions, denounced war against him. They de.
Charles received both with a dignity suitable to clare wr
his own rank, but spoke to each in a tone adapt- Emperor.
ed to the sentiments which he entertained of
their sovereigns. He accepted the defiance of
the English monarch with a firmness tempered
by ome degree of decency and refpe&t. His
reply to the French King abounded with that
acrimony of expression, Which personal rivafllip,
exasperated by the memory of many injuries in-
flited as well as suffered, naturally suggests.
He desired the French herald to acquaint his
sovereign, that he would henceforth confider
him not only as a base violater of public sith,
but as a stranger to the honour and integrity be-
coming a gentleman. Francis, too higli-pirited
to bear such an imputation, had recourse to an

k Rym. 14. oo. Hrbert, 85. Guic. 1 . 8. 471.

b uncommon

B O K uncommon expedient in order to vindicate his

V.

- .I -characer. He instantly sent back the herald
Fr i5' with a cartel of defiance, in which he gave the
t^enr- , Emperor the lie in form, challenged him to
tomb le tingle combat, requiring him to name the time

and place of the encounter, and the weapons with
which he chose to fight. Charles, as he was not
inferior to his rival in spirit or bravery, readily
accepted the challenge; but, after several mef-
fages concerning the arrangement of all the cir-
cumitances relative to the combat, accompanied
with mutual reproaches, bordering on the most
indecent scurrility, all thoughts of this duel,
more becoming the heroes of romance than the
two greatest monarchs of their age, were entirely
laid aside'.

The effet THE example of two personages o illufrious
of this in drew such general attention, and carried with it
promoting
the cuftnm so much authority, that it had considerable in-
o dclin fluence in introducing an important change in

manners all over Europe. Duels, as has already
been observed, had long been permitted by the
laws of all the European nations, and forming a
part of their jurisprudence, were authorized by
the magistrate, on many occasions, as the most
proper method of terminating queRtions with re-
gard to property, or of deciding in those which
refpeted crimes. But tingle combats being con-
fidered as solemn appeals to the omniscience and

I Recueil des Traitez, . Mem. de Blelay, 103, &c.
Sandov. HiR. 1. 837.

; s.. ,,:

jullice of the Supreme Being, they were allowed B o°° K
only in public causes, according to the prefcrip- ,
tion of law, and carried on in a judicial form. '58
Men accustomed to this manner of decision in
courts of justice, were naturally led to apply it
to perlbnal and private quarrels. Duels, which
at first could be appointed by the civil judge
alone, were fought without the interposition of
his authority, and in cafes to which the laws did
not extend. The tranfation between Charles
and Francis strongly countenanced this practice.
Upon every affront, or injury which seemed to
touch his honour, a gentleman thought himself
entitled to draw his sword, and to call on his ad-
verfary to make reparation. Such an opinion in-
troduced among men of fierce courage, of high
spirit, and of rude manners, when offence was
often given, and revenge was always prompt,
produced most fatal consequences. Much of the
belt blood in Chriflendorn was flded; many use-
ful lives were sacrificed; and, at ome periods,
war itself hath hardly been more deftrutive than
these contests of honour. So powerful, however,
is the dominion of falhion, that neither the ter-
ror of penal laws, nor reverence for religion, have
been able entirely to abolish a pra&ice unknown
among the ancients, and not justifiable by any
principle of reaflon though at the fame time it
must be admitted, that, to this absurd custom, we
must ascribe in bme degree the extraordinary gen-
tlenefs and complaisance of modern manners, and
that refpeCful attention of one man to another,

5 which,

3 0 os K which, at present, render the social intercoures
A-_. J*os life far more agreeable and decent, than among

ss. the most civilized nations of antiquity.

Retreat of WHILE the two monarchs seemed so eager to
rialits from terminate their quarrel by a personal combat,
Pebrry. Lautrec continued his operations, which promised

to be more decisive. His army, which was now
increased to thirty-five thousand men, advanced
by great marches towards Naples. The terror
of their approach, as well as the remonstrances
and the entreaties of the prince of Orange, pre-
vailed at last on the Imperial troops, though
with difficulty, to quit Rome, of which they
had kept poflefion during ten months. But
of that flourishing army which had entered the
city, scarcely one half remained; the reft, cut
off by the plague, or wafted by diseases, the es-
fe&s of their inactivity, intemperance, and de-
bauchery, fell vitims to their own crimes .
Lautrec made the greatest efforts to attack them
in their retreat towards the Neapolitan territories,
which would have finished the war at one blow.
But the prudence of their leaders disappointed
all his mea'sures, and conduced them with little
loss to Naples. The people of that kingdom,
extremely impatient to shake off the Spanih yoke,
received the French with open arms, wherever
'they appeared to take poffefion; and Gaeta and
Napls excepted, hardly any place of importance

m Guic. 1. xviii. 478.

remained

remained in the hands of the Imperialifis. The °0 KC

V.

preservation of the former was owing to the -,-
strength of its fortifications, that of the latter ,Ss"
to the pretence of the Imperial army. Lautrec, French t:e.
however, fat down before Naples; but finding it ei' :%t*
vain to think of reducing a city by force while
defended by o many troops, he was obliged to
employ the flower, but less dangerous.method of-
blockade; and having taken meailres which ap-
peared to him effectual, he confidently assured
his master, that famine would soon compel the
besieged to capitulate. These hopes were ilrong-
ly confirmed by the defeat of a vigorous attempt
made by the enemy in order to recover the com-
mand of the sea. The gallies of Andrew Doria,
under the command of his nephew Philippino,
guarded the mouth of the harbour. Moncada,
who had succeeded Lanoy in the vice-royalty,
rigged out a number of gallies superior to Do-
ria's, manned them with a chosen body of Spa-
niih veterans, and going on board hirmferf, to-
gether with the marquis del Guario, attacked
Philippino before the arrival of the Venetian and
French fleets. But he, by his superior skill in
naval operations, easily triumphed over the va-
lour and number of the Spaniards. The viceroy
was killed, moil of his fleet deRroyed, and Guafto,
with many officers of diltincion! being taken
prisoners, were put on board the captive gallies,
and sent by Philippino, as trophies of his vicory
to his uncle ".

n Guic. 1. xix. 497. P. Heuter. lib. x, c, 2 p. 231.
VOL. III. C NOT-

B 0 gK NOTWITHSTANDING this flattering profpec of

V.
Aj..-.. success, many circumfcances concurred to fruf-
circu- trate Lautrec's expecations. Clement, though

i5.re- he always acknowledged his being indebted to

tard ,.c Francis for the recovery of his liberty, and often
rrrcts of

complained of the cruel treatment which he had
met with from the Emperor, was not influenced
at this jun&ure by principles of gratitude, nor,
which is moreextraordinary, was he swayed by
the desire of revenge. His past misfortunes ren-
dered him more cautious than ever, and his recol-
leation of the errors which he had committed,
increased the natural irresolution of his mind,
While he amuscd Francis with promises, he fe-
cretly negociated with Charles; and being soli-
citous, above all things, to re-eftablifl his fa-
mily in Florence with their ancient authority,
which he could not expec from Francis, who had
entered into strict alliance with the new repub-
lick, he leaned rather to the fide of his enemy
than to that of his benefacor, and gave Lautrec
no affiltance towards carrying on his operations.
The Venetians, viewing with jealousy the pro-
grefs of the French arms, were intent only upon
recovering such maritime towns in the Neapoli-
tan dominions as were to be pofeiTed by their
republick, while they were altogether careless
about the reduction of Naples, on which the fuc-
cess of the common cause depended o. The King
of England, intead of being able, as had been

Cuic. 1. xix. 491.

projeted,
S

projected, to embarrass the Emperor by attack- B O i
ing his territories in the Low-Countries, found .---
his fubjetls so averse to an unneceifary war,
which would have ruined the trade of the nation,
that in order to silence their clamours, and put a
stop to the infurreAions ready to break out
among them, he was compelled to conclude a
truce for eight months with the governess of the
Netherlands . Francis himself, with the fame
unpardonable inattention of which he had firmnerly
been guilty, and for which he had frcred lb fe-
verely, neglected to make proper re:nirtaincs to
Lautrec for the support of his army .

TIHESE unexpetecd events rettarded the progress evoi of

of the French, discouraging both the general and l,it,,,o
his troops; but the revolt of Andrew Doria rt'nc.
proved a fatal blow to all their measures. That
gallant officer, the citizen of a republick, and
trained up from his infancy in the fea-fervice,
retained the spirit of independence natural to the
former, together with the plain liberal manners
peculiar to the latter. A perfe6t stranger to the
arts of fubmiflion or flattery neccfary in courts,
but conscious at the fame time of his own mcric
and importance, he always offered his advice
with freedom, and often preferred his complaints
and remonstrances with boldness. The French
ministers, unaccuffomed to such liberties, deter-

P Herbert 9. Rymcr, 14. z58.
G Guic. .xviii. 478.

C 2 mined

B °0 K mined to ruin a man who treated them with fio

V. A-_-J- little deference; and though Francis himself had
5.8. a jutl fnfe of Doria's services, as well as an

high esteem for his character, the courtiers, by
continually representing him as a man haughty,
intractable, and more solicitous to aggrandize
himself, than to promote the interest of France,
gradually undermined the foundations of his cre-
dit, and filled the King's mind with fufpicior
and distrust. From thence proceeded several as-
fronts and indignities put upon Doria. His ap-
pointments were not regularly paid; his advice,
even in naval affairs, was often flighted; an at-
tempt was made to seize the prisoners taken by
his nephew in the fea-fight off Naples; all which
hle bore with abundance of ill. humour. But an
injury offered to his country, transported him
beyond all bounds of patience. The French be-
gan to fortify Savona, to clear its harbour, and,
removing thither ome branches of trade carried
on at Genoa, plainly fewed that they intended
to render that town, long the objet of jealousy
and hatred to the Genoese, their rival in wealth
and commerce. Doria, animated with a patri-
otick zeal for the honour and interest of his coun-
try, remonstrated against this in the highest
tone, not without threats, if the measure were
not instantly abandoned. This bold ation, ag-
gravated by the malice of the courtiers, and
placed in the most odious light, irritated Francis
ro such a degree, that he commanded Barbefieux,
wvhom he appointed admiral of the Levant, to

4 fail

fail direcly to Genoa with the French fleet, to B o° K
arrest Doria, and to seize his gallies. This rash ...-.
order, the execution of which could have been 'r2'
secured only by the most profound secrecy, was
concealed with so little care, that Doria got
timely intelligence of it, and retired with all his
gallies to a place of safety. Guafto, his pri-
soner, who had long observed and fomented his
growing discontent, and had often allured him
by magnificent promises to enter into the Empe-
ror's service, laid hold on this favourable oppor-
tunity. While his indignation and resentment
were at their height, he prevailed on him to dif-
patch one of his officers to the Imperial court
with his overtures and demands. The negocia-
tion was not long; Charles, fully sensible of the
importance of such an acquisition, granted him
whatever terms he required. Doria sent back his
commiflion, together with the collar of St. Mi-
chael, to Francis, and lloifling the Imperial co-
lours, failed with all his gallies towards Naples,
not to block up the harbour of that unhappy city
as he had formerly engaged, but to bring them
protection and deliverance.

His arrival opened the communication wih wretched

the ea, and restored plenty in Naples, which ti, Fr'ri
was now reduced to the lalt extremity; and the aliel"r
French, having loft their superiority at sea, were
lbon reduced to great firaits for want of provi-
lions. The prince of Orange, who fuccecded the
viceroy in the command of the Imperial army,

C 3 .lhcvc.

B °0 K flhewed himself by his prudent condu&t worthy of

V.
A_-- that honour which his good fortune and the death

' of his generals had twice acquired him. Beloved

by the troops, who remembering the prosperity
which they had enjoyed under his command,
served him with the utmot alacrity, he let flip
no opportunity of harafling the enemy, and by
continual alarms or sallies, fatigued and weak-
ened them r. As an addition to all these misfor-
tunes, the difeafis common in that country during
the sultry months, began to break out among
the French troops. The priobners communi-
cated to them the pestilence which the Imperial
army had brought to Naples from Rome, and it
raged with such violence, that few, either officers
or soldiers, escaped the infection. Of the whole
army, not four thousand men, a number hardly
Iubficient to defend the camp, were capable of
doing duty'; and being now befeged in their
turn, they suffered all the miseries from which
the Imperialists were delivered. Lautrec, after
ltruggling, long with so many disappointments
and calamities, which preyed on his mind at the
Ao.'5. fame time that the peiilence wafted his body,

died, lamenting the negligence of his sovereign,
and the infidelity of his allies, to which so many
brave men had fallen victims'. By his death,
and the indisposition of the other generals, the

Jovii His. lib. xxxvi. p. 3 , &c. Sigonii Vita Dorie
p. 1139. Bellay, 4, &c.

. Bcllay, 117, &c.
t P. Heuter. Rertmn Auifr. lib, x. c. . 31.

command

command devolved on the marquis de Saluces, B Oo K
an officer altogether unequal to such a trust. He,
with troops no Icls dispirited than reduced, re- Raifehe
treated in disorder to Averit; which town being s'i'.
invested by the prince of Orange, Saluces was
under the nece.fi-y of consenting, that he himself
lhould remain a prisoner of war, that his troops
fiould lay down their arms and colours, give up
their bagga.:e, and march under a guard to the
frontiers of France. By this ignominious capi-
tulation, the wretched remains of tih French
army were saved; and the Emperor, by his own
perseverance and the good conduc of his gene-
rals, acquired once more the iuperiority in
Italy ,

The lots of Genoa followed immediately upon n :e-

the ruin of the army in Naples. To deliver his liberry.
country from the dominion of foreigners was Do-
ria's highest ambition, and had been his princi-
pal inducement to quit the service of France, and
enter into that of the Emperor. A most favour-
able opportunity for executing this honourable
enterprize now presented itself. The city of Ge-
noa, afflieLled by the pestilence, was almolt de-
ferted by its inhabitants; the French garrison
being neither regularly paid nor recruited, was
reduced to an inconsiderable number; Doria's
emissaries found that fich of the citizens as
remained, being weary alike of the French and

U Bllay, 117, &c. ovii Hill. lib. xxv, xxvi.

C 4 Imperial

/O c Imperial ykie, the rigour of which they had al-

<c- ternately felt, were ready to welcome him as their
{; s. delivcrer, and to second all his measures. Things

vearing this promising afpeft, he failed towards
the coallt oi Genoa; on his approach the French
gallies retired ; a finall body of men which he
landed, furprized one of the gates of Genoa in
the night-time; Trivulci, the French governor,
with his feeble garrison, hut himielf up in the
Spt. JZ. citadel, and Doria took pofeffion of the town

without bloodshed or refi'lance. Want of pro-
vifrons quickly obliged Trivulci to capitulate;
the people, eager to abolifil such an odious mo-
nument of their servitude, ran together with a
tumultuous violence, and levelled the citadel
with the ground.

D;,letrret- IT was now in Doria's power to have rendered
s^'Jl0. himself the sovereign of his country, which he

had so happily delivered from opprefiion. The
fame of his former alions, the success of his pre-
sent attempt, the attachnent of his friends, the
gratitude of his countrymen, together with the
fipport of the tLmperor, all conspired to facilitate
his attaining the fi(preme authority, and invited
him to lIty hold (js i. 1i.lt with a rnagnanimity
of v.wlch therc are few c*.aiicpls, he iacrificcd all
thoiughts of aggranclizing hiiinfelf to the virtuous
i:tistl'-ion o' eillblifhing liberty in his country,
the higliheftR bjec at which ambition can aim.

-laving afr';:mblcd the whole body of the people
in the courti b'efore Is pace, lie aured them,

that

that the happiness of feeing them once more in B o K
poffeflion of freedom, was to him a full reward
for all his services ; that, more delighted with 5$
the name of citizen than of sovereign, he clained
no pre-eminence or power above his equals; but
remitted entirely to them the right of fettling
what form of government they would now chute
to be eftablifled among them. The people
listened to him with tears of admiration and of
joy. Twelve persons were elected to new-model
the constitution of the republick. The influence
of Doria's virtue and example communicated it-
self to his countrymen; the factions which had
long torn and ruined the rfate, femed to be for-
gotten; prudent precautions were taken to pre-
vent their reviving; and the fame form of go-
vernment which had subsisted with little variation
since that time in Genoa, was established with
universal applau'e. Doria lived to a great age,
beloved, refpe&ed, and honoured by his coun-
trymen; and adhering uniformly to his profeflions
of moderation, without arrogating any thing un-
becoming a private citizen, he preserved a great
ascendant over the councils of the republick,
which owed its being to his generosity. '1 he au-
thority which he possessed was more flattering, as
well as more fatisfadory, than that derived from
sovereignty; a dominion founded in love and in
gratitude; and upheld by veneration for his vir-
tues, not by the dread of his power. His me-
mory is fill reverenced by the Genoere, and he
Is diftinguiflced in their public monuments, and

celebrated

B o0 K celebrated in the works of their hiflorians, by the

V.
.,... mofi honourable of all appellations, THE FA-

THER OF HIS COUNTRY, AND THE
RESTORER OF ITS LIBERTY .

T ^ ~FRANCIS, in order to recover the reputation of
n!i;i Mi. his arms, discredited by so many lofi's, made

new efiorts in tie Milanese. But the count of
St. Pol, a rash and unexperienced officer, to
whom he gave the command, was no match for
Antonio de Lcyva, the ablest of the Imperial ge-
nerals. I-le, by his superior 1k;ill in war, checked,
with a andful of men, the briilk but ill-concerted
motions of the French; and though so infirm
himflf that he was carried confantly in a litter,
he firpaled them, when occaflon required, no
Icis in aivity than in prudence. By an unex-
perc march he furprized, defeated, and took
tde Count of St. Fol, ruining the French army in
the Milanese as entirely as the prince of Orange
iad ruined that wlhich befegd Naples '.

.;'""- AMIDST these vigorous operations in the field,
r;on: b' *
tween each party discovered an impatient desire of
Clharlps and
lr.:nci. peace, and continual negociations were carried on

for that purpose. The French King discouraged,
and almol exhausted by T, many unsuccessful
enterprizes, was reduced now to think of obtain-

x Guic. I. . xx. p. 58. Sgonii Vitn Doria, p. 1146.
Jovii Hii. lib. xxvi. p. 3, &c.

y Guic. 1. xix. 520. P. Heuter. er. Auttr. lib. x. c. 3.
p. ;3. Mcm. dc Blla.t, 121.

ing

ing the release of his sons by conceflnons, not by B o°
the terror of his arms. The Pope hoped to re- -
cover by a treaty whatever he had laot in the war. ,s: 9
The Emperor, notwichftanding the advantages
which he had gained, had many reasons to make
him with for an accommodation. Solyman,
having over-run Hungary, was ready to break
in upon the Alrian territories with the whole
force of the Eall. The Rcformation gaining
ground daily in Germany, the princes who fa-
voured it had entered into a confederacy which
Charles thought dangerous to the tranquillity of
the Empire. The Spnniards murmuired at a war
the weight of which rel-ed chiefly on them. The
variety and extent of the Emperor's operations
far exceeded what his revenues could fpport:
his success hitherto had been owing chiefly to his
own good fortune, and to the abilities of his ge-
nerals, nor could he flatter himfilf that they,
with troops destitute of every thing necessary,
would always triumph over enemies still in a con-
dition to renew their attacks. All parties, how-
ever, were at equal pains to conceal, or to dif-
femble their real ntiments. The Emperor, that
his inability to carry on the war might not be sus-
pe&ed, insisted on high terms in the tone of a
conqueror. The Pope, solicitous not to lore his
present allies, before he came to any agreement
with Charles, continued to make a thousand pro-
teflations of fidelity to the former, while he pri-
vately negociated with the latter. Francis, afraid
that his confederates might prevent him by treat-

ing

B 0 0 K ing for themselves with the Emperor, had re-

v.

»--- course to many dishonourable artifices, in order
39- to turn their attention from the measures which

he was taking to adjust all differences with his
rival.

IN this situation of affairs, when all the con-

tencling powers wilhed for peace, but durst not
venture too hallily on the fleps necefisry fr at-
taining it, two ladies undertook to procure this
ray. blefing so much dellred by all Europe. These

were Margaret of Auflria, dowager of Savoy,
the Emperor's aunt, and Louise, Francis's mo-
ther. They agreed on an interview at Camnbray,
and being lodged in two adjoining houses, be-
tween which a communication was opened, met
together without ceremony or observation, and
held daily conferences, to which no person what-
ever was admitted. As both were profoundly
skilled in business, thoroughly acquainted with
the secrets of their refpeeive courts, and pof-
sessed with perseet confidence in each other,
they soon made great progress towards a final
accommodation; and the ambassadors of all the
confederates waited in anxious suspense to know
their fate, the determination of which was en-
tirely in their hands '.

Eeprite Bur whatever diligence they ued to haften
teY, b , forward a general peace, the Pope had the ad-
Po: arind
Clharles.

7 P. Ietitcr. Rer. Aullr. lib. x. c. 3. p. 33. Mcm.. d
slcI!y, p. 12zz.

,ar,

dress and industry to get the fart of his allies, B 0° K
by concluding at Barcelona a particular treaty --
for himself. The Emperor, impatient to visit
Italy in his way to Germany; and delirous of re- Junc aO*
eftablifling tranquillity in the one country, be-
fore he attempted to compose the disorders which
abounded in the other, found it neceftary to fe-
cure at leaf one alliance among the Italian fates,
on which he might depend. That with Clement,
who courted it with unwearied importunity,
seemed more proper than any other. Charles
being extremely solicitous to malke fume repara-
tion for the insults which he had offered to the
sacred chara&er of the Pope, and to redeem palt
offences by new merit, granted Clement, not-
withstanding all his misfortunes, terms more fa-
vourable than he could have expeled after a
continued 'eries of uccefs. Among other arti-
cles, he engaged to restore all the territories be-
longing to the ecclesiastical ifate; to re-eirablial
the dominion of the Medici in Florence; to give
his natural daughter in marriage to Alexander
the head of that family and to put it in the
Pope's power to decide concerning the fate of
Sforza, and the poflffion of the Milanese. In
return for there ample concessions, Clement gave
the Emperor the investiture of Naples without
ihe reserve of any tribute, but the prcfcnt of a
white Iteed, in acknowledgment of his sovereign-
ty; absolved all who had been concertd in as-
faulting and plundering Rome, and. permitted
Charles and his brother Ferdinand to levy the

fourth

B 0 O K fourth of the ecclefiaflical revenues throughout

V.
w -- their dominions'.

1539.

Angeiai 5. THE account of this tranfalion quickened the
Peace of
Cambray negociations at Cambray, and brought Margaret
between .
Charles and and Louise to an immediate agreement. The
Franci. treaty of Madrid served as the basis of that which

they concluded; the latter being intended to
mitigate the rigour of the former. The chief
articles were, That the Emperor hould not, for
the present, demand the restitution of Burgundy,
reserving, however, in full force, his rights and
pretensions to that dutchy; That Francis should
pay two millions of crowns as the ransom of his
sons, and, before they were set at liberty, should
restore such towns as he fill held in the Milanese;
That he hould resign the sovereignty of Slanders
and of Artois; That he should renounce all his
pretensions to Naples, Milan, Genoa, and every
other place beyond the Alps; That he should
immediately consummate the marriage concluded
between him and the Emperor's sifter Eleanorab.

Advintage-' THUS Francis, chiefly from his impatience to
o; for the procure liberty to his sons, sacrificed every thing
Empror.

which had at first prompted him to take arms,
or which had induced him, by continuing hof-
tilities, during nine fuccefive campaigns, to

Guic. 1. xix. 522.

b P. Heuter. Rer. Autr. lib. x. c 3. p. 234. Sandov.
Hilt. dell Empe'. Carl. V. ii. 28.

protrat

protrat the war to a length Iharly nown in En 0 1o
Europe before the eftablift:ncnt of iandling ar- ---
mics, and the imposition of exorbitant taxes, be- s
came universal. The Emperar, by this treaty,
was rendered sole arbiter of the fate of Italy;
he delivered his territories in the Netherlands
from an ignominious badge of ubjedion; and
after having baffled his rival in the field, he
prescribed to him the conditions of peace. The
different conduct and spirit with which the two
monarchs carried on the operations of war, led
naturally to such an issue of it. Charles, in-
cined by temper, as well as obliged by his litu-
ation, concerted all his schemes with caution,
pursued them with perseverance, and observing
circumstances and events with attention, let none
escape that could be improved to advantage.
Francis, more enterprizing than steady, under-
took great designs with warmth, but executed
them with remissness; and diverted by his plea-
fures, or deceived by his favourites, he often
loft the most promising opportunities of uccefs.
Nor had the character of the two rivals them-
selves greater influence on the operations of the
war, than the opposite qualities of the generals
whom they employed. Among the Imperialifls,
valour tempered with prudence; fertility of in-
vention aided by experience; clifcernmcnt to pe-
netrate the designs of their enemies; a provident
sagacity in condluding their own measures; in a
word, all the talents, which form great com-
manders and ensure victory, were confpicnous.

.Armong

B 0 0 K Among the French, there qualities were either

V.

wanting, or the very reverie of them abounded;
359' nor could they boast of one man (unless we ex-

cept Lautrec, who was always unfortunate) that
equalled the merit of Pescara, Leyva, Guafto,
the prince of Orange, and other leaders, whom
Charles had to set in opposition to them. Bour-
bon, Morone, Doria, who by their abilities and
conduf might have been capable of balancing
the superiority which the Imperialists had ac-
quired, were loft through the careleflnefs of the
King, and the malice or injustice of his coun-
fellors; and the most fatal blows given to France
during the progress of the war, proceeded from
the despair and resentment of there three persons,
who were forced to abandon her service.

Dinhonour. THE hard conditions to which Francis was
ahle to
Francis. obliged to fubmic were not the rnoft affiiing

circumstances to him in the treaty of Cambray.
He loft his reputation and the confidence of all
Europe, by abandoning his allies to his rival.
Unwilling to enter into the details necessary for
adjufing their interests, or afraid that whatever
he claimed for them. must have been purchased
by farther concessions on his own part, he gave
them up in a body; and without the least pro-
vision in their behalf, left the Venetians, the
Florentines, the duke of Ferrara, together with
such of the Neapolitan barons as had joined his
army, to the mercy of the Emperor. They ex-
claimed loudly against this bafc and perfidious

ation,

a&ion, of which Francis himself was so much B °o K
alhamed, that, in order to avoid the pain of -v--
hearing from their ambafladors the reproaches I59'
which hejuftly merited, it was some time before
he would content to allow them an audience.
Charles, on the other hand, was attentive to the
interest of every person who had adhered to him;
the rights of some of his Flemish fubjefts, who
had estates or pretensions in France, were secured;
one article was inferred, obliging Francis to re-
itore the blood and memory of the Constable
Bourbon; and to grant his heirs the poffeflion of
his lands which had been forfeited; another, by
which indemnification was stipulated for those
French gentlemen who had accompanied Bour-
bon in his exilec. This condut, laudable in
itself, and placed in the most striking light by a
comparison with that of Francis, gained Charles
as much eeem as the fucceis of his arms had
acquired him glory.

FRANCIS did not treat the King of England lr,.,, .

with the fame negle&t as his other allies. He '"'"s in
communicated to him all the steps of his nego-
ciation at Cambray, and luckily found that mo-
narch in a situation which left him no choice,
but to approve implicitly of his measures, and .i, rchem
to concur with them. Henry had been solicit- "' rl"t'f'

vorce.I fro
ing the Pope for ome time, in order to obtain his a.

c ujc. 1. xix. p. 525. P. IIeuter. Rer. Auftr. lib x.
c,4. p. 235.

VOL, III, D a di-

B o°v K a divorce from Catharine of Aragon his Queen.

V. -v--' Several motives combined in prompting the King

29 to urge his suit. As he was powerfully influenced

at ome seasons by religious considerations, he
entertained many scruples concerning the legiti-
macy of his marriage with his brother's widow;
his affe&ions had long been eranged from the
Queen, who was older than himself, and had loft
all the charms which she poffeied in the earlier
part of her life ; he was paflionately desirous of
having male issue; Wolfcy artfully fortified his
scruples, and encouraged his hopes, that he
might widen the breach between him and the
Emperor, Catharine's nephew; and, what was
more forcible perhaps in its operation than all
these united, the King had conceived a violent
love for the celebrated Anne Boleyn, a young
lady of great beauty, and of greater accomplish-
ments, whom, as he found it impoflible to gain
her on other terms, he determined to raise to
the throne. The Papal authority had often been
interposed to grant divorces for reasons less fpe-
cious than those which Henry produced. When
the matter was first proposed to Clement, during
his imprisonment in the castle of St. Angelo, as
his hopes of recovering liberty depended entirely
on the King of England, and his ally of France,
he expressed the warmest inclination to gratify
him. But no sooner was he iet free, than he dil-
covered other sentiments. Charles, who espoused
the prote&tion of his aunt with zeal inflamed by
refientment, alarmed the Pope on the one hand

with

with threats, which made a deep imprefflon on B K
his timid mind; and allured him on the other I.-
with those promires in favour of his family, 'sa9'
which he afterwards accomplifled. Upon the
prospect of thef, Clement not only forgot all
his obligations to Henry, but ventured to en-
danger the interest of the Romish religion in
England, and to run the rifque of alienating that
kingdom for ever from the obedience of the Pa-
pal fee. After amusing Henry during two years,
with all the subtleties and chicane which the court
of Rome can so dexterou ly employ to protract or
defeat any cause; after displaying the whole ex-
tent of his ambiguous and deceitful policy, the
intricacies of which the English historians, to
whom it properly belongs, have found it no
easy matter to trace and unravel; he, at last, re-
called the powers of the delegates, whom he had
appointed to judge in the point, avocated the
cause to Rome, leaving the King no other hope
of obtaining a divorce, but from the personal
decision of the Pope himself. As Clement was
now in ftri& alliance with the Emperor, who
had purchased his friendship by such exorbitant
conceflions, Henry despaired of procuring any
sentence from the former, but what was dictated
by the latter. His honour, however, and pas-
sions concurred in preventing him from relin-
quifhing his scheme of a divorce, which he de-
termined to accomplifl by other means, and at
any rate; and the continuance of Francis's friend-
flip being necessary to counterbalance the Empe

n 2 ror'a

B °0 K ror's power, he, in order to secure that, not

. only offered no remonltrances against the total
'529' negleC of their allies, in the treaty of Cambray,

but made Francis the present of a large fum, as
a brotherly contribution towards the payment of
the ransom for his sonsd.

Aue. it. MEANWHILx the Emperor landed in Italy with
The mpe.
r o,fits a numerous train of the Spanish nobility, and a

considerable body of troops. He left the govern-
ment of Spain during his abfcnce, to the Empress
Isabella. By his long residence in that country,
he had acquired such thorough knowledge of
the chara&cer of the people, that he could per-
feEtly accommodate the maxims of his govern-
ment to their genius. He could even assume,
upon some occasions, such popular manners, as
gained wonderfully upon the Spaniards. A ftrik-
ing instance of his disposition to gratify them
had occurred a few days before he embarked for
Italy: He was to make his publick entry into
the city of Barcelona; and tome doubts having
arisen among the inhabitants, whether they
should receive him as Emperor, or as Count of
Barcelona; Charles instantly decided in favour
of the latter, declaring that he was more proud
of that ancient title, than of his Imperial crown.
Soothed with this flattering exprefflon of his
regard, the citizens welcomed him with accla-
mations of joy, and the states of the province

d iecrbert. Mem. de Bellay, p. 12z.

swore

swore allegiance to his son Philip, as heir of the B V0 K
county of Barcelona. A similar oath had been i_ J
taken in all the kingdoms of Spain, with equal 'a
fatisfaSdion '.

THE Emperor appeared in Italy with the

pomp and power of a conqueror. Ambafi;dors
from all the princes and itates of that country at-
tended his court, waiting to receive his decision
with regard to their fate. At Genoa, where he
first landed, he was received with the acclama-
tions due to the prote tor of their liberties. Hlav-
ing honoured Doria with many marks of diftinc-
tion, and bellowed on the republick several new
privileges, he proceeded to Bologna, the place
fixed upon for his interview with the Pope. He Nov. 5.
asseted to unite in his publick entry into that
city the (fate and majesty that suited an Emperor,
with the humility becoming an obedient son of
the church; and while at the head of twenty
thousand veteran soldiers, able to give law to
all Italy, he kneeled down to kils the feet of
that very Pope, whom he had fu lately detained
a prisoner. The Italians, after fffering o imuch
from the ferocity and licentiousness of his armies,
and after having been long accustomed to form
in their imagination a pictre of Charles, which
bore ome resemblance to that of the barbarous
monarchs of the Goths or Huns, who had former-
ly affli&ed their country with like calamities,

Sandov. ii. p. ;0. Fcrrer. i. t6.

D { \~^ '*'

B °0 K were furprized to fee a prince of a graceful ap-

V.
' -- pearance, affable and courteous in his deport-

ment, of regular manners, and of exemplary at-
tention to all the offices of religion'. They were
fRill more astonished when he fettled all the con-
cerns of the princes and states, which now de-
pended on him, with a degree of moderation
and equity much beyond what they had ex-
peL'ed.

His nroe- CHARLES himself, when he set out from Spain,
rarior and
the o'ivr far from intending to give any such extraordinary
01 it. proof of his felf-denial, seems to have been re-

solved to avail himself to the utmost of the fu-
periority which he had acquired in Italy. But
various circumstances concurred in pointing out
the neceflity of pursuing a very different course.
The progress of the Turkish Sultan, who, after
over-running Hungary, had penetrated into
Sept. ,3 Austria, and laid siege to Vienna with an army

of an hundred and fifty thousand men, loudly
calling on him to colleft his whole force to op-
pose that torrent; and though the valour of the
. 6. Germans, the prudent condu& of Ferdinand,

together with the treachery of the Vizier, oon
obliged Solyman to abandon that enterprize with
infamy and loss, the religious disorders still grow-
ing in Germany made the Emperor's presence
highly necetfary thereg: The Florentines, in-

f Sandov.. Hist. del Emp. Carl. V. ii. 5o. 53, &c.
a Sle:dan, izi. Guic. . xx. 550.

stead

stead of giving their content to the re-establish- B o°°
ment of the Medici, which, by the treaty of Bar- --
celona, the Emperor had bound himself to pro- Ig,
cure, were preparing to defend their liberty by
force of arms; the vast preparations for his jour-
ney had involved him in unufilal expences; and
on this, as well as many other occasions, the mul-
tiplicity of his affairs, together with the narrow-
ness o his revenues, obliged him to contract his
vast schemes of ambition, and to forego present
and certain advantages, that he might guard
against more remote but unavoidable dangers.
Charles, from all there considerations, finding it
necelrary to assume an air of moderation, aced
his part with a good grace. He admitted Sforza
into his pretence, and not only gave him a full
pardon of all pafl offences, but granted him the
investiture of the dutchy, together with his niece
the King of Denmark's daughter in marriage.
He allowed the duke of Ferrara to keep poffeflion
of all his dominions, adjusting the points in dif-
pute between him and the Pope with an impar-
tiality not very agreeable to the latter. He came
to a final accommodation with the Venetians,
upon the reasonable condition of their refloring
whatever they had uurped during the late war,
either in the Neapolitan or Papal territories. In
return for so many conceflions, he exacted con.
fiderable fiums fiom each of the powers with
whoml he treated, which they paid without re-
lulance, and which afforded him the means of

D 4 pr.o

3 °o K proceeding on his journey towards Germany with
*---' a magnificence suitable to his dignity h.

R,5.
Ts THESE treaties, which restored tranquillity to
bliuths he Italy after a tedious war, the calamities of which
authoriry of
the M,.ci had chiefly affeced that country, were published
im Florence.

at Bologna with great solemnity on the first day
of the year one thousand five hundred and thirty,
amidst the universal acclamations of the people,
applauding the Emperor, to whose moderation
and generosity they ascribed the bleflings of
peace which they had so long desired. The Flo-
rentines alone did not partake of this general joy,
Animated with a zeal for liberty more laudable
than prudent, they determined to oppose the
restoration of the Medici. The Imperial army
had already entered their territories, and formed
the siege of their capital. But though deserted
by all their allies, and left without any hope of
succour, they'defended themselves many months
with an obstinate valour worthy of better fuc-
cess; anti even when they surrendered, they ob-
tained a capitulation which gave them hopes of
securing some remains of their liberty. But the
Emperor, from his delire to gratify the Pope,
frustrated all their expectations, and abolilhing
their ancient form of govornment, raised Alex-
ander di Medici to the fame absolute dominion
over that state, which his family have retained to
the present times. Philibert de Chalons, prince

k Sandov. ii. 55, &c,

of

of Orange, the Imperial general, was killed B 0°° K
during this siege. His eate and titles descended
to his sifter Claude de Chalons, who was mar- 155'
ried to Rent, count of Nassau, and flie tranfinit-
ted to her posterity of the house of Nassau the
title of Princes of Orange, which they have ren-
tiered so illustrious'.

AFTER the publication of the peace at Bo- State ofar-

fairs, civil

logna, and the ceremony of his coronation as a'nd lig;-
King of Lornbardy and Emperor of the Romans, ""ous CnG.
which the Pope performed with the accutomed Frb 2
formalities, nothing detained Charles in Italyk;
and he began to prepare for his journey to Ger-
many, His pretence became every day more
necessary in that country, and was olicited with
equal importunity by the catholicks and by the
favourers of the new doctrines. During that
long interval of tranquillity, which the abfcnce
of the Emperor, the contests between him and
the Pope, and his attention to the war with
France, afforded them, the latter had gained
much ground. Most of the princes, who had
embraced Luther's opinions, had not only ef-a-
blilhed in their territories that form of worfip
which he approved, but had entirely fuppieflFd
the rites of the Romih church. Many of the
free cities had imitated their conduct. Almnof

1 Guic. 1. xx. p. 341, &c. P. Ieuter. Rer. Aultr. lib.
ii. c. . . 236.

k H. Cornel. Agrippa de duplici Coronatione Car. V. ap.
$card. ii. 266,

one

0 0 K one half of the Germanick body had revolted
V.
~.. .- from the Papal fee, and its dominion, even in

2530' that part which had not hitherto haken off the

yoke, was considerably weakened by the exam-
ple of the neighbouring states, or by the secret
progress of those doctrines which had undermined
it among them. Whatever fatisfaaion the Em-
peror, while he was at open enmity with the fee
of Rome, might have felt in those events that
tended to mortify and embarrass the Pope, he
could not help perceiving now, that the religious
divisions in Germany would, in the end, prove
extremely hurtful to the Imperial authority.
The weakness of former Emperors had suffered
the great vassals of the empire to make such
fucccfsful encroachments upon their power and
prerogative, that during the whole course of a
war, which had often required the exertion of
his utmost frength, Charles hardly drew any
effeual aid from Germany, and found that
magnificent titles or obsolete pretensions were
almost the only advantages which he had gained
by swaying the Imperial feeptre. He now be-
came fully sensible, that if he did not recover in
tome degree the prerogatives which his prede-
ceflors had loft, and acquire the authority, as
well as possess the name, of head of the Empire,
his high dignity would contribute more to ob-
liruc3 than to promote his ambitious schemes.
Nothing, h fiw, was more essential towards
attaining this, than to llpprels opinions which
might forml new bonds of confederacy among

the

the princes of the Empire, and unite them by B °° K
ties fronger and more sacred than any political L.- .
connexion. Nothing seemed to lead more cer- 1530
tainly to the accomplishment of his design, than
to employ zeal for the eftablilled religion,of which
he was the natural protector, as the instrument
of extending his civil authority.

ACCORDINGLY, a prorpect no sooner opened of Proceedin

coming to an accommodation with the Pope, at SpireDs
than, by the Emperor's appointment, a diet of March s
the Empire was held at Spires, in order to take
into consideration the state of religion. The de-
cree of the diet assembled there in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-fix, which
was almost equivalent to a toleration of Luther's
opinions, had given great offence to the reft of
Christendom. The greatest delicacy of address,
however, was requisite in proceeding to any de-
cifion more rigorous. The minds of men kept
in perpetual agitation by a controversy carried
on, during twelve years, without intermiflion of
debate, or abatement of zeal, were now inflamed
to an high degree. They were accustomed to
innovations, and saw the boldest of them fuc-
cefsful. Having not only abolished old rights,
but fuhtituted new forms in their place, they
were influenced as much by attachment to the
ftftem which they had embraced, as by aversion
to that which they had abandoned. Luther him.
self, of a spirit not to be worn out by the
length and obstinacy of the combat, or to oe-

come

B o 0 come remiss upon success, continued the attack

V.
A.-v-i_ with as much vigour as he had begun it. His
1520. disciples, of whom many equalled him in zeal,

and ome lurpaffed him in learning, were no less
capable than their mater to conduct the con-
troverfy in the propereft manner. Many of the
laity, some even of the princes, trained up amidst
these incessant disputations, and in the habit of
listening to the arguments of the contending
parties, who alternately appealed to them as
judges, came to be profoundly killed in all the
quetions which were agitated, and, upon occa-
sion, could hew themselves not inexpert in any
of the arts with which these theological en-
counters were managed. It was obvious from
all these circumstances, that any violent decision
of the diet must have immediately precipitated
matters into confusion, and have kindled in Ger-
many the flames of a religious war. All, there-
fore, that the Archduke, and the other commis-
fioners appointed by the Emperor, demanded of
the diet, was, to enjoin those flates of the Empire
which had hitherto obeyed the decree issued against
Luther at Worms, in the year one thousand five
hundred and twenty-four, to persevere in the
observation of it, and to prohibit the other ltates
from attempting any farther innovation in reli-
gion, particularly from abolilhing the Mass, be-
fore the meeting of a general council. After
much dispute, a decree to that effct was ap.
proved of by a majority of voices'.

i Slcid, Hist, 17.

TtiL

THE Elevtor of Sazony, the marquis of Bran- B O , K
denburgh, the Landgrave of Hef(e, the dukes .-i

150.

of Lunenburgh, the prince of Anhalt, together Tbefow-
with the deputies of fourteen Imperial or free 'thefLrote
cities ", entered a olemn proteR against this de- at'g"f
cree, as unjust and impious. On that account April g.
they were distinguished by the name of PRO-
TESTANTS ", an appellation which hath since
become better known, and more honourable, by
its being applied indi'criminately to all the seóts,
of whatever denomination, which have revolted
from the Roman fee. Not satisfied with this
declaration of their descent from the decree of
the diet, the Protestants ent ambassadors into
Italy, to lay their grievances before the Emperor,
from whom they met with the most difcourag-
ing reception. Charles was at that time in close Delibera-

.0~

. , , - ..n.-,.. ,

~~~~ tion of th>e

union with the Pope, and solicitous to attach t ope an
him inviolably to his interest. During their long Em"p"rr
residence at Bologna, they held many confulta-
tions concerning the most effe&ual means of
extirpating the hercries which had sprung up in
Germany. Clement, whose cautious and timid
mind the proposal of a general council filled
with horror, even beyond what Popes, the con-
ftant enemies of such assemblies, usually feel,
employed every argument to dissuade the Em-

m The fourteen cities were Strafburgh, Nurcmbergh,

Ulm, Co fiance, Reutlingen, Windlheim, Meinengen,
Lindw, Kempten, I-Iai!brcn, Ifila, Wciffemburgh, Nord-
lingec, and St. Gal.

"Sleid. Hilt. 1 9. F. Paul. Hilt. p. 4;. Seckcnd. ii. 127.

5 peror

B OO K peror from conrenting to that measure. He re-

- presented general councils as faLtious, ungovern-
'53" able, presumptuous, formidable to civil au-

thority, and too flow in their operations to re-
medy disorders which required an immediate
cure. Experience, he said, had now taught both
the Emperor and himself, that forbearance and
lenity exasperated the spirit of innovation, which
they ought to have mollified; it was necessary,
therefore, to have recourse to the rigorous me-
thods which such a desperate cafe required ; Leo's
sentence of excommunication, together with the
decree of the diet at Worms, flould be carried
into execution, and it was incumbent on the Em-
peror to employ his whole power, in order to
overawe those, on whom the reverence due either
to ecclesiastical or civil authority had no longer
any influence. Charles, whose views were very
different from the Pope's, and who became daily
more sensible how obstinate and deep-rooted the
evil was, thought of reconciling the Protestants
by means less violent, and confidered the con-
vocation of a council as no improper expedient
for that purpose; but promised, if gentler arts
failed of success, that then he would exert him-
self with rigour to reduce those flubborn ene-
mies of the Catholick faitho.

Emperor SucH were the sentiments with which the Em-
g'eetf peror et out for Germany, having already ap-
Auglurg.
March as. °F. Paul, xlvii. Seck. 1. ii. 142. Hilt. de Confi.. d'Aux-

$ bourgh, parD. Chytreus, 4to. Antw. 1572, p. 6.

6 pointed

pointed a diet of the Empire to be held at Augf- B o v-
burg. In his journey towards that city, he had
many opportunities of observing the disposition '53
of the Germans with regard to the points in con-
troverfy, and found their minds every where
so much irritated and inflamed, as convinced him,
that nothing tending to severity or rigour ought
to be attempted, until all other measures
proved ineffectial. He made his publick entry
into Auglburg with extraordinary pomp; andune
found there such a full assembly of the members
of the diet, as was suitable both to the import-
ance of the affairs which were to come under
their consideration, and to the honour of an
Emperor, who, after a long absence, returned
to them crowned with reputation and success.
His presence seems to have communicated to all
parties an unusual spirit of moderation and desire
of peace. The EleCtor of Saxony would not
permit Luther to accompany him to the diet,
left he should offend the Emperor by bringing
into his presence a person excommunicated by
the Pope, and the author of all those dissentions
which it now appeared so difficult to compose.
At the Emperor's desire, all the Proteflant princes
sorbad the divines who accompanied them, to
preach in publick during their residence at Augf-
burg. For the fame reason they employed
Melan&hon, the man of the greatest learning,
as well as of the molt pacifick and gentle spirit
among the Reformers, to draw up a confeflion
of their faith, expressed in terms as little offen.

live

B 0 O K five to the Roman Catholicks, as a regard for

V.

/ .- truth would permit. Melanthon, who seldom
Th,3o. suffered the rancour of controversy to envenom
fslon o his style, even in writings purely polemical, ex-

ecuted a talk so agreeable to his natural difpo-
fition with great moderation and success. The
Creed which he composed, known by the name
of the Confeflion of Auglburg, from the place
where it was presented, was read publickly in
the diet. Some Popish divines were appointed
to examine it; they brought in their animad-
versions; a dispute ensued between them and
Melan'thon, seconded by ome of his brethren;
but though Melanahon softened some articles,
made concessions with regard to others, and put
the least exceptionable sense upon all; though
the Emperor himself laboured with great earnest-
ness to reconcile the contending parties ; so many
marks of diftintion were now established, and
such insuperable barriers placed between the two
churches, that all hopes of bringing about a
coalition seemed utterly desperate .

FROM the divines, among whom his endea-

vours had been so unsuccessful, Charles turned
to the princes their patrons. Nor did he find
them, how desirous soever of accommodation,
or willing to oblige the Emperor, more disposed

P Seckend. lib. ii. 159, &c. Abr. Sculteti Annales Evan-

gelici ap. Herm. Von der Hird. Hill. Liter. Reform. Lips.
1717. fol. p. 159.

than

than the former to renounce their opinions. At B ° K
that time, zeal for religion took poffefion of the --,--
minds of men, to a degree which can scarcely be ';30'
conceived by those who live in an age when the
paflions excited by the first manifestation of truth,
andl the first recovery of liberty, have in a great
measure ceased to operate. This zeal was then
of such strength as to overcome attachment to
their political interelt, which is commonly the
predominant motive among princes. The Elec-
tor of Saxony, the Landgrave of Hefle, and other
chiefs of the Proteitants, though solicited fepa-
rately by the Emperor, and allured by the pro-
mise or profpet of those advantages which it was
known they were mot solicitous to attain, re-
fused, with a fortitude highly worthy of imita-
tion, to abandon what they deemed the cause of
God, for the fake of any earthly acquisition q.

EVERY scheme in order to gain or disunite the Severede-

Protestant party proving abortive, nothing now the 'po-
remained for the Emperor but to take ome vi- teftan":
gorous measures towards asserting the dotrines
and authority of the etablified church. These,
Campeggio, the papal nuncio, had always re-
commended as the only proper and effectual
course of dealing with such obstinate hereticks.
In compliance with his opinions and remon- Nov. 9,
ttrances, the diet issued a decree, condemning
most of the peculiar tenets held by the Protcft-

i Sleid. 132. Scultet. Annal. z58.
VOL. III. E ants

B3 0 K Ants; forbidding any person to protect or tolerate

V.
L-~-i such as taught them; enjoining a ftri& obferv-

ance of the established rites; and prohibiting any
further innovation under evere penalties. All
orders of men were required to aift with their
persons and fortunes in carrying this decree into
execution; and such as refuted to obey it, were
declared incapable of acting as judges, or of ap-
.-- >, pearing as parties in the Imperial chamber, the

\ supreme court of judicature in the Empire. To

all which was subjoined a promise, that an appli-
cation flould be made to the Pope, requiring
him to call a general council within fix months,
in order to terminate all controversies by its so-
vereign decisions .

They nter THE severity of this decree, which they con-
into a Ie'at:e
·t .l. fidered as a prelude to the most violent perfecu-

c. tion, alarmed the Protestants, and convinced

them that the Emperor was resolved on their de-
ftruEtion. The dread of those calamities which
were ready to fall on the church, oppressed the
feeble spirit of Melan&hon i and, as if the cause
had already been desperate, he gave up himself
to melancholy and lamentation. But Luther,
who during the meeting of the diet had endea-
voured to confirm and aiiimante his party by feve-
ral treatises vwhich he addrellcid to them, was not
disconcerted or difinayed at the prospect of this
new danger. He comforted Melandhon and his

r' Scld. 1?39

other

other dJonding diic'ples, and exhorted the K
princes not to abandon tiole truths which they
had lately ahcr'cd with such laudable b.ldnefs '. ' V
IIis exhortations made the deeper imprifilon upon
them, as they were greatly alarmed at that time
by the account of a combination among the Po-
pish princes of the Empire for the maintenance of
the eftabliflied religion, to which Charles himself
had acceded'. This convinced them that it was
necessary to rand on their guard; and that their
own safety, as well as the success of their cause,
depended on union. Filled with this dread of the
adverse party, and with there sentiments concern-
ing the conduct proper for themselves, they assem-
bled at Smalkalde. There they concluded a league Dccm. Ix.
of mutual defence against all aggrefforsu, by
which they formed the Protestant fates of the
Empire into one regular body, and beginning al-
ready to confider themselves as such, they resolved
to apply to the Kings of France and England,
and to implore them to patronize and aflift their
new confederacy.

AN affair not conneted with religion furnished The Empr.

Z. .. -D. ror poponir'
them with a pretence for courting the aid of so- t. h.Ie is

hI other

reign princes. Charles, whose ambitious views elt.:,1Ki."g
enlarged in proportion to the increase of his power of:';t.
and grandeur, had formed a scheme of continuing
the Imperial crown in his family, by procuring

'Seck. i. Sleid. .

ii. 200.

S id . S . iii. I .
U Slid. Hifi. 14.

E 2 hJs

B 0°o K his brother Ferdinand to be eleted King of the

V.
v-_ Romans. The present juncture was favourable

5 for the execution of that design. The Emperor's

arms had been every where victorious; he had
given law to all Europe at the late peace; no
rival now remained in a condition to balance or
to controul him ; and the Eletors, dazzled with
the splendour of his success, or overawed by the
greatness of his power, durif scarcely dispute the
will of a prince, whose solicitations carried with
them the authority of commands. Nor did he
w.ant plaufiblc reasons to enforce the measure.
The affairs of his other kingdoms, he said,
obliged him to be often absent from Germany
the growing disorders occasioned by the contro-
verfies about religion, as well as the formidable
neighbourhood of the Turks, who continually
threateiied to break in with their desolating armies
into the heart of the Empire, required the con-
tant pretence of a prince endowed with prudence
capable of cornporing the former, and with power
as well as valour sufficient to repel the latter. His
brother Ferdinand possessed there qualities in an
eminent degree; by residing long in Germany,
he had acquired a thorough knowledge of their
constitution and manners; having been present
almost from the first rife of their religious diflcn-
sions, he knew what remedies were mioft proper,
what they could bear, and how to apply them;
as his own dominions lay on the Turkifl fron-
tier, he was the natural defender of Germany
againtt the invasions of the Infidels, being

prompted

prompted by interest no les than lie would be B 0 K
bound in duty to oppose then.

153c.

THESE arguments made little impression on the The Prote-

Protestants. Experience taught them, that no- to. at
thing had contributed more to the undiflurbed
progres of their opinions, than the interregnum
after Maximilian's death, the long absence of
Charles, and the slackness of the reins of govern-
ment which these occasioned; after deriving such
advantages from a llate of anarchy, they were
extremely unwilling to give themselves a new and
a fixed malter. They perceived clearly the ex-
tent of Charles's ambition, that he aimed at ren-
dering the Imperial crown hereditary in his fa-
mily, and would of course establish in the Empire
an absolute dominion, to which elective princes
could not have aspired with equal facility. They
determined therefore to oppose Ferdinand's elec-
tion with the utmost vigour, and to roue their
countrymen, by their example and exhortations,
to withifand this encroachment on their liberties.
The Eletor of Saxony, accordingly, not only
refused to be present at the electoral college, which Januar ,y
the Emperor summoned to meet at Cologne, but
infruaced his eldest son to appear there, and to
protest against the election as informal, illegal,
contrary to the articles of the golden bull, and
iubverfive of the liberties of the Empire. But Hci sciCrn,
the other Ele&ors, whom Charles had been at
great pains to gain, without regarding either his
.ibfence or protest, chose Ferdinand King of the

E 3 Romans;

E 3

B o0 K Romans; who a few days after was crowned at
A.i_- Aix-la-Chapellex.

Vsz.

,Ne,*'- WHEN the Protestants, who were assembled a
Profats second time at Smalkalde, received an account of
wih France. this tranfation, and heard, at the fame time,

that prosecutions were commenced, in the Im-
perial chamber, against some of their number,
on account of their religious principles, they
thought it necessary, not only to renew their for-
mer confederacy, but immediately to dispatch
their ambassadors into France and England.
Feb. 19. Francis had oblerved, with all the jealousy of a

rival, the reptration which the Emperor had ac.
quired by his leemning disinterestedness and mode.
ration in fettling the affairs of Italy and beheld
with great concern the successful tep which he
had taken towards perpetuating and extending
his authority in Germany by the election of a King
of the Romans. Nothing, however, would have
been more impolitick than to precipitate his
kingdom into a new war when exhauffed by ex-
traordinary efforts, and discouraged by ill fuc-
cess, before it had got time to recruit its ffrength,
or to forget pail misfortunes. As no provocation
had been given, and hardly a pretext had been
afforded him, he could not violate a treaty ,,'
peace which he himself had so lately solicitcd,
without forfeiting the esteem of all Europe, and.
being dteil:ed as a prince void of probity ant.

x Sleid. 14:. Seek. iii. . P. Heuter. Rer. Autlr. lii.
x. c. 6. p. 240.

honour,

honour. He observed, with great joy, powerful B ,00 K
fa&ions beginning to form in the Empire; he V
listened with the utmost eagerness to the com- '53
plaints of the Protestant princes; and without
teeming to countenance their religious opinions,
determined secretly to cherish those sparks of po-
litical discord which might be afterwards kindled
into a flame. For this purpose, he ent William
de Bellay, one of the ablet negociators in France,
into Germany, who visiting the courts of the
malcontent princes, and heightening their ill-
humour by various arts, concluded an alliance
between them and his master , which though
concealed at that time, and produtive of no im-
mediate effe&s, laid the foundation of an union
fatal on many occasions to Charles's ambitious
projects; and ihewed the discontented princes of
Germany, where, for the future, they might find
a prote&or no le's able than willing to undertake
their defence against the encroachments of the
Emperor.

THE King of England, highly incensed against i^1*s'

Charles, in complaisance to whom, the Pope had
long retarded, and now openly opposed his di-.
vorce, was no lels disposcd than Francis to
strengthen a league which might be rendered so
formidable to the Emperor. But his favourite
project of the divorce led him into such a laby-
;inth of schemes and negociations, and he was,

Y Bellay, 29, a 130, b. Sec. iii. 14.

E 4 g

B °0 K a the fame time, so intent on abolishing the

V.

-., --. papal jurifdition in England, that he had no
'5;'' leisure for foreign affairs. This obliged him to

reft satisfied with giving general promises, toge-
ther with a small supply in money to the confe-
derates of Smalkalde .

Charles MEANWHILE, many circumstances convinced
Courts the
PYrefantns. Charles that this was not a juncture when the

extirpation of heresy was to be attempted by vio-
lence and rigour; that, in compliance with the
Pope's inclinations, he had already proceeded
with imprudent precipitation; and that it was
more his interest to consolidate Germany into one
united and vigorous body, than to divide and
enfeeble it by a civil war. The Protestants, al-
ready considerable as well by their numbers as
by their zeal, had acquired additional weight and
importance by their joining in that confederacy
into which the rash steps taken at Augsburg had
forced them. Having now discovered their own
tirength, they despised the decisions of the Impe-
rial chamber; and being secure of foreign pro-
tection, were ready to set the head of the Empire
at defiance. Ac the fame time the peace with
France was precarious, the friendship of an irre-
solute and interested pontiff was not to be relied
on ; and Solyman, in order to repair the infamy
and lots which his arms had sustained in the for-
mer campaign, was preparing to enter Aufthia

IIlrbert, 152. 1;4.

with

with more numerous forces. On all these ac- B 00 K

V.

counts, especially the last, a peedy accommoda- t.-.
tion with the malcontent princes became necef- ''
fary, not only for the accomplishment of his fu-
ture schemes, but for ascertaining his present
safety. Negociations were, accordingly, carried
on by his direction with the Elector of Saxony
and his associates; after many delays occasioned
by their jealousy of the Emperor, and of each
other, after innumerable difficulties arising from
the inflexible nature of religious tenets, which
cannot admit of being altered, modified, or re- Crantsthea

fi.vourable

linquilhed in the fame manner as points of poli- ,er,,.
tical interest, terms of pacification were agreed 'I,, "I,
upon at Nuremberg, and ratified folennly in the
Diet at Ratisbon. In this treaty it was stipulated,
That universal peace be ellablifled in Germany,
until the meeting of a general council, the con-
vocation of which within fix months tie Emperor
ihall endeavour to procure; That no person be
niolefled on account of religion; That a flop be
pup to all processes begun by the Imperial
chlnber agaiift Protestants, and the sentences al-
ready paflied to their detriment be declared
void. On their part, the Protestants en-
gaged to alfilt the Emperor with all their forces
in refilting the invalion of the Turks '. Thus by
their firmness in adhering to their principles, by
the unanimity with which they urged all hcir
claim,, and by their dexterity in availing them-

* Du Mont Corp Diplomatiquc, tom. iv. p:rt ii. S-. 89.

6 fclves

B 0°v K selves of the Emperor's situation, the Protestants

V.
»,..... obtained terms which amounted almost to a tole-

5$2.' ration of their religion all the conceftions were

made by Charles, none by them; even the fa-
vourite point of their approving his brother's elec-
tion was not mentioned; and the Protestants of
Germany, who had hitherto been viewed only as
a religious ;fe, came henceforth to be confidered
a a political body of no fir.all consequence b

Canpaignin THE intelligence which Charles received of So-
l'Iun$ary.

lyman's having entered Hungary at the head of
three hundred thouland men, cut fort the deli-
berations of the Diet at Ratisbon ; the contingent
both of troops and money, which each prince was
to furnih towards the defence of the Empire,
having been already fettled, The Protestants, as
a testimony of their gratitude to the Emperor, ex-
erted themselves with extraordinary zeal, and
brought into the field forces which exceeded in
number the quota imposed on them; the Ca-
tholicks imitating their example, one of the
greatest and best appointed armies that had ever
been levied in Germany, assembled near Vienna.
Being joined by a body of Spani(h and Italian ve-
terans under the marquis del Guafto; by ome
heavy-armed cavalry from the Low-Countries;
:nr;d by the troops which Ferdinand had raised in
Bohemia, Aulfria, and his other territories, it
amounted in all to ninety tloufand disciplined

b Sleid. 149, c. Seek. iii. 19.

foot,

foot, and thirty thousand horse, besides a prodi- B K
gious swarm of irregulars. Of this vast army, '--
worthy the sirs prince in Chriltendom, the Em- 53 '
peror took the command in person; and man-
kind waited in fifpence the iue of a decisive
battle between the two grcatefl monarchs in the
world. But each of them dreading the other's
power and good fortune, they both conduced
their operations with such excefive caution, that
a campaign, for which such immense preparations
had been made, ended without any memorable
event. Solyman, finding it impossible to gain Septembr
ground upon an enemy always attentive and on
his guard, marched back to Constantinople to-
wards the end of autumn'. It is remarkable,
that in such a martial age, when every gentle-
man was a soldier, and every prince a general,
this was the first time that Charles, who had al-
ready carried on ftuch extensive wars, and gained
so many vic&oures, appeared at the head of his
troops. In this firit essay of his arms, to have
opposed such a leader as Solyman, was no frnall
honour; to have obliged him to retreat, merited
very considerable praise.

ABOUT the beginning of this campaign, the Aug. s.

Eleaor of Saxony died, and was succeeded by his
son John Frederick. The Reformation rather
gained than loft by that event; the new Eleeor,

C Jovii Hit. lib. xxx. p. oo, &c. Barre Hilt. de 1'!m.
pirc, i.8. 347.

no

B o°v K no less attached than his predecefors to the opi-

V.

**s -
v nions of Luther, occupied the station which they

52 had held at the head of the Proteflant party,

and defended, with the boldness and zeal of youth,
that cause which they had follered and reared
with the caution of old age.

Tr:e Emre. IMMIEDATELY after the retreat of the Turks,
ru w;l'.t Charles, impatient to revisit Spain, set out on
the Pot in his way thither, for Italy. As he was extremely
his way to
sin. desirous of an interview with the Pope, they

met a second time at Bologna, with the ame
external demonstrations of respect and friendship,
but with little of that confidence which had sub-
lifted between them during their late negocia-
tions there. Clement was much dissatisfied with
the Emperor's proceedings at Augsburg; his
concessions with regard to the speedy convocation
of a council, having more than cancelled all the
merit of the severe decree against the dotrines of
the Reformers. The toleration granted to the
Proteflants at Ratilbon, and the more explicit
promifl concerning a council, with which it was
accolpanied, had irritated him till farther.
Ciarlcs, however, partly from convicion, that
ti:e n:eeting of a council would be attended with
Ic.icg.- lIiutary es;es, and partly from his desire to

..'... I iea!c the Germ;ans, having solicited him by his
..i,,c.; a.inbalaiodo s to call that aembly without de-

lay, and now urging the fame thing in person,
Clck-ltnr was greatly embarrassed what reply he
f.l;u'.ll me !: cto a rquei, which it was indecent

to

to refuse, and dangerous to grant. He endea- B ° ° K
voured at first to divert Charles from the mea- ----
sure; but, finding him inflexible, he had re-
course to artifices which he knew would delay,
if not entirely defeat, the calling of that assem-
bly. Under the plausible pretext of its being
previously necessary to fettle, with all parties con-
cerned, the place of the council's meeting; the
manner of its proceedings; the right of the per-
ibns who fliould be admitted to vote; and the
authority of their decisions; he dispatched a nun-
cio, accompanied by an ambassador from the
Emperor, to the Elector of Saxony as head of
the Protestants. With regard to each of there
articles, inextricable difficulties and conteRs
arole. The Protestants demanded a council to
be held in Germany; the Pope insisted that it
flould meet in Italy: They contended, that all
points in dispute should be determined by the
words of holy scripture alone; he confidered not
only the decrees of the church, but the opinions
of fathers and doAors, as of equal authority:
They required a free council, in which the di-
vines, commissioned by different churches, should
be allowed a voice; he aimed at modelling the
council in such a manner as would render it en-
tirely dependant on his pleasure. Above all,
the Protestants thought it unreasonable, that they
should bind themselves to iubmiit to the decrees
of a council, before they knew on what princi-
ples these decrees ere to be founded, by what
persons they were to be pronounced, and what

forms

B o0o K forms of proceeding they would observe. The

V.
..~ Pope maintained it to be altogether unnecessary
'353' to call a council, if those who demanded it did

not previously declare their resolution to ac-
quiefce in its decrees. In order to adjust such
a variety of points, many expedients were pro-
posed, and the negociations spun out to such a
length, as effectually answered Clement's pur-
pose of putting off the meeting of a council,
without drawing on himself the whole infamy of
obftruting a measure, which all Europe deemed
so elfential to the good of the church .

TOGETHER with this negociation about call-

and for pre- .
Lerving the ing a council, the Emrperor carried on another,
tranquileity
of Italy. which he had frill rn re at heart, for securing

the peace eftablifled in Italy. As Francis had
renounced his pretensions in that country with
great reluaance, Charles made no doubt but
that he would lay hold on the first pretext as-
forded him, or embrace the first opportunity
which presented itself, of recovering what he had
loft. It became necessary, on this account, to
take measures for assembling an army able to
oppose him. As his treasury, drained by a long
war, could not supply the ums requifte for
keeping such a body conflantly on foot, he at-
tempted to throw that burden on his allies, and
to provide for the safety of his own dominions
at their expence, by proposing that the Italian

d F. Paul, Hist. 6i. Seckend. iii. 73.

fates

states flould enter into a league of defence against B °0 K
all invaders; that, on the first appearance of- V
danger, an army hould be raised and maintained '53t'
at the common charge; and that Antonio de
Leyva hould be appointed the generalifimo.
Nor was the proposal unacceptable to Clement,
though for a reason very different from that which
induced the Emperor to make it. He hoped, 1533,
by this expedient, to deliver Italy from the Ger-
man and Spanilh veterans, which had so long
filled all the powers in that country with terror,
and still kept them in subjection to the Imperial
yoke. A league was accordingly concluded; Feb. .
all the Italian states, the Venetians excepted,
acceded to it; the fum which each of the con-
trafting parties should furnish towards maintain-
ing the army was fixed; the Emperor agreed to
withdraw the troops which gave lo much um-
brage to his allies, and which he was unable any
longer to support. Having difhandcd part of
them, and removed the reft to Sicily and Spain,
he embarked on board Doria'& gallics, and ar-
rived at Barcelona. April l.

NOTWITI-STANDINrG all his precautions for fe- -D-

glien .

curing the pcace of Grnani, and mnnaintaining of the
that system which he had cilabiihncd in Italy, ;i,'n. ihe
the Emperor bcanm every day more and :norc Emprtr'
apprehenlfve that o:h would be ,)o ,'i':irbed
by the intrigues or armn: of the t;Lnch Ki,g.

GCuic. I. xx. 5 i. '::lrera., ix. i4.9

4 iis

B Oyo K His apprehensions were well founded, as nothing

V.

-y--- but the desperate situation of his affairs could
'5;' have brought Francis to give his consent to a

treaty so diihonourable and disadvantageous as
that of Cambray: He, at the very time of rati-
fying it, had formed a resolution to observe it
no longer than necefity compelled him, and took
a solemn protest, though with the molt profound
ikcrecy, against several articles in the treaty, par-
ticularly that whereby he renounced all preten-
sions to the dutchy of Milan, as unjufi, injuri-
ous to his heirs, and invalid. One of the crown
lawyers, by his command, entered a protest to
the fame purpose, and with the like secrecy, when
the ratification of the treaty was registered in
the parliament of Paris'. Francis seems to have
thought that, by employing an artifice un-
worthy of a King, deffrutive of publick faith,
and of the mutual confidence on which all tranf-
ations between nations are founded, he was re-
leafed from any obligation to perform the most
solemn promises, or to adhere to the molt sacred
engagements. From the moment he concluded
the peace of Cambray, he wished and watched for
an opportunity of violating it with safety. He
endeavoured for that reason to firengthen his
alliance with the King of England, whose friend-
Ihip he cultivated with the greatest assiduity. He
put the military force of his own kingdom on
a better and more refpetable footing than ever.

' Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom. iv. part z. p. 52.

He

He artfully fomented the jealousy and discontent B 0 0 K
of the German princes. -

1533.
BUT above all, Francis laboured to break the prticul.ly

with the

Rric confederacy which fubfifed between Charles Pope.
and Clement; and he had oon the fatisfaion to
observe appearances of disgust and alienation
arising in the mind of that suspicious and inte-
refted Pontiff, which gave him hopes that their
union would not be lading. As the Emperor's
decision in favour of the duke of Ferrara had
greatly irritated the Pope, Francis aggravated
the injustice of that proceeding, and flattered
Clement that the papal fee would find in him a
more impartial and no less powerful prote&or.
As the importunity with which Charles de-
manded a council was extremely offensive to the
Pope, Francis artfully created obstacles to pre-
vent it, and attempted to divert the German
princes, his allies, from insisting so obflinately
on that point g. As the Emperor had gained
such an ascendant over Clement by contributing
to aggrandize his family, Francis endeavoured
to allure him by the fame irresistible bait, pro-
posing a marriage between his second on, Hcnry
duke of Orleans, and Catharine, the daughter
of the Pope's coulin Laurence di Medici. On
the first overtures of this match, the Emperor
could not persuade himself that Francis really in-
tended to debae the royal blood of France by an

g Bellay, 141, &c. Sek. iii. 48. F. Paul, 63.
VOL. III. F alliance

B 0 0 K alliance with Catharine, whose ancestors had been

V.
'-u.nJ so lately private citizens and merchants in Flo-

3533' rence, and believed that he meant only to flatter

or amuse the ambitious Pontiff. He thought it
necessary, however, to efface the impression which
such a dazzling offer might have made, by pro-
mifing to break off the marriage which had been
agreed on between his own niece the King of
Denmark's daughter, and the Duke of Milan,
and to substitute Catharine in her place. But the
French ambassador's producing unexpectedly full
powers to conclude the marriage treaty with the
duke of Orleans, this expedient had no effet.
Clement was so highly pleased with an honour
which added such luflre and dignity to the house
of Medici, that he offered to grant Catharine the
investiture of considerable territories in Italy by
way of portion; he seemed ready to support
Francis in prosecuting his ancient claims in that
country, and consented to a personal interview
with that Monarch .

interview CHARLES was at the utmost pains to prevent a
b etween . .
Pop Eand meeting, in which nothing was likely to pass but
rianci. what would be of detriment to him; nor could

lie bear, after he had twice conlefcended to visit
the Pope in his own territories, that Clement
should bellow such a mark of diftin&ion on his
rival, as to venture on a voyage by sea, at an un-
favourable feaion, in order to pay court to Fran-

(G ic. 1. . 551, 553. Bellay, 138.

c Ui

cis in the French dominions. But the Pope's ea- B K
gerners to accomplish the match overcame all --
scruples of pride, or fear, or jealousy, which J533.
mutt have influenced him on any other occasion.
The interview, notwithstanding several artifices OEober.
of the Emperor to prevent it, took place at Mar-
feilles with extraordinary pomp, and demonftra-
tions of confidence on both fides; and the mar-
riage, which the ambition and abilities of Catha-
rine rendered in the lequel as fatal to France, as
it was' then thought dishonourable, was confum.
mated. But whatever schemes may have been fe-
cretly concerted by the Pope and Francis in fa-
vour of the duke of Orleans, to whom his father
proposed to make over all his rights in Italy, so
careful were they to avoid giving any cause of
offence to the Emperor, that no treaty was con-
cluded between them h. and even in the marriage-
articles, Catharine renounced all claims and pre-
tensions in Italy, except to the dutchy of Ur-
bino'.

BUT at the very time when he was carrying on Pope' con.

there negociations, and forming this connection rU'ardtohb.
with Francis, which gave so great umbrage to E'gln',
the Emperor, such was the artifice and duplicity divo"rce
of Clement's character, that he suffered the latter
to direc all his proceedings with regard to the
King of England, and was no less attentive to

h Guic. 1. xx. 555.
i Du Mont Corps iplom. iv. p. ii. lot.

F 2 gratify

B O
° K gratify him in that particular, than if the mofl

V.
-- , cordial union had ill subsisted between them.
5s33' Henry's suit for a divorce had now continued

near fix years; during all which period the pope
negociated, promised, retra&ed, and concluded
nothing. After bearing repeated delays and dif-
appointments, longer than could have been ex-
peted from a prince of such a cholerick and im-
petuous temper, his patience was at last so much
exhausted, that he applied to another tribunal for
that decree which he had solicited in vain at Rome.
Cranmer, archbilhop of Canterbury, by a fen-
tence founded on the authority of Universities,
Doftors, and Rabbies, who had been consulted
with refpe& to the point, annulled the King's
marriage with Catharine; her daughter was de-
clared illegitimate; and Anne Boleyne acknow-
ledged as Queen of England. At the fame time
Henry began not only to negle& and to threaten
the Pope whom he had hitherto courted, but to
make innovations in the church, of which he had
formerly been such a zealous defender. Clement,
who had already seen so many provinces and
kingdoms revolt from the Holy See, became ap-
prehenfive at last that England would imitate
theirexample, and partly from his solicitude to
prevent that fatal blow, partly in compliance
with the French King's solicitations, determined
to give Henry such fatisfation as might ill re-
tain him within the bosom of the church. But

,g4 , the violence of the Cardinals, devoted to the Em-
Mar. &3. peror, did not allow the Pope leisure for execut-

A ing

ing this prudent resolution, and hurried him, with B °° K
a precipitation fatal to the Roman See, to iffuc a -~
bull rescinding Cranmer's sentence, confirming '5-4.
Henry's marriage with Catharine, and declaring
him excommunicated, if, within a time specified,
he did not abandon the wife he had taken, and
return to her whom he had deserted. Enraged at
this unexpected decree, Henry kept no longer
any measures with the court of Rome; his sub- Papal a-

thority abo.
je&s seconded his resentment and indignation; an ihed in

England.

a& of Parliament was passed, abolishing the pa-
pal power and jurifdition in England i by ano-
ther, the King was declared supreme head of the
church, and all the authority of which the Popes
were deprived was vested in him. That vast fa-
brick of ecclesiastical dominion which had been
raised with such art, and whose foundations
seemed so deep, being no longer supported by the
veneration of the people, was overturned in a mo-
ment. Henry himself, with the caprice peculiar
to his character, continued to defend the doctrines
of the Romish church as fiercely as he attacked its
jurifdi&ion. He alternately persecuted the Pro-
teftants for rejecing the former, and the Catho-
licks for acknowledging the latter. But his sub.
jests being once permitted to enter into new paths,
did not chute to stop fliort at the precise point
prescribed by him. Having been encouraged by
his example to break some of their fetters, they
were o impatient to fliake off what Itill re-
mained , that in the following reign, with the

k Herbert. Burn. Hill. of Reform.

F 3 gcnclel,

B o°V K general applause of the nation, a total reparation
----' was made from the church of Rome in articles of

3j34. dotrine, as well as in matters of discipline and

jurifdi&ion.

DCtheof A SHORT delay might have saved the See of
VIA. Rome from all the unhappy consequences of Cle-

ment's rashness. Soon after his sentence against
Henry, he fell into a languilhing distemper,
which gradually wafting his constitution, put an
Sept. s. end to his Pontificate, the most unfortunate, both

during its continuance, and by its effeCs, that the

,Pa'i;,, church had known for many ages. The very day
ca. 13. on which the cardinals entered the conclave, they

raised to the papal throne Alexander Farnese, dean
of the sacred college, and the eldest member of
that body, who assumed the name of Paul III.
The account of his promotion was received with
extraordinary acclamations of joy by the people
of Rome, highly pleated, after an interval of more
than an hundred years, to lee the crown of St.
Peter placed on the head of a Roman citizen.
Persons more capable of judging, formed a fa-
vourable presage of his adminiltration, from the
experience which he had acquired under four Pon-
tificates, as well as the character of prudence and
moderation which he had uniformly maintained
in a station of great eminence, and during an acive
period that required both talents and address'.

EuROrE, it is probable, owed the continuance
of its peace to the death of Clement; for although

Guic. 1. xx. 556. F. Paul, 64.

no

no traces remain in hiflory of any league con- B ,°
eluded between him and Francis, it is scarcely to a--
be doubted but that he would have seconded the '534
operations of the French arms in Italy, that he
might have gratified his ambition by feeing one of
his family pofleffed of the supreme power in Flo-
rence, and another in Milan. But upon the elec-
tion of Paul III. who had hitherto adhered uni-
formly to the Imperial interest, Francis found it
necessary to suspend his operations for ome time,
and to put off the commencement of hostilities
against the Emperor, on which he was fully de-
termined.

WHILE Francis waited for an opportunity to Inrurearion

of the Ana-

renew a war which had hitherto proved so fatal to baptilts in
himself and his subjects, a tranfa&ion of a very Gem'"y.
singular nature was carried on in Germany.
Among many beneficial and salutary effects of
which the Reformation was the immediate cause,
it was attended, as must be the cafe, in all ations
and events wherein men are concerned, with some
consequences of an opposite nature. When the
human mind is rouzed by grand objects, and agi-
tated by strong palfions, its operations acquire
such force, that they are apt to become irregular
and extravagant. Upon any great revolution in
religion, such irregularities abound most, at that
particular period, when men, having thrown off
the authority of their ancient principles, do not
yet fully comprehend the nature, or feel the obli-

F 4 gation

B °0 K gation of those new tenets which they have em-

-v->
. braced. The mind, in that situation, pushing
'53+' forward with the boldness which prompted it to

rejet eftablilhed opinions, and not guided by a
clear knowledge of the yftem substituted in their
place, disdains all restraint, and runs into wild
notions, which often lead to scandalous or immo-
ral condut. Thus, in the first ages of the Christ-
ian church, many of the new converts, having
renounced their ancient Creeds, and being but
imperfectly acquainted with the dotrines and
precepts of Christianity, broached the mos ex-
travagant opinions, equally subversive of piety
and virtue; all which errors disappeared or were
exploded when the knowledge of religion in-
crealed, and came to be more generally diffused.
In like manner, soon after Luther's appearance,
the ralhnefs or ignorance of rome of his disciples
led them to publish tenets no less absurd than
pernicious, which being proposed to men ex-
trenely illiterate, but fond of novelty, and at a
time when their minds were turned wholly towards
religious speculations, gained too easy credit and
authority among them. To there causes mulf be
imputed the extravagances of Muncer, in the year
one thousnd five hundred and twenty-five, as
well as the rapid progress which they made among
the pealfnts; but though the infurre&ion excited
by rat Fanatic as loon suppressed, several of
his followers lurked in different places, and en-
deavoured privately to propagate his opinions.

IN

Is those provinces of Upper Germany, which B ^0 K

had already been so cruelly wafted by their en- '-
thufiaftick rage, the magistrates watched their Origin and
motions with such severe attention, that many thate.
of them found it necessary to retire into other
countries, omrne were punished, others driven into
exile, and their errors were entirely rooted out.
But in the Netherlands and Westphalia, where
the pernicious tendency of their opinions was
more unknown, and guarded against with less
care, they got admittance into several towns, and
spread the infecion of their principles. The mot
remarkable of their religious tenets related to the
Sacrament of Baptism, which, as they contended,
ought to be administered only to persons rrowni
up to years ofunderftanding, and should be per-
formed not by sprinkling them with water, but
by dipping them in it: For this realbn they con-
demned the baptism of infants, and rebaptizing
all whom they admitted into their fciety, the
fe& came to be difcinguifled by the name of
Anabaptists. To this peculiar notion concern-
ing baptism, which has the appearance of being,
founded on the practice of the church in the apo-
fRolick age, and contains nothing inconlilfent
with the peace and order of hliran i society, they
added other principles of a mol entlrhui alik;, as
wvell as dangerous nature. They maint:.inil that,
among Chrifians who had thi- precp;' of the
gospel to diret, and the spirit of Go.A cto gudle
them, the office of magiflacy) w;s not uniy J1 n-
peceffary, but an unlawtul cncl;.ach'inrct in

B °v K their Spiritual liberty; that the dillintions occa-

V.
tL _ sioned by birth, or rank, or wealth, being con-

5 trary to the spirit of the gospel, which confiders

all men as equal, hould be entirely abolished;
that all Christians, throwing their poifeflions into
one common flock, should live together in that
state of equality which becomes members of the
fame family; that as neither the laws of nature,
nor the precepts of the New Teflament had
placed any restraints upon men with regard to the
number of wives which they might marry, they
should fe that liberty which God himself had
granted to the patriarchs.

Settle i SUCH opinions, propagated and maintained
Muafter. with enthufiaftick zeal and boldness, were not

long of producing the violent effets natural to
them. Two Anabaptist prophets, John Matthias,
a baker of Haerlem, and John Boccold, or Beii-
kels, a journeyman taylor of Leyden, poflefled
with the rage of making proselytes, fixed their
residence at Munlter, an Imperial city in Weft-
phalia, of the first rank, under the Sovereignty of
its bishop, but governed by its own senate and
consuls. As neither of there Fanatics wanted the
talents requisite in desperate enterprizes, great
resolution, the appearance of fandity, bold pre-
tensions to inspiration, and a confident and plau-
fible manner of discoursing, they oon gained
many converts. Among there were Rothman,
who had first preached the Protestant doctrine in
Munlter, and Cnipperdoling, a citizen of good

7 birth,

birth, and considerable eminence. Emboldened a °0 K
by the countenance of such disciples, they openly -j
taught their opinions; and not satisfied with that s3
liberty, they made several attempts, though
without success, to fcize the town, in order to get
their tenets eftablilhed by publick authority.
At last, having secretly called in their affociatcs escome
from the neighbouring country, they suddenly tItcdy.
took pofeffion of the arsenal and fenate-houfe in
the night-time, and running through the fireets
with drawn swords, and horrible howlings, cried
out alternately, "' Repent, and be baptised," and
' Depart ye ungodly." The senators, the ca- Februry.
nons, the nobility, together with the more fober
citizens, whether Papists or Protestants, terrified
at their threats and outcries, fled in confusion,
and left the city under the dominion of a frantick
multitude, confiting chiefly of strangers. No-
thing now remaining to overawe or controul
them, they set about modelling the government
according to their own wild ideas; and though at
first they showed so much reverence for the an- Ea!)lf m

- new form of

cient conflitution, as to elec senators of their govern.
own fel, and to appoint Cnipperdoling and an-
other proselyte consuls, this was nothing more
than form; for all their proceedings were dire&ed
by Matthias, who, in the style, and with the au-
thority of a prophet, uttered his commands,
which it was inflant death to disobey. Having
begun with encouraging the multitude to pillage
the churches, and deface their ornaments; he en-
joined them to defiroy all books except the Bible,

as

B o0 K as useless or impious; he appointed the estates of

V.

.,^ fiuch as fled, to be confiscated, and fold to the
'534 inhabitants of the adjacent country; he ordered

every man to bring forth his gold, silver, and pre-
cious effcEts, and to lay them at his feet; the
wealth amafled by these means, he deposited in a
publick treasury, and named deacons to dispense
it for the common ife of all. The members of
this commonwealth being thus brought to a per-
sect equality, he commanded all of them to eat at
tables prepared in publick, and even prescribed
the diihes which were to be served up each day.
Having finilhed his plan of reformation, his next
care was to provide for the defence of the city;
and he took measures for that purpose with a pru-
dence which favoured nothing of fanaticifin. He
collected vait magazines of every kind; he re-
paired and extended the fortifications, obliging
every person without diftin&ion to work in his
turn; he formed such as were capable of bearing
arms into regular bodies, and endeavoured to
add the vigour ofdifcipline to the impetuosity of
enthufiafim. He sent emilfaries to the Anabaptilts
in the Low-Countries, inviting them to aflemble
at Munfler, which he dignified with the name of
Mount-Sion, that from thence they might set out
to reduce all the nations of the earth under their
dominion. He himself was unwearied in attend-
ing to every thing necessary for the security or in-
crease of the fe ; animating his disciples by his
own example to refute no labour, as well as to
repine at no hardship; and their enthusiastic pas-

Lions

sions being kept from subsiding by a perpetual B °0 K
fucceflion of exhortation, revelations, and pro- -----'
phecies, they seemed ready to undertake or to Ir4.
susser any thing in maintenance of their opinions.

WHILE they were thus employed, the bishop of The, bfinp

Muniter having assembled a considerable army, tk,,,,,,,
advanced to besiege the town. On his approach, them.
Matthias sallied out at the head of ome chosen
troops, attacked one quarter of his camp, forced
it, and after great slaughter returned to the city
loaded with glory and spoil. Intoxicated with
this fuccefl, he appeared next day brandifihing a
spear, and declared, that, in imitation of Gideon,
he would go forth with a handful of men and finite
the host of the ungodly. Thirty persons, whom he Ma..
named, followed him without hesitation in this
wild enterprize, and, ruffling on the enemy with
a frantic courage, were cut off to a man. The
death of their prophet occasioned at first great
consternation among his disciples; but Boccold,
by the fame gifts and pretensions which had
gained Matthias credit, soon revived their spirits john of
and hopes to such a degree, that he succeeded Luyde ca
him in the ame absolute diretion of all their author'y

among the

affairs. As he did not possess that enterprizing Anabitidl'.
courage which diftinguilhed his predecessor, he
satisfied hinfeif with carrying on a defensive
war; and, withour attempting to annoy the ene-
my by sallies, le waited for the succours he ex-
pe&ed from the Low-Countries, the arrival of
which was often foretold and promiefd by their

prophets.

B o°° K prophets. But though less daring in aion than

-v · Matthias, he was a wilder enthusiast, and of more
534* unbounded ambition. Soon after the death of

his predeceflor, having, by obscure visions and
prophecies, prepared the multitude for some ex-
traordinary event, he itripped himself naked,
and, marching through the streets, proclaimed
with a loud voice, " That the kingdom of Sion
was at hand; that whatever was highef on earth
ihould be brought low, and whatever was lowest
Ihould be exalted." In order to fulfil this, he
commanded the churches, as the most lofty
buildings in the city, to be levelled with the
ground; he degraded the senators chosen by
Matthias, and depriving Cnipperdoling of the
consulship, the highest office in the common.
wealth, he appointed him to execute the lowest
and molt infamous, that of common hangman,
to which strange transition the other agreed, not
only without murmuring, but with the utmost
joy; and such was the defpotick rigour of Boc-
cold's administration, that he was called almost
every day to perform ome duty or other of his
wretched fun&ion. In place of the deposed fe-
nators, he named twelve judges, according to
the number of tribes in. Israel, to preside in all
affairs; retaining to himself the fame authority,
which Moses anciently poffcffed as legislator of
that people.

NOT satisfied, however, with power or titles
King. which were not supreme, a prophet, whom he

had

had gained and tutored, having called the mul- 0o K
titude together, declared it to be the will of --
God, that John Boccold hould be King of Sion, 's4
and fit on the throne of David. John kneeling June m4.
down, accepted of the heavenly call, which he
solemnly protested had been revealed likewise to
himself, and was immediately acknowledged as
Monarch by the deluded multitude. From that
moment he assumed all the state and pomp of
royalty. He wore a crown of gold, and was
clad in the richest and most sumptuous garments.
A Bible was carried on his one hand, a naked
sword on the other. A great body of guards
accompanied him when he appeared in publick.
He coined money stamped with his own image,
and appointed the great officers of his houfhold
and kingdom, among whom Cnipperdoling was
nominated governor of the city, as a reward for
his former submission.

HAVItN now attained the height of power, Hie ieen.

Boccold began to ifcover palfions, which he nddu.
had hitherto restrained or indulged only in fe-
cret. As the excesses of enthufiafi have been
observed in every age to lead to sensual gratifi-
cations, the fame constitution that is ufceptible
of the former, being remarkably prone to the
latter, he intruAed the prophets and teachers to
harangue the people for several days concern-
ing the lawfulness, and even neceflity of taking
more wives than one, which they asserted to be
one of the privileges granted by God to the

faint.

B o0 K faints. When their ears were once accustomed

V.
5^ %to this licentious do&rine, and their paflions in-

534' flamed with the profpet of such unbounded in-

dulgence, he himself let them an example of
uing what he. called their Chrifian liberty, by
marrying at once three wives, among which the
widow of Matthias, a woman of singular beauty,
was one. As he was allured by beauty, or the
love of variety, he gradually added to the num-
ber of his wives, until they amounted to fourteen,
though the widow of Matthias was the only one
dignified with the title of Queen, or who ihared
with him the splendor and ornaments of royalty.
After the example of their prophet, the multi-
tude gave themselves up to the most licentious
and uncontrouled gratification of their desires.
No man remained satisfied with a single wife.
Not to use their Christian liberty, was deemed a
crime. Persons were appointed to search the
houses for young women grown up to maturity,
whom they instantly compelled to marry. To-
gether with polygamy, freedom of divorce, its
inseparable attendant, was introduced, and be-
came a new source of corruption. Every excess
was committed, of which the paflions of men are
capable, when restrained neither by the authority
of laws nor the sense of decency"'; and by a

nonftrous

m Prophetac & concionatorum autoritate juxta et exemplo,

tota urbe ad rapiendas pulcherrimas quafque fnminas dii-
curfurm et. Nec intra paucos dies, in tanta hnominum
turba fere ulla reperta eft supra annul: decimum quartur
qua ituprum pafla non fuerit. Lamb. Hortenl. p. 303.

Vu gE

monstrous and aJmolt incredible conjunction,B °o o K
voluptuouihern was engrafted on religion, and -
dissolute riot accompanied the aufterities of fa- 's
natical devotion.

MEANWHILei.,the German princes were highly A cnfcde-

offended at the insult offered to their dignity by the:Anl.
Boccold's presumptuous ufuipation. of royal ho- baptifl.
nours; and the profigate manners .Of his follow-
ers, which were a reproach to the Chriflian
name, filled men of all profefflins with horror.
Luther, who had teftifiea againt this fanatical
ipirit on its first appearance, now deeply lamented
its progress, and exposed the delusion with great
strength of argument, as well as acrimony of
flyle, called loudly on all the iates of Germany to
put a stop to a phrenzy nóess pernicious to' so-
ciety, than fatal td religion. The Emperor, oc-
cupied with other cares and projets, had not
leisure to attend to such adiftant object; but the
princes of the Empire, afemble.dby the King of
the Romans, voted a supply of men and money
to the bishop of Munster, who being unable to
keep a sufficient army on foot, had converted the

Vulgb viris quinas efle uxores, pluribus senas, nonnullis
fcptenas & otonas. ,JPuellas supra duodecimum atatis annum
ftatim amare. Id. 305. Nemo una contentus suit, neque
cuiquam extra effatas & viris immaturas continenti cffe licuit.
Id. 307. Tacebo hic, ut fit us honor auribus, quanta
barbaria et malitia ufi funt in puellis vitiandis nondum aptis
matrimonio, id quod mihi ncque ex vano, neque ex vulgi
fermonibus haufium eft, fed ex ea vetula, cui cura sic vi.
tiatarum demandata suit, auditum. Joh. Corvinus, 316.

VOL. III. G siege

B °O° tliege of the town into a blockade. The forces

raised in consequence of this refoluion,, were put
Bc' Se35h under the command of an officer of 'experience,

""' who approaching the town towards the end of

Spring, in the year one thqfandifive h udred
and thirty-five, pressed it mere cofely than
formerly; but found the fortifications so strong,
and so diligently glarded, that he durst not at-
tempt an aflault. It was nbw above fifteen
months finoI the Anabaptists had established their
dominion in Munfer; they had during that time
undergone prodigiouBafatigue in working on the
fortifications, and performing military duty.

DMa;.r d Notwithstanding the. prudent attention of their
fanaticism King to provide fr their fubfiftente, and his
of the be.
heged. frugal as well as regular oeconomy in their pub-

lick meals, they "ant to feel the approach of
famine. Several finall bodies of their brethren,
who were advancing to their affiftane from the
Low Countries, had been intercepted, and cut
to pieces; and, while all Germany was ready
to combine against them, they had no profpea
of succour. But such was the ascendant which
Boccold had acquired over the multitude, and so
powerful the fafcinationof enthufiafn, that their
hopes were as sanguine as ever, and they heark-
ened with implicit credulity t the visions and
predicions of their prophets, 'who assured them,
that the Almighty would speedily interpose, in
order to deliver the city. The faith, however,
of rome few, ihakeniby the violence and length
of their fuTferigs, began to fail; but being sus-

peEted

peted of an inclinatioito surrender to the ee- a 0o0 K
my, they-were punilhed with immediate death, - ~
as guilty of impiety in distrusting the power of '535
God. One of the King's wives, having uttered
certain words which implied rome doubt con-
cerning his divine miflion, he instantly called
the whole number together, and commanding
the blasphemer, as he called her, to kneel down,
cut off her head with his own hands; and so far
wde the reft from exprefling any horror at this
cruel deed, that they joined him in dancing with
a frantick joy around thebleeding body of their
companion.

By this time, the bellegccendured the unmodt The city

rigour'of famine; but they choferather to susser June '
hardlhips, the recital o which is Ihockirig to
humanity, thank to lifen to the terms of capitu-
lation offered them by the bishop. At last, a de-
ferter, whom they had taken into their service,
being either ess intoxicated with the fumes of
enthuriafm, o unable any lpnger to bear such
distress, made his efcap'rto the enemy, He in-
formed their general of wealpart in the forti-
fications whtih he had observed, and asuring
him that the besieged, exhausted with hunger
and fatigue, kept watch there with little care,
he offered to lead a party thither in the night,
The proposal was accepted, and a chosen body
of troops appointed for the ferviceij who, fcal-
ing the walls unperceived, feited one of the
gates, and admitted the reft of the army. The

G AnabaptifRs

B K Avnabaptifts, though fuprifed, defended them-
*.-v-* selves in the market-place with valour, height-
Ju5' ened by despair; but being oveiowered by

numbers, and surrounded on every hand, most
of them were slain, and the remainder taken
prisoners. Among the las wew the King and

Puninhment qnipperdoling. The King, loaded with chains,
of the was carried from city tod city as a fpe&acle to
and hi afro-,
cites. gratify the curiosity of the people, and wias x-

posed to all their: insults. His spirit, howteer,
was not broken oriumrnbled by is fad rererfe
of his condition; and^he adhered with unlhaken
firmness to the 'diftinguihing tenets of his fe&.
After this he was rought back to Munster,
the scene of his rtoyaky and crimes, and put to
death witll th-e host exqifite as well as lingering
tortures, all which he bore with aftonifling for-
titude. This extraordinary maif, who'had been
able to acquire such amazing dominion over the
minds of his followers, and to xcite commo-
tions so dangerous to society, was only twenty-
fix years bs age". 4

of the ea TOGET'ER '^h its Monarchi the kingdom
sio'd' of the Ahabaptifts carre to an end' Their prin-

ciples having taken deep root in the Low-Coin-

Sleid. 190, &c. Tumultuum Anabaptifiarum Liber

unus. Ant. Lamberto Hortenfio autore ap. Scardium, vol.
ii. p. z98, &c., Dc Miferabili Monalterienfium Obfidione,
&c. ibellus Antonii Corvini ap. Scard. 313. Anales Ana-
btptiflici a Joh. r!rico Ottioi4to. Bafilexi, '167. Cor.
Hcerlbachius Hit. Anab. Edit. 1637, p. 140.

tries,

tries, the party fill subsists there, under the B-. 0 K
name of Mennonitjs; but by a very singular re- ...
volution, this let, To mutinous and sanguinary
at/its first origin, hath become altogether inno-
cent and pacifick. Holding it unlawful to wage
war, or to accept of civil offices, they devote
themselves entirely to the duties of private citi-
zens, and by their induefry and charity endea-
%our to make reparation to human society for
tl' violence committed by their founders. A
small number of this fe which is fettled in
England, retain its peculiar tenets concerning
baptism, but without any dangerous mixture of
enthufiafmn.-

THE mutiny of the AnabaptifLs, though it Proceeding

drew general attention, did not so entirely en- i tr' she
gross he princes of, Germany, as not to allow l,,e of,
leisure for other tranfadions. The alliance be-
- tween the French King and the confederates at
Smalkalde, began about this time to produce
great effects. Ulric, Duke of Wurtemberg,
having been expelled his dominions in the year
one thousand five hundred and nineteen, on ac-
count of his violent and opprefive adminiftra-
tion, the louse of Austria had got poffeflion of
his dutchy. That prince having now by a long
exile atoned for the errors in his condut, which
were the effect rather of inexperience than of a
tyrannical disposition, was become the objet of
general compaflion. The Landgrave of I-effe,

Byle Diaion. Art. .4nalapiet..

G 3 in

B ° 0 in particular, his near relation, warmly espoused

_-v- *his interest, and used many efforts to recover for

him his ancient inheritance. But he King of
the Romans obstinately refused to relinquih" a
valuable acquisition which his family had made
with so much cafe. The Landgrave, unable to
compel him, applied to the King of France his
new ally. Francis, eager to embrace any op-
portunity of diftrefing the house of Austria, and
desirous of wrefling from it a territory, which
gave it footing and influence in a part of Ger-
many at a distance from its other dominionst
encouraged the Landgrave to take arms, and
secretly supplied him with a large fum of money.
This he employedoto raise troopsj and marching
with great expedition towards Wurtemberg, at-
tacked, defeated, and difpcrfed a' confierable
body of Austrians, entrusted with the defence
of the country. All the Duke's fubjets hastened,
with emulation, to receive their native Prince,
and re-invested him with that authority which is
tRill enjoyed by his descendants. At the fame
time the exercise of the Protefant religion was
cftabliled in his dominions P.

TheKing FERPINAND, how sensible soever of this un-
of.i csM, expeAted blow, not daring to attack a Prince
h*rn whom all the Protelant powers in Germany were

ready to support, judged it expedient to conclude
a treaty with him, by which, in the molt ample

P Skid, 172. Bellay, 159, &c.

form,

form, he recognized his title to the dutchy. The B O°V K
success of the Landgrave's operations, in behalf of X . -
the Duke of Wurtemberg, having convinced '5
Ferdinand that a rupture with a league, so formi-
dable as that of Smalkalde, was to be avoided
with the utmost care, he entered likewise into a
negociation with the Elecor of Saxony, the head
of that union, and by ome conceflions in favour
of the Protestant religion, and others of advan-
tage to the Emperor himself, he prevailed on
him, together with his confederates, to acknow-
ledge his title as King of the Romans. At the
fame time, in order to prevent any such precipi-
tate or irregular election in times to come, it was
agreed that no person hould hereafter be pro-
moted to that dignity without the unanimous con-
sent of the Eletors and the Emperor oon after
confirmed this stipulation .

THESE ats of indulgence towards the Pro- Pau III.

teftants, and the close union into which the King neralcs n.
of the Romans seemed to be entering with the '^I toM

at Mantua.

Princes of that party, gave great offence at
Rome. Paul III. though he had departed from
a resolution of his predecessor, never to content to
the calling of a general council, and had pro-
mifed, in the firit consistory held after his election,
that he would convoke that aflembly so much de-
lired by all Christendom, was no less enraged
than Clement at the innovations in Germany,

* Slcid. 173. Corps Diplom. tom. iv. p 2. 119.

G 4 and

B °0 K and no less averse to any cheme for reforming

V.

- Avu either the doctrines of the church, or, he .abufs
Lss. in the court of Ronme: But having been a witness

of the universal censure which Clement had in-
turred by his obstinacy with regard to thcf points,
he hoped to avoid the fame reproach by the seem-
ing alacrity with which he proposed a council;
flattering himself, however, that such difficulties
would arise concerning the tihe and place of meet-
ing, the persons who had a right to be present,
and the order of their proceedings, as would effec-
ttlally defeat the intention of thufe who demanded
that assembly, without exposing himself to any
imputation for refusing to call it. With this view
he dispatched nuncios to the several courts, in or-
der to make known his intention, and that he had
fixed on Mantua as a proper. place in which to
hold the council. Such difficulties as the Pope
had foreseen, immediately presented themselves
in great number. The French King did not ap-
prove of the place which Paul had chosen, as the
Papal and Imperial influence wouldneceflari'y be
too great in a town situated in that part of Italy.
The King of England not only concurred with
Francis in urging that objection, but refused, be-
fides, to acknowledge any council called in the
name and by the authority of the Pope. The
D.c .. German Protestants having met together at Smal-

kalde, infilted on their original demand of a
council to be held in Germany, and pleading the
Emperor's promil'e, as well as the agreement at
Ratilbon to t'at cltcctt, declared that they would

not

notconfider an assembly held at Mantua as a legal B O O

V.

or free representative of the church. By this di- .-~-
verfity of sentiments and views, such a field for a53
intrigue and negociation opened, as made it easy
for the Pope to aflume the merit of being eager
to aemble a council, while at the fame time he
could put off its meeting atrpleafure. The Pro-
,teltants, on the other hand, fufpectiAg his designs,
and sensible of the importance which they derived
from their union, renewed for ten years the league
of Smalkalde, which now became stronger and
more formidable by the accession of several new
members,'.

DURING there tranfa6tions in Germany, the Thcmpe.
Emperor undertook his famous enterprize against r;ont-

...,rprize again dition to

Africa, and

the piratical flates in Africa. That part of the aleof that
African continent lying along the coast of the "unt'
Mediterranean ea, which anciently formed the
kingdoms of Mauritania and Maffylia, together

This league was concluded December, one thousand five

hundred and thirty five, but not extended or signed in form
till September in the following year. The Princes who ac-
ceded to it were John Elctor of Saxony, Ernest Duke of
Brunswick, Philip Landgrave of Hecfe, Ulric Duke of Wur.
temberg, Barnim and Philip Dukes of Pomerania, John
George, and Joachim Princes of Anhalt, Gebhard and Al-
bert Counts of M'ansfeld, William Count of Nalau. The
cities, Strafburg, Nuremburg, Constance, Ulm, Magdeburg,
Bremen, Reutlingen, Hailbron, Mcmmengen, Lindaw, Cam-
pen, lfna, Bibrac, Windilicim, Aufburg, Frankfort, Eiling,
Brunswick, Goflar, Hanover, Gottingen, Eimbeck, Ham-
burg, Minden.

with

B °° r with the repub!ick of Carthage, and which is now

_I,- known by the general name of Barbary, had un-

3 dergone many revolutions. Subdued by the Ro-

mans, it became a province of their empire.
Conquered afterwards by the Vandals, they erected
a kingdom there. That being overturned by Be-
lifarius, the country continued subject to the
Greek Emperors, until it was over-run towards
the end of the seventh century, by the rapine and
irresistible arms of the Arabs. It remained for
some time a part of that vast empire which the
Caliphs governed with absolute authority. Its
immense distance, however, from the feat of go-
vernment, encourged the descendants of those
leaders, who had subdued the country, or the
chiefs of the Moors, its ancient.inhabitants, to
throw off the yoke, and tq set up for independ-
ence. The Caliphs, who derived their authority
from a spirit of enthufiafin, mor fitted for mak-
ing conquests than for preserving them, were
obliged to'connive at ats of rebellion which they
could not prevent; and Barbary was divided into
several kingdoms, of which Morocco, Algiers,
and Tunis were the moit considerable. The in-
habitants of these kingdoms were a mixed race,
Arabs, Negroes from the southern provinces,
and Moors, either natives of Africa, or who had
been expelled out of Spain; all zealous professors
of the Mahometan religion, and inflamed against
Christianity with a bigoted hatred proportional
to their ignorance and barbarous manners.

2 AMONG

AMONG these people, no less daring, incon- B 0, K

ftat, and treacherous, than the ancient inhabit- V.
ants of the famnercountry described by the Roman Rifsthe
historians, frequent seditions broke out, and many ,
changes in government took place. These, as
they affected only the internaffiate of a country
bo barbarous, are but little'known, and deserve
to be so: But about the beginning of the fix-
teenth century a sudden revolution happened,
which, by rendering the states of Barbary formi-
dable to the Europeans, hath made their hifiory
worthy of more attention. This revolution was
brought about by persons *orn in a rank of life
which entitled them to a no such illustrious part. bdB oh,:
Horuc and Hayradin, the ons of a potter in the
Ifie of Lesbos, prompted by a reflefs and enter-
prizing spirit, forfookstheir father's trade, ran to
sea, and joined a crew of pirates.< They soon dif-
tinguilhed themselves by their valour and acivity,
and becoming masters of a small brigantine, car-
ried on their infamous trade with luch condu&t
and success, that they assembled a fleet of iwelve
galleys, besides many vessels of smaller force. Of
this fleet Horuc, the elder brother, called Bar-
baroffa from the red colour of his beard, was ad-
miral, and Hayradin second in command, but
with almost equal authority. They called them-
selves the friends of the ea, and the enemies of
all who fail upon it; and their names soon became
terrible from the Straits of the Dardanels to those
of Gibraltar. Together with their fame and
power, their ambitious views extended, and while

acting
my

B oo 0K ating as Corsairs, they adopted tie ideas, and ac-
W -.- quired the talents of conquerors. They 'ten
53s5 carried the prizes which they cogk1n: the coafls !

of Spain and Italy into the ports of Barbary, and
enriching the inhabitants by the sale of their
bday, and the toughtlefs prodigality of their
crews, were welcome guests in every place at
which they touched. The convenient situation
of these harbours 1lying Lb near the greatest com-
mercial states at that time in. Christendom, made
the brothers with for 'an etablilhmen in that
country. An opportunity of accompliihing this
quickly presented itfcf, which they did not susser
to pass 'unimproved. Eutemi, King of Algiers,
having attempted fveral times, without success,
to take a fort which the Spanifli governors of
Oran had built not far from his capital, was so ill
advised as to aipply for aid to Barbarof'a, whose
valour the Africans confidered a irresistible. The
s'6. ative CorfaiP gladly accepted of the invitation,

and leaving his brother Hayradin with the fleet,
marched at the head of five thousand men to Al-
giers, where he was received as their deliverer.
Such a force gave him the command of the town;
and as he perceived that the Moors neither sus-
peCted him of any bad intention, nor were ca-
pable with their light-armed troops of opposing

olirtlc, the his disciplined veterans, he secretly murdered the
eldr b o-
(her, be. Monarch whom he had come to affifl, and caused
Com ms
trf Al. himself to be proclaimed King of Algiers in his
trep'' ftcad. The authority which he had thus boldly

usurped, he endeavoured to eftablilh by arts

6 suited

~.

E.MPERO' CHARLES V. 95

suited to the ginius of the people whom he had to B O K
gorin;,by liberality without bounds to. those - -
'who-'favout'ed his promotion, and by cruelty no S5
les unbounded towards all whom he had any rea-
son to diftlRft. c$t satisfied with the throne
which he ha acqpired, he attacked the neigh-
bouring King of Tremen, and hiving van-
quifhed him in battle, added his dominions to
those of Algiers. At the'fameime, he continued
to infest the coaft.pf Spain and Italy with fleets
which resembled the armaments of a great Mo-
narch, rathr than the light squadrons of a Cor-
fair. The devastations which these committed,
obliged Charles, about the beginning of his reign,
to. furnish the marquis de Comares, governor of si5,.
Oran, with oopfufficient to attack him. That
officer, anftied by the dethroned King of Tre-
mecen, executed the commifflon with such spirit,
that Barbaroffi's troops being beat in several en-
counters, he himself was fliut up in Tremecen.
After defending it to the last extremity, he was
overtaken in attempting to make lis escape, and
slain while he fought with an obstinate valour,
worthy of his former fame and exploits.

His brother Hayradin, known likewise by the Theprogreft

.name of Barbarossa, assumed the sceptre of Algiers itHydi",
with the fame ambition and abilities, but with brotlhu.
better fortune. His reign being undisturbed by
the arms of the Spaniards, which had full occu-
pation in the wars among the European powers,
he regulated with admirable prudence the.interior

police

BOOK0 K police of his kingdom, carried oNhis naval ope.
L- * rations with great vigour, and e*tended hi*on-

S3S· queftson the continent of Africa. But, perceiv-

ing that the Moors and Arabs submitted to his
government with the utrfcf relftance, and
being afraid that his cinual depredations
would, one day, dra*upon him the armof the

Pu. hi, do. Christians, he put his dominions under the pro-
ld,,the tcc&ion of the Grid Seignior, and received from
te sultn. him a body of Turkish soldiers sufficient for his

security against his domeftick as well as his so-
reign enemies. At las, the fame o his exploits
daily increasing, Solyman offered him.the com-
mand o the Turkifi fleet, as thg only person
whose valour and kill in naval affairs entitled him
to command against Andrew lJaoria the greatet
fea-officer of that age. Proud of this difinAion,
Barbarossa repaired to Constantinople, and with a
wonderful vertatility of mind, mingling the arts
of a courtier with the boldness of a Corsair, gained
the entire confidence both of the Sultan and his
Vizier. To them he communicated a scheme
which he had formed of rmaking himself master of
Tunis, the mos flourishing kingdom, at that
time, on the coast of Africa; and this being ap-
proved of by them, he obtained whatever he de-
manded for carrying it into execution.

Hist rchem His hopes of success in this undertaking were
ifs TiOliU founded on the intefsine divisions in the kingdom

of Tunis. Mahmed, the las King of that coun-
try, having thirty-four sons by different wives,

named

named Muley-Hafcen, one of the v'ungef among B O°° o
the, his. fccfor. That weak Prince, who - -
, owed this preference not to his own merit, but to S535

the ascendant which his mother had acquired over
a Monarch ;.doating with age, firit poisoned
Mahmed his father in order to prevent him from
-altering his destination; and then, with the bar-
barous policy which prevails wherever polygamy
is permited, and the right 4fucceflion is not
precifely'fixd, he put to death all his brothers
whom he could get into his power. Alrafchid,
one of the eldest, was so fortunate as to escape his
rage; and finding a retreat among the wandering
Arabs, made several attempts, by the aflfftance
of some of their chiefs, to recover the throne,
which of right belonged to him. But there prov-
ing unsuccessful, and the Arabs, from their na-
tural levity, being ready to deliver him up to his
merciless brother, he fled to Algiers, the only
place of refuge remaining, and implored the pro-
tecion of Barbarossa; who, discerning at once
all the advantages which might be gained by
supporting his title, received him with every pof-
fible demonstration of friendship nd refpet&
Being ready, at that time, to set fail for Conftan.
tinople, he easily pervaladed Alrafchid, whose ea-
gernefs to obtain a crown disposed him to believe
or undertake any thing, to accompany him thi-
ther, promising him effectual aiftance from So-
lyman, whom he represented to be the most ge-
nerous, as well as most powerful Monarch in the
world. But no sooner were they arrived at Con-

ftantinople,

* °0° K fantinople, tdan the false Corsair, regardlcfi of

V -. all his promises to him, opened to.he Sultan a
'3s"' plan for conquering Tunis, and annexing it to the

Turkilh empire, by making use of the name of
this exiled Prince, and by means of the party
ready to declare in his favour. Solyman approved,
with too much facility, of this perfidious propo-
fal, extremely suitable to the chara&er of its au-
thor, but altogeter unworthy of. a gret Prince.
A powerful fleet and numerous armyrtere soon
aflembled; at the fight' of which the credulbus
Alrafchid flattered himself, that he would soon
enter his capital in triumph.
tsruces. BUT just as this unhappy Prince was going to

embark, he was arrested by order of the Sultan,
ifut up in the seraglio, and was never heard'of
more. Barbarossa failed with a fleet of two hun-
dred and fifty vessels towards Africa. After ra-
vaging the coasts of Italy, and spreading terror
through every part of that country, he appeared
,before Tunis; and landing his men, gave out
.that he came to assert the right of Alrafchid,
-whom he retended to have left sick aboard the
Admiral galley. The fort of Goletta, which
commands the bay, soon fell into his hands, partly
by his own address, partly by the treachery of is
commander; and the inhabitants of Tunis, weary
.of Muley-Hafcen's government, took arms, and
.dclared for Alrafchid with such zeal and unani-
.zity, as obliged the former to fly so precipitately,
that be klft all his treasures behind him. The

gates,

gates were immediately set open to Barbarofla, as B o ° K
the restorer of their lawful sovereign. But when -v-
Alrafchid himself did not appear, and when in- '535
ltead of his name, that of Solyman alone was
heard among the acclamations of the Turkish fol-
diers marching into the town, the people of Tu-
nis began to fufpet the Corsair's treachery.
Their suspicions being soon converted into cer-
tainty, they ran to arms with the utmost fury,
and surrounded the citadel, into which Barba-
roffa had led his troops. But having foreseen
such a revolution, he was not unprepared for it;
he immediately turned against them the artillery
on the ramparts, and by one brilk discharge, dif-
perfed the numerous but undireEed assailants, and
forced them to acknowledge Solyman as their so-
vereign, and to submit to himself as his viceroy.

Hxs first care was to put the kingdom, of Barbror.'.

which he had thus got poffefilon, in a proper formidbl'
posture of defence. He strengthened the citadel
which commands the town; and fortifying the
Goletta in a regular manner, at vast expence,
made it the principal flation for his fleet, and his
great arsenal for military as well as naval tores.
Being now possessed of such extensive territories,
he carried on his depredations against the Christ-
ian States to a greater extent, and with more
deftrutive violence than ever. Daily complaints
of the outrages committed by his cruizers were
brought to the Emperor by his subjects, both in

VOL. III. H Spain

B Oo K Spain and Italy. All Christendom seemed to ex-
-- -' pee from him, as its greatest and most fortunate
2535. Prince, that he would put an end to this new and
Theex:led odious species of oppreflion. At the fame time
Tfr..'I -. Muley-acen, the exiled King of Tunis, find-

rth, ing none of the Mahometan Princes in Africa

aijn". willing or able to asiR him in recovering his
sss. throne, applied to Charles as the only person who

could assert his rights in opposition to such a for-
midable usurper. The Emperor, equally desirous
of delivering his dominions from the dangerous
neighbourhood of Barbarossa of appearing as the
protetor of an unfortunate Prince; and of ac-
quiring the glory annexed in that age, to every
expedition against the Mahometans, readily con-
cluded a treaty with Muley Hafcen, and began
to prepare for invading Tunis. Having made
trial of his own abilities for war in the late cam-
paign in Hungary, he was now become so fond
of the military character, that he determined to

Hprp,,,rr command on this occasion in person. The united
tioa for the
:,ition. strength of his dominions was called out upon an

enterprize in which the Emperor was about to
hazard his glory, and which drew the attention
of all Europe. A Flemish fleet carried from the
ports of the Low-Country a body of German in-
fantry ; the gallies of Naples and Sicily took on
board the veteran bands of Italians and Spa-
niards, which had ditinguiihed themselves. by so
many victories over the French the Emperor

' arxi Annales Brabant. i. 599,

j hlmett

himself embarked at Barcelona with the flower of B °° K
the Spanilh nobility, and was joined by a con- --
fiderable squadron from Portugal, under the Js3v
command of the Infant Don Lewis, the Empress's
brother; Andrew Doria conducted his own gal-
lies, the bes appointed at that time in Europe,
and commanded by the molt skilful officers: The
Pope furnished all the afllitance in his power to-
wards such a pious enterprize; and the order of
Malta, the perpetual enemies of the Infidels,
equipped a squadron, which, though small, was
formidable by the valour of the knights who frved
on board it. The port of Cagliari in Sardinia
was the general place of rendezvous. Doria was
appointed High-Admiral of the fleet; the com-
mand of the land-forces under the Emperor was
given to the marquis de Guafto.

ON the sixteenth of July, the fleet, consisting Lands;

of near five hundred vessels, having on board Atrica.
above thirty thousand regular troops, set fail from
Cagliari, and after a prosperous navigation, landed
within fight of Tunis. Barbarofra having received
early intelligence of the Emperor's imlnenfe ar-
mament, and fufpecaing its defination, prepared
with equal prudence and vigour for the defence
of his new conquest. H-Ie called in all his corsairs
from their different fiations; he drew fiom Al-
giers what forces could be fiared; he dilpatched
messengers to all the African Princes, Moors as
well as Arabs, and by representing Muley-Hafcen
as an infamous apostate, prompted by ambition

i ,, a and

B v0 K and revenge, not only to become the vassal of a

V.
--J Christian Prince, but to conspire with him to ex-
'535- tirpate the Mahommedan faith, he inflamed thofc

ignorant and bigoted chiefs to such a degree, that
,'ey took arms as in a common cause. Twenty
th,:lfand horse, together with a vast body of foot,
loon assembled at Tunis and by a roper diftri-
bution of presents among them from time to time,
Barbarofli kept the ardour which had brought
them together from subsiding. But as he was too
well acquainted with the enemy whom he had to
oppose, to think that these light troops could re-
fill the heavy-armed cavalry and veteran infantry
which composed the Imperial army, his chief

Layfiegeto confidence was in the strength of the Goletta,
Cot'.' and in his body of Turkifll ioldiers who were

armed and disciplined after the European fashion.
Six thousand of these, under the command of Si-
nan, a renegado Jew, the bravest and most expe-
rienced of all his corsairs, he threw into that fort,
which the Emperor immediately invested. As
Charles had the command of the sea, his camp
was so plentifully supplied not only with the ne-
ceffaries, but with all the luxuries of life, that
Muley-Hafcen, who had not been accustomed to
fee war carried on with such order and magnifi-
cence, was filled' with admiration of the Empe-
ror's power. His troops, animated by his pre-
fence, and confidering it as meritorious to hed
their blood in such a pious cause, contended with
each other for the posts of honour and danger.
Three separate attacks were concerted, and the

German!,

Germans, Spaniards, and Italians, having one B °O K
of these committed to each of them, pushed them -
forward with the eager courage which national 1535'
emulation inspires. Sinan displayed resolution
and skill becoming the confidence which his
master had put in him ; the garrison performed
the hard service on which they were ordered with
great fortitude. But though he interrupted the
beliegers by frequent allies, though the Moors
and Arabs alarmed the camp with their continual
incursions; the breaches oon became so confi-
derable towards the land, while the fleet battered
those parts of the fortifications which it could ap-
proach with no less fury and success, that an as-
lault being given on all fides at once, the place Tes it by
was taken by torm. Sinan, with the remains of Julys z.
his garrison, retired, after an obstinate reiftance,
over a shallow part of the bay towards the city.
By the reduction of the Goletta, the Emperor be-
came matter of Barbarossa's fleet, conlifting of
cighty-feven gallies and galliots, together with
his arsenal, and three hundred cannon, mostly
brass, which were planted on the ramparts; a
prodigious number in that age, and a remarkable
proof of the firength of the fort, as well as of the
greatness of the corsair's power. The Emperor
marched into the Goletta through the breach, and
turning to Muley-lHalcen who attended him,
"Here," fays he, is a gate open to you, by
which you hall return to take poffelfion of your
dominions."

H 3 BAAROSSA,

a 0 0 K BARBAROSSA, though he felt the full weight of

V.
%-_ the blow which he had received, did nor, how-

1'53' ever, lon: courage, or abandon the defence of

Tunis. But as the walls were of great extent,
and extremely weak; as he could not depend on
the fidelity of the inhabitants, nor hope that the
Moors and Arabs would sustain the hardships of
a siege, he boldly determined to advance with his
army, which amounted to fifty thousand men',
towards the Imperial camp, and to decide the fate
of his kingdom by the issue of a battle. This re-
solution he communicated to his principal offi-
cers, and representing to them the fatal confe-
quences which might follow, if ten thousand
Christian slaves, whom he had fiut up in the ci-
tadel, hould attempt to mutiny during the ab-
fence of the army, he proposed as a necessary pre-
caution for the publick security, to massacre them
without mercy before he began his march. They
all approved warmly of his intention to fight; but
inured as they were, in their piratical depreda-
tions, to scenes of bloodshed and cruelty, the
barbarity of his proporal concerning the slaves,
filled them with horror; and Barbarofla, rather
from the dread of irritating them, than swayed
by motives of humanity, consented to spare the
lives of the slaves.

,.f, BY this time the Emperor had begun to ad-
Bar"rota' vance towards Tunis and though his troops sus-

t Epi'res de Princes, par Rufcelli, p. 1 19, &c.

sered

sered inconceivable hardships in their march, o K
over burning sands, destitute of water, and ex-
posed to the intolerable heat of the fun, they oon '3S
came up with the enemy. The Moors and Arabs,
emboldened by their vast superiority in number,
immediately rurfed on to the attack with loud
Auts, but their undisciplined courage could not
long cfand the shock of regular battalions : and
though Barbarofa, with admirable pretence of
mind, and by exposing his own person to the
greatest dangers, endeavoured to rally them, the
rout became so general, that he himself was hur-
ried along with them in their flight back to the
city. There he found every thing in the utmolt
confusion Tome of the inhabitants flying with
their families and effets; others ready to set
open their gates to the conqueror; the Turkih
soldiers preparing to retreat; and the citadel,
which in such circumltances might have afforded
him ome refuge, already in the poffeflion of the
Christian captives. These unhappy men, ren-
dered desperate by their situation, had laid
hold on the opportunity which Barbarofia
dreaded. As oon as his army was at ome dif-
tance from the town, they gained two of their
keepers, by whose afliftance, knocking off their
fetters, and' bursting open their prisons, they
overpowered the Turkish garrifn, and turned
the artillery of the fort againit their former
masters. Barbarossa, disappointed and enraged,
exclaiming fimetimes against the false compaf.
(ion of his officers, and sometime condemning

H 4 his

B O o K his own imprudent compliance with their opi-

V.

*v nion, fled precipitately to Bona.
Trnas fur. MEANWHILE Charles, satisfied with the easy

and almost bloodless victory which he had
gained, and advancing slowly with the precau-
tion necessary in an enemy's country, did not ye
know the whole extent of,his own good fortuh
But at last, a messenger dispatched by the slaves
acquainted him with the success of their noble
effort, for the recovery of their liberty; and at
the fame time deputies arrived from the town, in
order to present him the keys of their gates, and
to implore his protecion from military violence.
While he was deliberating concerning the proper
measures for this purpose, the soldiers, fearing
that they hould be deprived of the booty which
they had expeced, rushed suddenly, and without
orders, into the town, and began to kill and
plunder without diftinaion It was then too late
to restrain their cruelty, their avarice, or licen-
tioufnefs. All the outrages of which soldiers are
capable in the fury of a storm, all the excesses of
which men can be guilty when their pasions are
heightened by the contempt and hatred which dif-
ference in manners and religion inspire, were
committed. Above thirty thousand of the inno-
cent inhabitants perished on that unhappy day,
and ten thousand were carried away as slaves.
Muley-Hafcen took pofellion of a throne fur-
rounded with carnage, abhorred by his fubjets
on whom he had brought such calamities, and

3 pitied

pitied even by those whose ralhnefs had been the B o 0 a
occasion of them. The Emperor lamented the ' _
fatal accident which had stained the luifre of his ij35
victory; and amid/t such a scene of horror there
was but one fpe&acle that afforded him any fatil-
fa&tion. Ten thousand Chritian slaves, among
whom were several persons of diftintion, met
him as he entered the town; and falling on their
knees, thanked and blefed him as their deli-
verer.

AT the fame time that Charles accomplished Refloresthe

exiled King

his promie to the Moorilh King, of re-establishing ,, his
him in his dominions, he did not neglect what
was necessary for bridling the power of the Afri-
can corsairs, for the security of his own fubje&ts,
and for the interest of the Spanilh crown: In or-
der to gain these ends, he concluded a treaty with
Muley-Hafcen on the following conditions; that
he should hold the kingdom of Tunis in fee of
the crown of Spain, and do homage to the Em-
peror as his liege lord; that all the Chriflian
laves now within his dominions, of whatever na-
tion, flould be let at liberty without ransom;
that no subjea of the Emperor's should for the
future be detained in servitude ; that no Turcifh
coriair hould be admitted into the ports of his
dominions; that free trade, together with the
publick exercise of the Chritlian religion, flould
be allowed to all the Emperor's ful)bjess; that the
Emperor hould not only retain the Goletta, but
that all the other ea-ports in the kingdom which

were

o0o 0 were fortified hould be put into his hands; tht
.--.. Muley-Hafcen should pay annually twelve thou-

sand crowns for the subsistence of the Spanish gar-
rifon in the Goletta; that he should enter into no
alliance with any of the Emperor's enemies, and
thould present to him every year, as an acknow.
tedgmnent of his vassalage, fix Moorish horses, and
as miny hawks . Having thus fettled the affairs
of Africa; chastised the insolence of the corsairs;
secured a safe retreat for the ships of his subje&s,
and a proper station to his own fleets, on that
coat from which ihe vws mufl infefaed by piratical
~As 7. depredations; Charles embarked again for Eu-

rope, the tempestuous weather, and lickncfs
among his troops, not permitting him to pursue
Barbarofla .

Yegoy BY this expedition, the merit of which seems to
I^mh,' have been estimated in that age, rather by the
aiucd. apparent generosity of the undertaking, the mag-

nificence wherewith it was conducted, and the
success which crowned it, than by the importance
of the consequences that attended it, the Empe-
ror attained a greater height of glory than at any
other period of his reign. Twenty thoulind

U Du Monts Corps Diplomat. ii. izS. Summonte Hit.
di Napoli, iv. 89.

% Job. Etrop i Diarium Expedition. Tunctana ap. Scard.

v. ii. p. 320, &c. JoviiHiltor. lib. xxxiv. 153, &c. San-
dov. ii. 154, &c. Vertot. Hist. de Cheval. dc Malthc. Epi!-
tres des Princes, par Rufcelli, traduites par Belleforelt, p.
119, 120, &c. Aton. Pontii Confentini Hilt. Belli adv.
Barbar. ap. Matthxi Analefta.

saves

saves whom he freed from bondage, either by his °0o o

V.

arms, or by his treaty with Muley-HafcenV, each i__
of whom he clothed and furnilhed with the means 53s
of returning to their refpetive countries, spread
all over Europe the fame of their benefa&tor's mu-
nificence, extolling his power and abilities with
the exaggeration flowirg from gratitude and ad-
miration. In comparison with him, the other
Monarchs of Europe made an inconsiderable
figure. They seemed to be solicitous about no-
thing but their private and particular interests;
while Charles, with an elevation of sentiment
which became the chief Prince in ChriRendom,
appeared to be concerned for the honour of the
Christian name, and attentive to the publick fe-
curity and welfare.

i Summonte lilt. de Nap. vol. iv. p. 103.

HE

# BOOK VI.

T H E
HIS TORY

OF THE
R E I N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VI.
B o o K T NFORTUNATELY for the reputation of

V' . U Francis I. among his contemporaries, his
*535. conduct, at this junture, appeared a perfec con-

The caues
ofanew traft to that of his rival, as he laid hold on the
war between
th, erw,',r the opportunity afforded him, by the Emperor's
and Francis having turned his whole force against the common

enemy, to revive his prectenfions in Italy, and to
plunge Europe into a new war. The trety of
Cambray, as has been observed, did not remove
the causes of enmity between the two contending
Princes; it covered up, but did not extinguish
the flames of discord. Francis, in particular,
who waited with impatience for a proper occasion
of recovering the reputation as well as territories
which he had loft, continued to carry on his ne-
gociations in different courts against the Empe-

ror,

ror, taking the utmost pains to heighten the jea- B o ° K
lousy which many Princes entertained of his power I
or designs, and to inspire the reft with the fame S3S"
suspicion and fear: Among others, he applied to
Francis Sforza, who, though indebted to Charles
for the poffeflion of the dutchy of Milan, had re-
ceived it on such hard conditions, as rendered
him not only a vassal of the Empire, but a tribu-
tary dependant upon the Emperor. The honour
of having married the Emperor's niece, did not
reconcile him to his ignominious (fate of subjec-
tion, which became so intolerable even to Sforza,
a weak and poor-fpirited Prince, that he listened
with eagerness to the firll proposals Francis made
ofrefcuing him from the yoke. These proposals
were conveyed to him by Maraviglia, or Mer-
veille, as he is called by the French historians, a
Milanese gentleman residing at Paris; and oon
after, in order to carry on the negociation with
greater advantage, Merveille was lent to Milan,
on pretence of visiting his relations, but with
secret credentials from Francis as his envoy. In
this charater he was received by Sforza. But
notwithfianding his care to keep that circum-
stance concealed, Charles fulpe&ing, or having
received information of it, remontrated and
threatened in such an high tone, that the Duke
and his ministers, equally intimidated, gave the
world immediately a most infamous proof of their
servile fear of offending the Emperor. As Mer-
veille had neither the prudence nor the temper
which the funq ion wherein he was emploved re-

quired,

B O K" quired, they artfully decoyed him into a quarrel,

Vl.
K ,-· in which he happened to kill his antagonist, one
ts35c . of the Duke's domefticks, and having instantly

seized him, they ordered him to be tried for that
crime, and to be beheaded. Francis, no less
aftonifled at this violation of a characer held fa-
cred among the moit uncivilized nations, than
enraged at the insult offered to the dignity of his
crown, threatened Sforza with the effets of his
indignation, and complained to the Emperor,
whom he confidered as the real author of that un-
exampled outrage. But meeting with no fatisfac-
tion from either, he appealed to all the Princes of
Europe, and thought himself now entitled to
take vengeance for an injury, which it would have
been indecent and pusillanimous to let pals with
impunity.

Frani e. BEING thus furnished with a pretext for begin-
tcute f
IIYa. ning a war, on which he had already resolved, he

multiplied his efforts in order to draw in other
Princes to take part in the quarrel. But all his
measures for this purpose were disconcerted by un-
foreseen events. After having sacrificed the ho-
nour of his house by the marriage of his son with
Catharine ofMedici, in order to gain Clement, the
death of that Pontiff had deprived him of all the
advantages which he expe&ed to derive from his
friendship. Paul, his fuccefror, though attached
by inclination to the Imperial interest, eemed de-
termined to maintain the neutrality suitable to his
characer as the common father of the contending

Princes.

Princes. The King of England, occupied with B 0 o
domeflick c:res and projects, declined, for once, .
engaging in the affairs of the continent, and re- '5sS
fuled to aift Francis, unless he would imitate his
example, in throwing off the Papal supremacy.
These difappointmenicts led him to solicit, with Hiwr;.ni-
greater earnestness, the aid of the Protestant the(;..,nn,
Princes afociated by the league of Smalkalde. e':""t
That he might the more easily acquire their confi-
dence, he endeavoured to accommodate himfelfto
their predominant paflion, zeal for their religious
tenets. He afficaed a wonderful moderation with
regard to the points in dispute; he permitted
Bellay, his envoy in Germany, to explain his fen-
timents concerning some of the molt important
articles, in terms not far different from those used
by the Protestants ; he even condescended to in-
vite Melandhon, whose gentle manners and pa-
cifick spirit diftinguilhed him among the Re-
formers, to visit Paris, that by his alliftance he
might concert the most proper measures for re-
conciling the contending sets, which so unhap-
pily divided the churchb. Thele concessions
must be confidered rather as arts of policy, than
the result of conviction; for whatever impreflon
the new opinions in religion had made on his
sifters, the Queen of Navarre and Dutchess of
Ferrara, the gaiety of Francis's own temper, and

rcheri Script. Ret. German. iii. 354, &c. Sleid.Hilt.
17.. 183. Seckend. lib. iii. ' 3.

Camerarii Vita Ph. Melan'honis, ia'. Hag. 1655.
p. 12.

his

B °0 K his love of pleasure, allowed him little leisure to

VA.

LA_~ examine theological controversies.

153S.

irritates BUT soon after he loft all the fruits of this dif-
them. ingenuous artifice, by a ftep very inconfient with

his declarations to the German Princes. This
ftep, however, the prejudices of the age, and the
religious sentiments of his own subje&s, rendered
it necessary for him to take. His close union with
the King of England, an excommunicated here-
tick; his frequent negociations with the German
Protestants; but above all, his giving publick
audience to an envoy from Sultan Solyman, had
excited violent suspicions concerning the sincerity
of his attachment to religion. To have attacked
the Emperor, who, on all occasions, made high
pretensions to zeal in defence of the Catholick
faith, and at the very jun&ure when he was pre-
paring for his expedition against Barbarossa, which
was then confidered as a pious enterprize, could
not have failed to confirm such unfavourable fen-
timents with regard to Francis, and called on him
to vindicate himself by ome extraordinary de-
monftration of his reverence for the established
docrines of the church. The indiscreet zeal of
fonc of his fubjeEts, who had imbibed the Pro-
teftant opinions, furnished him with such an oc-
cafloR as he desired. They had affixed to the
gates of the Louvre, and other publick places,
papers containing indecent reflections on the doc-
trines and rites of the Popilh church. Six of the
persons concerned in this rash action were disco-

vered

vered and seized. The King, in order to avert the B o°0 K
judgments which it was supposed their blafphe- - '
mies might draw down upon the nation, appointed 1535
a solemn procession. The holy sacrament was
carried through the city in great pomp; Francis
walked uncovered before it, bearing a torch in
his hand; the princes of the blood supported the
canopy over it the nobles marched in order be-
hind. In the presence of this numerous assembly,
the King, accustomed to express himself on every
fubje& in strong and animated language, declared
that if one of his hands were infe&ed with heresy,
he would cut it off with the other, and would not
spare even his own children, if found guilty of
that crime. As a dreadful proof of his being in
earnef, the fix unhappy persons were publickly
burnt before the procefllon was finished, with cir-
cumftances of the most hocking barbarity attend-
ing their execution c.

THE Princes of the league of Smalkalde, filled They refure

with resentment and indignation at the cruelty' jo i
with which their brethren were treated, could not
conceive Francis to be sincere, when he offered to
proteet in Germany those very tenets, which he
persecuted with such rigour in his own domi-
nions; so that. all Bellay's art and eloquence in
vindicating his master, or apologizing for his
condu&, made but little impression upon them.

Belcarii Comment. Rer. Gallic. 646. Slid. Hill. 17,
&c.

VOL. III. I They

B o 0 K They confidered likewise, that the Emperor, who

hitherto had never employed violence-againil',;
'3 5' dotrines of the Reformers, nor .ven given tlln

much moletation in their progress, was now bound
by the agreement at Ratisbon, not to dilturb ucli
as had embraced the new opinions; and the P;o-
tcilans wifely regarded this as a more certain and
.mnllc:diatce curity, than the precarious and. dif-
tant hopes with which Francis endeavoured to
allure them. Bcfides, the manner in which he
had behaved to his allies at the peace of Can.-
bray, was too recent to be forgotten, and did
not encourage others to rely much on his s-icnd-
fipl or gcncrofity. Upon all thefc accounts, the
Proreftant Princes refuled to ait the French
King in any holtile attempt againfa the Emperor.
Thie Ele&or of Sxony, the most zealous among
the.n, in order to avoid giving any umbrage to
Charles, would not permit Melancthoi to viric
the court of France, although that Reformer,
flattered perhaps by the invitation of ib great a
Monarch, or hoping that his presence there might
be of signal advantage to the Proteflant caul',
discovered a trong iclination to undertake thc.
journey d

The Fnh BUT though none of the many Princes wiwh
'"'cYs'o- envied or dreaded the power of Charles, wouil
,'ii,,tlsi. icond Francis's efforts in order to reduce and

d Camerarii Vita Milan. 4z &c. 415. Seckcnd. lib. ;.

circumibci

circumscribe it, he, nevertheless, commanded a o K

VA.

his army to advance towards the frontiers of Italy.
As his sole pretext for taking arms was that he Is5s
might chastise the Duke of Milan for his insolent
and cruel breach of the law of nations, it might
have been expected that the whole weight of his
vengeance was to have fallen on his territories.
But on a sudden, and at their very commence-
ment, the operations of war tool another direc-
tion. Charles Duke of Savoy, one of the least
active and able Princes of the line from which he
descended, had married Beatrix of Portugal, the
Empress's fifler. By her great talents, he soon
acquired an ablolute acendant over her husband:
and proud of her affinity to the Emperor, or al-
lured by the magnificent promises with which he
flattered her ambition, she formed an union be-
tween the Duke and the Imperial court, extremely
inconsistent with that neutrality, which wife po-
licy as well as the situation of his dominions had
hitherto induced him to obfcrve in all the quarrels
between the contending Monarchs. Francis wvrs
abundantly fenlible of the diftrels to which le
might be expolcl, if, when he eietered Italy, li,
Ihould leave behind himn the territories ofa Prince,
devoted so obfequioully to the Enpcrcr, that he
had ent his eldelt son to be educated in the con::;
of Spain, as a kind of hoi.age ftr his i'deiir.
Clement the Seventh, who had rpre'ncte. riis
danger in a strong light during his interview w'ich
Francis at Marfcilles, fuggeltr t liim, a.: tle:
lame time, the proper method ot guarding aga.i:;'t

J ;. it

B0 K it, having advised him to begin his operations
-V - againit the Milanese, by taking pofeflion of

1S35' Savoy and Piedmont, as the only certain way of

securing a communication with his own domi-

Takes pof- nons. Francis, highly irritated at the Duke on
fefirson of
ihe Duie of many accounts, particularly for having supplied
Savoy's do.
minions. the Constable Bourbon with the money that en-

abled him to levy the body of troops which ru-
ined the French army in the fatal battle of Pavia,
was not unwilling to let him now feel bothhow
deeply he resented, and how severely he could
punish there injuries. Nor did he want several
pretexts which gave ome colour of equity to the
violence that he intended. The territories of
France and Savoy lying contiguous to each other,
and intermingled in many places, various dif-
putes, unavoidable in such a situation, subsisted
concerning the limits of their refpe&ive property;
and betides, Francis, in right of his mother Lou-
ife of Savoy, had large claims upon the Duke her
brother, for her liare in their father's fuccelilon.
Being unwilling, however, to begin hostilities
without ome cauli of quarrel more specious than
these pretensions, many of which were obsolete,
and others dubious, he demanded permiiflon to
march through Piedmont in his way to the Mi-
lanefe, hoping that the Duke, from an excess of
attachment to the Imperial interest, might refute
this request, and thus give a greater appearance
of juLice to all his operations againfl him. But,
if we may believe the historians of Savoy, who
appear to be better informed with regard to this

6 particular

particular than those of France, the Duke rea- B o KC
dily, and with a good grace, granted what it was ----
not in his power to deny, promising free paifage '53'
to the French troops as was delired; so that Fran-
cis, a the only method now left ofjuftifying the
measures which he determined to take, was
obliged to insist for full fatisfa6ion with regard to
every thing that either the crown of France or his
mother Louise could demand of the house of
Savoy'. Such an evasive answer, as might have
been expeaed, being made to this requisition,
the French army under the admiral Brion poured
at once into the Duke's territories at different
places. The countries of Breffe and Bugey, united
at that time to Savoy, were over-run in a mo-
ment. Most of the towns in the dutchy of Savoy
opened their gates at the approach of the enemy;
a few which attempted to make resistance were
easily forced; and before the end of the cam-
paign, the Duke saw himself itripped of all his
dominions, but the province of Piedmonr, in
which there were not many places in a condition
to be defended.

To complete the Duke's misfortunes, the city The city of

of Geneva, the sovereignty of which he claimed, oe,,,',,
and in ome degree possessed, threw off his yoke, liberty
and its revolt drew along with it the loss of the
adjacent territories. Geneva was, at that time,

' HitRoire Gencalogique de Savoye, par Guichcnon,
tom. fol. Lyon. 66o, i. 639, &c.

I3 an

B °v K an Imperial city and though under the direct

---- dominion of its own bishops, and the remote so-
s535. vereignty of the Dukes of Savoy, the form of its

internal conflitution was purely republican, being
governed by yndics and a council chosen by the
cic zens. From these diitin& and often clashing
juri;Jicions, two opposite parties took their rife,
and had long fbfifted in the state; the one com-
posed of the advocates for the privileges of the
community, assumed the name of Eignctz, or
confederates in defence of liberty; and branded
the other, which tipported the episcopal or ducal
prerogatives, with the name of Mammelukes or
slaves. At length, the Protestant opinions be-
:st. ginning to spread among the citizens, inspired

such as embraced them with that bold enterpriz-
ing spirit which always accompanied or was na-
turally produced by them in their first operations.
As both the Duke and Bishop were from interefl,
from prejudice, and from political considerations,
violent enemies of the Reformation, all the new
converts joined with warmth the party of the
Eignotz; and zeal for religion, mingling with
the love of liberty, added strength to that gene-
rous passion. The rage and animosity of two sac-
tions, shut up within the fame walls, occasioned
frequent infurre&ions, which terminating moltly
to the advantage of the friends of liberty, they
daily gained ground.

THEi Duke and Bishop, forgetting their ancient
contel.s about jurifdition, had united againit

their

their common enemies, and each attacked them B oV K
wvith his proper wenpons. The BinQop excom- '-
municated the people of Geneva as guilty of a 5
double crime; of impiety, in apoatizing from
the elabliflied religion; and of sacrilege, in in-
vading the rights of his fe;. The Duk'e attacked
them as rebels against their lawful Prirce, and
attempted to render himself matter of the city,
firfi by furprize, and then by open force. The '5s4.
citizens, delpiing the thunder of the Bifnop's
cenlures, boldly asserted their independence
iagainfl the Duke; and partly by their own va-
lour, partly by the powerful afiiitance which they
received from their allies, the canton of Berne,
together with some finall fipplics both of men
and money, secretly furnished by the King of
France, they defeated all his attempts. Not fa-
tisfied with having repulsed him, or with re-
maining always upon the defensive themselves,
they now took advantage of the Dukie's inability
to resist them, while overwhelmed by the armies
of France, and seized several caliles and places of
strength which he poifeted in the neighbourhood
of Geneva; thus delivering the city from thofc
odious monuments of' its former fubjeleion, amd
rendering the publick liberty more Itcure fur the
future. At the aune time the canton of Birne
invaded and conquered the 1'aijs de Vd, to
which it hd lfome prctenfions. The canttn (;f
Fri.hlrgh, though zealouily attiached teo he C.-
tholick rcligion, and having no l;.bjre ot' con:.cl

1 4 with

a 0 0 K with the Duke, laid hold on part of the spoils of

VI.

--v--' that unfortunate Prince. A great portion of there
's35' conquests or ufiurpacions being till retained by

the two cantons, add considerably to their power,
and have become the most valuable part of their
territories. Geneva, notwithstanding many
schemes and enterprizes of the Dukes of Savoy to
re-eltablifh their dominion there, till keeps pof-
feflion of its independence; and in consequence
of that blessing, has attained a degree of confi-
deration, wealth and elegance, which it could not
otherwise have reached f,

The Empc. AMIDST such a fucceflion of disastrous events,
ror uable
nto a the the Duke of Savoy had no other resource but the
DUke of
s5,oy. Emperor's protetion, which, upon his return

from Tunis, he demanded with the most earnest
importunity; and as his misfortunes were occa-
sioned chiefly by his attachment to the Imperial
interest, he had a just title to immediate assist-
ance. Charles, however, was not in a condition
to support him with that vigour and dispatch
which the exigency of his affairs called for. Most
of the troops employed in the African expedition,
having been raised for that service alone, were
disbanded as oon as it was finilhed; the veteran
forces under Antonio de Leyva were hardly sus-
ficient for the defence of the Milanese; and the

f Hidf, de la Ville de Geneve, par Spon. z2°. Utr. 685,

p. 99. ill. de la Reformation de Suilfe, par Rouchat. Gen.
1i,2, tom. iv. p. 94, &c. tom, v. p. z16, c. Mem. de
Bldllay, J81.

Emperor's

Emperor's treasury was entirely drained by his B o0 K
vast efforts against the Infidels.

»53S.
BUT the death of Francis Sforza, occasioned, o*4

Death of
according to some historians, by the terror of a Srfora Duk

ofMilan.

French invasion, which had twice been fatal to
his family, afforded the Emperor full leisure to
prepare for action. By this unexpeced event, the
nature of the war, and the causes of discord, were
totally changed. Francis's first pretext for taking
arms, in order to chastise Sforza for the insult of-
sered to the dignity of his crown, was at once cut
off; but as that Prince died without issue, all
Francis's rights to the dutchy of Milan, which
he had yielded only to Sforza and his posterity,
returned back to him in full force. As the re-
covery of the Milanese was the favourite object of
that Monarch, he instantly renewed his claim to
it; and if he had supported his pretensions by
ordering the powerful army quartered in'Savoy to
advance without losing a moment towards Milan,
he could hardly have failed to secure the important
point of poffefion. But Francis, who became
daily less enterprising as he advanced in years,
and who was overawed at ome times into an ex-
cess of caution by the remembrance of his padl
misfortunes, endeavoured to establish his rights
by negociation, not by arms; and from a timid rrnnc;'s
moderation, fatal in all great affairs, negleced to that
to improve the favourable opportunity which pre- dutchy.
sented itself. Charles was more decifve in his
operations, and in quality of sovereign, took

poffeflon

B °V K poiTefilon of the dutchy, as a vacant fief of the

Empire. While Francis endeavoured to expl;in
'JS' and aftert his title to it, by arguments and me-

morials, or employed various arts in order to re-
concile the Italian powers to the thoughts of his
regaining footing in Italy, his rival was silently
taking effecual tcps to prevent it. The Empe-
ror, however, was very careful not to difcovcr
too early any intention of this kind; but seering
to admit the equity of Francis's claim, ic appeared
fblicitous only about giving him poiefion in such
a manner as might not disturb the peace of Eu-
rope, or overturn the balance of power in Italy,
which the politicians of chat country were so fond
of preserving. By this artifice he deceived Fran-
cis, and gained so much confidence with the reft
of Europe, that, almofl without incurring any sus-
picion, he involved the affair in new difficulties,
and protracted the negociations at pleasure.
Sometimes he proposcd to grant the investiture of
Milan to the Duke of Orleans, Francis's second
son, sometimes to the Duke of Angouleme, his
third son; as the views and inclinations of the
French court varied; he transferred his choice
alternately from the one to the other, with fch
profound and well-conducted dissimulation, that
neither Francis nor his ministers seem to have pe-
netrated his real intention and all military ope-
rations were entirely ffpended, as if nothing had
remained but to enter quietly into polrefion of
what they demanded.

DURINGc

DURING the interval gained in this manner, B o K

Charles, on his return from Tunis, assembled the _
states both of Sicily andNaples, and as they thought ch:
themselves greatly honoured by the presence of fP^,^:i'"
their sovereign, and were no less pleated with the
apparent disinterestedness of his expedition into
Africa, than dazzled by the success which had at-
tended his arms, prevailed on them to vote him such
liberal subsidies as were seldom granted in that age.
This enabled him to recruit his veteran troops, to
levy a body of Germans, and to take every other
proper precaution for executing or supporting
the measures on which he had determined. Bel-
lay, the French envoy in Germany, having disco-
vered the intention of raising troops in that coun-
try, notwithstanding all the pretexts employed in
order to conceal it, first alarmed his mailer with
this evident proof of the Emperor's insincerity g.
But Francis was so polIeffed at that time with the
rage of negociation, in all the artifices and refine-
ments of which his rival far surpassed him, that
instead of beginning his military operations, and
pulhing them with vigour, or seizing the Milanese
before the Imperial army was assembled, he satis-
fled himself with making new offers to the Em-
peror, in order to procure the investiture by his
voluntary deed. His offers were, indeed, so li-
beral and advantageous, that if ever Charles had
intended to grant his demand, he could not have
rcjeaed them with decency. He dexterously

( Mem. de Bellan, y z.

eluded

B °v0o eluded them by declaring that, until he consulted

VI.

v,. the Pope in person, he could not take his final
''j3 resolution with regard to a point which so nearly

concerned the peace of Italy. By this evasion he
gained ome farther time for ripening the schemes
which he had in view.

7Th- .mpe- THE Emperor at last advanced towards Rome,
rIr eten
Rome. and made his publick entry into that city with ex-
Api . traordinary pomp; but it being found necessary

to remove the ruins of an ancient temple of Peace,
in order to widen one of the ftrcets, through
which the cavalcade had to pass, all the historians
take notice of this trivial circumstance, which
they are fond to interpret as an omen of the
bloody war that followed. Charles, it is certain,
had by this time banilhed all thoughts of peace;
and at last threw off the mak, with which he had
so long covered his designs from the court of
France, by a declaration of his sentiments no less
singular than explicit. The French ambassadors
having in their master's name demanded a defi-
nitive reply to his propositions concerning the in-
veftiture of Milan, Charles promised to give it
next day in pretence of the Pope and Cardinals

W p;ck aflembled in full consistory. These being ac-
invective g,,int cordingly met, and all the foreign ambassadors
Firli'. invited to attend, the Emperor flood up, and ad-

dressing himself to the Pope, expatiated for ome
time on the sincerity of his own withes for the
peace of Christendom, as well as his abhorrence
of war, the miseries of which he enumerated at

great

great length, with fludied and elaborate oratory; 1 0 K-
he complained that all his endeavours to preserve ---
the tranquillity of Europe had hitherto been de- '5s6.
feated by the reflefs and unjust ambition of the
French King; that even during his minority he
had proofs of the unfriendly and hostile intentions
of that Monarch; that afterwards, he had openly
attempted to wrest from him the Imperial crown
which belonged to him by a title no less jut than
natural; that he had next invaded his kingdom
of Navarre; that not satisfied with this, he had
attacked his territories as well as those of his allies
both in Italy and the Low-Countries; that when
the valour of the Imperial troops, rendered irre-
fiftible by the protecion of the Almighty, had
checked his progress, ruined his armies, and
seized his person, he continued to pursue by de-
ceit what he had undertaken with injustice; that
he had violated every article in the treaty of Ma-
drid to which he owed his liberty, and as oon as
he returned to his dominions took measures for
rekindling the war which that pacification had
happily extinguihed ; that when new misfortunes
compelled him to sue again for peace at Cam-
bray, he concluded and observed it with equal
insincerity; that oon thereafter he had formed
dangerous connexions with the heretical Princes
in Germany, and incited them to disturb the
tranquillity of the Empire; that now he had
driven the Duke of Savoy, his brother-in.law
and ally, out of the greater part of his territories;
that after injuries o often repeated, and amidit

B 0 0

o so many sources of discord, all hope of amity or
_-~,^~ concord became desperate; and though he was

'5"3 still willing to grant the investiture of Milan to

one of the Princes of France, there was little pro-
bability of that event's taking place, as Francis,
on the one hand, would not consent to What he
judged necessary for securing the tranquillity of
Europe, nor, on theother, could he think it rea-
fonable or safe to give a rival the unconditional
poffilion of all that he demanded. Let us nor,
however, added he, continue wantonly to hed
cballienge the blood of our innocent fubjecs; let us decide

glecom- the quarrel man to man, with what arms he

pleases to chute, in our Ihirts, on an island, a
bridge, or aboard a galley moored in a river; let
the dutchy of Burgundy be put in deposit on his
part, and that of Milan on mine; these lhall be
the prize of the conqueror; and after that, let
the united forces of Germany, Spain, and France,
be employed to humble the power of the Turk,
and to extirpate heresy out of Christendom. But
if he, by declining this method of terminating
our differences, renders war inevitable, nothing
lhall divert me from prosecuting it to such extre-
mity, as hall reduce one of us to be the pouret
gentleman in his own dominions. Nor do I fear
that it will be on me this misfortune hall fall; I
enter upon action with the fairelt protipef of fluc-
cess; the juflice of my cause, the union of my
fubjets, the number and valour of my troops,
the experience and fidelity of my generals, all
combine to ensure it. Of all these advantages,

i the

the King of France is deftituce; and were my B OO0 C
resources no more certain, and my hopes of vic-
tory no bert,-r founded than his, I would instantly '5;
throw myfclf at his feet, and with folded hands,
and a rope about my neck, implore his mercy".

THIS long harangue the Emperor delivered with

an elevated voice, a haughty tone, and the greatefi
vehemence of exprellion and gesture. The French
ambathaclors, who did not fully comprehend hi,
meaning, as he spake in the Spanili tongue, were
totally disconcerted, and at a loss how they hou!d
answer such an unexpefted invecive; when one
of them began to vindicate his nalter's condudt,
Charles interposed abruptly, and would not per-
mit him to proceed. The Pope, without enter-
ing into any particular detail, fa-isfied himself with
a hort but pathetic recommendation of peace,
together with an offer of employing his finccre
endeavours in order to procure that bleming to
Christendom; and the assembly broke up in tl:e
greatest aftonifhmenr at the extraordiary I:cni:
which had been exhibited. In no part of his
conduct, indeed, did Charles ever deviate b 1'r i-imt'.e.
widely fiom his general char.ticr. I,!ial fd.ofl..
that prudent recollection, trhar cilnno!' 1 tnl re-
gular deportment io ftrlctly r;n:;' ' ' .. ,': n,
and lb admirably adapted to c ; ovw
palions, for which he was at all ,L c -
fjicuous, he appears on this oc.;; .

1cllay, 199. Sandov. Hifior. dl I£; . .

« I

B 0 0o mo august assembly in Europe, boasting of his

YL
a_^- own power and exploits with insolence; inveigh-
*536' ing against his enemy with indecency; and chal-

lenging him to combat with an ostentatious va-
lour, more becoming a champion in romance,
than the first Monarch in Christendom. But the
well-known and powerful operation of continued
prosperity, as well as of exaggerated praise, even
even upon the firmest minds, sufficiently account
for this seeming inconsistency. After having com-
pelled Solyman to retreat, and having fripped
Barbarossa of a kingdom, Charles began to con-
fider his arms as invincible. He had been enter-
tained, ever since his return from Africa, with
repeated scenes of triumphs and public rejoicings;
the orators and poets of Italy, the most elegant
at that time in Europe, had exhausted their ge-
nius in panegyrick, to which the astrologers added
magnificent promises of a more splendid fortune
still in F(ore. Intoxicated with all there, he for-
got his usual reserve and moderation, and was
unable to restrain this extravagant sally of vanity,
which became the more remakable, by being
both so uncommon and so publick.

Ha himself seems to have been immediately

sensible of the impropriety of his behaviour, and
when the French ambassadors demanded next day
a more clear explanation of what he had said con-
cerning the combat, he told them that they were
not to confider his proposal as a formal challenge
to their master, but as an expedient for preventing

bloodihed;

bloofdlhed; he endeavoured- to soften other ex- B 00 I
prefflions,: his difcoufe; ahd spoke in terms full -_--
of refpe& towards Francis. But though this 1536
light apology was far fromi eing sufficient to
remove the offence which had been given, Francis,
by an unaccountable infatuation, continued to
negociate, as if it had fill been possible to bring
their differences to a period by an amicable com-
position. Charles, finding him so eager to run
into the snare, favoured the deception, and, by
seeming to liten to his proposals, gained time to
prepare for the execution of his own designs'.

AT lafl the Imperial army assembled on the chartle

frontiers'of, the Milanese, to the amount of forty Franc,.
thousand foot and ten thousand horse, while that
of France encamped near Vercelli in Piedmont,
being-greatly inferior in number, and weakened
by the departure of a body of Swiss, whom Charles
artfully persuaded the popish cantons to recal, that
they might not serve against the Duke of Savoy,
their ancient ally. The French general, not
daring to'rifque a battle, retired as oon as the Im-
perialifts advanced. The Emperor put himself Mi, 6.
at the head of his forces, which the Marquis del
Guafto, the Duke of Alva, and Ferdinand de
Gonzaga commanded under him, though the fu-
preme dire&tion of the whole, was committed to
Antonio de Leyva, whose abilities and experience
justly entitled him to that diftintion. Charles

i Mem. dc Bellay, 2o;, &c.
'VoL. III. ,K. oon

Y '»». .
*»*" <» ~ ~ ~ ~ ,

B O I K soo difcovred his intention not to confine his

operations to therecoveryiof Piedmont and Sa-
voy, but_-topufh forward nd invade the southern
provincde .f France. This scheme he had long
medira:ed, and hadlong been.taking mealirc-s
forsexecuting it with such vigour as might enfire
,fu&cefs. He had remitted rerge fuuis to his lifter,
the governess of the LowCountries,/ and to his
brother, the King of the Romans, inftruting
them to levy all the forces.intheir power, in order
to form two separate b-odies, the one to enter
France on the fide of Picardy, the other on the
fide. of Champagne; while he, with the -nain
armyi fell up n the bppof;:c frontier ofhe kin,-
dom. Truting to.thefe vatl preparations, he
thqught it impoffile that Francis ,could reiii lfo
' imany unexpe&ed attarks% on fulch different quir-
ters; and began his enterprize with fucbe con-
*' fidence f its happy iue, that he desired Jovius

the hiRoriapi to make a large provision of paper
sufficient to record the viCtories \hich he was
going to acquire: r

M ,

, His miniftcrs and generals,. ifead of enter-
taining the ame 'anguine hopes, rrefented to
hinin n rhlftrongeft terms the danger of leadin.
his troops.bo (ar from his own terrirories, to fiicil
a distance from his magazines, and into provinces
which did not yieldc'fufitient tubint.ence for thi
own inhabitants. ,They entreated, himn to confider
the inexhauftiile resources of Franc n

c main t:li:-
'.ing a ,defenrfive wa., an 'tlh' aive zeal wirt'l

· ' 1: '
." ,; X hi :!

which a gallant nobility would iferve a Prince B K
whomthey loved- in epel!ing the enemies of their k-----
country; they itecalled to his remembrance the '536.
fatal miscarriage of Bourbon and-Pefcara, when
they ventured upon the 'ame enterprizeunder '
circumstances which seered as certain to promise
-fucccils .t'le Marquis del GuaftR, in particular,

fell on'his nees, and..coijured him to abandon
the undertaking~ as defperate.t But many cir-
cumnces combined in leading Charles to dif-
regard'all their rerponfrances. He could flclom
be brought, on any 6ccafion, t6 depart from a
resolution which he had' once taken; le was too
aptto under-rat.e and defpife!'the talents ofhis
rival the King of France, becaue they differed so
widely from his own; he was blilnded by the pre-
,fufinption which 'accompanies prosperity; and.re-
lied, perhaps, in some degree,; on the prophecies
which predi'ted the increase of his own grandeur.
'He not 6nlyadhered obstinately to his own plan,
but determinei' to avance towards France with.
"out waiting for the reduCtion' bfany,.part of Pied-
mont, except such towns as were abfolutelS necef-
fary for preserving his communication with the
Milanese. * '

THE Marquis de Saluces, t' whomr Francis Recover

had entrutted the command of a fiall body of pl',,heuk
troops left for te defence of Piedmont, rendered Savoy'lido.

P I . : ....~ s minionr.

thhis more easy than Charles had any reafo t)
expect&.. That nobleman, educated inm.the court
of France, diftingtuifle bconrinual' marks of

W <*,nc. ,e, X^ . i

·

*i * the

re
\ b i·"

B o, K the King's favour, ad 'noured1fS lately with
* _» _a charge of such import cefuddenly, andiwith-

36 out any provcation or pretext oi£ifguft,,revolt-

ed 4;rom his encefaIpr.. Hi! motives to this
treachrous aon, wer as childilh as the deed
itself was base. Being strongly polffred with a
fuperftiious tSihi in diviatin and astrology, he
believed with full affurandt, that th:fatal period
of the French nition.was' a, hand; that op its
ruins the4Empreror'would eftabilh an universal
monarchy; that therefore he ought to follow the
dictates of prudence, in aacilpg himself to his
riog fortune, and could incurno blame for
deserting aPrince whom Heavep tad'devoted to
deftru&ion ". His treason became still more
-" odious, by his eployinghat very authority with
y, whichiFrancis lsad invested him, in order to open

the kingdom toehis enemies.-? Whatever was
proposed or undeitaketby his officers under his
command fort,,he defence;of. their onquefs, he
ejected or defeated. Whatv'er properly belonged
to hirifelf, ascoimander in chief, to provide or
perform for that' purpose, he totally negleted.
. In this manner, he' rendered towns even of the
greatest ciequence untenale, by leaving them
deftituteither of provifior*i or amniunition, 'or
artillerydor :a flniient garrison; and the Im-
perialifts must have reduced'Pied*iont in as flort
a time as was neceffjry tomafth through ir, if
Montiezat, the gOvernor of Foffano, had not, by

Bclay, 2221a. 6, b.

,; ; t,,' '*i' ' ¥ an

''~ ,r ' X ,., -e.. p.^ '
*, -

ani etraordinary effort of courage and pnilitary B °0 K
conu&,, detained. thehm almost a month, before ---
.that inconsiderable place. .

'*' 9 , 1 t

**

By this meritorious and seasonable service, he Franci's
, gained his.mafler fuffitient time for assembling Pdeftcof

101 his kinlk*.

higforces, and for concerting a fyffem of defence oI,,.
against a dangyr which he now saw to be in-
etable. Francis fixed upon the only proper and
efte&ual plan sos: defeating the invasion of a
powerfuenemy, and his prudence in chufing
this plan,' as well as his perseverance in excuting
it, efervy,.thi* reater Braise, as it was equally
contrary to his \'on natural temper, and to the
gnius of the Frencll nation. le determined to
remain altogether upon the defensive; never to
"hazard aattle, or even a great fIirmifh, without
certainty of success; to fortify his camps in a
reguar manner; to throw garrisons only into
towns of grea strength; to deprive the enemy of
1ubaience, by laying waite the country before
-thenT; andto favethe whole kingdom, by facri-
.sicing oneof its provinces. The execution of this Entrl.l
plan he cormited e tirely to the marechal Mont- renry with

fs~; .' ~' ·/'0 . ,'' * .the e eru.

mnorncy, who was the author of it; a man won- tioanf ir.
derfully fitted by nature for fucia trust. Haughty,
severe, confident in his on abilities, and de-
lfping thof: o other, men 'incapable of being
diveted from any resolution by remonflrances or
entreaties, andgi in prosecuting any scheme, re-
gardlefa alike of love and of pity.

K 3 . ... MONT-

"" '
!& ./;.

134 , THE REIGN OF'THE t

B 0 0 K4. 'E '"C
Y '

B O K MONTMORENCY pade choice of a ftrontg cam
.. -.- under the wals of Avignon, at the confluence of
i'; ere^ :ps the Rhone ahd Durance, ori of which plentiffilly
t Avinc" s.iupplied his troops with-all necessaries from the

inland provinces, and the otfierwovered his camp
on that fide, where it was moftprobable'the enemy
wodd approach. He laboured with; unwearied
iiduftry to render the fortifications of this camp
. impregnable, and assembled thEie a confiderabTe

arriy, though greatly inferior to that of the ene-
my' while the King with anotheir body4 troops
encamped at Valence, higher up the Rhone.
Marfcilles and Aries were the only towns"he
thoughltit necefiry to defena thleformer, in order
to retain the coTrnmantof the 4a; thilatter, as
the arrier of the province of Languedoc; and
each of thefe~le furniflied with numerous garri-
lbnsof his best {obps, commanded by officers
on whose fidelityaiid valou he could rely. ,,The
inhabitants of the other towns, well as of
the'open country were compelled o abanidon
their houses, and were conducted to the' nioun-
tains, to the camp at Avignon, or to the inland
*;Frovince3. .oThe fcrtificatins cfuch places as

in;,!h have aflfor(le' flielteror defence ti. the
enemy, were thrown down. Cornbforage, and
provifions.of every kind, were carried away or de-
froyed; all the mills and ove's were ruined, and
t t!h wells filled tp orrendred ufelef. The.de-
vrftation 'extended' t'roi the Alps to Ialrfeilles,
,'and from the seA to the confines of Dau.phinc;

t *,t. ,4'. nor

.- r , i ** 1 t

nor does history afford any i'rftaie among c il- B VIo K
ized nations, in which :this" cruet expedient for ---
the public faifecy/sas eployed with the fame '3'
,(rigour. . ^ .>

MEANWHILE, thel Emperor arrived with the chaI --

,c· . . :ls I4"u-

van of lhs army on the frontiers of rovrnce, anid vnc.
was ill. so poireiled with confdence of ficcels,
that dring a fe v days' when lie was obliged to
halt until the reft of iis troops came up, he be;an
to divide-his future conquests among his officers;
and as a new incitement to serve him with zeal,
,gave them liberafromifes of offices, lands, and
. honours&in France . The face of detblation,

hotwever, which presented itfelfto him, when he
entered ' country, began to damp his hopes;
andi convinced him :that a Monarch, who, in or-
der to distress an enemy, had ivoluntarily ruined
one of is richelt pjrovinces, would defend the'
rell with obfinate despair. Nor was it long before
'' he becane fenft6leF.}hat Francis's plan of defence

+'4' ., ' V* . ',

was as prude}.as it appeared 4o be extraordinary.
, Hi- 'fleet, on which Charles chiefly depended for

fubfifteice, was prevented for some time by con-
-lary.vinds, anQother accidents to whic naval
dperaCtnsr are fubje, ffom approaching the
Frenihllcoaft, even after its arrival, it afnorded
a't bes a precarious ndni fcaiiny fqpply to such a

lnumierous body of. troops'; nothiing was to be
"found i the countIy itflf for th.:ir ilppurt nor

' BelI;;y), :66, a San.icv. ii. 231
.. .' ,Ka .

112,

B 0 0 K could they lrJI ali considerable aid from the
'-- dominions ofthe DIkec of Savoy, exhausted al-

153. ready b mnaintaining tw rear armies. The

Emper^was no less embarrafl'ft hw, to employ,
. thani hd ttuS'fifihis forces,; for though he was

now in pofffliain. of almost a entire province,
he culd not be said to have the" ommtnd of it,
while.he li 'only dtfencelefs towns; and while
the frencti betides their camp at Avignon, con-
tinued masters f MarfeiltEs and Aries. 'At first
he thought of' attacking tie camp, and of termi-
nating the war by one decifiveblow; but fldiful
officers, who were appointed oYiew it, declared
the attempt to be utterly' impra&icable. ;.He
Mai:;;e5. then gave orders to inveIf'MarleillesAnd Aries,

hoping that te French w ld quit t1ir advan-
tageouspo6fl in order to relijeb therq; 'but lMont-
moren'y achering Airmly to his plan, remained
_ immneable at Avignon, and the Imperlifts iet
with fuch'a warm reception.from the-garrifons of
both towns, tat they reliniiifl** tliir enter-
prizes with loss a disgrace. Alia lai effort,
the Emperor ivanced oncermore towards Avig-
non, tIough with an army hrafrd by th^'perpe-
tual incurfons of ifallparnie of tie French
light troops, weakene by diseases, an dpirited
.by disasters, which seemed more intolerable; be-
cause they were unexpc&ed. t

Montmo. DURING thefepoperItions M9ntmorency found
rtitnys fu' highfelf expoded to',iater danger from his own
hlsplang t roops than 'frmthe enemy; and their inconfi-
dfeact. " '".'." defate'

' 4 : . . .* ^

derate valout went near to have precipitated the B K
kingdom ito those calamities, which he with ---
such inSuftry #id caution had endeavoured to 1536
avoids Unaccustomed to behold an enemy ra-
vaging their' country almost without controul;
impatient of such long ination; unacquainted
with the flow and remote, but certain effecs of
Mo:tmorency's sysem of defence; fe French
:iihed for a battle with no less ardour'that the
,Imperialils. They confidcred the condut of
their general as a disgrace to their country. His
caution they imputed to timidity; his circum-
.fIpetion to want offpirit i and the constancy with
:vhielh he puriued his plan, to obstinacy or pride.
·These reflecions, wifpered at first among the
soldiers anc4lfubalternswere adoptd,, by degrees,
by officers bs higher rank; and as many of them
envied Montmorency's favour with the King', and
more weiiffatisfied with his harsh difgiufting
niannerfthe discontent soon became great in his
A camp,w\hich.-wa filled with general murmurings,

and'almolt 6ps complaints againf his, measures.
Montmorency, on whom the sentiments of his
own troops made as little impreflion as the insults
of tieh emy,, adherd steadily to his sysem;
thoughi in qrder to *concile the army to his
A mixims, no less contrary to the genius of the na-
tion, than to the ideas of war among undisciplined
troopi.,hc aumed an unusual affabilityq'in. his
deportment, and ofttii explained, with great con-
dclcenfion, the 'motives of hiscondut&, the advan-
tages whlh had already. resulted fforf' it, and the

certain
Yjr~. *. >

B o o K: certain success with which it woulf be attended.
1-- At ladl Francis itetd his..army t vignon,

53°- Which having received several rthforcements he

now confidered as of trength sufficient to fce the
enemy. As he had put nofma cohflraint upon
himself,' in consenting that his troops fbou!d re-
main so long upr. the 8efenfive, ican hardly be
doubted bt that his fondnelfSfor what was dar-
" ingand fprendid, added to the impatience both

of officers and soldiers, would':'at last have over-
ruled Montmorency's' alutaty caution".

Tbe r:trc=t HAPPILY the retreat of the e*my delivered the

and mretyh-

C
o: on. kingdom from the danger which any ranll':refo-
al Army. lution miht have eeajwed. TheEEmperor;

after fpendig tv;o,.inglorious months ih Provence,
witlhut hving performed any thing fuitcle to
his v,at prcparations, or that could jufiify the
oqnfidence with w'hich he had boasted his own
..; povwer, found ,l.that, beNlt' Antonio de 'Leyva,

iand other officers ofItinliii nnh', ehadtoft .one
half or his troops by diiates, 'drty fanine; and
that the rIC' t' were in noondition to ruiggre ny
k, .' e'r with cala!itieb, ,4Ythich f, mafiof'heir
Y colipianions had perished *Nccjlty, trefdre,

extolted fiom hii 'orders. to retire'; .nd though
he v.nasli;le ti.ne in' mption before the French
' ;f.i;'picccl his intentionv^j body of light rt;ooi),

'
asti by crowds oftpeaftcs, eager tot be re-
.venged on Lofcw ho 1ha bthtblch doeailion

r M*dts Bellav sió§, &c>sy», &tc. . . ,

.' s ' \ *, 'on

'" t

'

. '
* ..... , ' '. .

on their country, hung upon the rear of the Im- B °0 K
perialifts,- and by fcizing eer!favourable oppor- <--

~~~~~~~tu~y o

~ a~,ttacking,36.

tuity of attacking them, th, threw them often into
confusion. The road by which they fled, for they
pursued their march with such ciforder and. pre-
cipitation, that5 it scarcely deserves the name of a
retreat, was ftrewed.with arms or baggage, which
in their hurry andirepidation theyhad abandoned,
and covered with, the sick, the wounded, and the
dead; insomuch that Martin Bellay, an eye-
witness o£ftheir calamities, endeavours to give his
readers Xome idea of it, by comparing their mi-
fcries to those which the Jews fufF/red from the
i/torious and dettructive arms of the Romans.
If Montihorency, at this critical moment, had ad-
v'ancl with, all his forces, nothing could have
ifavethe whore Imperi army from utter ruin.

B , &i.-

g.en

ra . *
. But'that general, by tiandig so long and lo ob-

Itnately on the defensive, had beconme cautious
to excess; his mind tenrcious of any bent it had
once taken, could ot assume a contrary one as
suddenly as the change of circtmRlances.required;
and h still contiued to repeats, his favourite
maxims, thatit was:imore prudent to allow the
lionrto efcspe,sthawtoidrive him to despair, and
at a bridg of gold flould be made for a retreat-
idg ertemy.' .

THE Empeor haing condu&ed te fhatered
r remains of his tCops to the frontiers of Milan,

j * Mem ..deBllay, 316., Sando,. ii.. dcl Empcr. ii. 232

r.r

'. "If and
rissi' ~ ~, .,* .

B 0 0 K and appointed the marquis del Guaftl to succeed
^-- .' * Leyva in the ovegnment o the dutchy, set out

535. for Genoa. As he could; not bear to expose hjn-

self to the scorn of the. Italians, after fufh a fad
reverse of fortune; -and did not choose, under
his present circumstances, to revifiPt those cities
througth which he hadTfo lately passed in triumph
for one conquest, and in certin expectation of
HNovmbe,. another ; he embarked directly for Spain P.

¢ *, .

Operations NOR was the progress of his arms qopthe oppo-
in Picardy.

site frontier of France such As to alleviate, in any
degree, the lofles whichk 1 had sustained in Pro-
vence. -Bellay,,by his address and intrigues: had
prevailed on so many of the German princes to
withdraw the contiigentof troops wich they had
furnihed to the Kiengi the Romans, tt he
was obliged to lay aside all lhoughts of his in-
tended irruption into Chgpagne. ThoughWa
powerful army levieca in tle Low-Countries en-
tered Picardy, whicl hey found b feebly guard-
ted, whilc.the ftreggthof'tie kingdom was drawn
towards te so; yet-the nobiity taking arms
with their usual alacrity, fupilied {y their fpiric
the defe&t'of the Kirg's trpigj itionl, and"4e-
fended Peronne, and other towns wich were at-
tacked, withjfuch vigour as obliged the enemy
to retire, without makingay conquest of im-
4portabcee. 4' * y .^ -

P Jovii HiPlr. lib. xv. p. 174, Ac.
qi Mcm.de Belay, 3&c. '
1 .

. * s , '"* . .. *Y tA t

THUS Francis, by the. prudence of his own B O° K

measures, nd by the union and valour of his ub- '.-
je&s, rendered abortive those vast efforts in which *536
his rival had alipoft exhausted his whole force.
As thihumbled the Emperor's arrogance no less
than it checked his power, he was mortified more
ftnfibly on this occasion than on any other, during
the courfiof the.long conteits between him and
the Frehch Mqnarch.

ONE circumstance alone embittered the joy Deathof the

DJiuphin.

with which the success of the campaign inspired
Francis. That was the death of the Dauphin,
his eldest on, a Prince of great'hopes, and ex-
tremely beloved by the people on account of his
rfenblance tohis father. This happening fud- Imputedto
denly, was impuited to poison, not only by the poi"o
vulgar, fond of ascribing the death of illustrious
perfoinaes to extraordinary causes, but by the
King. and his miniitrs. The count de Monte-
cuculi,. an Italian inobleman, cup-bearer to the
Dauphiri, being seized on suspicion and put to
the torture, openly charged the Imperial gene-
rals,,Gonzaga and Leyva, with having instigated
him to the commiflion of that crime: he even
threw out Come indireca and obscure accusations
against the Emperor hinmfclf. At a time when
all France was animated with implacable hatred
agalift Charles, this uncertain and extorted charge
was cinfidered as an inconteftible proof of guilt;
while the confidence with which both he and his
officers aferted their own innocence, together

· -

, ':. with
"'* ~~~~~~~~~~..

B °0 K with the indignation, asvell as horror, which they

vi.
L. __expressed on their being supposed capable of such

1536 a detestable ation, were little attended to, and

less regarded'. It is evident, however, that the
Emperor could have no inducement to perpetrate
such a crime,> as Francis was ill in the vigour
of life himself, and had two sons, beside the Dau-
phin, grown up to a good age. That single con-
fideration, without mentioning the Efiperor's
general character, unblemilhed by the imputation
of any deed resembling this in atrocity, is more
than sufficient to counterbalance the weight of a
dubious testimony uttered during the anguish of
torture'. According to the most unprejudiced
historians, the Dauphin's death was occasioned by
his having drunk too freely of cold 'water after
over-heating himself at tennis; ancdthiskaccount,
as it is the most simple, it likewise the most cre-
dible. But if his days were cuf ihlort by piifon,
it is not improbable that tste Emperor conjec-
tured rightly, when he affiried that it had been
administered' by the direction of Catharinc of Me-
dici, in order'to secure the crown to the Duke of
Orleans, her hulband '. The advantages result-
ing to her by the Dauphin's death, were obvious
as well as great; nor did her boundless and daring
ambition ever scruple at any ation necessary to-
wards attaining the objeCtsiwhich he had in view.

r Mem. de Bellay, 289. ,

..

' Sandov. Hist. del Empcr. ii. 23 1.
' Vera y Zuniga Vida de Carlo V. p. 5.

Q't '

. , -..NEXT

,$r,~" *

.J ..

** "
- '

NEXT year opened with a tr:anl.ti.)n verv un- B O K

common, but to incapable of prjr, cin any.v
effcct, tai it w nould ot delCrve to.be m! ntiOIed, Dc-of
if it were not'a ltriki,; n'o',i of rlc peribnal '=rli-'"
animofity-whiclh iinglid itrilf in all the hoftili- '""-i'"ei
ties between Charles and Francis, and which often tor.
betrayed them into such indletelcits towards each
other, as leifened the dignity of boh,. Francis,
accompanied by the peers and princes of the
blood;,'having ten his !iat.in the parliament of
'Pariswith the uliutl folemnities, the advocate-
general appearcd; and after accusing Charles of
Austria (for lb he ahfóed to call the Empci-or),
of. having violated the treaty of C:lnbray, by
wlvich he was ablblved from the homage Idue to
the crpwn of France for the counties of Artois and
Slanders; infifled that this treaty being now void,
l he was till to be confidered as a vassal of the
crown, and by consequence, had been guilty of
rebellion in taling arnis againt h!is. fbvcreign;
a.nd therefore hell demanded that Charles should
be umrnmoned to appear in pe;ibn, or by his
cn.lnfel, before the parliament of Paris, his legal
jutdges, to answer for his crime. The requel: was
granted; a herald repaired to the frontiers of Pi-
ca;dy, and fumnmoned him with !he accuftoned
tfrmalities to appear againfl a day prefixed. That
rcnli being expired, Land no perbn ;ppearin in
' Ils name, the parliament gave jldgmLent, " That
Clarles of' Austria had forfcitid by rebellion and
(:onltumacy thole ficfs; dtlcla;red Fai:nders and
' Aruois to be re-unitcd to. te crown c.' France,"

and

B °0 K and ordered their decree for this pirpof to be

Vi. .sy-. publilhed by found of trumpet on the frontiers of
537. these provincesl.

Clmpa;gn SOON after this vain difplayof his rfetmen t,
opens in,
the AL, rather than of his power, Francis marched to-

wards the Low-Cotutries, as if he had intended
M"arch to execute tht sentence which his parliament had

pronounced,; and to seize those territories whic,
it had awarded to him. As the .een of Hun-
gary,. to whom her brother the Emperor had
committed the government of that part of his
dominions, was not pepared for so early a cam-
paign, he at sirss made fqme progress, and took
several towns of importanc . But being obliged
soon to leave his army in. order to superintend
:the other operations of war, the Flemings having
aflembled a numerous army, not only.recovered
mot of the places whici they had loft- but began
to make conquests in thei? turni. At lat they
invested Terouenne, and the Duke of Orleans,
now Dauphin, by the death of his brother,'and
Montmorency, whom Francis had honoured with
the constable's sword, as the reward of his great
services during the former caripaign, determined

A ufupen. to hazard a battle in order to relieve it. While
fia of arms
tiere, they were advancing for this purpose, and within

a few miles of the enemy, they were ftopt flort
by the arrival 'f an herald from the Qjeen of

Lcttres et Mcmoires d'Etat, par Ribier, tom. Blois,
1666. tom. i. p. . a,

6 Hungary,

Hungary, acquainting him that a fufpcnfion of B OOK K
arms was now agreed upon.

z37.

THIS unexpeced event was owing to the zeal-

ous endeavours of the two sifters, the Queens of
France and of Hungary, who had long laboured
to reconcile the contending Monarchs. The war
in the Netherlands had laid waste the frontier
provinces of both countries, without any real ad-
vantage to either. The French and Flemings
equally regretted the interruption of their com-
merce, which was beneficial to both. Charles
as well as Francis, who had each strained to the
utmost, in order to support the vast operations of
the former campaign, found that they could not
now keep armies on foot in this quarter, without
weakening their operations in Piedmont, where
both wilhed to push the war with the greatest
vigour. All thele circumstances facilitated theJuly 30
negociations of the two Queens; a truce was con-
cluded, to continue in force for ten months, but
it extended no farther than the Low-Countries.

IN Piedmont the war was frill prosecuted with ,. "i

great animosity; and though neither Charles nor
Francis could make the powerful efforts to which
this animosity prompted them, they continued to
exert themselves like combatants, whose rancour
remains after their strength is exhausted. Towns
were alternately loft and retaken; kirmilhes were

' Memoires de Ribier, 56.
VOL. III. L fought

B OO K fought every day; and much blood was shed,
--.-.. without any decisive aion, that gave the fupe-
*537' riority to either fide. At last the two Queens,

determining not to leave unfinilhed the good work
which they had begun, prevailed, by their im-
portunate solicitations, the one on her brother,
the other on her husband, to content also to a
truce in Piedmont for three months. The con-
ditions of it were, that each should keep posse-
Lion of what was in his hands, and after leaving
garrisons in the towns, hould withdraw his army
out of the province; and that plenipotentiaries
flould be appointed to adjust all matters in dif-
pute by a final trearyY.
MTotive of THE powerful motives which inclined both

Princes to this accommodation, have been often
mentioned. The expenccs of the war had far
exceeded the fums which their revenues were
capable of supplying, nor durst they venture
upon any great addition to the impositions then
established, as subjes were not yet taught to
bear with patience the immense burdens to which
they have become accuitomed in modern times.
The Emperor, in particular, though he had con-
trated debts which in that age appeared prodi-
gious , had it not in his power to pay the large
arrears long due to his arny. At the fame time
he had no profpet of deriving any aid in money
or men either from the Pope or Venetians, though

Memoirs de Ribicr, 6. Ribier, i. 29.1..

h .

he had employed promises and threats, alternately, B 0 K
in order to procure it. But he found the former '-
not only fixed in his rellution of adhering fteadi-
ly to the neutrality which he had always declared
to be suitable to his character, but passionately
desirous of bringing about a peace. He per-
ceived that the latter were still intent on their
ancient object of holding the balance even between
the rivals, and solicitous not to throw too great a
weight into either scale.

WI.AT made a deeper impreflion on Charles of w!>;h,

than all these, was the dread of the Turkith arms, Il.nc: ..ml
which, by his league with Solyman, Francis had E.iperroittl
drawn upon him. Though Francis, without the lt..j'i
assistance of a ingle ally, had a war to maintain
againif an enemy greatly superior in power to
himself, yet to great was the horror of Chriflians,
in that age, at any union with Infidels, which
they confidered not only as diflonourable but
profane, that it was long before he could be
brought to avail himself of the obvious advan-
tages resulting from such a confederacy. Neceflity
at last surmounted his delicacy and feruples. To-
wards the close of the preceding year, La Forest,
a secret agent at the Ottoman Porte, had cons
cluded a treaty with the Sultan, whereby Soly-
man engaged to invade the kingdom of Naples,
during the next campaign, and to attack the King
of the Romans in I-ungary with a powerful army,
while Francis undertook to enter the Milanese at
the fame time with a proper force. Solyman had

L puntually

83 0 K punctually performed what was incumbent on

VI.
*- . him. Barbarossa with a great fleet appeared on

537 the coast of Naples, filled that kingdom, from

which all the troops had been drawn towards
Piedmont, with conflernation, landed without
refinance near Taranto, obliged Caltro, a place
of some strength, to surrender, plundered the ad-
jacent country, and was taking measures for te-
curing and extending his conquefls, when the
unexpected arrival of Doria, together with the
Pope's gallies, and a squadron of the Venetian
fleet, made it prudent for him to retire. In
Hungary the progress of the Turks was more for-
midable. Mahmet, their general, after gaining
several finall advantages, defeated the Germans
in a great battle at Effek on the Dravea. Hap-
pily for Christendom, it was not in Francis's
power to execute with equal exaanefs what he
had stipulated; nor could he assemble at this junc-
ture an army trong enough to penetrate into the
Milanese. By this he failed in recovering poffif-
sion of that dutchy; and Italy was not only saved
from the calamities of a new war, but from feel-
ing the desolating rage of the Turkith arms, as
an addition to all that it had fufferedb. As the
Emperor knew that he could not long resist the
efforts of two such powerful confederates, nor
could expect that the fame fortunate accidents
would concur a second time to deliver Naples,

Illiinhcffi Hist. Hung. lib. xiii. p. 1,9.
b Jovii Hiflor. lib. xxxv. p. 18,.

and

and to preserve the Milanese: As he foresaw that B O K
the Italian states would not only tax him loudly -v-
with inlatiable ambition, but might even turn Sj7'
their arms against him, if he ihould be so re-
gardlefs of their danger as obstinately to protract
the war, he thought it necessary, both for his
safety and reputation, to give his conent to a
truce. Nor was Francis willing to sustain all the
blame ofobftruding the re-eftabli(hment of peace,
or to expore himself on that account to the danger
of being deserted by the Swils and other so-
reigners in his service. He even began to appre-
hend that his own fubjets would fcrve him coldly,
if by contributing to aggrandize the power of the
Infidels, which it was his duty, and had been the
ambition of his ancefltors to depress, he continued
to aft in direct opposition to all the principles
which ought to influence a Monarch diftinguilhed
by the title of Moss Christian King. He chore,
for all there reasons, rather to run the risk of dif-
obliging his new ally the Sultan, than, by an un-
seasonable adherence to the treaty with him, to
forfeit what was of greater consequence.

BUT though both parties consented to a truce, NeIgc;:.

tions Ut a
the plenipotentiaries found insuperable difficul- peace be.

tween

ties in fettling the articles of a definitive treaty. Charle, and
Each of the Monarchs, with the arrogance of a Francis
conqueror, aimed at giving law to the other; and
neither would To far acknowledge his inferiority,
as to sacrifice any point of honour, or to relinquish
any matter of right, so that the plenipotentiaries

L 3 fpcnt

3 o K sent the time in long and fruitless negociations,

. and separated afzer agreeing to prolong the truce

IS5s. for a few months.

The P1ope THE Pope, however, did not despair of accom-
condiues
thfc in er- plifhing a point in which the plenipotentiaries

had failed, and took upon himself the sole burden
of negociating a peace. To form a confederacy
capable of defending Christendom from the for-
midable inroads of the Turkish arms, and to con-
cert effectlal measures for the extirpation of the
Lutheran herely, were two great obje&s which
P.ul had much at heart, and he confidered the
union of the Emperor with the King of France as
an cfential preliminary to both. To be the
inftrumert of reconciling these contending Mo-
narchs, whom his predeceflors by their interested
and indecent intrigues had so often embroiled,
was a circumstance which could not fail of throw-
ing diftingui fed lufire on his characer and ad-
;ninillration. Nor was he without hopes that,
while he pursued this laudable end, he might
fccure advantages to his own family, the aggran-
dizing of which he did not neglec, though he
aimed at it with a less audacious ambicion than
was common among the Popes of that century.
nfluenced by these confdleerations, he proposed
an interview between the two Monarchs at Nice,
and offered to repair thither in person, that le:
might at as mediator in comporing all their dif-
ferences. When a Pontiffof a venerable charar-
ecr, and of a very advanced age, was willing,

fo.ll

from his zeal for peace, to undergo the fatigues B °VI K
of such a distant journey, neither Charles nor V -
Francis could with decency decline the interview.
But though both came to the place of rendez-
vous, so great was the difficulty of adjusting the
ceremonial, or such the remains of diltruft and
rancour on each fide, that they refused to fee one
another, and every thing was tranfaaed by the
intervention of the Pope, who visited them alter-
nately. With all his zeal and ingenuity he could
not find out a method of removing the obitacles
which prevented a final accommodation, parti-
cularly those arising from the poffeflion of the
Milanese; nor was all the weight of his authority
sufficient to overcome the obstinate perseverance
of either Monarch in asserting his own claims.
At lalt, that he might not seem to have laboured A truce so
altogether without effect, he prevailed on them c" ,'id
to sign a truce for ten years, upon the fame con- ',,Ni'r.
dition with the former, that each should retain
what was now in his poffeflion, and in the mean
time hould fend ambalfadors to Rome, to difcuts
their pretensions at leisure .

THUS ended a war of no long continuance, but

very extensive in its operations, and in which
both parties exerted their utmolt flrength. Though
Francis failed in the objcet that he had princi-

c Recucil des Traitez, ii. 210. Relatione del Nicolo Tiepolo

de 'ahocameno di Nizza chcz. Du Mont Corps Diplomat.
par. ii. p. 174.

L 4 pally

°0 0 K pally in view, the recovery of the Milanese, he
VI.
*». .v acquired, nevertheless, great reputation by the

.538 wisdom of his measures as well as the success of

his arms in repulsing a formidable invasion; and
by securing pofCefion of one half of the Duke of
Savoy's dominions, he added no inconsiderable
accellion to his kingdom. Whereas Charles, re-
pulsed and baffled, after having boasted so arro-
gantly of victory, purchased an inglorious truce,
by sacrificing an ally who had rashly confided too
much in his friendship and power. The unfor-
tunate Duke murmured, complained, and re-
monftrated againit a treaty ol much to his dil-
advantage, but in vain; he had no means of
redress, and was obliged to submit. Of all his
dominions, Nice, with its dependencies, was the
only corner of which he himself kept poffeflion.
He saw the reft divided between a powerful in-
vader and the ally to whose protection he had
trusted, while he remained a fad monument of
the imprudence of weak princes, who, by taking
part in the quarrel of mighty neighbours, between
whom they happen to be situated, are crulhed and
overwhelmed in the lhock.

Inte'v^"w A FEW days after signing the treaty of truce,
Ihetween
Cha.Iei and the Emperor let fail for Barcelona, but was driven
Franci at
AIFpne. by contrary winds to the iland St. Margaret

on the coast of Provence. When Francis, who
happened to be not far distant, heard of this, he
confidered it as an office of civility to invite him
to take Ihelter in his dominions, and proposed a

personal

personal interview with him at Aigues-mortes. B 0 K
The Emperor, who would not be outdone by his L--~
rival in complaisance, instantly repaired thither. '53
As oon as he cast anchor in the road, Francis,
without waiting to fettle any point of ceremony,
but relying implicitly on the Emperor's honour
for his security, visited him on board his galley,
and was received and entertained with the warmelt
demonstrations of esteem and affection. Next
day the Emperor repaid the confidence which the
King had placed in him. He landed at Aigues-
niortes with as little precaution, and met with a
reception equally cordial. He remained on hore
during the night, and in both visits they vied with
each other in expreflions of refpe& and friend-
(hipd. After twenty years of open hostilities, or
of secret enmity; after so many injuries recipro-
cally inflited or endured; after having formally
given the lie and challenged one another to ingle
combat; after the Emperor had inveighed so
publickly against Francis as a Prince void of
honour or integrity; and Francis had accused him
as accessary to the murder of his eldest son, such
an interview appears altogether singular and even
unnatural. But the history of these Monarchs
abounds with such surprising transitions. From
implacable enmity they appeared to pass, in a
moment, to the most cordial reconcilement; from

d Sandov. Hit. vol.ii. 238. Relation dl'entrevuedeCharl.

V. & Fran. I. p:r M. de la Rivoire. Hilt. de Langued. par
D. D. De Vic & \'aifette. tomn. v. Prcuves. p. 93.

suspicion

n o1 K suspicion and ditiruft to perfec confidence; and
A -- s from pratifing all the dark arts of a deceitful
'1IS' policy, they could assume, of a sudden, the libe-

ral and open manners of two gallant gentlemen.

THE Pope, betides the glory of having refored

peace to Europe, gained, according to his ex-
pecation, a point of great consequence to his
family, by prevailing on the Emperor to betroth
Margaret of Austria, his natural daughter, for-
merly the wife of Alexander di Medici, to his
grandson O'avio Farnese, and in consideration
of this marriage, to bestow several honours and

Thea territories upon his future fon-in-law. A very
The ffifr;.

,'on f tragical event, which happened about the begin-
<a Mdici. ning of the year one thouland five hundred and

thirty-feven, had deprived Margaret of her first
husband. That young prince, whom the Empe-
ror's partiality had railed to the supreme power in
Florence, upon the ruins of the publick liberty,
neglected entirely the cares of government, and
abandoned himself to the most diifolute de-
bauchery. Lorenzo di Medici his nearest kinf-
man was not only the companion but director of
his pleasures, and employing all the powers of a
cultivated and inventive genius in this diflonour-
able miniltry, added uch elegance as well as
variety to vice, as gained him an absolute ascend-
ant over the mind of Alexander. But while Lo-
renzo seemed to be funk in luxury, and afFeecd
such an appearance of indolence and effeminacy,
that he would not wear a fworl, and trembled ;1:

the

the fight of blood, he concealed under that dif- B K
guile, a dark, designing, audacious spirit. Prompt- ----.
ed either by the love of liberty, or allured by the '53-
hope of attaining the supreme power, he deter-
mined to assassinate Alexander his benefactor and
friend. Though he long revolved this design in
his mind, his reserved and suspicious temper pre-
vented him from communicating it to any person
whatever; and continuing to live with Alexander
in their uffal familiarity, he, one night, under
pretence of having secured him an assignation with
a lady of high rank whom he had often solicited,
drew that unwary Prince into a secret apartment
of his house, and there flabbed him, while he lay
carelessly on a couch expecting the arrival of the
lady whose company he had been promised. But
no sooner was the deed done, than flanding afto-
nilhed, and struck with horror at its atrocity, he
forgot, in a moment, all the motives which had
induced him to commit it. Instead of rouzing the
people to recover their liberty by publishing the
death of the tyrant, instead of taking any flep to-
wards opening his own way to the dignity now
vacant, he locked the door of the apartment, and,
like a man bereaved of reason and presence of
mind, fled with the utmofl precipitation out of
the Florentine territories. It was late next morn-
ing before the fte of the unfortunate Prince was
known, as his attendants, accustomed to his irre-
gularities, never entered his apartment early. Im-
mediately the chief persons in the hfate affemblecl.
Being induced partly by the zeal of cardinal Cibo

4 for

B O o K for the house of Medici, to which he was nearly

- related, partly by the authority of Francis Guic-
CotSodi ciardini, who recalled to their memory, and re-

e'diit presented in riking colours the caprice as well
Fbed of' th as turbulence of their ancient popular govern-
Florentine
fIatc ment, they agreed to place Cofino di Medici, a

youth of eighteen, the only male heir of that il-
luftrious house, at the head of the government;
though at the fame time such was their love of
liberty, that they eftablilhed several reguiations
in order to circumscribe and moderate his power.

Hisrvern MEANWHILE Lorenzo having reached a place
mentoppo£-
ed bythe of safety, made known what he had done, to

fle^in. Philip Strozzi and the other Florentines who had

been driven into exile, or who had voluntarily
retired, when the republican form of government
was abolishcd, in order to make way for the do-
minion of the Medici. By them, the deed was
extolled with extravagant praises, and the virtue
of Lorenzo was compared with that of the elder
Brutus, who disregarded the ties of blood, or with
that of the younger, who forgot the friendship
and favours of the tyrant, that they might pre-
serve or recover the liberty of their countrye.
Nor did they reft satisfied with empty panegy-
ricks; they immediately quitted their different
places of retreat, assembled forces, animated their
vassals and partizans to take arms, and to seize
this opportunity of re-eftablilhing the publick

e lettere di Principi, tom. iii. p. 52.

liberty

liberty on its ancient foundation. Being openly B 0O K
afifted by the French ambassador at Rome, and --
iscretly encouraged by the Pope, who bore no 5
*rood-will to the house of Medici, they entered
tie Florentine dominions with a considerable
body of mrn: But the persons who had elected
Corino poe'lTeed not only the means of supporting
his government, but abilities to employ them in
the moil proper manner. They levied, with the
'reCateft expedition, a good number of troops; they
ende::voured by every art to gain the citizens of
greatest authority, and to render the adminiftra-
tion of the young Prince agreeable to the people.
Above all, they courted the Emperor's protecion,
as the only firm foundation of Cosmo's dignity
and power. Charles, knowing the propensity of
the Florentines to the friendship of France, and
how much all the partisans of a republican go-
vernment dctefted him as the oppressor of their
liberties, saw it to be greatly for his interest to
prevent the re-establishment of the ancient con-
flitution in Florence. For this reason, he not
only acknowledged Cofno as head of the Flo-
rentine slate, and conferred on him all the titles
of honour with which Alexander had been digni-
sied, but engaged to defend him to the umoft;
and as a pledge of this, ordered the commanders
of such of his troops as were stationed on the fron-
tiers of Tuscany, to support him against all ag-
grefors. By their aid, Cosmo obtained an easy
vitory over the exiles, whose troops he surprised
i the niglht-ime, and took moLt of the chiefs pri-

2 foners;

B 0 0 K foners: an event which broke all their measures,

VI.

and fully established his own authority. But
S8j though he was extremely desirous of the addi-

tional honour of marrying the Emperor's daugh.
ter, the widow of his predecessor, Charles, secure
already of his attachment, chose rather to gratify
the Pope, by bestowing her on his nephew .

iThefriend- DURING the war between the Emperor and
Em: between
Fr.ncis and Francis, an event had happened which abated in
Henry VIIi.
bewins to Iome degree the warmth and cordiality of friend-

. snip which had long subsisted between the latter

and the King of England. James the Fifth of
Scotland, an enterprizing young Prince, having
heard of the Emperor's intention to invade Pro-
vence, was so fond of fnewing that he did nor
yield to any of his ancestors in the sincerity of his
attachment to the French crown, and so eager to
diftinguifl himself by ofme military exploit, tlha
he levied a body of troops with an intention of
leading them in person to the assistance of the
King of France. Though some unfortunate ac-
cidents prevented his carrying any troops into
France, nothing could divert him from going
thither in person. Immediately upon his landing,
he haltened to Provence, but had been detained
so long in his voyage, that he came too late to
have any share in the military operations, and met

' Jovii HiRf. c. xcviii. p. 218, &c. Bclcarii Comment

1. xxii p. 696. Iltoria de fui tempi di Giov. Bat. Adriani.
Ven. 1587. p. 1o.

the

the King on his return after the retreat of the Im- B O o K
perialifts. But Francis was so greatly pleased --
with his zeal, and no less with his manners and
conversation, that he could not refuse him his
daughter Magdalen, whom he demanded in rrar- s.j:.
riage. It mortified Henry extremely to fee a
Prince of whom he was immoderately jealous,
form an alliance, from which he derived such an
acceflion of reputation as well as fecurityg. He
could not, however, with decency, oppolc Francis's
beLtowing his daughter upon a Monarch delcended
from a race of Princes, the moil ancient and
faithful allies of the French crown. But when
James, upon the sudden death of Magdalen, de-
manded as his second wife Mary of Guile, he
warmly folicired Francis to deny his suit, and in
order to disappoint him, asked that lady in mar-
riage tor himlelf. When Francis preferred the
Scottilh King's sincere courtship to his artful and
malevolent propolal, he dilcovered much diffatis-
falion. '1 he pacification agreed upon at Nice,
and the familiar interview of the two rivals at
Aigues-mortes, filled Henry's mind with new
suspicions, as if Francis had altogether renounced
his friendflip for the fake of new connections
with the Emperor. Charles, thoroughly ac-

Th1' Emp¢-

quainted with the temper of the Englifli King, r c',urts
and watchful to oblerve all the hiftings and ca- H
prices of his paflions, thought this a fvourable
opportunity of renewing his negociations with

Hilt. of Scotland, vol. i. p. 77.

him,

B 0 0 Ki him, which had been long broken off. By the
* _- _death of Queen Catharine, whose interest the Em-

3 peror could not with decency have abandoned, the

chief cause of their discord was removed; so that
without touching upon the delicate question of
her divorce, he might now take what measures
he thought most effctual for regaining Henry's
good-will. For this purpose, he began with pro-
poing several marriage-treaties to the King. He
offered his niece, a daughter of the King of Den-
mark, to Henry himself; he demanded the prin-
cess Mary for one of the Princes of Portugal, and
was even willing to receive her as the King's ille-
gitimate daughter h. Though none of these pro-
jeaed alliances ever took place, or perhaps were
ever seriously intended, they occasioned such fre-
quent intercourse between the courts, and so
many reciprocal profeflions of civility and esteem,
as considerably abated the edge of Henry's ran-
cour against the Emperor, and paved the way for
that union between them which afterwards proved
so disadvantageous to the French King.

Progresof THE ambitious schemes in which the Emperor
the Refor.
mtion, had been engaged, and the wars he had been car-

rying on for some years, proved, as usual, ex-
tremely favourable to the progress of the Refor-
mation in Germany. While Charles was absent
upon his African expedition, or intent on his vail
projects againIt France, his chief object in Ger-

Menm. d Ribier, t. i. 496.

many

many was to prevent the difflnfions about relgion B o
from dilturbing the publick tranquillity, by
granting such indulgence to the Protestant Princes '33s
as might induce them t concur with his mea-
fures, or at least hinder them from taking part
with his rival. For this reason, he was careful
to secure to the ProteRants the poffefion of all
the advantages which they had gained by the ar-
ticles of pacification at Nuremberg, in the year
one thousand five hundred and thirty-two'; and
except ome night trouble from the proceedings
of the Imperial chamber, they met ith nothing
to disturb them in the exercise of their religion,
or to interrupt the successful zeal with which they
propagated their opinions. Meanwhile the Pope sNmc:i
continued his negociations for convoking a gene- trp"eg
ral council; and though the Protestants had ex- toa enetak

Council,

pressed great diffatisfa&ion with his intention to
fix upon Mantua as the place of meeting, he ad-
hered obstinately to his choice, issued a bull on
the second of June, one thousand five hundred
and thirty-fix, appointing it to assemble in that
city on the twenty-third of May the year follow-
ing; he nominated three cardinals to preside in
his name enjoined all Christian Princes to coun-
tenance it by their authority, and invited the pre-
lates of every nation to attend in perion. This
citation of a council, an assembly which fiom its
nature and intention demanded quiet times, s
well as pacifick dispositions, at the very junture

Du Mont Corps Diplom. tom, iv. part . p. 38.
VOL. I!!, M vhen

B °0 K when the Emperor was on his march towards

VI.
-'.-' France, and ready to involve a great part of Eu-

rope in the confusions of war, appeared to every
person extremely unseasonable. It was intimated,
however, to all the different courts by nuncios
dispatched of purpose . With an intention to
gratify the Germans, the Emperor, during his
residence in Rome, had warmly solicited the
Pope to call a council; but being at the fame
time willing to try every art in order to persuade
Paul to depart from the neutrality which he pre-
served between him and Francis, he sent Heldo
his vice-chancellor into Germany, along with a
nuncio dispatched thither, inftrucing him to fe-
cond all the nuncio's representations, and to en-
force them with the whole weight of the Imperial
Ivb. . authority. The Protestants gave them audience

at Smalkalde, where they had assembled in a body,
in order to receive them. But after weighing all
their arguments they unanimously refused to ac-
knowledge a council summoned in the name and
by the authority of the Pope alone; in which he
assumed the sole right of presiding; which was
to be held in a city not only far distant from Ger-
many, but fubje& to a Prince, a tranger to them,
and closely conneted with the court of Rome;
and to which their divines could not repair with
safety, epecially after their doarines had been
Ltigmatized in the very bull of convocation with
the name of heresy. These and many other ob-

k Pallavic. Hill. Cone. Trid. 11 3.

jetions

jetions against the council, which appeared to B K
them unanswerable, they enumerated in a large
manifesto, which they publiihed in vindication of 1Ss.
their condut '.

AGAINST this the court of Rome exclaimed as

a flagrant proof of their obstinacy and prcfilmp-
tion, and the Pope still persisted in his resolution
to hold the council at the time and in the place
appointed. But some unexpected difficulties
being Itarted by the Duke of Mantua, both about
the right ofjurifdicion over the persons who re-
forted to the council, and the security of his ca-
pital amidst such a concourse of strangers, the
Pope, after fruitless endeavours to adjust there,
first prorogued the council for some months, and olno'. .
afterwards transferring the place of meeting to
Vicenza in the Venetian territories, appointed it
to assemble on the first of May in the following
year. As neither the Emperor nor French King,
who had not then come to any accommodation,
would permit their fubjeds to repair thither, not
a tingle prelate appeared on the day prefixed, and
the Pope, that his authority might not become
altogether contemptible by ol many ineffectual
intimations, put off the meeting by an indefinite
prorogation 'n.

I Scidan, 1. xii. 123, &c. Seckcud. Corn. lib. iii. p.
143, &c.

' F. Paul, 117. Pallavic. 117.

M 2 BUT,

B O°V K BUT, that he might not seem to have turned

r- - his whole attention towards a reformation which

1538.

A partial he was not able to accomplish, while he negleetc.l
reformation
ofabufe by that which was in his own power, he deputed a
th Pope. certain number of cardinals and bilhops, with

full authority to inquire into the abuses and cor-
ruptions of the Roman court and to propose t!h
most effetual method of removing them. The
scrutiny, undertaken with reluctance, was carried
on slowly and with remissness. All defe&s were
touched with a gentle hand, afraid of probing too
deep, or of discovering too much. But even by
this partial examination, many irregularities were
deteced, and many enormities exposed to light,
while the remedies which they fuggeited as most
proper, were either inadequate, or were never ap-
plied. The report and resolution of these depu-
ties, though intended to be kept secret, were
transmitted by ome accident into Germany, and
being immediately made publick, afforded ample
matter for refle&ion and triumph to the Pro-
tefants . On the one hand they demonitrated
the necessity of a reformation in the head as well
as the members of the church, and even pointed
out many of the corruptions against which Luther
and his followers had remonstrated with the greatelt
vehemence. They flewed, on the other hand,
that it was vain to expet this reformation from
ecclefiafticks themselves, who, as Luther strongly

Sleidan, 233.

exprefle,.i

eKpreffed it, piddled at curing warts, while they aB °o K
overlooked or confirmed ulcers °. .

3539.
THE earnestness with which the Emperor Aleeaue

formed in

seemed, at first, to press their acquiescing in the oppoition
Pope's scheme of holding a council in Italy, smailt'de.
alarmed the Protestant Princes so much, that they
thought it prudent to strengthen their confede-
racy, by admitting several new members who so-
licited that privilege, particularly the King of
Denmark. Heldo, who, during his residence in
Germany, had observed all the advantages which
they derived from that union, endeavoured to
counterbalance its effets by an alliance among
the catholick powers of the Empire. This league,
distinguished by the name of Holy, was merely
defensive; and though concluded by Heldo in
the Emperor's name, was afterwards disowned by
him, and subscribed by very few Princes .

THE Protestants oon got intelligence of this Alrms tl

association, notwichftanding all the endeavours of
the contracting parties to conceal it; and their
zeal, always apt to fufpet and to dread, even to
excess, every thing that seemed to threaten reli-
gion, inffantly took the alarm as if the Emperor
had been just ready to enter upon the execution
of some formidable plan for the extirpation of
their opinions. In order to disappoint this, they
held frequent consultations, they courted the

" Seek. 1. iii. 164. v Seck. I. ii. 171. Rccucil
e: Traitez.

M 3 Kings

B 0I I; Kilngs of France and England with great affiduit;,
_ --.-, and even began to think of railing the refpelivc
,s9. contingents both in men and money which they

were obliged to furnifi by ihe treaty oSmalkalde.
But it was not long before they were convinced
that these apprehensions were without foundation,
and that the Emperor, to whom repose was ab-
folutely necessary after efforts so much beyond
his ltrength in the war with France, had no
thoughts of dilfurbing the tranquillity of Ger-
many. As a proof of this, at an interview with
Aril 19. the Protestant Princes in Francfort, his ambaffa-

dors agreed that all concefions in their favour,
particularly those contained in the pacification of
Nuremberg, should continue in force for fifteen
months; that during this period all proceedings
of the Imperial chamber against them hould be
suspended; that a conference hould be held by a
few divines of each party, in order to discuss the
points in controversy, and to propose articles of
accommodation which flould be laid before the
next diet. Though the Emperor, thar he mighi
not irritate the Pope, who remonstrated again&e
the firfi part of this agreement as impolitick, and
a;aillt the latter as an impious encroachneiU
upon his prerogative, never formally ratified tliis
convention, it was bl;erved with considerable ex-
actntis, and greatly lirengthcned the bais of that
cclefiaftical liberty, for which the l'roteflait
Contcnded q'

a }'. Paul, .:. Slitl.
S .-i . Scc<. . iii. 200.

A )'.--.

A FEW days after the convention at Francfort, B o I K

George Duke of Saxony died, and his death was
an event of great atvantage to the Reformation. Ap53924.
That Prince, the head of the Albertine, or younger Roet-
branch of the Saxon family, possessed, as marquis be]at ,,
of Milnia and Thuringia, extensive territories, s;xo'-.
comprehending Dresden, Leipfick, and other
cities now the most confderable in the electorate.
From the first dawn of the Reformation, he had
been its enemy as avowedly as the electoral
Princes were its proteCtors, and had carried on
his opposition not only with all the zeal flowing
from religious prejudices, but with a virulence
inspired by personal antipathy to Luther, and im-
bittered by the domefick animosity subsisting be.
tween him and the other branch of his family.
By his death without issue, his fucceflion fell to
his brother Henry, whose attachment to the Pro-
teftanr religion surpassed, if polible, that of his
predecessor to popery. Henry no iboner took
porfeflion of his new dominions, than, disregard-
ing a clause in George's will, dictated by his bi-
gotry, whereby he bequeathed all his territories
to the Emperor and King of the Romans, if his
brother hould attempt to make any innovation in
religion, he invited ome Protestant divines, and
among them Luther himself, to Leipfick. By
their advice and afTitance, he overturned in a
few weeks the whole system of ancient rites, elta-
blirfling the full exercise of the reformed religion,
with the universal applause of his fubjets, who
h.la long wilhed for this change, which the au-

M 4 thority

B o00 K thority of their Duke alone had hitherto pre-
-. _ vented'. This revolution delivered the Pro-
'5:9' teflants from the danger to which they were ex-

posed by having an inveterate enemy situated in
the middle of their territories; and their domi-
nions now extended in one great and almost un-
broken line from the flore of the Baltick to the
banks of the Rhine.

A mutiny SOON after the conclusion of the Truce at Nice,
of the Im-
priatroops. an event happened, which satisfied all Europe that

Charles had prosecuted the war to the utmost ex-
tremity that the state of his affairs would permit.
Vast arrears were due to his troops, whom he had
long amnufed with vain hopes and promises. As
they now foresaw what little attention would be
paid to their demands, when by the re-establish-
ment of peace their services became of less im-
portance, they loft all patience, broke out into
an open mutiny, and declared that they thought
themselves entitled to seize by violence what was
detained from them contrary to all justice. Nor
was this spirit of sedition confined to one part of
the Emperor's dominions; the mutiny was almost
as general as the grievance which gave rife to it.
The soldiers in the Milanese plundered the open
country without controul, and filled the capital
itself with consternation. Those in garrison at
Goletta threatened to give up that important
fortress to Barbarossa. In Sicily the troops pro-

Sleidan, z49.

ceeded

ceeded to still greater excesses; having chaced B ° 0 K
away their officers, they eleced others in their .
fead, defeated a body of men whom the viceroy '539.
sent against them, took and pillaged several cities,
conducting themselves all the while in such a
manner, that their operations resembled rather
the regular proceedings of a concerted rebellion,
than the ralhnefs and violence of a military mu-
tiny. But by the address and prudence of the
generals, who partly by borrowing money in their
own name, or in that of their master, partly by
extorting large umsn from the cities in their re-
fpeAive provinces, raised what was sufficient to
discharge the arrears of the soldiers, there infur-
re&tions were quelled. The greater part of the
troops were disbanded, such a number only being
Iept in pay as was necessary for garrisoning the
principal towns, and protecting the sea-coasts
from the insults of the Turks '.

IT was happy for the Emperor that the abilities carte of

=-,. ~ ""

. , , -

/* , /* ,.-

~~~~~ Carfile held

of his generals extricated him out of there diffi- t .old.
culties, which it exceeded his own power to have
removed. He had depended, as his chief re-
source for discharging the arrears due to his fol-
diers, upon the subsidies which he expected from
his Castilian fubjeds. For this purpofc, he as-
fembled the Cortes of CafRile at Toledo, and
having represented to them the great expence of
his military operations, together with the vast

' Jovii Hilfor, I, xxxvii. 203. c. Sandov. Fcrrcras, ix.
209.

3 debts

B °0 K debts in which these had necessarily involved him,

-.-... he proposed to levy such fiupplies as the present
'529 exigency of his affairs demanded, by a general
Th-rom- excire on commodities. But the Spaniards al-
., 11 isac- ready felt themfclves oppressed with a load of taxes
fe.b.y. unknown to their ancestors. They had often com-

plained that their country was drained not only of
its wealth but of its inhabitants, in order to pro-
fecute quarrels in which it was not interested, and
to fight battles from which it could reap no bene-
fit, and they determined not to add voluntarily to
their own burdens, or to furnish the Emperor
with the means of engaging in new enterprizes no
les ruinous to the kingdom than most of those
which he had hitherto carried on. The nobles,
in particular, inveighed with great vehemence
against the imposition proposed, as an encroach-
ment upon the valuable and diftinguilhing privi-
lege of their order, that of being exempted from
the payment of any tax. - They demanded a con-
ference with the representatives of the cities con-
cerning the state of the nation. They contended
that if Charles would imitate the example of his
predecessors, who had resided constantly in Spail,
and would avoid entangling himself in a multi-
plicity of tranfatcions foreign to the concerns of
his Spanish dominions, the stated revenues of the
crown would be fully sufficient to defray the ne-
ceffary expences of government. They repre-
sented to him, that it would be unjust to lay r:c\'
burdens upon the people, wlile this prudent ni.d
effctual method of re-eTablihing publiclk creuii:

ci *

and securing national opulence, was totally ne- B O°° K
gle&ed'. Charles, after employing arguments, v_
entreaties, and promises, but without success, in '539.
order to overcome their obstinacy, difiniffed the Tieancient

conf'itution
afembly with great indignation. From that pe- of theCor.

re, sub-

riod neither the nobles nor the prelates have been terted.
called to these assemblies, on pretence that such
as pay no part of the publick taxes, flould not
claim any vote in laying them on. None have
been admitted to the Cortes but the procurators
or representatives of eighteen cities. These, to
the number of thirty-fix, being two from ach
community, form an aembly which bears no re-
semblance either in power or dignity or independ-
ence to the ancient Cortes, and are absolutely at
the devotion of the court in all their determina-
tions . Thus the imprudent zeal with which the
Castilian nobles had supported the regal preroga-
tive, in opposition to the claims of the commons
during the commotions in the year one thousand
five hundred and twenty-one, proved at las fatal
to their own body. By enabling Charles to de-
press one of the orders in the tfate, they destroyed
that balance to which the constitution owed its
security, and put it in his power, or in that of
his successors, to humble the other, and to (trip
it of its moll valuable privileges.

t Sandov. Hill. vol. ii. 269.
' Sandov. ibid. Le Siulnce du Governement, par M. de
.cal, tomn. ii. 3p. l:.

AT

B 0° K AT that time, however, the Spanish grandees

VL
. _uuJ still possessed extraordinary power as well as pri-
Thp9anifi vileges, which they exercised and defended with
flillporefed an haughtiness peculiar to themselves. Of this
igh prv the Emperor himself had a mortifying proof du-

ring the meeting of the Cortes at Toledo. As
he was returning one day from a tournament ac-
companied by most of the nobility, one of the
serjeants of the court, out of officious zeal to clear
the way for the Emperor, truck the Duke of In-
fantado's horse with his batton, which that haugh-
ty grandee resenting, drew his sword, beat and
wounded the officer. Charles, provoked at such
an insolent deed in his pretence, immediately
ordered Ronquillo the judge of the court to arrest
the Duke; Ronquillo advanced to execute his
charge, when the constable of Castile interposing,
checked him, claimed the right of jurifdistion
over a grandee as a privilege of his office, and
conduted Infantado to his own apartment. All
the nobles present were so pleated with the bold-
ness of the constable in aflerting the rights of their
order, that, deserting the Emperor, they attended
him to his house with infinite applauses, and
Charles returned to the palace without any person
along with him but the cardinal Tavera. The
Emperor, however, sensible of the affront, saw the
danger of irritating a jealous and high-fpirited
order of men, whom the flightelf appearance of
offence might drive to the most unwarrantable
extremes. For that reason, instead of firaining

at

at any ill-timed exertion of his prerogative, he B o ,r K
prudently connived at the arrogance of a body too --
potent for him to controul, and sent next morn- ,s39.
ing to the Duke of Infantado, offering to inflict
what punilhment he pleased on the person who
had affronted him. The Duke confidering this
as a full reparation to his honour, inltantly for-
gave the officer; bestowing on him, besides, a
considerable present as a compensation for his
wound. Thus the affair was entirely forgotten';
nor would it have deserved to be mentioned, if it
were not a striking example of the haughty and
independent spirit of the Spanish nobles in that
age, as well as an instance of the Emperor's dex-
terity in accommodating his conduct to the cir-
cumftances in which he was placed.

CHARLES was far from discovering any such Infrrcaion

condescension or lenity towards the citizens of
Ghcnt, who not long after broke out into open
rebellion against his government. An event
which happened in the year one thousand five
hundred and thirty-fix, gave occasion to this rafn
insurrection so fatal to that flourishing city. At
that time the Queen dowager of Hungary, gover-
nes of the Netherlands, having received orders
from her brother to invade ' Fance with all the
forces which fle could rai'e, fie aftlilbled the
States of the United Provinces, and obtained
from them a subsidy of twelve hundred thousand

' Sandov, ii, 27.. Ferrcra:, ix., 22. 2.Miniainu, z3.

florinll

B O K florins, to defray the expence of that undertaking.

i' 1Of this fum, the county of Slanders was obliged
'5s9. to pay a third part as its proportion. But the

pretensions the citizens of Ghent, the molt considerable city
ofthe cii- in that country, averse to a war with France, with

which they carried on an extensive and gainful
commerce, refused to pay their quota, and con-
tended, that in consequence of stipulations be-
tween them and the anceltors of their present so-
vereign the Emperor, no tax could be levied upon
them, unless they had given their express consent
to the imposition of it. The governess, on the
other hand, maintained, that as the subsidy of
twelve hundred thousand florins had been granted
by the States of Slanders, of which their repre-
fentatives were members, they were bound, of
course, to conform to what was enaced by them,
as it is the first principle in society, on which the
tranquillity and order of government depend, that
the inclinations of the minority must be over-
ruled by the judgment and decision of the superior
number.

ProceeJins THE citizens of Ghent, however, were not will-
,hcm. ing to relinquish a privilege of such high import-

ance as that which they claimed. Having been
accustomed, under the government of the houle
of Burgundy, to enjoy extensive immunities, and
to be treated with much indulgence, they dif-
dained to sacrifice to the delegated power of a
regent, those rights and liberties which they had
often and successfully afterted against their greatest

4 Princes.

Princes. The Qteen, though he endeavoured 8 °o K
at first to sooth them, and to reconcile them to --
their duty by various concessions, was at last so '153
much irritated by the obltinacy with which they
adhered to their claim, that fie ordered all the
citizens of Ghent, on whom fle could lay hold in
any part of the Netherlands, to be arrested. But
this rash action made an impression very different
from what fle expe&ed, on men, whose minds
were agitated with all the violent paflions which
indignation at oppreflion and zeal for liberty in-
Ipire. Less asseted with the danger of their
friends and companions, than irritated at the
governess, they openly despised her authority, and
sent deputies to the other towns of Slanders, con-
juring them not to abandon their country at such
a jun:ure, but to concur with them in vindi-
cating its rights against the encroachments of a
woman, who either did not know or did not re-
gard their immunities. All but a few incon-
fiderable towns declined entering into any confe-
deracy against the governess: they joined, how-
ever, in petitioning her to put off the term for
payment of the tax so long, that they might have
it in their power to fend rome of their number into
Spain, in order to lay their title to exemption
before their sovereign. This he granted with
ome difficulty. But Charles received their com-
milfloners with an haughtiness to which they were
not accustomed from their ancient Princes, and
enjoining them to yield the fame refpeaful obedi-
ence to his filter, which they owed to him in per-

son,

B 0 0 K son, remitted the examination of their claim t.,

VI.
.-- the council of Malines. This court, which is
'159' properly a standing committee of the parliament

or tates of the country, and which possesses the
supreme jurifdition in all matters civil as well as
criminal Y, pronounced the claim of the citizens of
Ghent to be ill-founded, and appointed them
forthwith to pay their proportion of the tax.

They anke ENRAGED at this decision, which they confi-
arms, and
offer to sub- dered as notoriously unjust, and rendered desperate
mit to
Francc. on feeing their rights betrayed by that very court

which was bound to prote& them, the people of
Ghent ran to arms in a tumultuary manner, drove
such of the nobility as resided among them out of
the city; secured several of the Emperor's officers;
put one of them to the torture, whom they ac-
cufed of having stolen or destroyed the record,
that contained the privileges of exemption from
taxes which they pleaded, chore a council to
which they committed the direction of their as-
fairs; gave orders for repairing and adding to
their fortifications; and openly ere&ed the stand-
ard of rebellion againit their sovereign . Sen-
fible, however, of their inability to support what
their zeal had prompted them to undertake, and
desirous of securing a proteEtor against the for-

y.Dciittione di tutti pcefi baffli i Lud. Guicciardini.
Ant. '571. f. p. 53.

z" · Meioires fur la revolte de Gantois en 1539, par Jean

d'Hollander,ecrit en 157. A la Haye 1747. P. Heuter.
Rcr. Aultr. li. xi. p. z62. Sandov. Hifor tort. ii. p. 28z.

midable

midable frces by which they might expect soon B O K
to be attacked, they sent sone of their number -
to Francis, offering not only to acknowledge him 539
as their sovereign, and to put him in immediate
pofefrlion of Ghent, but to aiff him with all their
forces in recovering tllole provinces in the Nether-
lands, which had anciently belonged to the crown
of France, and had been so lately re-united to it
by the decree of the parliament of Paris. This
unexpeaed proposition coming firom persons who
had it in their power to have performed intaritly
one part of what tey undertook, and who could
contribute so efic;ttually towards the execution of
the whole, opened vafl as well as alluring pro-
fpcEts to Francis's ambition. The counties of
Slanders and Artois were of greaer valucjhan the
dutchy of Milan, which he had T) long laboured
to acquire with pafflonate but fruitless desire,;
their situation with rel)ect to France rendered it
more easy to conquer or to defend them; and
they might be formed into a fep.rate principality
fbr the uke of Orleans, no less filitabl' to hL
dignity than that which his fatrl ai:med at o0;-
taiing. To this, tiie.<'lnings, whdwcre ac- '
qiui'nted with the Fench manners,.d verr-
nrent would not have.bcep aierfe and his, Vwn
subjects, weary o tir deftrucivex'1itions
into Italy, would h tave turped.tPfecir arms towards
this quarter with more good-wil. aj'ibth; W
greater yigour. Seral .coniderat s, never- Fan
thelefs, prevented Francis froml lying '' , of 7a
tis opportunity, tl Inmt avourabIin rappea-

Vo ,
Al. " N .

B 0 K: ance which had ever presented itself, of extending

VI. Z,

his dominions, or distressing the Emperor. Fror,
5'j9 the time of their interview at Aigues-mortes,

Charles had continued to court the King of France
with wonderful attention; and often flattered
him with hopes of gratifying at last his wishes
concerning the Milanese, by granting the inveti.
ture of ieither to him or to one of his sons. But
though these hopes and promises were thrown our
with no other intention than to detach him from
his confederacy with the Grand Seignior, or to
raise suspicions in Solyman's mind by the appear-
ance of a cordial and familiar intercourse fubfilt-
ing between the courts of Paris and Madrki,
F'noawas weak enough to catch at the fliadow
by which he had been so often deceived, and
from eageriefs to seize it, relinquilhed wharmuit
hSave noved a mor'e fubitantial acquisition. Be-
fides iihs, the Dauphin jeaous to excess of his
,brother, and unwilling that a Prince who feerned
to be off rreftlefi^nd enterprizing nature flioul.i
i,. ''btarcjaiaeftablithimeht, which from its fituarion

%smight '-''bonfiderec. almost as a dorneftick onr,

, q made f Moritnireicyntviho, by a finguhl;
. " .;ece of g' e tune, was at tl'e.fame tirnlieth

.'fao e or e f ther
h. o. he son, to deta

t',th.licVn of.~the Flenfigs,,,and to diver.

.-jL^ ,t frciqin.efpoiifi»g tlit$i.caul'e. rtontlV.o-

''!.~ " r '

'', ingraL epr djin strong ternls,

^'.:',i Stli 1'h1 on'lWl~., i ch Francis would
~.< ^.a cori fat Patin, which he .had

e irerlyfYtily, 'adttllac othi could be so

efficacious to overcome the Emperor'staverfion tq a o o K
this, as his adhering sacredly to the truce, and re-
fusing on this occaion to countenance his rebel- 's5'
lious subje&s. Francis, apt of himself to over-
rate the value of the Milanese, because he eflimated
it from the length of time as well as from the great
effortwhicli he had employed in order to re-con-
quer it, and fond of every aaion which 1hd the ap-
pearance of gcneroftry, assented witloudifficulty
to sentiments so agreeable to his owh, reje&edthc
propositions of the citizens of Ghent,, and ldif-
miffed their deputies with an harfhinfwer'.

NOT satisfied with this, by a farthe.presnement.CoTu~i..
in generosity, he communicated to the Emperor cat:l,,eLt

or -,;. A intentions

his whole negociation with the malecontents, and ,o te

o t

all that he knew of their schemes and intentions .
This convincing proof of Francis's disinterested-
ness relieved Charle from thl most dii^qieting
apprehensions, and opened .a.way to extricate .- -
himself out of all his difficultie. Hea- d already ; ,.;5:
received full information of all the trai'fains'in o
tle Netherlands, and of th rage with whichthg
peple of Ghent id taken' arms against ls'
yernment. He wvs tboroug'i acquainted vi^ A

co iary; wi , tloviyqc liber 'hei
ment to ther ancie t prgcs 4 A
, ,. ,

r . .

. B i .t.. . ;'

^^1^^
,} " , t *' '/>

- ^ ^ .^.*.N^ 111 (r**l

B n O' well as the invincible obstinacy with which theit

v* . minds, flow but firm and persevering, adhered
3539. to any mcafure on which they had leisure to fix.

He easily sav what enbcuragement and support
,they might have derived from the alance of
France, and though now free from any danger
on that uarter, he was flill sensible that some im-

'

-
, mediate . well as vigorous interposition was ne-

: wcflTary, in oer to prevent the spirit of difaffec-
tio~froln spreading in a country where the num-
b her of citfes, the multirude of people, together
with the great wealth issused among them by
e.corimerce,irendered it peculiarly formidable, and
- 'ould flppy it with inexhauflible resources. No

delr atin, expedient, after long deliberation, appeared to
C.,l',,l",:l -him so effecual as his going in prfon to the
his jurney
t'"ne Ne Netherlands and .the governess his filter being of

the farite opinion, warmtn folicited-him to under-
take tlf journey. eTherwfe only two different

it" routes which he'co d take; one by land through

'~. 'I^ taly crmanj the other entirely by sea,

.. [§o
om t i ain t to on in-the Low-

pjtounirie's. Butmi. fqrmer 'was. more tedious

".ited hie pre ent xigencof his,.affairs nior

' ,. cJtdy
in c ncy nhd y, or even

brooo>r r wzithou h a

'e '

'da ih d' 'treqgjs, is *guld

4**., vicl- 9'as *must have

'. : " S... ah'
,

under the convoy of a powerful fleet. This per- l 'v, K
plexing situation, in which he was under the ne-
ceflity ofchufing, and did not know what to chufe,
inspired him at last withlthe lingular and seem-
ingly extravagant thought of patling through
France, as the most expelitious way of reaching Proposs to

pais t;rouigh

the Netherlands. He propofedl in his council to pFrstr.
demand Francis's permilion for that. purpose.
All his counsellors joined with one voice in con-s'
demning the measure as no lets rafl than .npre-
cedented, and which mutl infallibly expofet^lhim
to disgrace or to danger; to dilgrace, if the de-
mand were rejeted in the manner that he had
reason to expect $ to danger, if he put his person
in the power of an enemy whom he had often of-
fended, who had ancient injuries to revenge, as.
well as subjes of present conte(t still remaining
undecided. But Charles, who had tudied the
charaCter of his rival with greater care, and, more
profound discernment thin any of his ministers, "
perfited in his plan, and flatt*ced hiimfel'. that it-'"
might be accomplished nPMlIV, without dca ger
to.his own perfo, but even out' the-expence'
olany conc flon detrimental to his crown. *

WWITH this ew Wi m.unicated t ater o which
to tbti Frenchalaanb at his :ou],·ht.lcs| i
Granvelle his,'e r i oPari: in o o
obtain fro m

Fr4 f

per'(f to .

.it

S

ETl c

i

,
he tr t Ilsata

e. ,ec time he reitrcci tlY ancis

F 4

N'3 0

s
. i

Vo Lt would not exact any new promise, or even .n(.:
_-~ on former engagenents, at this junEture, left

whatever he should grant, under his present cir-
cumfances, might Icem rather to be extorted I1\
hecefity, than to flow from friendlhip or the love
of juttice.i Francis, initead of attending to th;
snare which fch a night artifice scarcely conceal-
ed, was so dazzled with the splendour of over-
coming an enemy by as of generosity, and l,,
pleased with the air f superiority which the re:;.
tudE' and disinterestedness bs his proceedings gav..
him on this oecafion, that e at once affrnted to
all that was demanded. Judging of the Empe-
for's heart by his own, h imagined thit the fcn.
timenc4 of gratitude, arising from the remem-
brance of good offices and liberal treatment,
wotid determinie. him more forcibly to fulfil w!.-
he had so ofen promised, than the most preci:L
stipulations that could be inlcrted in any treary.

"-.L '. stl ,, fs '~ ($a*'s' '
,'h

o.i$'i gp

iS0 r s, to whom every moment

4jgn hat
,Wio.a-, was precious f .. notwitandingi tile fears

" n fuftpici ns ofs-iiSpanih futjetc'with a finali

;'butfpe i tra no about an hturedi prfon.

f p Eio Fance, he vas

*tvrn^ =,d ,d
0 u ce Ss Or-

'

r , ri' :t

" . ,

I4OsrVOU
dS nand~e~ts~F~Er! cc 'ss~y

other pledge for his security. In all the towns B",,0
through which he pafled, the greatest poflible --1.
magnificence was displayed; the magistrates pre-
sented him the keys of the gates; the prison
doors were set open; and, by the royal honours
paid to him, he appeared more like the sovereign
of the country than a stranger. The King ad-
vanced as far as Chatelherault to meet him; their
interview was diftinguilhed b the warmest ex-,
prefions of friendflip and regard. They pro- 54.
ceeded tgether towards Paris, and presented to
the inhabitants of that city, the extraordinary
fpecaacle of two rival Monarchs, whore enmity had
diaurbed and laid Wylte Europe during twenty
years, making their solemn entry together with all
the symptoms of a confidential harmony, as if they
had forgotten for ever pall injuries, and would
never revive hofilities for the future c

Cl-l.RLES remained fix days at Paris; but amidi The , p.-

, '* ,'"   , *' -~

, *

. rr's sci-

the perpetual caresses f the.French court, and tudr,
the various ntertaipment$contrived to artife or
to dq.jir.honour, lie discov'ered an extreme im-
patiente to contitise lis jouney, arfng as much
frorn anairehenion of .ngciveh confantly
oppressed hinasiro the nece5y' his re-

i*'>^ hers e ^ fE fatl ea .i-mgt a;
* datitray'.,y Lo ~ .ls riv', r leaCe' 4./ "l

m,^ s

., Hi. c. . i .

N i ~ el

"
, .

*'3 *K *

^
* ' '*<i

B 0 0 K them; and though his artifices to conceal thele

Vi.
-.--- should be fucce'sful, he could not help fearing

'i4' that motives of interest might at las: triumph over

the scruples of honour, and tempt Francis to
avail himself of the advantage now in his hands.
Nor were there wanting persons among the French
ministers, who advised the King to turn his own
arts against the Emperor, and as the retribution
due for o many i stances of fraud or falsehood, to
seize and detain Ihis person until he granted himn
full fatisfaaion with regard to all the just claims
of the French crown. But no consideration could
induce Francis to violate the faith which he had
pledged, nor could any argument convince him
that Charles, after. all the promises that he had
given, and all the favours which he had received,
might fill be capable 6f deceiving him. Full of
this false confidence, he accompanied him to Sr.
Q!intin; and the two Princes, who had met him.
on the borders of Spain, did not.tale leave ui
him untilke entered his dominions in the Low-
Countries. r

and i.finge.. ArfooInk theEmperorrealhed his ow.rteri-
a,;ty. .

,ety. toricm rc acdt hadors demanded the
J3ant ry' acco pl ii wi.t he giad f mifed. con-

~; ; n t. tMl
a~

engr' c . . u,

·..G

'It, ^
), pp, ire ' theb G.li:.

he still continued to talk of his resolutions with B °o K
refpe& to that matter in the fame strain as when -
hle entered France, and even wrote to the King 15'
much to the fame purpose, though in general
terms, and with equivocal exprefflons, which he
might afterwards explain away or interpret at plea-
lure . ,

MEANWH ILE, the unfortunate citizens of Ghent, R,d-on

destitute of leaders capable either ofdirecing their ;
councils, or conducting their troops; abandoned
by the French King and unsupported by their
countrymen; were unable to refiL their off'cnl'd
sovereign, who was ready to advance againit them
with one body of troops which he had railed in
the Netherlands, with another drawn out of Ger-
many, and a third which had arrived from Sain f
by sea. The near approach of danger. made
them, at last, so fnfible of their own folly. rhi
they sent ambassadors to the-Emperor, imp'iloring
his mercy, and offering to set open their gates.at , .
his approach. Charles, without vouchsafing thii ,, s,..
any other answer, than that he! would .apear '
among-them as thirer fovereigri, witi^he flptre
and the. 'ord in, his h.d, beganhjiarch at, ',
the head of hrttpis. Tlhug!aht!gi eer i
M.city, o!1lX
twlenyo Fdc. j

iayA.e ' touc ed, " e

^ ,

i..

. W .
. : "

·I.WP~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

B o00 K wards the place of his nativity. Twenty-fix of
_-40 the principal citizens were put to death; a greater
ar:d Puni. number was sent into banishment; the city was
ti...h' declared to have forfeited all its privileges and

Ap . immunities; the revenues belonging to it were

confiscated; its ancient form of government was
r, abolished; the nomination of its magitrates was

,
- vested for the future in the Emperor and his fuc-

ceffors; a new yftem of laws and political admi-
' nialration was prescribed b and in order to bridle

the seditious spirit of the citizens, orders were
v' , given to ered a trong citadel, for defraying the

expence of which a fine of an hundred and fifty
thousand florins was imposed on the inhabitants,
together with an annual tax of fix thousand florins
for the support of the garrison . By these rigor.

' idj proceedings, Charles not only punished the
» , citizens of Ghent, but set an awful example of

jeriy before his other.fubje&s in the Ncther-

.o.

- :;nds,'whofe immunities and privileges, partly

~ ,~. the effectn artly the cause of their extensive com-
· , Wiercecircuumfcrihed the royal prerogative v.ichn

sve farr bpunils) arid ofteo ,stool in, the .ly
w. of aft .whjh, he ij^hed ,to'tindertake, or
, fcttere in hi operations.
ct,,, ' vindi nd r-ei t

i"tl ^|Sp ^ a~theL q ?ntrie ndl

an c. hi11^

01 rle;. de I£re, sas

i'Aasll. 1 oui I

' o

"^fc 1? leG3ande, I.t l y, 17', . i. p. 'a
~i oei.4sara;Aiilea Braba, vol. i. 6J; *

*1 ^

2 > ; t; ',A t S^
r~e A '* .N A ^ W'-A

'W .^' * A( . teslP'«lb..*'*^*--ab"

being now under no necessity of continuing the B 9t r
fame scene of falsehood and dissimulation with iv
which he had long amuled Francis, began gradu- '4ft
ally to throw aide the veil under which he had
concealed his intentions with relpet to the Mila-
nefe. At first, he eluded te demands of the
French anbafadors, when they again reriinded
him of his promites; then he propofted, by way
of quivalent for the dutchy of Milan, to grant
the Dke of Orleans the inveffiture of Slanders,
clogging the ofer, however, with impraaicable ,
conditions, or such as he knew would be reje&- '
ed d. At last, being driven from all his evasion
and subterfuges by their insisting for a categorical
answer, he peremptorily refused to give up a ter-
ritory of such value, or voluntarily t6 make such
a liberal addition to the ffrength of an enemo|y <;
diminishing his own power . He denied at thi 'i
fame time, that he had ever made any pronm'e
which could bind him to an action so foolish, a'd. "!
so contrary to his own interest . , .

OF'all the tranfalions in thetE.pero ; life,

this, without dubtr,'rfle&s fegritefti o-
ndlir on hs reputatio. TbWjugh i es was
u not extremeIy fcruilus.t pch,, es about
ale means whih he erli
. Biends, or &l*ays olCcrf theA5ftri| pre- A

W,.

'

i i

A6

5-b
- n Mem.de'Ribicresft9.a Ribicr, i.

Iit.*'3%'tp;38>a*^ .
. ^

A 0, LI
* '

B K cepts of veracity and honour, he had hitherto
---- maintained some regard for the maxims of that
J40' lets precise and rigid morality by which Mo-

r narchs think themlielves entitled to regulate their
conduct. But, on this occasion, the scheme that
he formed of deceiving a generous and open-
hearted Prince; the illiberal and mean artifices
-W by which he carried it on; the insensibility with

which he received all the marks of his friendflip,
i.~ as well as the ingratitude with which he requited

t
. them; are all equally unbecoming the dignity of
-' his charafter, and inconsistent with the grandeur

of his views.

THIS anfa&ion exposed Francis to as much

:* A scorn as it*did the Emperor to censure. After
, s! ttexperience of a long reign, after so many op-
*i ~p ortunities of discovering the duplicity and arti-

es of his rival, the credulous simplicity with

a'. e~

!d, ich he trusted him at this juncure seemed to

ait -.ri } no other return than it acually met with.
ic: Er icis,;?:however, remonstrated and exclaimed,

as ibi~ d 4eieni the first instance in which the

"E laor had.decved hmn Feling, as is usual,

the in wih 'offered to hs understanding
still ror.ll ' heinjury done to his in-

terKe o i reintmesn, as made it
sobv that he hold ;h ir or-
J t u ty of beinie r ,^ that a war, no cf

o irous 4j

t c so

icratcly- jlraed,.

"^3 2
w -^(ifopn brea out wpe.A

**» s^" r,- 'i^C.- 'd

THIS year is rendered memorable by the efta- B t°

'

blifhment of the Order of Jeluits; a body whole ,,o,
influence on eccleiaftical as well as civil aflfirs T.'p
hath been so conliderable, that an account of the thl'ljns.
genius of its kaws and government jultly merits a tiontrtc
place in hiflory. When men take a view of the Jeuits. .J
rapid progress of this society towards wealth and
power; when they contemplate the admirable pru-
dence with which it has been governed; when they
attend to the persevering and fyftemiatick spirit ' .
with which its schemes have been carried on ; they '
are apt to acribe foch a ingular inlitution to the' i
fiperior wisdom of its founder, and to suppose that'-
he had formed and digected his plan with profound ' '
policy. But the Jesuits, as well as the other mo-
naftick orders, are indebted for the existence of
their order not to the wisdom of their founder,
but to his enthufialin. Ignatio Loyola, whom I '
h.ve already mentioned on occasion of the wound ,
which he received in defending Pampeluna,h, was,
a fanatick diflinguifhed by extravaganciesin fen- ";t
timent and conduds no less incompatibleiftie ?

.'

.maxims of foberyeafon, thani repugnant t^ie .,
iirit of true religion. 'The wiftifadventues, 'd
visionary schemes, in which, hii, entlinm en-'.
gaged h'tir, equal any thing ]rcordóFidt'e le-
gends of the/Romilh faincs;,' but are unworthy *f

n in hist ry. '

- .', , .

.* *'
B "*
, Ys ; *' ' % .?* *;$

PROMPD by fib fani ial fpirNt, or inciedFntc
bt. tlic Ioi of pwerant 1 ino from w n iV.i,

.J .; a,~' . ~.

92...

Yii)^ "^"4 F·'
oi r3Z .-"*'-'*

u Vv; K such pretenders to superior fantity are not ex.

- ' empt, Loyola was ambitious of becoming the
14' 'founder of a religious order. The plan, which

*/ he formed of its confiituion and laws, was fug-

gelted, as he gave out, and as his. followers atill
teach, by the immediate inspiration of heaven'.
But notwithltanding this high pretension, his de-
sign met at first with violent oppqfition. The

. ~ Pope, to whom Loyola had applied for the fanc-
* '"'"d tion of his authority to confirm the infitution,

referred his petition to a committee of Cardinals.
,. They represented the eftablilhment to be unnecef-

";'I"fary as well as dangerous, -and Paul refused to

aB "
< grant his approbation of it. At last, Loyola re-

' a moved all his icruples by an offer which it was

,iie(popt's impoffible.for.any Pope to resist. e proposed

'onfirmin that besides the three vows of poverty, of chastity,
ioder and of monaltick obedienae, which are common

i. to all the orders of regulars, the members of his

.' society Ihould take a fourth vow of obedience to

~"'l ~ the Pope, binding themfelvesitogo whithersoever
"'' e, hrajhould command for the service of religion,
, r.' an witout requ4ing any tng from the Holy

: '" fr heir uppit. At a time wlhe the papa
'aSauthoint ltd reived such a hock by the'revolt
. osso n nationsi'fror the Romiib#yrch at
,,l^imthen'h ery)r par ,tthe popish Cyltem was

. altlke4 with so tiich violencet and. fuccefst tha

' aacquifition 'qs a .idy of men,cths peculiaf yi 4
:W < jlotred t See Qf";oTneClnd wste+; i lligh;

.;m" 'a .. \. ' - , .,.. ra
.

^51 t^ 1
PRc dei .j ~on$ f Jefuies.au Pare-

.j i e, par.. l .

.'Msc?] iitt...... -
'iL ,./j? ,

set in opposition to all its enemies, was an obje& B K
of the highest consequence. Paul, intantly per- -._
ceiving this, confirmed the infitution of the Je- gpt.57'
suits by his bull; granted the moll ample privi-
leges to the members'of the society; and ap-
pointed Loyola to be the first general of the or-
der. The event hath fully jultified Paul's dif-
cernment, .in expelting such beneficial confe-
quences to the See of Rome from this institution.
In les than half a century, the society obtained
eltabli'lhments in every country that adhered to
the Roman catholick church; -its power and :
wealth increased arazingly; the number of its
members became great their character awell
as accomplishments were still greater; and the
Jeiuits were celebrated by the friends, and
dreaded by the enemies of the Romish faith, as
the most able and nterprizing order in the
church.

THE conltitutiOl and laws of the society were tontnit

tion and

perse&ed btay ez and Aq'aviva, the, twoge- nius merit
nrals who succeeded Loyola,.rnen far superior to P.enion.
,their maftcr in abilitie, and'in the fcience'of'go-
vernment. They frartcd that.,fyifemof profound ,
and arteJpolicy which. diftingil4her&te order. ?

-

The large infusion Qs^anaticifm, mingled withk
its regulatiot;hould,be imputed to i[yoah its' ?i
,'tetr. l circumstances .epncurrce in glv-

ing da

eq of characleiPto the, of Je' ,

iitsi;sandi frning the irebbrs ot not only
t9 talgrar part in thWemirs of the fri r' thn
.W' "

. .

h

'*
,ii

,m, 9 o i. x
* '

B oVI K any other body of monks, but to acquire superior
*-.- > influence in the conduct of them.

1540.

The ob:eft THE primary objec of imoft all the monaftick
luLt,.'cr" orders is to separate men from the world, and

from any concern in its affairs. In the olitude
and'fiience of the cloister, the monk is called to
work out his own salvation by extraordinary ats
of mortification and piety. He is dead to the
world, and ought not to mingle in its tranfac-
tions. He can be of no benefit to mankind, but
by his example-and by his prayers. On the con-
trary, the Jesuits are taught-Or confider thelrfelves
as formed for ation. They are chosen soldiers,
bound to exert themselves continually in the ser-
vice of God, and of the Pope, his vicar on earth.
Whatever tends to instruct the ignorant; what-
ever can be of use to reclair or to oppose the ene-
mies of the. Holy See, is their proper obje&.
',That they may have full leisure for this active
>-. £service, they are totally exe rpted from thol

funcions, the performance of wvhihl is the chief
business of other, ,onks. They appear in no

4 procefions; they 'p ife'ho rigorous aufterities;
. they do not cotfume onealf of their time in the
0 repetition,of tedious offices k. But *ey are rc-

/quired tb attend to alP e trsa fa&ions of the
* , wprli, 1 accouo of the inflite. which thcl

,* i iay hna pog religion thetl dirced to

'$ '
*. Co,ilendit . de Monclarp . xii. . Sur

^cstru^ eo Jcuia ^^&^wD'Aleinert, p.,Asc

. -al~~~~e ^ ' W stm ^

iludy the dispositions of persons in high rank,' B' o, K
and to cultivate their friendship'; and by the very -v.--
contitution, as well as genius of the order, afpi.
rit of action and intrigue is infused into all its
members.

As the obje& of the society of Jesuits differed .Pu'iar;ti;

in the form

from that of the other monaftick orders, the di- Ofi ts.l;v.
verfity was no less in the form of its government. with reifpcf
The other orders are to be confidered as volun- bhh^;o,
tary afiociations, in which whatever affects the v'.
whole body, is regulated by the common suffrage
of all its members. The executive power is veiled
in the persons placed at the head of each convent,
or of the whole society; the legislative authority
resides in the community. Affairs of moment,
relating to particular convents, are determined in
conventual chapters such as refpet the whole
order are confidered in general congregations.
But Loyola, full of the ideas of implicit obedi-
ence, which he ;iad derived from his military
profelion, appointed that the government of his
order flhauld be p4irely monarchical. A general,
chosen for life by deputies from the iveral pro-
vinces, poffefled powegthat was supreme and in-
dependenct extending to every person, and to
every cafe. He, by his sole authority, nomi-
nated provincials, reCtors, and every other officer
employed in ,the government of the society, and
could remove.ithem at pleasure. In .him was

'Compte par l .dceModclar, p. xii.
Vo' ill. 0 veted

'
.»

B °0 K vested the sovereign administration of the reve-

.-=o nues and funds of the order. Every member be-

longing to it was at his disposal; and by his un-
controlable mandate, he could impose on them
any talk, or employ them in what service soever he
pleated. To his commands they were required
to yield not only outward obedience, but to resign
up to him the inclinations of their own wills, and
the sentiments of their own understandings. They
were to lifen to his injuncions, as if they had
been uttered by ChriR himself. Under his di-
reftion, they were to be mere paflive instruments,
like clay in the hands of the potter, or like dead
carcasses incapable of resistance ". Such a fingu-
lar form of policy could not fail to impress its
character on all the members of the order, and to
give a peculiar force to all its operations. There
is not in the annals of mankind any example of
such a perfec despotism, exercised not over monks
shut up in the cells of a convent, but over men
dispersed among all the nations of the earth.

cirnm#.anB. As the constitutions of the order vef, in the
cc which
enable him General, such absolute dominion over all its
tith te members, they carefully provide for his being
adt. . perfectly informed with respect to the character

and abilities of his fubjees. Every novice who
offers himself as a candidate for entering into the
order, is obliged to manifefl his confcitsn to the

"l Compte Rendu au Prlem. de Bretagne, par M. de Cha-

lotai, p. 4, &c. Compt Fa M. de Monclar, 83. 8l5'
3+4i.

superior,

superior, or to a person appointed by him; and °0 F K
is required to confers not only his fins and de- A
sers, but to discover the inclinations, the pas- .s40'
sions, and the bent of his foul. This manifefta-
tion must be renewed every fix months . The
society, not satisfied with penetrating in this man-
ner into the innermost recelfes of the heart, di-
re&s each member to observe the words and
ations of the novices they are constituted spies
upon their condu&; and are bound to disclose
every thing of importance concerning them to
the superior. In order that this scrutiny into their
character may be as complete as poflible, a long
noviciate must expire, during which they pass
through the several gradationsof ranks in the so-
ciety, and they must have attained the full age of
thirty-three years before they can be admitted to
take the final vows, by which they become pro-
fjd members °. By these various methods, the
superiors, under whose immediate infpetion the
novices are placed, acquire a thorough know-
ledge of their dispositions and talents. In order
that the General, who is the foul that animates
and moves the whole society, may have under
his eye every thing neceflary to inform or direet
him, the provincials and heads of the several
houses are obliged to transmit to him regular and
frequent reports concerning the members under

" Compte par M. de Monclar, p. 121, &c.
o Compte par M. de Moncl. 215. 241. Sur la defr. des
Jce. par M. DJAlemb. p. 39.

0 a their

B 0 0 K their infpeEtion. In these they descend into rm.

V¥.
'--v=- nute details with refpct to the character of each

person, his abilities natural or acquired, his tem-
per, his experience in affairs, and the particular
department for which he is bes fitted P. These
reports, when digefied and arratiged, are entered
into regillers, kept of urpofe. thht the Genera
may, at one comprehensive, view' survey the state
of the ociety in every corner of the erth", ob-
serve the qualifications and talents of its Atem-
bers; and thus chooue, with perfect iffdrmation,
thle inifruments,' whiich his abflolute'power can

* 4 . » .

P M. de Chalotais has made a calculation ds the number

of these reports, hich the General of the efuits mulf annu-
ally receive according to the regulations.ofthe foiety. These
amount in all to 6584. f his fum be divided by 37, the
number of provinces in the order, it appears that 177 reports
concerning the Rate of each province are tranfntifted to Rome
annually. Compte. p. 5':. Belides this, thertmay be ex-
traordinary letters, or faci as are sent by the monitors or fp:es
whom the General and Provincials entertain in each house.
Compte par M. de Moncl. p. +3 1. Hilt; des Jefuices, Amlt,
1761, tom. iv. p. 56. The provincials and heads of houses
not only report concerning the members of the society, but
are bound to give the General an account of the civil affairs
in the country wherein they are fettled, as far ah their know-
ledge of thein may be of benefit to religion. I his condition
may extend to every particular, so that the General is fur.
nifhed with full information concerning the tranfacions of
every Prince and Itate in tho .world. Compte par M. de
Moncl. 443. iill. dcs Jesuit. ibid. p. 58. When the ffairs
with respect to which the provincials or relors write arc of
importance, they are direced to fe cyphers; and,each of
them has a particular cypher from the General. Compte par
.M. Chalotais, p. 54. ,

employ

employ in ar'v iirvie fur which he thinks meet n 0 K
to deltinc them '.

1540.
As it was the profeTef.t intention of the order of "rgrcrs of

T ,' * I

I i * i i * the power

Jeluics to labour \v,!t ur, vcaried zeal in promot- a:t,, i,.f.
ing the falvatio; o men, this engiged them, of '"'" 0 the
course, in many active functiois. From their
first institution, they confidered the educarion of
youth as their pecul:ar provincei rtiey ained at
being spiritual guvlcs and confe:iurs; they
preached freqtuc:tl' in uorir to inllruc t le people;
they set ouc as riiifi-naries to convert i.;-believing
nations. ThP rev '.y of the iftitie.ion, as well
as the fingul iz!y of its obj:.t, prccured the or-
der many ad:nir.irs and patruns. The governors
of the lfoicty had the addcls to av.lthiemifelves
of every circuumrftane n its favour, and in a hort
time, the number as well as i.li-nce of its mem-
bes increascd wondcriliy. Bifore the expira-
tion of the fixtccnth century, the Jesuits had ob-
tained the chief direEtion i the d ucation of youth
in every cathofick country in Europe. They had
become the confe(fors of alimot all its monarchs,
a functicn of no finall importance in any reign,
but under a weak prince, tiperior even to that
of minister. They were the spiritual guides of
alimoft every perlbn eminent for rank or pow r.
They pouffefed the highest degree of cu'.fid-nce
and interest with the appal court, as the mol

' Compte par M. de Moncl p. 15. 49..--Copt par
M. de Chalotais, p. 52. 222.

0 3 2caloui

B 0 0 K zealous and able champions for its authority.

Vi.

- ' The advantages which an ative and enterprizing
1540. body of men might derive from all these circum-

stances are obvious. They formed the minds of
men in their youth. They retained an ascendant
over them in their advanced years. They pof-
sessed, at different periods, the diretion of the
most considerable courts in Europe. They min-
gled in all affairs. They took part in every in-
trigue and revolution. The General, by means
of the extensive intelligence which he received,
could regulate the operations of the order with
the most perse& discernment, and by means of
his absolute power could carry them with the ut-
most vigour and effec r.

Progrert of TOGETHER with the power of the order, its
it»lithh. wealth continued to increase. Various expedi-

ents were devised for eluding the obligationd of
the vow of poverty. The order acquired ample
possessions in every catholick country; and by the
number as well as magnificence of its publick
buildings, together with the value of its property,

r When Loyola, in the year 54o, petitioned the Pope to

authorize the institution of the order, he had only ten dif-
ciples. But in the year z608, fixty-cight years after their
firlt institution, the number of efuits had increased to ten
thousand five hundred and eighty-one. In the year 1710,
the order pofdfl'ed twenty-four profefid houses; fifty-nine
houses of probation; three hundred and forty refidencies; fix
hundred and twelve colleges; two hundred miflions; one
hundred and fifty seminaries and boarding-fchools; and con-
filled of 19,998 Jesuits. Hilt. des Jesuites, tom. i. p. 20.

moveable

moveable or real, it vied with the most opulent B o 0 K
of the monaftick fraternities. Besides the sources -
of wealth common to all the regular clergy, the 's40
Jesuits pofleffed one which was peculiar to them-
selves. Under pretext of promoting the success
of their millions, and of facilitating the support
of their mifflonaries, they obtained a special li-
cence from the court of Rome, to trade with the
nations which they laboured to convert. In con-
sequence of this, they engaged in an extensive
and lucrative commerce, both in the East and
Weft Indies. They opened warehouses in diffe-
rent parts of Europe, in which they vended their
commodities. Not satisfied with trade alone,
they imitated the example of other commercial
societies, and aimed at obtaining settlements.
They acquired poffeflion accordingly of a large
and fertile province in the southern continent of
Aierica, and reigned as sovereigns over some
hundred thousand subjects '.

UNHAPPILY for mankind, the vast influence Per"iiots"

effres of

which the order of Jesuits acquired by all there thefeon
different means, has been often exerted with the cil ctly.
most pernicious effc&t. Such was the tendency
of that discipline obfcrved by the society in form-
ing its members, and such the fundamental max-
ims in its confitution, that every Jesuit was
taught to regard the interest of the order as the
capital objett, to which every consideration was

* Hit. des Jef. iv. 168-196, &c,

0 4 to

B o° K to be sacrificed. This fpiric of attachment or

VI.
* -L.- their order, the most ardent, perhaps, that ever

540' influenced any body of men ', is the chara&erif-

tick principle of the Jesuits, and serves .as a key
to the genius of their policy, as well as to the pe-
culiarities in their sentiments and condut.

As it was for the honour and advantage of the

society, that its members should poflefs an as-
cendant over persons in high rank or of great
power, the desire of acquiring and preserving such
a direEtion of their condut, with greater facility,
has led the Jesuits to propagate a system of re-
laxed and pliant morality, which accommodates
itself to the paflfions of men, which justifies their
vices, which tolerates their imperfections, which
authorizes almost every ation that the most au-
dacious or crafty politician would with to perpe-
trate.

As the prosperity of the order was intimately

connected with the preservation of the papal au-
thority, the Jesuits, influenced by the fame prin-
ciple of attachment to the interests of their so-
ciety, have been the most zealous patrons of thole
doctrines, which tend to exalt ecclesiastical power
on the ruins of civil government. They have
attributed to the court of Rome a jurifdiEtio as
extensive and abfblute as was claimed by the most
presumptuous pontiff's in the dark ages. They

Compte, par M. de Moncl. p. z85.

have

·have contended for the entire independenc B o K
of ecclefiaflicks on the civil magistrate. They Y
have publilhed such tenets concerning the duty 5'O
of opposing Princes who were enemies of the
catholick faith, as countenanced the molt atro-
cious crimes, and tended to dissolve all the ties
.which Sonne& fubjeas with their rulers.

As the order derived both reputation and au-

.thority from the zeal with which it stood forth in
defence of the Romi(h church against the attacks
of the-reformers, its members, proud of this dif-
tinction, have confidered it as their peculiar func'
tion to combat the opinions, and to check the
,progress of the Protestants. They have made use
of every art, and have employed every weapon
against them. They have set themclves in oppo-
fition to every gentle or tolerating mearure in
ther favour. They have inceflfatly fturred up
against them all the rage of ecclesiastical and civil
perlecution.

MONKS of other denominations have, indeed,

ventured to teach the fame pernicious dotrines,
and have held opinions equally incunfiftent with
the order and happiness of civil society. But
they, from rcafons which are obvious, have either
delivered such opinions with greater reserve, or
have propagated them with leis fuccl's. Who-
ever recollects the events which have happen d in
Europe during two centuries, will find that the

:*.'~~~~i ,~
~Jecuits

k~~~~~~~H.

S O K Jesuits may jutly be confidered as responsible for
i__- J most of the pernicious efeas arising from that

1540' corrupt and dangerous cafuifiry, from those ex-

travagant tenets concerning eccleiaitical power,
and from that intolerant spirit, which have been
the disgrace of the church of Rome throughout
that period, and which have brought to many
calamities upon civil society".

Smneadvan. BUT amidf many bad consequences flowing
fages mfsc-

rngfrm from the institution of this order, mankind, it
^fiao- must be acknowledged, have derived from it
'er" ome considerable advantages. As the Jesuits

made the education of youth one of their capital
obje&ts, and as their first attempts to establish
colleges for the reception of students were vio-
lently opposed by the univerlities in different
countries, it became necessary for them, as the
mot effecual method of acquiring the publick
favour, to surpass their rivals in science and in.

paticularly duftry. This prompted them to cultivate the
toiMtu. tRudy of ancient literature with extraordinary ar-

dour. This put them upon various methods for
facilitating the inftru&ion of youth ; and by the
improvements which they made in it, they have
contributed so much towards the progress of po-
lite learning, that on this account they have me-
rited well of society. Nor has the order of Je-
suits been successful only in teaching the elements

l Encyclopedie, Art. 7t/iitts, tom. viii. 13.

of

of literature, it has produced likewise eminent B 00 K
maters in many branches of science, and can --.-
alone boast of a greater number of ingenious 's40'
authors, than all the other religious fraternities
taken together '.

BUT it is in the new world that the Jesuits have Mo,; erPe-
exhibited the most wonderful display of their abi- the fele-

ment of he

lities, and have contributed most effectually to Jefuitsi
the benefit of the human species. The conquer- '
ors of that unfortunate quarter of the globe had
nothing in view, but to plunder, to enslave, and

· M. d'Alembert has observed, that though the Jesuits have

made extraordinary progress in erudition of every species;
though they can reckon up many of their brethren who have
been eminent mathematicians, antiquaries, and critics;
though they have even formed ome orators of reputation;
yet the order has never produced one man, whose mind was
Co much enlightened with found knowledge, as to merit the
name of a philosopher. But it seems to be the unavoidable
effet of monaftick education to contrat and fetter the human
mind. The partial attachment of a monk to the interest of
his order' which is often incompatible with that of other ci-
tizens; the habit of implicit obedience to the will of a Supe-
rior, together with the frequent return of the wcarifome and
frivolous duties of the cloifler, debase his ficultics, and cx-
tinguiO. that generosity of sentiment and spirit, which quali-
fies mien for thinking or feeling jufly with rcfipct to what is
proper in life and conduct. Father Paul of Vcnice is, per-
haps, the only person educated in a cloiler, that ever was
altogether superior to its prejudices, or who vicwed the tranf-
aftions of men, and reasoned concerning the intci ells of !o-
ciety, with the enlarged sentiments of a philosopher, with
the discernment of a man conversant in affairs, and with the
liberality of a gentleman.

to

B 0 0 K to exterminate its inhabitants. The Jesuits alone

VL.
.-~,-' have made humanity the obje& of their fettling

there. About.the beginning of the iaft century
they obtained admiflion into the fertile province
of Paraguay, which tretches across the fouthrn
continent of America, from the bottom of the
mountains of Potofi, to the confines of the Spa-
nifh and Portugutfe fettlemnents on the banks of
the.river de la Plata. They found the inhabit-
ants in a slate little different fromn'that which
takes place among men when they firR begin to
unite together; firangers to the arts; furfifting
precariously by hunting or fi!hing. and hardly
acquainted with the first principles of fubordina.
tion and government. The Jesuits set them-'
selves to instruct and to civilize these savages,
They taught them.,q cultivate the ground, to
rear. tame animals, and to build houses. Tey
brought them to live together in villages. They
trained theni to arts and manufactures. They
nade them taste the sweets of society; and accuf-
tomed them to the bleflings of security and order.
There people became the fubjets of their bene-
fa'tors; who have governed them with a tender
attention, referbling that with which a father di-
reds his children. , Refpeled and beloved tlmuof
to adoration, few Jesuits presided over loine
hundred thousand Indians. They maintained a
perfect equality among all the members of the
Community. Each of tremn was obligedl to la-
boUr not for hmnfelf alope, but for thelpublick.
The produce of their fields, together with tc

fruits

'ruits of their industry of every species, were d- B 0o) K
pofired in common storehouses, from which each -
individual received every thing ncefllry fbr the '54'
fipply of his wants. By this institution, almbft til
the passions which disturb the peace of society, 'nd
render the members of it unhappy, were extin-
guifhed. A few magistrates, chosen by the In-
dians themselves, watched over the publick tran-
quillity and secured obedience to the laws. The
fanguirry punishments frequent under other go-
vernments were unknown. An admonition from

Jfuic; a flight mark of infamy; or, on !ome fin-
gular occasion, a few lathes with a whip, were
lufficient to maintain good order among these
innocent and happy peopleY.

BUT even in this meritorious effort of the Je- Even he
uits for the good of mankind, the genius and tho anlbi.
rpirit of their order have mingled and are dif- licy ortl.
cernible. They plainly aimed at ellablitling in cermiie.
Paraguay an independent empire, fubje& to the
iciety alone, and which, by the superior excel-
lcn c of its constitution and police, could scarcely
hav'e failed to extend its dominion over all the
rfuthern continent of America. With this view,
in brdlr to prevent the Spaniards or Portuguese
in he adjacent settlements, from acquiring any
dlngerous influence over the people within the

H iIil. du Paraguay par Pere de Charlcvoix, tom. ii. +2.

&c.'. 'vyagte au Perou par Don G.Juan & ). Ant. de Ulloa.
t.om. iS +q%, &c. Par. 4to. 1752.

I limits

°0 0 K limits of the province fubje& to the society, the
i-.--' Jesuits endeavoured to inspire the Indians with

'540 hatred and contempt of there nations. They cut

off all intercourse between their subjects and the
Spanish or Portuguese settlements. They prohi-
bited any private trader of either nation from
entering their territories. When they were obliged
to admit any person in a publick charater from
the neighbouring governments, they did not per-
mit him to have any conversation with their sub-
jests, and no Indian was allowed even to enter
the house where there strangers resided, unless in
the presence of a Jesuit. In order to render any
communication between them as difficult as pof-
fible, they indulrioully avoided giving the In-
dians any knowledge of the Spanish, or of any other
European language; but encouraged the different
tribes, which they had civilized, to acquire a
certain dialea of the Indian tongue, and laboured
to make that the universal language throughout
their dominions. As all there precautions, with-
out military force, would have been insufficient
to have rendered their empire secure and perma-
nent, they inftruced their subje&s in the Euro-
pean arts of war. They formed them into bodies
of cavalry and infantry, completely armed and
regulary disciplined. They provided a great
train of artillery, as well as magazines stored with
all the implements of war. Thus they establish-
ed an army so numerous and well-appointed, as
to be formidable in a country, where a few sickly
and ill-difciplined battalions composed all the

military

military force kept on foot by the Spaniards or B ° ° K
Portuguese'. -

S54o.

THE Jesuits gained no considerable degree of Reao for

power during the reign of Charles V. who, with Afvw" ie
his usual sagacity, discerned the dangerous ten- °fra" `
dency of the institution, and checked its progrefsa. 'd pro:ger
But as the order was founded in the period of
which I write the history, and as the age to which
I address this work hath seen its fall, the view
which I have exhibited of the laws and genius of
this formidable body will not, 1 hope, be unac-
ceptable to my readers especially as one circum-
stance has enabled me to enter into this detail
with particular advantage. Europe had observed,
for two centuries, the ambition and power of the
order. But while it felt many fatal effes of
these, it could not fully discern the causes to
which they were to be imputed. It was unac-
quainted with many of the singular regulations in
the political constitution or government of the
Jesuits, which formed the enterprizing spirit of
intrigue that diftinguilhed its members, and ele-
vated the body itself to such a height of power.
It was a fundamental maxim with the Jesuits,
from their first infitution, not to publiih the rules
of their order. These they kept concealed as an
impenetrable mystery. They never communi-

2 Voyage de Juan & de Ulloa, tom. i. 549. Recucil des

toutes les Pieces qui ont paru fur les Affaires des Jesuits en
Portugal, tom. i. p. 7, &c.

Compte par M. de Moncl, p. 3 1 .

3 cated

B 0v K cated them to firangers; nor even to the greater

VI.
b .- part of their own members. They refuted to#

5'4. produce them when required by courtsofjuftices;

and by a trange solecism in policy, the civil
power in different countries authorized or con-
nived at the eltablifhment of an order of men,
whose constitution and laws were concealed with a
solicitude, which alone was a good reason for
having excluded them. Duringfthe prosecutions
lately carried on against them in Portugal and
France, the Jesuits have been so inconsiderate as
to produce the mysterious volumes of their in-
ftitute. By the aid of there authentick records,
the principles of their government may be deli-
neated, and the sources of their power inveitigated
with a degree of certainty and precision, which,
previous to that event, it was impossible to at-
tain . But as I have pointed out the dangerous
tendency of the conititution and spirit of the order
with the freedom becoming an historian, the can-
dour and impartiality no less requisite in that

b Hist. des Jef. tom. iii. z36, &c. Compte par M. de
Chalot. p 38.

c The greater part of my information concerning the go-

vernment and laws of the order of Jefilits, I have derived from
the reports of M. de Chalotais and M. de Monclar. I rell not
my narrative, however, upon the authority even of there rc-
fpRable magifirates and elegant writers, but upon innu-
merable paftiges which they have extracted fromt.jhe conltito-
tions of the order, deposited in their hands. Hofpinian, a
Protetant Divine of Zurich, in his Hiforia Jefuitica, printed
A.D. 1619, published a mall part of the constitutions of
the Jelfuits, of which by fume accident he had got a copy;
p.i 3-- 54

charaacer

charater call on me to add one observation, B 00 K
That no class of regular clergy in the Romish --J
church has been more eminent for decency, and '54
even purity of manners, than the major part of
the order of Jcfuitsd. The maxims of an in-
triguing, ambitious, interelted policy, might in-
fluence those who governed the society, and might
even corrupt the heart, and pervert the condu&
of ome individuals, while the greater number,
engaged in literary pursuits, or employed in the
funions of religion, was left to the guidance of
those common principles which restrain men from
vice, and excite them to what is becoming and
laudable. The causes which occasioned the ruin
of this mighty body, as well as the circumstances
and effets with whichit has been attended in the
different countries of Europe, though objees ex-
tremely worthy the attention of every intelligent
observer of human affairs, do not fall within the
period of this history.

No sooner had Charles re-eftabliflhed order in Assais f

Gcrundcy

the Low-Countries, than he was obliged to turn
his attention to the affairs of Germany. The Pro-
teftants pressed him earnestly to appoint that con-
ference between a felet number of the divines of
each party, which had been stipulated in the con-
vention at Francfort. The Pope confidered such
an attempt to examine or decide the points in dif-
pute as derogatory to his right of being the f-

d Sur la defrua. des Jef. par M. D'Alcmbcxt, p. Ss.
VOL. III. P premnc

B 0O K preme judge in controverly; and being convinced
*.-.-- that it would either be ineffectual by determining

'54< nothing, or prove dangerous by determining too

much, he employed every art to prevent the meet-
ing. The Emperor, however, finding it more

an.,l e for his interest to sooth the Germans than to gra-
pP.lad tify Paul, paid little regard to his remonstrances.
Provftnt In a diet held at Haguenaw, matters were ripen-
divine, o p
June s. ed for the conference. In another diet assembled
Dec. 6.

at Worms, the conference was begun, Melanc-
thon on the one fide and Eckius on the other,
sustaining the principal part in the dispute; but
after they had made ome progress, though with-
out concluding any thing, it was suspended by
the Emperor's command, that it might be re-
newed with greater solemnity in his own presence
S54s. in a diet summoned to meet at Ratisbon. This

assembly was opened with great pomp, and with
a general expectation that its proceedings would
be vigorous and decisive. By the content of both
parties, the Emperor was entrusted with the
power of nominating the persons, who lhould
manage the conference, which it was agreed should
be conducted not in the form of a publick difpu-
tation, but as a friendly scrutiny or examination
into the articles which had given rife to the pre-
Cent controversies. He appointed Eckius, Grop-
per and Pflug, on the part of the Catholicks;
Melandchon, Bucer, and Piftorius, on that of the
Protestants; all men of diftinguilhed reputation
among their own adherents, and, except Eckius,
all eminent for their moderation, as well as de-

A tirous

firous of peace. As they were about to begin B o
their consultations, the Emperor put into their' .
hands a book, composed, as he said, by a learned '5'
divine in the Low-Countries, with such extra-
ordinary perspicuity and temper, as, in his opi-
nion, might go far to unite and comprehend the
two contending parties. Gropper, a canon of
Cologne, whom he had named among the mana-
gers of the conference, a man of address as well
as of erudition, was afterwards fufypeed to be
the author of this fliort treatise. It contained
positions with regard to twenty-two of the chief
articles in theology, which included most of the
questions then agitated in the controversy between
the Lutherans and the church of Rome. By
ranging his fentinients in a natural order, and
exprefling them wih great finplicity; by em-
ploying often the very words of scripture, or of
the primitive fathers; by softening the rigour of
some opinions, and explaiiiing away what was
absurd in others; by conceflions, now on one
fide, and now on the othcr; and especially by
banilhing as much as porg;tic !.holt:ick phrases,
those words and terms of ar; i; controversy, which
Jerve as badges of di"inctiuon the dliiternt fees,
and for which theologia:s often contend more
fiercely than for opinions themlelves; he framed
his work in such a manner, as pronifed fairer than
any thing that had hitherto been attempted, to
con;pofe and to termiiaice religious difi:ntions'.

CGolda. Conit. Impcr. ii. p. 8:.

P 2 BUT

'B °o K BUT the attention of the age was turned, with

V1.

' ---J such acute observation, towards theological con-
fruittfr. troverfies, that it was not easy to impose on it by

any gloss, how artful or specious soever. The
length and eagerness of the dispute had separated
the contending parties so completely, and had set
their minds at such variance, that they were not
to be reconciled by partial conceflions. All the
zealous Catholicks, particularly the ecclefiaficks
who had a feat in the diet, joined in condemning
Gropper's treatise as too favourable to the Luthe-
ran opinion, the poison of which heresy it con-
veyed, as they pretended, with greater danger,
because it was in some degree disguised. The
rigid Protestants, epecially Luther himself, ard
his patron the Ele&or of Saxony, were for reje&-
ing it as an impious compound of error and truth,
craftily prepared that it might impose on the
weak, the timid, and the unthinking. But the
divines, to whom the examination of it was com-
mitted, entered upon that business with greater
deliberation and temper. As it was more easy in
itself, as'well as more confiltent with the dignity
of the church to make conceiflons, and even al-
terations with regard to speculative opinions, the
discussion whereof is confined chiefly to schools,
and which present nothing to the people that
either (Irikes their imagination or affects their
senses, they came to an accommnodation about
there without much labour, and even defined the
great article concerning jultification to their mu-
tual .ftisfa&fion. But, when they proceeded to

$ point'

points of jurifdiaion, where the interest and au- B O°V° K
thority of the Roman See were concerned, or to _
the rites and forms of external worship, where
every change that could be made must be publick,
and draw the observation of the people, there the
Catholicks were altogether untratable; nor could
the church either with safety or with honour
abolish its ancient institutions. All the articles
relative to the power of the Pop>, the authority
of councils, the administration of the sacra-
ments, the worship of faints, and many other
particulars, did not, in their nature, admit of any
temperament; o that after labouring long to
bring about an accommodation with refpe to
these, the Emperor found all his endeavours in-
effeaual. Being impatient, however, to close
the diet, he at last prevailed on a majority of the
members to approve of the following recess;
" That the articles concerning which the divines RhCfitof
had agreed in the conference, should be held as siKo,,,o
points decided, and be observed inviolably by all; *,lii

cnuncil

that the other articles about which they had dif- Ju, as.
sered, hould be deferred to the determination of
a general council, or if that could not be obtain-
ed, to a national fynod of Germany; and if it
flould prove impracticable, likewise, to assemble
a fynod, that a general diet of the Empire should
be called within eighteen months, in order to give
some final judgment upon the *hole controversy,
that the Emperor flould use all his interest and
authority with the Pope, to procure the meeting

P 3 either

B ov K either of a general council or fynod; that, in the

VI.
---- mean time, no innovations should be attempted,

no endeavours hould be employed to gain ro-
felytes; and neither the revenues of the church,
nor the rights of the monasteries, hould be in.
vaded .

Pves of. ALL the proceedings of this diet, as well as the
nce both
t PapifsI recess in which they terminated, gave great of-
, 'ote". fence to the Pope. The power which the Ger-

mans had assumed of appointing their own divines
to examine and determine matters of controverts,
he confidered as a very dangerous invasion on his
rights; the renewing of their ancient propofil
concerning a national fynod, which had been so
often rejected by him and his predecessors, ap-
peared extremely undutiful; but the bare men-
tion of allowing a diet, composed chiefly of lay-
men, to pass judgment with refpe& to articles of
faith, was deemed no less criminal and profane,
than the worst of thole herefies which they feerned
zealous to suppress. On the other hand, the
Protestants were no less dissatisfied with a recess,
that considerably abridged the liberty which they

chatlei enjoyed at that time. As they murmured lousily
curt. the
ploLctnt3. againIt it, Charles, unwilling to leave any feeds

of discontent in the Empire, granted them a pri-
vate declaration, in the most ample terms, ex-
empting them from whatever they thought op-

f Slcidan, 267, &c. Pallav. 1. iv. c. 1l. p. ;36. F. Paul,
p8. 86Seckend. 1. iii. 256.

preflivr

preflive or injurious in the recess, and afcertainiag B o°° K
to them the full poieffion of all the privileges I--
which they had ever enjoyed". ,s4'

EXTAOR DINARY as these concessions may ap- Affir of

pear, the situation of the Emperor's affairs at this Hu""nsy.
junaure made it necessary for him to grant them.
He foresaw a rupture with France to be not only
unavoidable, but near at hand, and durt not
give any such cause of dilguft or fear to the Pro-
teftants, as might force them, in felf-defence, to
court the protection of the French King, from
whom, at present, they were much alienated.
The rapid progress of the Turks in Hungary,
was a more powerful and present cause of the
moderation which Charles discovered. A great
revolution had happened in that kingdom; John
Zapol Sczpus having chosen, as has been related,
rather to possess a tributary kingdom, than to
renounce the royal dignity to which he had been
accustomed, had, by the assistance of his mighty
protector Solyman, wrested from Ferdinand a
great part of the country, and left him only the
precarious pofifefQn of the reft. But being a
prince of pacifick qualities, the frequent attempts
of Ferdinand, or of his partisans among the Hun-
garians, to recover what they had loft, greatly
disquieted him; and the necessity on these occa-
sions, of calling in the Turks, whoQm1 le onfildered

t Sleid. z8;. Seckend. 366. Dumont Corps Diplm.
iv. p. ii. p. z10.

P 4 and

B 0 0 K and felt to be his maifers rather than auxiliaries,

v.

.,. was hardly less mortifying. In order, therefore,
A. f".s; to avoid thee distresses, as well as to secure quiet

and leisure for enjoying the arts and amusements
in which he delighted, he secretly came to an
agreement with his competitor, on this condition;
That Ferdinand hould acknowledge him as King
of Hungary, and leave him, during life, the un-
tholefted pof(cffion of that part of the kingdom
now in his power; but that, upon his derrife, the
sole right of the whole should devolve upon Ser-
dinand h. As John had never been married, and
was then far advanced in life, the terms of the
contra& seemed very favourable to Ferdinand.
But, soon after, ome of the Hungarian nobles;
solicitous to prevent a foreigner from acending
their throne, prevailed on John to put an end to
a long celibacy, by marrying Isabella, the daugh-

. ,ter of Sigifmond, King of Poland. John had the

^i,"hofth fatisfa&ion, before his death, which happened
King of
HUr-ry. within less than a year after his marriage, to fee a

Ton born to inherit his kingdom. To him, with-
out regarding his treaty with Ferdinand, which
he confidered no doubt, as void, upon an event
not foreseen when it was concluded, he bequeath-
ed his crown appointing the Queen and George
Martinuzzi, biflop of Waradin, guardians of his
son, and regents of the kingdom. The greater
part of the Hungarians immediately acknow-
ledged the young Prince as King, to whom, in

* IluanhSfli Hit . Hung. lib. xii. p. 135.

IT)elmlor,

memory of the founder of their monarchy, they B ° v
gave the name of Stephen'. -.

1541.
FERDINAND, though extremely disconcerted by Ferdinad's

t>

,~~~~ cs~clLert to

this unexpected event, resolved not to abandon oatin the
the kingdom which he had acquired by his corm- '"
pad with John. He ent ambafladors to the
Queen to claim poffefion, and to ofler the pro-
vince of Transylvania as a settlement for her son,
preparing at the fame time to assert his right by
force of arms. But John had committed the care
of his son to persons, who had too much pirit to
give up the crown tamely, and who possessed abi-
lities sufficient to defend it. The Queen, to all
the address peculiar to her own sex, added a maf-
culine courage, ambition, and magnanimity.
Martinuzzi, who had raised himself from the Chaate

and power

lowest rank in life to his prelent dignity, was one of Marti.
of those extraordinary men, who, by the extent
as well as variety of their talents, are fitted to at
a superior part in bufling and factious times. In
:ifcharging the fun&ions of his ecclesiastical
affice, he put on the semblance of an humble and
iuftere fantity. In civil tranfadions, he disco-
vered industry, dexterity, and boldnels. During
war he laid aside the caflock, and appeared on
lorfeback with his fcymitar and buckler, as acive,
is ostentatious, and as gallant as any of his coun-
:rymen. Amidit all these dilfferent and contra-
.litory forms which he could aume, an infa-

Jovii Hist. lib. xxxix. p. 239. a. &c.

tiable

0 0 K tiable desire of dominion and authority was con.
,,-_ fpicuous. From fch persons it was obvious what
';4' answer Ferdinand had to expect. He oon per-

ceived that he must depend on arms alone for re-
covering Hungary. Having levied for this pur.
pose a considerable body of Germans, whom his
partisans among the Hungarians joined with their
vassals, he ordered them to march into that part
of the kingdom which adhered to Stephen. Mar-
tinuzzi, unable to make head against such a pow.
erful army in the field, satisfied himself with hold-
ing out the towns, all of which, especially Buda
the place of greatest consequence, he provided
with every thing necessary for defence; and in
: in the the mean time he sent ambassadors to Solymar;

beseeching him to extend towards the son, the
fame Imperial proteion which had so long main-
tained the father on his throne. The Sultarn
though Ferdinand used his utmost endeavours to
thwart this negociation, and even offered to ac
cept of the Hungarian crown on the fame igno
minious condition of paying tribute to the Otto
man Porte, by which John had held it, saw fudl
profpets of advantage from elpoufing the interel
of the young King, that he instantly promifal
him his protection; and commanding one arnry
to advance forthwith towards Hungary, he hirn-
self followed with another. Meanwhile the Ger-
mans, hoping to terminate the war by the reduc-
tion of a city in which the King and his mother
were hut up, had formed the liege of Buda.
Martinuzzi, having drawn thither the flrengti

of

of the Hungarian nobility, defended the town B °O ° K
with such courage and kill, as allowed the f
Turkish forces time to cume up to its relief. '54'
They instantly attacked the Germans, weakened
by fatigue, diseases, and desertion, and defeated
them with great slaughter k.

SOLYMAN oon after joined his victorious troops, s:'y",*:

and being weary of so many expensive expedi- coend..
tions undertaken in defence of dominions which
were not his own, or being unable to refilf this
alluring opportunity of seizing a kingdom, while
possessed by an infant, under the guardianship of
a woman and a pries, he allowed interested con.
fiderations to triumph with too much facility
over the principles of honour and the sentiments
of humanity. What he planned ungenerously,
he executed by fraud. Having prevailed on the
Queen to fend her son, whom he pretended to be
desirous of feeing, 'into his camp, and having, at
the fame time, invited the chief of the nobility
to an entertainment there, while they, fufpeting
no treachery, gave themselves up to the mirth
and jollity of the fealt, a felet band of troops by
the Sultan's orders seized one of the gates of
Buda. Being thus master of the capital, of the
King's person, and of the leading mi.n among the
nobles, he ordcred the Queen. together with hrr
Ton, to be conducted to i'ranfylvania, which pro-
vince he allotted to them, and, appointing a

k Iluanhaflii Ililt. hiung. lib. xiv. p. I5o.

Bahia

BOO K Basha to preside in Buda with a large body of ful-

V¥.
^,-v- diers, annexed Hungary to the Ottoman Empire.

' The tears and complaints of the unhappy Queen

had no influence to change his purpose, nor could
Martinuzzi either refill his ablolute and uncon-
troulable command, or prevail on him to recall
it'.

Fernand', BEFORE the account of this violent uurpation
s=u'r. oreached Ferdinand, he was ob unlucky as to have

dispatched new ambailadors to Solyman with a
fresh representation of his right to the crown of
Hungary, as well as a renewal of his former over-
ture to hold the kingdom of the Ottoman Porte,
and to pay for it an annual tribute. This ill-
timed proposal was rejeced with scorn. The Sul-
tan elated with success, and thinking that he might
prescribe what terms he pleased to a Prince who
voluntarily proffered conditions so unbecoming his
own dignity, declared that he would not suspend
the operations of war, unless Ferdinand initantly
evacuated all the towns which he lill held in
Hungary, and consented to the imposition of a
tribute upon Austria, in order to reimburse the
fums which his presumptuous invasion of Hungary
had obliged the Ottoman Porte to expend in de.
fence of that kingdom '"

Iltuanhaffii, lib. xiv. p. 55. Jovii hiaor. lib. xxxix
p. 2476, &c.

Iluanha.i'i hillt. I-lung. lib. xiv. p. 158.

IN

Is this ate were the affairs of Hungary. As B °O,°

the unfortunate events there had either happened *-
before the dissolution of the diet at Ratisbon, or 4
were dreaded at that time, Charles saw the danger
of irritating and inflaming the minds of the Ger-
mans, while a formidable enemy was ready to
break into the Empire; and perceived that he
could not expect any vigorous affiltance either to-
wards the recovery of Hungary, or the defence
of the Austrian frontier, unless he courted and
satisfied the Protestants. By the concefions which
have been mentioned, he gained this point, and
luch liberal supplies both of men and money
were voted for carrying on the war against the
Turks, as left him under little anxiety about the
security of Germany during next campaign ".

IMMEDIATELY upon the conclusion of the diet, Empeo

the Emperor set out for Italy. As he pafled l l'
through Lucca he had a short interview with the
Pope but nothing could be concluded concern-
ing the proper method of composing the religious
disputes in Germany, between two Princes, whose
views and interest with regard to that matter were
at this junture so opposite. The Pope's endea-
vours to remove the causes of discord between
Charles and Francis, and to extinguilh those
mutual animofities which threatened to break dut
suddenly into open hostility, were not more fuc-

fefsful.

* leid. :i3j

THE

A 0 0 K THE Emperor's thoughts were bent so entirely,
I_.... at that time, on the great enterprize which he had
nH;is 5P- concerted againt Algiers, that he listened with
^on ag'd little attention to the Pope's schemes or overtures,
motives of and haltened tojoin his army and fleet°.

ALGIERS frill continued in that state of depend-

ence on the Turkish empire to which Barbarossa
had fubje&ed it. Ever since he, as captain Bafla,
commanded the Ottoman fleet, Algiers had been
governed by Hafcen-Aga, a renegado eunuch,
who, by pafling through every station in the Cor-
fair's service, had acquired such experience in war,
that he was well fitted for a flation which required
a man of tried and daring courage. Hafcen, ip
order to hew how well he deserved that dignity,
carried on his piratical depredations against the
Christian States with amazing activity, and out-
did, if poflible, Barbarossa himself in boldness
and cruelty. The commerce of the Mediterra-
nean was greatly interrupted by his cruisers, and
such frequent alarms given to the coast of Spain,
that there was a neceflity of ereting watch-towers
at proper diltances, and of keeping guards con.
ftantly on foot, in order to e,.'ecry the approach of
his squadrons, and to protect the inhabitants from
their descents P. Of tis the Emperor's fubjeds
had long complained, reprefinting it as an enter-
prise correfpondin; to his power, and becoming

Sandev. hiflnr. tom. ii. g98.
w Jovii hilt. 1. xl. p. 66.

his
,j-

his humanity, to reduce Algiers, which, since the nB o `
conquest of Tunis, was the common receptacle - -_
of all the free-boo:ers; and to exterminate that '
lawless race, the implacable enemies of the Chriftl
ian name. Moved partly by their entreaties, and
partly allured by the hope of adding to the glory
which he had acquired by his lait expedition into
Africa, Charles, before he left Madrid, in his
way to the Low-Cotuntries, had ifTued orders both
in Spain and Italy to prepare a fleet nd armny for
this purpole. No change in circumlances, since
that timre, could divert him from this refuiution,
or prevail on him to turn his arms towards Hun-
garyi though the success of the Turks in that
country seemed more immediately to require his
pretence there; though many of his most faithful
adherents in Germany urged that the defence of
the Empire ought to be his firif and peculiar care;
though such as bore him no good will ridiculed
his preposterous conduct in flying from an enemy
;tlmoft at hand, that he might go in quest of a re-
mote and more ignoble foe. But to attack the Sul-
tan in Hungary, how splendid oever that measure
might appear, was an undertaking which exceeded
his power, and was not conrsllenr with his interest.
To draw troops out of Spain or Italy, to march
them into a country so distant as Hungary, to
provide the vast apparatus necefTary for transport-
ing thither the artillery, ammunition, and bag-
gage of a regular army, and to push the war in
that quarter, where it could not be brought to
ary issue during several campaigns, were under-

takin-,

B K takings so expensive and unwieldy as did not cor-
'-r - respond with the low condition of the Emperor's

treasury. While his principal force was thus em-
ployed, his dominions in Italy and the Low.
Countries must have lain open to the French
King, who would not have allowed such a favour-
able opportunity of attacking them to go unim-
proved. Whereas the African expedition, the
preparations for which were already finiihed, and
almost the whole expence of it defrayed, would
depend upon a single effort; and besides the fe-
curity and fatisfa&ion which the success of it must
give his subje&s, would detain him during fb
ihort a face, that Francis could hardly take ad-
vantage of his absence, to invade his dominions
in Europe.
FHi prepa- ON all there accounts, Charles adhered to his

"" first plan, and with such determined obstinacy,

that he paid no regard to te Pope, who advilfd,
or to Andrew Doria who conjured him not to ex-
pose his whole armament to almost unavoidable
deltrution, by venturing to approach the danger-
ous coast of Algiers at such an advanced season of
the year, and when the autumnal winds were so
violent. Having embarked on board Doria's
gallies at Porto-Venere in the Genoese territories,
he soon found that this experienced sailor had not
judged wrong concerning the element with which
he was so well acquainted; for such a storm arole
that it was with the utmost difficulty and danger
he reached Sardinia, the place of general rendcz

vous. But as his courage was undaunted, and B 0o K
his temper often infexible, neither the remon-
fprances of the Pope and Doria, nor the danger to 1541'
which he had already been exposed by disregarding
them, had any other eetL than to confirm him in
his fatal resolution. The force, indeed, which he
had collected was such as might have inspired a
Prince less adventrous, and less confident in his
own schemes, with the moti sanguine hopes of
iuccefs. It confilled of twenty thouland foot, and
two thousand horse, Spaniards, Italians, and Ger-
mans, moffly veterans, together with three thou-
find volunteers, the flower of the Spanish and
Italian nobility, fond of paying court to the Em-
peror by attending him in his favourite expedi-
tion, and eager to fihare in the glory which they
believed he was going to reap; to these were
added a thousand loldiers sent from Malta by the
order of St. John, led by an hundred of its most
gallant Knights.

THE voyage, from Majorca to the African l.an in

coast, was not less tedious, or full of hazard, than Afri"a
that which he had just finished. When he ap-
proached the land, the roll of the sea, and ve-
hemence of the winds, would not permit the troops
to dilnlbark. But at last, the Emperor, seizing
a favourable opportunity, landed them without
nopofition, not far fiom Algiers, and immediately
advanced towards the town. To oppose this
mighty army, Hafcen had only eight hundred
Turks, and five thousand Moors, prtly natives

VOL. Ill. Qt of

B 00 K of Africa, and partly refugees from Granada. 1I

VI.
-.--. returned, however, a fierce and haughty anfwver

' when summoned to surrender. But with fch a

handful of soldiers, neither his desperate courage,
nor consummate fiill in war, could have lcng re-
sifted forces superior to thofle which had defeated
Barbaroffi at the head of sixty thousand men,
and which had reduced Tunis, in spite of all his
endeavours to fve it.

Th dt:n.- BUT howfoevcr far the Emperor might thin.!
beiel hih hirmlelf beyond the reach of any danger from the
:"i'iy enemy, he was suddenly expoled to a more dread-

ful calamity, and one against which human pru-
dence and human efforts availed nothing. On
the second day after his landing, and before he
had time for any thing but to ditperfe some lihlt-
armed Arabs who molested his troops on their
march, the clouds began to gather, and the hea-
vens to appear with a fierce and threatening ;as
pe&. Towards evening, rain began to fall, ac-
companied with violent wind, and the rage of t'ie
tempest increaring, during the night, the Ibldiers,
who had brought nothing ashore but their arms,
remained expoled to all is fury, without tents, or
Iheiter, or cover of any kind. The grour.l \ a
uoon so wet that they could not lie down on iC;
their camp being in a lolituation was overilow-
cd with water, and they funl at every flep to the
ankles in mud; while the wind blew with tfch
impetuosity, tlat, to prevent their falling, they
were obliged to thrust their spears into the grounl,

an:,

and to support therriclves by taking hold of them. B O° K
Hafcen was too vigilant an oicer to allow an -
enemy in such distress to remain unmno!efted.
About the dawn of morning, he rallied out with
boldiers, who, having been screened from the
itorm under their own roofs, were fresh and vi-
gorous. A body of Italians, who were stationed
nearest the city, dispirited and benumbed with
cold, fled at the approach of the Turks. The
troops at the poll behind them, discovered greater
courage; but as the rain had extinguiflied their
matches and wet their powder, teir muskets were
ullelefs, and having scarcely l.re!tlh to handle
their other arms, they were i;,on thrown into con-
furlon. Almolt the whole army, with the Em-
peror himself in pcrfon, was obliged to advance,
before the enemy could be repulsed, who, after
spreading such general conflernation, and killing
a considerable number of men, retired at last in
good order.

BUT all feeling or remembrance of this loss ancdfet.

and danger were quickly obliterated by a more
dreadful as well as assesing fpetaclc. It was
now broad day; the hurricane had abated nothing
of its violence, and the sea appeared agitated with
all the rage of which that deftrucrive element is
capable; all the flips, on which alone the whole
army knew that their safety and fubfiilence de-
pended, were seen driven fiom their anchors,
some dashing againlt each other, ome beat to
pieces on the rocks, many forced alhore, and not

Q 2 a few

Bn K
0 a few finking in the waves. In less than an hour,

vi.
*-.-- fifteen lips of wa;-, and an hundred and forty

'541 transports with eight thoufanal men periflhd ; and

such of the unhapp, r crews as fcaped thle fury of
the sea, vwre murdered with:ut mercy, by the
Arabs, as fTon as tli-v reached !:nid. The Emperor
iloo in ilcnt anguilh and ailonihflnnt behoii-
ing t!is fatal event, which at once blaflld all his
l;opes of fucccfs, nd buried in the depths the
vast flores which he had provided, as well for
m:nnouing the cnemy, as for fubtitting his own
troops. I-e l had it not in his power to afford
them: any other a.aifla:;cc or relief than by fend-
ing l;':;; troo;s to drive avay the Arabs, and
thus delivering a few who were to fortunate as to
get alhorc from the cruel fate which their com-
p)lions ihad met ith. At last the wind began
* to fall, and to give f;l:e hopes that as many ifips

iig'ht cl'calc, as to lave the army from perifiing
by fIilinc, and traniport thein back to Europe.
3.it theic v.ere ::;ly hoples; the approach of even-
ing covered the fia with darkness ; nd it beirg
Illlponible for the officers aboard the fiips wnich
l:ad outlived the liorm, to fend any intclic:;ce
to their companions who were ashore, tcy re-
,incd during the nicht in all the anguif of
ifuipcile and uncertainty. Next day, a boat ilf-
patched by Doria made shift to reach land, \wiL:
information, that having weathered out the ftor:n,
to which, during fifty years knowledge of the sea,
he had never ieen any equal in fierccrefs and hor-
ror, he had found it necessary to bear away with

6 i:

ihattered fiips to C.pe Metafuz. le advised the n O,o K
Emperor, as the face of the f;y was ill lowering --
and tempLnfiuous, to mnarch witlh all fpedc to tha.c 5'
place, where the troops could re-embark with
greater eaie.

WHATEVER comfort this intelligence afForded (''l t

Charles, from being iirlrc;i t:.:: p:irt o' his cer.
had elcag'ped. was bl.iiiccd by the new cares nd
pc!rplexr. in which it involved him with regard
to is arilmy. Metasirz was at leat three days
march (r-irn his prclt;.'i ca;mp; ail the provisions
which h had brought are a hIis fill: ianding
were now cconfiuflmed; ili fldsicrs, worn out withl
fatigue, werz h.rdlv .;bL:- :,r Inch ;a j ,)r:lnv, even
in a friendiy count:r ; and being clilirited by a
lucceion of hardlhips, whirh victory il;elf swould
fearcely have rendered tolerable, ctihy were in no
condition to uniergo new toils. lut the ituation
of the army was such, as allowedl nlt ne mo-
ment for deliberation, nor lft it in the !'ia!l doubt-
ful what to c'ioofe. They were ordered inflantly
to march, tile wou.nded, the lick, anl the feeble,
being placed in the centre; liich as Ileemed mos
vigorous were PI;ationed in the Iront and rear.
Then the fad cflects of what they had ful-ered
began to appear more mrnifillyv than ever, and
new calamities were added to all tho!: which they
had already endured. Some cold( hardly bear
tle weight of their ars s; others, (ipent with the
toil of forcing their way chirough deip and almot
iinp.ffable roads, funk down and died ; many

Q 3 perilhrd

B O I; perifiled by famine, as te whole arnm fuoif
.--- chiefly on roots and berries, or the Hefh of hor >r,

'5'' killed by the Emperor's order, and dii.ributcd

among the fcveral battalions; many were drowned
in brooks, which were lvoln so much by the ex-
ccfive rains, tlht in pa.ing them they wadcd uiR
to the chin; not a few were killed by the eneir.y,
who, during the greatest part of their retrea,
alarmed, harafed, and annoyed them night and
day. At last they arrived at Mctafuz; and t.,:
weather being now lb call as to restore their corn-
municatin with the fleet, they were supplied wit.'
plenty of provisions, and cheered with the prc-
spect of 1afcty.

tii frr,.: DURING this dreadful series of calamities, the
t.ir.d. Emperor dilcovered great qualities, many of

which an almost uninterrupted flow of profperitr
had hitherto aforded him no opportunity of ilf-
playing. He appeared conspicuous for firmness
and confCancy of iirit, for magnanimity, forti-
tude, humanity, and compalion. He endured
as great hardiiiips as the meanest tfldier; he ex-
posed his own person wherever danger threatened;
he encouraged the delponding; virted the ck;
and wounded; and animated all by hij words a:.l
example. When the army embarked, he v.;a
among the laflt who left the filore, although a c','
of Arabs hovered at no great dillancc, rea,; to
fall on the rear. By these VirLtucs, Charles atonlJl,
in some degree, for his obllinacy and prcrumlp-
tion in undertaking an expedition lb {fatal to l:is
i.lbjets. 5

T'HE calak';ies wv.ic' attended this unfortunate B 0 0 K

V#.

ci.:tcrprize dlid not cn:i .ere; for no soner were -.'
the forces got on bo:.:r, tha:n a n.e form arising, Ret.r to
though less furious t ?.n t'e fbr;:er, fcattcred the Eur'""p
lqect, and oliged ticml, ipalrately, to make to-
wards fiich ports in Ci,;;.n or I;jly as they could
firlt reach; thus fprt-adin the account of thieir
dlififters, with all t!ie circuinTances of aggrava-
tion and horror, wichl th:r fear or fancy fug-
gested. The Emperor himfJif, after ecaping
great dangers, and being forccd into the port of
Btugia in Africa, where he was obliged by contrary Dc. :
winds to remain several weeks, arrived at last in
Spain, in a condition very difierent from that in
which he had returned from his former expedition
against the Infidels z.

" Carol. V. Expeditio ad Argyriam per Nicolaum Villag-

noncm Equitem Riodium ap. Scardium, v. ii. 35. Jovii
Hist. I. xl. p. 69, &c. Vcra y Zuniga vida de Carlos V.
p. 83. Sandov. Hiftor. ii. z9, &c.

L4 T HE

# BOOK VII.

T E
THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

13 O O K VII.
BOOK VII.
T HE calamities which the Emperor suffered B 0 0

VIz.

in his unfortunate enterprize againt Algiers

were great; and the account of these, which aug- Rn.,wa of
mented in proportion as it spread at a greater ofiilit;,esb
diltance from the scene of his disasters, encouraged hi o motivs

for it.

Francis to begin hostilities, on which he had been
for rome time resolved. But he did not think it
prudent to produce, as the motives of this refolu-
;ion, either his ancient pretensions to the dutchy
cf Milan, or the Emperor's difi; Tenuity in vio-
Lting his repeated promises with rgard to the
rtflitution of that country. The former might
klve been a good reason against concluding the
trnce of Nice, but was none for breaking it; the
itter could not be urged without exposing his

own

B K ow

R clrcdlii:; as much as the Emperor's want cf
a-_ - irnterity. A violcnt and unwarrantable actiu,

4'' c one of the Imperial generals, furnished himn

\nih a realfn to juify his taking arms, which
was of greater weight than either of thefl, and
fu ch as woulid h.;vc rulcd hiin, if he had bern
as cde>rous of peace as he was eager for war.
Francis, by signing the treaty of truce at Nice,
v.i':hout conliiltin Sym:;an, gave (as e forc-
iL.') grcat O.i'nCe to that haughty Monarch, who.
cc!!fidercd an al,;ance with him as an honour ur
v,!iici a Chrilian prince had caufi to be pro;d.
The r.ch King's friendly interview with the
Inp;t-:;-cr in P-uvcnce, followed by such extra-
o:i:.;ry appearances of union and confidence as
uco.npanied Charles's reception in France, in-
1duced the Sultan to fufped that the two rivals had
at last forgotten their ancient enmity, in order
that they might form such a general confederacy
agiinft the OCtornan power, as had been lor.
vlbhrd for in Chri^' end!, and often attempted
in vain. Charles, with his uri;al art, endeavour-
*e to confirm and lirengthen these iffpicions, by
i;ifhr',ling h;s cii;rics at Cnftantinople, as
,*eil as in rto!e caurts wi;h which Solyman held
any intellige:ce, to repreicnt the clncord be.
tween h;im and Fr.lcis to be lo entire, that their
renti!renrs, views, and prfuirs, would be the
lam;e for the future". It was not without ditfi

,. lrnm. de Ribler, ton. i. p, 5$2.

c iUA

culty that Francis cced there imprefflons; but B °o K
th e a '!r.'icf; cf P.i'con, thle French aimbafador at
the Porte, totgther with the manifest advantage
cr c rrs;in on h:fliities ag:inft the house of
Au.(ir:a in concert .il France, prevailcd at
lcngCth on the Sinrt n to ecr into a co!er con-
junion wi' Fra: ..s ;.iLn ever. Rincon return-
ed into France, in order t coimmunicate to his
mafcer a scheme of the Suiltn's, for ganiing the
concurrence of the Venetians in their operations
again.f the common enemy. Solyman having
lately concluded a peace with that republick, to
which the mediation of Francis and the good
offices of Rincon had greatly contributed, thought
it not i affible to allure the senate by such ad-
vantages, as, together with the example of the
French Monarch, might overbalance any scruples
ariing either from decency or caution, that
could operate on the other fide. Francis, warm-
ly approving of this measure, dispatched Rincon
back to Constantinople, and, dire6ing him to go
by Venice along with Frcgofo, a Genotle exile,
whom he appointed his ambafador to that re-
publick, empowered them to negociare the mat-
ter with the senate, to whom Solyman had sent
an envoy for the fame purpose " The marquis
del Guafto, governor of the Milanese, an officcr
of great abilities, but capable of attempting and
executing the mos' atrocious a'ions, got intelli-
gence of the motions and dellination of there am-

Hial. d Vcnc:. de Paruta, iv. Iz;.

baaitdors,

B K baffadors. As he knew how much his mafice

VII.

..--.- wished to discover the intenLions of the Frlic!i
Thnur.ler King, and of what cuni:sqcilenicc it was to rtar.
of his an. the execution of his ne.ifurces, he cmn-,oyed ct'l :
h I!;.-cr, h's
prx: .or i'oldiers belonging to the garrilbn of Pavia to lie

in wait for Rincon and Fregof) as thev failec
dowvn the Po, who murdered them and molt of
their attendants, and cizcd their papers. Up;!i
recciving an account of lh:s barbauus outragr,
co:mitted, during tle flbfillencllcofr a

tru gai:ii'

persons heid sacred by the molt uncivil':;ed na-
tions, i:rancis's grief for the unhappy fate of two
servants whom he loved and trusted, his uneafi-
ness at the inctrruption of his fellines by their
death, and every other pafion, were swallowed
up ad los in the indignation whici this insu:lt
on the honour of his crown excited. He ex-
claimed loudly against Guafo, who, having drawn
upon hIimfe!f all the infamy of aafilnation with-
out making any discovery of importance, as the
ambafTadors had left their inflruions and other
papers of consequence behind them, now boldly
denied his eing acceftary in any if to the
crime. I-e sent an ambanaidor to the Emperor,
to dumz:;d !':i;tablc reparation fr an indignity,
v.lhch no pIn!:ce, huw inconfideralble Ifver or
l'lilla:n;imo:s, could tanmely enduire: And when
ChIarcs, Iml.atiracen at that time to set out on his
African cxp t'uitin, cndeavoirced to put him olr
witl an evasive an vecr, hli :t;pealcd to all the
courts in Europe, fci:ting forth the heinufniei of
the injury, the li;iriA of mtod-rntl ion with which

he

lie had applied f'r redrers, nl the iniquity of the B 0°° K
Emperor in disregarding thisu iU req'.et .

NOTWITHSTANDING the confidence with vhich

Guafto artedl his own innocence, the accufa-
tinns of the French g;incd greater credit than all
his prorelt:tions; and B.;!l;a, te French con-
mander in Piedmont, rocured, a; length, by his
industry and aclre's, such a minute detail of the
tranlGihion, with the teftirnony f so many of the
parties concerned, as amounted almioft to a legal
proof of the marquis's guilt. In confequenceofthis
opinion of the publick, confirmed by such flrong
evidence, Francis's complaints were univcrfally
allowed to be well founded, and the steps which
he took towards renewing hostilities, were ascribed
not merely to ambition or relfintment, but to the
unavoidable necessity of vindicating the honour
of his crown .

HOWEVER just Francis migl:ht esteem his own

cause, he did not trust 1o much to that, as to ne-
glect the proper precautions for gaining other
allies betides the Sultan, by vlwhuo aid he might
counterbalance the Emperor's superior power.
But his negociations to this effct' were attended
with very little ficcefs. Henry VIII. eagerly
bent at that time upon schemes a inft Scotland,
which he knew would at once diliolve his union
with France, was inclinable rather to take part

c Bellay, 367, &c. Jovii I-Iit. lib .xl. 2C8.

with

BOO K with the Emperor, than to contribute in any dc-

A_ gree towards favouring the operations again f
'54'. him. The Pope adhered inviolably to his ancient

system of neutrality. The Venetians, notwith-
standing Solyman's solicitations, imitated the
Pope's example. The Germans, satisfied with
the religious liberty which they enjoyed, found it
more their interest to gratify than to irritate the
the Emperor; so that the Kings of Denmark and
Sweden, who on this occasion were first drawn in
to interest themselves in the quarrels of the more
potent Monarchs of the south, and the duke of
Cleves, who had a dispute with the Emperor
about the possession of Guelders, were the only
confederates whom Francis secured. But the do-
minions of the two former lay at such a diltance,
and the power of the latter was o inconfiderablc,
that he gained little by their alliance.

Francis's FRANCIS, however, supplied all defeEts by his
indutirv in
preparing own aivity. Being afflited at this time with a

ar aiftemper, the effec of his irregular pleasures,

and which prevented his pursuing them with the
fame licentious indulgence, he applied to bufinef
with more than his usual industry. The fame caulf
which occasioned this extraordinary attention to
his affairs, rendered him morose and dissatisfied
with the ministers whom he had hitherto employ-
ed. This accidental peevishness being sharpenet
by refleaing on the false steps into which he had
lately been betrayed, as well as the insults to
which he had been exposed, Tome of those in whom

he

he had hitherto placed the greatest confidence felt B o o
the effects of this change in his temper, and were ---
deprived of their offices. At last he disgraced
Montmorency himself, who had long directed
affairs, as well civil as military, with all the autho-
rity of a miniflcr no less beloved than trustcd by
his mailer; and Francis being fond of fhcwing
that the fall of such a powerful favourite did not
affect the vigour or prucdinc of his adminii-ra-
tion, this was a new motive to redouble his dili-
gence in preparing to open the war by fume
Iplendid and extraordinary etiubrt.

FRANCIS accordingly bnougt into the ,i.l five 1'4

armies. One to act in Ltxe;.ibourg under the tive .r.-:
duke of Orleans, acco!p;,nic by the dulk of f,,d.
Lorraine as his inf-ructor in the art of war. An-
other commanded by the dauphin marched to-
wards the frontiers of Spain. A third led by Van
RolTem the marshal of Gucldrrs, and composed
chiefly of the troops of Cleves, had Brabant al-
lotted for the theatre of its opcrations. A ourth,
of which the duke of Vendome was gcncral,
hovered on the borders of Flandcrs. The lat,
confifing of the forces cantoncd in Piedmont, was
destined for the admiral Annih.a.lr. The dauphin
and his brother were appointed to comnmand
where the chief exertions were intended, and the
greatest honour to be reapcl; the a;rmy of the
former amounted to sorry thou(ind, that of the
latter to thirty thousand men. Nothing appears
more furprizing than that Francis did not pour

wi h

B °0 KI with there numerous and irresistible armies into
.-.--'. the Milanese, which had so long been the object

of his wishes as well as enterprizes; and that he
should choose rather to turn almost his whule
strength into another diretion, and towards new
conquests. But the remembrance of the difatiUrs
which he had met with in his former expeditions
into Italy, together with the diffliculty of fipport-
ing a war carried on at such a distance from his
own dominions, had gradually abated his violat
inclination to obtain footing in that country, aln
made him willing to try the fortune of his arms in
another quarter. At the fmne time he expetcd
to make such a powerful imprelion on the fro:-
tier of Spain, where there were few towns of any
firength, and no army aembled to oppofc him,
as might enable him to recover poffleion of tihc
country of Roufli!on, lately difinenbered froin
the French crown, before Charles could bring into
the field any force able to obstruct his progrcf .
The necefnty of fpporting his ally the duke of
Clevcs, and the hope of drawing a confidcl:'rab
body of 1tldiers out of Germany by his iea;is,
determined him to a with vigoUIr in the Lo. ;-
Countries.

JTUne THE dauphin and duke of Orleans opcnel thE

Their ope.
rtions. campaign much about the fame time ; the forn'l r

laying siege to Perpignan the cnpital of Rou!l-
Ion, and the latter entering Luxembourg. '1
duke of Orleans pushed his operations with tii:
greitefl rapidity and fuccels, one town fallii:';

;i':a I

after another, until no place in that large dutchy B 0 K
remained in the Emperor's hands but Thionville. -
'or could he have failed of over-running the '"'
:djacent provinces with the fme ease, if he had
rot voluntarily flopc fiort in this career of vi&ory.
But a report prevailing that the Emperor had de-
termined to hazard a bartle in order to save Per-
pignan, on a sudden the duke, prompted by
youthful ardour, or moved, pcr.:ps, by jealouly
of his brother, womn he both envied and hated,
ab'andoned his own conquer, and liaftened to-
wards Roufillon, in order to divide with him the
glory of the victory.

ON his departure ome of his troops were dif-

banded, others deserted their colours, and the
reft, cantoned in the towns which he had taken,
remained inactive. By this conduc, which leaves
a dishonourable iputation either on his under-
flanding or his heart, or on both, he not only
renounced whatever he could have hoped from
iich a promising commencement of the cam-
paign, but gave the enemy an opportunity of re-
covering, before the end of summer, all the con-
quests which he had gained. On the Spanish
frontier, the Emperor was not so inconsiderate as
to venture on a battle, the 1ofs of which might
have endangered his kingdom. Perpignan, though
poorly fortified, and brifklv attacked, having been
largely supplied with ammunition and provision.
by the vigilance of Doria , was defended so long

d Sigonii Vira A. Doria, p. 119!,
VOL. III. R and

B VO1 K and so vigorously by the duke of Alva, the per.

Vil.
*.,.-- fevering obstinacy of whose temper fitted him ad-

3'4' mirably for such service, that at lafl the French,

after a siege of three months, wafted by diseases,
repulsed in several aflaults, and delpairing of fuc-
cess, relinquifled the undertaking, and retired
into their own country'. Thus all Francis's
mighty preparations, either from some defec in
his own conduct, or from the superior power and
prudence of his rival, produced no effecs which
bore any proportion to his expence and efforts, or
such as gratified, in any degree, his own hopes,
or answered the expectation of Europe. The
only solid advantage of the campaign was tilhe
acquisition of a few towns in Piedmont, which
Bellay gained rather by stratagem and addre!s,
than by the force of his arms.

',5+3 MEANWHILE the Emperor and Francis, though

Prearaito s
for another both considerably exhausted by such great but in-

decisive efforts, discovering no abatement of thei;
mutual animosity, employed all their attention,
tried every expedient, and turned themselves to-
wards every quarter, in order to acquire new allies,
together with such a reinforcement of strength as
would give them the superiority in the enluing
campaign. Charles, taking advantage of the ter
ror and resentment of the Spaniards, upon the fud-
den invasion of their country, prevailed on the
Cortes of the several kingdons to grant him sub-

e Sandov. Hill. tor. ii. 315.
Sandov. Hill. ii. 318. Bcilay, 387, &c. Frrcr. ix

'll Ii

sidies with a more liberal hand than usual. At B o°°
0

vii.

the fame time he borrowed a large ;im from John -
King of Portugal, and, by way of fccurity for his '53
repayment, put himn in pcf."lion of the Molucca
!les in the Eaff Indies, with the gainful con-
merce of precious fptices, which that felquefered
curner of tile globe yields. Nut f.itis-ied with
this, he negociated a nlmarri- te bctvween Philip his
only son, now in his fi:ctci Lih year, and Mary
daughter of that Monarc', with womu her fa-
ther, the most opulent prince in Euro, c,, g.ive a
large dower; and having likewise prfti:tded rhe
Cortes of Aragon and Valencia to recognile I'hilip
as the heir of there crowns, he obtained from
them the donative usual on such occafionsg.
There extraordinary supplies enabled him to make
iuch additions to his forces in S:in, that he
could detach a great body into t'ie [L,n-Countries,
and yet reserve as many as were ft'u.licnt ior the
defence of the kingdom. 1-;vi;.; :.5'5s iprovided
for the iecurity of Spain, a nd coi l:: ir.l the go-
vernment of it to his i,, lie li;l:i tinr Itil., in
Ihis way to Germany. Blt how ar.,cntive focvcr MJ,
to raile the funds for carry in; on the war, or eager
to gralip at any new expedient for that urpore, he
was not fb inconliderate as to acc.-pr (,f an over-
ture which Paul, knowing his necelicti; artfully
threw out to him. That ambitious Pontiff, no
leis sagacious to discern, than watcliil to seize
opportunities of aggrandizing hi fmily, solicited

* Ferreras, ix. 238. 241. Jovii Hilt. ib. xlii. 298. 6.

R 2 him

B 0 K him to grant OFtavio his grandchild, whom the
.---- Emperor had admitted to the honour of being his

o :bn-in-law, the invefliture of the dutchy of Mi-
lan, in return for whic! he promised such a vall
lum of money as would have gone far towards
fipplying his present exigencies. But Charles,
.s well from unwiliingnefs to alienate a province
of so much value, as from disgust at the Pope,
who had hitherto refiued to join in the war against
Francis, rejeaed the proposal. His dissatisfaction
with Paul at that juncture was so great, that he
even refused to approve his alienating Parma
and Placentia from the patrimony of St. Peter,
and fettling them on his son and grandson as
a fief to be held of the Holy See. As no
other expedient for raising money among the
Icalian states remained, he coniented to withdraw
the garrisons which he had hitherto kept in the
citadels of Florence and Leghorn in confidera-
tion for which, he received a large present from
Cosmo di Medici, who by this means secured his
own independence, and got poffflfion of two
forts, which were july called the fetters of Tuf-
cany'.

The r.are. BUT Charles, while lie see;ned to have turned!
ciations his whole attention towards raing the furns ne-
vilr.ry ceffary for defraying the expences of the year,

had not been negligent of objecs more diilant,

h Adriani Illoria, i. z19. Sleid. it . Jovii Hit. lib. xl'i
p. 3oz. Vila di Ccf. Medici di Baldini, p. 34.

though no leTs imnp.-r-n:, and had concluded a B K
league offensive a;;d d.':-n!ive wit! I-nry VIII. *-C
from which he derived, n the C., reer ad- 4
vantage than fromn ai his cther preparations.
Several fighr circu:nlt;ncces, whic! have already
been mentioned, had b'-u. to a!inate the as-
fetions of that Monarch f o il Francis his present
ally, and new incidents cf grcater inment had
occurred to increa!c his digut and animofily.
Henry, desirous of eltabli!'.iiiu an unori:lnity in Henry's

-

i ;;ture..it 4

religion in Great Britain, as well as ond of mak- Frnce and
ing proselytes to his own opinions, hadl furmed a
fchein of perillading his nephew the King of
Scotland to renounce the Pope's fiuprerac. , and
to adopt the famne fIltc! of reforinmaion, which
he had introduced into England. Th;s :1easure
he pursued with his ulual agernecs and impetuo-
fity, making such advantageous offers to James,
whom he confidered as nt over-fcrnouloiifiv at-
tached to any religious tenets, that he hardly
doubted of ifucc fs. His propofions were ac-
cordingly received in such a manner, that he
flattered himself with having gained his point.
But the Scottish ecclefiafticks, forelecipg the rir
of the church to be the confiquence of the King's
union with England; and the prr tians of France,
no less convinced that it would put an end to the
influence of that crown upon the publick councils
of Scotland, combined together, and by !leir in-
linuations defeated Henry's fcllemre at thz very
moment when he expe&ctd it to have taken elitd.
Too haughty to brook such a difl:ppointlnenr,

1R 3 which

B o 0 K which he imputed as nmurch to the arts of the
. .-a French, as to the levity of the Scottish Monarch,

3 lihce took arms againfl Scotland, threatening to

fubduc the kingdom, since he could not gain the
friendflhip of its King. At the fame time, his
resentment at Francis quickened his negociations
with tle Emperor, an alliance with whom he was
now as forward to accept as the other could be to
oilcr ir. During this war with Scotland, and
before the conclusion ot his negociations with
Charles, James V. died, leaving his crown to
Mary his only daughter, an infant a few days
old. Upon this event, Henry altered at once hi
whole 1yl'-il with regard to Scotland, and aban-
doning all thoughts of conquering it, aimed a:
what was more advantageous as well as more
pracicable, an union with that kingdom by a
marriage between Edward his only son and the
young Quecn. But here, too, he apprehended
a vigorous opposition from the French facion in
Scotland, which began to beflir itself in order
to thwart the mneaf'lre. The neceflity of crushing
this party among the Scots, and of preventinj
Francis from furninfing them any effe'ual aid,
confirmed Henry's resolution of breaking widi
France, and pufled him on to put a finilhing
hand to the treaty of confederacy with the E-
peror.

Feh. 1,. IN this league were contained first of all, ar-
let^wen ticles for securing their future amity and mutual
,herlal defence then were enumerated the demands

which

which they were refpetively to make upon Fran- B 0o K
cis; and the plan of their operations was fixed, -
if he hould refuse to grant them fatisfa&tion. 154'
They agreed to require that Francis flould not
only renounce his alliance with Solyman, which
had been the source of infinite calamities to
Christendom, but allb that he should make repa-
ration for the damages which that unnatural union
had occasioned; that he (hould restore Burgundy
to the Emperor; that he should defill immediate-
ly from holilities, and leave Charles at leisure to
oppose the common enemy of the Christian faith;
and that he should immediately pay the urims due
to Henry, or put some towns in his hands as fe-
curity to that effc&t. If, within forty days, he
did not comply with these demands, they then
engaged to invade France each with twenty thou-
sand foot and five thousand horse, and not to lay
down their arms until they had recovered Bur-
gundy, together with the towns on the Somme,
for the Emperor, and Normandy and Guienne, or
even the whole realm of France, for Henry .
Their heralds, accordingly, set out with these
haughty requisitions; but no: being permitted to
enter France, could not perform their commifllon,
and the two Monarchs held themselves fully en..
titled to execute whatever was tlipulated in their
treaty.

F ANCIS, on his part, was not less diligent in Frnci'
preparing for the approaching campaign. Hav- f^t'sly-

man.
i Rym.xiv. 768. Herb. 238.

R 4 ing

B IJ K ing early observed the symptoms of Henry's 'i-
- gust and alienation, and finding all his endeavours

543' to sooth and reconcile him ineffetual, he knew

his temper too well not to expet that open hofti-
lities would quickly follow upon this cessation of
frienldflip. For this reason he redoubled his en-
deavours to obtain from Solyman such aid as might
counterbalance the great acceflion of ftrent!i
which the Emperor would receive by his ai;i-
ance with England. In order to Iupply the place
of the two abaffadors who had been murder:!
by Guafto, he sent as his envoy, first to Venice,
and then to Conllantinople, Paulin, a captain ot
foot, a man ofa daring active spirit, and on accounr
of thefr qualities thought worthy of this fervicc,
to which he was recommended by Bellay, who
had trained him to the arts of negociation, and
made trial of his talents and address on several oc-
cafions. Nor did he belie the opinion conceived of
his courage and abilities. Halening to Conftan-
tinople, without regarding the dangers to which he
vwas exposed, he urged his master's demands wi:!
such boldnels, and availed him!-lfofevery circum-
lanc \vw:'. 'uch dexterity, that quickly he re-
moved all thc Sultan's diffculties. As iome of trh
Bafliaws, swayed either by their own opinion, n:
influenced by the Enmperor's miiries, who h.
made: their way even into tnis court, hd decl:rei
in the Divan again a ing i; coacert with Franc,
he found means either to convince or lilence tie,;.

k Sandov. Flnitnr. toni. ii. 3 ,6. Jovii Hill. lib. xi. Sl ,
&c. 300, :c. Brantomc.

A:

At last he obtained orders for Barbarossa to fail with B K
a powerful fleet, and to regulate all his operations -'
by the directions of the French King. Francis 541
was not equally successful in his attempts to gain
the princes of the empire. The extraordinary
rigour with which he thought it neceflary to punish
iuch of his fubjets as had embraced the protestant
opinions, in order to give ome notable evidence
of his own zeal for the Catholick faith, and to
wipe off the imputations to which he was liable
from his confederacy with the Turks, placed an
insuperable barrier between him and such of the
Germans as interest or inclination would have
prompted molt readily to join him'. His chief
advantage, however, over the Emperor, he de-
rived on this, as on other occasions, from the
contiguity of his dominions, as well as from the
extent of the royal authority in France, which
exempted him from all the delays and disappoint-
ments unavoidable wherever popular assemblies
provide for the expences of government by occa-
:onal and frugal subsidies. Hence his domeftick
preparations were always carried on with vigour
and rapidity, while thole of the Emperor, unless
when quickened by some foreign fipply, or ome
temporary expedient, were to the it degree flow
and dilatory.

LONG before any army was in readiness to op- peration
pose him, Francis took the field in the Low- Cour.ri.i

' iexk. lib iii. ot.

Coun tries,

B 0O K Countries, against which he turned the whole

viI.

- weight of the war. He made himself master of
'543 Landrecy, which he determined to keep as tlhe

key to the whole province of Hainault; and or-
dered it to be fortified with great care. Turning
from thence to the right, he entered the dutchy
of Luxembourg, and found it in the fame de-
fencelels state as in the former year. While he
was thus employed, the Emperor having drawn
together an army, composed of all the different
nations subjet to his government, entered the
territories of the Duke of Cleves, on whom he
had vowed to inflia exemplary vengeance. Tis
prince, whole conduCt and situation were imnilar
to that of Robert de la Mark in the first war be-
tween Charles and Francis, resembled him like-
wife in his fate. Unable, with his feeble army,
to face the Emperor, who advanced at the head
of forty-four thousand men, he retired at his ap-
proach; and the Imperialists being at liberty to

Toi Eb:ps act as they pleased, immediately invested Duren.
,tna ofy 'Ihat town, though gallantly defended, was won
the Dutchy
of Ces by assault all the inhabitants put to the sword,
AuSii a4t

and the place itself reduced to ashes. This dread-
ful example of fevericy struck the people of tlih
country with such general terror, that all the
other towns, even such as werecapable of resistance,
lent their keys to the Emperor; and before a bodyv
of French, detached to his afliltance, could conm
up, the duke himself was obliged to make his
fubmifion to Charles in the most abject manner.
Being admitted into the Imperial presence, ;

kneeled,

kneeled, together with eight of his principal sub- B o00 K
jets, and implored mercy. The Emperor al- .--
lowed him to remain in that ignominious potlure, '543
and eying him with an haughty and implacable
look, without deigning to answer a single word,
remitted him to his miniters. The conditions,
however, which they prescribed were not so ri-
gorous as head rcafon to have expeiced after such
a reception. I-e was obliged to renounce his spt. 7.
alliance with France and Denmark; to resign all
is pretensions to the dutchy of Gueldres; to en-
ter into perpetual amity with the Emperor and
King of the Romans. In return for which, all
his hereditary dominions were restored, except
two towns which the Emperor kept as pledges of
his fidelity during the continuance of the war;
and he was re-inflated in his privileges as a prince
of the Empire. Nor long after, Charles, as a
proof of the sincerity of his reconcilement, gave
him in marriage one of the daughters of his bro-
ther Ferdinand m.

HAVING thus chastised the presumption of the Beniec

Duke of Cleves, detached one of his allies from L"""nrecy
Francis, and added to his dominions in the Low-
Countries a considerable province which lay con-
tiguous to them, Charles advanced towards Hain-
ault, and laid iege to Landrecy. There, as the
first fruits of his alliance with Henry, he was
joined by fix thousand English under Sir John

"' Hari Annal. Bralant, t. i. 6:8. Recucil des Traitnz,
t. ii. 226.

Wallop.

3 0 0 K Wallop. The garrison, confiLing of veteran

-v'-' troops commanded by De la Lande and Deess,

two officers of reputation, made a vigorous re-
fiftance. Francis approached with all his forces
to relieve that place; Charles covered the siege;
both were determined to hazard an engagement;
and all Europe expeced to fee this contest, which
had continued o long, decided at last by a battle
between two great armies, led by their refpeaive
Monarchs in perlbn. But the ground which 1e-
parated their two camps was iuch, as put the
dHifadvantagre manif:ftlv on his fide who hould
venture to attack, and neither of them chof to
run that rifque. Amidt a variety of movements,
in order to draw the enemy into the fiare, or to
avoid it themrnlves, Francis, with admirable con-
du&t and equal good fortune, threw firlf a sup-
ply of frelh troops, and then a convoy of provi-
sions, into the town, o that the Emperor, despair-
ing of success, withdrew into winter-quarters n, in
order to preserve his army from being entirely
ruined by the rigour of the season.

s"""w"n Da .RING this campaign, Solyman fulfilled his
,va& t;>- engagements to the French King with great punc-

tualiry. H-e himself marched into Hungary with
a numerous army; and as the princes of the Em-
pire made no great effort to save a country which
Charles, by employing hi- own force against Fran-
cis, seemed willing to sacrifice, there was no ap-

C Rcl!ay, Ic:, &c.

pearance

pearance of any body of troops to oppose his pro- B OI .
grefs. He besieged, one after another, Quinque v-_v
Ecclesia, Alba, and Gran, the three most con-
fiderable towns in the kingdom, of which Ferdi-
nand had kept possession. The first was taken by
storm; the other two surrendered; and the whole
kingdom, a small corner excepted, was fubjeted
to the Turkish yoke . About the fame time, Bfrlb

dercentoa

Barbarossa failcd with a fleet of an hundred and itaiv.
ten gallies, and coafing along the ilore of Cala-
bria, made a descent at Rheggio, which he plun-
dered and burnt; and advancing from thence to
the mouth of the Tiber, he flopt there to water.
The citizens of Rome, ignorant of his defina-
tion, and filled with terror, began to fly with
such general precipitation, that the city would
have been left deferred, if they lad not resumed
courage upon letters from Paulin the French en-
voy, afluring them that no violence or injury
would be offered by the Turks to any ltate in
alliance with the King his mafterP. From Ostia,
Barbarossa failed to Marseilles, and being joined
by the French fleet with a body of land forces on
board, under the count d' Enguien, a gallant
young prince of the house of Bourbon, they di-
rered their course towards Nice, the sole retreat
of the unfortunate duke of Savoy. There, to the c,:, e.
atoninlmcnt and scandal of all Christendom, the
Lilies of France anl Crelcent of Mahomet ap-

t I;lunher . I-illor. Hung. 1. xv. 167.
P jovii Hi.. 1. xliii. 304, &c. Pallavic. z6o.

i1 pe~apred

Bn o K peared in conjunction againf a fortress on which

.-- the Cross of Savoy was displayed. The town,
543' however, was bravely defended against their com-

bined force by Montfort a Savoyard gentleman,
who flood a general aiTault, and repulsed the
enemy with great loss, before he retired into the
castle. That fort, situated upon a rock, on which
the artillery made no impreifion, and which could
not be undermined, he held out so long, that
Doria had time to approach with his fleet, and the
marquis dl Guafto to march with a body of
Sept. S. troops from Milan. Upon intelligence of this,

the French and Turks raited the fiegeq; and
Francis had not even the consolation offuccels, to
render the infamy, which he drew on himself by
calling in such an auxiliary, more tolerable.

Prepra- FROM the finall progress of either party during
tionls for a'
n,,,cam. this campaign, it was obvious to what a length
Pais'. the war might be drawn out between two princes:

whose power was o equally balanced, and who,
by their own talents or ativity, could so vary and
multiply their resources. The trial which they
had now made of each other's firength might have
taught them the imprudence of perifting in a
war, wherein there was greater appearance ct
their diftrefling their own dominions than of con-
quering those of their adverfiry, and flould havy
difpoled both to wifl for peace. If Charles an-!

q Guichenon Hilloire de Savoye, t. i. p. 61. P.!:.
425, &a.

Frantr.i

Francis had been influenced by considerations of B 0 0 K
interest or prudence alone, this, without doubt,
must have been the manner in which they would '54s3
have reasoned. But the personal animosity, which
mingled itself in all their quarrels, had grown to
be so violent and implacable, that, for the pleafilre
of gratifying it, they disregarded every thing else;
and were infinitely more solicitous how to hurt
their enemy, than how to secure what would he
of advantage to themfclves. No sooner then did
the season force them to suspend hostilities, than,
without paying any attention to the Pope's re-
peated endeavours or paternal exhortations to re-
establish peace, they began to provide for the
operations of the next year with new vigour, and
an ativity increasing with their hatred. Charles
turned his chief attention towards gaining the
princes of the Empire, and endeavoured to rouse
the formidable but unwieldy strength of the Ger- A:";rs or
manick body against Francis. In order to under- c""*"'y
stand the propriety of the steps which he took for
that purpose, it is necessary to review the chief
tranfaaions in that country since the diet of Ratif-
bon in the year one thousand five hundred and
forty-one.

Muc.H about the time that affrnbly broke up, ,Tauriceof

Maurice succeeded his father Henry in the govern- oe^Yid .
ment of that part of Saxony which belonged to tl.r.
the Albcrtine branch of the Saxon family. This
voung prince, then only in his twentieth year,
h11, even at that earlv period bgun to dif:over

/3 the

B o K the great talents which qualified him for acting

-v- .. such a diltinguifhed part in the affairs of Ger-
543 many. As oon as he entered upon the admini-

ftration, he truck out into such a new and fin-
gular path, as hewed that he aimed, from the
beginning, at something great and uncommon.

The iews Though zealously attached to the Proreftant opi-
and condua
of this nions, both from education and principle, he
Prince. refused to accede to the league of Smalkalde,

being determined, as he 1aid, to maintain the
purity of religion which was the original object of
that confederacy, but not to entangle himself in
the political interests or combinations to which i;
had given rile. At the fame time, foreseeing a
rupture between Charles and the confederates of
Smalkalde, and perceiving which of them was
most likely to prevail in the contest, initead of
that jealousy and diltruft which the other Protef-
tants exprelTed of all the Emperor's designs, he
affeeAed to place in him an unbounded confidence;
and courted his favour with the utmofl aiduity.
When the other Protestants, in the year fifteen
hundred and forty-two, either declined alifing
Ferdinand in Hungary, or afforded him relui-ant
and feeble aid, Maurice marched thither in per-
son, and rendered himself cor.ficuous by his zeal
and courage. From the fame motive, he had led
to the Emperor's assistance, during the last cam-
paign, a body of his own troops; and the gracc-
fillrefs of his perlbn, his dexterity in all military
exercises, together with his intrepidity, which
courted and delighted in danger, did not diftin-

guinf

guiih him more in the field, than his great abilities B o° K
and infinlating address won upon the Emperor's _
confidence and favour,. While by this conduct, '43'
which appeared extraordinary to those who held
the fame opinions with him concerning religion,
Maurice endeavoured to pay court to the Em-
peror, he began to discover some degree of jea-
lousy of his cousin the Eletor of Saxony. This,
which proved in the sequel so fatal to the Ele&or,
had almoit occasioned an open rupture between
them; and oon after Maurice's accelfion to the
government, they both took arms with equal
rage, upon account of a dispute about the right
of jurifdi&ion over a paultry town situated on the
Moldaw. They were prevented, however, from
proceeding to ation by the mediation of the
Landgrave of Hefle, whose daughter Maurice
had married, as well as by the powerful and au.
thoritative admonitions of Luther'.

AMIDST there tranfa&tions, the Pope, though The Po.e

propufcs t

extremely irritated at the Emperor's concessions holdpa ene-
to the Protefiants at the diet of Ratibon, was so at eri,
warmly solicitcd on all hands, by such as were
most devoutly attached to the See of Rome, no
ieft than by those whole fidelity or designs he sus-
peted, to summon a general courcil, that he
found it impoLible to avoid any longer callin.
that alemnbly. The impatience br its meeting,
and the expetations of great cleas from its dc-

r Sleid. 317. Seek. 1. iii. 371. 386. 4 8.
' Sleid. ga~ . Seek. 1. iii. ^ .
Vo^. Ill' cisns,

B 0 K cifions, seemed to grow in proportion to the dif-

VII.
-J- Jficulty of obtaining it. He flill adhered, how-

53 ever, to his original resolution of holding it in

some town of Italy, where, by the number of
ecclefiafticks, retainers to his court, and depend-
ing on his favour, who could repair to it without
difficulty or expence, he might influence and even
dire&t all its proceedings. This proposition,
though often rejeced by the Germans, he in-
fruc&ed his nuncio to the diet held at Spires, in
March 3. the year one thousand five hundred and forty-two,

to renew once more; and if he found it gave no
greater fatisfa&tion than formerly, he, as a lads
concefllon, empowered him, to propose for the
place of meeting, Trent, a city in the Tyrol,
fubje& to the King of the Romans, and situated
on the confines between Germany and Italy. The
Catholick princes in the diet, after giving it as
their opinion that the council might have been
held with greater advantage in Ratisbon, Cologne,
or some of the great cities in the Empire, ap-
proved of the place which the Pope had named.
The Protestants unanimbufly exprefTed their dif-
fatisfa&ion, and protested that they would pay no
regard to a council held without the precincts of
the Empire, called by the Pope's authority, and
in which he assumed the right of presiding .

M" ', TNE Pope, without taking any notice of their
summonsit obje&ions, publiihed the bull of intimation,

t Sleid. 291. Seck. 1. iii. 283.

named

named three cardinals to preside as hs legates, B 00o K
and appointed them to repair to Trent before the Doy-
firit of November, the day he had fixed for open.- Ii
ing the council. But if Paul had desired the
meeting of a council as sincerely as he pretended,
he would not have pitched on such an improper
time for calling it. Instead of that general union
and tranquillity, without which the deliberations
of a council could neither be conducted with fe-
curity, nor attended with authority, such a fierce
war was jult kindled between the Emperor and
Francis, as rendered it impoible for the eccleft-
afticks from many parts of Europe to resort thi-
ther in safety. The legates, accordingly, re.
mained several months at Trent; but as no
person appeared there, except a few prelates from
the ecclesiastical slate, the Pope, in order to obh;, to
avoid the ridicule and contempt which this drew pror""tgue
upon him from the enemies of the church, re.
called them and prorogued the council u.

UNHAPPILY for the authority of the papal fee, The Empt.

at the very time that the German Protcilants took the I ratl
every occasion of pouring contempt upon it, the '""'
Emperor and King of the Romans found it necef-
fary not only to connive at their condu&, but to
court their favour by repeated ats of indulgence.
In the fame diet of Spires, wherein they had pro-
teRed in the mnot difrefpeatful terms against
alfembling a council at Trent, Ferdinand, who

F. Paul, p 97. Sleid. 296.

a depended

B o°0 K depended on their aid for the defence of Hungary,

VII.
*- . -' not only permitted that proteltation to be inferred

xs<3 in the records of the diet, but renewed in their

favour all the Emperor's conceflions at Ratisbon,
adding to them whatever they demanded for their
farther security. Among other particulars, he
granted a suspension of a decree of the Imperial
chamber against the city of Gofar, one of thofc
which had entered into the league of Stmalkaid.,
on account of its having seized the ecclefiafticai
revenues within its domains, and enjoined lHenry
duke of Brunswick to desist from his attnmpts tr
carry that decree into execution. But -Henr, a
furious bigot, and no Icis obllinate than rah i::
all his undertakings, continuing to disquiet thl'

Thtirviwor. people of Goflar by his incursions, the Eleóor oi
einspo,' of Saxony and Landgrave of Hesse, that they

might not susser any member of the Smalkaldick
body to be oppressed, assembled their forces, de-
clared war in form against Henry, and in the
lpace of a few weeks, tripping him entirely of his
dominions, drove him as a wretched exile to ta;e
refuge in the court of Bavaria. By this at oi
vengeance, no less severe than sudden, they filled
all Germany with dread of their power, and the
onfecderatcs of Salkalde appeared, by this firll
effort of their arms, to be as prompt as capable
to protea those who had joined their a!iociation".

, Sleid. 296. Conmlcmo:ratio fuccinll:L cauf;:rum Bc!lii
&c. a Smalkaldicis contra iIenr. L: . ab iitl;im cli:.
ap. Scarditnn, tom. ii. 307.

..MlBOLD£ L:;'

EMBOLDENED by so many conceflions in their Bo 0

VII.

favour, as well as by the progress which their
opinions daily made, the princes of the league of 543'
Smalkalde took a solemn protest against the Impe-
rial chamber, and declined its jurifdi&ion for the
future, because that court had not been visited
or reformed according to the decree of Ratisbon,
and continued to discover a nmol indecent par-
tiality in all its proceedings. Not long after this,
they ventured a ftep farther; and protesting
against the recess of a diet held at Nuremberg,
which provided for the defence of Hungary, re- Apri, ,
fused to furni(h their contingent for that purpose, 1513.
unless the Imperial chamber were reformed, and
full security were granted them in every point
with regard to religion y.

SUCH were the lengths to which the Protest- Die t

epire.,

ants had proceeded, and such their confidence in ,s54.
their own power, when the Emperor returned
from the Low-Countries, to hold a diet, which
he had summoned to meet at Spires. The refpet
due to the Emperor, as well as the importance of
the affairs which were to be laid before it, render-
ed this assembly extremely full. All the Electors,
a great number of princes ecclesiastical and fecu-
lar, with the deputies of molt of the cities, were
present. Charles Coon perceived that this was not
a time to offend the jealous spirit of the Protest-
ants, by asserting in any high tone the authority

Y Scid. 304. 307. Seck. 1. iii. 404. 416.

S 3 and

aB oI K and dotrines of the church, or by abridging, in
*» .<z the fnalleft article, the liberty which they now

'54* enjoyed; but that, on the contrary, if he expe&ed

any support from them, or wilhed to preserve
Germany from intestine disorders while he was
engaged in a foreign war, he must sooth them by
new concelions, and a more ample cxtcnfion of
their religious privileges. He began, accordingly,
with courting the Ele&or of Saxony and Land-
grave of Hefle, the heads of the Proteflant party,
and by giving up ome things in their favour, and
granting liberal promises with regard to others,
he secured himself from any danger of opposition

tetmpe- on their part. Having ascertained this capital
*or solicit.
its id point, he then ventured to address the diet with
:tain/ rae,. greater freedom. He began by representing is

own zeal, and unwearied efforts with regard to
two things most essential to Chrillendom, the pro-
curing of a general council in order to compote
the religious dissentions which had unhappily
arisen in Germany, and the providing Ibme pro-
per means for checking the formidable progress
of the Turkish arms. But that his pious endea-
vours had been entirely defeated by the unjufti-
fiable ambition of the French King, who having
wantonly kindled the flame of war i;l Europe,
which had been o lately extinguished by the truce
of Nice, rendered it impolflble for the fathers of
the church to assemble in council, or to deliberate
with security; and obliged him to employ thote
forces in his own defence, which, with greatc,
fatisfatlion to himself, as well as more honour to

Clhrilten-

Christendom, he would have turned against the B o° K
Infidels. That Francis, not thinking it enough -
to have called him off from opposing the Infidels, 'I44
had, with unexampled impiety, invited them into
the heart of Christendom, and, joining his arms
to theirs, had openly attacked the duke of Savoy
a member of the Empire. That Barbarossa's fleet
was now in one of the ports of France, waiting
only the return of spring to carry terror and de-
folation to the coast of ome Christian state. That
in such a situation it was folly to think of distant
expeditions against the Turk, or of marching to
oppoei his armies in Hungary, while such a power-
ful ally received him into the centre of Europe,
and gave him footing there. That prudence
dictated to oppose the nearest and most imminent
danger, firif of all, and by humbling the power
of France, to deprive Solyman of the advantages,
which he derived from the unnatural confederacy
formed between him and a Monarch, who fill
arrogated the name of Molf Christian. That, in
truth, a war against the French King and the Sul-
tan ought to be confidered as the fame thing; and
that every advantage gained over the former, was a
revere and sensible blow to the latter. That, there-
fore, he now demanded their aid against Francis,
not merely as an enemy of the Germanick body,
or of him who was its head, but as an avowed
ally of the Infidels, and a publick enemy to the
Christian name.

IN order to give greater weight to this violent
invective of the Emperor, the King of the Romans

S 4 stood

I ? °°

stood up, and related the rapid conquests of the

A _*'rn^ Sultan in Hungary, occasioned, as he said, by the
L'S fatal necessity imposed on his brother, of employ-

ing his arms againf France. When he had
finished, the ambassadors of Savoy gave a detail
of Barbarossa's operations at Nice, and of the
ravages which he had committed on that coatr.
All these, added to the general indignation which
Francis's unprecedented union with the Turks
excited in Europe, made such an impreflion on
the diet as the Emperor wilhed, and disposed
most of the members to grant him such effecdal
aid as he had demanded. The ambafadors whom
Francis had sent to explain the motives of his
conduct, were not permitted to enter the bounds
of the Empire; and the apology which they pub-
lilhed for their master, vindicating his alliance
with Solyman, by examples drawn from scrip-
ture, and the practice of Chriltian princes, was
little regarded by men, irritated already or pre-
judiced against him to such a degree, as to be
incapable of allowing their proper weight to any
arguments in his behalf.

i'f"ivtin SUCH being the favourable disposition of the
inotde to Germans, Charles perceived that nothing could
{iin the
irwattlt. now obftru& his gaining all that he aimed ar, but

the fears and jealoulies of the Protestants, which
he determined to quiet by granting every thing
that the utmost solicitude of these paflions could
desire for the ecurity of their religion. With
this view he consented to a recess, whereby all
the rigorous edicts hitherto issued againIf the Pro-

teltants

teflants were suspended; a council either general ovii
or national to be assembled in Germany was de- '-
dared necessary, in order to re-establish peace in
the church; until one of these hould be held
(which the Emperor undertook to bring about
as soon as possible), the free and publick exercise
of the Proteflant religion was authorized; the
Inperial chamber was to give no molestation to
the Protcftants; and when the term, for which
the present judges in that court were ele&ed,
fliould expire, persons duly qualitied were then
to be admitted as members, without any diftinc-
tion on account of religion. In return for these Aid ni

b- the iet.

extraordinary as of indulgence, the Protetants
concurred with the other members of the diet, in
declaring war againit Francis in name of the
Empire; in voting the Emperor a body of twenty-
four thoualnd foot and four thousand horse, to
be maintained at the publick expence for fix
months, and to be employed against France; and
at the fame time the diet imposed a poll-tax to be
levied throughout all Germany on every person
without exception, for the support of the war
against the Turks.

CHARLES, while he gave the greatet attention chirle'

n-eOCiatilo

to the minute and intricate detail of particulars wih Den.
necelfary towards conduAing the deliberations of ensland.
a numerous and divided aembly to such a fuc-
cefsful period, negociated a separate peace with
the King of Denmark; who, though he had hi-
therto performed nothing considerable in conre-

quence

°0 0 K quence of his alliance with Francis, had it in his
-~-. power, however, to make a formidable divecrfon
544* in favour of that monarch2. At the fame time,

he did not neglea proper applications to the
King of England, in order to route him to more
vigorous efforts against their common enemy.
Little, indeed, was wanting to accomplish this;
for such events had happened in Scotland as in-
flamed Henry to the most violent pitch of resent-
ment against Francis. Having concluded with
the parliament of Scotland a treaty of marriage
between his son and their young Queen, by which
he reckoned himself secure of effecting the union
of the two kingdoms, which had been long de-
fired, and often attempted without success by his
predecessors, Mary of Guise the Queen-mother,
cardinal Beatoun, and other partizans of France,
found means not only to break off the match,
but to alienate the Scottish nation entirely from
the friendship of England, and to strengthen its
ancient attachment to France. Henry, however,
did not abandon an obje&t of so much importance;
and as the humbling of Francis, betides the plea-
sure of taking revenge upon an enemy who had
disappointed a favourite measure, appeared the
molt effectual method of bringing the Scots to
accept once more of the treaty which they had
rejected, he was o eager to accomplish this, that
he was ready to second whatever the Emperor
could propose to be attempted againl that mo-

z Dimont Corps Diplom. t. iv. p. ii. p. 7+.

narch.

larch. The plan, accordingly, which they con- o K
certed, was such, if it had been pun&tually exe- - --
cuted, as must have ruined France in the first s4
place, and would have augmented so prodigiously
the Emperor's power and territories as might in the
end have proved fatal to the liberties of Europe.
They agreed to invade France each with an army
of twenty-five thousand tnen, and, without losing
time in besieging the frontier towns, to advance
direcly towards the interior provinces, and to
join their forces near Paris .

MEANWHILE, Francis Rood alone in opposition TheFnchA

take tm

to all the enemies whom Charles was mustering feld in
againt him. Solyman had been the only ally Picdmnt.
who did not desert him; but the affitance which
he received from him had rendered him so odious
to all Chrifsendom, that he resolved rather to
forego all the advantages of his friendship, than
to become, on that account, the obje&t of general
detestation. For this reason, he difinifed Barba-
roffa as soon as winter was over, who, after ra-
vaging the coast of Naples and Tulcany, return-
ed to Conltaninople. As Francis could not hope
to equal the forces of his rival, he endeavoured
to supply that defet by dispatch, which was more
in his power, and to get the tartof him in taking
the field. Early in the spring the count d'En- Invetiea.
guicn invested Carignan, a town in Piedmont, i"sn
which the marquis del Guafto the Imperial gene-

* Herbert, z25. Bellay, 44$*

2S ~ ral

B o0 K ral having surprised the former year, confidered

.--- as of so much importance, that he had fortified
'4-' it at great expence. The count puihed the siege

with such vigour, that Guafto, fond of his own
conquest, and feeing no other way of saving it
from falling into the hands of the French, re-
solved to hazard a battle in order to relieve it.

The Impe- He began his march from Milan for this purpose,
march to and as he was at no pains to conceal his intention,
rclievc it.

it was loon known in the French camp. En-
guien, a gallant and enterprising young man,
wifled paflionately to try the fortune of a battle;
his troops desired it with no less ardour; but the
peremptory injuncion of the King not to venture
a general engagement, flowing from a prudent
attention to the present situation of affairs, as
well as from the remembrance of former difalters,
restrained him from venturing upon it. Unwill-
ing, however, to abandon Carignan, when it was
jut ready to yield, and eager to distinguish his
command by some memorable action, he dif-
patched Monluc to court, in order to lay before
the King the advantages of fighting the enemy,
and the hopes which he had of victory. The
King referred the matter to the council; all the
minifers declared, one after another, against
fighting, and supported their sentiments by rea-
sons extremely plausible. While they were deli-
vering their opinions, Monluc, who was per-
mitted to be present, discovered such visible and
extravagant fyrnptons of impatience to speak, as
well as such diffatisfacftion with what he heard, thar

Francis,

Francis, diverted with his appearance, called on B oo K
him to declare what he could offer in reply to .
sentiments which seemed to be as just as they '
were general. Upon this, Monluc, a plain but
spirited soldier, and of known courage, repre-
sented the good condition of the troops, their
eagerness to meet the enemy in the field, their
confidence in their officers, together with the
everlafing infamy which the declining of a battle
would bring on the French arms; and he urged
his arguments with such lively impetuosity, and
such a flow of military eloquence, as gained over
to his opinion, not only the King, naturally fond
of daring aions, but several of the council.
Francis, catching the fame enthusiasm which had
animated his troops, suddenly started up, and
having lifted his hands to Heaven, and implored
the Divine protecion, he then addrefled himself
to Monluc, ¢" Go, fays he, return to Piedmont,
and fight in the name of God ."

No sooner was it known that the King had B:t.-or

given Enguien leave to fight the Imperialists,
than such was the martial ardour of the gallant
and high-fpirited gentlemen of that age, that the
court was quite deserted, every person desirous
of reputation, or capable of service, hurrying to
Piedmont, in order to fliare, as volunteers, in
the danger and glory of the ation. Encouraged
by the arrival of so many brave officers, Enguien

b Mcmoircs dc Alonluc.

immediately

3* ° immediately prepared for battle, nor did Guafto

VIA. =-..j decline the combat. The number of cavalry was
'5* almost equal, but the Imperial infantry exceeded

the French by at least ten thousand men. They
prsi. met near Cerifoles, in an open plain, which as-

forded to neither any advantage of ground, and
both had full time to form their army in proper
order. The hock was such as might have been
expe&ted between veteran troops, violent and ob-
ftinate. The French cavalry ruffling forward to
the charge with their usual vivacity, bore down
every thing that opposed them; but, on the other
hand, the steady and disciplined valour of the
Spanish infantry having forced the body which
they encountered to give way, vi&ory remained
in fupence, ready to declare for whichever ge-
neral could make the belt use of that critical mo-
ment. Goafo, engaged in that part of his army
which was thrown into disorder, and afraid of
falling into the hands of the French, whose venge-
ance he dreaded on account of the murder of
Rincon and Fregofo, los his presence of mind,
and forgot to order a large body of reserve to ad-
vance; whereas Enguien, with admirable courage
and equal conduct, upported, at the head of his
gens d'armes, such of his battalions as began to
yield; and at the fame time he ordered the Swiss
in his service, who had been victorious wherever
they fought, to fall upon the Spaniards. This
motion proved decilive. All that followed was
confusion and slaughter. The marquis del Guato,
wounded in the thigh, escaped only by the fwifr-

nttA

ness of his horse. The vitory of the French was B o°o K
complete, ten thousand of the Imperialists being ---
slain, and a considerable number, with all their ts*
tents, baggage and artillery taken. On the part
of the conquerors, their joy was without allay, a
few only being killed, and among these no officer
of diftinion '.

THIS splendid action, beside the reputation zeai&otifr.

with which it was attended, delivered France from
an imminent danger, as it ruined the army with
which Guafto had intended to invade the country
between the Rhone and Saone, where there were
neither fortified towns nor regular forces to op-
pole his progress. But it was not in Francis's
power to pursue the victory with such vigour as
to reap the advantages which it might have yield-
ed; for though the Milanese remained now almost
defenceless; though the inhabitants, who had long
murmured under the rigour of the Imperial go-
vernment, were ready to through off the yoke;
though Enguien, flushed with success, urged the
King to seize this happy opportunity of recover-
ing a country, the acquisition of which had been
long his favourite object; yet, as the Emperor
and King of England were preparing to break in
upon the opposite frontier of France with superior
force, it became necessary ro sacrifice all thoughts
of conquest to the publick safety, and to recal

' Bellay, 429, &c. Mcmoires de Monluc. Jovii hil. 1.
tliv. p. 3$7. 6.

twelve

B 0 0 K twelve thoufind of Enguien's belt troops to be

employed in defence of the kingdom. En-
guien's subsequent operations were, of confe-
quence, ls languid and inconsiderable, that the
reduaion of Carignan and fume other towns in
Piedmont, was all that he gained by his great
vitory at Cerifoles .

Ope3tions THE Emperor, as usual, was late in taking t!:e
In the Lo-

tutic,. field, but he appeared, towards the beginning oi

June, at the head of an rmy more numerous,
and better appointed than any which he had hi-
therto led against Flrancc. It amounted almio!
to fifty thousand men, and part.of it having re-
duced Luxembourg and fu-ie other towns in the
Netherlands, before he himfeif joined it, he now
marched with the whole towards the frontiers of
Iaa' Champagne. Charles, according to his agree.

ment with the King of England, ought to have
advanced direclly towards Paris; and the dau-
phin, who commanded the only army to which
Francis trusted for the ecurity of his dominions,
was in no condition to oppose him. But the success
with which the French had defended Provence in
the year one thousand five hundred and thirty-fix,
had taught them the modl effetual method of
dilrelling an invading enemy. Champagne, a
country abounding more in vines than corn, was
incapable of maintaining a great army; and be-
fore the Emperor's approach, whatever could be

d Bellay, 439, &c.

ci

of any use to him had been carried off or de- B ° K
Itroyed. This rendered it necefr'iy for himn to * .
he mafler of some places of lcrcngth, in order to
!)cure the convoys, on which alone he now per-
ceived that he must depend for lublfitlence; and
he found the frontier towns o ill provided for
&dfence, that he hoped it would not be a work
either of much time or difficulty to reduce them.
Accordingly Ligny and Cornmercy, which he
fir!l attacked, f{lrrendered after a flort refilance.
Hie then invcfiled St. Diflcr, which, though it The Eme.
commanded an important pas! on the Marne, s. Difif.
was defitute of every thing necelfary for fultain- Ji 5.
ing a siege. But the count de Sancerre and M.
de la Lande, who had acquired such reputation
by the defence of Landrecy, generoully threw
themselves into the town, and undertook to hold
it out to the last extremity. The Emperor soon
found how capable they were of making good
their promile, and that he could not expect to
take the town without bcfieging it in form. This
accordingly he undertook; and as it was his na-
ture never to abandon any entcrprife in which he
had once engaged, he perfilled in it with an in-
considerate obltinacy.

THE King of England's preparations for the rTnrvVlil.

campaign were complete long before tle Eln- lo.
peror's; but as he did not chooft, on the one
hand, to encounter alone the whole power of
France, and was unwilling, on the other, that
lis troops should rem:.in inactive, he took that

Vol.. III. 1 opportunity

B

i K opportunity of chastising the Scots, by fending

-_ his fltet, together with a considerable part of his
'"' infantry, under the earl of Hertford, to invade

their country. Hertford executed his cornmif-
sion with vigour, plundered and burnt Edinburgh
and Leith, laid wafle the adjacent country, and
reimbarked his men with such dispatch, that tihey
joined their sovereign soon after his landing in
i;'y 4. France. When Henry arrived in that kingdor,

he found the Emperor engaged in the fiegc of
St. Differ; an ambafTador, however, whom he
fcnt to congratulate the Englifl Monarch on his
safe arrival on the continent, solicited him to
march, in terms of the treaty, diretly to Paris.
But Charles had Iet his ally such an ill example
of fulfilling the conditions of their confederacy
with exa&nefs, that Henry, observing him em-
ploy his time and forces in taking towns for his
own behoof, saw no reafon.why he should not
attempt the redu&tion of forne places that lay
conveniently for himself. Without paying any
regard to the Emperor's remonstrances, 'he im-
mediately invefled Eologne, and commanded the
duke of Norfolk to prcls the siege of Montreuil,
which had ben begun before his arrival, by a
body of Flemings, in conjuncion with son;e
Englifi troops. While Charles and Henry siev'-
ed such attention each to lis own intereit, they
both negleed the common cause. Instead of
the union and confidence requisite towards con-
duding the grcat plan that they had formed, they
early difcovcred a mutual jealousy of each ot!:er,

W i, t.

Which, by degrees, begot dilruft, and ended in B
open hatred".

544.

BY this time, Francis had, with unwearied in- G.oant de-

duftry, drawn together an army, capable, as well D,; r.
from the number as from the valour of the
troops, of making head againit the enemy. But
the dauphin, who itill ated as general, prudently
declining a battle, the loss of which would have
endangered the kingdom, satisfied hiuifelf with
harassing the Emperor with his ligt troops, cut-
ting off his convoys, and laying waste the coun-
try around him. Though extremely direred
by these operations, Charles fill presehd the siege
of St. Difier, which Sancerre defended with afto-
nifhing fortitude and condu 2. He flood repeat-
ed assaults, repulsing the enemy in them all; and
undismayed even by the death of the brave De la
Lande, who was killed by a cannon-ball, he con-
tinued to shew the fame bold cotu:tenance and
obstinate resolution. At the end cf five week s,
he was still capable of holding out si me time
longer, when an artifice of Granvill's induced
him to surrender. That crafty politician, having
intercepted the key to the cypher which the Duke
of Guise used in communicating intelliece to
Sancerre, forged a letter in his name, authorizing
Sancerre to capitulate, as the King, though! highly
satisfied with his behaviour, thought it impru-
dent to hazard a battle for his relief, This letter

T Herbert
T 3 he

8 °0 K; he conveyed into the town in a manner which

--> could raile no suspicion, and the governor fell
S54' into the snare. Even then, he obtained such ho-

nourable conditions as his gallant defence merit-
ed, and among others a cessation of hostilities for
eight days, at the expiration of which he bound
hi:nfelf to open the gates, if Francis, during that
time, did no :r tt:;ck the Imperial army, and
throw frclh tri.. into the town'. Thus San-
c'rree, by detainii:; the Emperor so long before
an inconijIcrai' ic: ,placc, afforded his sovereign full
time to ;lllnhllc all his forces, and what rarely
falls to the lot ,t an oicr in such an inferior
commland, ac,.:;i-d the lory of having saved his
coun yrv.

A:E-'. ,". As soon as St. Difler surrendered, the Fmperor
ror pen'- advanced into the heart of Champagne, but San-
th, h11rt , cerre's obflinate rcrfi-anc; had damped his fan-
Id 'iU' guine hopes of penetrating to Paris, and led him

seriously to irl,:c on l; ,:i he might expect be-
sure towns o !e:c\cer i'i-cn^th, and defended by
more numero ?r!i!;;ns. At the fame time,
the procuiril,; !i;l)b.'; c: for his army was at-
tendiccl with i-.:.it ',,ii 'ulty, which increased in
prpo:rtion : s !.c vi.th v

;-w from his own fiontier.

He had loft a '.!: 1iiillber of his best troops
in the siege of 5c. Di.r, and many fell daily
in I; irmin fls, wliich it was not in his power to
a;'oidl, though they wafted his army insensibly,

r;ltntome, tomr. vi. 489.

without

without lealing to any dccifive a&ion. The sea- B K

V1i,

son advanced apace, and hle had not vt' the corn- -
mand either of a fliuFcicnt extent of territory, or 154'
of any such confidcr.;ble town as renllered it fife
to winter in the en-:': v's c'.niury. Great arrears
ton were due to his i;,i icr' , who were upon the
point of mutiny for t.r j:-.!', vi:i! h knew not
from what funds to Itri ry n.

e. All hclic con-

fiderations induced l,;;n to lilcnl to the overtures
of peace, which a p .nih D) o;:ic:ln, tile con-
feffi; of llis fifler the (' .ecn ,i S:-a.3:c, had le-
cretly na;lde to his cojl'i'r, a nrni of the ame
order. In confqu.etnce of this, plenipotentiaries
were nanmed n both fi.is, and began their con-
ferences in Clhaufl , a ;1:i'1 village near Chalons.
At the fame time, Charics, either from a desire
of making one great final elfort against France, or
merely to gain a pretext for deserting his allyand
concluding a fparate peace, sent an ambassador
formally to require Henry, according to the fli-
pulation in their treaty, to advance towards Paris.
While he expected a return from him, and waited
the iue of the conferences at Chauflc, he con-
tinued to march forward, though in the utmost
distress from scarcity of provisions. But at last,
by a fortunate motion on his part, or through
some neglect or treachery on that of the French,
he surprised first Eperney and then Chateau
Thierry, in both which were considerable maga-
zines. No sooner was it known that thele towns,
the latter of which is not two days march from
Paris, were in the hands of the enemy, than that

T 3 great

B o o K great capital, defenceless, and susceptible of any
A_- violent arlam in proportion to its greatness, was
'554' filled with coniernation. The inhabitants, as if

the Emperor had been already at their gates, fled
in the wildest confusion and despair, many fend-
ing their wives and children down the Seine to
Rouen, others to Orleans, and the towns upon
the Loire. Francis himfeif, more affli&ed with
this than with any other event during his reign,
and fenfibe as well of the triumph that his rival
would enjoy in insulting his capital, as of the
danger to which the kingdom was exposed, could
not refrain from crying out, in the first emotion
of his Ilurprile and sorrow, How dear, O my
God, do I pay for this crown, which I thought
thou hadit granted me freelyg !" But recovering
in a moment from this sudden sally of peevilhnefs
and impatience, he devoutly added, " Thy will,
however, be done;" and proceeded to iflue the
necefiary orders for opposing the enemy with his
usual aivity and pretence of mind. The dau-
phin detached eight thousand men to Paris, which
revived the courage of the affrighted citizens; he
threw a trong garrison into Meaux, and by a
forced march got into Fertc, between the Impe-
rialills and the capital.
n",t:a 0o UroN this, the Emperor, who began again to

feel the want of provisions, perceiving that the
dauphin rill prudently declined a battle, and not

U Brantomc, tom. vi. 8Xz.

daring

daring to attack his camp with forces so much B K
fllattered anti reduced by hard fcrvice, turned -
suddenly to the right, and tbegan to fall back to- *544'
wards Soilions. Having about this time received
Henry's anfwver, whereby he refuilld to ab.ndon
the sieges of Bologne and Montreuil, of both
which he expected every mo;;rnt to get pofielfion,
he thought himinflfabfolvcd from all obligations of
adhering to the treaty with him, and at full liberty
to consult his own interet in what manner foevcr
he pleased. lIe conlented, therefore, to renew
the conference, which the lurprifc of Epernay
had broken off. To conclude a peace between Pencebe-
two princes, one of whoin greatly defred, and n ir.,icis

cnr.luded at

the other greatly needed it, did not require a long cIr; y.
negociation. It was igned at Crefpy, a finall
town near Meaux, on the eighteenth of Septem-
ber. The chief articles of it were, That all the
conquests which either party had made fiRce the
the truce of Nice flall be rellored; That the
Emperor hall give in marriage to the Duke of
Orleans, either his own eldest daughter, or the
second daughter of his brother Ferdinand; That
if he chose to bellow on him his own daughter,
he shall fettle on her all the provinces of the Low-
Countries, to be ere&edl into an independent
slate, which flall descend to the male ilfue of the
marriage; That if he determined to give him his
niece, he ihall, with her, grant him the invefti-
ture of Milan and its dependencies; That he
Ihall within four months declare which of thicre
two Princeifes he had pitched upon, and filfil

T 4 the

.1D 0 K the refpeaive con"tions upon the confummati)n

_cv --.of the marriage, which llall take place within a

' year from the da:e of the treaty; That as soon as

the Duke of Orleans is put in poffeiion either o
the [,ow-Countrics or. of Milan, Francis fl:i!
rectore to the IDu.ke ot'S ivoy all that he now pol-
lcdresof !;:; rerritorics, except Pignerol and Munt-
niiian; Thiat Francis lhall renounce all pret .-
lions to the kingdom of Naples, or to the so-
vereignty of Slanders and Artois, and Charles
ihall give up his claiin to the dutchy of Burgun-
dy and county, of Charolois; That Francis Ihnil
give no aid to the exiled King of Navarre; T'i,.
both Monarchs shall join in making war upon
the Turk, towards which the King shall furnifl:,
when required by the Emperor and Empire, fix
hundred men at arms, and ten thouland foot h.

»of BESIDES the immediate motives to this peace,
;oriclu. ;

arising fiomn the distress of his army through want
of provisions; from the difficulty of retreating
out of France; and the impofiibility of securing
winter-quarters there; the Emperor was influ-
enced by other considerations, more distant, in-
deed, but not less weighty. The Pope was o-
fended to a great degree, as well at his concel-
sions to the Proteltants in thie late diet, as at his
consenting to call a council, and to admit of
publick disputations in Germany, with a view of'

h Recucil dks Tr'tc., t. i. 227. Bclius di Caufis Pacis
:re:iac in .\;':s ]ru.ict. Lips. 1763.

dctermining

determining the dotrines in controversy. Paul K
confidering both thelc steps as sacrilegious en-
croachmlents on the jurifdliction as well as privi- 's4'
leges of the Holy See, had addrefed :o the Em-
peror a renonftrance rather than a letter on this
ibje't, written ith fiich acrimony of language,
and in a lyle of such high authority, as discover-
cd more of an intention to draw on a quarrel
than of a desire to reclaim himi. - This ill humour
was not a little inflamed by the Emperor's league
with Henry, which being contracted with an
heretick, excommunicated by the apoftolick fee,
appeared to the Pope a profane alliance, and
was not less dreaded by him than that of Francis
with Solyman. Paul's son and grandson, highly
incensed at the Emperor for having refused to
gratify them with regard to the alienation of
Parma and Placentia, contributed by their fug-
geftions to four and difg,,li him lill more. To
all which was added the powerful operation of
the flattery and pronies which Francis incessant-
ly employed to gain him. Though from his desire
of maintaining a neutrality, the Pope had hither-
to fuppreTlTd his own resentment, ,had eluded the
artifices of his own family, and refilled the folici-
tations of the French King, it was not ffe to rely
much on the fteilinefs of a man whom his pas-
sions, his friends, and his interest combined to
flHake. Tihe union of the Pope with France,
Charles well knew, would instantly expose his
duoinions in Italy to be attacked. The Vene-
tians, he forclaw, would probably follow the ex-

5 ample

B vo K ample of a Pontiff, who was confidered as a mdel
%-. - of political wisdom among the Italians; and ths,
344. at ajun&cure when he felt himfell hardly equal to

the burden of the present war, he would be over-
whelmed with the weight of a new confedteracy
againtt him'. At the fame time, the Turks,
almost unrefited, made such progress in Hun-
gary, reducing town after town, that they ap.
proached near to the confines of the Austrian p!o-
vincesk. Above all thfee, the extraordinary pro-
grefs of the Protestant dotrines in Germany, and
the dangerous combination into which the Prin :s
of that profelion had entered, called for his im-
mediate attention. Almof, one half of Germarny
had revolted from the eflablifhed church; the
fidelity of the reft was much shaken; the nobility
of Austria had demanded of Ferdinand the free
exercise of religion' the Bohemians, among
whom some feeds of the docrines of Huss still
remained, openly favoured the new opinions; the
archbithop of Cologne, with a zeal rare among ec-
clefiafticks, had begun the reformation of his dio-
cefe; nor was it pofible, unless ome timely and
effe'tual check were given to the spirit of innova-
tion, to foresee where it would end. He himilf
had been a witness, in the late diet, to the per-
emptory and decisive tone which the Proteflants
had now assumed. He had seen how, fiom con-

P. Paul, loo. Pallavic. 163.
llluanliafs.i Hilt. ung. 1-7.
i Sleid. z8,.

fidcncc

fidence in their number and union, they had B oV0 K
forgotten the humble style of their first petitions, 3.J
having grown to such boldness as openly to de- '54~4
tpife the Pope, and to hew no great reverence
for the Imperial dignity itself. If, therefore, he
wifled to maintain either the ancient religion or
his own authority, and would not choose to
dwindle into a mere nominal head of the Empire,
tome vigorous effort was requisite, which could
not be made during a war that required the great-
el exertion of his tfrength against a foreign and
powerful enemy.

SuCH being the Emperor's inducements to

peace, he had the address to frame the treaty of
Crefpy so as to promote all the ends which he had
in view. By coming to an agreement with Fran-
cis, he took from the Pope all profpe& of advan-
tage in courting the friendship of that Monarch in
preference to his. By the proviso with regard to
a war with the Turks, he not only deprived Soly-
man of a powerful ally, but turned the arms of
that ally against him. By a private article, not
inserted in the treaty that it might not raise any
unseasonable alarm, he agreed with Francis that
both hould exert all their influence and power in
order to procure a general council, to assert its
authority, and to exterminate the Proteflant
heresy out of their dominions. This cut off all
hope of afriltance which the confederates of Smal-
.klde might expect from the French King.m; and

l Seecc. 1. iii. 496.

lett

3 oo ) x: i, t'.; r f.; .::.::: ,:-- o;- !i. ica!e.iy of an ancient
~- r;va:l, . :.i ::':'c.::'.r tc.iipct Francis to forgt
'544' this ej urag:. n.;;, he i'; him em;'trraTcd witi a

v;::; ag.inf:li Lg1;lIn.I, which would put it out of
his pwcr to take any part in tie aifi;'s of Gcr-

V.'.r c. ll ENR R, pol.te^d at all times with an high idea
ltnu- be-
:w.n .. of his own power and importance, fict, in the
' nc. a nd
ol,:nJ. niolt fnfib!e manner, the negle v.with which the

Emperor had treated him in concluiin. a fl-parate
peace. But the situation of his asli:rs was such
as foimewlat ;il! viateJ the mi,'>Liiication wlici
this occarun,-cl. For thu;t.h he was obliged to
Scp. 4. recall the e ot Norfolk from the ficge of

Montreuil, because the Fle.niih troops received
orders to retire, Bo.one had surrendered beffore
the negociations at Crlefy were brought to an
ifTie. While clated with vanity on acco:nit of
this conqueffl, and in.;mcd ;iL' irdignation
against tle sivycr;r, the amlnafTl^ors whlmi
Francis fer.t to mIae overtures of peace, found
him too arrogant to rant vwhat was moderate r
equitable. His demands were indeed extrava-
gant, and made in tile tone of a conqueror; that
Francis fIhoil renounce his alliance with Scot-
land, and not only pay up the arrears of former
debts, but rcimburf rhc money which he had
r:pen'ded in the prc'k;nt wr. Francis, though
Iinccrely dcfirous of peace, and willing to yield a

re.:t: d:;al in order to obtain it, being now free
f:j n rt 't' pr:t;Tl'e o- tlie Iiperial als, rejeated

thcfi

these ignominious proporitions with disdain; and B K
Henry departing for England, hostilities continued -v-

544-
between the two nations ".

TFE treaty of peace, how acceptable soever to The d'.
the people of France, who:m it delivcred firom the tisfitid ith

the p-ace f

dread of an enemy who had pnetr.ated into the c-,efy.
heart of the kingdon, was toulv complained of
by the dauphin. L'E confdercd it as a manifest
proof of the King his slather's c:;i:-:lordinary par-
tiality towards his younger brother, now Duke
of Orleans, and complained that, from his eager-
ness to gain an eftablifilinent fur ; favourite Ion,
he had sacrificed the honour of the kirgd.no, andi
renounced the mofi ancient as well as valuable
rights of the crown. Bi:t s lie c ur;i not venture
to offend the King by rcftingl to, raiisy it, though
extremely defiri-us at the ame time of securing to
himself the privilege of reclai:wing what was now
alienated so much to his detriment, he fcretly
protested, in prefi:nce of Ibine of his adhlerents,
against the whole tralr..ilcion; an declared what-
ever he should be oiigc: to do in orJcr to con-
firm it, null in iti'f; Iandv voi: of all ol iigation.
The parliament of ' houloui, lprobably by the
intigation of his p.,riila;s, 'id the anme ". But
Francis, highly p!eaed as well with having deli-
vered his fubjeEts from the mililries of an invasion,
as with the propc:c of acquiring an indepcndent
settlement for hibs on at no grc;:tr price chan the

n Mem. de RiLier, r. i. p. z. I-i:;L r:, 24.4.

Recueil dc Traitcz, t. ii. ^ . 2 8.

rtno uncilng

B o0 0 renouncing conquests to which he had no just

->. v~claim; titles which had hitherto proved the source
'54* of expence or difallers to the nation and rights

grown obsolete and of no value; ratified the treaty
with great joy. Charles, within the time pre-
fcribed by the treaty, declared his intention of
giving Ferdinand's daughter in marriage to the
Duke of Orleans, together with the dutchy of
Milan as her dowry P. Every circumstance seemed
to promise the continuance of peace. The Em-
peror, cruelly afficted with the gout, appeared
to be in no condition to undertake any enterprise
where great activity was requisite, or much fa-
tigue to be endured. He himflif felt this, or
wished at lear that it hould be believed; and
being o much disabled by his excruciating dif-
temper, when a French ambassador followed him
to Brussels, in order to be present at his ratifica-
tion of the treaty of peace, that it was with the
utmost difficulty that he signed his name, he ob-
served, that there was no great danger of his vio-
lating these articles, as a hand that could hardly
hold a pen, was little able to brandiih a lance.

The Em- THE violence of his disease confined the Em-
peror's fchemcs peror several months in Brulels, and was the
with refpet *
to Cer. apparent cause of putting off the execution of the
m"ny' vas schemes which he had formed in order to

humble the Protestant party in Germany. But
there were other reasons for this delay. For,

P Rccueil de Traitez, t. ii. 238.

however

however prevalent the motives were which deter- B K
mined him to undertake this enterprise, the na- .J
ture of that great body which he was about to '544
attack, as well as the situation of his own affairs,
made it necessary to deliberate long, to proceed
with caution, and not too suddenly to throw aside
the veil under which he had hitherto concealed
his real sentiments and fchenes. He was sensible
that the Pro:efrants, conscious of their own
strength, but under continual apprchenfions of his
designs, had all the boldnels of a powerful party
joined to the jalouil of a feeble faction; and
were no lets quick-lighted to discern the firit ap-
pearance of danger, than ready to take arms in
order to repel it. At the fame time, he continued
involved in a Turkifr war; and though, in order
to deliver himself from this incumbrance, he had
determined to fend an envoy to the Porte with
moll advantageous and even submissive overtures
of peace, the resolutions of that haughty court
were so uncertain, that before there were known,
it would have been highly imprudent to have
kindled the flames of civil war in his own do-
minions.

UPON this account, he appeared dissatisfied The Pope

with a bull issued by the Pope immediately after general
the peace of Crefpy, summoning the council to Cn'il'to
aftemble at Trent early next spring, and exhorting Tnt.;9
all Christian Princes to embrace the opportunity
that the present happy interval of tranquillity as-
forded them, of fipprefiing tholil heretics which

6 threatened

B o o K threatened to subvert whatever was sacred or vene-
^ . rable among Chriflians. But after such a flight

4 expreflion of dislike, as was neceflary in order to

cover his designs, he determined to countenance
the council, which might become no inconfider-
able instrument towards accomplishing his pro-
je&s, and therefore not only appointed ambafla-
dors to appear there in his name, but ordered the
ecclefiafticks in his dominions to attend at the
time prefixed .

Ds54. SUCH were the Emperor's views, when the Im-

Diet t
Wnrm,. perial diet, after fveral prorogations, was opened
Marci 4.

at Worms. The Proteliants, who enjoyed the
free exercise of their religion by a very precarious
tenure, having no other security for it than the
recess of the last diet, which was to continue in
force only until the meeting of a council, wished
carneftly to eablifh that important privilege
upon some firmer basis, and to hold it by a per-
petual not a temporary title. But, instead of
offering them any additional security, Ferdinand
opened the diet with observing, that there were
two pointr, chiefly, which required consideration,
the prosecution of the war against the Turks, and
the late of religion; that the former was the moit
urgent, as Solyman, after conquering the greatest
part of Hungary, was now ready to fall upon the
Austrian provinces; that the Emperor, who, fiom
the beginning of his reign, had neglected no op-

s F. Paul, 104.

portunily

portunity of annoying this formidable enemy, and B ° o
with the hazard of his own person had resifted his - -m.
attacks, being animated still with the fame zeal, '5s+'
had now contented to Rop short in the career of
his success against France, that, in conjunction
with his ancient rival, he might turn his arms
with greater vigour against the common adver-
fary of the Christian faith; that it became all the
members of the Empire to second those pious
endeavours of its head; that, therefore, they
ought, without delay, to vote him such effecAual
aid as not only their duty but their interest called
upon them to furnish; that the controversies
about religion were so intricate, and of such dif-
ficult difcuflion, as to give no hope of its being
poflible to bring them at present to any final
issue; that by perseverance and repeated solicit- Ferdinand
ations the Emperor had at length prevailed on the cma to
Pope to call a council, for which they had so lekgnthe
often wished and petitioned; that the time ap- coul'aii
pointed for its meeting was now come, and both
parties ought to wait for its decrees, and fubmir
to them as the decisions of the universal church.

THE popith members of the diet received this

declaration with great applause, and signified their
entire acquiescence in every particular which it
contained. The Protestants exprefled great fur-
prise at propositions, which were so manifestly
repugnant to the recess of the former diet; they
insisted that the questions with regard to religion,
as first in dignity and importance, ought to come

VOL. III. U first

o o K first under deliberation; that, alarming as the
VI.
I_.- progress of the Turks was to all Germany, the

securing the free exercise of their religion touched
them still more nearly, nor could they prosecute
a foreign war with spirit, while solicitous and con-
cerned about their domeftick tranquillity; that if
the latter were once rendered firm and permanent,
they would concur with their countrymen in
pushing the former, and yield to none of them in
activity or zeal. But if the danger from the
Turkish arms was indeed so imminent, as not to
admit of such a delay as would be occasioned by
an immediate examination of the controverted
points in religion, they required that a diet should
be instantly appointed, to which the final fettle-
ment of their religious disputes should be referred;
and that in the mean time the decree of the for-
mer diet concerning religion should be explained
in a point which they deemed essential. By the
recess of Spires it was provided, that they should
enjoy unmolested the publick exercise of their re-
ligion, until the meeting of a legal council; but
as the Pope had now called a council, to which
Ferdinand had required them to submit, they be-
gan to fufpe& that their adversaries might take
advantage of an ambiguity in the terms of the re-
cess, and pretending that the event therein men-
tioned had taken place, might pronounce them to
be no longer entitled to the fame indulgence. In
order to guard against this interpretation, they
renewed their former remonstrances against a
:ouncil called to meet without the bounds of the

Empire,

Empire, summoned by the Pope's authority, an B i K
in which he aumed the right of presiding; and *-
declared that, notwithfanding the convocation of '5
any such illegal assembly, they still held the recess
of the late diet to be in full force.

AT other juntures, when the Emperor Emperorar-

thought it of advantage to tooth and gain the Pro- Woms.
teftants, he had devised expedients for giving
them fatisfaftion with regard to demands seem-
ingly more extravagant; but his views at present
being very different, Ferdinand, by his command,
adhered inflexibly to his first propositions, and
would make no concessions which had the most
remote tendency to throw discredit on the coun-
cil, or to weaken its authority. The Protestants,
on their part, were no less inflexible; and, after
much time spent in fruitless endeavours to con-
vince each other, they came to no conclusion.
Nor did the presence of the Emperor, who upon
his recovery arrived at Worms, contribute in any May s,
degree to render the Protestants more compliant.
Fully convinced that they were maintaining the
cause of God and of truth, they hewed themselves
Superior to the allurements of interest, or the fug-
geftions of fear; and in proportion as the Em-
peror redoubled his solicitations, or discovered his
designs, their boldness seems to have increased.
At last they openly declared, that they would not he Prete
even deign to vindicate their tenets in prefnce of tc:, dt

cOnnexibsl

a council, assembled not to examine, but to con- with the
demn thep j and that they would pay no regard ",UnCI

U a to

^° K *b an aembly held under the influence of a
X.-* Pope, who had already precluded himself from

X'SS all title to r as a judge, by his having fligma-

tized their opinions with the name of heresy, and
denounced against them the heaviest censures,
which, in the plenitude of his usurped power, he
could inflict'.

codtua of WHILE the Protestants, with such union as well
Mauric of
Saony ia as firmness, rejected all intercourse with the coun-

cil, and refused their assent to the Imperial de-
mands in refpet to the Turkish war, Maurice of
Saxony alone shewed an inclination to gratify the
Emperor with regard to both. Though he pro-
fefled an, inviolable regard for the Protefeant re-
ligion, he assumed an appearance of moderation
peculiar to himself, by which he confirmed the
favourable sentiments which the Emperor already
entertained of him, and gradually paved the way
for executing the ambitious designs which always
occupied his active and enterprising mind'. His
example, however, had little influence upon such
as agreed with him in their religious opinions;
and Charles perceived that he could not hope
either to procure present aid from the Protestants
against the Turks, or to quiet their fears and jea-
loufies on account of their religion. But as his
schemes were not yet ripe for execution, nor his
preparations so far advanced that he could force

Sleid. 343, &c. Seck. iii. 543, &c. Thuan. Hitor.

lib. ii. p. 56.
I a Seck. iii. 57.

their

their compliance, or punih their oblfinacy, he a

' o

artfully cgncealed his own intentions. That he '--
might augment their security, he appointed a diet Au5
to be held at Ratisbon early next year, in order to
adjust what was now left undetermined and pre-
vious to it, he agreed that a certain number of
divines of each party should meet, in order to con-
ser upon the points in difpuce t

BUT how far soever this appearance of a desire TlIePotet.

ants b[ai
to maintain the present tranquillity might have to urfpe

the Enipc.

imposed upon the Protefants, the Emperor was m."p
incapable of such uniform and thorough diflimu-
lation, as to hide altogether from their view the
dangerous designs which he was meditating
against them. Herman count de Wied, Arch.
bifflop and Eletor of Cologne, a prelate confpi-
cuous for his virtue and primitive simplicity of
manners, though not more diftinguilbed for learn-
ing than the other descendants of noble families,
who in that age possessed most of the great bene-
sices in Germany, having become a proselyte to
the dotrines of the Reformers, had begun in the
year one thousand five hundred and forty-three,
with the aiftance of Melanathon and Bucer, to
abolifl the ancient fuperRition in his diocese, and
to introduce in its place the rites established
among the Protestants. But the canons of his
cathedral, who were not pofleffed with the fame
spirit of innovation, and who foresaw how fatal

' Slei. 351

U 3 the

3 o1t K the levelling genius of the new fc& would prove
i-vJ to their dignity and wealth, opposcd, from the

beginning, this unprecedented enterprize of their
Archbishop, with all the zeal flowing fron reve-
rence for old institutions, heightened by concern
for their own interest. This opposition, which
the Archbithop confidered only as a new argu-
ment to demonstrate the necefiity of a reforma.
tion, neither hook his resolution, nor slackened
his ardour in prosecuting his plan. The canons,
perceiving all their endeavours to check his ca.
reer to be ineffe&tual, solemnly protested against
his proceedings, and appealed for redress to the
Pope and Emperor, the former as his ecclefiafti-
cal, the latter as his civil superior. This ap-
peal being laid before the Emperor, during his
residence in Worms, he took the canons of
Cologne under his immediate protection; en-
joined them to proceed with rigour against all
who revolted from the established church; pro-
hibited the Archbi(hop to make any innovation in
his diocese; and summoned him to appear at
Brussels within thirty days, to answer the accufa-
tions which lhould be preferred against him u.

To this clear evidence of his hostile intentions

against the Protestant party, Charles added other
proofs still more explicit. In his hereditary do-
minions of the Low-Countries, he persecuted all
who were fufpe&ed of Lutheranifm with unrelent-

i Sleid. 310. 340. 31. Seckendi .

iii 4 53
* ing

ing rigour. As loon as he arrived at Worms, he B 1O0 K
silenced the Protestant preachers in that city. He L-
allowed an Italian monk to inveigh against the .s
Lutherans from the pulpit of his chapel, and to
call upon him, as he regarded the favour of God,
to exterminate that pestilent heresy. He dispatched
the embassy, which has been already mentioned,
to Constantinople, with overtures of peace, that
he might be free from any apprehensions of dan-
ger or interruption from that quarter. Nor did
any of these steps, or their dangerous tendency,
escape the jealous observation of the Protestants,
or fail to alarm their fears, and to excite their so-
licitude for the safety of their feet.

MEANWHILE, Charles's good fortune, which Deathofthe

Duke of

predominated on all occasions over that of his oUs.
rival Francis, extricated him out of a difficulty,
from which, with all his sagacity and address, he
would have found it no easy matter to have difen-
tangled himself. uft about the time when the sept. ..
Duke of Orleans should have received Ferdi-
nand's daughter in marriage, and together with
her the possession of the Milanese, he died of a
pestilential fever. By this event, the Emperor
was freed from the necessity of giving up an im-
portant province into the hands of an enemy, or
from the indecency of violating a recent and so-
lemn engagement, which must have occasioned an
immediate rupture with France. He affeAed,
*however, to express great sorrow for the untimely
tdeath of a young Prince, who was to have been

U 4 fX

A 0 0 K so nearly allied to him; but he carefully avoided

Vil.
X' v X entering into any frelh difcufllons concerning the

'S4' Milanese; and would not lifen to a proposal

which came from Francis of new-modelling the
treaty of Crefpy, so as to make him ome repara-
tion for the advantages which he had loft by the
demise of his son. In the more aive and vi-
gorous part of Francis's reign, a declaration of
war would have been the certain and infantane-
ous conscquence of such a flat refusal to comply
with a demand seemingly so equitable; but the
declining Rate of his own health, the exhausted
condition of his kingdoms, together with the
burden of the war against England, obliged him,
at present, to dissemble his resentment, and to
put off thoughts of revenge to some other junc-
ture. In consequence of this event, the unfor-
tunate Duke of Savoy loft all hope of obtaining
the reflitution of his territories; and the rights or
claims relinquished by the treaty of Crefpy, re-
turned in full force to the crown of France, to
serve as pretexts for future wars".

The Pope UPON the sirs. intelligence of the Duke of Or-
utchies oIr leans's death, the confederates of Smalkade flat-
Purma and
Placeetia tered themselves that the essential alterations

his son. which it occasioned could hardly fail of producing

a rupture, which would prove the means of their
fafecy. But they were not more disappointed with
regard to this, than in their expe&tations from an

;lcarii Comment. 769. Paruta, Hit Vcnet, iv. p. 177.

event

event which seemed to be the certain prelude of B °o K
a quarrel between the Emperor and the Pope, -
When Paul, whose paflion for aggrandizing his '4*'
family, increased as he advanced in years, and as
he saw the dignity and power which they derived
immediately from him becoming more precarious,
found that he could not bring Charles to approve
of his ambitious schemes, he ventured to grant
his on Peter Lewis the investiture of Parma and
Placentia, though at the riflk of incurring the
displeasure of the Emperor. At a time when a
great part of Europe inveighed openly against
the corrupt manners and exorbitant power of
EcclefiaRicks, and when a council was summoned
to reform the disorders in the church, this inde-
cent grant of such a principality, to a son of
whose illegitimate birth the Pope ought to have
been ahamed, and whose licentious morals all
good men detested, gave general offence. Some
Cardinals in the Imperial interest remonstrated
against such an unbecoming alienation of the pa-
trimony of the church; the Spanilh ambassador
would not be present at the solemnity of his in-
feofment; and upon pretext that these cities were
part of the Milanese state, the Emperor peremp-
torily refused to confirm the deed of investiture.
But both the Emperor and Pope being intent
upon one common object in German.y, acrificed
their particular paflions to that publick cause, and
fupprefced the emotions of jealousy or resentment
which were rising on this occasion, that they

might

B °o L might jointly pursue what each esteemed of greater

- v ' importance .
2545.

Hecy of ABOUT this time the peace of Germany was
Bmnfwick
Wkidc G diurbed by a violent but Ihort eruption of Henry
many. Duke of Brunswick. This Prince, though ill

fiript of his dominions, which the Emperor held
in sequestration, until his differences with the
confederates of Smalkalde hould be adjusted,
poiTlffed however o much credit in Germany,
that he undertook to raise for the French king a
considerable body of troops to be employed in the
war against England. The money tipulated for
this purpose was duly advanced by Francis; the
troops were levied; but Henry, initead of lead-
ing them towards France, suddenly entered his
own dominions at their head, in hopes of re-
covering them before any army could be afTem-
bled to oppose him. The confederates were not
more surprised at this unexpected attack, than
the King of France was astonished at a mean
thievilh fraud, so unbecoming the charater of a
Prince. BEc the Landgrave of Hel'e, with in-
credible expeid ion, collected as many men as
put a flop to t progress of Henry's undifci-
plined forces, and b.eing joined by his fon-in-law,
Maurice, and by ome troops belonging to the
Elecor of Saxony, he ga d such advantages
over Henry, who was rafll ... hold in forming
his schemes, but feeble and un:. 'crniined in exe-

Y Paruta, HilR. Vcnet. iv. 178. °o.

3

cuting them, as obliged him to disband his army, B , 0°
and to surrender himself, together with his eldest ---
son, prisoners at discretion. He was kept in 256
close confinement, until a new reverse of affairs
procured him liberty .

As this defeat of Henry's wild enterprise add- The Refer*

ed new reputation to the arms of the Protefants, t.:e ruai.
the Reformation of the Palatinate brought a great
acceffon of strength to their party. Frederick,
who succeeded his brother Lewis in that Eleto-
rate, had long been fufpeaed of a secret propen-
fity to the doctrines of the Reformers, which,
upon his acceflion to the principality, he openly
maniffteed. But as he expeted that omething
effecQual towards a general and legal eablifh-
ment of religion, would be the fruit of so many
diets, conferences, and negociations, he did not,
at first, attempt any publick innovation in his
dominions. Finding all there issue in nothing, Jiano.
he thought himself called, at length, to counte-
nance by his authority the system which he ap-
proved of, and to gratify the wishes of his sub-
je&s, who, by their intercourse with the Protest-
ant fates, had universally imbibed their opinions.
As the warmth and impetuosity which accom-
panied the spirit of Reformation in its firlt efforts,
had somewhat abated, this change was made
with great order and regularity; the ancient rites
were abolilhed, and new forms introduced, with-

Sleid. 352. Seek. iii. 567.

out

0B 0° K out any as of violence, or symptom of difcon.

v'- t tent. Though Frederick adopted the religious
a6.

system of the Protestants, he imitated the example
of Maurice, and did not accede to the league of
Smalkalde *.

The emint
a*lmbles at A FEW weeks before this revolution in the Pa-

latinate, the general council was opened with the
accustomed folemnities at Trent. The eyes of
the Catholick fates were turned with much ex-
pecation towards an aflembly, which all had
confidered as a natural and adequate remedy for
the disorders of the church when they first broke
out, though many were afraid that it was now
too late to hope for great benefit from it, when
the malady, by being sufFered to make progress
during twenty-eight years, had become invete-
rate, and grown to uch extreme violence. The
Pope, by his last bull of convocation, had ap-
p6inted the firR meeting to be held in March.
But his views, and those of the Emperor, were
so different, that almof the *hole year was spent
in negociations. Charles, who foresaw that the
rigorous decrees of the council against the Pro-
teftants would oon drive them, in ftif-defence
as well as from resentment, to ome desperate
extreme, laboured to put otf its meeting until
his warlike preparations were so far advanced,
that he might be in a condition to second its de-
cifions by the force of his arms. The Pope, who

· Sleid. 356. Seek. 1. iii. 616.
6 had

had early sent to Trent the legates who were to v.
preside in his name, knowing to what contempt *,.
it would expose his authority, and what suspicions
it would beget of his intentions, if the fathers of
the council hould remain in a Dlate of inadtivity,
when the church was in sech danger as to require
their immediate and vigorous interposition, in-
filled either upon translating the council to tome
city in Italy, or upon suspending altogether its
proceedings at that junaure, or upon authorizing
it to begin its deliberations immediately. The
Emperor rejected the two former as equally offen-
five to the Germans of every denomination, but
finding it impoflible to elude the latter, he
proposed that the council should begin with re-
forming the disorders in the church, before it
proceeded to examine or define articles of faith.
This was the very thing which the court of Rome
dreaded molt, and which had prompted it to em-
ploy so many artifices in order to prevent the
meeting of such a dangerous judicatory. Paul,
though more compliant than some of his prede-
cefors with regard to calling a council, was no
less jealous than they had been of its jurifdition,
and saw what matter of triumph such a method
of proceeding would afford the hereticks. IHe
apprehended consequences not only humbling
but fatal to the papal fee, if the council came
to confider an inquest into abuses as their only
business; or if inferior prelates were allowed
to gratify their own envy and peevishness, by
prescribing rules to thole who were exalted above

them

B o K them in dignity and power. Without listening,
- therefore, to this insidious proposal of the Em-

peror, he inftruted his legates to open the
council.

Jai 'Jo. THE firR eflion was spent in matters of form.

Its procc¢..0
iap. In a subsequent one, it was agreed that the fram-

ing a confellion of faith, wherein should be con-
tained all the articles which the church required
its members to believe, ought to be the first and
principal business of the council; but that, at the
fame time, due attention hould be given to what
was necefrary towards the reformation of manners
and discipline. From this first symptom of the
spirit with which the council was animated, from
the high tone of authority which the legates who
presided in it assumed, and from the implicit de-
ference with which mos of the members followed
their directions, the ProteRants conjectured with
ease what decisions they might expet. It aso-
nifhed them, however, to fee forty prelates (for
no greater number were yet aflembled) aflume
authority as representatives of the universal church,
and proceed to determine the mot important
points of dotrine in its name. Sensible of this
indecency, as well as of the ridicule with which
it might be attended, the council advanced lowly
in its deliberations, and all its proceedings were
for ome time languishing and feeble . As
soon as the confederates of Smalkalde received

F.Paul, 1so, &c, Pallavic. p. 18o, &c.

information

information of the opening of the council, they B ,1 K
publilhed a long manifesto, containing a renewal . --
of their protest against its meeting, together with 54
the reasons which induced them to decline its ju-
rifdiaionsc. The Pope and Emperor, on their
part, were so little solicitous to quicken or add
vigour to its operations, as plainly discovered
that some obje& of greater importance occupied
and interested them.

THE Protestants, as they were not inattentive Apprehe-

- fiong of t c

or unconcerned fpetators of their motions, enter- piostatats.
tained every day more violent suspicions of their
intentions, and received intelligence from dif-
ferent quarters of the machinations carrying on
against them. The King of England informed
them, that the Emperor having long resolved to
exterminate their opinions, would not fail to em-
ploy this interval of tranquillity which he now
enjoyed, as the most favourable juncture for car-
rying his design into execution. The merchants
of Augsburg, which was at that time a city of
extensive trade, received advice, by means of
their correspondents in Italy, among whom wege
some who secretly favoured the Protestant cause',
that a dangerous confederacy against it was
forming between the Pope and Emperor. In
confirmation of this, they heard from the Low-
Countries that Charles had issued orders, though
with every precaution which could keep the mea-

c Seckend . iii. 6oz, &c. 4 Seek. .iii. 579.

iure

0 0 K sure concealed, for railing troops both there and
X1y1 in other parts of his dominions. Such a variety
5*6. of information, corroborating all that their own

jealousy or observation led them to apprehend, left
the Protestants little reason to doubt of the Em-

Teir deli. peror's hostile intentions. Under this impreffionj
bmuion. the deputies of the confederates of Smalkalde

assembled at Francfort, and by communicating
their intelligence and entiments to each other,
reciprocally heightened their sense of the impend-
ing danger. But their union was not such as
their situation required, or the preparations of
their enemies rendered necessary. Their league
had now fubifted ten years. Among o many
members, whose territories were intermingled with
each other, and who, according to the custom of
Germany, had created an infinite variety of mu-
tual rights and claims by intermarriages, alliances,
and contrats of different kinds, fubjecs of jea-
lousy and discord had unavoidably arisen. Some
of the confederates, being conneced with the
Duke of Brunlwick, were highly disgusted with
the Landgrave, on account of the rigour with
which he had treated that rash but unfortunate
Prince. Others taxed the Eletor of Saxony and
Landgrave, the heads of the league, with having
involved the members in unneceiSary and exorbi-
tant expences by their profuseness or want of
economy. The views, likewise, of those two great
Princes, who, by their superior power and autho-
rity, influenced and direted the whole body,
being extremely different, rendered all its mo-

tions

tions languid, at a time when the utmost vigour B ° I K
2nd dispatch were requisite. The Landgrave, of - ^-
: violent and enterprising temper, but not for- '5+6.
gctful, amidst his zeal for religion, of the usual
maxims of human policy, insisted that, as the
danger which threatened them was manifest and
unavoidable, they should have recourse to the
most effectual expedient for securing their own
lifety, by courting the protection of the Kings of
France and England, or by joining in alliance
with the Protestant cantons of Swifferland, from
whom they might expe&t 'uch powerful and pre-
sent aiftance as their situation demanded. The
Eletor, on the other hand, with the molt up-
right intentions of any Prince in that age, and
with talents which might have qualified him
abundantly for the adminiltration of government
in any tranquil period, was pofelffed with such
fuperltitious veneration for all the parts of the
Lutheran system, and such bigoted attachment
to all its tenets, as made him averse to an union
with those who differed from him in any article
of faith, and rendered him very incapable of un-
dertaking its defence in times of difficulty and
danger. He seemed to think, that the concerns
of religion were to be regulated by principles and
maxims totally different from those which apply
to the common affairs of life; and being swayed
teo much by the opinions of Luther, who was
not only a firanger to the rules of political con-
duet, but delpilcd them; he often ilcovered an
uncomplying spirit, that proved of the greatelt

VOL. III. X detriment

B K detriment to the cause which he wiffied to support.

VIi.

Influenced, on this occasion, by the severe and
34 rigid notions of that Reformer, he refused to en-

ter into any confederacy with Francis, because
he was a persecutor of the truth; or to solicit the
friendship of Henry, because he was no less im-
pious and profane than the Pope himself; or even
to join in alliance with the Swiss, because they
differed from the Germans in several essential
articles of faith. This dissention, about a point
of such consequence, produced its natural effets.
Each secretly censured and reproached the other.
The Landgrave confidered the EleCtor as fettered
by narrow prejudices, unworthy of a Prince called
to at a chief part in a ene of such importance.
T'he Ikltor iufprectled him of loole principles and
ambitious views, which corresponded ill with the
iacred cause wherein the- were engaged. But
though the Flecor's ficruplcs prevented their
timely application for foreign aid ; and thejealoufy
or discontent of the other Princes defeated a pro-
poal for renewing their original confederacy, the
term during which it was to continue in force being
on the point of expiring; yet the sense of their
conmon danger indiuced them to agree with re-
gard to other points, particularly, that they would
never acknowledge the assembly at Trent as a
lawful council, nor fuffr the Archbishop of Co-
logne to be oppressed on account of the fleps
which he had taken towards the reformation of
his diocefc .

c Seek. 1. iii. 566. 5o. 61;. Skid. 35;.

THE Landgrave, about this time, desirous of 0°, K
penetrating to the bottom of the Emperor's in- --
tentions, wrote to Granvelle, whom he knew to Ttirtneo.

ctions

be thoroughly acquainted with all his master's withthe
schemes, informing him of the several particulars Emperor.
which raised the suspicions of the Prote (ants, and
begging an explicit declaration of what they had
to fear or to hope. Granvelle, in return, asured
them, that the intelligence which they had receiv-
ed of the Emperor's military preparations was
exaggerated, and all their suspicions destitute of
foundation; that though, in order to guard his
frontiers against any insult of the French or Eng-
lifh, he had commanded a finall body of men
to be raised in the Low-Countries, he was as so-
licitous as ever to maintain tranquillity in Ger-
many .

BUT the Emperor's ations did not correspond

with there profeflions. For, inItcad of appoint-
ing men of known moderation and a pacifick
temper to appear in defence of the Catholick
doctrines at the conference which had been agreed
on, he made choice of fierce bigots, attached to
their own system with a blind obitinacy, that ren-
dered all hope of a reconcilement defpcrate.
Malvenda, a Spanish divine, who took the con-
du&2 of the debate on the part of the Catholicks,
mahaged it with all the subtle dexterity of a s:ho-
laftick metaphysician, more fiudious to perplex

t Sleid. 3 .

X his

s 0 0 K his adversaries than to convince them, and more

Vl.

- - intent on palliating error than on discovering
,4(6' truth. The Protestants filled with indignation,

as well at his sophistry as at some regulations
which the Emperor endeavoured to impose on
the disputants, broke off the conference abruptly,
being now fully convinced that, in all his late
measures, the Emperor could have no other view
than to amuse them, and to gain time for ripen.
ing his own schemes s.

* Sleid. 358. Seek. 1. iii. 6o.

THE

# BOOK VIII.

TH
HISTORY

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK VIII.
W HILE appearances of danger daily in- B o o K

creased, and the empeft which had been '- -

so long a gathering was ready to break forth in all D,aSh4t
its violence against the Protestant church, Luther Lutr.
was saved, by a seasonable death, from feeling
or beholding its deftru&tive rage. Having gone,
though in a declining fate of health, and during
a rigorous season, to his native city of Eyfleben,
in order to compose, by his authority, a diffen-
tion among the counts of Mansfield, he was seized Feb. ,s.
with a violent inflammation in his stomach, which
in a few days put an end to his life, in the sixty-
third year of his age. As he was raised up by
Providence to be the author of one of the greatet
and most interesting revolutions recorded in his.
tory, there is not any person perhaps whose cha-

X 3 rafter

aB 0o ° raaer has been drawn with such opposite colours.
i- -I .In his own age, one party, struck with horror

'54<' and inflamed with rage, when they saw with what

a daring hand he overturned every thing which
they held to be sacred, or valued as beneficial,
imputed to himn not only all the defecs and vices
of a man, but the qualities of a demon. The
other, warmed with the admiration and gratitude,
which they thought he merited as the refforer of
light and liberty to the Christian church, ascribed
to him perfections above the condition of huma-
ity, and viewed all his aions with a veneratiaii
bordering on that which should be paid only to
those who are guided by the immediate inipira-
w chdi- tion of Heaven. It is his own conduct, not the

undiRfinguilhing censure or the exaggerated praif:
of his contemporaries, that ought to regulate the
opinions of the present age concerning him.
Zeal for what he regarded as truth, undaunted
intrepidity to maintain his own system, abilities
both natural and acquired to defend his prin-
ciples, and unwearied induitry in propagating
them, are virtues whiclh lline lo confpicuoully in
every part of his behaviour, that even his enemies
iluft allow him to have poflcfled them in an emi-
nent degree. To these may be added, with equal
justice, such purity and even austerity of manners,
as became one who aflumed the chara&erof a
Reformer; such sanctity of life as fuiited the
dotrine which he delivered; and such perse dif-
intereltednefs as affords no flight presumption of
his sincerity. Superior to all felfinl confidera-

tio s,

tions, a firanger to the elegancies of life, andB °oy K
despising its pleasures, he left the honours and .----
emoluments of the church to his disciples, re-
maining satisfied himself in his original state of
profefor in the university, and palfor of the town
of Wittemberg, with the moderate appointments
annexed to these offices. His extraordinary qua-
lities were allayed with no inconsiderable mixture
of human frailty and human paflions. These,
however, were of such a nature, that they cannot
be imputed to malevolence or corruption of heart,
but seem to have taken their rife from the fame
source with many of his virtues. His mind,
forcible and vehement in all its operations, roused
by great objecs, or agitated by violent palions,
broke out, on many occasions, with an inpetuo-
fity which astonishes men of feebler spirits, or
fluch as are placed in a more tranquil situation.
By carrying ome praise-worthy dispositions to
excess, he bordered sometimes on what was cul-
pable, and was often betrayed into ations which
exposed him to censure. His confidence that his
own opinions were well founded, approached to
arrogance; his courage in asserting them, to ra(h-
nets; his firmness in adhering to them, to obfti-
nacy; and his zeal in confuting his adversaries,
to rage and scurrility. Accustomed himifelf to
confider every thing as subordinate to truth, he
expected the fame deference for it from other
men; and, withdut making any allowances for
their timidity or prejudices, he poured forth

X 4 against

B S K againf such as disappointed him in this parti-
*-v_-' cular, a torrent of invective mingled with con-

*O6. tempt. Regardless of any distinction of rank or

characer when his dotrines were attacked, he
chaltifed all his adversaries indiscriminately, with
the fame rough hand; neither the royal dignity
of Henry VIII. nor the eminent learning and
abilities of Erafinus, screened them from the
fame gross abuse with which he treated Tetzcl or
Eccius.

BUT these indecencies of which Luther was

guilty, must not be imputed wholly to the vio-
lence of his temper. They ought to be charged
in part on the manners of the age. Among a
rude people, unacquainted with those maxims,
which by putting continual restraint on the pas-
sions of individuals, have polilhed society and
rendered it agreeable, disputes of every kind were
managed with heat, and itrong emotions were
uttered in their natural language, without reserve
or delicacy. At the fame time, the works of
learned men were all composed in Latin, and
they were not only authorized, by the example of
eminent writers in that language, to use their
antagonifs with the most illiberal scurrility; but,
in a dead tongue, indecencics of every kind ap-
pear less hocking than in a living language,
whose idioms and phrases seem grols, because they
ire familiar.

IN pafling judgment upon the charaters of B O I
men, we ought to try them by the principles and .'
maxims of their own age, not by those of an- '54*
other. For, although virtue and vice are at all
times the fame, manners and customs vary conti-
nually. Some parts of Luther's behaviour, which
to us appear molt culpable, gave no disgust to
his contemporaries. It was even by some of those
qualities, which we are now apt to blame, that
he was fitted for accomplishing the great work
which he undertook. To route mankind, when
funk in ignorance or fuperition, and to encoun-
ter the rage of bigotry, armed with power, re-
quired the utmolt vehemence of zeal, as well as
a temper daring to excess. A gentle call would
neither have reached, nor have excited those to
whom it was addressed. A spirit more amiable,
but lets vigorous than Luther's, would have
flhrunk back from the dangers, which he braved
and surmounted. Towards the close of Luther's
life, though without any perceptible declension of
his zeal or abilities, the infirmities of his temper
increased upon him, so that he grew daily more
peevish, more irascible, and more impatient of
contradiction. Having lived to be witness of
his own amazing success; to fee a great part
of Europe embrace his doEtrines; and to hake
the foundation of the papal throne, before which
the mightiest Monarchs had trembled, he dif-
covered, on omne 6ccafions, fymproms of vanity
and felf-applauie. He mull have been, indeed,
more than man, if, upon contemplating all that

he

B o Kc he aually accomplilhed, he had never felt any

JCh- sentiment of this kind rising in his bread *.
1546.

SOME time before his death he felt his strength

declining, his constitution being worn out by a
prodigious multiplicity of business, added to the
labour of discharging his ministerial funtion
with unremitting diligence, to the fatigue of con-
tant study, betides the composition of works as
voluminous as if he had enjoyed uninter ;:.rej
leisure and retirement. His natural ii.icpidity
did not forsake him at the approach of death;
his last conversation with his friends was con-
cerning the happiness reserved for good men in
a future world, of which he spoke with the ser-
vour and delight natural to one who expected
and wished to enter soon upon the enjoyment of

* A remarkable infiance of this, aswell of a certain fingu-

larity and elevation of sentiment, is found in his Lafi Will.
Though the effetds which he had to bequeath were very in-
considerable, he thought it neceflary to make a Testament,
but scorned to frame it with the usual legal formalities. No-
tus umr, fays he, in clo, in terra, & inferno, & autorita-
tem ad hoc fulticientem habeo, ut mihi soli credatur, cum
Deus mihi, homini licet damnabili, et miferabili peccatori,
ex paterna mifericordia Evangelium filii fui crediderit, dede-
ritque ut in eo verax & fidclis fuerim, ita ut multi in mundo
illud per me acceperint, & me pro Dostor vcritatis agnove-
rint, fpreto banno Pap;e, Ca:litris, Rcgum, Principum
facerdotum, immo omnium d.Lmunum odio. Q)iidni, igitur,
ad dispositionem haic, in re cxigua, rffliciait. i adfit manms
mea tetimonium, & dici poflit, hiec ripfit D. Martinus Lu-
ther, Notarius Dei, & telis Evangelii ejus. Sec. 1. iii.
p. 6il.

!t

it . The account of his death filled the Roman B 0 o K

ViU.

Catholick party with exceflive as well as indecent *-.-.
joy, and damped the spirits of all his followers; '5*
neither party sufficiently confidering that his doc-
trines were now so firmly rooted, as to be in a
condition to flourish independent of the hand
which first had planted them. His funeral was
celebrated by order of the Elecor of Saxony with
extraordinary pomp. He left several children by
his wife Catherine a Boria, who survived him.
'Towards the end of the lad century, there were
in Saxony rome of his descendants in decent and
honourable stations b.

THE Emperor, meanwhile, pursued the plan The Empe.
of dissimulation with which he had set out, em- voun to

amuse and

ploying every art to amuse the Protestants, and to deeiv he
quiet their fears and jealousies. For this putrpofe Potcftas.
he contrived to have an interview with the Land-
grave of Hesse, the most active of all the confe-
derates, and the most filfpicious of his designs.
To him he made lfch warm profelflons of his Mauch .
concern for the happiness of Germany, and of his
aversion to all violent measures; he denied in
such express terms, his having entered into any
league, or having begun any military preparations
which fiould give cause of alarm to the Proreft-
ants, as seem to have dispelled all the Landgrave's
doubts and apprehensions, and sent him away

Sleid. 362. Seek. lib. iii. 632, &c.
b Seek. I. iii. 65t.

fully

a io K fully satisfied of his pacifick intentions. This
L _.^ artifice was of great advantage, and effectually

1546. anrwered the purpose for which it was employed.

The Landgrave upon his leaving Spires, where
he had been admitted to this interview, went to
Worms, where the Smalkaldick confederates were
assembled, and gave them such a flattering repre-
fcntation of the Emperor's favourable disposition
towards them, that they, too apt, as well from
the temper of the German nation, as from the
genius of all great afrociations or bodies of men,
to be flow, and dilatory, and undecifive in their
deliberations, thought there was no neceflity of
taking any immediate measures against danger,
which appeared to be distant or imaginary c.

roceeaing SucH events, however, oon occurred, as stag-
ofthe coun.

aclgainft gered the credit which the Protestants had given
the Protefl-

.b te, to the Emperor's declarations. The council of

Trent, though still composed of a small number of
Italian and Spanish prelates, without a ingle de-
puty from any of the kingdoms which it assumed
a right of binding by its decrees, being ahamed
of its long inaAivity, proceeded now to fettle
articles of the greatest importance. Having be-
gun with examining the first and chief point in
controversy between the church of Rome and the
Reformers, concerning the rule which hould be
held as supreme and decisive in matters of faith,
the council, by its infallible authority, deter-

Sllid. Hill 367. 373.

mined,

mined, " That the books to which the defigna* B ° K
tion of Apocryphal hath been given, are of equal _-.
authority with those which were received by ApriS.
the Jews and primitive Christians into the sacred
canon; that the traditions handed down from the
apoftolick age, and preserved in the church, are
entitled to as much regard as the do&trines and
precepts which the inspired authors have com-
mitted to writing; that the Latin translation of
the Scriptures, made or revised by St. Jerome,
and known by the name of the Vulgate translation,
Ihould be read in churches, and appealed to in
the schools as authentick and canonical. Againtt
all who disclaimed the truth of these tenets, ana-
themas were denounced in the name and by the
authority of the Holy Ghost. The decision of
these points, which undermined the main founda-
tion of the Lutheran system, was a plain warning
to the Protestants what judgment they might ex-
pet when the council Ihould have leisure to take
into consideration the particular and lubordinate
articles of their creed d.

THIS discovery of the council's readiness to

condemn the opinions of the Protestants, was soon
followed by a striking instance of the Pope's re-
solution to punifl such as embraced them. The
appeal of the canons of Cologne again t their
Archbiflop having been carried to Rome, Paul
eagerly seized on that opportunity, both of dif-

d F. Paul, 141. Pallav. zo6.

playing

°0 K playing the extent of his own authority, and of
'---' teaching the German ecclefiafticks the danger of
's46. revolting from the eflablilhed church. As no

person appeared in behalf of the Archbilhop, he
was held to be convicted of the crime of heresy,
Apri! 6. and a Papal bull was issued, depriving him of his

ecclesiastical dignity, inflicting on him the fen-
tence of excommunication, and absolving his
subje&s from the oath of allegiance which they
had taken to him as their civil superior. The
countenance which he had given to the Lutheran
heresy was the only crime imputed to him, as
well as the only reason afigned to justify the ex-
traordinary rigour of this decree. The Protest-
ants could hardly believe that Paul, how zealous
soever to defend the etablilhed system, or to
humble those who invaded it, would have ven-
tured to proceed to such extremities against a
Prince and Elector of the Empire, without hav-
ing previously secured such powerful protection as
would render his censure something more than an
impotent and despicable sally of resentment. They
were of course deeply alarmed at this sentence
against the Archbishop, confidering it as a sure
indication of the malevolent intentions not only
of the Pope, but of the Emperor, against the
whole party d.

'halC UPON this fresh revival of their fears, with

about to
cmmnce such violence as is natural to men rouzed from a
lofilities

wdfif the
PIOuaM. d Sleid. 35. F. Paul, ;;. pallavic. :24.

fal fe

false security, and conscious of their having been B °o K
deceived, Charles saw that it was now necessary
to throw aside the veil, and to declare openly 'st.
what part he determined to a. By a long series
of artifice and fallacy, he had gained so much
time, that his measures, though not altogether
ripe for execution, were greatly matured. The
Pope, by his proceedings against the Elector of
Cologne, as well as by the decree of the council,
had precipitated matters into such a situation, as
rendered a breach between the Emperor and the
Protestants almofR unavoidable. Charles had now
no choice left him but either to take part with
them in overturning what the See of Rome had
determined, or to support the authority of the
church openly by force of arms. Nor did the Negoc;ats

'-ith the

Pope think it enough to have brought the Em- Pope.
peror under a necefity of aAing; he pressed him
to begin his operations, by promising to second
him with such vigour as could not well fail of fe-
curing his success. Transported by his zeal against
heresy, Paul forgot all the prudent and cautious
maxims of the Papal See, with regard to the
danger of extending the Imperial authority be-
yond due bounds; and in order to crulh the Lu-
therans, he was willing to contribute towards
raising up a master that might one day prove
formidable to himself as well as to the reft of
Italy.

BUT, beides the certain expectation of aflt- Concluers

truce with
ance from the Pope, Charles was now secure from "ym.

any

B o l K any danger of interruption to his designs by the
ssi - Turkish arms. His negociations at the Porte,

'546' which he had carried on with great assiduity since

the peace of Crefpy, were on the point of being
terminated in such a manner as he desired. Soly-
man, partly in compliance with the French King
who, in order to avoid the disagreeable obliga-
tion of joining the Emperor against his ancient
ally, laboured with great zeal to bring about an
accommodation between them; and partly from
its being neceflary to turn his arms towards the
east, where the Persians threatened to invade his
dominions, consented without difficulty to a truce
for five years. The chief article of it was, That
each hould retain possession of what he now held
in Hungary; and Ferdinand, as a sacrifice to the
pride of the Sultan, submitted to pay an annual
tribute of fifty thousand crowns '.

C.ins M-iu. BUT it was upon the aid and concurrence of the
aice, and
other Germans themselves that the Emperor relied with
Princes in
eImany, the greatest confidence. The Germanick body,

he knew, were of such vast strength, as to be in-
vincible if it were united, and that it was only by
employing its own force that he could hope to
subdue it. Happily for him, the union of the
several members in this great system was so feeble,
the whole frame was so loosely compaced, and
its different parts tended lo violently towards fe-

Iuanhafii Hill. ung. iSo. Mn. de Ribicr, tom. i.
582.

S paration

paration from each other, that it was almost im- B
pofible for it, on any important emergence, to *-.
join in a general or vigorous, effort. In the pre-
lent junAure, the sources of discord were as many,
and as various, as had been known on any occa-
sion. The Roman Catholicks, animated with
zeal in defence of their religion proportional to
the fierceness with which it had been attacked,
were eager to second any attempt to humble those
innovators, who had overturned it in many pro-
vinces, and endangered it in more. John and
Albert of Brandenburg, as well as several other
Princes, incensed at the haughtiness and rigour
with which the Duke of Brunswick had been
treated by the confederates of Smalkalde, were
impatient to rescue him, and to be revenged on
them. Charles observed, with fatisfadion, the
working of those palfions in their minds, and
counting on them as sure auxiliaries whenever he
lhould think it proper to at, he found it, in the
mean time, more necefary to moderate than to
inflame their rage.

Suci was the situation of affairs, such the dir- Ro'ds diet

at Ratltbon.

cernment with which the Emperor foreiaw and
provided for every event, when the diet of the
Empire met at Ratisbon. Many of the Roman
Catholick members appeared there in perlbn, but
molf of the confederates of Smalkalde, under
pretence of their being unable to bear the expence
occasioned by the late unnecessary frequency of

VOL. III. Y such

b 1? i ch assemblies, sent only deputies. Their jea-
--- . loufv of the Emperor, together with an appre-
1546- henion that violence might, perhaps, be erim-

ployed, in order to force their approbation of
what he hould propose in the diet, was the true
cause of their absence. The speech with which
the Emperor opened the diet was extremely art-
ful. After profcffing, in common form; his
regard for the prosperity of the Germanick boly,
and declaring, that, in order to bellow his whole
attention upon the re-establishment of its order
and tranquillity, he had at present abandoned all
other cares, rejeded the molt prefling solicitations
of his other subjects to reside among them, and
postponed affairs of the greatest importance; he
took notice, with some difapprobarion,. that his
disinterested example had not been imitated;
many menbers of chief consideration having ne-
gte&ed to attend an assembly to which he had
repaired with such manifest inconvenience to him-
self. He then mentioned their unhappy diflfn-
tions about religion lamented the ill success of
his pait endeavours to compose them complained
of the abrupt dissolution of the late conference;
and craved their advice with regard to the belt
and molt effic&ual method of restoring union to
the churches of Germany, together with that
happy agreement in articles of faith, which their
ancellors had found to be of no less advantage to
their civil intcreftj than becoming their Chrifian
profcilion.

4 Br

Bi this gracious and popular method of con- B 0 K

fulting the members of the diet, rather than of,--v-
obtruding upon them any opinion of his own, 154ó'
besides the appearance of great moderation,
and the merit of paying much respect to their
judgment, the Emperor dexterouly avoided dif-
covering his own sentiments, and reserved to
himself, as his only parr, that of carrying into
execution what they should recommend. Nor
was he less secure of such a decision as he wiihed
for, by referring it wholly to themselves. The
Roman Catholick members, prompted by their
own zeal, or prepared by his intrigues, joined
immediately in representing that the authority
of the council now met at Trent ought to be
final in all matters of controversy; that all
Christians houid submit to its decrees as the in.
fallible rule of their faith; and therefore they be-
fought him to exert the power, with which he
was invested by the Almighty, in protecting that
aflembly, and in compelling the Protestants to
acquiesce in its determinations. The Protestants,
on the other hand, presented a memorial, in
which, after repeating their objetions to the
council of Trent, they propoed, as the only
effe&ual method of deciding the points in dif-
pute, that either a free general council hould be
assembled in Germany, or a national council of
the Empire hould be called, or a fcle6t number
of divines lhould be appointed out of each party
to examine and define articles of faith. They
mentioned the recesses of several diets favourable

Y a to

B Vn1 to this proporition, and which had afforded them
---- the profped of terminating all their differences in
546' this amicable manner; they now conjured the

Emperor not to depart from his former plan, and
by offering violence to their consciences, to bring
calamities upon Germany, the very thought of
which must fill every lover of his country with
horror. The Emperor receiving this paper with
a contemptuous fiile, paid no farther regard to
it. Having already taken his final resolution,
and perceiving that nothing but force could com-
Ije 9. pel them to acquiesce in it, he dispatched the

Cardinal of Trent to Rome, in order to conclude
an alliance with the Pope, the terms of which
were already agreed on; he commanded a body
es troops, levied on purpose in the Low-Coun-
tries, to advance towards Germany; he gave
commiflions to several officers for raising men in
different parts of the Empire; he warned John
and Albert of Brandenburg, that now was the
proper time of exerting themselves, in order to
rescue their ally, Henry of Brunswick, from cap-
tivity f.
rTh pr.. ALL these things could not he traRfa&ed with-

l , out the obfervaiion and knowledge of the Protest-

ants. The secret vas row in many hands; under
whatever veil the Emperor till asseted to conceal
his designs, his officers kept no such mysterious
refrve; and his allies an-: fubjecs spoke out his

f Slgid. 374. Seek. iii. 658.

intentions

intentions plainly. Alarmed with reports of this B 0O K
kind fiom every quarter, as well as with the
preparations for war which they lfiw begun, the ,546'
deputies of the confederates demanded audience
of the Emperor, and, in the name of their maf-
ters, required to know whether thiefe military
preparations were carried on by his command,
and for what end, and against what enemy ? To
a question put in such a tone, and at a time when
fats were become too notorious to be denied, it
was necelary to give an explicit answer. Charles
owned the orders which he had iiTued, and pro-
fefling his purpose not to molest any on account
of religion who flould as as dutiful fubje~ts
declared that he had nothing in view but to main-
tain the rights and prerogatives of the Imperial
dignity, and, by punishing some factious mem-
bers, to preserve the ancient conititution of the
Empire from being impaired or dissolved by their
irregular and licentious conduct. Though the
Emperor did not name the pertfns whom he
charged with such high crimes, and deiined to
be the obje&ts of his vengeance, it was obvious
that he had the Elector of Saxony and Landgrave
of Hesse in view. Their deputies confidering
what he had said, as a plain declaration of
his hostile intentions, immediately retired from
Ratisbon .

THE Cardinal of Trent found it no difficult T Enpe.
matter to treat with the Pope, who having at ;:'t',' Y

Sid. 376.

Y 3 lengdi

B i 1 . length brought the Emperor to adopt that plan

.-v--* which he had long recommended, assented with
Jy7 6. eagerness to every article that he proposed. The

league was signed a few days after the Cardinal's
arrival at Rome. The pernicious herefies which
abounded in Germany, the obstinacy of the Pro-
teftants in rejeting the holy council aembled at
Trent, and the neceflity of maintaining found
doctrine, together with good order in the church,
are mentioned as the motives of this union be-
tween the contracting parties. In order to check
the growth of there evils, and to punith such as
had impiously contributed to spread them, the
Emperor, having long and without success made
trial of gentler remedies, engaged inltantly to
Ltlke the field with a sufficient army, that he might
compel all who disowned the council, or had
apoflatized from the religion of their forefathers,
to return into the bosom of the church, and sub-
mit with du: obedience to the Holy See. He
likewise bound himself not to conclude a peace
with them during fix months without the Pope's
content, nor without assigning him his share in
any conquerss which should be made upon them;
and that even after this period he should not agree
to any accommodation which might be detrimen-
tal to the church, or to the interest of religion.
On his part, the Pope itipulated to deposit a large
fum in the bank of Venice towards defraying the
expence of the war; to maintain, at his own
charge, during the space of fix months, twelve
thouiand foot, and five hundred horsei to grant

the

the Emperor, for one year, half of the ecclcef- B ° 'K
aftical revenues throughout Spain; to authorize '-.,-
him, by a bull, to alienate as much of the lands,
belonging to religions houite in that country, as
would amount to the luir. of five hundred thou-
sand rowns; and to e.;ploy not only spiritual
censures, but military force aainft any Prince
who floould attempt to interrupt or defeat the
execution of this treaty .

NOTWITFSTAN''DIN the explicit t-nrms in which zndrvon
the extirpation of hcrelV was declared to be the clt i in.

t' ntons

.object of the war which was to follow upon th.s f,.m tbe
treaty, Charl.s frill endeavoured to persuade the Ir"m *."".
Germans that he had no defiL-n to abridge their
religious libe-ry, but tat he aimed only at vin-
dicating his own authority, and repre'irg the in-
folence of such as had encroached upon it. With
this view, he wrote circular letters in the fame
firain with his answer to the deputies at Ratisbon,
to most of the free cities, and to fveral of the
Princes who had embraced the Proteitant doc-
trines. In thele he complained loudly, but in
general terms, of the contempt into which the
Impeial dignity had fallen, and of the prefump-
tuous as well as disorderly behaviour of bome
members of the Empire. He declared that he
now took: arms, not in a religious, but in a civil
quarrel; not to oppress any who continued to
behave as quiet and duuitul fubjees, but to

h Sleid. 381. Pallav. 255. Dumont Corps Diplom. Ix.

Y 4 humbl!

B o0 K humble the arrogance of such as had thrown of'

L- i all sense of that subordination in which they were

54 placed under him as head of the Germanicl

body. Gross as this deception was, and mani-
fest as it might have appeared to all who confi-
dered the Emperor's conduct with attention, it
became necessary for him to make trial of its
effec;t and ifch was te confidence and dexterity
s.ith which he employed it, that he derived t!,e
mofl slid advantages from this artifice. If ie
had avowed at once an intention of overturning
the Protestant church, and of reducing all Ger-
nany under its former state of fubje&tion to the
Papal See, none of the cities or Princes who had
embraced the new opinions could have remained
neutral after such a declaration, far less could
they have ventured to aflift the Emperor in such
an enterprize. Whereas by concealing, and even
disclaiming any intention of that kind, he not
only saved hirnfelf from the danger of being
overwhelmed by a general confederacy of all the
Protestant tiates, but he furnished the timid with
an excuse for continuingmi'nacive, and the design-
ing or interel-ed with a pretext for joining him,
without expoling themselves to the infamy of
abandoning their own principles, or having an
acive hand in suppressing them. At the fame
time the Emperor well knew, that if, by their
alltance, he were enabled to break the power
of the Elecor of Saxony and Landgrave, he
might afterwards prescribe what terms he pleated
to the feeble remains of a prty without union or

leaders,

leaders, who would then regret, too late, their B O K
mistaken confidence in him, and their inconfide- -
rate desertion of their aflociatEs. zs46.

THE Pope, by a sudden and unforeseen display Th Pope

of his zeal, had well nigh disconcerted this plan his plan.
which the Emperor had formed with so much
care and art. Proud of having been the author
of such a formidable confederacy against the Lu-
theran heresy, and happy in thinking that the
glory of extirpating it was reserved for his Pon-
tificate, he publifned the articles of his league
with the Emperor, in order to denonRrate the
pious intention of their confederacy, as well as
to display his own zeal, which prompted him to
make such extraordinary efforts for maintaining
the faith in its purity. Not satisfied with this,
he soon after issued a bull, containing molt libe-
ral promises of indulgence to all who hould en-
gage in this holy enterprize, together with warm
exhortations to such as could not bear a part in
it themselves, to increase the fervour of their
prayers, and the feveritoF their mortifications,
that they might draw down the blessing of Hea-
ven upon thole w"io undertook it'. Nor was it
zeal alone which pushed the Pope to make decla-
rations o inconfiltent with the account which the
Emperor himself gave of his motives for taking
arms. He was much scandalized at Charles's
diflimulation in such a cause; at his seeming to

! Du Mont Corps Diplom.

be

B v0 K be ashamed of owning his zeal for the church,

VIII.
1-~- and at his endeavours to make that pass for a po-
15461 litical contest, which he ought to have glorieu in

as a war which had no other object than the de-
fence of religion. With as much solicitude,
therefore, as the Emperor laboured to disguise
the purpose of the confederacy, did the Pope en-
deavour to publiih their real plan, in order that
they might come at once to an open rupture with
the Protestants, that all hope of reconcilement
might be cut off, and that Charles might be
under fewer temptations, and have it less in his
power than at present, to betray the interelts of
the church by any accommodation beneficial to
himfelfk.

TrE Emperor, though not a little offended at

the Pope's indiscretion or malice in making this
discovery, continued boldly to pursue his own
plan, and to aflfrt his intentions to be no other
than what he had originally avowed. Several of
the Protestant ftatecs hom he had previouly
gained, thought therelves justified, in some
mealure, by his declarations, for abandoning their
associates, and even for giving affifance to him.

The prip,. BUT there artifices did not impoe on the greater
cation of the
PotUf.nt, and founder part of the Protestant confederates.
for their
own de. They clearly perceived it to be against the re-

formed religion that the Emperor had taken arms,

k . Paul, 188. Thuan. iif. i..

anw

and that not only the fuppreflion of it, but the B 110 '
extinction of the German liberties, would be the '- --
certain consequence of his obtaining such an en- 546.
tire superiority as would enable him to execute
his schemes in their full extent. They deter-
mined therefore, to prepare for their own de-
fence, and neither to renounce those religious
truths, to the knowledge of which they had at-
tained by means so wonderful, nor to abandon
those civil rights which had been transmitted to
them by their ancestors. In order to give the
necessary directions for this purpose, their de-
puties met at Ulm, soon after their abrupt de-
parture from Ratisbon. Their deliberations were
now conduted with such vigour and unanimity,
as the imminent danger which threatened them
required. The contingent of troops, which each
of the confederates was to furnish, having been
fixed by the original treaty of union, orders were
given for bringing them immediately into the
field. Being sensible, at last, that through the
narrow prejudices of fbme 'f their members, and
the imprudent security of others, they had ne-
gleted too long to ftrenglren themselves by so-
reign alliances, they now applie-d with great ear-
neftnefs to the Venetians and Swil's.

To the Venetians they represented the Empe- Tlney so;et

ror's intention of overturning the prefcnt system thevn:.
of Germany, and of raising hilnfelf to abfollite 'ic'
power in that country by means of foreign force

furnilhed

B o0 K frnilhed by the Pope; thev warned them how
---# fatal this event would prove t the liberties of
546-. Italy, and that by fultcring Charles to acquire

unlimited authority in the one country, they wouli
soon feel his dominion to be no less defpotick i:
the other; they besought them, therefore, not to
grant a pafTage trough their territories to thoic
troops, which ought to be treated as cormoa
enemies, becaute by subduing Germany they pre-
pared chains fcr the reft of Europe. These re-
flections had not escaped the sagacity of t!hose
wife republicans. Tihcy had communicated their
fentimcnts to the Pope, and had endeavoured to
divert him from an alliance, which tended to
render irrefilible the power of a potentate, wholi
:ambition he already knew to be boundless. But
they had found Paul so eager in the profccuticn
of his own plan, that he disregarded all their re-
monfarances'. This attempt to alarm the Pope
having proved unsuccessful, they would do no-
khing more towards preventing the dangers wiich
they foresaw; and in return to the application
from the confederates of Smalkade, they inform-
ed tliem, that they could not obfrua the march
of the Pope's troops through an open country,
but by Icvying an army Itrong enough to tac-
the'n in the field ; and that this would draw upon
themselves the whole weight of his as well as of the
Emperor's indignation. Fc; t'. fame reason thej
declined lending a funm of money, which the

A v li:i t.lor a di fui tempi, liv. v. p. 32.

~".r L? .

Ele&or of Saxony and Landgrave proposed to B 0 K
borrow of them, towards carrying on the war".

x546.

THE demands of the confederates upon the ort!.c
Swiss were not confined to the obftruCing of the
entrance of foreigners into Germany; they re-
quired of them, as the neareil neighbours and
closest allies of the Empire, to interpose with their
wonted vigour for the preicrvation of its liberties,
and not to stand as inative fpetators, while their
brethren were oppresscd and cnfaved. But with
whatever zeal the reformed Cantons might have
been dilpofed to a when the cul'e of the Refor-
mation was in danger, the Helvetick body was o
divided with regard to religion, as rendered it
unsafe for the Protestants to take any ftep without
consulting their associates; and among them the
emiflaries of the Pope and Emperor had such in-
fluence, that a resolution of maintaining an exac
neutrality between the contending parties, was
the utmost which could be procured".

BEING disappointed in both there applications, o Fr n,

I. a . Hc-.

the Protestants, not long ater, had recourse to ty vill.
the Kings of France and England; the approach
of danger either overcoming the Ele&tor of
Saxony's fcruplcs, or obliging him to yield to the
importunities of his associates. The lituation of

"' Sleid. 31. Paruta Ilior. Venet. tom. iv. o. Lam-

hertus Hortenfius d bello Gcrmanico, apud Scardium, vol. ii.
p. 547.

" Sleid. 392.

the

3B Vo K the two Monarchs flattered them with hopes of

success. Hostilities between them had continued
*546 ffor some time after the peace of Crefpy. But be-

coming weary at last of a war, attended with no
glory or advantage to either, they had lately ter-
minated all their differences by a peace concluded
at Campe near Ardres. Francis having with great
difficulty procured his allies, the Scots, to be in-
cluded in the treaty, in return for that conceflion
he engaged to pay a great fum, which Henry
demanded as due to him on several accounts, and
he left Bologne in the hands of the Englilh, as a
pledge for his faithful performance of that article.
But though the re-establishment of peace seemed
to leave the two Monarchs at liberty to turn their
attention towards Germany, so unfortunate were
the Protestants, that they derived no immediate
advantage from this circumstance. Henry ap-
peared unwilling to enter into any alliance with
them, but on such conditions as would render
him not only the head, but the supreme dire&or
of their league; a pre-eminence which, as the
bonds of union or interest between them were but
feeble, and as he differed from them so widely in
his religious sentiments,. they had no inclination
to admit °. Francis, more powerfully inclined by
political conliderations to afford them ailtance,
found his kingdom so much exhautled by a long
war, and was so much afraid of irritating the
Pope, by entering into close union with excoll-

Rymer, xv. 93. Herbert, 258.

municated

municated Hereticks, that he durlf not undertake B K
the protection of the Smalkaldickl league. By '.
this ill-timed caution, or fuperllitious deference
to scruples, to which at other times he was not
much addited, he loft the mos promising oppor-
tunity of mortifying and difreffir.g his rival, which
presented itself during his whole reign.

BUT, notwithstanding their ill success in their Prottlan

° t.ike ie

negociations with foreign courts, the confederates sied with
found no difficulty at home, in bringing a uss- ótmy.
cient force into the field. Germany abounded at
that time in inhabitants; the feudal inititutions,
which subsisted in full force, enabled the nobles
to call out their numerous vassals, and to put
them in motion on the Ihorteit warning; the
martial spirit of the Germans, not broken or ener-
vated by the introduction of commerce and arts,
had acquired additional vigour during the conti-
nual wars in which they had been employed, for
half a century, either in the pay of the Emperors,
or Kings of France. Upon every opportunity of
entering into service, they were accustomed to
run eagerly to arms and to every standard that
was erected, volunteers flocked from all quarters P
Zeal seconded, on this occasion, their native ar-
dour. Men on whom the dodrines of the Re-
formation had made that deep impreflion which
accompanies truth when irll discovered, prepared
to maintain it with proportional vigour; and

P Seek. . iii. 161.

among

0 0
o, among a warlike people, it appeared infamous
/C-, to remain inacive, when the defence of religion
Z546* was the motive for taking arms. Accident com-

bined with all these circumitances in facilitating
the levy of soldiers among the confederates. A
considerable number of Germans, in the pay of
France, being dismissed by the King on the pro.
fpe& of peace with England, joined in a body the
standard of the Protestants. By such a concur-
rence of causes, they were enabled to aflemble in
a few weeks an army compoed of seventy thou-
sand foot and fifteen thousand horse, provided
with a train of an hundred and twenty cannon,
eight hundred ammunition waggons, eight thou-
sand beafs of burden, and fix thousand pioneersr.
This army, one of the most numerous, and un-
doubtedly the best appointed of any which had
been levied in Europe during that century, was
not raised by the united effort of the whole Pro-
teftant body. The Elecor of Saxony, the Land-
grave of Hesse, the Duke of Wurtemberg, the
Princes of Anhalt, and the Imperial cities of Auf-
bourg, Ulm, and Strafburg, were the only powers
which contributed towards this great armament:
The Eletors of Cologne, of Brandenburg, and
the Count Palatine, overawed by the Emperor'b
threats, or deceived by his profeflions, remained
neuter. John marquis of Brandenburg Bareith,

q Thuan. 1. i. 68.

Thuan. 1. i. 6o. Ludovici ab Avila & Zuniga Con.

mentariorum d bel. Gcrm. lib. duo, Antw, 150i. izino.
p. 13, a.

5 and

and Albert of Brandenburg Anfpach, though both B. o ' K
early converts to Lutheranifm, entered openly -
into the Emperor's service, under pretext of hav- 546.
ing .obtained his promise for the security of the
Protestant religion; and Maurice of Saxony soon
followed their example.

THE number of their troops, as well as the Theiaeqn*t.

amazing rapidity wherewith they hadi assembled :.ero,'
them, aftonified the Emperor, and filled him he'"
with; the mot disquieting apprehen ions. He was,
indeed, in no condition to refill such a mighty
force. Shut up in Ratisbon, a town of no great
strength, whose inhabitants being moflly Lu-
therans, would have been more ready to betray
than to aflift him, with only three thousand Spanish
foot, who had served in Hungary, and about five
thousand Germans who had joined him from dif-
ferent parts of the Empire, he must have been
overwhelmed by the approach of such a numerous
army, which he could not fight, nor even hope
to retreat from in safety. The Pope's troops,
though in full march to his relief, had hardly
reached the frontiers of Germany; the forces
which he expected from the Low-Countries had
not yet begun to move, and were even far from
being complete'. His situation, however, called
for more immediate filcour, nor did it fcem
praticable for hin to wait ir such distant auxili-
aries, with whom his junation was so precarious&

Sleid, 39. Avi'., , a.
VOL. II. Z BLT

1 0 1 K BUT it happened fortunately for Charles, that
a_,_ the confederates did not avail themselves of the
Th2546i. advantage which lay so full in their view. In civil
prugocina wars, the firt fleps are commonly taken with
in"feadof much timidity and hesitation. Men are soli-

citous, at that time, to put on the semblance of
moderation and equity; they strive to gain parti.
fans by seeming to adhere ftrialy to known forms;
nor can they be brought, at once, to violate those
established institutions, which in times of tran-
quillity they have been accustomed to reverence;
hence their proceedings are often feeble or di-
latory, when they ought to be molft vigorotus
and decisive. Influenced by those considerations,
which, happily for the peace of society, operate
powerfully on the human mind, the confederates
could not think of throwing off that allegiance
which they regularly owed to the head of the Em-
pire, or of turning their arms against him without
one solemn appeal more to his candour, and to
the impartial judgment of their fellow-fubjeas.
July 5. For this purpose, they addrefled a letter to the

Emperor, and a manifesto to all the inhabitants
of Germany. The tenour of both was the am¢e.
They represented their own conduct with regird
to civil affairs as dutiful and fubtmiffive; th1y
mentioned the inviolable union in which they had
lived with the Emperor, as well as the many ad
recent marks of his good-will and gratitude heri-
withal they had been honoured; they afterced r:
ligion to be the sole cause of the violence hllci
the Emperor now meditated against them; anti il

pr;o

proof of this produced many arguments to con- B k r.
vince those who were so weak as to be deceived -.--
by the artifices with which he endeavoured to '546
cover his real intentions; they declared their own
resolution to risk every thing in maintenance of
their religious rights, and foretold the diiolution
of the German constitution, if the Emperor hould
finally prevail against them'.

CHARLES, though in such a perilous ituation Tie mpe..

as might have inspired him with moderate senti- "r' Put
ments, appeared as inflexible and haughty as if hle :anp
his affairs had been in the most prosperous slate. J.ly".
His only reply to the address and manifesto of the
Protestants, was to publifl the ban of the Empire
against the Elector of Sxony and Landgrave of
Hefle, their leaders, and against all who should
dare to assist them. By this sentence, the ulti-
mate and most rigorous one which the German
jurisprudence has provided for the punishment of
traitors, or enemies to their country, they were
declared rebels and outlaws, and deprived of
every privilege which they enjoyed as members
of the Germanick body; their goods were confif-
cated; their fulhjcts absolved from their oath of al-
legiance; and it became not only lawful but meri-
torious to invade their territories. The nobles, and
free cities, who framed or perfeced the constitution
of the German Government, had not been so negli-
gent of their own afety and privileges as to trust

Sleld. 3°4.

Z 2 the

8 0 0 K the Emperor with this formidable jurifdicion.
* · The authority of a diet of the Empire ought to
'546. have been interposed before any of its members

could be put under the ban. But Charles over-
looked that formality, well knowing chat, if his
arms were crowned with success, there would re-
main none who would have either power or cou-
rage to call in question what he had done". The
Emperor, however, did not found his sentence
against the Elecor and Landgrave on their revolt
from the eftablilhed church, or their conduct
with regard to religion; he affe&ed to aflign for
it reasons purely civil, and those too expressed in
such general and ambiguous terms, without
specifying the nature or circumstances of their
guilt, as rendered it more like an at of defpotick
power than of a legal and limited jurifdi&ion.
Nor was it altogether from choice, or to conceal
his intentions, that Charles had recourse to the
ambiguity of general exprefllons; he durst not
mention too particularly the caures of his sentence,
as every aion which he could have charged up-
on the Ele&or and Landgrave as a crime, might
have been employed with equaljuitice to concicnn
many of the Protestants whom he frill pretended
to confider as faithful subjects, and whom i:
would have been extremely imprudent to alarm
or disgust.

Sleid. 386. Du Mont. Corps Diplom. iv. p. 11. 314
Pfeffel Hilt. Abregc du Droit Publ. 168. 736. 158.

I 3T)i

THE confederates, now perceiving all hopes of 'B O, K

accommodation to be at an end, had only to k---
choose whether they would fubmic without refcrve They de-
to the Emperor's will, or proceed to open hoftili- Ci-a" "
ties. They were not detitute of publick spirit Charle.
and refo!ution to make the proper choice. A
few days after the ban of the Empire was pub-
lilhed, they, according to the custom of that age,
sent a herald to the Imperial camp with a solemn
declaration of war against Charles, to whom they
no longer gave any other title than that of pre-
tended Emperor, and renounced all allegiance, ho-
mage or duty which he might claim, or they had
hitherto yielded to him. But previous to this
formality, part of their troops had begun to a&.
The command of a considerable body of men Their firt

? operations,

raised by the city of Auglburg having been given
to Sebastian Schertel, a soldier of fortune, who
by the booty that he got when the Imperialists
plundered Rome, together with the merit of long
service, had acquired wealth and authority which
placed him on a level with the chief of the Ger-
man nobles: that gallant veteran resolved, before
he joined the main body of the confederates, to
attempt foncething suitable to his former fame,
and to the expeCtation of his countrymen, As
the Pope's forces were hastening towards Tyrol,
in order to penetrate into Germany by the nar-
row pales through the mountains which run across
that country, he advanced thither with the utmost
rapidity, and seized Ehrenberg and Cuffitein,
two strong castles which commanded the principal

Z 3 defiles.

B 0 0 K defiles. Without itopping a moment, he con-

'->-- tinued his march towards Infpruck, by getting
'56. poffeflion of which he would have obliged the

Italians to flop hort, and with a finall body of men
could have refited all the efforts of the greatft
armies. Cafilealto, the governor of Trent, know-
ing what a fatal blow this would be to the Empe-
ror, all whose designs must have proved abortive
if his Italian auxiliaries had been intercepted,
raised a few troops with the utmost dispatch, and
threw himself into the town. Schertel, however,
did not abandon the enterprize, and was prepar-
ing to attack the place, when the intelligence of
the approach of the Italians, and an order from
the Ele&or and Landgrave, obliged him to drfift.
By his retreat the passes were left open, and the
italians entered Germany withGut any opposition,
but from the garrisons which Schertel had placed
in Ehrenberg and Cuffftein, and these having no
hopes of being relieved, surrendered, after a nfort
resistance *.

NOR

x Seckend. lib. ii. 70. Adriani Iftoria di uoi tempi, lib.
335.

e Seckendorf, the indulrious author of the Commentariul

Apologeticus de Lutheranifmo, whom I have so long and
safely followed as my guide in German afiairs, was a de-
fcendent from Schertel. With the care nd solicitude of a
German, who was himself of noble birth, Seckendorf has
published a long digression concerning his anceflor, calculated
chiefly to how how Schertel was ennobled, and his polterity
allied to many of the most ancient families in the Empire.
Among other curious particulars, he gives us an account of
is wealth, the chief source of which was the plunder he go

;;r

NoR was the recalling of Schertel the only 8 1° K

error of which the confederates were guilty. As
the supreme command of their army was corn- and "il oa.
mitted, in terms of the league of Snalkalde, to
the 'Eleor of Saxony anti Landgrave of Hefre
with equal authority, all the inconveniencies
arising from a divided and co-ordinate authority,
which is always of fatal consequence in the opera-
tions of war, were immediately felt. The Elec-
tor, though intrepid in his own person to excess,
and most ardcntly zealous in tie cause, was flow
in deliberating, uncertain as well as irrefl!ute in
his determinations, and confantly preferred mea-
fures which were cautious and safe, to such as.
v.,cre bold or decisive. The Landgrave, of a
more ative and enterprising nature, formed all
his resolutions with promptitude, wilned to exe-
cute them with spirit, and uniformly preferred
such schemes as tended to bring the contelt to a
speedy ifiue. Thus their maxims, with regard
to the condu&t of the war, differed as widely as
those by which they were influenced in preparing
for it. Such perpetual contrariety in their senti-
ments gave rife, imperceptibly, to jealousy and
the spirit of contention. These multiplied the
diifentions flowing from the incompatibility of
their natural temper, and rendered them more

at Rome. His landsd caite was fold by his grandsons for fix
hundred thoulfainl forins. By this we may form omu idea of
the riches amaflbd by the CoJdotliri, or commanders f
mercenary bands in that age, At the t,king of Rome Schelerl
was only a captain. Scckend. lib. ii. 73.

Z 4 violent,

B i0. K violent. The other members of the league con-
G-~- fidering themselves as independent, and subje&t

to the Elector and Landgrave, only in confe-
quence of the articles of a voluntary confederacy,
did not long retain a proper veneration for com-
manders, who proceeded with o little unanimity;
and the numerous army of the Protestants, like a
vast machine whose parts are ill compaced, and
which is destitute of any power sufficient to move
and regulate the whole, aaed with no consistency,
vigour, or ffee&t.

The Pope's TH Emperor, who was afraid that, by re-
troop jin
the Eirpc. maining at Ratisbon, he might render it impof-

tzr fible for the Pope's forces to join him, having

boldly advanced to Landhut on the Ifer, the
confederates loft some days in deliberating whe-
ther it was proper to follow him into the territo-
ries of the Duke of Bavaria, a neutral Prince.
When at las they surmounted that scruple, and
began to move towards his camp, they suddenly
abandoned the design, and hastened to attack
Ratisbon, in which town Charles could leave only
a small garrison. By this time the papal troops,
..mounting fully to that number which Paul had
itpulated to furnish, had reached Landshut, and
were oon followed by fix thousand Spaniards of
the veteran bands stationed in Naples. The con-
federates, after Schertel's pirited but fruitlef
expedition, seem to have permitted there forces
to advance unmolested to the place of rendez-
vous, without any attempt to attack either them

or

or the Emperor separately, or to prevent their B o o
jun&ionx. The Imperial army amounted now to -
thirty-fix thousand men, and was still more for- 's5
midable by the discipline and valour of the troops,
than by their number. Avila, commendador of
Alcantara, who had been present in all the wars
carried on by Charles, and had served in the
armies which gained the memorable vi&ory at
Pavia, which conquered Tunis, and invaded
France, gives this the preference to any martial
force he had ever seen affembied. O&avio Far-
nefe, the Pope's grandson, aifed by the ablest
officers formed in the long wars between Charles
and Francis, commanded the Italian auxiliaries.
His brother, the Cardinal Farnese, accompanied
him as papal legate; and in order to give the
war the appearance of a religious enterprize, he
proposed to march at the head of the army, with
a cross carried before him, and to publish indul-
gences wherever he came, to all who Should give
them any assistance, as had anciently been the
pratice in the Crusades against the Infidels. But
this the Emperor ftri&ly prohibited, as incon-
fifent with all the declarations which he had
made to the Germans of his own party; and the
legate perceiving, to his astonishment, that the
exercise of the Protestant religion, the extirpa-
tion of which he confidered as the role objec of
the war, was publickly permitted in the Imperial
camp, oon returned in difgult to Italy".

x Adriani Iftoria de fuoi tempi, lib. v. 340o
Y Avila, 18. 2 i. Paul, 19:.

TH E

0 0 TK TnE arrival of there troops enabled the Empe.
-_ - ror to fend filch a reinforcement to the garrison

6 at Ratisbon, that the confederates, relinquilhing

all hopes of reducing that town, marched towards
Ingoldftadt on the Danube, near to which Charles
was now encamped. They exclaimed loudly
againfi the Emperor's notorious violation of the
laws and constitution of the Empire, in having
cailed in foreigners to lay waste Germany, and to
oppreis its liberties. As in that age, the domi-
nion of the Roman See was so odious to the Pro-
teflants, that the name of the Pope alone was
sufficient to inspire them with horror at any en-
terprize which he countenanced, and to raise in
their minds the blackest suspicions, it came to be
universally believed among them, that Paul, not
satisfied with attacking them openly by force of
arms, had dispersed his emissaries all over Ger-
many, to set on fire their towns and magazines,
and to poison the wells and fountains of water.
Nor did this rumour spread only among the vul-
gar, being extravagant as well as frightful enough
to make a deep impreflion on their credulity;
even the leaders of the party, blinded by their
prjudices, publifled a declaration, in which they
accuSed the Pope of having employed such Anti-
christian and diabolical arts against them'. Thele
sentiments of the confederates were confirmed, in
some measure, by the behaviour of the papal
troops, who, thinking nothing too rigorous to-

a Sleid. 399.

wards
,9

wards Hereticks anathematized by the church, B 0 1 K
were guilty of great cxceffs in the Lutheran ter-
ritories, and aggravated the calamities of war, by *s s.
mingling with it all the cruelty of bigoted zeal.

THE first operations in the field, however, did The rife.

not correspond with the violence of those pallions vance to
which animated individuals. The Emnperor had mpl
prudently taken the reollution of avoiding an "rm.
acion with an enemy so far superior in number",
especially as he foresaw that nothing could keep
a body compoed of so many and uch difimilar
members from falling to pieces, but the prefling
to attack it with an inconsiderate precipitancy.
The confederates, though it was no less evident
that to them every moment's delay was pernicious,
were still prevented by the weakness or division
of their leaders from exerting that vigour, with
which their situation, as well as the ardour of their
soldiers, ought to have inspired them. On their i,,~wC »
arrival at Ingoldftadt, they found the Emperor
in a camp not remarkable for strength, and fur-
rounded only by a flight entrenchment. Before
the camp lay a plain of such extent, as afforded
sufficient space for drawing out their whole army,
and bringing it to at at once. Every confider-
ation should have determined them to have seizcd
this opportunity of attacking the Emperor; and
their vast superiority in numbers, tie eagerness of
their troops, together with the liability of ihe

b Avila,, 8, a

G.rutan

a 0 K German infantry inpitched battles, afforded them

the most probable expetation of vicory. The
"s'i Landgrave urged this with great warmth, declar-

ing that if the sole command were veiled in him,
he would terminate the war on that occasion, and
decide by one general ation the fate of the two
parties. But the Elector, refle&ing on the valour
and dicipline of the enemy's forces, animated by
the prel-nce of the Emperor, and conduAed by
the belt officers of the age, would not venture
upon an ation, which he thought to be so doubt-
ful, as the attacking such a body of veterans on
ground which they themselves had chosen, and
wvhile covered by fortifications which, though
imperfect, would afford them no small advantage
in the combat. Notwithfanding his hesitation
and remonstrances, it was agreed to advance to-
wards the enemy's camp, in battle array, in order
to make a trial whether by that insult, and by a
furious cannonade which they began, they could
draw the Lnperialifts out of their works. But the
Emperor had too much sagacity to fall into this

Tie "w!ie. inare. IHe adhered to his own system with in-
,i', flexible constancy; and drawing up his soldiers

behind their trenches, that they might be ready
to receive the confederates if they should venture
upon an assault, calmly waited their approach,
and carefilly restrained his own men from any
excursions or skirmishes which might bring on
an engagement. Meanwhile, he rode along the
lines, and addrelling the troops of the different
nations in their own language, encouraged them
by the chcerfulnefs of his voice and countenance;

he

he exposcd himself in places of greatest danger, 00°
and amidst the warmest fire of the enemy's ar- r
tillery, the most numerous that had hitherto been s4 .
brought into the field by any army. Roused by
his example, not a man quitted his ranks; it was
thought infamous to discover any symptom of fear
when the Emperor appeared so intrepid; and the
meanest soldier plainly perceived, that their de-
clining the combat at prcfcnt was not the else&
of timidity in their genera!, but the result of a
well weighed caution. The confederates, after
firing several hours on the Imperialits, with more
noise and terror than execution, feeing no pro-
fpet of alluring them to fight on equal terms,
retired to their own camp. The Emperor em-
ployed the night with tfch diligence in strength-
ening his works, that the confederates, returning
to the cannonade next day, found that, though
they had now been willing to venture upon such
a bold experiment, the opportunity of naking an
attack with advantage was loft .

AFTER such a discovery of their own feeble- Ti.e P'.

ness or irresolution, iand of the prudence as well ,", 1,,'
firmness of the Emperor's conduc', the confede- =t'."'.
rates turned their whole aention towards pre-
venting the arrival of a powerful reinforcement
of ten thouland foot, and four thousand horse,
which the count de Buren was bringing to the
Emperor from the Low-countries. But though

c Sleid. 395. 397. Avila, 27, a b, r. rcr.f. p.
Scard, ii,

that

0 0 that general had to traverse such an extent of
*^.~ country; though his route lay through the terri-

546. tories of several states warmly disposed to favour

the confederates; though they were apprized of
his approach, and by their vafi superiority in
numbers might easily have detached a force sus-
ficient to overpower him, he advanced with such
rapidity, and by such well- concerted movements,
while they opposed him with such remiflnefs, and
Sept. to. o little military kill, that he conduced this body

to the Imperial camp without any loss d.

UPON the arrival of the Flemings, in whom he

placed great confidence, the Emperor altered, in
some degree, his plan of operations, and began
to a& more upon the offensive, though he fiill
avoided a battle with the utmost industry. He
made himself matier of Neuburg, Dillingen, and
Donawert on the Danube; of Nordlingen, and
several other towns, situated on the most confi-
derable fireams which fall into that mighty river.
By this he got the command of a great extent of
country, though not without being obliged to
engage in several sharp encounters, of which the
success was various, nor without the molt immi-
nent danger, oftener than once, of being drawn

Sate ns into a battle. In this manner the whole autumn
both aimiet.

was spent; neither party gained any remarkable
superiority over the other, and nothing was yet
done towards bringing the war to a period. The
Emperor had often foretold, with confidence,

d Sleid. 403.

th:^

that discord and the want of money would compel B ° n K
the confederates to disperse that unwieldy body, -v-
which they had neither abilities to guide, nor s6
funds to support'; but though he waited with im-
patience for the accomplilhment of his predi&ion,
there was no profpet of that even: being at hand.
Meanwhile he himself began to susser from the
want of forage and provisions; even the Catholick
provinces being so much incensed at the intro-
ducion of foreigners into the Empire, that they
supplied them with reluct&nce, while the camp of
the confederates abounded with a profusion of all
necessaries, which the zeal of their friends in the
adjacent countries furnished with the utmost li-
berality and good will. Great numbers of the
Italians and Spaniards, unaccustomcd to the cli-
mate or food of Germany, were become unfit for
service through sickness '. Considerable arrears
were now due to the troops, who had scarcely
received any money from the beginning of the
campaign; the Emperor, experiencing on this,
as well as on former occasions, that his jurifdic-
tion was more extensive than his revenues, andt
that the former enabled him to assemble a greater
number of soldiers, than the latter were fulficient
to pay. Upon all these accounts, he found it
difficult t keep his army in the field; some of
his ablest generals, and even the Duke of Alva

e Belli Smalkaldici Commentarius Grieco frmione fcriptu
a Joach. Camerario, ap. Freherum, vol. iii. p. 479.

Camerar. ap. Freher. 483.

hlinfdif,

B uo K himrelf, persevering and obstinate as he usually
.--..^ vwas in the prosecution of every measure, advising

'*56* him to disperse his troops into winter-quarters.

But as the arguments urged againf any plan
which he had adopted, rarely made much impref-
sion upon the Emperor, he paid no regard to their
opinion, and determined to continue his efforts
in order to weary out the confederates; being
well assured that if he could once oblige them to
separate, there was little probability of their
uniting again in a body . Still, however, it re-
mained a doubtful point, whether his Readiness
was most likely to fail, or their zeal to be ex-
haulted. It was ltill uncertain which party, by
first dividing its forces, would give the fupe-
riority to the other; when an unexpeted event
decided the contest, and occasioned a fatal reverse
in the affairs of the confederates.

Thfchemrc MAURrcs of Saxony havi ig insinuated himself
of MaU, ice
f Suyy.. into the Emperor's confidence, by the arts which

have already been described, no sooner saw hofti-
lities ready to break out between him and the
confederates of Smalkalde, than vast profpeEts of
ambition began to open upon him. That portion
of Saxony, which descended to him from his
ancestors, was far from farisfying his aspiring
mind; and he perceived with pleasure the ap-
proach of civil war, as amidst the revolutions and
convulsions occafiuned by it, opportunities of

s Thuan. 83.

acquiring

acquiring additional power or dignity, which at B K
other times are fought in vain, prefcnt themfclves -
to an enterprising spirit. As he was thoroughly 3546
acquainted with the state of the two contending
parties, and the qualities of their leaders, he did
not hesitate long in determining on which fide the
greatef advantages were to be expected. Having
revolved all there things in his own mind, and
having taken his final resolution of joining the
Emperor, he prudently determined to declare
early in his favour; that by the merit of this,
he might acquire a title to a proportional recom-
penfe. With this view, he had repaired to Ra-
tifbon in the month of May, under pretext of
attending the diet; and after many conferences H, league

. .. with the

with Charles or his ministers, he, with the most Emperor.
mysterious secrecy, concluded a treaty, in which
he engaged to concur in assisting the Emperor as
a faithful fubje&; and Charles, in return, ftipu-
lated to beflow on him all the spoils of the Ele&tor
of Saxony, his dignities as well as territoriesh.
History hardly records any treaty that can be
confidered as a more manifest violation of the
mos powerful principles which ought to influence
human ations. Maurice, a professed Protestant,
at a time when the belief of religion, as well as
zeal for its interests, cook l-rong poffeflion of
every mind, binds himself to contribute his aflill-
ance towards carrying on a war which had mani-

h Hari Annal. Brabant, vol. . 638. Struvii Corp. 1048.
Thuan. 84.

VL. III. A a feltly

° ° K feRly no other objet than the extirpation of the,
1--- Proceftant dotrines. He engages to take arms
1546. againRf his father-in-law, and to flrip his nearest

relation of his honours and dominions. He joins
a dubious friend against a known benefator, to
whom his obligations were both great and recent.
Nor was the Prince who ventured upon all this,
one of those audacious politicians, who, provided
they can accomplish their ends, and secure their
interest, avowedly disregard the most sacred obli-
gations, and glory in contemning whatever is
honourable or decent. Maurice's conduct, if the
whole must be ascribed to policy, was more artful
and masterly; he executed his plan in all its parts,
and yet endeavoured to preserve, in every ftep
which he took, the appearance of what was fair,
and virtuous, and laudable. It is probable, from
his subsequent behaviour, that, with regard to
the Protestant religion at least, his intentions
were upright, that he fondly trusted to the Em-
peror's promises for its security, but that, ac-
cording to the fate of all who refine too much in
policy, and who tread in dark and crooked paths,
in attempting to deceive others, he himself was,
in ome degree, deceived.

lis artifice His first care, however, was to keep there en*
in order to
onete his gagements with the Emperor closely concealed:
ouimon.. and so perfet a mailer was he in the art of dil

simulation, that the confederates, notwithstanding
his declining all connexions with them, and his
remarkable aflduity in paying court to the Em-

peror,

peror, seemed to have entertained no suspicion B °

o K

of his designs. Even the Elecor of Saxony, --
when he marched at the beginning of the cam- 1546*
paign to join his afrociates, committed his domi-
nions to Maurice's protection, which he, with an
insidious appearance of friendship, readily under-
took . But scarcely had the Elector taken the
field, when Maurice began to consult privately
with the King of the Romans how to invade those
very territories, with the defence of which he was
ent.xuted. Soon after, the Emperor ent him a
copy of the Imperial ban denounced against the
Eletor and Landgrave. As he was next heir to
the former, and particularly intereted in pre-
venting strangers from getting his dominions into
their poffeflion, Charles required him, not only
for his own fake, but upon the allegiance and
duty which he owed to the head of the Empire,
instantly to seize and detain in his hands the for-
feited estates of the Elector; warning him, at the
fame time, that if he negleted to obey there
commands, he flould be held as accefary to the
crimes of his kinfinan, and be liable to the fame
punilhmcnt .

THIS artifice, which it is probable Maurice

himself suggested, was employed by him in or-
der that his conduEt towards the Elector might
seem a matter of necefliiy but not o choice, an
at of obedience to his fupcrior, rather than a

: Sruvii Corp. o.l1i6. Sicid. Y9. Thban. 84.

A a = voluntary

B 0 0 K voluntary invasion of the rights of his kinfinan

VIII.

and ally. But in order to give some more fpe-
cious appearance to this thin veil with which he
endeavoured to cover his ambition, he, soon
after his return from Ratilbon, had called toge-
ther the states of his country; and representing to
them that a civil war between the Emperor and
confederates of Sinalkalde was now become un-
avoidable, desired their advice with regard to
the part which he lhould a in that event. They
being prepared, no doubt, and tutored before-
hand, as well as desirous of gratifying their Prince,
whom they both eteemed and loved, gave such
counfcl as they knew would be most agreeable;
advising him to offer his mediation towards re-
conciling the contending parties; but if that
were reje&ed, and he could obtain proper security
for the Protestant religion, they delivered it as
their opinion that, in all other points, he ought
to yield obedience to the Emperor. Upon re-
ceiving the Imperial rescript, together with the
ban against the Ele&or and Landgrave, Maurice
summoned the ates of his country a second time;
he laid before them the orders which he had re-
ceived, and mentioned the punilhment with which
he was threatened in cafe of disobedience; he ac-
quainted them that the confederates had refused
to admit of his mediation, and that the Emperor
had given him the most fatisfatory declarations
with regard to religion; he pointed out his own
intercft in securing poffeflion of the eletoral do-
minions, as well as the danger of allowing firan-

7 gers

gers to obtain an etablilhment in Saxony; and B o° K
upon the whole, as the point under dtliberation A
refpeted his fubjets no less than himfclf, he de- 1546'
fired to know their fentitments, how he flould
fleer in that difficult annd arduous conjunuttre.
The states, no less obfelquious and compl:ifant
than formerly, relying on the Emperor's promiies
as a perse& security for their religion, proposed
that, before he had recourse to more violent me-
thods, they would write to the Elector, exhorting
him, as the best means, not only of appearing
the Emperor, but of preventing his dominions
from being seized by foreign or hostile powers, to
give his content that Maurice lhould take postef-
sion of them quietly and without opposition.
Maurice himself seconded their arguments in a
letter to the Landgrave, his father-in-law. Such
an extravagant proposition was rejeted with the
scorn and indignation which it deserved. The
Landgrave, in return to Maurice, taxed hilm
with his treachery and ingratitude towards a kinf-
man to whom he was so deeply indebted; he
treated with contempt his affectation of executing
the Imperial ban, which he could not but know
to be altogether void, by the unconstitutional and
arbitrary manner in which it had been ilfuc l; he
besought him, not to susser himself to be so far
blinded by ambition, as to forget the obligations
of honour and fiiendfhip, or to betray the Pro-
teftant religion, the extirpation of which out of
Germany, even by the acknowledgmieTy o the

A a 3 Pope

B Ko0 o Pope himself, was the great object of the present

war'.

S1546.

He invIs BUT Maurice had proceeded too far to be di-
the territo-
ri of the verted from pursuing his plan by reproaches or
Eletor of
saxony. arguments. Nothing now remained but to exe-
Noenmbtr. cute with vigour, what he had hitherto carried on

by artifice and dissimulation. Nor was his bold-
ness in action inferior to his subtlety in contri-
vance. Having assembled about twelve thousand
men, he suddenly invaded one part of the electoral
provinces, while Ferdinand, with an army com-
posed of Bohemians and ungarians, overran
the other. Maurice, in two harp encounters,
defeated the troops which the Elecor had left to
guard his country; and improving these advan-
tages to the utmost, made himself master of the
whole Elecorate, except Wittemberg, Gotha,
and Eisenach, which being places of considerable
strength, and defended by sufficient garrisons,
refused to open their gates. The news of there
rapid conquefs oon reached the Imperial and
confederate camps. In the former, their satis-
fation with an event, which it was forefecn would
be producive of the most important confe-
quences, was expressed by every possible demon-
itration of joy. The latter was filled with ato-
nifhment and terror. The name of Maurice was
mentioned with execration, as an apollate from

Skid. 405, &c. Thuan. 85. Camcrar. 484.

religion,

religion, a betrayer of the German liberty, and a B o : K
contemner of the most sacred and natural ties. ---
Every thing that the rage or invention of the
party could fuggefr, in order to blacken and ren-
der him odious; invectives, satires and lampoons,
the furious declamations of their preachers, toge-
ther with the rude wit of their authors, were all
employed against him. While he, trusting to
the arts which he had so long pra&ised, as if his
acions could have admitted of any serious julfi-
fication, published a manifesto, containing the
fame frivolous reasons for his condut, which he
had formerly alleged in the meeting of his states,
and in his letter to the Landgrave m.

THE Eletor, upon the first intelligence of Te etnfc.

Maurice's motions, propored to return home with lmake ocr-
his troops for the defence of Saxony. But the Como<-

don to the

deputies of the league, assembled at Ulm, pr- Emperor1
vailed on him, at that time, to remain with the
army, and to prefer the success of the common
cause before the security of his own dominions.
At length the sufferings and complaints of his
subje&s increased it much, that he discovered the
utmost impatience to set out, in order to rescue
them from the oppreflion of Maurice, and from
the cruelty of the Hungarians, who, having been
accustomed to that licentious and merciless species
of war which was thought lawful against the
Turks, committed, wherever they came, the wild-

m Scid. 409, 41o.

Aa 4 eft

B l0 K etc as of rapine and violence. This desire of
*-v- the Ele&or was so natural and so warmly urged,

3546. that the deputies at Ulm, though fully sensible

of the unhappy consequences of dividing their
army, durst not reftfe their content, how unwil-
ling soever to grant it. In this perplexity, they
repaired to the camp of the confederates at Gien-
gen on the Brenz, in order to consult their con-
ftituents. Nor were they lets at a loss what to
determine in this prefling emergence. But, after
having confidered seriously the open desertion of
some of their allies; the scandalous lukewarm-
ness of others, who had hitherto contributed
nothing towards the war; the intolerable load
which had fallen of consequence upon such
members as were most zealous for the cause, or
most faithful to their engagements; the ill fuc-
cess of all their endeavours to obtain foreign aid;
the unusual length of the campaign; the rigour
of the eafon; together with the great number
of soldiers, and even officers, who had quitted
the service on that account; they concluded that
nothing could save them, but either the bringing
the contest to the immediate decision of a battle
by attacking the Imperial army, or an accommo-
dation of all their differences with Charles by a
treaty. Such was the despondency and dejetion
which now oppressed the party, that of there two
they chore what was most feeble and unmanly,
empowering a minister of the Elecor of Bran-
denburg to propound overtures of peace in their
name to the Emperor.

No

No sooner did Charles perceive this haughty B l c

confederacy, which had fb lately threatened to -v-.*
drive him out of Germany, condescending to whichhe
make the first advances towards an agreement, rejc.
than concluding their spirit to be gone, or their
union to be broken, he immediately assumed the
tone of a conqueror; and, as if they had been
already at his mercy, would not hear of a nego-
ciation, but upon condition of the Eletor of
Saxony's consenting previously to give up himself
and his dominions absolutely to hisdifpofal ". As
nothing more intolerable or ignominious could
have been prescribed, even in the worst situation
of their affairs, it is no wonder that this pro-
porition was rejected by a party, humbled and
disconcerted rather than subdued. But though
they refused to submit tamely to the Emperor's
will, they wanted spirit to pursue the only plan
which could have preserved their independence;
and forgetting that it was the union of their troops
in one body which had hitherto rendered the con-
federacy formidable, and had more than once
obliged the Imperialists to think of quitting
the field, they inconsiderately abandoned this
advantage, which, in spite of the diversion in
Saxony, would still have kept the Emperor in lthl ton"
awe; and yielding to the EleEtor's entreaties, e"t'ray ;-
consented to his proposal of dividing the army.
Nine thousand men were left it the dutchy of
WVutemberg, in order to protet that province,

IIortcnfius, ap. Scard. ii. 485.

U

°
0 K as well as the free cities of Upper Germany; a
- - considerable body marched with the Elector to-

' wards Saxony; but the greater part returned with

their refpc&ive leaders into their own countries,
and were dispersed there°,

A!m ,all THE moment that the troops separated, the
t},c rr. '.
h. r.; confederacy ceased to be the objet of terror; and
th. ,,,iP. the members of it, who, while they composed

part of a great body, had felt but little anxiety
about their own security, began to tremble when
they reflected that they now stood exposed singly
to the whole weight of the Emperor's vengeance.
Charles did not allow them leisure to recover from
their conlcrnation, or to form any new schemes
of union. As lbon as the confederates began to
retire, he put his army in motion, and though it
was now the depth of winter, he resolved to keep
the field, in order to make the most of that fa-
vourable junc'ure for which he had waited so long.
Some nall towns, in which the enemy had left
garrilons, immediately opened their gates. Nor-
lingen, Rotrnberg, and Hall, Imperial cities,
iitbmirced soon after. Though Charles could not
prevent the Ele&or from levying, as he retreated,
large contributions upon the archbishop of Mentz,
the abbot of Fulda, and other ecclefiafticks', this
was more than balanced by the fubmiflion of
Ulm, one of the chief cities of Suabia, highly
diftinguiflied by its zeal for the Smalkaldick

Sleid . P Thuan. 88.

league.

league. As oon as an example was set of desert- B 0 , K
ing the common cause, the reft of the members -.
became instantly impatient to follow it, and seem- '"
ed afraid left others, by getting the start of them
in returning to their duty, hould, on that ac-
count, obtain more favourable terms. The Elec-
tor Palatine, a weak Prince, who, notwithiland-
ing his profeflions of neutrality, had, very pre-
pofteroufly, ent to the confederates four hundred
horse, a body o inconsiderable as to be scarcely
any addition to their strength, but great enough
to render him guilty in the eyes of the Emperor,
made his acknowledgments in the molt abject
manner. The inhabitants of Augsburg, haken
by so many instances of apoftacy, expelled the
brave Schertel out of their city, and accepted
such conditions as the Emperor was pleased to
grant them.

THE Duke of Wurtemberg, though among the

first who had offered to submit, was obliged to
sue for pardon on his knees; and even after this
mortifying humiliation, obtained it with difficul-
ty. Memmingen, and other free cities in the ,;4.
circle of Suabia, being now abandoned by all
their former aflociates, found it necessary to pro-
vide for their own safety, by throwing themlelves
on the Emperor's mercy. Strafburg and Frank-
fort on the Maine, cities far remote from the feat
of danger, discovered no greater fteadinds than

q Mem. de Ribler, tom. i. 589.

thul'e

B K those which lay more exposid. Thus a confede.
--^-. racy, lately so powerful as to shake the Imperial
1547' throne, fell to pieces, and was dissolved in the

space of a few weeks; hardly any member of that
formidable combination now remaining in arms,
but the Eletor and Landgrave, whom the Em-
peror, having from the beginning marked out as
the vi&cims of his vengeance, was at no pains to

The rigor- reconcile. Nor did he grant those who submitted
Ms condi-
ioos Cmt- to him a generous and unconditional pardon.
po'd bythe Conscious of his own superiority, he treated them
Emperor.

both with haughtiness and rigour. All the Princes
in person, and the cities by their deputies, were
compelled to implore mercy in the humble pof-
ture of supplicants. As the Emperor laboured
under great difficulties from the want of money,
he imposed heavy fines upon them, which he
levied with molt rapacious exatnefs. The Duke
of Wurtemberg paid three hundred thousand
crowns; the city of Augsburg an hundred and
fifty thousand; Ulm an hundred thousand Frank-
fort eighty thousand; Memmingen fifty thousand;
and the reft in proportion to their abilities, or
their different degrees of guilt. They were
obliged, betides, to renounce the league of Smal-
kalde; to furnish afiftance, if required, towards
executing the Imperial ban against the Eletor
and Landgrave; to give up their artillery and
warlike fores to the Emperor; to admit garri-
sons into their principal cities and places of
strength; and, in this disarmed and dependent
situation, to expect the final award which the Em-

peror

peror lhould think proper to pronounce when the B 0o K
war came to an iiue . But, amidst the great ^.-
variety of articles ditated by Charles on this '547.
occasion, he, in conformity to his original plan,
took care that nothing relating to religion should
be inserted; and to such a degree were the con-
federates humbled or over-awed, that, forgetting
the zeal which had so long animated them, they
were solicitous only about their safety, without
venturing to insist on a point, the mention of
which they saw him avoiding with so much in-
duftry. The inhabitants of Memmingen alone
made ome feeble efforts to procure a promise of
protection in the exercise of their religion, but
were checked so severely by the Emperor's mini-
fters, that they instantly fell from their demand.

THE Eleor of Cologne, whom, notwithfLand-

ing the sentence of excommunication issued
against him by the Pope, Charles had hitherto
allowed to remain in possession of the archiepif-
copal fee, being now required by the Emperor to
submit to the censures of the church, this virtu-
ous and difinterefced prelate, unwilling to expose
his fubjeas to the miseries of a war on his own
account, voluntarily resigned that high dignity. Ian. s
With a moderation becoming his age and cha-
racter, he choie to enjoy truth together with the
exercise of his religion in the retirement of a pri-
vate life, rather than to disturb society by engag-

r Sleid. 411, &c. Thuan. lib. iv. p. z15. Mem. de Ri.
bier, tom. i. 606,

ing

BO 0 K ing in a doubtful and violent struggle in order to

, ) «retain his office .
,S47-

The Elcor MEANWHILE the Eleftor of Saxony reached the
S,"n, ton frontiers of his country unmolested. As Maurice
recover.por- could aflimble no force equal to the army which

accompanied him, he, in a hort time, not only
recovered poffeflion of his own territories, but
over-ran Mifnia, and stripped his rival of all that
belonged to him, except Dresden and Leipfic,
which, being towns of ome strength, could not
be suddenly reduced. Maurice, obliged to quit
the field, and to shut himself up in his capital,
dispatched courier after courier to the Emperor,
representing his dangerous situation, and soliciting
him with the most earned importunity to march
immediately to his relief. But Charles, busy at
that time in prescribing terms to such members
of the league as were daily returning to their al-
legiance, thought it sufficient to detach Albert
Marquis of Brandenburg-Anfpach with three
thourand men to his assistance. Albert, though
an enterprising and ative officer, was unexpect-
edly furprized by the Elector, who killed many
of his troops, dispersed the remainder, and took
him prisoner'. Maurice continued as much ex-
posed as formerly; and if his enemy had known
how to improve the opportunity which presented
itself, his ruin must have been immediate and un-
avoidable. But the Elector, no less flow and di-

' Slcid. 418. Thuan. lib. iv. 128.
' Avila, 99. 6. Mcm. de Ribicr, torn. i. 62o.

x latory

latory when invested with the sole command, than B °O °
he had been formerly when joined in authority -
with a partner, never gave any proof of military ,5+'
acivity but in this enterprize against Albert. In-
flead of marching diretly towards Maurice, whom
the defeat of his ally had greatly alarmed, he in-
considerately listened to overtures of accommoda-
tion, which his artful antagonist proposed with
no other intention than to amuei him, and to
flacken the vigour of his operations.

SUCH, indeed, was the porture of the Eme- ThC F--.

ror's affairs that he could not march inftanylv to d *,,. ^.
the relief of his ally. Soon after the separation E ^ :
of the confederate army, he, in order to ease him- L: v1- ""
self of the burden of maintaining a superfluous
number of troops, had dismissed the count of
Buren with his Flemings", imagining that the
Spaniards and Germans, together with the papal
forces, would be fully sufficient to crufl any de-
gree of vigour that yet remained among the
members of the league. But Paul, growing wife
too late, began now to discern the imprudence of
that measure, sorn which the more sagacious Ve-
netians had endeavoured in vain to difTuade him.
The rapid progress of the Imperial arms, and the
ease with which they had broken a combination
that appeared no less firm than powerful, opened
his eyes at length, and made him not only forget
at once all the advantages which he had expected

u Avila, 83. 6. Mern. de Ribier, tonm. i. 592.

from

B 0 0 K from uch a complete triumph over heresy, but
'-._-' placed, in the strongest light, his own impolitick

'47' condut, in having contributed towards acquiring

for Charles such an immense increase of pwer,
as would enable him, after opprefling the liber-
ties of Germany, to give law with absolute autho-
rity to all the states of Italy. The moment that
he perceived his error, he endeavoured to corre-

5°cP1S it. Without giving the Emperor any warning of
arooxp. his intention, he ordered Farnese, his grandson,

to return instantly to Italy with all the troops un-
der his command, and at the fame time recalled
the licence which he had granted Charles, of ap-
propriating, to his own use, a large hare of the
church lands in Spain. He was not destitute of
pretences to justify this abrupt desertion of his
ally. The term of fix months, during which the
flipulations in their treaty were to continue in
force, was now expired; the league, in oppofi-
tion to which their alliance had been framed,
seemed to be entirely diflipated; Charles, in all
his negociations with the Princes and cities which
had submitted to his will, had neither consulted
the Pope, nor had allotted him any part of the
conquefs which he had made, nor had communi-
cated to him any (hare in the vast contributions
which he had raised. He had not even made any
provision for the suppression of heresy, or the re-
establishment of the catholick religion, wlicl
were Paul's chief inducements to belfow the trea-
fures of the church so liberally in carrying on the
war, These colours, however specious, did not

conceal

conceal from the Emperor that secret jealousy B o nK
which was the true motive of the Pope's condu&. ---
But, as Paul's orders with regard to the march s7
of his troops were n less peremptory than unex-
pected, it was inpolible to prevent their retreat.
Charles exclaimed loudly against his treachery,
in abandoning him so unseasonably, while he
was prosecuting a war undertaken in obedience
to the papal injunctions, and from which, if
successful, so much honour and advantage would
redound to the church. To complaints he added
threats and expostulations. But Paul remained
inflexible; his troops continued their march to-
wards the ecclesiastical state; and in an elaborate
memorial, intended as an apology for his behavi-
our, he discovered new and more manifest fymp-
toms of alienation from the Emperor, together
with a deep-rooted dread of his power'. Charles,
weakened by the withdrawing of so great a body
from his army, which was already much dimi-
nilhed by the number of garrisons that he had
been obliged to throw into the towns which had
capitulated, found it necefary to recruit his forces
by new levies, before he could venture to march
in person towards Saxony.

THE fame and plendour of his success could A confnr;.

not have failed of attrating such multitudes of turyinheio
soldiers into his service from all the extensive ter- Gcnoa.
ricories now subjet to his authority, as must have
soon put him in a condition of taking the field

x F. Paul, 208. Pallavic. par. ii. p. , Thuan. 126.
VOL. III. B b against

B °1° K against the Ele&or; but the sudden and violent

1y -> eruption of a conspiracy at Genoa, as well as the
'547 great revolutions which that event, extremely

mysterious in its first appearances, seemed to por-
tend, obliged him to avoid entangling himself in
new operations in Germany, until he had fully
discovered its source and tendency. The form of
government which had been established in Genoa,
at the time when Andrew Doria restored liberty
to his country, though calculated to obliterate
the memory of former diflentions, and received
at first with eager approbation, did not, after a
trial of near twenty years, give universal fatisfac-
tion to those turbulent and factious republicans.
As the entire administration of affairs was now
lodged in a certain number of noble families,
many envying them that pre-eminence, wished

Theobjea for the restitution of a popular government, to
.fthe con- which they had been accutomed; and though all

reverenced the disinterested virtue of Doria, and
admired his talents, not a few were jealous of
that ascendant which he had acquired in the coun-
cils of the commonwealth. His age, however,
his moderation, and love of liberty, afforded
ample security to his countrymen that he would
not abuse his power, nor stain the close of his
days by attempting to overturn that fabrick,
which it had been the labour and pride of his life
to ere&. But the authority and influence which
in his hands were innocent, they easily law would
prove deftru&ive, if usurped by any citizen of
greater ambition, or less virtue. A citizen of

this

this dangerous charater had atually formed such B o
pretensions, and with some prospect of success. -
Giannetino Doria, whom his grand uncle Andrew 547
destined to be the heir of his private fortune,
aimed likewise at being his successor in power.
His temper haughty, insolent, and overbearing
to such a degree as would hardly have been tole-
rated in one born to reign, was altogether infup-
portable in the citizen of a free Rfate. The more
sagacious among the Genoese already feared and
hated him as the enemy of those liberties for which
they were indebted to his uncle. While Andrew
himself, blinded by that violent and undifcerning
affetion which persons in advanced age often
contra& for the younger members of their family,
set no bounds to the indulgence with which he
treated him; eeming less solicitous to secure and
perpetuate the freedom of the commonwealth,
than to aggrandize that undeferving kinsman.

BUT whatever suspicion of Doria's designs, or

whatever diffatisfa&ion with the system of admit
nifration in the commonwealth, these circum-
fances might have occasioned, they would have
ended, it is probable, in nothing more than mur-
murings and complaints, if John Lewis Fiefco
count of Lavagna, observing this growing dif-
gust, had not been encouraged by it to attempt
one of the boldest ations recorded in history.
That young nobleman, the richest and most il- ofic:ifl-
lufrious fubje& in the republick, poeflled, in an ,,^ ......
eminent degree, all the qualities which win upon ,.;.

B b 2 the

B 0 , K the human heart, which command refpet, or

v-. secure attachment. He was graceful and ma-
tw5' jeftick in his person; magnificent to profusion;

of a generosity that prevented the withes of his
friends, and exceeded the expectations of strangers;
of an insinuating address, gentle manners, and a
flowing affability. But under the appearance of
there virtues, which seemed to form him for en-
joying and adorning civil life, he concealed all
the dispositions which mark men out for taking
the lead in the most dangerous and dark confpi-
racies; an insatiable and reltlefs ambition, a cou-
rage unacquainted with fear, and a mind that
disdained subordination. Such a temper could
ill brook that station of inferiority, wherein he
was placed in the republick; and as he envied
the power which the elder Doria had acquired,
he was filled with indignation at the thoughts of
its descending, like an hereditary possession, to
Giannetino. Thefe'various paflions, preying with
violence on his turbulent and aspiring mind, de-
termined him to attempt overturning that domi-
nation to which he could not submit.

iotu;ues AT first he thought of an alliance with Francis,
tionr o tha and even proposed it to the French ambassador

rpiato,. at Rome, as the most effectual means of accom-

plifhing this; and after expelling Doria, together
with the Imperial faction, by his aliftance, he
resolved to put the republick once more under
the protection of that Monarch, hoping in return
for that service to be entrefted with the principal

lhare

hare in the administration of government. But B °,° K
having communicated his scheme to a few chosen -
confidents, from whom he kept nothing secret, '
Verrina, the chief of them, a man of delperate
fortune, capable alike of advising and executing
the molt audacious deeds, remonstrated with ear-
neftnefs against the folly of exposing himself to
the molt imminent danger, while he allowed an-
other to reap all the fruits of his success and ex-
horted him warmly to aim himself at that pre-
eminence in his country, to which he was deltined
by his illustrious birth; was called by the voice
of his fellow-citizens, and would be raised by the
zeal of his friends. This discourse opened such
vast profpets to Fiefco, and so suitable to his
genius, that abandoning his own plan, he eagerly
adopted that of Verrina. The other persons pre-
sent, though sensible of the hazardous nature of
the undertaking, did not choose to condemn what
their patron had o warmly approved. It was
instantly resolved, in this dark cabal, to affaflinate
the two Dorias, as well as the principal persons
of their party, to overturn the established system
of government, and to place Fiefco on the ducal
throne of Genoa. Time, however, and prepara.
tions were requisite to ripen such a design for exe-
cution; and while he was employed in carrying
on there, Fiefco made it his chief care to guard
againt every thing that might betray his secret,
or create suspicion. The disguise he assumed,
was of all othiers the most impenetrable. He
seemed to be abandoned entirely to plcafure and

B b 3 difflpation.

B 0 o K diflipation. A perpetual gaiety, diversified by
v_ the pursuit of all the amusements becoming his

age and rank, engrossed, in appearance, the whole
of his time and thoughts. But amidst this hurry
of diflipation, he prosecuted his plan with the
most cool attention, neither retarding the design
by a timid hesitation, nor precipitating the exe-
cution by an excess of impatience. He continued
his correspondence with the French ambassador
at Rome, though without communicating to
him his real intentions, that by his means
he might secure the protetion of the French
arms, if hereafter he should find it necefiary to
call them to his aid. He entered into a close
confederacy with Farnese Duke of Parma, who
being disgusted with the Emperor for refuting to
grant him the investiture of that dutchy, was
eager to promote any measure that tended to di-
minifh his influence in Italy, or to ruin a family
so implicitly devoted to him as that of Doria.
Being sensible that, in a maritime state, the ac-
quifition of naval power was what he ought chiefly
to aim at, he purchased four galleys from the
Pope, who probably was not unacquainted with
the design which he had formed, and did not dif-
approve of it. Under colour of fitting out one
of there galleys to fail on a cruise against the
Turks, he not only affcmbled a good number of
his own vassals, but engaged in his service many
bold adventurers, whom the truce between the
Emperor and Solyman had deprived of their usual
occupation and subsistence.

WHILE

WHILE Fiefco was taking these important feps, I , o, K

he preserved so admirably his usual appearance '*1 -
of being devoted entirely to plealure and amuse- 's47.
ment, and paid court with such artful address to
the two Dorias, as imposed not only on the gene-
rous and unfufpicious mind of Andrew, but de-
ceived Giannetino, who, conscious of his own
criminal intentions, was more apt to distrust the
designs of others. So many instruments being
now prepared, nothing remained but to itrike
the blow. Various consultations were held by
Fiefco with his confidents, in order to fettle the
manner of doing it with the greatest certainty and
effe&. At first, they proposed to murder the
Dorias and their chief adherents, during the cele-
bration of high mars in the principal church;
but as Andrew was often absent from religious
folemnities, on account of his great age, that de-
sign was laid aside. It was then concerted that
Fiefco hould invite the uncle and nephew, with
all their friends whom they had marked out as
vicims, to his house; where it would be easy to
cut them off at once without danger or resistance;
but as Giannetino was obliged to leave the town
on the day which they had chosen, it became ne-
ceflary likewise to alter this plan. They at ladt
determined to attempt by open force, what they
found difficult to effcet by Stratagem, and fixed
on the night between the second and third of Ja-
nuary, for the execution of their enterprize. The
time was cholen with great propriety for as the
Doge of the former year was to quit his office,

B b 4 according

B 10 0 according to custom, on the first of the month,
-..v-~ and his successor could not be ele&ed sooner than
5+7' the fourth, the republick remained during that

interval in a fort of anarchy, and Fiefco might
with less violence take polIeflion of the vacant
dignity.

The ccnrpi- THE morning of that day, Fiefco employed in
rators m-
tmble to visiting his friends, paflin some hours among
axecute
theirplan. them with a spirit as gay and unembarraffed as

at other times. Towards evening, he paid court
t0 the Dorias with his usual marks of refpet, and
lurveying their countenance and behaviour with
the attention natural in his situation, was happy
to observe the perfeCt security in which they re-
mained, without the least foresight or dread of
that storm which had been so long a-gathering,
and was now ready to burst over their heads.
From their palace he hastened to his own, which
stood by itself in the middle of a large court, fur-
rounded by a high wall. The gates had been set
open in the morning, and all persons, without
diftinaion, were allowed to enter, but strong
guards potled within the court suffered no one to
return. Verrina, meanwhile, and a few persons
trusted with the secret of the conspiracy, after
conducting Fiefco's vassals, as well as the crews
of his galleys into the palace in finall bodies, with
as little noise as poflible, dispersed themselves
through the city, and, in the name of their pa-
tron, invited to an entertainment the principal
citizens whom they knew to be disgusted with the

admini-

administration of the Dorias, and to have inclina- B o0 Ki
tion as well s courage to attempt a change in __
the government. Of the vast number ofperfona 547
who now filled the palace, a few only knew for
what purpose they were assembled; the reft, ao-
nilhed at finding, instead of the preparations for
a feast, a court crowded with armed men, and
apartments filled with the initruments of war,
gazed on each other with a mixture of curiosity,
impatience, and terror.

WHILE their minds were in this slate of fur- Fiefcr' e-

hortations

penfe and agitation, Fiefco appeared. With a to th.
look full of alacrity and confidence, he addrelfed
himself to the persons of chief diftin&ion, telling
them, that they were not now called to partake of
the pleasure of an entertainment, but to join in a
deed of valour, which would lead them to liberty
and immortal renown. He set before their eyes
the exorbitant as well as intolerable authority of
the elder Doria, which the ambition of Gianne-
tino, and the partiality of the Emperor to a
family more devoted to him than to their coun-
try, was about to enlarge and to render perpe-
tual. This unrighteous domination, continued
he, you have it now in your power to subvert,
and to etablifh the freedom of your country on a
firm basis. The tyrants muf be cut off. I have
taken the molt effecual measures for this pur-
pose. My associates are numerous. I can de-
pend on allies and protectors if necessary. Hap-
pily the tyrants are as secure as have been pro-

vident.

B o0 K vident. Their insolent contempt of their coun-
X- . trymen has banilhed the suspicion and timidity

547.' which usually render the guilty quick-fighted to

discern, as well as sagacious to guard against the
vengeance which they deserve. They will now
feel the blow, before they fufpe& any hostile
hand to be nigh. Let us then rally forth, that
we may deliver our country by one generous
effort, almost unaccompanied with danger, and
certain of success. These words, uttered with
that irresistible fervour which animates the mind
when routed by great obje&ts, made the defred
impreiflon on the audience. Fiefco's vassals,
ready to execute whatever their master hould
command, received his discourse with a murmur
of applause. To many whose fortunes were def-
perate, the licence and confusion of an infurrec-
tion afforded an agreeable profpet&. Those of
higher rank and more virtuous.fentiments, durst
not discover the surprise or horror with which
they were struck at the proposal of an enterprize
no less unexpected than atrocious; as each of
them imagined the other to be in the secret of the
conspiracy, and saw himself surrounded by per-
sons who waited only a signal from their leader to
perpetrate the greatest crime. With one voice
then all applauded, or feigned to applaud, the un-
dertaking.
I, ;,,,r. FIEsco having thus fixed and encouraged his

hi wh aflociates, before he gave them his last orders, he

hastened for a moment to the apartment of his

wife,

wife, a lady of the noble house of Cibo, whom B °o K
he loved with tender affetion, and whose beauty v
and virtue rendered her worthy of his love. The 547.
noise of the armed men who crowded the court
and palace, having long before this reached her
ears, she concluded ome hazardous enterprize to
be in hand, and lhe trembled for her husband.
He found her in all the anguilh of uncertainty
and fear; and as it was now impoflible to keep
his design concealed, he informed her of what he
had undertaken. The prospect of a scene so full
of horror as well as danger, completed her
agony; and foreboding immediately in her mind
the fatal issue of it, she endeavoured, by her
tears, her entreaties, and her despair, to divert
him from his purpose. Fiefco, after trying in
vain to tooth and to inspire her with hope, broke
from a situation into which an excess of tender-
ness had unwarily seduced him, though it could
not shake his resolution. " Farewel, he cried,
as he quitted the apartment, you flall either never
fee me more, or you shall behold to-morrow every
thing in Genoa fubje& to your power."

As oon as he rejoined his companions, he Th.t.irk

allotted each his proper ation; ome were ap- tty
pointed to assault and seize the different gates of
the city; some to make themselves masters of the
principal streets or places of strength: Fiefco
reserved for himself the attack of the harbour
where Doria's gallies were laid up, as the polf of
chief importance, and of greatest danger. It

°o0 K was now midnight, and the citizens slept in the
-._--- security of peace, when this band of conspirators,
'547' numerous, desperate, and well-armed, rulhed out

to execute their plan. They surprised ome of
the gates, without meeting with any refifance.
They got poffeflion of others after a sharp con-
flit with the soldiers on guard. Verrina, with
the galley which had been fitted out against the
Turks, blocked up the mouth of the Darfena or
little harbour where Doria's fleet lay. All poffi-
bility of escape being cut off by this precaution,
when Fiefco attempted to enter the galleys from
the shore to which they were made fast, they were
in no condition to make refitance, as they were
not only unrigged and disarmed, but had no crew
on board, except the slaves chained to the oar.
Every quarter of the city was now filled with noise
and tumult, all the streets resounding with the
cry of Fiefco and Liberty. At that name, so po-
pular and beloved, many of the lower rank took
arms, and joined the conspirators. The nobles
and partisans of the aristocracy, astonished or
affrighted, hut the gates of their houses, and
thought of nothing but of licuring them from pil-
lage. At last the noise excited by this scene of
violence and confusion, reached the palace of
Doria; Giannetino started immediately from his
bed, and imagining that it was occasioned by
some mutiny among the ailors, ruhed out with
a few attendants, and hurried towards the har-
bour. The gate of Sr. Thomas, through which
he had to pass, was already in the poffelion of the

confpi-

conrpirators, who, the moment he entered, fell B °°
upon him with the utmost fury, and murdered --J
him on the spot. The fame must have been the 5'*
fall of the elder Doria, if Jerome de Fiefco
had executed his brother's plan, and had pro-
ceeded immediately to attack him in his palace;
but he, from the fordid consideration of prevent-
ing its being plundered amidst the confusion,
having forbid his followers to advance, Andrew
got intelligence of his nephew's death, as well as
of his own danger; and mounting on horseback,
saved himself by flight. Amidst this general
consternation, a few senators had the courage to
aflemble in the palace of the republick . At
first, ome of the most daring among them at-
tempted to rally the scattered soldiers, and to
attack a body of the conspirators; but being re-
pulsed with loss, all agreed that nothing now
remained, but to treat with the party which eemed
to be irrefitible. Deputies were accordingly
sent to learn of Fiefco what were the concef-
sions with which he would be satisfied, or rather
to submit to whatever terms he hould please to
prescribe.

BUT by this time Fiefco, with whom they were cause of

empowered to negociate, was no more. Just as hnsi^s
he was about to leave the harbour, where every
thing had succeeded to his wil, that he might
join his victorious companions, he heard some

II palzza delaI Sitioria,

extraordinary

3 0

v extraordinary uproar on board the Admiral gal-
*_*L * ley. Alarmed at the noise, and fearing that the

7 slaves might break their chains, and overpower

his aociates, he ran thither; but the plank
which reached from the flore to the vcffel hap-
pening to overturn, he fell into the ea, whilst he
hurried forward too precipitately. Being loaded
with heavy armour, he funk to the bottom, and
perilhed in the very moment when he must have
taken full pofeflion of every thing that his ambi-
tious heart could desire. Verrina was the first
who discovered this fatal accident, and foreseeing,
at once, all its consequences, concealed it with the
utmost industry from every one but a few leaders
of the conspiracy. Nor was it difficult, amidst the
darkness and confusion of the night, to have kept
it secret, until a treaty with the senators hould
have put the city in the power of the conspirators.
All their hopes of this were disconcerted by the
imprudence of Jerome Fiefco, who, when the
deputies of the senate inquired for his brother,
the count of Lavagna, that they might make
their proposals to him, replied with a childilh va-
nity, " 1 am now the only person to whom that
title belongs, and with me you must treat." These
words discovered as well to his friends as to his
enemies what had happened, and made the im-
prefion which might have been expe&ed upon
both. The deputies, encouraged by this event,
the only one which could occasion such a sudden
revolution as might turn to their advantage,

8 assumed

aflumed instantly, with admirable pretence of 00 .
mind, a new tone, suitable to the change in their I-_
circumstances, and made high demands. While ,s7.
they endeavoured to gain time by protra&ing the
negociation, the reft of the senators were busy in
assembling their partisans, and in forming a body
capable of defending the palace of the republick.
On the other hand, the conspirators, astonished
at the death of a man whom they adored and
trusted, and placing no confidence in Jerome, a
giddy youth, felt their courage die away, and
their arms fall from their hands. That profound
and amazing secrecy with which the conspiracy
had been concerted, and which had contributed
hitherto so much to its success, proved now the
chief cause of its miscarriage. The leader was
gone; the greater part of those who aced under
him, knew not his confidents, and were itrangers
to the objet at which he aimed. There was no
person among them whose authority or abilities
entitled him to assume Fiefco's place, or to finish
his plan; after having loft the spirit which ani-
mated it, life and ativity deferred the whole
body. Many of the conspirators withdrew to
their houses, hoping that amidst the darkness of
the night they had passed unobserved, and might
remain unknown. Others fought for safety by a
timely retreat; and before break of day, most of
them fled with precipitation from a city, which,
but a few hours before, was ready to acknowledge
them as maftcrs.

NiXT

B 0 0 K NEXT morning every thing was quiet in Genoa;

VnL
-v zi~ not an enemy was to be seen; few marks of the

Tts47.ity violence of the former night appeared, the con-
^e^-ebliih- fpirators having conduced their enterprize with

more noise than bloodshed, and gained all their
advantages by surprise, rather than by force of
arms. Towards evening, Andrew Doria returned
to the city, being met by all the inhabitants, who
received him with acclamations of joy. Though
the disgrace as well as danger of the preceding
night were frelh in his mind, and the mangled
body of his kinfinan still before his eyes, such
was his moderation as well as magnanimity, that
the decree issued by the senate againf the confpi-
rators, did not exceed thatjuR measure of feve-
rity which was requisite for the support of govern-
ment, and was ditated neither by the violence of
resentment, nor the rancour of revenge .

The Empe AFTER taking the necessary precautions for
atth con. preventing the flame, which was now o happily
rpinq.

2 Thuan. 93. Sigonii vita Andrea Doriae, x196. La

Conjuration du Compte de Fiefque, par Cardin. de Retz.
Adriani Ioria, lib. vi. 369. Folieta Conjuatio Jo. Lud.
Fiefci ap. Graev. Thef. Ital, i. 883.

* It is remarkable, that Cardinal de Retz, at the age of

eighteen, composed a history of this conspiracy, containing
such a discovery of his admiration of Fiefco and his enter-
prize, that it is not surprising that a minilter, o jealous and
discerning as Richlieu, Ihould be led, by the perufalof it, to
predict the turbulent and dangerous spirit of that young Ec-
clefiaftic. Mem. de Retz, tomr. i.p. 3.

6 extinguilhcd,

extinguilhed, from breaking out anew, the first B o K
care of the senate was to fend an ambassador to - --.
the Emperor, to give him a particular detail of 's47'
what had happened, and to beg his affifance to-
wards the redution of Montobbio, a firong fort
on the hereditary estate of the Fiefci, in which
Jerome had shut himself up. Charles was no less
alarmed than aftonifled at an event so strange
and unexpected. He could not believe that
Fiefco, how bold or adventurous soever, durit
have attempted such an enterprize, but on foreign
suggestion, and from the hope of foreign aid.
Being informed that the Duke of Parma was well
acquainted with the plan of the conspirators, he
immediately supposed that the Pope could not
be ignorant of a measure, which his son had
countenanced. Proceeding from this to a far-
ther conjecture, which Paul's cautious maxims
of policy in other instances rendered extremely
probable, he concluded, that the French King
must have known and approved of the design;
and he began to apprehend that this spark
might again kindle the flame of war which
had raged so long in Italy. As he had drained Suspends his

. .oprtions

his Italian territories of troops on account of the iGcrny.
German war, he was altogether unprovided for
resisting any hostile attack in that country; and
on the first appearance of danger, he mull have
detached thither the greatest part of his frces
for its defence. In this situation of affairs, it
would have been altogether imprudent in the

YOL. IlI. C c Emperor

3 0 K Emperor to have advanced in person against the
v_, - Ele&or, until he hould learn with some degree

57~' of certainty whether such a scene were not about

to open in Italy, as might put it out of his power
to keep the field with an army sufficient to op-
Vofe him.

THE

# BOOK IX.

THE
H I S TORY

OF THE
R E IGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IX.
T H E Emperor's dread of the hostile inten- B o K

tions of the Pope and French King did not lx_^

proceed from any imaginary or ill-grounded sus- 5j.4
picion. Paul had already given the strongest louof the

mperor's

proofs both of his jealousy and enmity. Charles pwer and
could not hope, that Francis, after a rivalfhip
of so long continuance, would behold the great
advantages which he had gained over the confe-
derate Protestants, without feeling his ancient
emulation revive. He was not deceived in this
conjecture. Francis had observed the rapid pro-
grefs of his arms with deep concern, and though
hitherto prevented, by circumstances which have
been mentioned, from interposing in order to
check them, he was now convinced that, if he

Cc 2 did

B °Ix K did not make ome extraordinary and timely
A-_- effort, Charles must acquire such a degree of
1547. power as would enable him to give law to the reft

of Europe. This apprehension, which did not
take its rife from the envy of rivalihip alone, but
was entertained by the wisest politicians of the
age, suggested various expedients which might
serve to retard the course of the Emperor's vic-
tories, and to form by degrees such a combina-
tion againf him as might put a stop to his dan-
gerous career.

Neociates WITH this view, Francis inftruced his emif-
with the
Protestants; saries in Germany to employ all their address in

order to revive the courage of the confederates,
and to prevent them from submitting to the Em-
peror. He made liberal offers of his assistance to
the Eletor and Landgrave, whom he knew to be
the most zealous as well as the most powerful of
the whole body; he used every argument, and
proposed every advantage which could either con-
firm their dread of the Emperor's designs, or de-
termine them not to imitate the inconsiderate
credulity of their associates, in giving up their
religion and liberties to his disposal. While he
took this ftep towards continuing the civil war
which raged in Germany, he endeavoured like-
wife to stir up foreign enemies against the Em-

wvih Soly. peror. He solicited Solyman to seize this fa-
nmani vourable opportunity of invading Hungary,

which had been drained of all the troops necef-
fary for its defence, in order to form the army

againlt

againf the confederates of Smalkalde. He ex- B 00 K
horted the Pope to repair, by a vigorous and sea- --
fonable effort, the error of which he had been '547
guilty in contributing to raile the Empcror to
such a formidable height of power. Findig wth ti
Paul, both from the confciouihefs of his own V'"ati'a
mistake, and his dread of its consequences, abun-
dantly disposed to lifRen to his exhortations, he
availed himself of this favourable difpoficion
which the Pontiff began to discover, as an argu-
ment to gain the Venetians. He endeavoured to
convince them that nothing could save Italy, and
even Europe, from oppreflion and servitude, but
their joining with the Pope and him, in giving
the first beginning to a general confederacy, in
order to humble that ambitious potentate, whom
they had all equal reason to dread.

HAVING set on foot there negociations in the withthe

King of

southern courts, he turned his attention next to- PInmari
wards those in the north of Europe. As the King laad. 1
of Denmark had particular reasons to be offended
with the Emperor, Francis imagined that he
would not be backward to approve of the league
which he had projeced; and left considerations
of caution or prudence hould restrain him from
joining in it, he attempted to overcome thei, by
offering him the young Queen of Scots in mar-
riage to his son . As the ministers who governed
England in the name of Edward VI. had openly

* Mem. de Ribier, i. 600oo 66.

C 3 declared

B 0 0 K declared tnemfelves converts to the opinions of
a_- the Reformers, as oon as it became safe upon
'47s' Henry's death to lay aide that difgui'e which his

unforgiving bigotry had forced them to aflume,
Francis flattered himself that their zeal would not
allow them to remain inative fpe&tators of the
overthrow and dftru&ion of those who profefed
the fame faith with themselves. He hoped, that
notwithstanding the struggles f facion inci-
dent to a minority, and the profpe&2 of an ap-
proaching rupture with the Scots, he might pre-
vail on them likewise to take part in the common
cause b.

WHILE Francis employed such variety of ex-

pedients, and exerted himself with such extraor-
dinary ativity, to route the different Rates of
Europe against his rival, he did not neglect
what depended on himself alone. He levied
troops in all parts of his dominions; he colleted
military ores; he contracted with the Swiss
cantons for a considerable body of men; he put
his finances in admirable order; he remitted con-
fiderable fums to the Eletor and Landgrave; and
took all the other feps necessary towards com-
mencing hostilities, on the shortest warning, and
with the greatet vigour c.

rb« Emr OPERATIONS so complicated, and which re-
, or:ry quired the putting so many infruments in me-

b Mcm, de Ribier, i. 63S. c Ibid. 595.

tionD

fidn, did not escape the Emperor's observation. B sO K
He was oon informed of Francis's intrigues in i-_
the several courts of Europe) as well as of hisi 57
domeftick preparations; and sensible how fatal
an interruption a foreign war would prove to his
designs in Germany, he trembled at the profpe&
of that event. The danger, however, appeared
to him as unavoidable as it was great. He knew
the insatiable and well-dire&ted ambition of Soly-
man, and that he always chose the season for be-
ginning his military enterprises with prudence
equal to the valour with which he conduted
them. The Pope, as he had good reason to be-
lieve, wanted not pretexts to justify a rupture,
nor inclination to begin hostilities He had al-
ready made ome discovery of his sentiments, by
exprefling a joy altogether unbecoming the head
of the church3 upon receiving an account of the
advantage which the Elector of Saxony had gained
over Albert of Brahdenburg; and as he was now
secure of finding in the French King, an ally of
sufficient power to support him, he was at no
pains to conceal the violence and extent of his
enmityd. The Venetians, Charles was well as-
fured, had long observed the growth of his power
with jealousy, which, added to the solicitations
and promises of Frances might at last quicken
their sow counsels, and overcome their natural
caution. The Danes and Englilh, it was evident,
had both peculiar reason to be di3guftcd, as well

Me. de Ribier, tom. i. 637.

Cc 4 as

B OxO K as fronr motives to ac against him. But above

Ix.
i- --, all, he dreaded the active emulation of Francis

'547 himfdf, whom he confidered as the foul and mover

of any confederacy that could be formed against
him; and, as that Monarch had afforded pro-
tetion to Verina, who failed directly to Mar-
feilles upon the miscarriage of Fiefco's confpi-
racy, Charles expe&ed every moment the com-
mencement of those hostile operations in Italy, of
which he conceived the infurretion in Genoa to
have been only the prelude.

Entertains BUT while he remained in this slate of fufpence
hope from
the decin- and solicitude, there was one circumstance which

iFrnis'of afforded him bme prospect of escaping the dan-
hbdlth ger. The French King's health began to decline.

A disease, the effet of his intemperance and in-
considerate pursuit of pleasure, preyed gradually
on his conflitution. The preparations for war,
as well as the negociations in the different courts,
began to languilh, together with the Monarch
March. who gave spirit to both. The Genoese, during

that interval, reduced Montobbio, took Jerome
Fiefco prisoner, and putting him to death, toge-
ther with his chief adherents, extinguished all
remains of the conspiracy. Several of the Im-
perial cities in Germany, derpairing of timely
afllifance from France, submitted to the Empe.
ror. Even the Landgrave seemed disposed to
abandon the Elector, and to bring matters to a
speedy accommodation, on such terms as he could
obtain. In the mean time, Charles waited with

impatience

impatience the ifiue of a distemper, which was B o°x° K
to decide whether he must relinquish all other --
fchemts, in order to prepare for resisting a com- 47
bination of the greater part of Europe against
him, or whether he might proceed to invade
Saxony, without interruption or fear of danger.

THE good fortune, so remarkably propitious

to his family, that ome historians have called it
the Star of the House of Anfiria, did not desert
him on this occasion. Francis died at Ram- Death of
bouillet, on the last day of March in the fifty- fe'ionlsi
third year of his age, and the thirty-third of his °aesr an
reign. During twenty-eight years of that time, rhlldip
an avowed rivalfhip fubfifed between him and Charles.
the Emperor, which involved not only their own
dominions, but the greater part of Europe in
wars, prosecuted with more violent animosity,
and drawn out to a greater length than had been
known in any former period. Many circum-
stances contributed to both. Their animosity
was founded in opposition of interest, height-
ened by personal emulation, and exasperated not
only by mutual injuries, but by reciprocal insults.
At the fame time, whatever advantage one seem-
ed to poflefs towards gaining the ascendant,
was wonderfully balanced by rome favourable
circumstance peculiar to the other. The Em-
peror's dominions were of great extent, the French
King's lay more compa&; Francis governed his
kingdom with absolute power; that of Charles
was limited, but he supplied the want of autho-

rity

b 0o K rity by address: the troops of the former werd
4__mj more impetuous and enterprising thoe of the

'147' latter better disciplined, and more patient of fa-

tigue. The talents and abilities of the two Mo-
narchs were as different as the advantages which
they possessed, and contributed no less to prolong
the contest between them. Francis took his re-
solutions suddenly, prosecuted theni at first with
warmth, and pushed them into execution with a
most adventurous courage; but being destitute
of the perseverance necessary to surmount diffi-
culties, he often abandoned his designs, or re.
laxed the vigour of pursuit, from impatience, and
sometimes from levity. Charles deliberated long
and determined with coolness; but having once
fixed his plan, he adhered to it with inflexible
obstinacy, and neither danger nor discourage-
ment could turn him aside from the execution of
it. The success of their enterprizes was as dif-
ferent as their charaters, and was uniformly in-
fluenced by them. Francis, by his impetuous
activity, often disconcerted the Emperor's befd
laid schemes; Charles, by a more calm but steady
prosecution of his designs, checked the rapidity
of his' rival's career, and baffled or repulsed his
most vigorous efforts. The former, at the open-
ing of a war or of a campaign, broke in upon his
enemy with the violence of a torrent, and carried
all before him; the latter, waiting until he saw
the force of his rival be:gin to abate, recovered in
the end not only all that he had loft, but made
new acquisitions. Few of the French Monarch's

attempts

attempts towards conquest, whatever promising B 0o O
afpe they might wear at first, were condu&ed I--
to an happy iflue; many of the Emperor's enter- 'S
prizes, even after they appeared desperate and
impracticable, terminated in the mod prosperous
manner. Francis was dazzled with the splendour
of an undertaking; Charles was allured by the
profpe& of its turning to his advantage.

THE degree, however, of their comparative

merit and reputation has not been fixed either by
a ftri&i scrutiny into their abilities for government,
or by an impartial consideration of the greatness
and success of their undertakings; and Francis
is one of those Monarchs who occupies a higher
rank in the temple of Fame, than either his ta-
lents or performances entitle him to hold. This
pre-eminence he owed to many different circum-
stances. The superiority which Charles acquired
by the vicory of Pavia, and which from that pe-
riod he preserved through the remainder of his
reign, was so manifest, that Francis's struggle
against his exorbitant and growing dominion was
viewed by mos of the other powers, not only
with the partiality which naturally arises for those
who gallantly maintain an unequal contest, but
with the favour due to one who was refifing a
common enemy, and endeavouring to set bounds
to a Monarch equally formidable to them all.
The characters of Princes, too, especially among
their contemporaries, depend not only upon their
talents for government, but upon their qualities

3 as

B °0 K as men. Francis, notwithstanding the many

Ix.

*vi. errors conspicuous in his foreign policy and do-
'47. meftick administration, was nevertheless humane,

beneficent, generous. He pofeffied dignity with-
out pridej afability free from meanness; and
courtesy exempt from deceit. All who had ac-
cess to him, and no man of merit was ever denied
that privilege, refpe&ed and loved him. Capti-
vated with his personal qualities, his fubjets
forgot his defe&s as a Monarch, and admiring
him as the mos accomplished and amiable gen-
tleman in his dominions, they hardly murmured
at acts of male- administration, which, in a Prince
of less engaging dispositions, would have been
deemed unpardonable. This admiration, how-
ever, must have been temporary only, and would
have died away, with the courtiers who bestowed
it; the illusion arising from his private virtues
must have ceased, and posterity would have
judged of his publick condudt with its usual im-
partiality; but another circumstance prevented
this, and his name hath been traninitted to pofte-
rity with increasing reputation. Science and the
arts had, at that time, made little progress in
France. They were just beginning to advance
beyond the limits of Italy, where they had re-
vived, and which had hitherto been their only
feat. Francis took them immediately under his
protection, and vied with Leo himself, in the
zeal and munificence with which he encouraged
them. He invited learned men to his court, he
conversed with them familiarly, he employed

7 them

them in bufiners, he raised them to offices of B O0 o
dignity, and honoured them with his confidence.
That race of men, not more prone to complain s'.
when denied the refpet to which they fancy
themselves entitled, than apt to be pleated when
treated with the diftinaion which they confider
as their due, thought they couild not exceed in
gratitude to such a benefa&or, and rained their
invention, and employed all their ingenuity in
panegyrick. Succeeding authors, warmed with
their descriptions of Francis's bounty, adopted
their encomiums, and refined upon them. The
appellation of Father of Letters bestowed upon
Francis, hath rendered his memory sacred among
historians; and they seem to have regarded it as
a fort of impiety to uncover his infirmities, or to
point out his defe&s. Thus Francis, notwith-
standing his inferior abilities, and want of fuc-
cess, hath more than equalled the fame of Charles.
The virtues which he pofefled as a man, hath
entitled him to greater admiration and praise,
than have been bestowed upon the extensive ge-
nius and fortunate arts of a more capable, but
less amiable rival.

BY his death a considerable change was made rtea, d

Fraacil'l

in the slate of Europe. Charles, grown old in death.
the arts of government and command, had now
to contend only with younger Monarchs, who
could not be regarded as an equal match for him,
who had flood the encounter with Henry VIII.
and Francis I. and come off with honour in all

thole

i o o K those different conteRfs. By this event, he was

Ix.
-m _- eased of all his disquietude, and was happy to
ts*7. find that he might begin with safety those opera-

tions against the Eletor of Saxony, which he had
hitherto been obliged to fupend. He knew the
abilities of Henry II. who had just mounted the
throne of France, to be greatly inferior to those
of his father, and foresaw that he would be so
much occupied for some time in displacing the
late King's ministers, whom he hated, and in
gratifying the ambitious demands of his own fa-
vourites, that he had nothing to dread, either
from his personal efforts, or from any confederacy
which this unexperienced Prince could form.
Charle BUT as it was uncertain how long such an in-

ainthe terval of security might continue, Charles deter-

Sa.ono. mined instantly to improve it: and as soon as he
Apil 3. heard of Francis's demise, he began his march

from Egra on the borders of Bohemia. But the
departure of the papal troops, together with the
retreat of the Flemings, had so much diminished
his army, that sixteen thousand men were all he
could af'emble. With this inconsiderable body
he set out on an expedition, the event of which
was to decide what degree of authority he ihould
possess from that period in Germany; but as this
little army.confited chiefly of the veteran Spanish
and Italian bands, he did not, in trusting to
them, commit much to the decision of chance;
anod even with so small a force he had reason to
entertain te most fangoine hopes of success,

The

The Ele&or, it is true, had levied an army great- B 0o K
ly superior in number but neither the expe- '--.
rience and discipline of his troops, nor the abili- 7
ties of his officers, were to be compared with
those of the Emperor. The Ele&or, besides,
had already been guilty of an error, which de-
prived him of all the advantage which he might
have derived from his superiority in number, and
was alone sufficient to have occasioned his ruin.
Instead of keeping his forces united, he detached
one great body towards the frontiers of Bohemia,
in order to facilitate his junction with the male-
contents of that kingdom, and cantoned a con-
fiderable part of what remained in different places
of Saxony, where he expected the Emperor would
make the firlt impression, vainly imagining that
these open towns, with small garrisons, might be
rendered tenable against an enemy.

THE Emperor entered the southern frontier of Protef of

Saxony, and attacked Altorf upon the Elter.
The folly of the measure which the Elector had
taken was immediately seen, the troops posted in
that town surrendering without refitance; and
those in all the other places between that and the
Elbe, either imitated their example, or fled as
the Imperialists approached. Charles, that they
might not recover from the panick with which
they seemed to be struck, advanced without losing
a moment. The Elecor, who had fixed his
head-quarters at Meissen, continued in his wonted
tate of luctuation and uncertainty. He even

became

B °0 K became more undetermined, in proportion as the
^-.- . danger drew near, and called for prompt and de-

cifive reolutions. Sometimes he ated, as if he
had resolved to defend the banks of the Elbe, and
to hazard a battle with the enemy, as soon as the
detachments which he had called in were able to
join him. At other times, he abandoned this as
rash and perilous, seeming to adopt the more
prudent counsels of those who advised him to
endeavour at protrating the war, and for that
end to retire under the fortifications of Wittem-
berg, where the Imperialifis could not attack
him without manifest disadvantage, and where he
might wait, in safety, for the succours which he
expeted from Mecklenburgh, Pomerania, and
the ProteRant cities on the Baltic. Without fix-
ing upon either of these plans, he broke down
the bridge at Meissen, and marched along the east
bank of the Elbe to Muhlberg. There he deli-
berated anew, and, after much hesitation, adopt-
ed one of there middle schemes, which are always
acceptable to feeble minds incapable of deciding.
He left a detachment at Muhlberg to oppose the
ImperialiRs, if they hould attempt to pals at that
place, and advancing a few miles with his main
body, encamped there in expecation of the event,
according to which he proposed to regulate his
subsequent motions.

Pal* tih CHARLES, meanwhile, pushing forward incef-
lsbsc. fantly, arrived the evening of the twenty-third of

April on the banks of the Elbe, oppofitc to Muhl-

berg.

berg. The river, at that place, was three hun- B ° K
dred paces in breadth, above four feet in depth,
its current rapid, and the bank possesed by the '5'
Saxons. was higher than that which he occupied.
Undismayed, however, by all there obstacles, he
called together his general officers, and, without
aiking their opinions, communicated to them his
intention of attempting next morning to force his
paflage over the river, and to attack the ene-
my wherever he could come up with them. They
all expressed their aonifiment at such a bold
resolution; and even the Duke of Alva, though
naturally daring and impetuous, and Maurice of
Saxony, notwithstanding his impatience to crush
his rival the Elecor, remonstrated earnefily against
it. But the Emperor, confiding in his own judg-
ment or good fortune, paid no regard to their
arguments, and gave the orders neceflary for exe-
cuting his design.

EARLY in the morning, a body of Spanish

and Italian foot marched towards the river, and
began an incessant fire upon the enemy. The
long heavy muskets used in that age, did execu-
tion on the opposite bank, and many of the fol-
diers, hurried on by a martial ardor in order to
get nearer the enemy, rushed into the fream, and
advancing brcaft-high, fired with a more certain
aim, and with greater effet. Under cover of
their fire a bridge of boats was begun to be laid
for the infantry; and a peasant having under-
taken to condut the cavalry through the river by

VOL. III. D d a ford

B 0 0 K a ford with which he was well acquainted, they
-^--' also were put in motion. The Saxons polled in

547' Muhlberg endeavoured to obftrut these opera-

tions, by a brisk fire from a battery which they
had erected; but as a thick fog covered all the
low grounds upon the river, they could not take
gim with any certainty, and the Imperialists sus-
sered very little, at the fame time the Saxons
being much galled by the Spaniards and Italians,
they set on fire ome boats which had been col-
leted near the village, and prepared to retire.
The Imperialifis perceiving this, ten Spanilh
soldiers instantly stript themselves, and holding
their swords with their teeth, swam across the
river, put to flight such of the Saxons as ventured
to oppose them, saved from the flames as many
boats as were sufficient to complete their own
bridge, and by this spirited and successful action,
encouraged their companions no less than they
intimidated the enemy.

BY this time, the cavalry, each trooper having

a foot soldier behind him, began to enter the ri-
ver, the light horse marching in the front, followed
by the men at arms, whom the Emperor led in
person, mounted on a Spanish horse, dressed in a
sumptuous habit, and carrying a javelin in his
hand. Such a numerous body struggling through
a great river, in which, according to the directions
of their guide, they were obliged to make several
turns, sometimes treading on a firm bottom,
sometimes swimming, presented to their compa-

nions,
3

nions, whom they left behind, a fpe&acle equally B °o° K
magnificent and intereting d. Their courage, at -^
taRs, surmounted every obltacle, no man betray-
ing any symptom of fear, when the Emperor
fiared in the danger no less than the meaneit fol-
dier. The moment that they reached the opposite
fide, Charles, without waiting the arrival of the
reft of the infantry, advanced towards the Saxons
with the troops which had pasTcd along with him,
who, flulhed with their good fortune, and de-
fpifiug an enemy who had negleted to oppose
them, when it might have been done with iuch
advantage, made no account of their superior
numbers, and marched on as to a certain vic-
tory.

DUtrING all there operations, which neceflarily Iil ecns

of the Eleci

consumed much time, the Ele&or remained in- tor.
acive in his camp; and from an infatuation which
appears to be so amazing, that the best informed
historians impute it to the treacherous arts of his
generals who deceived him by false intelligence,
he would not believe that the Emperor had pawsed
the river, or could be so near at hand . Being
convinced, at last, of his fatal mistake, by the
concurring testimony of eye-witnefes, he gave
orders for retreating towards Wittemberg. But
a German army, encumbered, as usual, with bag-
gage and artillery, could not be put suddenly in

d Avila, 115, a.
* Camerar. ap. Freher. iii. 493. Struv. corp. hist. Germ.
1047. 1049. t

D d _ _tion

0 0x K motion. They had just begun to march when

** the light troops of the enemy came in view, and

5J47' the Elcor saw an engagement to be unavoidable.

Bttle of As he was no less bold in action than irresolute in
MulhauCn.

council, he made the disposition for battle with
the greatest preence of mind, and in the most
proper manner; taking advantage of a great
forest to cover his wings, so as to prevent his
being surrounded by the enemy's cavalry, which
were far more numerous than his own. The
Emperor, likewise, ranged his men in order as
they came up, and riding along the ranks, ex-
horted them with few but efficacious words to do
their duty. It was with a very different fpiric
that the two armies advanced to the charge. As
the day, which had hitherto been dark and cloudy,
happened to clear up at that moment, this acci-
dental circumstance made an impreflion on the
different parties corresponding to the tone of their
minds; the Saxons, surprised and disheartened,
felt pain at being exposed fully to the view of the
enemy; the Imperialists, being now secure that
the Protestant forces could not escape from them,
rejoiced at the return of fun-hine, as a certain
presage of vi&ory. The hock of battle would
not have been long doubtful, if the personal cou-
rage which the Elecor displayed, together with the
activity which he exerted from the moment that
the approach of the enemy rendered an engage-
ment certain, and cut off all polfibility of hefi-
tation, had not revived in ome degree the spirit of
his troops. They rpulfed the Hungarian light-

s horse

horse who began the attack, and received with 8 OO
firmness the men at arms who next advanced to -
the charge; but as there were the flower of the 'i'
Imperial army, were commanded by experienced
officers, and fought under the Emperor's eye, the
Saxons oon began to give way, and the light
troops rallying at the fame time and falling on
their flanks, the flight becane general. A finall The Eleor
body of chosen soldiers, among whom the Elec- a.nd tke,
tor had fought in person, itill continued to de- prin .
fend themselves, and endeavoured to save their
matier by retiring into the forest; but being fur-
rounded on every fide, the Elector, wounded in
the face, exhausted with fatigue, and perceiving
all resistance to be vain, urrendered himself a
prisoner. He was conduted immediately to-
wards the Emperor, whoan he found just returned
from the pursuit, standing on the field of battle
in the full exultation of success, and receiving the
congratulations of his officers, upon this com-
plete victory obtained by his valour and condut.
Even in such an unfortunate and humbling fitua-
tion, the Ele&or's behaviour was equally magna.
nimous and decent. Sensible of his condition,
he approached his conqueror without any of the
sullenness or pride which would have been imr
proper in a captive; and conscious of his own
dignity, he descended to no mean f.ibmifipn, un-
becoming the high tfation which he held among
the German Princes. " The fortune of war,
said he, has made me your prisoner, mot gra-
pious Emperor, and I hope to be treated"--

Dd3 Here

B ° x K Here, Charles harfily interrupted him; " An4

*^ . < am I then, at lft, acknowledged to be Em-

Hi har7 peror Charles of Ghent was the only title you
tcepEo lately allowed me. You hall be treated as you
se deserve." At these words he turned from him

abruptly with an haughty air. To this cruel re-
pulse, the King of the Romans added reproaches
in his own name, using expreflions fill more un-
generous and insulting. The Ele&or made no
reply; but, with an unaltered countenance, which
discovered neither astonishment nor deje&ion, ac-
companied the Spanish soldiers appointed to guard
him'.

Charles', TIS decisive vicorv cost the Imperialills only
,ftr bi, fifty men. Twelve hundred of the Saxons were
.Cy7l* killed, chiefly in the pursuit, and a greater num-

ber taken priboners. About four hundred kept
in a body, and escaped to Wittemberg, together
with the elecoral Prince, who had likewise been
wounded in the aCtion. After refting two days in
the field of battle, partly to refresh his army, and
partly to receive the deputies of the adjacent
towns, which were impatient to secure his pro-
tection by submitting to his will, the Emperor
began to move towards Wittemberg, that he
might terminate the war at once, by the reduc-
tion of that city. The unfortunate Eletor was

¢ Sleid. his. 426. Thuah. 1;6. Hortenfius de Bello

Ccirman. ap. Scard. vol.ii. 498. Defcript. Pugnr Mul-
berg. ibid, p. 509. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr. lib. xii. c. 13.
p. 298.

carried

carried along in a fort of triumph, and exposed B Xo K
every where, as a captive, to his own subje&s; a --
fpe&acle extremely affliting to them who both 5417
honoured and loved him; though the insult was
so far from subduing his firm spirit, that it did
not even ruffle the wonted tranquillity and com-
pofure of his mind.

As Wittember, the residence, in that age, oflebglt.

the eletoral branch of the Saxon family, was one
of the strongest cities in Germany, and could not
be taken, if properly defended, without great
difficulty, the Emperor marched thither with the
utmost dispatch, hoping that while the confterna-
tion occasioned by his vitory was fill recent, the
inhabitants might imitate the example of their
countrymen, and submit to his power, as oon
as he appeared before their walls. But Sybilla of
Cleves, the Elector's wife, a woman no lcfs dif-
tinguilhed by her abilities than her virtue, in.
head of abandoning herself to tears and lamenta-
tion upon her husband's misfortune, endeavoured
by her example as well as exhortations, to ani-
mate the citizens. She inspired them with such
resolution, that, when summoned to surrender,
they returned a vigorous answer, warning the
Emperor to behave towards their sovereign with
the respect due to his rank, as thty were deter-
mined to treat Albert of Brandenburg, who was
still a prisoner, precisely in the fame manner that
he treated him. The spirit of the inhabitants,
po less than the strength of the city, seemed now

Pd4 to

B 0 0 K to render a siege in form necessary. After fuck

lx.
t-- a signal vitory it would have been disgraceful not

57 to have undertaken it, though at the fame time

the Emperor was dcetitute of every thing requi-
site for carrying it on. But Maurice removed all
difficulties, by engaging to furnish provisions,
artillery, ammunition, pioneers, and whatever
else hould be needed. Trusting to this, Charles
gave orders to open the trenches before the town.
It quickly appeared, that Maurice's eagerness to
reduce the capital of those dominions, which he
expeced as his reward for taking arms against his
kinsman, and deserting the Protestant cause, had
led him to promise what exceeded his power to
perform. A battering train was, indeed, carried
safely down the Elbe from Dresden to Wittem-
berg; but as Maurice had not sufficient force to
preserve a secure communication between his ter-
ritories and the camp of the besiegers, Count
Mansfeldt, who commanded a body of electoral
troops, destroyed a convoy of provisions and mi-
litary fiores, and dispersed a band of pioneers
defined for the service of the Imperialifis. This
put a fRop to the progress of the siege, and con-
vinced the Emperor, that as he could not rely on
Maurice's promises, recourse oght to be had to
some more expeditious as well as more certain
method of getting poffeflion of the town.

The tre.- THE unfortunate Eletor was in his hands,
eroutnr. and Charles was ungenerous and hard-hearted
men '' enough to take advantage of this, in order to

*, '~~ ~make

make an experiment whether he might not bring B °,° K
about his design, by working upon the tender- --
ness of a wife for her husband, or upon the piety as*
of children towards their parent. With this
view, he summoned Sybilla a second time to
open the gates, letting her know that if Ihe again
refused to comply, the EleEtor hould answer
with his head for her obstinacy. To convince
her that this was not an empty threat, he brought
his priloner to an immediate trial. The pro-
ceedings against him were as irregular as the
stratagem was barbarous. Inflead of confulring
the flates of the Empire, or remitting the cause
to any court, which, according to the German
constitution, might have legally taken cog-
nizance of the Eletor's crime, he fubjc&ed the
greatest Prince in the Empire to the jurifdi&ion
of a court-martial, composed of Spanil and Ita-
lian officers, and in which the unrelenting Duke
of Alva, a fit instrument for any a of violence,
presided. This strange tribunal founded its Mjyso.
'charge upon the ban of the Empire which had
been issued against the prisoner, a sentence pro-
nounced by the ole authority of the Emperor,
and destitute of every legal formality which could
render it valid; but presuming him to be thereby
manifeftlyconvited of treason and rebellion, the
court-martial condemned him to susser dcath by
being beheaded. This decree was intimated to
the Elector while amuting himself in playing at
Chefs with Ernest of Brunswick his fellow-prifoner.

He

B Oi K He paused for a moment, though without dirco-

1 -- vering any symptom either of furprize or terror,
heSE'c. and after taking notice of the irregularity as well
,i^' ,,,as injustice of the Emperor's proceedings; j It is

cafy, continued he, to comprehend his scheme.
I mutl die, because Wittemberg will not fur-
render; and I lhall lay down my life with plea-
sure, if, by that sacrifice, I can preserve the dig-
nity of my house, and tranfinit to my poferity
the inheritance which belongs to them. Would
to God, that this sentence may not asse&t my wife
and children more than it intimidates me! and
that they, for the fake of adding a few days to a
life already too long, may not renounce honours
and territories which they were born to poffefsg!"
He then turned to his antagonist, whom he chal-
lenged to continue the game. He played with
his usual attention and ingenuity, and having
beat Ernef, expressed all the fatisfa&ion which
is commonly felt on gaining such vitories. After
this he withdrew to his own apartment, that he
might 'employ the reft of his time in such relic
gious exercises as were proper in his situation h.

Tie diFerf IT was not with the fame indifference, or com-
Of hi f.
wily. pofure, that the account of the Eletor's danger

was received in Wittemberg. Sybilla, who had
supported with such undaunted fortitude her
huiband's misfortunes, while he imagined that
they could reach no farther than to diminish his

Thuan,i. 1:. Struvii corpus, o15o.

power

power or territories, felt all her resolution fail as B °X K
soon as his life was threatened. Solicitous to save 'v.
that, he despised every other consideration; and s
was willing to make any sacrifice, in order to
appease an incensed conqueror. At the fame time,
the Duke of Cleves, the Elecor of Branden-
burg, and Maurice, to none of whom Charles
had communicated the true motives of his vio-
lent proceedings against the Eletor, interced-
ed warmly with him to spare his life. The
first was prompted to do so merely by com-
passion for his sifter, and regard for his brother-
in-law. The two others dreaded the univer-
fal reproach that they would incur, if, after
having boasted so often of the ample fecu-
rity which the Emperor had promised them
with refpet to their religion, the first effect of
their union with him hould be the public execu-
tion of a Prince, who was justly held in reverence
as the most zealous prote&or of the Protestant
cause. Maurice, in particular, foresaw that he
must become the obje& of detestation to the
Saxons, and could never hope to govern them
with tranquillity, if he were confidered by them
as accessary to the death of his nearest kinsman,
in order that he might obtain poffefllon of his
dominions.

WHILE they, from such various motives, foil- His taty

with
cited Charles, with the most earned importunity, Charier,

by which

pot to execute the sentence; Sybilla, and his h frurcen.
Fhilcrcn, conjured the Eletor, by letters as well ^ihei,,

as

0 x0 K as messengers, to cruple at no concession that
^* _- would extricate him out of the present danger,
'5s7 and deliver them from their fears and anguilh on

his account. The Emperor, perceiving that the
expedient which he had tried began to produce
the efferc that he intended, fell by degrees from
his former rigour, and allowed himself to soften
into promises of clemency and forgiveness, if the
Elctor would hew himself worthy of his favour,
by submitting to reasonable terms. The Elector,
on whom the confideratiun of what he might sus-
ser hmfelf had made no imprcfi.on, was melted
by the tears of a wife whom he loved, and could
9y 1,. not reilf the intreaties of his family. In com-

pliance with their repeated Solicitations, he agreed
to articles of accommodation, which he would
otherwise have rejeced with disdain. The chief
of them were, that he fhouldrefign the Eletoral
dignity, as well for hirnfelf as for his posterity,
into the Emperor's hands, to be disposed of en-
tirely at his pleasure; that he hould instantly put
the Imperial troops in poffellion of the cities of
Wittemberg nd Gotha that he hould set Al-
bert of Brandenburg at liberty without ransom;
that lie hould submit to the decrees of the Im-
perial chamber, and acquiesce in whatever re-
formation the Emperor hould make in the con-
ftitution of that court; that he ihould renounce
all leagues against the Emperor or King of the
Romans, and enter into no alliance for the future,
in which they were not comprehended. In re-
turn for there important concefflons, the Empe-

rof

ror not only promised to spare his life, but to I °°
fettle on him and his posterity the city of Gotha ----
and its territories, together with an annual pen- ,547?
sion of fifty thousand florins, payable out of the
revenues of the elecorate; and likewise to grant
him a fum in ready money to be applied towards
the discharge of his debts. Even these articles of '"', ;
grace were clogged with the mortifying condition
of his remaining the Emperor's prisoner during
the reft of his life i. To the whole, Charles had
subjoined, that he hould submit to the decrees
of the Pope and council with regard to the con-
troverted points in religion; but the Elector,
though he had been persuaded to sacrifice all the
objects which men commonly hold to be the
dearest and moR valuable, was inflexible with
regard to this point; and neither threats nor in-
treaties could prevail to make him renounce what
he deemed to be truth, or persuade him to at
in opposition to the ditates of his conscience.

As oon as the Saxon garrison marched out Mu.ireput

in poilsclion
of Wittemberg, the Emperor fulfilled his en- of th Elc..

t (or3 domi.

gagements to Maurice; and in reward for his aio,.'
merit in having deserted the Protestant cause, and
having contributed with such success towards the
difiblution of the Smalkaldick league, he gave
him pofleflon of that city, together with all the
other towns in the eletorate. It was not with-
out relutance, however, that he made such a

I Seid. 427. Thuan. i. 142. Du Mont. Corps Di-
plom. iv. p. ll. 332.

sacrifice {

B 0 OK sacrifice; the extraordinary success of his arms
X_, had begun to operate, in its usual manner, upon

tS4' his ambitious mind, suggesting new and vast

projets for the aggrandizement of his family, to-
wards the accomplishment of whicl the retaining
of Saxony would have been of the utmost confe-
quence. But as this scheme was not then ripe
for execution, he durst not yet venture to dif-
close it; nor would it have been either safe or
prudent to have offended Maurice, at that junc-
ture, by such a manifest violation of all the pro-
mises, which had educed him to abandon his
natural allies.

egcil. THE Landgrave, Maurice's father-in-law, was
the Land- till in arms; and though now left alone to main-
V t' tain the Protestant cause, was neither a feeble

nor contemptible enemy. His dominions were
of considerable extent; his fubjeas animated with
zeal for the Reformation; and if he could have
held the Imperialifis at bay for a short time, he
had much to hope from a party whose strength
was fill unbroken, whose union as well as vigour
might return, and which had reason to depend,
with certainty, on being effetually supported by
the King of France. The Landgrave thought
not of any thing so bold or adventurous; but
being seized with the fame consternation which
had taken poffellion of his aflociates, he was
intent, only, how to procure favourable terms
from the Emperor, whom he viewed as a con-
queror, to whose will there was a neceflity of

submitting.

Submitting. Maurice encouraged this tame and B
pacifick fpirir, by magnifying, on the one hand, . -
the Emperor's power by boasting, on the other, 1547.
of his own interest with his victorious ally; and by
representing the advantageous conditions which
he could not fail of obtaining by his intercefion
for a friend, whom he was lb solicitous to save.
Sometimes the Landgrave was induced to place
such unbounded confidence in his promises, that
he was impatient to bring matters to a final ac-
commodation. On other occasions, the Empe-
ror's exorbitant ambition, refrained neither by
the scruples of decency, nor the maxims of jus-
tice, together with the recent and hocking proof
which he had given of this in his treatment of the
Elector of Saxony, came so full into his thoughts,
and made such a lively impression on them, that
he broke off abruptly the negociations which he
had begun; seeming to be convinced that it was
more prudent to depend for safety on his own
arms, than to confide in Charles's generosity.
But this bold resolution, which despair had fug-
gested to an impatient spirit, fretted by difap-
pointments, was not of long continuance. Upon
a more deliberate survey of the enemy's power,
as well as his own weakness, his doubts and fears
returned upon him, and together with themnthe
spirit of negociating, and the delfre of accom-
modation.

MAURICE, and the Eletor of Brandenburg, The condi.

tions pro.
acted as Mediators between him and the Em- fcribrd by

the Etrrnpi
peror; e,.

J uX'' peror; and after all that the former had vaunted
v_--» of his influence, the conditions prescribed to the

3547. Landgrave were extremely rigorous. The articles

with regard to his renouncing the league of
Smalkalde, acknowledging the Emperor's autho-
rity, and submitting to the decrees of the Impe-
rial chamber, were the fame which had been
imposed on the Elector of Saxony. Besides these,
he was required to surrender his person and ter-
ritories to the Emperor; to implore for pardon
on his knees; to pay an hundred and fifty thou-
sand crowns towards defraying the expences of the
war; to demolilh the fortifications of all the
-J towns in his dominions except one; to oblige the

garrison which he placed in it to take an oath of
fidelity to the Emperor; to allow a free paflage
through his territories to the Imperial troops as
often as it shall be demanded; to deliver up all
his artillery and ammunition to the Emperor to
set at liberty, without ransom, Henry of Brunf-
wick, together with the other prisoners whom he
had taken during the war; and neither to take
arms himself, nor to permit any of his subjects to
to serve, against the Emperor or his allies for the
future .

To which THE Landgrave ratified these articles, though
he s m.with the utmot relutance, as they contained no

stipulation with regard to the manner in which
he was to be treated, and left him entirely at the

Sleid. 430. Thuan. . iv. a46.

Emperor's

Emperor's mercy. Necessity, however, cornm- o KX
pelled him to give his aflent. Charles; who had - v--J
aiumed the haughty and imperious tone of a
conqueror, ever since the reduction of Saxony,
insisted on unconditional submission, and would
permit nothing to be added to the terms which he
had prescribed, that could in any degree limit the
fulntes of his power, or restrain him from be-
having as he saw meet towards a Prince whom he
regarded as absolutely at his disposal. But though
he would not vouchsafe to negociate with the
Landgrave, on such a footing of equality, as to
susser any article to be inserted among those which
he had dictated to him, that could be confidered
as a formal Ripulation for the security and freedom
of his person; he, or his ministers in his name,
gave the Eletor of Brandenburg and Maurice
such full fatisfation with regard to this points that
they alured the Landgrave that Charles would
behave ro him in the fame way as he had done to
the Duke of Wurtemberg, and would allow him,
whenever he had made his fubmiliion, to return
to his own territories. Upon finding the Land-
grave to be ill poflefled with his former fufpi-
cions of the Emperor's intentions, and unwilling
to trust verbal or ambiguous declarations; in a
matter of such essential concern as his own liberty,
they sent him a bond signed by them both, con-
taining the most olemn obligations, that if any
violence whatsoever was offered to his person,
during his interview with the Emperor, they
would intintly surrender themselves to his sons,

VoL. III. E e and

B X0 K and remain in their hands to be treated by them

IX.
-v ' in the fame manner as the Emperor hould treat

7 him .

He rhepa;m TWHI, together with the indispensable obliga-
to the Im-
rial court. tion of performing what was contained in the

articles of which he had accepted, removed his
doubts and scruples, or made it necessary to get
over them. He repaired, for that purpose, to
to the Imperial camp at Hall in Saxony, where a
circumstance occurred which revived his fufpi-
cions and increased his fears. Just as he was
about to enter the chamber of pretence, in order
to make his publick fubmiflion to the Emperor,
a copy of the articles which he had approved of
was put into his hands, in order that he might
ratify them anew. Upon perusing them, he per-
ceived that the Imperial ministers had added two
new articles; one importing, that if any dispute
should arise concerning the meaning of the for-
mer conditions, the Emperor hould have the
right of putting what interpretation upon them
he thought most reafohable; the other, that the
Landgrave was bound to fubmir implicitly to the
decisions of the council of Trent. This unwor-
thy artifice, calculated to surprise him into an
approbation of articles, to which he had not the
moit distant idea of assenting, by proposing them
to him at a time when his mind was engrossed
and disquieted with the thoughts of that humbling

Du Mont Corps Diplow. iv p. 11. 336.

5 ceremony

ceremony which e had to perform, filled the B o K
Landgrave with indignation, and made him fly L-i
out into all those violent expressions of rage to
which his temper was prone. With ome diffi-
culty, the Eletor of Brandenburg and Maurice
prevailed at length on the Emperor's ministers to
drop the former article as unjust, and to explain
the latter in such a manner, that he could agree
to it, without openly renouncing the Protestant
religion.

THIS obstacle being surmounted, the Land- The man.

no in hich
grave was impatient to finish a ceremony which, the empe-

ror rcivd

how mortifying soever, had been declared ne- h;m.
ceffary towards his obtaining pardon. The Em-
peror was feated on a magnificent throne, with
all the ensigns of his dignity, surrounded by a
numerous train of the Princes of the Empire,
among whom was Henry of Brunswick, lately the
Landgrave's prisoner, and now, by a sudden re-
vcrfe of fortune, a fpedator of his humiliation.
The Landgrave was introduced with great folem-
nity, and advancing towards the throne, fell
upon his knees. His chancellor, who walked
behind him, immediately read, by his master's
command, a paper which contained an humble
confession of the crime whereof he had been
guilty; an acknowledgment that he had merited
on that account the most severe punishment; an
absolute resignation of himself and his dominions
to be disposed of at the Emperor's pleasure; a
fubmiflive petition for pardon, his hopes of which

E e were

3 °1 K were founded entirely on the Emperor's clemency;
.-..-. and it concluded with promises of behaving, for
'w4 the future, like a subjec, whose principles of

loyalty and obedience would be confirmed, and
would even derive new force from the sentiments
of gratitude which must hereafter fill and animate
his heart. While the chancellor was reading this
abica declaration, the eyes of all the fpe&ators
were fixed on the unfortunate Landgrave; few
could behold a Prince, so powerful as well as
high-fpirited, suing for mercy in the posture of a
supplicant, without being touched with commife-
ration, and perceiving serious refleions arise in
their minds upon the instability and emptiness of
human grandeur. The Emperor viewed the
whole transaction with an haughty unfeeling
composure; and preserving a profound silence
himself, made a sign to one of his secretaries
to read his answer; the tenor of which was,
That though he might have justly inflicted on
him the grievous punishment which his crimes
deserved, yet, prompted by his own generosity,
moved by the solicitations of several Princes in
behalf of the Landgrave, and influenced by his
penitential acknowledgments, he would not deal
with him according to the rigour ofjuitice, and
would fubje& him to no penalty that was not
specified in the articles which he had already
subscribed. The moment the secretary had
finished, Charles turned away abruptly, without
deigning to give the unhappy suppliant any sign
of companion or reconcilement. He did not

even

even desire him to rife from his knees; whic[ B 0 K
the Landgrave having ventured to do unbidden, --
advanced towards the Emperor with an intention ,7.
to kifs his hand, flattering himself, that his
guilt being now fully expiated, he might pre-.
fume to take that liberty. But the Elector of
Brandenburg, perceiving that this familiarity
would be offensive to the Emperor, interposed,
and desired the Landgrave to go along with him
and Maurice to the Duke of Alva's apartments
in the cattle.

HE was received and entertained by that

nobleman with the refpec and courtesy due to
such a guest. But after supper, while he was
engaged in play, the Duke took the Elecor
and Maurice aside, and communicated to them,
the Emperor's orders, that the Landgrave must
remain a prisoner in that place under the cuf- ffied .
tody of a Spanilh guard. As they had not he- p"il*.,
therto entertained the most diflant suspicion of
the Emperor's sincerity or recitude of intention,
their surprise was exceflive, and their indignation
not inferior to it, on discovering how greatly
they had been deceived themselves, and how
infamously abused, in having been made the in-
firuments of deceiving and ruining their friend.
They had recourse to complaints, to arguments,
and to intreaties, in order to save themselves
from that disgrace, and to extricate him out of
she wretched situation into which he had been

E e 3 betrayed

°0° K betrayed by too great confidence in them. But
t--.-' the Duke of Alva remained inflexible, and

pleaded the neceflity of executing the Emperor's
commands. By this time it grew late, and the
Landgrave, who knew nothing of what had
passed, nor dreaded the snare in which he was
entangled, prepared for departing, when the fatal
orders were intimated to him. He was struck
dumb at sirs with astonishment, but after being
silent a few moments, he broke out into all the
violent expressions which horror, at injustice ac-
companied with fraud, naturally fuggefis. He
complained, he expoftulated, he exclaimed;
sometimes inveighing against the Emperor's arti-
sices as unworthy of a great and generous Prince;
sometimes censuring the credulity of his friends
in trusting to Charles's insidious promises; some-
times charging them with meanness in slooping
to lend their affifance towards the execution of
such a perfidious and dishonourable scheme; and
in the end he required them to remember their
engagements to his children, and instantly to
fulfil them. They, after giving way for a little to
the torrent of his paflion, solemnly aerted their
own innocence and upright intention in the
whole tranfaaion, and encouraged him to hope,
that, as oon as they saw the Emperor, they
would obtain redress of an injury, which affe&ed
their own honour, no le's than it did his liberty.
At the fame time, in order to soothe his rage and
impatience, Maurice remained with him during

the

the night, in the apartment where he was con- B K
fined". m.-

1547.

NEXT morning, the Elecor and Maurice ap- The le' lt

plied jointly to the Emperor, representing the in- b ug.nd
famy to which they would be exposed throughout lic't in Vai.

for his li-

Germany if the Landgrave were detained in berty.
custody; that they would not have advised, nor
would he himself have consented to an interview,
if they had fufpefed that the lots of his liberty
was to be the consequence of his fubmillion; that
they were bound to procure his release, having
plighted their faith to that effe&t, and engaged
their own persons as sureties for his. Charles
listened to their earnest remonstrances with the
utmost coolness. As he now stood no longer in
need of their lirvices, they had the mortification
to find that their former obsequiousness was for-
gotten, and little regard paid to their intercefflon.
He was ignorant, he told them, of their particu-
lar or private tranfa&tions with the Landgrave,
nor was his condu& to be regulated by these;
though he knew well what he himself had pro-
mifed, which was not that the Landgrave hould
be exempt from all restraint, but that he hould
not be kept a prisoner during life*. Having

said

m Sleid. 433. Thuan. 1. iv. 147. Struv. Corp. Hi.
Germ. ii. 1052.

* According to several hiRorians of great name, the Em.

peror, in his treaty with the Landgrave, stipulated that he
would not detain him in any prison. But in executing the

E e 4 deed

°0 fa aid this with a peremptory and decisive tone, he
La__i3 put an end to the conference; and they feeing no
$+7! probability, at that time, of making any im-

preflion upon the Emperor, who seemed to have
taken this resolution deliberately, and to be ob-
finately bent on adhereing to it, were obliged to
acquaint the unfortunate prisoner with the ill
success of their endeavours in his behalf. The
disappointment threw him into a new and more
violent transport of rage, so that to prevent his
proceeding to some desperate extremity, the
Elctor and Maurice promised that they would
not quit the Emperor, until, by the frequency
and fervour of their importunity, they had ex-
torted his consent to set him free. They accord-
ingly renewed their solicitations a few days after-
yards, but found Charles ipore haughty and in-

deed which was written in the German tongue, the Imperial
ministers fraudulently substituted the word ewiger, instead of
simiger, and thus the treaty, in place of a promise that he
phould not be detained in ay prison, contained only an en-
gagement that he hould not be detained in prpetual imprison-
inent. But authors, eminent for hiflorical knowledge and
critical accuracy, have called in question the truth of this
common ory. The silence of Sleidan with regard to it, as
well as its not being mentioned in h varipus memorials
which he has published concerning the Landgrave's imprison-
ment, greatly favour this opinion. But as several books
which contain the information necefiary towards difcufling this
point with accuracy, are written in the German language,
Which J do not underftapd, I cannot pretend to inquire into
this matter with the fame precision, wherewith I have endea.
voured to fettle some' other'controverted faIt which have
occured in the course of this history. See Struv. Corp. so1z.
Mbolleinm' Ecclf, Hiit, vol. ii p. 61, t16. ngl. Edition.

tractable

tradable than before, and were warned that if B °OcQ K
they touched again upon a fubje& so disagreeable, a
and with regard to which he had determined to &47
hear nothing farther, he would instantly give
orders to convey the prisoner into Spain. Afraid
of hurting the Landgrave by an officious or
ill-timed zeal to serve him, they not only de-
sifted, but left the court, and as they did not
chufe to meet the first allies of the Landgrave's
rage upon his learning the cause of their depar-
ture, they informed him of it by a letter, wherein
they exhorted him to fulfil all that he had promised
to the Emperor, as the most certain means of
procuring a speedy release.

WHATEVER violent emotions their abandoning JtP, 'nd;

his cause in this manner occasioned, the Land- tiaint.
grave's impatience to recover liberty made him
follow their advice. He paid the fum which had
been imposed on him, ordered his fortreffles to
be razed, and renounced all alliances which could
give offence. This prompt compliance with the
will of the conqueror produced no ctFet. He
was Rill guarded with the fame vigilant severity;
and being carried about, together with the de-
graded Eletor of Saxony, wherever the Empe-
ror went, their disgrace and his triumph was
each day renewed. The fortitude as well as
equanimity, with which the Elefor bore there
repeated insults, were not more remarkable than
the Landgrave's fretfulness and impatience. His
active impetuous mind could ill brook restraint;

an4

B ox0 K and refle&ion upon the hameful artifices by
'-L'-- which he had been decoyed into that situation,
I$47.

as well as indignation at the injultice with which
he was still detained in it, drove him often to the
wildest excesses of passion.

The' ':-nr THE people of the different cities, to whom
et the En-
reros'e. Charles thus wantonly exposed those illufrious
»aions n
cemany. prisoners as a publick fpe&acle, were sensibly

touched with such an insult offered to the Ger-
manick body, and murmured loudly at this in-
decent treatment of two of its greatest Princes.
They had oon other causes of complaint, and
such as affected them more nearly. Charles pro-
ceeded to add oppression to insult, and arrogat-
ing to himself all the rights of a conqueror, ex-
ercifed them with the utmost rigour. He order-
ed his troops to seize the artillery and military
stores belonging to such as had been members of
the Smalkaldick league, and having collected
upwards of five hundred pieces of cannon, a great
number in that age, he ent part of them into the
Low-Countries, part into Italy, and part into
Spain, in order to spread by this means the fame
of his success, and that they might serve as mo-
numents of his having subdued a nation, hitherto
deemed invincible. He then levied, by his sole
authority, large fums, as well upon those who had
served him with fidelity during the war, as upon
such as had been in arms againit him; upon the
former, as their contingent towards a war, which
having been andertaken, as he pretended, for the

common

common benefit, ought to be carried on at the B o°° I
common charge; upon the latter, as a fine by
way of punishment for their rebellion. By there zs47'
exactions he amassed above one million fix hun-
dred thousand crowns, a fum which appeared
prodigious in the sixteenth century. But so ge-
neral was the conflernation which had seized the
Germans upon his rapid success, and such their
dread of his victorious troops, that all implicitly
obeyed his commands; though, at the fame time,
theft extraordinary firetches of power greatly
alarmed a people jealous of their privileges, and
habituated, during several ages, to confider the
Imperial authority as neither extensive nor formi-
dable. This discontent and resentment, how in-
duftrioufly soever they concealed them, became
universal; and the more there paflions were re-
firained and kept down for the present, the more
likely were they to burst out oon with additional
violence.

WHILE Charles gave law to the Germans like Ferd;ilant

ncroch-

a conquered people, Ferdinand treated his sub- ,,,n on
jets in Bohemia with fill greater rigour. That h' tibBtie
kingdom possesed privileges and immunities as heianfub.
extensive as those of any nation in which the feu-
dal institutions were established. The prerogative
of their Kings was extremely limited, and the
crown itself elecive. Ferdinand, when placed on
the throne, had .confirmed their liberties with every
solemnity prelcribed by their excellive solicitude
for the security of a constitution of government to

which

0 X° K which they were extremely attached. He oIon
IX.
.-- _a began, however, to be weary of a jurifdition so

S47' much circumscribed, and to despise a sceptre

which he could not transmit to his posterity; and
notwithstanding all his former engagements, he
attempted to overturn the confitution from its
foundations; that instead of an elefcive kingdom
he might render it hereditary. But the Bohe-
mians were too high-fpirited tamely to relinquih
privileges which they had long enjoyed. At the
fame time, many of them having embraced the
doctrines of the Reformers, the feeds of which
John Huss and Jerome of Prague had planted in
their country about the beginning of the preced-
ing century, the desire of acquiring religious
liberty mingled itself with their zeal for their
civil rights; and these two kindred paflions heigh-
tening, as usual, each other's force, precipitated
them immediately into violent measures. They
had not only refused to serve their sovereign
againt the confederates of Smalkalde, but having
entered into a close alliance with the Elector of
Saxony, they had bound themselves by a solemn
alociation, to defend their ancient constitution;
and to persist, until they hould obtain additional
grants as they thought ne'cessary towards perfe&t-
ing the present model of their government, or
rendering it more permanent. They chose Caf-
par Phlug, a nobleman of diftintion, to be their
general; and rifed an army of thirty thousand
men to enforce their petitions. But either from
the weakness of their leader, or from the diffen-

By tions

tions in a great unwieldy body, which, having B 0X0
united hastily, was not thoroughly compa&ed, or -_-
from ome other unknown cause, the subsequent 1547,
operations of the Bohemians bore no proportion
to the zeal and ardour with which they took their
first resolutions. They suffered themselves to be
amused o long with negociations and overtures
of different kinds, that before they could enter
Saxony, the battle of Muhlberg was fought, the
Elecor deprived of his dignity and territories, the
Landgrave confined to close cuftedy, and the.
league of Smalkalde entirely diflipated. The fame
dread of the Emperor's power which had seized
the reft of the Germans, reached them. As oon
as their sovereign approached with a body of Im.
perial troops, they instantly dispersed, thinking
of nothing but how to atone for their past guilt,
and to acquire some hope of forgiveness, by a
prompt fubmifllon. But Ferdinand, who enter-
ed his dominions full of that implacable resent-
ment which inflames Monarchs whose authority
has been despised, was not to be mollified by the
late repentance and involuntary return of rebel-
lious fubjets to their duty. He even heard, un-
moved, the intreaties and tears of the citizens
of Prague, who appeared before him in the
posture of fupplianrs, and implored for mercy.
The sentence which he pronounced against them
was rigorous to extremity; he abolished many of
their privileges, he abridged others, and new-
modelled the constitution according to his plea-
lure. He condemned to death many of thore

who

B3 0 K who had been most ative in forming the late

-.. -.. association against him, and punished fill a greater
'547. number with confiscation of their goods, or per-

petual banishment. He obliged all his subje&s,
of every condition, to give up their arms to be
deposited in forts where he planted garrisons; and
after disarming his people, he loaded them with
new and exorbitant taxes. Thus, by an ill-con-
duted and unsuccessful effort to extend their
privileges, the Bohemians not only enlarged the
sphere of the royal prerogative, when they in-
tended to have circumscribed it, but they almost
annihilated those liberties which they aimed at
establishing on a broader and more secure founda-
tion".

Det held at THE Emperor, having now humbled, and, as
Auiur. he imagined, subdued the independent and stub-

born spirit of the Germans by the terror of arms
and the rigour of punishment, held a diet at
Augsburg, in order to compose finally the con-
troverfies with regard to religion, which had so
long dfturbed the Empire. He durst not, how-
ever, trust the determination of a matter so in-
teresting to the free suffrage of the Germans,
broken as their minds now were to fubjecion.
He entered the city at the head of his Spanish
troops, and afligned them quarters there. The
test of his soldiers he cantoned in the adjacent

" leid. 40.419. 434. Thuan. 1. iv. 9g. 150. Struv.
Covi iilages

villages;

villages; so that the members of the diet, while B o° K
they carried on their deliberations, were fur- -
rounded by the fame army which had overcome 7'
their countrymen. Immediately after his publick
entry, Charles gave a proof of the violence with
which he intended to proceed. He took posses-
sion by force of the cathedral, together with one
of the principal churches; and his priess having,
by various ceremonies, purified them from the
pollution with which they supposed the unhallowed
ministrations of the Protestants to have defiled
them, they re-eftablilhed with great pomp the
rites of the Romish worfhipo.

THE concourse of members to this diet was TheEnmpe.

ror exhrts
extraordinary; the importance of the affairs con- them to

labmi to

cerning which it was to deliberate, added to the the General
fear of giving offence to the Emperor by an ab- Cunc""l.
fence which lay open to mifconftrution, brought
together almost all the Princes, nobles, and re.
presentatives of cities who had right to fit in that
assembly. The Emperor, in the speech with
which he opened the meeting, called their atten.
tion immediately to that point, which seemed
chiefly to merit it. Having mentioned the fatal
effe&s of the religious dissentions which had arisen
in Germany, and taken notice of his own uni
wearied endeavours to procure a general council,
which alone could provide a remedy adequate to
those evils, he exhorted them to recognise its

* Slcid. 435. 437.

authority,

B 0 0 : authority, and to sand to the award of an afltnm-
* . - bly, to which they had originally appealed, as

's41' having the sole right ofjudgment in the cafe.

voD re.a- BUT the council, to which Charles wified them
Wmlutlns i
d coOnci,. to refer all their controversies, had, by this time,

undergone a violent change. The fear and jea-
lousy, with which the Emperor's sirs fuccefles
against the confederates of Smalkalde had inspired
the Pope, continued to increase. Not satisfied
with attempting to retard the progress of the Im-
perial arms, by the sudden recal of his troops,
Paul began to confider the Emperor as an enemy,
the weight of whose power he must oon feel,
and against whom he could not be too hasty in
taking precautions. He foresaw that the imme-
diate effec of the Emperor's acquiring absolute
power in Germany, would be to render him en-
tirely master of all the decisions of the council,
if it should continue to meet in Trent. It was
dangerous to allow a Monarch, o ambitious, to
get the command of this formidable engine,
which he might employ at pleasure to limit or to
overturn the papal authority. As the only me-
thod of preventing this, he determined to tranf-
late the council to some city more immediately
under his own jurifdi&ion, and at a greater
distance from the terror of the Emperor's arms,
or the reach of his influence. An incident for-
tunately occurred, which gave this measure the
appearance of being necessary. One or two of
the father's of the council, together with some of

their

their domefticks, happening to die suddenly, the B °o K
physicians, deceived by the symptoms, or suborned -v-
by the Pope's legates, pronounced the distemper 547*
to be infe&ious and pestilential. Some of the
prelates, struck with a panick, retired; others
were impatient to be gone; and after a short con-
fultation, the council was tranlated to Bologna, WMrca lt.
a city subjet to the Pope. All the bishops in
the Imperial interest warmly opposed this refolu-
tion, as taken without neccflity, and founded on
false or frivolous pretexts. All the Spanifhl pre- Trannted
lates, and mot of the Neapolitan, by the Empe- so uelr,
ror's express command, remained at Trent; the
reft, to the number of thirty-four, accompanying
the legates to Bologna. Thus a fchifin com-
menced in that very assembly, which had been
called to heal the divisions of Christendom; the
fathers of Bologna inveighed againfR those who
staid at Trent, as contumacious and regardless of
the Pope's authority; while the other accused
them of being so far intimidated by the fears of
imaginary danger, as to remove to a place where
their consultations could prove of no service to-
wards re-eftablilhing peace and order in Ger-
many P.

THE Emperor, at the fame time, employed all symptom

his interest to procure the return of the council bfat th
to Trent. But Paul, who highly applauded his Po.e an
own sagacity in having taken a ftep which put it

P F. Paul, z48, &c.
VOL. III. F f out

B °0 K out of Charles's power to acquire the direcion of
i__*^ that aficmbly, paid no regard to a request, the

7 object of which was so extremely obvious. The

summer was consumed in fruitless negociations
with refpe& to this point, the importunity of the
one and obfinacy of the other daily increasing. At
las an event happened which widened the breach
irreparably, and rendered the Pope utterly averse
from listening to any proposal that came from the
Emperor. Charles, as has been already observed,
had so violently exasperated Peter Lewis Farnese,
the Pope's on, by refuting to grant him the in-
veftiture of Parma and Placentia, that he had
watched ever since that time with all the vigi-
lance of refencment for an opportunity of reveng-
ing that injury. He had endeavoured to preci-
pitate his father into open hostilities against the
Emperor, and had earnestly solicited the King of
France to invade Italy. His hatred and tefent-
ment extended to all those whom he knew that the
Emperor favoured; he persecuted Gonzaga, go-
vernor of Milan, with ill offices, and had encou-
raged Fiefco in his attempt upon the life of An-
drew Doria, because both Gonzaga and Doria
poflefird a great degree of the Emperor's esteem
and confidence. His malevolence and secret in.
trigues were not unknown to the Emperor, who
could not be more desirous to take vengeance
on him, than Gonzaga and Doria were to be em-
ployed as his inftrunents in infliting it. Far-
nere, by the profligacy of his life, and by enur-
micies of every kind, equal to thole committed

by

by the worst tyrants who have disgraced human B 00 r
nature, had rendered himself so odious, that they -v.
thought any violence whatever might be attempt- 25I
ed against him. They oon found among his
own subje&s, persons who were eager, and even
deemed it meritorious to lend their hands in such
a service. As he, animated with the jealousy
which usually pofleffes petty sovereigns, had em-
ployed all the cruelty and fraud, whereby they en-
deavour to supply their defet of power, in order
to humble and extirpate the nobility fubje to
his government, five noblemen of the greatef
diftincion in Placentia, combined to avenge the
injuries, which they themselves had suffered, as
well as those which he had offered to their order.
They formed their plan in conjuncion with Gon-
2aga; but it remains uncertain whether he origi-
nally suggested the scheme to them, or only ap-
proved of what they proposed, and co-operated
in carrying it on. They concerted all the pre-
vious feps with such foresight, conduced their
intrigues with such secrecy, and displayed such
courage in the execution of their design, that it
may be ranked among the most audacious deeds sePt.
of that nature mentioned in hiflory. One body
of the conspirators surprised, at mid-day, the
gates of the citadel ),f Placentia where Farnese
refi'Jed, overpowered ;iis guards, and murdered The.RffTi.
him. Another party of them made themselves hPope'
maflers of the tc,,n, and called upon their fellow- son
citizens to take arms, in order to reaffume their
liberty. The multitude ran towards the citadel,

F f from

°x0 K from which three great guns, a signal concerted
-_- with Gonzaga, had been fired; and before they

could guess the cause or the authors of the tu-
mult, they law the lifeless body of the tyrant
hanging by the heels from one of the windows of
the citadel. But so universally detestable had he
become, that not one expressed any sentiment of
concern at such a fad reverse of fortune, or dif-
covered the lead indignation at this ignominious
treatment of a sovereign Prince. The exultation
at the success of the conspiracy was general, and
all applauded the actors in it, as the deliverers of
their country. The body was tumbled into the
ditch that surrounded the citadel, and exposed to
the insults of the rabble; the reft of the citizens
returned to their usual occupations, as if nothing
extraordinary had happened.

The mpe- BEFORE next morning, a body of troops ar-
rial troops
take colr. riving from the frontiers of the Milanese, where
Plccdtle. they had been posted in expectation of the event,

took poffllion of the city in the Emperor's name,
and reinstated the inhabitants in the poflefion of
their ancient privileges. Parma, which the Im-
perialifts attempted likewise to surprise, was saved
by the vigilance and fidelity of the officers whom
Farnese had intruded with the command of the
garrilbn. The death of a, son whom, notwith-
standing his infamous vices, Paul loved with an
excess of parental tenderness, overwhelmed him
with the deepest affliiion and the loss of a city
of such consequence as Placentia, greatly embit-

tered

tered his sorrow. He accused Gonzaga, in open B °O
consistory, of having committed a cruel murder, ---
in order to prepare the way for an unjust ufurpa- 's*7'
tion, and immediately demanded of the Emperor
fatisfa&ion for both; for the former, by the
punishment of Gonzaga; for the latter, by the
restitution of Placentia to his grandson O&avio,
its rightful owner. But Charles, who, rather
than quit a prize of such value, was willing, not
only to expose himself to the imputation bs being
accefary to the crime which had given an oppor-
tunity of seizing it, but to bear the infamy of de-
frauding his own fon-in-law of the inheritance
which belonged to him, eluded all his folicita-
tions, and determined to keep poilflion of the
city, together with its territories%

THIS resolution, flowing from an ambition so ThC Popc

*0~~

. . . . courts the

rapacious, as to be restrained by no consideration alliance of
either of decency or ju(tice, transported the Pope King nd
so far beyond his usual moderation and caution, .hecV"'-
that he was eager to take arms against the Empe-
ror, in order to be avenged on the murderers of his
son, and to recover the inheritance wrested from
his family. Conscious, however, of his own in-
ability to contend with such an enemy, he warm-
ly solicited the French King and the republick ot
Venice to join in an oenfive league againit
Charles. But Henry was intent at that time on
other objeas. His ancient allies the Scots, hav-

F. Paul, 257. Pallavic. 41, 42. huan. iv. S54. Mem.
de Ribier, 59. 67. Nat;l;i Cmitib Iiflor. lib. iii. p. 64.

F f ing

3B x° K ing been defeated by the Englilh in one of the

.-v -- greatest battles ever fought between these two
i 5*7 rival nations, he was about to fend a numerous

body of veteran troops into that country, as well
to preserve it from being conquered, as to gain the
acquisition of a new kingdom to the French mo-
narchy, by marrying his son the Dauphin to the
youngQueen of Scotland. An undertaking accom-
panied with such manifest advantages, the success
of which appeared to be so certain, was not to be
relinquilhed for the remote prospect of benefit
from an alliance depending upon the precarious
life of a Pope of fourscore, who had nothing at
heart but the gratification of his own private re-
fentment. Instead, therefore, of ruihing head-
long into the alliance proposed, Henry amused
the Pope with fich general profeflions and pro-
mies, as might keep him from any thoughts
of endeavouring to accommodate his differences
with the Emperor, but 'at the fame avoided any
such engagement is might occasion an immediate
rupture between Charles and 'himself, or preci-
pitate hirm into a war for which he was not pre-
pared. ' The Venetians, though m uch alarmed
at feeing Placentia in the hands of the Imnperialifts,
imitated the' wary condut of the French King,
as it nearly'refembled the spirit with which they
themselves usually carried on their negocia-
tions'.

Mem. de Ribier, ii. 63. 71. 78. 85. 95. Paruta Ior. di
Vencz. 199. o3. Thuan . iv. 16o.

BUT,

BUT, though the Pope found that it was not B °0 K

in his power to kindle immediately the flames of -v--
war, he did not forget the injuries, which he was Tberitof
obliged for the present to endure; resentment at sfor
fettled deeper in his mind, and became more ran- 'ethe-
corous in proportion as he felt the difficulty of "itoTreat.
gratifying it. It was, while these sentiments
of enmity were in full force, and the desire of
vengeance at its height, that the diet of Augf-
burg, by the Emperor's command, petitioned
the Pope, in the name of the whole Germanick
body, to enjoin the prelates who had retired to
Bologna to return again to Trent, and to renew
their deliberations in that place. Charles had
been at great pains in bringing the members to
join in this request. Having observed a confi-
derable variety of sentiments among the Protest-
ants with refpet to the fubmifiion which he had
required to the decrees of the council, ome of
them being altogether intratable, while others
were ready to acknowledge its right of jurifdic-
tion upon certain conditions, he employed all
his address in order to gain or to divide tem.
He threatened and overawed the Eletor Pala-
tine, a weak Prince, and obnoxious to vengeance
on account of the afliltance which he had given
to the confederates of Smalkalde. The hope of
procuring liberty for the Landgrave, together
with the formal confirmation of his own eleAoral
dignity, overcame Maurice's cruples, or pre-
vented him from opposing what he knew would
be agreeable to the Emperor. The E6tor of

F f 4 Branden-

B x00 K Brandenburg, less influenced by religious zeal
h--~- than any Prince of that age, was easily induced to

7 imitate their example, in assenting to all that the

Emperor required. The deputies of the cities
remained still to be brought over. They were
more tenacious of their principles, and though
every thing that could operate either on their
hopes or fears was tried, the utmost that they
would promise was, to acknowledge the jurifdic-
tion of the council, if effectual provision were
made for securing to the divines of all parties
free access to that assembly, with entire liberty
of debate; and if ll points in controversy were
decided according to scripture and the usage of
the primitive church. But when the memorial
containing this declaration was presented to the
Emperor, he ventured to put in pratice a very
extraordinary artifice. Without reading the paper,
or taking any notice of the conditions on which
they had insisted, he seemed to take it for grant-
oa. 9. ed that they had complied with his demand, and

gave thanks to the deputies for their full and un-
reserved fubmiflion to the decrees of the council.
The deputies, though aoniihed at what they
had heard, did not atcerpt to set him right,
both parties being better peased that the matter
fiould remain under this slate of ambiguity, than
to push for an explanation, which mult have oc-
cafioned a dispute, and would have led, perhaps,
to a rupture'.

* F. Paul, j59. Sleid. 44o Tilus. tom.i. 155.

HAVING

HAVING obtained this seeming fubmiflion from B °O° K
the members of the diet to the authority of the - -

' 547.

council, Charles employed that as an argument The Pope
to enforce their petition for its return to Trent. &dm.hS
But the Pope, from the fatisfation of mortifying
the Emperor, as well as from his own aversion to
what was demanded, resolved, without hesitation,
that his petition should be rejeaed; though, in
order to avoid the imputation of being influenced
wholly by resentment, he had the address to
throw it upon the fathers at Bologna, to put a
dire& negative upon the request. He referred to
their consideration the petition of the diet, and
they, ready to confirm by their aflent whatever Decem. 0.
the legates were pleased t dictate, declared that
the council could not, in consistence with its dig-
nity, return to Trent, unle(s the prelates who,
by remaining there, had discovered a fchifmatick
spirit, would first repair to Bologna, and join
their brethren; and that, even after their junc-
tion, the council could not renew its consultations
with any prospect of benefit to the church, if the
Germans did not prove their intention of obey-
ing its future decrees to be sincere, by yielding
immnediate obedience to those which it had al-
ready pal '.

Tis anfwcr was communicated to the Empe- The Erp-

ror by the Pope, who at the fame time exhorted 3iP *P.
him to comply with demands which appeared to BOIi"g1,"t

' F. Paul, 250. Pallav. i. 49.

be

B o° K be so reasonable. But Charles was better ac-

lx. -,v-' quainted with the duplicity of the Pope's charac-

'5 ter than to be deceived by such a gross artifice;

he knew that the prelates of Bologna durst utter
no sentiment but what Paul inspired; and, there-
fore, overlooking them as mere instruments in
the hand of another, he confidered their reply as
a full discovery of the Pope's intentions. As he
could no longer hope to acquire such an ascend-
ant in the council as to render it subservient to
his own plan, he saw it to be necessary that Paul
should not have it in his powr to turn against
himn the authority of so venerable an assembly.

54&'. In order to prevent this, he sent two Spanish
Jao I 5 lawyers to Bologna, who, in the presence of the

legates, protested, That the translation of the
council to that place had been unneceflary, and
founded on falle or frivolous pretexts; that while
it continued to meet there, it ought to be deemed
an unlawful and schismatical conventicle; that
all its decisions ought of course to be held as null
and invalid; and that as the Pope, together with
the corrupt ecclefiafticks who depended on him,
had abandoned the care of the church, the Empe-
ror, as its protector, would employ all the power
which God had committed to him, in order to
preserve it fromn those calamities with which it
vas threatened. A few days after, the Imperial
January 3. ambafndor at Rome demanded an audience of

the Pope, and in pretence of all the Cardinals, as
well as foreign miniters, protested againf the

proceedings

proceedings of the prelates at Bologna, in terms B °o K
equally harsh and difrefpeftful . .

IT was not long before Charles proceeded to The Empe.

carry these threats, which greatly alarmed both ^i f'"r t
the Pope and council at Bologna, into execu- ,iefirfaith
tion. He let the diet know the ill success of his i'" C'
endeavours to procure a favourable answer to
their petition, and that the Pope, equally re-
gardlefs of their entreaties, and of his services
to the church, had refused to gratify them by
allowing the council to meet again at Trent;
that, though all hope of holding this assembly
in a place, where they might look for freedom of
debate and judgment, was not to be given up, the
profpec& of it was, at present, distant and uncer-
tain; that, in the mean time, Germany was torn
in pieces by religious dissensions, the purity of
the faith corrupted, and the miinds of the people
disquieted with a multiplicity of new opinions
and controversies formerly unknown amorig
Chri'Lians; that, moved by the uty w!,icl ::
owed to them as their sovereign, and to th':
Church as its protetor, he had e.nployed fomrc
divines, of known abilities and learn ng, to pre-
pare a system of dotrine, to which all fhokld
conform, until a council, such as they wifliLd
for, could be convocated. This system was
compiled by Pflug, Helding, and Agricola, of
whom the two former were dignitaries in the

" F. Paul, 264. Pallay.. Sleid. 446. Gollalti ConRPt.
Imperial. i. 561.

Romi.,h

B o Romilh church, but remarkable for their paci-

_ . sick and healing spirit; the last was a Protestant
'5s4 divine, fufpeted, not without reason, of having

been gained by bribes and promises, to betray
or misead his party on this occasion. The ar-
ticles presented to the diet of Ratifban in the
year one thousand five hundred and forty-one,
in order to reconcile the contending parties,
served as a model for the present work. But as
the Emperor's situation was much changed since
that time, and he found it no longer necelary to
manage the Protestants with the fame delicacy
as at thatjunture, the conceflions in their favour
were not now so numerous, nor did they extend
to points of so much consequence. The treatise
contained a complete system of theology, con-
formable in almost every article to the tenets of
the Romilh church, though expressed, for the
most part, in the softet words, or in scriptural
phrases, or in terms of fudied ambiguity. Every
doctrine, however, peculiar to Popery, was re-
tained, and all the rites, which the Protestants
condemned as inventions of men introduced into
the worship of God, were enjoined. With regard
to two points only, ofme relaxation of their rigour
was granted, and some latitude in pracice admit-
ted. Such ecclefiaticks as had married, and
would not put away their wives, were allowed,
nevertheless, to perform all the funcions of their
sacred office; and those provinces which had
been accustomed to partake of the cup, as well
as of the bread in the sacrament of the Lord's

Supper-

Supper, were still indulged the privilege of re- ° o

K

ceiving both. Even there were declared to be ----
concefions for the fake of peace, and granted 's
only for a season, in compliance with the weak-
ness or prejudices of their countrymen1.

THIS system of dotrine, known afterwards by Th;i which

was called

the name of the Interim, because it contained the loteim
temporary regulations, which were to continue fetlhe diet,
no longer in force than until a free general coun- May '.
cil could be held, the Emperor presented to the
diet, with a pompous declaration of his sincere
intention to re- eIlabiilh tranquillity and order in
the church, as well as of his hopes that their
adopting there regulations would contribute
greatly to bring about that desirable event. It
was read in presence, according to form. As soon
as it was finished, the archbilhop of Mentz, pre-
sident of the electoral college, rose up hastily,
and having thanked the Emperor for his un-
wearied and pious endeavours in order to restore
peace to the church, he, in name of the diet,
signified their approbation of the fytlem of doc-
trine which he had prepared, together with their
resolution of conforming to it in every particular.
The whole afembly was amazed at a declaration
so unprecedented and unconflitutional, as well as
at the Elector's presumption in pretending to de-
liver the sense of the diet, upon a point which
had not hitherto been the fubje& of consultation

' F. Paul, 270. Pallav. ii. 6o. Sleid. 4;. 457. Sruv.
Corp. tioS. Goldat. Conftit. Imper. i. 5 1.

or

B X 0 K or debate. But not one-member had the courage

IX.

.--- to contradit what the Eletor had said; some

1542.

and es5trt being overawed by fear, others remaining silent
t^eip- through complaisance. The Emperor held the

archbishop's declaration to be a full constitutional
ratification of the Interim, and prepared to en-
force the observance of it, as a decree of the
Empire .

New a*s DURING this diet, the wife and children of the
fruitlels (o.
lications Landgrave, warmly seconded by Maurice of
for the Landgrave's Saxony, endeavoured to interest the members in
like'. behalf of that unhappy Prince, who still an-

guilhed in confinement. But Charles, who did
not chue to be brought under the necessity of
rejecing any request that came from such a re-
fpec'able body, in order to prevent their repre-
fentations, laid before the diet an account of his
tranfatdions with the Landgrave, together with
the motives which had at firt induced him to de-
tain that Prince in cufRody, and which rendered
it prudent, as he alleged, to keep him fill under
reitraint. It was no easy matter to give any
good reason for an action, incapable of being
justified. But he thought the most frivolous pre-
texts might be produced in an assembly willing
to be deceived, and afraid of nothing so much as
to dilcover that it saw his conduct in its true
colours. His account of his ; n conduct was
accordingly admitted to be fully i.:iisfaaory, and

7 Sleid. +Co. F. Paul, a;3. Pailav. 63. .

. ser

after some feeble intreaties that he would extend B 0°° t
his clemency to his unfortunate prisoner, the -
Landgrave's concerns were no more mentioned. S54 .

IN order to counterbalance the unfavourable

imorefion which this inflexible rigour might
leave in their minds, Charles, as a proof that
his gratitude was no less permanent and un-
changeable than his resentment, inveRed Mau-
rice in the electoral dignity, with all the legal
formalities. The ceremony was performed, with
extraordinary pomp, in an open court, so near
the apartment in which the degraded Ele&tor was
kept a prisoner, that he could view it from his
windows. Even this insult did not ruffle his
usual tranquillity; and turning his eyes that way,
he beheld a prosperous rival receiving those en-
signs of dignity of which he had been stripped,
without uttering one sentiment unbecoming the
fortitude which he had preserved amidit all his
calamities ';

IMMEDIATELY after the dissolution of the diet, TheTrtefimn

the Emperor ordered the Interim to be publilhed ,provd of
in the German as well as Latin language. It rbyt'
met with the usual reception of conciliating P'aif'.
schemes, when proposed to men heated with dif-
putation; both parties declaimed again f it with

s Sleid. 441.
* Thuan. Hid. lib. v. 176. Struv. Corp. ro;+. Invef-

titura Maurrtii a Mammerano Lucemburgo delcripta ap.
Scardiu, ii. So8.

i equil

X 0 0 K equal violence. The Protestants condemned it
«l - as a system containing the groflft errors of
aS8. Popery, disguised with so little art, that it could

impose only on the moR ignorant, or on those
who, by wilfully ihutting their eyes, favoured the
deception. The Papists inveighed againt it, as
a work in which some docrines of the church
were impiously given up, others meanly conceal-
ed, and all of them delivered in terms calculated
rather to deceive the unwary, than to inftru&t the
ignorant, or to reclaim such as were enemies to
the truth. While the Lutheran divines fiercely
attacked it, on one hand, the general of the Do-
minicans with no less vehemence impugned it on
the other. But at Rome, as oon as the con-
tents of the Interim came to be known, the in-
dignation of the courtiers and ecclefiafticks rose
to the greatef height. They exclaimed against
the Emperor's profane encroachment on the fa-
cerdotal function, in presuming, with the con-
currence of an aflembly of laymen, to define
atticles of faith, and to regulate modes of wor-
hip. They compared this rash deed to that of
tJzzah, who, with an unhallowed hand, had
touched the ark of God; or to the bold attempts
of those Emperors, who had rendered their me-
mory detestable, by endeavouring to model the
Christian church according to their pleasure.
They even affeced to find out a resemblance
between the Emperor's condu& and that of
Henry VIII. and exprefred their fear of his imi-
tating the example of that apostate, by usurping

the

the title as well as jurifdition belonging to the B ° K
head of the church. All, therefore, contended -
with one voice, that as the foundations of eccle- '543.
fiaftical authority were now haken, and the whole
fabrick ready to be overturned by a new enemy,
some powerful method of defence must be pro-
vided, and a vigorous refitance must be made,
at the beginning, before he grew too formidable
to be opposed.

THE Pope, whose judgment was improved by The fenct

longer experience in great tranfa&ions, as well as the Pope
by amore extensive observation of human affairs, th i.reg
viewed the matter with more acute difcernmenr,
and derived comfort from the very circumstance
which filled them with apprehension. He was
astonished, that a Prince of such superior saga-
city as the Emperor, hould be so intoxicated
with a single vi&ory, as to imagine that he might
give law to mankind, and decide even in those
matters, with regard to which they are most im-
patient of dominion. He saw that, by joining
any one of the contending parties in Germany,
Charles might have had it in his power to have
oppressed the other, but that the presumption of
success had now inspired him with the vain
thought of his being able to domineer over both.
He foretold that a system which all attacked, and
none defended, could not be of long duration
and that, for this reason, there was no need of
his interposing in order to haften its fall for as

VoL. III. G g soon

B °0 K soon as the powerful hand which now upheld it

lx.

_-^- was withdrawn, it would fink of its own accord,

134S' and be forgotten for ever .

#ThoET.; THE Emperor, fond of his own plan, adhered
compiahcce to his resolution of carrying it into full execution.
with the
interim. But though the Elecor Palatine, the Eletor of

Brandenburg, and Maurice, influenced by the
fame considerations as formerly, feerned ready to
yield implicit obedience to whatever he flould
enjoin, he met not every where with a like obfe-
fequious fubmiflion. John Marquis of Bran-
denburg Anlpach, although he had taken part
with great zeal in the war against the confederates
ofSmalkalde, refuted to renounce docrines which
he held to be sacred; and reminding the Empe-
ror of the repeated prcmifes which he had given
his Protestant allies of allowing them the free
exercise of their religion, he claimed, in confe-
quence of these, to be exempted from receiving
the Interim. Some other Princes, also, ven-
tured to mention the fame scruples, and to plead
the fame indulgence. But on this, as on other
trying occafons,/the firmness of the Elector of
Saxony was molt dilinguiflled, and merited the
highest praiFc. Charles, well knowing the autho-
rity of his example with all the Protestant party,
1iboured, with the utmost earneftiiefs, to gain
his approbation of the Inerim, and by employ-
ing fc imiimes promis'es of setting him at liberty,

.S'1i, . 6S. F1. i'.Lu, 271. 277. rallav. ii. 64.

some times

fomctimes threats of treaing him with greater 00 K
harihneis, attempted alternately to work upon his -.-
hopes and his fears. But he was alike re!-ardllcs i5s48
of both. After having declared his si:ced belief in
the dodinics of the Rcformation, " I cannot
now, said he, in my old age, abandon the prin-
ciples, for which I early contended ; nor, in or-
der to procure. freedom uring a few declining
years, will I betray that good caufc, on account
of which I have uflfred to much, and am fill
willing to futfer. Better for me to enjoy, in this
fiiitu(de, the efleem of virtuous men;, together
with the approbation of my own conflience, than
to return into the world, with the imputation
and guilt of aporlacy, to disgrace and embitter
the remainder of my days." By this magnani-
mous resolution, he set his countrymen a pattern
of conduc&, so very different from that which the
Emperor wifled him to have exhibited to them,
that it drew upon him fresh marlks of his difplea-
sure. The rigour of his confiner.ent was in-
creased; the number of his ervanrs abridged; the
Lutheran clergymen, who hl;-! hi:herto been per-
mitted to attend hilm, were diiniTcd ; and even
the books of devotion, which had been his chief
consolation during a tedious imprisonment, were
taken from him'. The Landgrave of HIefle,
his companion in misfortune, did not maintain
the fame constancy. His patience and fortitude
were both so much cxhaufted by the length of hiis

Sleil. 462.
G g 2 confine-

B 0 0 K confinement, that, willing to purchase freedom
».---- at any price, he wrote to the Emperor, offering

' not only to approve of the Interim, but to yield

an unreserved submission to his will in every other
particular. But Charles, who knew that what-
ever course the Landgrave might hold, neither
his example nor authority would prevail on his
children or fubjecs to receive the Interim, paid
no regard to his offers. He was kept confined
as ftri&ly as ever; and while he suffered the cruel
mortification of having his conduct set in contrast
to that of the Elector, he derived not the finalleft
benefit from the mean ftep which exposed him to
such deserved censure d.

The free BUT it was in the Imperial cities that Charles
cities Rrltg-

"gl gins met with the most violent opposition to the In-
rece.ving
the nerim. terim. These finall commonwealths, the citizens

of which were accustomed to liberty and inde-
pendence, had embraced the doctrines of the
Reformation when first published, with remark-
able eagerness; the bold spirit of innovation
being peculiarly suited to the genius of free
government. Among them, the Protestant
teachers had made the greatest number of pro-
fclytes. The most eminent divines of the party
were fettled there as pallors. By having the
diretion of the schools and other seminaries of
learning, they had trained up disciples, as well
initru&cd in the articles of their faith, as zeal-
ous to defend them. Such persons were not to

d Slcid. 46a.

be

be guided by example, or swayed by authority; B 0 K
but having been taught to examine and to decide *i--J
in matters of controversy, thought that they were
both qualified and entitled to judge for them-
selves. As oon as the contents of the Interim
were known, they, with one voice, joined in re-
futing to admit it. Augsburg, Ul!n, Strafburg,
Constance, Bremen, Magdeburg, together with
many other towns of lels note, presented remon-
itrances to the Emperor, setting forth the irregu-
lar and unconllitutional manner in which the
Interiml had been enacted, and beseeching him
not to oer such violence to their consciences, as
to require their assent to a form of doctrine and
worship, which appeared to them repugnant to
the'expres precepts of the divine law. But
Charles having prevailed on so many Princes of
the Empire to approve of his new model, was not
much moved by the representations of those
cities, which, how formidable soever they might
have proved, if they could have been formed into
one body, lay so remote from each ocher, that ir
was easy to oppress them separately, before it was
possible for them to unite,

IN order to accomplish this, the Emperor cne.reiif

saw it to be requisite that his mea!ures should be tyfu bi.
vigorous, and executed with such rapidity as to
allow no time for consulsing any coinmon plan
of opposition. Having laid down this maxim
as the rule of his proceedings, his first attempt

c 3 was

3 0 0 K was upon the city of Augsburg, which, thou'hl
iJ - overawed by the presence of the Spanish troops,

154. he knew to be as much diflatisfied with the In-

terim as any in the Empire. He ordered one body
of these troops to seize the gates; he posted the
reft in different quarters of the city; and aflem-
At";. bling all the burgesses in the town, he, by his

sole absolute authority, published a decree abo-
lifning their present form of government, dif-
solving all their corporations and fraternities, and
nominating a small number of persons, in whom
he vested for the future the right of adminiftra-
tion. Each of the persons, thus chofrn, took an
oath to obfcrve the Interim. An a of power, so
unprecedented as well as arbitrary, which ex-
cluded the body of the inhabitants from any share
in the government of their own community, and
fubjeEed them to men who had no other merit
than their servile devotion to the Emperor's will,
gave general disgust; but as they durst not ven-
ture upon refiftanee, they were obliged to tfb-
mit in filencee. From Augsbur;g, in which he
left a garrison, he proceeded to Ulm, and new-
modelling its government with the ame violent
hand, he seized such of their pastors as refiufed to
fub'cribe the Interim, committed then' to prison,
and at his departure carried them along with him
in chains'. By this fverity he not only secured
the reception of the Interim in two of the molt

e Sleid. 469. f Ibid. 47z.

powerful

powerful cities, but gave warning to tie reft B ° K
what such as continued refracory had to expect. -
The ee of the example was as great as he Zi48'
could have wished, and maIny tjwns, in order to
save themfielvcs from the like vengeance, found
it necessary to comply with what he enjoined.
This obedience, exrorcd by the rigour of autho-
rity, produced no cn.e in the lcntiments of the
Germans, and extended no farther than to niake
them conform io far to the ltcter of tie law, as
was barely iiffcient to fcrecn them from puniflh-
ment. Tlheir preachers accompanied those cere-
monies, the obifrvaion of which the Interim pre-
icriced, ':ith :.;ch an; explication of their Lcn-
dencv, as filrved rather to conlirm than to remove
the fcr'plH's of their hearers with regard to thecm.
The peol', miany of whom had grown iup to
mature ear.s ii:nce the eltabJifhment of the re-
formed rclilcn, and had een acce led to in
other term o p blick worlhil, beheld thei poln-
oi:s pageanry of tihe popifi fcrvce wihi contemrpt
or horror; an.l in inoft pl:ic^s the R,,nJifh eccle-
fiallicks, who returned to take pofl;iilon of rlheir
churches, could hardly be prot.eLtcd ti'.n insult,
or their mir.sitratios fro. int:crrip:i,)i. Thus,
notwicthtlanding the apparent comiipliance o o
many cities, the inhabitants being accuflomn::l to
fieedom, submitted vwith rlu.tanc:: to the ip)wc;-
which now oprete(d them. T'he: rlndleritand-
ing as well as inclination revolted ar.?;!in t the
doE1rines and rites ilmpofic on I;em ; and though,

fir

0 x0 for the present, they concealed their indignation
Ix.
X<-~ and resentment, it was evident that there paflions

,'4s. could not always be kept under restraint, but

would break out at last in effects proportional to
their violence .

The Pope CHARLES, meanwhile, highly pleased with hav-
te, conce; ing bended the stubborn spirit of the Germans to
Ibogna.'t such general fubmiflion, departed for the Low-

Countries, fully determined to compel the cities,
which Rill food out, to receive the Interim. He
carried his two prisoners the Ele&or of Saxony
and Landgrave of Hclfe along with him, either
because he durst not leave them behind him in
Germany, or because he wished to give his coun-
trymen the Flemings this illutrious proof of the
success of his arms, and the extent of his power.
Sept. 17. Before Charles arrived at Brussels, he was in-

formed that the Pope's legates at Bologna had
difinifed the council by an indefinite prorogation,
and that the prelates aflfmbled there had return-
ed to their refpeaive countries. Neceflity had
driven the Pope into this measure. By the secef-
lion of those who had voted against the tranfla-
tion, together with the departure of others, who
grew weary of continuing in a place where they
were not suffered to proceed to business, so few
and such inconsiderable members remained, that
the pompous appellation of a General Council
could not, with decency, be beflowed any longer

Mem. de Ribier, ii . S8. ed. 491.

3 upoq

upon them. Paul had no choice but to dissolve B °0 K

IX.

an afflmbly which was become the objec of con- * -.
tempt, and exhibited to all Christendom a molft 3s4
glaring proof of the impotence of the Romish
See. But unavoidable as the measure was, it lay
open to be unfavourably interpreted, and had the
appearance of withdrawing the remedy, at the
very time when those for whose recovery it was
provided, were prevailed on to acknowledge its
virtue, and to make trial of its efficacy. Charles
did not fail to put this conftruEtion on his con-
dut; and by an artful comparison of his own
efforts to suppress heresy, with Paul's scandalous
inattention to a point so essential, he endeavoured
to render the Pontiff odious to all zealous Catho-
licks. At the fame time, he commanded the pre-
lates of his faction to remain at Trent, that the
Council might still appear to have a being, and
might be ready, whenever it was thought expe-
dient to resume its deliberations for the good of
the church h.

THE motive of Charles's journey to the Low- The Em-

ror rceive
Countries, beside gratifying his favourite paflion h. ron

Philip in

of travelling from one part of his dominions to Phh Low.
another, was to receive Philip his only son, who Cogwttle.
was now in the twenty-firft year of his age, and
whom he had called thither, not only that he
might be recognized by the States of the Ne-

P»llav.p.zl. 7.

therlands

B o0 0 therlands as heir-apparent, but in order to f-
'---' cilitate the execution of a vast scheme, the objet

* of which, and the reception it met with, shall be

hereafter explained. Philip, having left the go-
vernmen: of Spain to Maximilian, Ferdinand's
eldest son, to whom the Emperor had given the
Princess Mary his daughtir in marriage, embark-
ed for Italy, attended by a numerous retinue of
Spanili nobles'. The squadron which escorted
him, was commanded by Andrew Doria, who,
notwithifanding his advanced age, insisted on the
honour of performing, in person, the fame duty
to the fun, which he had often discharged to-
Nov. 25. wards the father. He landed safely at Genoa;

. from thence he went to Milan, and proceeding
April . through Germany, arrived at the Imperial court

in BruiTcls. The States of Brabant, in the first
place, and those of the other provinces in their
order, acknowledge his right of succession in
common form, and he took the customary oath
to preserve all their privileges inviolatek. In all
the towns of the Low-Countries through which
Philip passed, he was received with extraordinary
pomp. Nothing that could express the respect
of the people, or contribute to his amusement
was negleted; pageants, tournaments, and pub-
lick fpe&acles of every kind were exhibited with
that expensive magnificence which commercial

1 Ochoa, Carolea, 362.
k -Iaraxi annal. Drabanr. 6;,.

nations

nations display, when, on any occasion, they de- B o K
part from their usual maxims of frugality. But --..-
amidst these scenes of festivity and pleasure, '54*
Philip's natural severity of temper was discernible.
Youth itself could not render him agreeable, nor
his being a candidate for power form him to
courtesy. He maintained a haughty reserve in
his behaviour, and discovered such manifest par-
tiality towards his Spanish attendants, together
with such an avowed preference to the manners
of their country, as highly diifufled the Flemings,
and gave rife to that antipathy, which afterwards
occasioned the revolution so fatal to him in that
part of his dominions'.

CHARLES was long detained in the Nether-

lands by a violent attack of the gout, which re-
turned upon him tb frequently, and with such
increasing violence, that it had broken, to a great
decree, the vigour of his consnitution. He ne-
verthelefs did not flacken his endeavours to
enforce the Interim. The inhabitants of Straf-
bilrg, after a long firuggle, found it necessary to
,ive obedience; those of Conftlnce, who had
taken arms in their own defcnce, were compelled
by force not on!y to conform to te Interim, but
to renounce thlir privileges s a free city, to o
homage to Ferdin.ind as Arcl!idu!:e of Aatria,

I Mehim. de Riller, ii. 2 I). L,'ivel!l.ie lIem.n de Clrd.

Granve:~;l¢l~ , .and

and,

o o i and, as his vassals, to admit an Austrian gover-
li.
_- -- nor and garrison ". Magdeburg, Bremen, Ham-

54t* burg, and Luleck were the only Imperial cities

of note that fill continued refratory.

* Skid. 474. 491.
END OF THE THIRD VOLUME.
