THE

HISTOR

OF

A M E R I C A.

CONTAININO

THE IIISTORT OF VIRGINIA,

TO Till TEAR 1688; AND

THE HIISTORY OF NEIl ENGLAND,

TO THE TEAR i65l.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

rIiNCIAL OP TNHE UWNI SITT OF EDINIUIGH, RISTOIIOG-

IAAHEI TO MIS MAJE rl you SCOTLAND, AND

JLIMBR OF THE ROO AL ACADkMT 0O

MISTOAT AT MADI1D.

A NEW EDITION.

B A sI L: printed and fold by JAMES DECNER.
ST A SB Iu o : fold by F. G. LEVEAULT.

M D CC C.

# ADVERTISEMENT.

ADVERTISEMENT.

T HE original plan of my Father, the
late Dr. Roberfon, with rerpeQt to the
Iliflory of America, comprehended not
only an account of the discovery of that
country, and of the conquefls and co-
lonies of the Spaniards, but embraced
also the hiflory of the British and Por-
tuguefe Eflablishments in the New World,
and of the Settlements made by the fe-
Seral nations of Europe in the WVeft India
islands. It was his intention not to have
pubhshed any part of die Work until the
i hole was completed. In the Preface to
his Ililory of America, he has fated the
reasons w hich induced him to depart from
that resolution, and to publish the Two
Volumes whlich contain an account of the

d lco\ ery of the New World, and of die
progrels of l e Spanish arms and colo-
n es in that quarter of the globe, lIe
t)as, l he ha 1 m Ie some progress in
li Iflstory of Bi ush \mcnca;" and he
anooun es |us intcnt on to rtIurni to ijat
p rt of I as Work, as soon as thle fcr-
ruent i\\ ch at il it time prevaded an the
Ilnusl Color ins in Amenca, sl oul I flub-
f c, an I regular goi emment xbe re- flab-
1 I ed. \ an us can cs concurred in pre-
e cnung I am from I Il II r g I as int nuon.

Dunng dti co Ir eofa wie orts llnts,

Islich Ie c rly f re w s\olid ha\e a
St.l Icrminat n, Dr. R xrt on at dif-
firent umcs dcfiroed man) of I s prs.
Blt after I s ik sh, I f un I that part of
t e ilif ry o BI a sh Amenca \ltich I e

d
l role
ad mar

yi rm

y he re, and hluch

as now ofT( rrd to t e Publ c. Ic is u ntren
\idih I ts own hait d, as all I m 1orks
were; it as carefully corriled as at y
rart of I s \fanufcrl s i udich I hai e et cr

seen; and he had thought it iworthy of
be ng prerln ed, as it escaped tie flames
to w hsch To many other papers had been
committed. I read it \\ith the utmott
attention; but, btfore I came to any re-
rs it on about the publication, I put the
MS.ir to the hands offome of those friends
i horn my Father ufcd to confullt on fudch
occalfons, as it v ould have been rashness
and pre unpl on in me to have trunfed to
my own partial deafion. It was perused
by rome other pcrfons al o, in w ho e tafle
and judgment I have the greatest con-
f tence: by all of them I was encouraged
t) offer at to ti c Pubhc, as a fragment
run us and interefing in itfilf, and not
a en r to any of my Fad er's Works.

1Whcn I determaned to follow that

ad\tce, at was a arcumfLance of great
\eC ht isth me, dtat as I never could
ii k my elf at lberty to declroy thofo
papers ~ l alc my Father had thought

Srnl y of being prefenred , and as I

a

could not know into i hose hands they
might hereafter fall, I confdecred it as
certain that they would be publhshed at
some future period , ~ hen they might
meet ith an Editor, w ho, not being
aCuated by the Lame sacred regard for
the reputation of dthe Author which I feel,
might make alterations and additions, and
obtrude the iw'hole on the Public as a
genuine and authentic iwork. The MS.
is now published , such as it was left by
the Author; nor ha\ e I presumed to make
any addition, alteration, or correclion
,i hatever.

W* ROBERTSON.

April

i I; .

# THE LIFE OF THE AUTHOR.

THE LIFE

T H E AUTIIO R,

WCTILLIAM ROIERTSOW was born a the
parsonage house of Borthwick, near Dalkeith, in
t7it. His father, a refpelable clergyman, and
learned in that species of knowledge which oc-
cupied the chief attention of Scotch divines in
the earlier part of this century, was called to
be one of the ministers of the city of Edinburgh, in
the Old Grey-friars church. At the High-School
William received his claflical education, and
thence removed to the University of the fame
place. During his continuance at College, a
circumflance happened which tended to flimulate
the exertion of his powers. Young men, some
originally belonging to the fame seminary, othen
from different Colleges, having formed a connec-
ton, inflituted a small society for literary im-
provement and philosophical dfrquifition. Among
there were Mr. Adam Ferguson from St. Andrews

a4

University, since so eminent in moral and political
science; Mr. Hugh Blair, no less diftinguilbed in
elegant literature than his friend in profound;
Mr. John Home, who has since introduced the
Tragic Muse to the Scottish woods; Mr. Alexander
Carlyle, the inadequacy only of whore exertions
to his powers has precluded the attainment of
the fame literary eminence; and Mr. Alexander
Wedderburne, diftinguilfed for genius and lhter.s
ary emertions among the ablest youths of the circle
in which he then moved, as now by his genius,
legal, and parliamentary efforts, in the exalted
flation which he fills.

In this juvenile society there was, befrdes the

ability of its members, another cause that tended
to their improvement: they were not all deflined
to the fame profeflion. Scotch fludents of divinity,
during the first forty years of this century, confined
their associations too much to members of their
own body, and thence, naturally, to exclusively,
profellional objedis, and even those by no means
on the liberal and enlarged plan molT conducive
to profeflional utility. Polemic divinity was almost
the sole fubjeQ of their inquiries. That fludy
they followed too much, according to the plans
handed down from their puritanical predecessors.
Their sermons were deeply tinaured with the

enthufiafic canr and fanmiliar coarfener of the
Covenanters. The ability of Profcffor iVdllam
Hamilton produced the commencement of a fa-
vorable change; the talents and learning of Dr.
Wilhart, an increase of improvement. Still,
however, literature and science had many obflaclcs
to encounter in the Scottish Universities; nor were
they such as might have bell formed and dire~led
such minds as a Fergufon's, a Wedderborne's,
and a Robertfon's. There minds, indeed, were
such as seldom retain the charadcriflic of any
particular seminary; they form and charaaerize
themselves. In a society of young men of vi.
gorous talents and different eflimations, there
was necessarily an enlarged circle of fubjeds of
discussion. The variety and multiplicity expand-
ed the mind; the contelt of generous emulation
sharpened and invigorated the faculties; while the
knowledge previoufy necessary for their exercises,
and the examination it was to undergo, increased
extent and accuracy of attainment, and produced
close habits of invefligation. The members of
the society, in whatever particulars they might
severally differ, agreed in being informed, juA,
and able reafoners.

Taste was beginning to advance in Scotland

as well as liberal knowledge and science. Accuracy

and elegance of composition became prevalent
among our associated youths, as well as extent
and depth of information and powers of difcuflion.
Mr. Robertfon's efforts of youth exhibited those
charateriflics which afterwards flill more strongly
marked the prdduAions of his manhood. He
was diftinguilbhed chiefly for his power of com-
bination, for his comprehensive views, for mak-
ing the reader or hearer perfealy acquainted with
aaions, their series, their causes, and effeas; for
tracing his fubjedt to the source, and following
it throughout its various branches; for marking
the diftindive features of each part, and the ge-
neral afped of the whole; for a clear and fa-
tisfadory representation of fads, with their ad-
jun~ds; for a most acute and perfed investigation
of principle and cause, and dedudion of con-
sequences. His narrative, abounding in logical
and philosophical excellence, was enriched,enliven-
ed, diversified, and beautified with the pleasing
imagery which vivacity and force of fancy bestow,
aided and embellilhed by dclearnes, propriety,
and elegance of diaion.

In 1744, ' Mr. Robertson was ordained miniAier

of Gladfmuir.

I The late Dr. Robert Hamilton, the learned, able, and

worthy Paofellor of Divinity in Edinburgh, informed the writer

The first public theatre that offered ' for the

display of his talents was the General Aflcmbly
of the Church of Scotland. It is the annual
meetings of this court that produce to view men
who would otherwise remain in the deepest ob-
fcurity. There the humble paflor, whole lot has
been cast in the remotef corner of the Highland
wilds, feels himself, for a time, on a footing of
equality with the first citizen in the kingdom: he
can there dispute with him the prize of eloquence,
the most flattering diftindion to a liberal mind,
a rliftinaion which is naturally fought after with
the greater eagerness in that assembly, as the
simple eftablilbment of the church of Scotland
has rendered it the only pre-eminence to which
the greatest part of its members can ever hope
to attain.

The clergy of Scotland have long been divided

into two parties: the one has fought for popular
favor, by cherilhing those sentiments of bigotry
and fanaticism, to which the people there were
so unhappily disposed: the other has uniformly

of this article that Mr. Iobertfon was born ia April i71s, and
ordained miniter in 1746. He, however, has adopted the com.
mon account of his birth and first preferment, whuch makes
both somewhat earlier.

a See Encyclopadla Britaooica, vol. pvL. p.8.

endeavoured to check or to eradicate those senti.
mnents, and to enlablil the principles of rational
and moderate religion in their place. At the
head of the moderate party, when Mr. Robertson
entered the church, was Mr. Thomas Tulideph,
Principal of the united College of St. Andrew's,
a gentleman of great talents, clear, manly, and
forcible eloquence. A valetudinarian slate of
health not long after prevented Principal Tulideph
from taking that a(cive concern in the direaion
of the Assembly that he had bellowed on it while
his health permitted the exertion of his vigorous

powers.

The clergy began to look on young Robertson

as the man that was deflined to be at the head
of the fuciety to which he belonged. The penetra-
tion, indeed, of principal Tulideph anticipated,
in the first essays of Robertson, not only a leader
of the church, but a leader of literature, design-
ed to throw a lufire on the body to which he
belonged, and on the country which gave him
birth. This was an opinion which Mr. Tulideph
declared both in public and in private to a con-
fidential friend, on hearing a speech from Mr.
Robertson in the assembly of 1749. 2 Mr.

1 Or about that time. The conidentlal friend was Mr.

Adam Fargafon, miniter of Monlia, in Perthihire; a tery

Robertson was equally able in reply as in opening
a question; and as there were men of considerable
powers on the opposite fide, his talents were
improved and strengthened by the contention of
public debate, as they had at an earlier flage
been invigorated by the juvenile contests of private
societies.

The first publication of Mr. Robertson was a

sermon preached at Edinburgh, before the ' So-
ciety for propagating Christian Knowledge,' and
afterwards publilhed; the fubjea of which was,
' The slate of the world at the appearance of
Jesus Chrift.' In this prodution the talents of
the hilftorian and philosopher were manifefl; the
genius which combined to many circumstances in
themselves detached, and of which the co-opera-
tion would have escaped a writer of ordinary
discernment; and thowed their tendency to one
great objet. This work, publilhed in a collec-
tion of sermons by clergymen of the Church of
Scotland, and from them entitled the ' Scotch
Preacher,' merits the peculiar attention of those
who would with to trace the advancing mind of

able supporter of the moderate party, both when condul&ed
by Principal Talideph, and afterwards by Dr. Roberfon himselF.
By Mr, Ferguson it was ommunicated to the writer of this
article.

Robertson. Tile performance in queflion increaf.
ed the reputation which his eloquence in the
Assembly had procured, and accelerated his ad-
million to an Edinburgh living.

The chief object which exerted the powers

and occupied the attention of Robertson was the
hiitory and' charader of man, less indeed, as a
fubjed of pneumatology than as modified by
different periods of civilization, different forms
ofpolicy, and other circumfiances, either essentially
connected or accidentally co-operating with these.
That the powers of Robertson were not adequate
to the most profound metaphysical exertions, it
would be presumptuous to assert; that he could
not have penetrated into the recesses of intellec
and affeQion with as much force as Locke and
Hutchinson, or with the more experimental,
close, and fuccefsful investigation of a Reid, it
would be arrogance in common men to affirm.
In fad, however, it was the active force of man,
as determined by the Rfate of society, more than
the anatomy of his mind, that Dr. Robertson
considered.

In 1759 he published, in two volumes quarto

" The Hiflory of Scotland during the Reigns of
Queen Mary and King James VI. till his Ac-
ceflion to the Crown of England, with a Review

of

of the Scots History previous to that Period.
This work, in its ftruaure, is one of the most
complete of modern histories. It is not a dry
jejune narrative of events deflitute of ornament,
nor is it a mere frothy relation, all glow and
coloring. The historian discovers a fufficient
force of imagination to engage the reader's atten-
tion, with a due proportion of judgment to
check the exuberance of fancy. The arrangement
of this work is admirable, and the descriptions
are animated. His flyle is copious, nervous, and
correa Important and interesting as the period
itself is, one of the chief sources of inflrnmAon is'
the exhibition of the institutions, manners, and
cuffoms of the times, - the government and
religion in themselves, and as affedted by these in
combination with the events. While chivalry
engages our affedions in the cause of a beautiful
and lovely woman in difirefs, and policy, perhaps
men, more aauated by underfitanding and less by
feeling, may conned the supremacy of Elizabeth,
and the annihilation of Mary's power, with the
existence of the Protestant religion and fuccefsful
opposition to the combination of despotism, goad-
ed by bigotry; and though virtue cannot approve
the motives of the English Queen, nor the means
which the employed, yet patriotism may rejoice

b

that the machinations of the St. Bartholomew
massacre did not, in England, possess an auxiliary;
who, though not ofafanguinary disposition herself,
was by ties of blood and of faith so closely conne&-
ed with the leaders of the Catholic league.

The opinion of Robertson concerning the guilt

of Mary has been earneilly disputed by Messrs.
Tytler, Stuart, and Whitaker. To enter into
this difcufion would ill suit our confined limits.
Without inquiring whether his conclusion, refped-
ing that one fubjed, was perfeQly just; we cannot
help thinking, that even on that fubjed, accord-
ing to the evidence before him, his inference was
probable, and his reasoning on the means of
ascertaining accessary guilt, very able. Whether
Mary, however, was innocent orguilty, is only
a single quefiion, the solution of which either
way does not affea this work as an objea of
Qriticifm, and an accemfion to philosophical hiflory.
One of the chief excellencies in the History of
Scotland, after importance of narrative, perspicuity
of arrangement, exhibition of human nature in
general, is the portraits of particular charaden.
Even the charader of Mary herself is drawn by
thb hand of a master, with the most vigorous
conception, most acute, and nice discrimination,
atd even, we will not hesitate to fay, with a

most candid liberality, according to the facts that
he had contemplated, 4.

For his first publication the profits of Dr. Ro-

bertfon were very inconsiderable for so valuable
a work. We have heard that the copy-right was
fold for three hundred pounds. But the fuccefa
of the work gave Dr. Robertson a very high
place in the temple of Fame. Home only pre-
vented him from the highest place among modern
hiforians.

In 1761 Dr. Robertson was appointed PrinR

cipal of the University; soon after Hitloriographer
to his Majefly for Scotland, and one of his Ma-
jefty's Chaplains for that kingdom.

Dr. Robertson became now acquainted with

men of the highest rank in the literary and
political world. In the habits of intimacy with
Johnson, the vigorous and penetrating mind of
Robertson comprehended the character of that

4 The reader will observe that wre limit ottr obfervatiot

entirely to the testimony which Dr. Robertson himself had coa-
Gidered, as he found it in the writings of the historians of the
time, and the inferences to which Mary's condua both before
and after the death of her husband, led contemporary and
subsequent writers to draw, and apparently without any groL
violation of probability. We are far from asserting that both
dire& testimony and probable inference may not have bee.
*verturned by stronger testimony and fironger reaioninu

bq

extraordinary man; admired his acute, forcible,
and profound underfianding; rich, firong, and
brilliant imagination, and most retentive memory,
1itored with the most accurate and extensive know-
ledge; but did not, like some of the intimates
of the Litchfield sage, admit him to be equally
able on every fubjea. Masterly as were the
writings of Johnson in philology, criticism,
biography, and ethics, Robertson would by no
means allow him equal merit in politics, and confi-
dered his bright understanding, when exercised
on such fubjeas, as darkened by the narrow
prejudices of high- church bigotry. Robertson
became also well acquainted with Edmund Burke;
who, as the friend of liberty, without licentiousness;
of order, without arbitrary power; of religion,
without bigotry; was in sentiments more congenial
to Robertson himself.

The success of his first great literary effort en-

couraged him to farther exertion. Delineation of
9man was his favorite employment. He had already
traced him as modified by the effeats of the
northern irruptions into the Roman Empire by -"
feudal infltitutions which the conquests of the
northern invaders produced, by the manners
resulting from those inflitutions, and from religion.
But his difquifitions had been chiefly confinedb

to man in one country. In the natural progress
of a great mind, expanding its views as it advanced
in acquirement, he took a much wider survey
of the phenomena of human nature, and of tile
causes by which these were affjeed. He projeced
a work which SHOULD CONNECT ANCIENT TO MO-
DERN MAN; lihould Ihow how the human character
had degenerated in Europe from the time of the
Romans; and following it to the lowest abyss
of darkness, ignorance, and barbarism, mark
its beginning efforts to rife; attend it in its progress;
describe its exertions until it reached a period of
light, knowledge, and civilization. He chose as
his fubjea the Reign of the Emperor Charles V.
' It was," as he observes in his preface, 'daring
his administration. that the powers of Europe
were formed into one great political system, in
which each took a station, wherein it has since
remained, with less variation than could have
been expeaed after the shocks occasioned by so
many internal revolutions, and so many foreign
wars. The great events which happened then
have not hitherto spent their force. The political
principles and maxims then eftablilhed still continue
to operate. The ideas concerning the balance
of power, then introduced or rendered general,
still influence the councils of nations.' The sift

b3

volume contains a view of the progress of society
in Europe, from the subversion of the Roman
Empire to the beginning of the sixteenth century.

A critical investigation of so celebrated a work

as the History of Charles V. would be superfluous.
Amidst a great variety offubordinate excellence,
its leading charaderiftics are, the combination of
every material either of fad or refledion, which
can exhibit the aaual slate of society at the time
described, and extend our knowledge of man as
a social, civil, and political being; with that
lucid arrangement which results from a mind of
the most penetrating discernment and enlarged
comprehension; viewing every part and relation
of its fubjeas, and the whole together; informing
us concerning man's aaual fiate at different periods,
and inftruding us in the means of meliorating his
charater and condition. The clearness and force
of the language was an adequate, and its elegance
and harmony a pleating vehicle of wisdom.

The History of Charles V. was fold for 4,5ool.

and publihled in 1769. The publication of this
performance extended over Europe a literary re-
putation that had, before been chiefly confined
to Britain.

This history made only part of the great plan

according to which Robertson had projected to

delineate man. He had there traced European
society as influenced by causes belonging to Europe
itself; another objea discovered at the conclusion
of the period of his retrofped was pregnant with
events and consequences moil important to the
European slates; and thus a fubjeQ of political
investigation: while it presented man under a
different afped from any ofthofe we had formerly
beheld; and thus afforded matter for the most
momentous, philosophical, and moral inquiries.
An historian of less skill and genius might have
probably considered the discovery of America in
its mere relation to the power or opulence of
the Spanish Empire during that period. The
genius of Robertson was not for viewing a fubjea1
in so detached lights. ' Every (he says, in his
preface to Charles V.) intelligent reader will eb-
serve one omiflion in my work, the reason of
which it is necessary to explain. I have given
no account of the conquests of Mexico and Peru,
or of the eftablilhment of the Spanish colonies in
the continent and islands of America. The history
of these events I originally intended to have relat-
ed at considerable length. But upon a nearer
and more attentive consideration of this.part of
my plan, I found that the discovery of the New
World; the state of society among its ancient

b4

inhabitants; their charaaer, manners, and arts;
the genius of the European settlements in its various
provinces, together with the influence of these
upon the fyflems of policy or commerce in Eu-
rope, were fubiedts so splendid and important,
that a superficial view of them could afford little
fatisfaCion; and, on the other hand, to treat of
them as extensively as they merited, must pro-
duce an episode disproportionate to the principal
I have, therefore, reserved these for a separate
hiflory; which, if the performance now offered
to the public shall receive its approbation, I pur-
pose to undertake.'

Views ¶ and sketches of the New World had

been given by able writers: and splendid portions
of the American fitory had been adorned with all
the beauties of eloquence. But prior to the ap-
pearance of Dr. Robertfon's history, no author
had bestowed the mature and profound inveftiga-
tion which such a fubjea required, or had finilhedl
tpon a regular plan, that complete narration and
perfea whole which it is the province of the
historian to transmit to pofierity. The history of
the New World 6 gives us the fpedacle of savage

; See Encyclopzdia Britannica, vol. xvL p. 309.
4 See Monthly Review, vol. lvii p. 47.

life in a more perfet form than it is elsewhere
to be found. In other records we fee men in a
low degree of civilization, and mark the progress
and improvement of our species; here only we
remount to the first footfieps of the human race;
we trace the nations from the nursery and the
cradle, and behold man in his original slate, new
from the hand of 'nature.

Dr. Robertson gives therefore a striking proof

of his judgment in beftowing so much learned
* research, and devoting so large a part of his book
to illufirate the early state of the American nations.
In the fourth book of his first volume, he displays so
much patient investigation and found philosophy;
abounds in such beautiful and interesting defcrip-
tion; and exhibits such variety and copioufnefi
of elegant writing; that future times will probably
refer to it as that part of his works which gives the
best idea of his genius, and is the most finilhed of
' all his producions. In his inquiries into the bodily
constitution of the Americans, the qualities of
their minds; their domestic, civil, and political
state and inflitutions; their arts, their religion,
their manners, and their customs; he, instead of
imputing their character and condition to physical
nature, with vigorous and strong sense, and found
philosophy, ascribes them to moral and political

causes. The history is a very important addition
to Britifi flores of hiflorical information , philoa
fophical inftrudtion, and elegant literature. By
his Hiflory of America he not only supported,
but increased his fame.

Engaged as Robertson was in laborious research

and profound invefligation, he 1ill continued to
be the leading clergyman in the General Assembly.
The chief point of debate,among the representatives
of the Scottish church, was concerning the gift of
livings. The moderate party approved of the
disposition eflablifhled by the law of patronage;
their opponents were anxious for popular elec-
tions; and not without policy, as, if the populace
were to be the eledtors, an ignorant, superficial,
declamatory, puritanical demagogue might have
procured the popular voice in preference to a
Leechman, a Campbell, or a Robertson.

In 1778, a motion having been made by one

of the leaders of the popular party (in which
there werenot wanting men ofconfiderable ability)
for petitioning the legislature not to extend to
Scotland a late ad for relieving the Catholics in
England, Dr. Campbell replied in a speech of
great acuteness, chiefly irony. Mr. Dundas, the
chief Lay member of the assembly, perceiving
that a considerable part of the mover's arguments

proceeded on very ignorant assumption concerning
its origin, with his usual clearness, and accuracy
of historical knowledge, rated to the house the
precise and special circumstances that had led the
legislature, at a particular junaure in the reign
of King William, to enaa the law in question;
and with his accustomed strength demonfitrated
the absurdity and injustice of fuffering a law
affecing a numerous body of people to remain
unrepealed, when the special reasons for it had
ceased. Dr. Robertson argued on the fame fide
as his friend Mr. Dundas; and proved the Ca-
tholic character, in civilized countries, to have loft
great part of its noxious nature, and consequently
to be no longer deservedly fubjeded to reftridions
formerly expedient, and even necessary. The
moderate leaders became extremely unpopular.
Puritanical incendiaries represented Dr. Robertson
as favorable to the establishment of the Catholic
faith. Alfociations were formed by mechanics
and manufacturers, to oppose popery, and ex.
press their reprobation of those clergy who had,
they said, betrayed the cause of the preibytery,
and were engaged in an unlawful commerce
with the lady of Babylon; the weavers of Glasgow,
Renfrew and Paisley displaying a peculiar zeal
against the dodrines ofAnti-chrift. The puritanical

papaphobia was again becoming violent. The
populace was inflamed, and role to tumult
and riot in various places. At Edinburgh, a
party of those enlightened theologians, the Leith
sailors, took the lead in flirring up vengeance
against the enemies of that religion , for the
knowledge and pratice of which they were
themselves so eminently distinguished. Assisted
by many other divines, they set fire to chapels
and houses of the papifts. They threatened to
destroy the house of Dr. Robertson; but a guard
of soldiers secured every avenue to the college;
and before these precautions were taken, even
his person might not have escaped from fanatical
fury, had he not taken refuge in the Castle of
Edinburgh.

In the following Assembly, in May 1779, on

a question relative to the Catholic laws, Dr.
Robertlon made a speech, in which both sides
of the house allowed that he had equalled if not
surpassed the best former efforts of his own
eloquence; and proved to the fatisfadion even
of his opponents, that his conduat had been
such, in the whole of the business, as to merit
their approbation. For some years after this
little business occurred before the Assembly that
could call forward the talents of a Robertson,

he retired from that theatre on which he ha4 so
long eminently diftinguilhed himself.

In 1787 appeared a translation of the Abbe

Clavigero's History of Mexico; in which work
the author threw out various refledions, tending
in several points to impeach the credit of Dr. Ro-
bertfon's History of America. This attack in-
duced our learned hiflorian to revile his work, and
to inquire into the truth of the charges brought
against it by the historian of New Spain ; and this he
appears to have done with a becoming attention to
the importance of the fads that are controverted,
and to the common interests of truth. The result
he publilhed in 1788, under the title of 'Additions
and Corretions to the former Editions of Dr.
Robertfon's History of America.' In many of
the disputed passages, he fully answered the
Abbe Clavigero, and vindicated himself: in others,
he candidly submitted to correction, and thus
gave additional value to his own work 1.

In 1791 he publifled an 'Hiftorical Difquifi.

tion concerning the Knowledge which the An-
cients had of India, and the Progress of Trade
with that Country prior to the Discovery of the
Passage to it by the Cape of Good Hope; with

7 See Encyclopadia Britanaics, voL xvi. p. 309.

an Appendix, containing observations on the
Civil Polity, the Laws, and Judicial Proceedings,
the Arts, the Sciences, and Religious Inflitu-
tions of the Indians.' The perusal of Major
Rennell's Memoir, for illustrating his map of
Indoftan, fuggeflted to Dr. Robertson the design
of examining more fully than he had done, in
his History of America , into the knowledge
which the ancients had of India, and of con-
fidering what is certain, what is obscure, and
what is fabulous, in their accounts of that re-
mote country. This was not the only fubjeQ
which employed his literary exertions after his
retirement from public life. The last year gave
to the world the present, very valuable pofthu.
mous work.

Dr. Robertson had long enjoyed a very vi-

gorous conflitution; but about the year 1789
his health began to decline. He was seized with
a lingering illness, which he bore with a fortitude
worthy of his philosophical mind, and the re-
fignation of a Christian Minister. After frequent'
intermiflions, his distemper, in 1793, became
more severe than ever. On the ilth of June
he breathed his last, at Grange - House , hi
country- feat, near Edinburgh.

The close and vigorous application which,

through a long life, enabled Dr. Robertfon's
great intelleCtual powers to leave monuments of
delight and inftrucion to the remotest posterity,
did not prevent him from enjoying the pleasures
of fecial intercourse. He was very happy in
his own family, had great pleasure in parties
of friends and intimates, and not onftrequently
joined in larger and more mixed, companies.
He was no enemy to the convivial meetings
which Scottish hospitality so often produces in
the good town of Edinburgh. In company he
was extremely entertaining; he had a great fund
of agreeable anecdote , facetious humor, and
an excellent colledion of good stories, which he
told with much pleasantry and point. Although,
as a discriminating observer and able painter, he
could bring forward very strong and poignant
satire when he chose; yet he was far from being
habitually satirical. In his common conversation
you must fee that he was a very acute, discern-
ing, and facetious man: you might discover that
he was a wife man: but he did not, exhibit his
wisdom for the mere ostentatious display of fu-
periority. In his manners he was affable, pleas-
ing, and unassuming: in the various relations
of life, exemplary and efitiable.

Dr. Robertson was rather under the middle

size, well proportioned, and fitrongly limbed.
His countenance, though not handsome, indicat-
ed amiableness of disposition, and expressed the
force of his underflanding. His dark eyes were
uncommonly penetrating.

The Doaor left three sons and two daughters.

The eldeit son is Procurator for the Church of
Scotland, and an Advocate. The other two are
officers in the army; and one of them diflinguilh-
ed himself under Lord Cornwallis, in such a
manner as to command the warmest praise from
that illustrious General.

# BOOK IX.

THE

HISTORY

OF

A M E R I C A.

BOOK IX.

T H E dominions of Great Britain in America B

o K

are next in extent to those of Spain. Its acquifi- Spirits

tions there are a recompence due to those enter- adventure
prifing talents which prompted the Engliih to ~laan b
enter early on the career of discovery , and to Columbus's
pursue it with persevering ardor. England was daicovein'eB
the second nation that ventured to visit the New
WVorld. The account of Columbus's fuccefsful
voyage filled all Europe with astonishment and
admiration. But in England it did something
piore; it excited a vehement desire of emulating
the glory of Spain, and of aiming to obtain some
fihare in those advantages which were expeCed in
this new field opened to national activity. The
attention of the Engliih court had been turned
towards the discovery of unknown countries, by
its negociation with Bartholemew Columbus.
Henry VII. having liftenad to his propoiitions

0 o o K with a more favorable ear than could have been
Ix. expeoted from a cautious, diflrufiful' prince,

averse by habit as well as by temper to new and
hazardous projecs, he was more easily induced
to approve of a voyage for discovery, proposed
by some of his own fubjeds, soon after the return
of Christopher Columbus.

heckeda by But though the English had spirit to form this

.. ne scheme, they had not, at that period, attained

tion; to such skill in navigation as qualified them for

carrying it into execution. From the inconsiderate
ambition of its monarchs, the nation had long
wasted its genius and acivity in pernicious and
ineffectual efforts to conquer France. When this
ill-directed ardor began to abate, the fatal contest
between the houses of York and Lancaster turned
the arms of one half of the kingdom against. the
other, and exhausted the vigor of both. During
the eourfe of two centuries, while indufiry and
commerce were making gradual progress, both
in the south and north of Europe, the Engliih
continued so blind to the advantages of their own
situation, that they hardly began to bend their
thoughts towards those objects and pursuits, to
which they are indebted for their present opulence
and power. While the trading vessels of Italy,
Spain, and Portugal, as well as those of the Hans
Towns, visited the most remote ports in Europe,
and carried on an ative intercourse with its
various nations, the English did little more than
creep along their own coasts, in small barks,
.vhich conveyed the produtioin of one county tq

another. Their commerce was almost wholly Ba o o
passive. Their wants were supplied by firangers; Ix.
and whatever necessary or luxury of life their own
country did not yield, was imported in foreign
bottoms. The cross of St. George was seldom
displayed beyond the precinais of the narrow
seas. Hardly any Englifl Ilhip traded with Spain
or Portugal, before the beginning of the fifteenth
century; and half a century more elapsed before
the Engliflh mariners became so adventurous as to
enter the Mediterranean.

In this infancy of navigation, Henry could not Expedition

commit the condut of an armament, destined 'from Brifto,
to explore unknown regions, to his own fiubjeds. command
He invefited Giovanni Gaboto, a Venetian adven- of Cabot.
turer, who had fettled in Bristol, with the chief
command and issued a commission to him and
his three sons, empowering them to fail, under
the banner of England, towards the east,. north
or weft, 'in order to discover countries 'noccupied
by any Christian fate; to take poffeffion of them
in his name, and to carry on an exclusive trade
with the inhabitants, under conditidn of paying
a fifth part .of the free profit on every vcyage to
the crown: This commiifion was granted on
March 5th, 1495, in less than two years after the
retxrn of Columbus from America ,. But Cabot
(for that is the name he afThmed in England, 'in'd.
by which.he is best known) did not fet'eodtsori
his voyage for two years.'. He, together with his

Ba

e
o o K second fbn Sebastian, embarked at Briflol, on
Jx board a ship furnifled by the king, and was ac-
May. Rompanied by four small barks, fitted out by the

merchants of that city.

Cabot disco- As in that age the most eminent navigators,
o'"dnd.- formed by the inftrudions of Columbus, or
and fails animated by his example, were guided by ideas
along the derived from his superior knowledge and expe-
virginia. fjience, Cabot had adopted the system of that

great man, concerning the probability of opening
a new and fliorter passage to the East Indies, by
holding a weftrrn course. The opinion which
Columnbu? had formed, with refped to the islands
which he had discovered, was universally received.
They were supposed to lie contiguous to the great
continent iU India, and to conflitute a part of
the yaft countries comprehended under that ge-
neral name, Cabot4 accordingly, deemed it pro.
bable, that by fleering to the north-west, . he
mnight reach India by a shorter course ·thah. that
which Columbus had taken, and hoped to aill in
with thel coast of Cathay y or China, of whole
fertility and opulence the descriptions of Marco
Polo had excited high ideas. After.failing for
some weeks due we.aft and nearly on the parallel
of the port from which he took his departure,
he discovered a large island, which he called
Pninmp Vista, and hisfailorn Newfoundland~i and
in afawwdays he defcrieda fmaUer isle, to which

une 4. hie gave ath ai~neo Stfilobn. He landed on

both these, made some observations on their foil
and produaions, and brought off three ofithe

natives. Continuing his course westward, he soon B o oa
reached the continent of North America, and L
failed along it from the fifty-fixth to the thirty-
eighth degree of latitude, from the coast of Labra4
dor to that of Virginia. As his chief objeA was
to discover -some inlet that might open a passage
to the weft, it does not appear that he landed
any where during this extensive run; and he re-
turned to England, without attempting either
settlement or conquest in any part of that continent-.
- If it had been Henry's purpose to prosecute the Henry does
objed of the commission given by him to Cabot, nr prO it by
and to take poffeflion of the countries which he covery;
had discovered, the success of this voyage must
have answered his most sanguine expetations,
His filbjeas were, undoubtedly, the first Euro-
peans who had visited that part of the American
continent, and were entitled to whatever right of
property prior discovery is supposed to confer.
Countries which fitretched in, an uninterrupted
course through such a large portion of the ternm
perate zone, opened a profpea of fettling to ad-
vantage under mild climates, and in a fertile foil.
But by the time that Cabot returned to England,
he found both the state of affairs and the king's
inclination unfavotable to' any scheme the exe-
cution of which would have required tranquillity
and leisure. Henry was involved in a war with
Scotland, and his kingdom was not yet fully
composed after the commotion excited by a

S Monfon's Naval Tra&s, in Churchill's Colled. iii. sir.

B3

0 o o K formidable infurretion of his own fiibjctds in the
Ix. weft. An ambassador from Ferdinand of Arragon

was then in London; and as He'hry set a high
value upon the friendflhip of that monarch, for
whose charater he profefled much admiration,
perhaps from its similarity to his own, and was
endeavouring to strengthen their union by nego-
ciating the marriage which afterwards took place
between his eldest son and the princess Catharine,
he was cautious of giving any offence to a prince,
jealous to excess of all his rights. From the po-
fition of the islands and continent which Cabot
had discovered, it was evident that they lay within
the limits of the ample donative which the bounty
of Alexander VI. had conferred upon Ferdinand
and Isabella. No person, in that age, questioned
the validity of a papal grant; and Ferdinand was
not of a temper to relinquilh any claim to which
he had a ftadow of title. Submiflion to the au-
thority of the Pope, and deference for an ally
whom he courted, seem to have concurred with
Henry's own situation, in determining him to
abandon a scheme, in which he had engaged with
some degree of ardor and expedation. No
attempt towards discovery was made in England
during the remainder of his reign; and Sebastian
Cabot, finding no encouragement for his acive
talents there, entered into the service of Spain 3.

S Some schemes of discovery seem to have been formed in

England towards the beginning of the sixteenth century. But as
there is no other memorial of them, than what remains in a
patent granted by the king to the adventurers, it is probable

This is the most probable account of the sudden B'o ok

cessation of Henry's adtivity, after such success in rx.
his firit essay as might have encouraged him to mediate fuc.
persevere. The advantages of commerce, as well ce*frs.
as its nature, were so little understood in England
about this period, that by an aCt of parliament
in the year 1488, the taking of interest for the use
of money was prohibited under severe penalties *.
And by another law, the profit arising from deal-
ing in bills of exchange was condemned as favour-
ing of usury (. It is not surprising, then, that
no great effort Thould be made to extend trade,
by a nation whose commercial ideas were still so
crude and illiberal. But it is more difficult to
discover what prevented this scheme of Henry VII.
from being resumed during the reigns of his son
and grandson; and to give any reason why no
attempt was made, either to explore the northern
continent of America more fully, or to fettle in it.
Henry VIII. was frequently at open enmity with
Spain: the value of the Spanish acquisitions in
America had become so well known, as might have
excited his desire to obtain some footing in those

that they were feeble or abortive proje&s. If any attempt had
been made in consequence of this patent, it would not haveefca-
ped the knowledge of a compiler so induatrious and inquisitive
as Hakluyt. In his patent, Henry reftrits the adventurers froum
encroaching on the countries discovered by the kings of Porty-
gal, or any other prince in confederacy with England. Ry-
mer's Fcedera, vol. xiii. p. y7.

4 3Heu. VII. o . ¶ Ibid. e,6

0.o 0 x opnlent regions; and during a confidcrable part

X. of his reign, the prohibitions in a papal bull would

not have restrained him from making encroach-
ment upon the Spanifli dominions. But the reign
of Henry was not favorable to the progress of
discovery. During one period of it, the acive
part which he took in the affairs of the continent,
and the vigor with which he engaged in the con-
test between the two mighty rivals, Charles V.
and Francis I., gave full occupation to the enter-
prifing spirit both of the king and of his nobility.
During another period of his adminiflration,,his
famous controversy with the court of Rome kept
the nation in perpetual agitation and suspense.
Engrossed by those objets, neither the king nor
the nobles had inclination or leisure to turn their
attention to new pursuits; and without their patro-
page and aid, the commercial part of the nation
was too inconsiderable to make any effort of con-
sequence. Though England, by its total separation
from the church of Rome, soon after the acceflion
of Edward VI., disclaimed that authority, which,
by its presumptuous partition of the globe between
two favorite nations, circumscribed the ativity
of every other slate within very narrow limits,
yet a feeble minority, diftraded with fation, was
not a juncture for forming schemes of doubtful
success and remote utility. The bigotry of Mary,
and her marriage with Philip, disposed her to pay
a sacred regard to that grant of the Holy See,
which vested in a husband, on whom flhe doted,
an exclusive right to every part of the New World.

Thus, through a singular succession of various Bo o x
causes, fixty-one years elapsed from the time that Ix.
the Englilh discovered North America, during
which their monarchs gave little attention to that
country which was destined to be annexed to their
crown, and to be a chief source of its opulence
and power.

But though the public contributed little towards Expedition

the progress of discovery, naval ikill, knowledge tA mSeth
of commerce, and a spirit ofenterprife, began to under the
spread among the English. During the reign of bo

mm a

Henry VIII.. several new channels of trade were Cabot.
opened, and private adventurers visited remote
countries with which England had formerly no
intercourse. Some merchants of Bristol having
fitted out two thips for the southern regions of
America, committed the condua of thenm to
Sebastian Cabot, who had quitted the service of iis.
Spain. Hevifited the coasts ofBrafil, and touched
at the islands of Hispaniola and Puerto Rico; and
though this voyage seems not to have been bene-
ficial to the adventurers, it extended the sphere of
English navigation, and added to the national flock
of nautical science 6. Though disappointed in their
expectations of profit in this first essay, the mer-
chants were not discouraged. They font, fuccefi
fively, several vessels from different ports towards
the fame quarter, and seem to have carried on
an interloping trade in the Portuguese settlements
with success 7. Nor was it only towards the weft,

rHakinyt, iii. 49L tIi. i..a

a o a K that the adtivity of the Englilh was direced. Other

Ix. merchants began to extend their commercial views

to the east; and by establishing an intercourse with
several islands in the Archipelago, and with some
of the towns on the coast of Syria, they found a
-fiew market for woollen cloths, (the only manu-

facture which the nation had begun to cultivate,)
and supplied their countrymen with various pro-
dudions of the east, formerly unknown, or received
from the Venetians at an exorbitant price s.

rnfc-cenfal But the discovery of a shorter passage to the East

d"i cov Indies, by the north-west, was still the favorite
north-west projeC of the nation, which beheld, with envy,
afage to the vast wealth that flowed into Portugal, from

its commerce with those regions. The scheme was
accordingly twice resumed under the long admi.

17 and niftration of Henry VIII.; firit, with some slender
36. ' aid from the king, and then by priyate merchants.

Both voyages were disastrous and unfucceisful. In
the former, one of the ships was loft. In the lat-
ter, the stock of provisions was so illproportioned
to the number of the crew, that although they
were but fix months at sea, many perilhed with
hunger, and the survivors were confirained to sup-
port life by feeding on the bodies of their dead
companions 9.

Sir Hugh The vigor of the commercial spirit did not

ls int ih relax in the reign of Edward VI. The great fifllery
of a north, on the banks of Newfoundland became an objec
fa passage. of attention; and from some regulations for the

8 Hakluyt, ii. 96, &c.
9 Ibid. i. 213, &9. iii. t9, 13o.

encouragement of that branch of trade, it f'eems B o o S
to have been prosecuted with adtivity and fuc- x.
cess 1o. But the profpeCl of opening a communi-
cation with China and the Spice Islands, by some
other route than round the Cape of Good Hope, -

iull continued to allure the English, more than.
any scheme of adventure. Cabot, whose opinion
was deservedly of high authority in whatever re-
lated to naval enterprise, warmly urged the Eng-
lifh to make another attempt to discover this pas-
sage. As it had been thrice searched for in vain,
by fleering towards the north-west, he proposed
that a trial should now be made by the north-eaftl
and supported this advice by such plausible rea-
sons and conjedures, as excited sanguine expec-
tations of fiuccefs. Several noblemen and'perfons
of rank, together with some principal merchants,
having associated for this purpose, were incorpo-
rated, by a charter from the king, under the
title of The Company of Merchant Adventurers for
the Discovery of Regions , Dominions, Islands,
and Places unknown. Cabot, who was appointed
governor of this company, soon fitted out two Ix.
thips and a bark, furnilhed with infirudions in his
own hand, which discover the great extent both
of his naval skill and mercantile sagacity.

Sir Hugh Willoughby, who was intrufted with May i.

the command, flood direatly northwards along
the coast ofNorway, and doubled the North Cape.
But in that tempestuous ocean, his small squadron

£o Hakluyt, iii. 13r.

a o o K was separated in a violent florm. Willoughby's

Ix. thip and the bark took refuge in an obscure har-

bour in a desert part of Ruffian Lapland, where
he and all his companions were frozen to death.

Willoughby Richard Chancelour, the captain of the other vessel,
f'hiGfhip$ was more fortunate; he entered the White Sea,
winters at and wintered in safety at Archangel. Though no
Archangel. vessel of any foreign nation had ever vilited that

quarter of the globe before, the inhabitants recei-
ved their new visitors with an hospitality which
would have done honor to a more polilhed peo-
ple. The English learned there, that this was a
province of a vast empire, fubje6t to the Great
Duke or Czar of Muscovy, who resided in a great
city twelve hundred miles from Archangel. Chan-
celour, with a spirit becoming an officer employed

captain in an expedition for discovery, did not hesitate a
sMofcow. moment about the part which he ought to take,

and set out for that distant capital. On his arrival
'in Moscow, he was admitted to audience, and
delivered a-letter which the captain of each flhip
had ireceived from Edward VI. for the sovereign
of whatever country they fliould discover, to John
Vafilowitz, who at that time filled the Ruffian
throne. John, though he ruled over his fubjeds
with the cruelty and caprice of a barbarous despot,
- was not destitute of political sagacity. He inflantly
perceived the happy consequences that might flow
from opening an intercourse between his domi-
nions and the western nations of Europe; and,
delighted with the fortunate event to which he was
indebted for this unexpedced benefit, he treated

.Chancelour with great refped; and, by a letter B o oK.
to the king of England, invited his fubjefls to Feb. x

4,

trade in the Ruffian dominions, with ample pro-
mises of protection and favor z.

Chancelour, on his return, found Mary seated Trade open.

on the Engliih throne. The success of this voyage, ea with
the discovery of a new course of navigation, the
eitablifhment of commerce with a vast empire, the
name of which was then hardly known in the weft,
and the hope of arriving, in this direction, at those
regions which had been so long the objedt of de-
fire, excited a wonderful ardor to prosecute the
delign with greater vigor. Mary, implicitly gui-
ded by her husband in every ad ofadminiftration,
was not unwilling to turn the commercial adivity
of her fubjeCds towards a quarter, where it could
not excite the jealousy of Spain, by encroaching
on its poffeffions in the New World. . She wrote
to John Vafilowitz in the most refpedful terms,
courting his friendlhip. She confirmed the char-
ter of Edward VI., empowered Chancelour, and
two agents appointed by the Company, to fiego.
ciate with the Czar in her name; and according
to the fpirit-of that age, the granted an exclusive
right of trade with Russia to the Corporation of
Merchant Adventurers 12. In virtue of this, they
not ohlyreftablifhed an active and gainful c6m-
mnerc&,with Russia, but, in hopes of reaching
China) fhey puflhed their discoveries eaftwardLs to
the coast of Nova Zembla, the Straits ofWaigatd

1

Hai nylut, i. gst~ &c. is: bid. ss8, &s..

B 0 0 K and towards the mouth of the great river Oby.

But in those frozen seas, which Nature seems not
to have destined for navigation, they were expo.
fed to innumerable difafiters, and met with fuccef-
five disappointments.

communica. Nor were their attempts to open a communica-
tion with I-
di by lnd. tion with India made only in this channel. They

appointed some of their faAtors to accompany the
Ruffian caravans, which travelled into Perlia by
the way of Aftracan and the Caspian Sea, infiruc-
ting them to penetrate as far as possible towards
the east, and to endeavour, not only to establish
a trade with those countries, but to acquire every
information that might afford any light towards
the discovery of a passage ,to China by the north-
east s3. Notwithstanding a variety of dangers to
which they were exposed in travelling through so
many provinces, inhabited by fierce and licen-
tious nations, some of these factors reached Bokara,
in the province of Chorafan; and though prevented
from advancing farther by the civil wars which
desolated the country, they returned to Europe
with some hopes of extending the commerce of
the Company into Persia, and with niuch intelli-
gence concerning the slate of those remote regions
of the east '4.

axpedidoa The fuccefsful progress of the Merchant Adven-
to the co turers in discovery, routfed the emulation of their

countrymen, and turned their aacivity into new
phannels. A commercial intercourse , 'hitherto

II Hakluyt, L. 30!. 14 Ibid. 310, &&t

unattempted by the English, having been opened B o "o x
with the coast of Barbary, the specimens which Ix,
that afforded of the valuable produdions of As-
rica, invited some enterprising navigators to visit
the more remote provinces of that quarter of the
globe. They failed along its weflern fllore, traded
in different ports on both sides of the Line, and
after acquiring considerable knowledge of those
countries, returned with a cargo ofgold-duft, ivory,
and other rich commodities, little known at that
time in England, This commerce with Africa
seems to have been pursued with vigor, and was
at that time no less innocent than lucrative; for as
the Englilh had then no demand for slaves, they
carried it on for many years, without violating
the rights of humanity. Thus far did the Englifli
advance during a period which may be considered
as the infant slate of their navigation and com4
merce; and feeble as its steps at that time may
appear to us, we trace them with an interesting
curiofity,and look back with fatisfadion to the early
essays of that spirit which we now behold in the
full maturity of its strength. Even in those first
efforts of the Englifl, an intelligent observer will
discern presages of their future improvement. As
- soon as the activity of the nation was put in motion,
it took various directions, and exerted itself in
each with that steady, persevering induitry, which
is the foul and guide of commerce. Neither dif-
couraged by the hardihips and dangers to' which
they were exposed in those northern seas which
they first attempted to explore, nor afraid. of

B o o K venturing into the sultry climates of the torrid zone,

Ix. the English, during the reigns of Henry VIII.,

Edward VI., and Mary, opened some of the most
considerable sources of their commercial opulence,
and gave a beginning to their trade with Turkey,
with Africa, with Russia, and with Newfoundland.

Reign ofEli- By the progress which England had already made
zabeth aupi- in navigation and commerce, it was now prepared
cilous to diL.
covery. for advancing farther; and on the accession of

Elizabeth to the throne, a period commenced,
extremely auspicious to this spirit which was rising
in the nation. The domestic tranquillity of the
kingdom, maintained, almost without interrup-
tion, during the course of a long and prosperous
reign; the peace with foreign nations, that sub-
sifted more than twenty years after Elizabeth was
seated on the throne; the Queen's attentive eco-
nomy, which exempted her fubjeds from the
burden of taxes oppreflive to trade; the popu-
larity of her administration; were all favorable
to commercial enterprise, and called it forth into
vigorous exertion. The discerning eye of Elizabeth
having early perceived that the security of a king-
dom, environed by the sea, depended on its
naval force, the began her government with ad-
ding to the number and strength of the royal navy;
which, during a fadtious minority, and a reign
intent on no objet but that of fupprefling heresy,
had been negleted, and fuffered to decay. She
filled her arsenals with naval stores; The built
several ships of great force, according to the ideas
of that age, and. encouraged her fubjeds to imitate

her

her example, that they might no longer depend B o o
on foreigners from whom the English had hitherto x.
purchased all vessels of any considerable burden 2.*
By those efforts, the skill of the English artificers
was improved, the number of sailors mecreafed,
and the attention of the public turned to the navy,
as the most important national object. Initead
of abandoning any -of the new channels of com-
merce which had been opened in the three pre-
ceding reigds, the English frequented them with
greater assiduity, and the patronage of their fover-
eign added vigor to all their efforts. In order to
secure to them the continuance of their exclusive
trade with Russia, Elizabeth cultivated the con-
nexion with John Vafilowitz, which had been
formed by her predecessor, and, by successive
embassies, gained his confidence so thoroughly,
that the English enjoyed that lucrative privilege
during his long reign. She encouraged the Com-
pany of Merchant Adventurers, whose monopoly
of the Ruffian trade was confirmed by ad of par-
liament '4, to resume their design of penetrating
into Persia by land. Their second attempt, con- xs',,
duded with greater prudence, or undertaken at
a more favorable junture than the first, was
more fuccefsful. Their agents arrived in the Per-
fian court, and obtained such protection and im-
munities from the Shah, that for a course of
years they carried on a gainful commerce in his

iS Camd. Annales, p. 7o. edit. 1615 foL
14 Hakluyt, L 369.

m a o a kingdom "r; and by frequenting the various pro-

I. vinces ofPerfia, became so well acquainted with

the vast riches of the eaRs, as flrengthened their
delign of opening a more dired.intercourfe with
those fertile regions by sea.

Frobisher But as every effort to accomplish this by the
make th north-east had proved abortive, a scheme was
discover the formed, under the patronage of the Earl of War-
"orth-w wick, the head of the enterprising family of Dud-

ley, to make a new attempt, by holding an op-
pofite course by the north-welt. The condud of
this enterprise was committed to Martin Frobisher,

zir6, 's77, an officer of experience and reputation. In three
and n78s. fucceflive voyages he explored the inhospitable

coast of Labrador, and that of Greenland, (to
which Elizabeth gave the name of Meta Incognita,)
without discovering any probable appearance of
that passage to India for which he fought. This
new' tifappointment was sensibly felt, and might
have damped the spirit of naval enterprise among
the English, if it had not resumed fresh vigor,
amidst the general exultation of the nation, upon

sir Francis the fuccefsful expedition of Francis Drake. That
Drake fails bold navigator, emulous of the glory which Ma-
world. gellan had acquired by failing round the globe,

formed a scheme of attempting a voyage, which
all Europe had admired for lixty years, without
venturing to follow the Portuguese discoverer in his
adventurous course. Drake undertook this with
a feeble squadron, in which the largest vessel did

£5 Hakluyl~, 1. 344, &in.

not exceed a hundred tons, and he accomplished B o o K
it, with no less credit to himself, than honor to iX
his country. Even in this voyage, condndted with
other views, Drake seems not to have been inat-
tentive to the favorite objeRc of his countrymen,
the discovery of a new route to India. Before he
quitted the Pacilic Ocean, in order to stretch
towards the Philippine islands, he ranged along
the coast of California, as high as the latitude of
forty-two degrees north, in hopes of discovering,
on that fide, the communication between the two
seas, which had to often been searched for in vain
on the other. But this was the only unfuccefsful
attempt of Drake. The exceflive cold of the cli-
mate, intolerable to men who had long been ac.
cuitomed to tropical heat, obliged him to stop
short in his progress towards the north; and whether
or not there be any passage from the Pacific to the
Atlantic Ocean in that quarter, is a point flill
unafcertained 's.

From this period, the Engliflh seem to havre ,nthufiarm

confided- in their own abilities and courage, as ofdifcdve,'.
equal to any naval enterprise. They had now
'vifited every region to which navigation extended
in that age, and had rivalled the nation of highest
repute for naval flkill in its most splendid exploit'.
But notwithstanding the knowledge which they
had acquired of the different quarters of the globe,
they had not hitherto attempted any settlement
But of their own country. Their merchants had-

ts Hakluyt, iii. 440. Camd. Annal. 3ox, &c.

C 2.

9 o o K not yet acquired such a degree, either of wealth

Ixx or of political influence, as were requisite toward.

carrying a scheme of colonization into execution.
Persons of noble birth were destitute of the ideas
and information which might have disposed them
to patronize such a design. The growing power
of Spain, however, and the ascendant over the
other nations of Europe to which it had attained
under Charles V. and his son, naturally turned
the attention of mankind towards the importance
of those settlements in the New World, to which
they were so much indebted for that pre-eminence.
The intercourse between Spain and England, dur-
ing the reign of Philip and Mary; the resort of
the Spanish nobility to the Englifli court, while
Philip resided there; the study of the Spanilh lan-
guage; which became fashionable; and the trans-
lation of several hiflories of America into English,
diffufed gradually through the nation a more dif-
tiiit knowledge of the policy of Spain in planting
its colonies, and of the advantages which it derived
from them. When hostilities commenced between
Elizabeth and Philip, the profped of annoying
Spain by sea opened a new career to the enter-
prifing spirit of the Englilh nobility. Almost every
eminent leader of the age aimed at diftinguilhing
himfelfby naval exploits. That service, and the
ideas conneCted with it, the discovery of unknown
countries, the establishment of distant colonies,
and the enriching of commerce by new commo-
dities, became familiar to persons of rank.

In consequence of all those concurring causes, B o o K

the Englifl began seriously to form plans of set- ix.
tling colonies in those parts of America, which

of a ^ooy

hitherto they had only visited. The projeaors in North
and patrons of these plans were mostly persons of America.
rank and influence. Among them, Sir Humphry
Gilbert, of Compton in Devonihire, ought to be
mentioned with the diftindion due to the con-
dudor of the first English colony to America. He
had early rendered himself conspicuous by his
military services both in France and Ireland; arid
having afterwards turned his attention to naval
affairs, he published a discourse concerning the
probability of a north-west passage,. which disco-
vered no inconsiderable portion both of learning
and ingenuity, mingled with the enthusiasm, the
credulity, and sanguine expedations which incite
men to new and hazardous undertakings I?. With
those talents, he was deemed a proper person to
be employed in establishing a new colony, and
easily obtained from the Queen letters patent, Ju-ne t
veiling in him fufficient powers for this purpose.

, ss.

As this is the first charter to a colony, granted Charter

by the Crown of England, the articles in it merit granted by
particular attention, as they unfold the ideas of uen Eia.
that age, with refped to the nature of such fet-'
tlements. Elizabeth authorizes him to discover and
take poffeffion of all remote and barbarous lands,
unoccupied by any Christian prince or people.
She vests in him, his heirs and afligns for ever,

er Hakluyt, iii. ii.

C3

S0 O aI the full right of property in the foil ofthofe corn-
. tries whereof he shall take poffeflion. She permits

such of her-fubjeas, as were willing to accom-
pany Gilbert in his voyage, to go and fettle in the
countries which he ihall plant. She empowers
him, his heirs and afligns, to dispose of whatever
portion of those lands he Ihall judge meet to per-
sons fettled there, in fee-fimple, according to the
laws of England. She ordains, that all the lands
granted to Gilbert fiall hold of the Crown of
England by homage, on payment of the fifth part
of the gold or silver ore found there. She confers
upon him, his heirs and assigns, the complete
jurifdidions and royalties, as well marine as other,
within the said lands and seas thereunto adjoin-
ing; and as their common safety and interefl would
render good government necessary in their new
settlements, file gave Gilbert, his heirs and assigns,
full power to convic, punilh, pardon, govern,
and rule, by their good discretion and policy, as
well in causes capital or criminal as civil, both
marine and other, ill persons who Ifall from time
to time fettle within the said countries, according,
to such statutes, laws, and ordinances as fliall be
by him, his heirs and assigns, devised and eflab-
liflled for their better government. She declared,
that all who fettled there fllould have and enjoy
all the privileges of free denizens and natives of
Engiland, any law, custom , or usage to the con-
trary notwithstanding. And finally, the prohi-
bited all persons from attempting to fettle within
two hundred leagues of any place which Sir

Humphry Gilbert, or his associates, shall have B 0 0o
occupied, during the space of fix years Ts. Ix.

With those extraordinary powers, suited to Sirs expedi.

the high notions of authority and prerogative pre- tion fails.
valent in England during the sixteenth century,
but very repugnant to more recent ideas with.
" refpecl to the rights 6f free men, who voluntarily'
unite to form a colony, Gilbert began to collea
associates, and to prepare for embarkation. His
own charater, and the zealous efforts of his half-
brother, Walter Ralegh, who, even in his early
youth, displayed those splendid talents, and that
undaunted spirit, which .create admiration and
confi'dence, soon procured him a fufficient num-
ber of followers. But his success was not suited
either to the sanguine hopes of his countrymen,
or to the expense of his preparations. Two expe-
ditions, both of which he conduced in person,
ended disastrously. In the last, he himself perifhie rso.
ed, without having effeted his intended fettle,
ment on the continent of America, or perform.
ing any thing more worthy of notice, than the
empty formality of taking poffeffion of the island
of Newfoundland, in the name of his sovereign,
The dissensions among his officers; the licentious
and ungovernable spirit of some of his crew; his
total ignorance of the countries which he purposed
to occupy; his misfortune in approaching the con-
tinent too far towards the north, where the inhof-
pitable coast of Cape Breton did not invite them

18 Hakluyt, iii. 135 C4

B

o o x to fettle; the lnipwreck of his largest velffel and
Jx. above all, the scanty provision which the funds

of a private man could make of what was requisite
for eftabliflhing a new colony, were the true causes
to which the failure of the enterprise must be im-
puted, not to any deficiency of abilities or refo-
'lution in its leader I9.

The plan re. But the miscarriage of a scheme, in which
fumed by Ra. Gilbert had wasted his fortune, did not discourage

Ralegh. He adopted all his brother's ideas; and

us3. applying to the Queen, in whose favor he flood

March. 26. high at that time, he procured a patent, with

jurifdition and prerogatives as ample as had been
granted unto Gilbert 0o. Ralegh, no less eager

Arril 2y. to execute than to undertake the scheme, instantly

despatched two small vessels, under the command
of Amadas and Barlow, two officers of trust, to
visit the countries which he intended to fettle,
and to acquire some previous knowledge of their
coasts, their foil, and produaions. In order to

Dircovery or avoid Gilbert's error, in holding too far north,
Virginia they took their course by the Canaries and the

Weft India islands, and approached the North
American continent by the Gulph of Florida. Un-
fortunately their chief researches were made in that
part of the country now known by the name of
North Carolina, the province in America most
destitute of commodious harbours. They touch-
ed first at an island, which they call Wokocon
(probably Ocakoke), situated on the inlet into

19 Haklniyt, iii. I43, &c.
so Ibid. 243.

Pamplicoe Sound, and then at Raonoke, near B o o x
the mouth of Albemarle Sound. In both, they Ix.
had some intercourse with the natives, whom they
found to be savages, with all the charuteriftic
qualities of uncivilized life, bravery, aversion to
labor, hospitality, a propensity to admire, and
a willingness to exchange their rude produdaions
for English commodities, especially for iron, or
any of the useful metals of which they were defti-
tute. After spending a few weeks in this traffic,
and in visiting some parts of the adjacent conti-
nent, Amadas and Barlow returned to England sept. z5.
with two of the natives, add gave such splendid
descriptions of the beauty of the country, the ser-
tility of the foil, and the mildness of the climate,
that Elizabeth, delighted with the idea of occupy-
ing a territory, superior, so far, to the barren
regions towards the north hitherto visited by her
fubjedts, bellowed on it the name of Virginia; as
a memorial that this happy discovery had been
made under a virgin Queen 3-. -

Their report encouraged Ralegh to hasten his Colonyetab-

preparations for taking poffeffion of such an invit-, lifed in Vir-
ing property. He fitted out a squadron of fevenrt icab Si
small ships, under the command of Sir Richard Greenville.
Greenville, a man of honorable birth, and of
courage so undaunted as to be conspicuous even
in that gallant age. But the spirit of that preda-
tory war which the English carried on against
Spain, mingled with this scheme of settlement;

ai Hakluyt, iui. 24g.

B O 0 K and on this account, as well as from Unacquaint.

x. ance with a more dired and fliorter course to

North-America, Greenville failed by the Weft
India islands., He spend some time in cruising
among these, and in taking prizes; so that it was
towards the close of June before he arrived on the
coast of North America. He touched at both tihe
islands where Amadas and Barlow had landed,
and made some excursions into different parts of
the continent round Pamplicoe and Albemarle
Sounds. But as, unfortunately, he did not ad-
vance far enough towards the north, to discover

Au,,,, . the noble Bay of Chefapeak, he eftablifled the

colony which he left on the island of'Raonoke,
an incommodious flation, without any safe har-
bour, and almost uninhabited. .

lan aannr This colony conlified only of one hundred
of perihing and eighty persons, under the command of Captain

uefrn~tie Lane, afllifted by some men of note, the most

ngland. distinguished of whom was Hariot an eminent

mathematician. Their chief employment, during
a residence of nine months, was to obtain a more
extensive knowledge of the country; and their
researches were carried .on with greater spirit, and
reached farther than could have been expeced
from a colony so feeble, and in a flation so difad-
vantageous. But from the fame impatience of
indigent adventurers to acquire sudden wealth,
which gave a wrong direaion to the induflry of
the Spaniards in their settlements, the greater part

is Hakluyt, iii. 2ij.

of the Englifhl seem to have considered nothing as B o o
worthy of attention but mines of gold and silver. Ix.
These they fought for, wherever they came; there
they inquired after with unwearied eagerness. The
savages soon discovered the favorite objedcs which
allured them, and artfully amused them with to
many tales concerning pearl fiflieries; and rich
mines of various metals, that Lane and his com-
panions wasted their time and acQivity in the chi-
merical pursuit of these, instead of laboring' to
raise provisions for their own subsistence. On
discovering the deceit of the Indians, they were
so much exasperated, that from expoftulations
and reproaches, they proceeded to open hostility.
The supplies of provisions which they had been xssa
accustomed to receive from the natives were of
course withdrawn. Through their own negligence,
no other precaution had been taken for their sup-
port. Ralegh, having engaged in a scheme too
expensive for his narrow funds, had not been able
to fend them that recruit of stores with which
Greenville had promised to furnish them early in
the spring. The colony, reduced to the utmost
distress, and on the point of perifluing with famine,
was preparing to disperse into different difirids of
the country in quest of food, when Sir Francis Jue i
Drake appeared with his fleet, returning from a
fuccefsful expedition against the Spaniards in the
Weft Indies. A scheme which he formed, of fur-
nifhing Lane and his associates with such supplies
as might enable them to remain with comfort in
their station, was disappointed by a sudden storm,

B o o K in which a small vessel that he destined for their

IX. service was dadhed to pieces; and as lie could not

supply them with ahother, at their joint request,
as they were worn out with fatigue and famine,

June 19. he carried them home to England 23.
Gnowledge Such was' the inaulfpicious beginning of the
f t ount Englifl settlements in the New World ; and after
this expedi. exciting high expedations, this irflt attempt pro-
ti"J. duced no effec but that of affording a more com-

plete knowI.dge of the country; as it enabled
Harlot, a man of science and observation, to de.
scribe its foil, climate, produtions, and the man.
ners of its inhabitants, with a degree of accuracy
which merits no inconsiderable praise, when com-
pared with the childish and marvellous tales pub-
lifhed by several of the early vifitants of the New
World. There is another consequence of this
abortive colony important enough to entitle it
to a place in history. Lane and his associates, by
their constant intercourse with the Indians, had
acquired a relish for their favorite enjoyment of

Ufeoftobac- smoking tobacco; to the use of which, the cre-
co introduced dulity of that people not only ascribed a thousand
in England.

SEgad. imaginary virtues, but their fuperltition considered

the plant itself as a gracious gift of the gods, for
the solace of human kind, and the most acceptable
offering which man can present to heaven 4*.
They brought with them a specimen of this new
commodity to England, and taught their coun-
trymen the method of using it; which Ralegh,

a2 Hakluyt, iii. 2gg. Camd. Annal. 387.
na Hariot ap. Hakluyt, iii. 271. De Bry. America, Pars 1.

and some young men of falhion, fondly adopted. a o o It
From imitation of them , from love of novelty, x.
and from the favorable opinion of its salutary
qualities entertained by several physicians, the
pradtice spread among the Engliih. The Spaniards
and Portuguese had, previous to this, introduced
it in other parts of Europe. This habit of taking
tobacco gradually extended from the extremities
of the north to those of the south, and in one form
or other seems to be equally grateful to the in-
habitants of every climate; and by a singular ca-
price of the. human species, no less inexplicable
than unexampled, (so bewitching is the acquired
tafle for a weed of no manjfeft utility, and at first
not only unpleasant, but nauseous,) that it has
become almofl as universal as the demands of
those appetites originally implanted in our nature.
Smoking was the first mode of taking tobacco in
England; and we learn from the comic writers
towards the close of the sixteenth century and the
beginning of the seventeenth, that this was deemed
one of the accomplishments of a man of fajhion
and spirit.

A few days after Drake departed from Roanoke,

a small bark, despatched by Ralegh with a supply
offlores for the colony, landed at the place where
the English had fettled; but on finding it deserted
by their countrymen, they returned to England.
The bark was hardly gone, when Sir Richard
Greenville appeared with three fliips. After search-
ing in vain for the colony which he had planted,
without being able to learn what had befallen it,

a o o he left fifteen of his crew to keep poffefIion of the

x. illand. This handful of men was soon overpow-

ered and cut in pieces by the savages 1.

Ratseh's fe- Though all Ralegh's efforts to eflablifl a cblony
"fo atteamp in Virginia had hitherto proved abortive, and had
tony in vir- been defeated by a fucceflion of disasters and dis-
,""ia. appointments, neither his hopes nor resources
*ss., were exhausted. Early in the following year, he

fitted out three flhips, under the command of
Captain Jolhn White, who carried thither a colony
more numerous than that which had been fettled
under Lane. On their arrival in Virginiia, after
viewing the face of the countrycovered with one
continued forest, which to them appeared an
uninhabited wild, as it was occupied only by a
few scattered tribes of Iavages, they discovered
that they were destitute of many things which they
deemed essentially necessary towards their sub-
fiftence in such an uncomfortable situation; and,
with one voice, requefied White, their comman-
der, to return to England, as the person among
them most likely to solicit, with efficacy, the
fuipply on which depended the exiflence of the
colony. White landed in his native country at a
most unfavorable season for the negociation which
he had untertaken. He found the nation in uni-
versal alarm at the formidable preparations of
Philip II. to invade England, and collecting all
its force to oppose the fleet to which he had arro-
gantly given the name of the Invincible Armada.

41 Haktluyr, lii. z6~. aSZ.

Ralegh, Greenville, and all the most zealous BooR
patrons of the new settlement, were called to ad x.
a diflinguifhed part in the operations of a year Iss.
equally interesting and glorious to England. Amidit
danger so imminent, and during a contest for the
honor of their sovereign and the independence
of their country, it was impossible to attend to a
less important and remote objet. The unfortu- colony ie-
nate colony in Roanoke received no supply, and "i1 ,ly s.'
perished miserably by famine, or by the unrelent-
ing cruelty of those barbarians by whom they were
surrounded.

During the remainder of Elizabeth.s reign, Raleghabao-

the scheme of establishing a colony in Virginia gt o'

.

was not resumed. Ralegh, with a most aspiring tllng a o..
mind and extraordinary talents, enlightened by l.oa *' vi-
knowledge no less uncommon, had the spirit and
the defedts of a projetor. Allured by new ob-
jects, and always giving the preference to such as
were most splendid and arduous, he was apt to en-
gage in undertakings so vaift and so various, as to
be far beyond Pis power of accompliihing. He
was now intent on peopling and improving a large
diftriA of country in Ireland, of which he had
obtained a grant from the Queen. He was a deep
adventurer in the scheme of fitting out a powerful
armament against Spain, in order to eftablih Don
Antonio on the throne of Portugal. Hehad begun
to form his favorite, but visionary plan, of pene-
trating into the province of Guiana, where he
fondly dreamed of taking poffeflion of inexhauf-
tible wealth, flowing from the richest mines in

0 o o K the New World. Amidlt this multiplicity of pro.
ec. jects, offuch promising appearance, anti recomi

mended by novelty, he naturally became cold
towards his ancient and hitherto unprofitable
scheme of fettling a colony in Virginia, and was
easily iriduced to allign his right of property in
that country, which he had never vihted, toge-
ther with all the privileges contained in his patent,

March, <96x. to Sir Thomas Smith, and a company of mer-

chants in London. This company, satisfied with
a paltry traffic carried on by a few small barks,
made no attempt to take'pofleffion of the country.
Thus, after a period of a hundred and fix years
from the time that Cabot discovered North Ame-
rica, in the name of Hemlly VII. and of twenty
years from the time that Ralegh planted the first
colony, there was not a single Englishman fettled
there at the demise of Queen Elizabeth, in the
year one thousand fix hundred and three.

eircumnances I have already explained the causes of this,
in Elizabeth's during the period previous to the accellion of Eli-
oable to zabeth. Other causes produced the fame effea
tolonization. under her administration. Though for one half

of her reign England was engaged in no foreign
war, and commerce enjoyed that perfect security
which is friendly to its progress; though the glory
of her latter years gave the highest tone of eleva-
tion and vigor to the national spirit; the Queen
herself, from her extreme parsimony, and her
aversion to demand extraordinary supplies of her
fubjeas, was more apt to restrain than to second
the ardent genius of her people. Several of the

most

most splendid enterprises in her reign were con- B o o K
certed and executed by private adventurers. All IX
the schemes for colonization were carried on by
the funds of individuals, without any public aid.
Even the felicity of her government was adverse
to the establishment of remote colonies. So power-
ful is the attraction of our native foil, and such
our fortunate partiality to the laws and manners
of our own country, that men seldom chufe to
abandon it, unless they be driven away by oppref-
sion, or allured by vast profpeCs of sudden wealth.
But the provinces of America in which the Eng-
lilh attempted to fettle did not, like those occu-
pied by Spain, invite them thither by any ap-
pearance offilver or golden mines. All their hopes
of gain were distant; and they saw that nothing
could be earned but by persevering exertions of
industry. The maxims of Elizabeth's adminiftra-
tion were, in their general tenor, so popular, as
did not force her fubjedts to emigrate, in order to
escape from the heavy or vexatious hand of power.
It seems to have been with difficulty that there
slender bands of planters were colleAed, on which
the writers of that age bestow the name of the
first and second Virginian colonies. The fulness
of time for English colonization was not yet arrived.

But the succession of the Scottish line to the rsos. Reign

crown of England hastened its approach. James of James fa.

vorable to

was hardly seated on the throne before he dif- umeanabuli.
covered his pacific intentions, and he soon termi- ment of co.

loaies.

nated the long war which had been carried on
between Spain and England, by an amicable treaty.

D

a o 0 K From that period, uninterrupted tranquillity co

Ix. tinued during his reign. Many persons of high

rank, and of ardent ambition, .to whom the war
with Spain had afforded constant employment,
and presented alluring profpeds, not only of fame
but of wealth, soon became so impatient of lan-
guifhing at home without occupation or objed,
that their invention was on the fit;tch to find some
exercise for their adivity and talents. To both
these, North America seemed to open a new field,
and schemes of carrying colonies thither became
more general and more popular.

Direa coetre A voyage, undertaken by Bartholemew Gof-
from England nold in the las year of the Queen, facilitated, as
rka frfi at- well as encouraged, the execution of these schemes.
tempted by He failed from Falmouth in a small bark, with

thirty-two men. Infitead of following former navi-
gators in their unnecessary circuit by the Weft
India isles and the Gulf of Florida, Gofnold fleered
due weft, as nearly as the winds would permit,
and was the first English commander who reached
America by this florter and more dired course.
That part of the continent which he first descried
was a promontory in the province now called Maf-
fachufets Bay, to which he gave the name of Cape
Cod. Holding along the coast, as it stretched
towards the south-west, he touched at two islands,
one of which he called Martha's Vineyard, the
other Elizabeth's Island; and visited the adjoining
continent, and traded with its inhabitants. He
and his companions were so much delighted every
where with the inviting afped of the country, that

notwithflanding the smallness of their number, a B 0 o K
part of them consented to remain there. But IL
when they had leisure to refled upon the fate of
former settlers in America, they retracted a refo-
lution formed in the first warmth of their admira-
tion; and Gofnold returned to England in less than
four months from the time of his departure a.

This voyage, however inconsiderable it may Conrequence,

appear, had important effets. The Englilh now of Gofolold's
discovered the afped of the American continent to
be extremely invitinig far to the north of the place
where they had formerly attempted to fettle. The
coast of a vast country, firetching through the
most defihable climates, lay before them. The
richness of its virgin foil promised a certain recom-
pence to their indufiry. In its interior provinces
unexpeded sources of wealth might open , and
unknown objeds of commerce might be found.
Its distance from England was diminished almost
a third part, by the new course which Gofnold;
had pointed out. Plans for establishing colonies
began to be formed in different parts of the king-
dom; and before these were ripe for execution,
one small vessel was sent out by the merchants of
Bristol, another by the Earl of Southampton
and Lord Arundel of Wardour, in order to learn
whether Gofnold's account of the country was td
be considered as a just representation of its state,
or as the exaggerated description of a fond disco-.
verer. Both returned with a full confirmatioi

2a Purchas, iv. p. 1647.

a o o K of his veracity, and with the addition of so many

IX. new circumstances in favor of the country,

acquired by a more extensive view of it, as greatly
increased the desire of planting it.

Hakluyt im. The most ative and efficacious promoter of

,res thea this was Richard Hakluyt, prebendary ofWelt-

and naval minster, to whom England is more indebted for
finl of ha its American poffeffions than to any man of that

age. Formed under a kinsman of the fame name,
eminent for naval and commercial knowledge, he
imbibed a similar tafle, and applied early to the
fludy of geography and navigation. These favor-
ite sciences engrossed his attention, and to diffufe
a relilh for them was the great objeQ of his life.
In order to excite his countrymen to naval enter-
prise, by flattering their national vanity, he pub-
lilhed, in the year one thousand five hundred and
eighty-nine, his valuable colleation of voyages
and discoveries made by Englifihmen. In order
to supply them with what information might be
derived from the experience of the most fuccefsful
foreign navigators, he translated some of the belft
accounts of the progress of the Spaniards and Por-
tuguefe in their voyages both to the East and Weft
Indies, into the English tongue. He was consulted
with refped to many of the attempts towards dif-
covery or colonization during the latter part of
Elizabeth's reign. He corresponded with the offi-
cers who conduted them, direQed their researches
to proper objeds, and published the history of
their exploits. By the zealous endeavours of a
person, equally refpeaed by men of rank and men

of buLnefs, many of both *orders formed an B o o
af.oration to establish colonies in America, and. Ix.
petitioned the king for thefandion of his authority
to warrant the execution of their plans.

James, who prided himfelfon his profound flkill James dair-

in the science of government, and who had turned of the coaf
his attention to confider the advantages which America into
might be derived from colonies, at a time when two parts'
he patronized a scheme for planting them in fame
of the ruder provinces of his ancient kingdom,
with a view of introducing industry and civilization
there 26, was now no less fond of direding the
active genius of his English fubjeds towards occn-'
pations not repugnant to his own pacific maxims,
and listened with a favorable ear to their appli-
cation. But as the extent as well as value of the
American continent began now to be better known,
a grant of the whole of such a vast region to any
one body of men, however refpedable, appeared
to him an ad of impolitic and profuse liberality.
For this reason, he divided that portion of North
America, which firetches from the thirty-fourth
to the forty-fifth degree of latitude, into two dif-
tridts, nearly equal; the one called the first or
south colony of Virginia, the other, the second
or north colony. He authorized Sir Thomas Gates, i6os.
Sir George Summers, Richard Hakluyt, and their April IS.
associates, moflly resident in London , to fettle
any part of the former which they should chufe,
and vefied in them a right of property to the land

as Hist. of Scotland, ii. 239.

D3

a o o K extelding along the coast fifty miles on each fide

Ix. of the place of their firit habitation, and reaching

and grants into the interior country a hundred miles. The
charters to latter diflridt he allotted, as the place of fettle-
two Comp.
mies. ment, to sundry knights, gentlemen, and mer-

chants of Bristol, Plymouth, and other parts in
the weft of England, with a similar grant of ter-
ritory. Neither the monarch who issued this char-
ter, nor his fubjeds who received it, had any
conception that they were proceeding to lay the
foundation of mighty and opulent slates. What
James granted was nothing more than a simple
charter of corporation to a trading company, em-
powering the members of it to have a common
feal, and to a8t as a body politic. But as the ob-
jeEl for which they associated was new, the plan
eflablifhed for the adminifiration of their affairs
was uncommon. Inflead of the power nfually
granted to corporations, of eleting officers and
framing by-laws for the condud of their own ope.

Tenor or rations, the supreme government of the colonies
these char. to be fettled was vested in a council resident in

England, to be named by the king, according to
such laws and ordinances as should be given under
his figni manual; and the subordinate jurifdidion
was committed to a council resident in America,
which was likewise to be nominated by the king,
and to ad conformably to his inftrudions. To
this important clause, which regulated the form
of their confitution, was added, the concession
of several immunities, to encourage persons to
fettle in the intended colonies. Some of these were

the fame which had been granted to Gilbert and B o o K
Ralegh; such as the securing to the emigrants and Ix
their descendants all the rights of denizens, in the
fame manner as if they had remained or had been
born in England; and granting them the privilege
of holding their lands in America by the freest
and least burdensome tenure. Others were more
favorable than those granted by Elizabeth. He
permitted whatever was necessary for' the fufte-
nance or commerce of the new colonies to be ex-
ported from England, during the space of seven
years, without paying any duty; and as a farther
incitement to industry, he granted them liberty
of trade with other nations, and appropriated the
duty to be levied on foreign commodities, for
twenty-one years, as a fund for the benefit of
the colony 27.

In this singular charter, the contents of which Dereas of

have been little attended to by the historians of there char
America, some articles are as unfavorable to the
rights of the colonists, as others are to the interest
of the parent state. By placing the legislative and
executive powers in a council nominated by the
crown, and guided by its infirudtions, every
person fettling in America seems t'o be bereaved
of the noblest privilege of a free man; by the un-
limited permiflion of trade with foreigners, the
parent slate is deprived of that exclusive commerce
which has been deemed the chief advantage result.
ing from the eftablilhment of colonies. But in the

27 Stith. Hist of Virginia, p. 35. Append. p. x. Purchas,

V. 1683.

Bo o K infancy of colonization, and without de guidance .

Zx" of observation or experience, the ideas of men

with refped to the mode of forming new fettle-
ments, were not fully unfolded, or properly ar-
ranged. At a period when they could not foresee
the future grandeur and importance of the comrn
munities which the/ were about to call into exist-
ence, they were ill qualified to concert the best
plan for governing them. Besides, the Englifll of
that age, accustomed to the high prerogative and
arbitrary rule of their monarchs, were not ani-
mated with such liberal sentiments, either con-
cerning their own personal or political rights, as
have become familiar in the more mature and
improved slate of their conflitution.

colonies of Without helitation or reludance the proprie-
irginia an tors of both colonies prepared to execute their
load. refpedive plans; and under the authority of a

charter, which would now be rejeded with dif-
dain, as a violent invasion of the sacred and ina-
lienable rights of liberty, the firlt permanent set-
tlements of the English in America were efltablifhed.
From this period, the progress of the two pro-
vinces of Virginia and New England form a regu-
lar and conneded flory. The former in the south,
and the latter in the north, may be considered as
the origilnal and parent colonies; in imitation of
which, and under whose flelter, all the others
have been successively planted and reared.

Advantages The first attempts to occupy Virginia and New
of trarin" England were made by very fc'chle bodies ofemig-
the history of
tI coonies rants. As there fettled, under great disadvantages,

among tribes of savages, and in an uncultivated

- o o tt

desert; as they attained gradually, after long ftrug- in their in-
gles and many disasters, to that maturity of sant fate.
Ifrength, and order of policy, which entitles them
to be considered as refpedable slates, the history
of their persevering efforts merits particular atten-
tion. It will exhibit a fpeaacle no less firiking
than inftruaive, and presents an opportunity,
which rarely occurs, of contemplating a society
in the first moment of its political existence, and
of observing how its spirit forms in its infant slate,
how its principles begin to unfold as it advances,
and how those charaderiftic qualities, which dif-
tinguifl its maturer age, are successively accquired.
The account of the eftablifiment of the other
English colonies, undertaken at periods when the
importance of such poffeflions was better under-
flood, and effected by more dired and vigorous
exertions of the parent state, is less interesting. I
fliall therefore relate the history of the two origi-
nal colonies in detail. With refped to the fubfe-
quent settlements, some more general observations
concerning the time, the motives, and circum-
itances of their eftablilhment, will be fufficient. I
begin with the history of Virginia, the most an-
cient and most valuable of the British colonies in
North America.

Though many persons of diftindion became Newport

proprietors in the company which undertook to a.l fr-
plant a colony in Virginia, its funds seem not to
have been considerable, and its firit effort was
certainly extremely feeble. A small velfel of a

B o o K hundred tons, and two barks, undl the com-

Ix. mand of Captain Newport, failed with a hundred

and five men, dellined to remain in the country.
Some of these were of refpedable families, par-
ticularly a brother of the Earl of Northumberland,
and several officers who had served with reputation'
in the reign of Elizabeth. Newport, I know not
for what reason, followed the ancient course by

ido7. the WVeft Indies, and did not reach the coast of
A^pil 26. North America for four months. But he ap-

proached it with better fortune than any former
navigator; for having been driven, by the violence
of a fiorm, to the northward of Roanoke, the
place of his destination, the first land he discovered

Discovers the was a promontory which he called Cape Henry,
Chefapeak. the southern boundary of the Bay of ChefapeaL

The English flood diredly into that spacious inlet,
which seemed to invite them to enter; and as they
advanced, contemplated, with a mixture of delight
and admiration, that grand reservoir, into which
are poured the waters of all the vast rivers, which
not only diffufe fertility through that diftrid of
America, but open the interior parts of the country
to navigation, and render a commercial intercourse
more extensive and commodious than in any other
region of the globe. Newport, keeping along the
southern shore, failed up a river, which the natives
called Powhatan, and to which he gave the name

pais up Ja.- of James-River. After viewing its banks, during
pinc-River, a run of above forty miles from its mouth, they

all concluded that a country, where safe and con-
venient harbours seemed to be numerous, would

be a more suitable fation for a trading colony, B o ao
than the Ihoaly and dangerous coast to the south, Ix.
on which their countrymen had formerly fettled.
Here then they determined to abide; ajid having
chosen a proper spot for their residence, they gave
this infant settlement the name of James-Town, Founds Ja-
which it till retains; and though it has never men-Town,
become either populous or opulent, it can boast
of being the most ancient habitation of the Englilh
in the New World. But however well-chofen the
situation might be, the members of the colony
were far from availing themselves of its advan-
tages. Violent animofities had broke out among
some of their leaders, during their voyage to Vir-
ginia. These did not subside on their arrival there.
The first deed of the council, which assumed the
government in virtue of a commission brought Bad admi-
from England under the feal of the company, niitration.
and opened on the day after they landed, was an
ad of injufftice. Captain Smith, who had been
appointed a member of the council, was excluded
from his feat at the board, by the mean jealousy
of his colleagues, and not only reduced to the
condition of a private man, but of one fufpeded
and watched by his superiors. This diminution
ofhis'influence, and restraint on his activity, was
an essential injury to the colony, which at that
jundure flood in need of the aid of both. For
soon. after they began to fettle, the Engliflh were
involved in a war with the natives, partly by their
own indiscretion, and partly by the suspicion and
ferocity of those barbarians. And although the

B o O K Indians, scattered over the countries adjacent to

Jx. James-River, were divided into independent tri-

Colony an-
noved by the hes, so extremely feeble that hardly one of them
Indians. could muller above two hundred warriors as,

they teazed and annoyed an infant colony by their
inceflant hostilities. To this was added a calamity
fill more dreadful; the flock ofprovifions left for

June xn. their fubfiflence, on the departure of their ihips

for England, was so scanty, and of such had qua-
lity, that a scarcity, approaching almost to ab-

suffers from solute famine, soon followed. Such poor un-
Acarcity, and
the unheahi- wholesome fare brought on diseases, the violence
ners of the of which was foxnuch increased by the sultry heat
liimate, of the climate, and the moisture of a country co-

vered with wood, that before the beginning of
September, one half of their number died, and
most of the survivors were sickly and dejeded. In
such trying extremities, the comparative powers
of every individual are discovered and called forth,
and each naturally takes that flation, and alfumes
that ascendant, to which he is entitled by his ta-

smith called lents and force of mind. Every eye was now tur-
to the corn- ned towards Smith, and all willingly devolved
res the prof- on him that authority, of which they had formerly

riyof the deprived him. His undaunted temper, deeply

tindured with the wild romantic spirit char'adter-
iflic of military adventures in that age, was pe-
culiarly suited to such a situation. The vigor of
his conflitution continued, fortunately, flill un-
impaired by disease, and his mind was never"

s8 Purchas, vol. iv. 1692. Smith's Travels, p. *3.

appalled by danger. He instantly adopted the B o o K
only plan that could save them from deftruclion. zx.
He began by-furrounding James-Town with such
rude fortifications as were a fufficient defence against
the assaults of savages. He then marched, at the
head of a small detachment, in quest of their
enemies. Some tribes he gained by carelfes and
presents, and procured from them a supply of pro-
visions. Others he attacked with open force; and
defeating them on every occasion, whatever their
superiority in numbers might be, compelled them
to impart to him some portion of their winter
flores. As the recompence of all his toils and dan-
gers, he fawabundande and contentment re-eftab-
lifhed in the colony, and hoped that he fliould
be able to maintain them in that happy slate,
until the arrival of flips from England in the spring:
but in one of his excursions he was surprised by a
numerous body of Indians, and in making his
escape from them, after a gallant defence, he
funk to the neck in a swamp, and was obliged to
surrender. Though he knew well what a dread- He is taken
ful fate awaits the prisoners of savages, his prc- p""ioner by
fence of mind did not forsake him. He lltuwed
those who had taken him captive a mariner's com-
pass, and amused them with so many wonderful
accounts of its virtues, as filled them with aston-
ifhment and veneration, which began to operate
very powerfully in his favor. They led him, how-
ever, in triumph through various parts of the
country, and conducted him at last to Powhatan,
the most considerable Sachim in that part of

B o o K Virginia. There the doom ofdeath beingpronoun.

1X. ced, he was led to the place of execution, and

his head already bowed down to receive the fatal
blow, when that fond attachment of the Ameri-
can women to their European invaders, the bene.
ficial effects of which the Spaniards often expe-
rienced, interposed in his behalf. The favorite
daughter of Powhatan ruflied in between him and
the executioner, and, by her entreaties and tears,
prevailed on her father to spare his life. The be-
neficence of his deliverer, whom the early Eng-
lifh writers dignify with the title of the Princess
Pocahuntas, did not terminate here; file soon after
procured his liberty, and sent him from time to
time seasonable presents of provisions =9.

on his re- Smith, on his return to James-Town, found
turn, he nd the colony reduced to thirty-eight persons, who,
almost rin- in despair, were preparing to abandon a country

*d. which did not seem destined to be the habitation

of Englifllmen. He employed caresses, threats,
and even violence, in order to prevent them from
executing this fatal resolution. With difficulty he
prevailed on them to defer it so long, that the

Seasonable succour anxiously expeled from England arrived.
-clcours from Plenty was infitantly restored; a hundred new
England. planters were added to their number, and an

ample flock of whatever was requisite for clearing
and sowing the ground was delivered to them.
But an unlucky incident turned their attention
from that species of industry which alone could

29 Smith's Travels, p. 44, &c. Purchas, iv. 1704. Stith.

p. 45, &c.

render their situation comfortable. In a fmrall B o

o

fiream of water that ifllued from a bank of sand Ix"

Colonifls de-

near James-Town, a sediment of some shining ceivedbythe
mineral substance, which had some resemblance appearances
of gold, was discovered. At a time when the pre-
cious metals were conceived to be the peculiar
and only valuable productions of the New World,
when every mountain was supposed to contain a
treasure, and every rivulet was searched for its
golden sands, this appearance was fondly confi-
dered as an infallible indication of a mine. Every .
hand was eager to dig; large quantities of this
glittering duff were amassed. From some assay of
its nature, made by an artist as unskilful as his
companions were credulous, it was pronounced
to be extremely rich. "There was now" (says
Smith) "no talk, no hope, no work, but dig
" gold, wash gold, refine gold 30. " With this
imaginary wealth the first veflel returning to Eng-
land was loaded, while the culture of the land,
and every useful occupation, were totally neglected.

The effects of this fatal delusion were soon felt. Smith ander.

Notwithstanding all the provident aaivity of takes a fur..

vey of the

Smith, in procuring corn from the natives by country.
traffic or by force, the colony began td fuffer as
much as formerly from scarcity of food, and was
wasted by the fame diftempers. In hopes of ob-
taining some relief, Smith proposed, as they had
not hitherto extended their researches beyond the
countries contiguous to James-River, to open an

30 Smith's Travels, p. 53.

B o o K intercourse with the more remote tribes, and to

Ix. examine into the slate of culture and population

among them. The execution of this arduous de-
sign he undertook himself, in a small open boat,
with a feeble crew, and a very scanty flock of
provisions. He began his survey at Cape Charles,
and in two different excursions, which continued
above four months, he advanced as far as the river
Sufquehannah, which flows into the bottom of
the Bay. He visited all the countries both on the
east and weft thores; he entered most of the con-
fiderable creeks; he failed up many of the great
rivers as far as their falls. He traded with some
tribes; he fought with others; he obfcrvcd the
nature of the territory which they occupied, their
mode offubfiftence, the peculiarities in their man-
ners; and left among all a wonderful admiration
either of the beneficence or valor of the English.
After failing above three thousand miles in a paltry
vessel, ill fitted for such an extensive navigation,
during which the h'ardlhips to which he was ex-
posed, as well as the patience with which he en-
dured, and the fortitude with which lie fur-
mounted them, equal whatever is related of the
celebrated Spanish discoverers in their most daring
enterprifes,' he returned to James-Town; he
brought with him an account of that large portion
of the American continent now comprehended in
the two provinces of Virginia and Maryland 3'i
so full and exacM, that after the progress ot

information

21 Smith's Travels, p. 65, &c.

information and research for a century and a half, B o o g
his map exhibits no inaccurate view of both coun- IX
tries, and is the original upon which all fqbfequent
delineations and descriptions have been formed 31.
, But whatever pleasing profpe" of future bene-
fit might open upon this complete discovery of a
country formed by nature to be the feat of an ex-
clufive commerce, it afforded but little relief for
their present wants. The colony still depended
for subsistence chiefly on supplies from the natives;
as, after all the efforts of their own industry,
hardly thirty acres of ground were yet cleared so as
to be capable of culture 33. By Smith's attention,
however, the flores of the English were so regularly
filled, that for some time they felt no considerable
difirefs; and at this junaure a change was made in
the constitution of the company, which seemed
to promise an increase of their security and hap-
pinefs. That supreme direction of all the comr
pany's operations, which the king by his charter
had reserved to himself, discouraged persons of
rank or property from becoming members of .
society so dependant on the arbitrary will of the
crown. Upon a representation of this to James; rso9.
he granted them a new charter, with more am~le ay 3. A
privileges. He enlarged the ?oundaries of thb granted.
colony; he rendered the powers ps the company,
as a corporation, more explicit and complete; he
abolished the jurifdidtion of the council rfident
in Virginia; he vested the government entirely in

a; Stith, p. 83. 3; Ibid. p. 97.

BOoK a cOtunc1h residing in London; he granted to

Ix. the proprietors of the company the right of

eleating the persons who were to compose this
council, by a majority of voices; he authorized
this council to establish such laws, orders, and
forms of government and magistracy, for the
colony and plantation, as they in their difcre-
tion should think to be fittest for the good of
the adventurers and ithabitants there; he empow-
ered them to nominate a governor to have the ad-
ministration of affairs in the colony, and to carry
their orders into execution 34. In consequence of
these concefllions, the company having acquired
the power of regulating all its own tranfaaions,
the number of proprietors increased, and among
them we find the most refpedable names in the
nation.

lord aela. The first deed of the new council was to appoint
wiatre p Lord Delaware governor and captain-general of
wanor. their colony in Virginia. To a person of his rank,

those high-founding titles could be no allurement;
and by his thorough acquaintance with the pro-
grefs and fRate of the settlement, he knew enough
of the labor and difficulty with which an infant
colony is reared, to expea any thing but anxiety
and care in discharging the duties of that delicate
office. But from zeal to promote an establishment
which he expected to prove so highly beneficial
to his country, he was willing to relinquiflh all the
comforts of an honorable fRation, to undertake

24 Stith, Append. 8.

a long voyage to fettle in an uncultivated region Bo o Ki
destitute of every accommodation to which he

Ote

had been accustomed, and where he foresaw that summersap.
toil and trouble and danger awaited him. But as pointed to

command

he could not immediately leave England, the tin the ar-
council dispatched SirThomas Gates and Sir George rival of

Lord Dela.

Summers, the former of whom had been ap- ware.
pointed lieutenant-general and the latter admiral,
with nine ships and five hundred planters. They
carried with them commiflions, by which they
were empowered to supersede the jurifdidion of
the former council, to proclaim Lord Delaware
governor, and, until he should arrive, to take
the adminifiration of affairs into their own hands.
A violent hurricane separated the vessel in which Their lhip
Gates and Summers had embarked from the reft stranded oil

the coast of

of the fleet, and firanded it on the coaft' of Ber- Bermudas.
mudas. The other ships arrived safely at James- Augua u.
Town. But the fate of their commanders was
unknown. Their commission for new-modelling
the government, and all other public papers, were
supposed to be loft, together with them. The
present form of government, however, was held
to be aboliihed. No legal warrant could be pro-
duced for eftabliflhing any other. Smith was not'
in a condition at this junRure to assert his own
rights, or to ad with his wonted vigor. By an
accidental explosion of gunpowder, he had been
so miserably scorched and mangled, that he was
inc'apable of moving, and under the necessity bs
committing himfelt to the guidance of his friends,
who carried him aboard ono of the ships returning

Ea

B o O K to England, in Lopes that he might recover by

n. more skilful treatment than he could meet with

in Virginia 3,.

Anarchy in After his departure, every thing tended faA to
th colony. the wildest anarchy. Fadion and discontent had

often risen so high among the old settlers, that
they could hardly be kept within bounds. The
spirit of the new-comers was too ungovernable to
bear any restraint. Several among them of better
rank were such diflipated hopeless young men, as
their friends were glad to fend out in quest of
whatever fortune might betide them in a foreign
land. Of the lower order, many were so profli-
gate or desperate, that their country was happy
to throw them out as nuisances in society. Such
persons were little capable of the regular fubordi-
nation, the stria ceconomy, and persevering in-
duflry, which their situation required. The In-
dians observing their mifcondud, and that every
precaution for sustenance or safety was neglected,
not only withheld the supplies of provisions which
they were accustomed to furnilh, but harassed them

the cebolo with continual hostilities. -All their subsistence was
duced I' derived from the stores which they had brought

from England: these were soon consumed; then
the domeflic animals sent out to breed in the
country were devoured; and by this inconsiderate
'vafte, they were reduced to such extremity of
famine, as not only to eat the most nauseous and
anwholefome roots and berries, but to feed on

3s Purchas, iv. 1734, &c. Smith's Travels, p. 89. Stith,

f#. io6, &6.

the bodies of the Indians whom they flew, and B o o x
even on those of their companions who funk under VX
the oppression of such complicated distress. In
less than fix months, of five hundred persons
whom Smith left in Virginia, only sixty remain-
ed; and these so feeble and dejeated, that they
could not have survived for ten days, if succour
had not arrived from a quarter whence they did
not expec it 36.

When Gates and Summers were thrown afliore oates and

on Bermudas, fortunately not a single person on summer"-
board their ship perifled. A considerable part of emnudas.
their provisions and fltores too was saved, and in
that delightful spot, Nature, with spontaneous
bounty, presented to them such a variety of her
produtions, that a hundred and fifty people sub-
sifted in affluence for ten months on an unin.
habited island. Impatient, however, to escape
from a place where they were cut off from all
intercourse with mankind, they set about building
two barks with such tools and materials as they
had, and by amazing efforts of perfeverancb and
ingenuity they finished them. In these they em-
barked, and fleered diredly towards Virginia, in
hopes of finding an ample consolation for all their
toils and dangers in the embraces of their com-
panions, and amidst the comforts of a flourilhing
colony. After a more prosperous navigation than
they could have expected in their ill-confitruded
vessels, they landed at James-Town. But instead May ~3

2s Stith, p. 116. Purchas, iv. 1748.

E3

B o 0 K of that joyful interview for which they fondly

Lx looked, a fpeQacle presented itself which flruck

rind the co- them with horror. They beheld the miserable
tmny n remainder of their countrymen emaciated -with
tre&f. famine and sickness, funk in despair, and in their

figure and looks rather resembling fpeares than
human beings. As Gates and Summers, in full
confidence of finding plenty of provisions in Vir-
ginia, had brought with them no larger flock
than was deemed necessary for their own support
during the voyage, their inability to afford relief
to their countrymen, added to the anguiflh with

_. which they viewed this unexpeced scene ofdiftrefs.
Ix-gi.L Nothing now remained but inflantly to abandon

a country, where it was impossible to subsist any
longer; and though all that could be found in
the stores of the colony, when added to what re-
mained of the flock brought from Bermudas, did
not amount to more than was fufficient to fitpport
them for sixteen days, at the most scanty allow-
ance, they set fail, in hopes of being able to
reach Newfoundland, where they expeded to be
relieved by their countrymen employed at that
season in the fiflhery there 37.

Are aouat to But it was not the will of Heaven that all the
return to Eng- labor of the Englifl, in planting this colony, as
land , when
Lord Dela. well as all their hopes of benefit from its future
ware arrives. 'profperity, should be for ever loft. Before Gates,

37 A minute and curious account of the shipwreck of Gates

and Summers, and of their adventures in Bermudas, was com-
posed by Strachy, a gentleman who accompanied them, and was .
published by Purchas, iv. 1734.

and the melancholy companions of his voyage, had- . o o i
reached the mouth of James-River, they were met t
by Lord Delaware, with three flips, that brought
a large recruit of provisions, a considerable pumber
of new settlers, and every thing requisite for de-
fence or cultivation, By persuasion and authority
he prevailed on them to return to James-Town,
where they found their fort, their magazines, and
hpufes entire, which Sir Thomas Gates, by some
happy chance, had preserved from being set on
fire at the time of their departure. A society so
feeble and disordered in its frame required a tender
and skilful hand to cherifi it, and reflore its vigor.
This it found in Lord Deliaware: he searched into wie aidmi-
the causes of their misfortunes, as far as he could nifLration of

Lord Dela.

discover them, amidst the violence of their mutual wae.
accusations; but instead of exerting his power in
punilhing crimes that were past, he employed his
prudence in healing their dissensions, and in guard-
ing against a repetition of the fame fatal errors.
By unwearied alliduity, by the refpecl due to an
amiable and beneficent charater, by knowing
how to mingle severity with indulgence, ana when
to assume the dignity of his office t as well as when
to display the gentleness natural to his own tem-
per, he gradually reconciled men corrupted by
anarchy to subordination end difciplin he turn-
ed the attention of the idle and profligate to in-
duftry, and taught the Indians again to reverenpe
and dread the Englifll name. Under fuch' ani rwcr.

- .. March 8.

adminifiration, the colony began once more to ,~, health
assume a promising appearance; whpe Ahhappily ob6iges him

> E'l

B o o i for it, a complication of difeifus hrougl.t on by

Ix. the climate obliged Lord Delaware to quil the

to return to
England. country "8; the Sovcrnnicnt of 1which lie com-

mitted to Mr. Percy.

May 10. s;r lie was soon fuiperfi dcd by the arrival of Sir
ThnoasnDale Thomas D1le; in whom the compmin had vL fled
appo'nted go.
vernor. more absolute authority than in any of i i; pri ,le-
Narti l law ceffoi s, empovwering him to rule by mniu il w11 ;
ciablhlfeld, a fliort code of whlichl, found d on the praicce of

the armies in the Low Countries, the most ri id
military fchliool at that time in Europe, they rent
out with him. This f cfem of government is to
violent and arbitrary, that even the Spaniards
thcmfelves had not ventured to introduce it into
their settlements; for among them, as soon as a
plantation began, and the arts of peace fnccceded
to the operations of war, the julifdialion of the
civil magiflrate was uniformly cflabliflicd. But
however unconflitutional or opprefhive this may
appear, it was adopted by the advice of Sir F'rancis
Bacon, the most enlightened philosopher, and
one of the most eminent lawyers of the age 39.
The company, well acquainted with the ineflicacy
of every method which they had hitherto em-
ployed for reflraining the unruly mutinous spirits
which they had to govern, cagerly adopted a plan
that had the fanaion of fich high authority to re-
commend it. Happily for tile colony, Sir Thomas
Dale, who was intrufled with this dangerous
power, exercised it with prudence and moderation.

.S Stith, p. 11T. Purchas, iv. 1764.
39 Bacon, Essay on Plantations, p. 3.

By the vigor which the summary mode of military B o o K
punihm'nient gave to his administration, he intro- L.
duced into the colony more perfed order than
had ever been eftablilhed there; and at the fame
time he tempered its vigor with so much difcre-
tion, that no alarm seems to have been given by
this formidable innovation 40.

The regular form which the colony now began ,-.

to assume, induced the King to issue a new charter March I1.
for the encouragement of the adventurers, by iffied to the
which he not only confirmed all their former pri- colony: new
vileges, and prolonged tile term of exemption confere.'
from payment of duties on the commodities ex-
ported by them, but granted them more exten-
five property, as well as more ample jurifdidtion.
All the islands lying within three hundred leagues
of the coast were annexed to the Province of Vir-
ginia. In consequence of this, the company took
poffefflon of Bermudas, and the -other small isles
discovered by Gates and Summers; and at the
fame time prepared to fend out a considerable
reinforcement to the colony at James-Town. The
expense of those extraordinary efforts was defrayed
by the profits of a lottery, which amounted nearly
to thirty thousand pounds. This expedient, they
were authorized to employ by their new char-
ter 4r; and it is remarkable, as the lirft instance,
in the English history, of any public countenance
given to this pernicious seducing mode of levying
money. But the House of Commons, which

40 Btith, p. r2s.
41 Ibid, p. 191. Appendix, 23, &R,

B O 0 K towards the close of this reign began to observe

Ix. every measure of government with jealous atten.

tion, having remonflrated againfl the inflitution as
ulnconflitutional and impolitic, James recalled the
licence under the fandion of which it had been
eltabliTled 4.

cultivation By the severe discipline of martial law, the aai-
of thlnds vity of the colonifls was forced into a proper direc-

tion, and exerted itself in useful industry. This,
aided by a fertile foil and favorable climate, soon
enabled them to raise such a large flock ofprovi-
fions; that they were no longer obliged to trust
for fubfiflence to the precarious supplies which
they obtained or extorted from the Indians. In
proportion as the English became more indepen-
dent, the natives courted their friendlfip upon
more equal terms. The happy effects of this were

Treaty with quickly felt. Sir Thomas Dale concluded a treaty
the natives, with one of their molt powerful and warlike tribes,

iituated on the River Chickahominy, in which they
consented to acknowledge themselves fubjeds of
the King of Great Britain, to assume henceforth
the name of Englishmen, to fend a body of their
warriors to the affiitance of the English, as often
as they took the field againflt any enemy, and to
deposit annually a flipulated quantity of Indian
corn in the flore-houfes of the colony 43. An
event, which the early historians of Virginia relate
with peculiar fatisfadion, prepared the way for

41 Chalmer's Annals, i. 3t.
43 Hamer Solida Narratio, ap. de Bry. Pars x. p. 33.

Stith, p. n3a. -

this union. Pocahuntas, the favorite daughter B o o K
of the great Chief Powhatan, to whose intercession Ix.
Captain Smith was indebted for his life, perfever-
ed in her partial attachment to the English; and
as the frequently vilited their settlements, where
file was always received with refpedful hospitality,
her admiration of their arts and manners conti-
nued to increase. During this interconrfe, her
beauty, which is represented as far superior to
that of her countrywomen, made such impression
on the heart of Mr. Rolfe, a young man of rank Roife mar.
in the colony, that he warmly solicited her to ties the
accept of him as a husband. Where manners.are an Indian
simple, courtihip is not tedious. Neither artifice chief.
prevents, nor ceremony forbids the heart from
declaring its sentiments. Pocahuntas readily gave
her consent; Dale encouraged the alliance, and
Powhatan did not disapprove it. The marriage
was celebrated with extraordinary pomp; and
from tliat period a friendly correspondence sub-
sifted between the colony and all the tribes sub-
jet to Powhatan, or that flood in awe of his power.
Rolfe and his Princess, (for by that name the wri-
ters of the last age always diflinguifll her,) set out
for England, where the was received by James
and his Queen with the refpefl suited to her birth.
Being carefully inftruCded in the principles of the
Christian faith, she was publicly baptized, but
died a few years after, on her return to America,
leaving one son; from whom are sprung some of
the most refpedable families in Virginia, who
boast of their descent from the race of the ancient

B 0 0 K rulers of their country 44. But notwithstanding

Ix.. the visible good effects of that alliance, none of

Rolfe's countrymen seem to have imitated the
example which he set them, of intermarrying with
the natives. Of all the Europeans who have fettled
in America, the English have availed themselves
least of this obvious method of conciliating the
affetion of its original inhabitants; and, either
from the fliinefs conspicuous in their national
charader, or from the want of that pliant facility
of manners which accommodates itself to every
situation, they have been more averse than the
French and Portuguese, or even the Spaniards,
from incorporating with the native Americans.
.The Indians, courting such an union, offered
their daughters in marriage to their- new 'guefts:
and when they did not accept of the proffered
alliance, they naturally imputed it to pride and
to their contempt of them as an inferior order of
beings *4.

Land in Vir. During the interval of tranquillity procured by
gn- rt be. the alliance with Powhatan, an important change
perey. was made in the ftlte of the colony. Hitherto no

right of private property in land had been eflabliflh-
ed. The fields that were cleared had been culti-
vated by the joint labor of the colonists; their
product was carried to the common store-houses,
and distributed weekly to every family, according
to its number and exigencies. A society, deflitute

44 Hamer Solida Narratio, ap. de Bry, Pars x. p. a3. Stith,

p. I29. 146. Smith's Travels, p. 113. Isx.

45 ]everley's Hifk. of Virg. p. 25.

of the first advantage resulting from social union, B o o K
was not formed to prosper. Industry, when not x.
excited by the idea of property in what was ac-
quired by its own efforts, made no vigorous ex-
ertion. The head had no inducement to contrive,
nor the hand to labor. The idle and improvident
trusted entirely to what was issued from the com-
mon flore; the assiduity even of the sober and at-
tentive relaxed, when they perceived that others
were to reap the fruit of their toil; and it was
computed, that the united industry of the colony
did not accomplilh as much work in a week as
might have been performed in a day, if each indi-
vidual had labored on his own account. In order Advantages.
to remedy this, Sir Thomas Dale divided a con-
fiderable portion of the land into small lots, and
granted one of there to each individual in full pro-
perty. From the moment that industry had the
certain profped of a recompence, it advanced with
rapid progress. The articles of primary neceflity
were cultivated with so much attention as secured
the means of subsistence; and such schemes of im-
provement were formed as prepared the way for
the introduction of opulence into the colony 46.

The indufirious spirit, which began to rife cultreofto.

among the planters, was soon direded towards a bacco intro.
new object; and they applied to it for some time
with such inconsiderate ardor as was productive
of fatal consequences. The culture of tobacco,
which has iince become the staple of Virginia and

6 Smith's Travels, p. 14. Stith, p. 131.

B o o K the source of its proSperity, was introduced about

Ix. this time into the colony. As the taste for that

weed continued to increase in England, notwith-
flanding the zealous declamations of James against
it, the tobacco imported from Virginia came to a
ready market; and though it was so much inferior
in quality or in estimation to that raised by the
Spaniards in the Weft Indian illands, that a pound
of the latter fold for eighteen fmlllings, and of the
former for no more than three fllillings, it yielded

adn conre- a considerable profit. Allured by the profpedl of
que"nes ari- such a certain and quick return, every other species

of industry was negleted. The land which ought
to have been reserved for railing provisions, and
even the fireets of James-Town, were planted with
tobacco. Various regulations were framed to ref-
train this ill-direded activity. But from eagerness
for present gain, the planters disregarded every
admonition. The means offubfiftence became so
scanty as forced them to renew their demands upon
the Indians, who, feeing no end of those exac-
tions, their antipathy to the Engliflih name revived
with additional rancor, and they began to form
schemes of vengeance, with the secrecy and silence
peculiar to Americans *7.

Meanwhile the colony, notwithstanding this

error in its operations, and the cloud that was
gathering over its head, continued to wear an
afped of prosperity. Its numbers increased by
successive migrations; the quantity of tobacco

47 Stith, p. 140. 147. 164. 368. Smith, p. 14o. Purchas,

iv. 1787.

exported became every year more considerable, Ba o o
and several of the planters were not only in an Ix.
easy situation, but advancing fast to opulence 48;
and by two events, which happened nearly at
the fame time, both population and industry were
greatly promoted. As few women had hitherto
ventured to encounter the hardflips which were
unavoidable iri an unknowh and uncultivated
country, most of the colonists, confirained to live
single, considered themselves as no more than
fojourniers in a land to which they were not at-
tached by the tender ties of a family and children.
In order to induce them to fettle there, the com-
pany took advantage of the apparent tranquillity
in the country, to fend out a considerable num-
ber of young women, of humble birth, indeed, Young wo.
but of unexceptionable charaater, and encouraged men migrate

from Eng-

the planters, by premiums and immunities, to land to vir.
marry them 49. These new companions were re- giniaL
ceived with such fondness, and many of them so
comfortably eftabliflied, as invited others to fol-
low their example, and by degrees thoughtless
adventurers, assuming the sentiments of virtuous
citizens and of provident fathers of families, be-
came solicitous about the prosperity of a country,
which they now considered as their own. As the
colonists began to form more extensive plans of
industry, they were unexpectedly furnilhed with
means of executing them with greater facility. A
Dutch %hip from the Coast of Guinea, having failed

48 Bmidi, p. i39. 49 Stirb, p. i66, 597.

a o o K up James-River, fold a part of her cargo ofnegroes

.er i ar to the planters so; and as that hardy race was

Negroes fir -l
introduced, found more capable of enduring fatigue under a

sultry climate than Europeans, their number has
been increased by continual importation; their
aid seems now to be essential to the exiflence of
the colony, and the greater part of field labor in
Virginia is performed by servile hands.

But as the condition of the colony improved,

the spirit of its members became more indepen-
dent. To Englilhmen the summary and severe
decisions of martial law, however tempered by
the mildness of their governors, appeared into-
lerably opprenive; and they longed to recover tile
privileges to which they had been accuflomed
under the liberal form of government in their

1619. June. native country. In compliance with this spirit,
Sirs general Sir George Yeardley, in the year 1619, called the
assembly of
reprefenta- first general assembly that was ever held in Virgi-
tives. nia; and the numbers of the people were now so

increased, and their settlements so dispersed, that
eleven corporati6ns appeared by their reprefenta-
tives in this convention, where they were per-
mitted to assume legislative power, and to exer-
cife the noblest fundCion of free men. The laws
enacted in it seem neither to have been many, nor
of great importance; but the meeting was highly
acceptable to the people, as they now beheld
among themselves an image of the English confti-
tution, which they reverenced as the most perfect

model

1o Beverley, p. 37.

model of free government. In order to rendet a o o x
this resemblance more complete, and the rights -X
of the planters more certain, the company issued Juy l.. New
a charter or ordinance, which gave a legal and coleftdtioia

gi~ea to the

permanent form to the government of the colony. colony.
The supreme legiflatiye authority in Virginia, in
imitation of that in Great Britain, was divided
and lodged partly in the governor, who held the
place of the sovereign; partly in a council of state
named by the company, which poffeffed some of
the diftinaions, and exercised some of the functions
belonging to the peerage; partly in a general
council or assembly composed of the representatives
of the people, in which were velted powers and
privileges similar to those of the House of Com-
mons. In both these councils all questions were
to be determined by the majority of voices, and
a negative was reserved to the governor; but no
law or ordinance, though Wpproved of by all the
three members of the legislature, was to be of
force, until it was ratified in England by a general
court of the company, and returned under its
feal Ir. Thus the conititution of the colony was
fixed, and the members of it are henceforth to
be considered, not merely as servants of a com-.
mnercial company, dependant on the will and
orders of their superior, but as free men and citi~eni,

The natural effe of that happy change in tieir Jaltry ix.

condition was an increase of their industry, (,The C"L*'.
produA ps tobacco in Virginia was now equal,

ix Stitft, Appendix, p. ~,. &4

B o o K not only to the confumn ption of it in Great Brit-

IX. ain <2, but could furlith some quantity for a

Direa trade foreign market. The company opened a trade
of the colony for it with Holland, and (flablifLed warehouses
with Holland.
Gives ofnce in Middlcburgh and Flushing. James, and his
to James. privy council, alarmed at feeing the commerce

of a commodity, for which the demand was daily
increasing, turned into a channel that tended to
the diminution of the revenue, by depriving it
of a considerable duty imposed on tile importation
of t'blcco, inrerpofed with vigor to check this
innovation. Some expedient wvas found, by which
the matter was acjnfled for the prefint ; but it
is remarkable as the first inltance of a difference
in sentiment 1, tween the parent Rlate and the co-
lony, concerning their refpcttixe rights. The
former concluded , that the trade of the colony
should be confined to England, and all its pro-
ductions be landed there. 7 he latter claimcd,
not only the general privilege of Engliflnmen to

sz It is a matter of oime curiosity to trace the progrcfs oF

the consumption of this unnccetlary commodity. The use of
tobacco seems to have been first introduced into 1inland ahoult
the year 1586. Possibly a few sea-faring persons maty have ac-
quired a relish for it by their intercourse with the Spaniards
previous to that period ; but the use of it cannot be denominated
a national habit sooner than the time I have matiolald Upon
an average of the seven years immediately precedinig the year
162;2 the whole import of tobacco into Englan amounted to
a hundred and forty-two thoilfand airid eghty-five polulids weight.
Stithl 1. 246. From this it appears, that the tanR had fprcad
with a rapidity which is remarkable. But how inconsiderable
is that quantity to what is. now confitmed in Great Britain!

carry their commodities to the best rharket, but B o o d
pleaded the particular conceflions in their charter,

.

by ivhich an unlimited freedom of commerce
seemed to be granted to them is. The time for
a more full discussion of this important question
was not yet arrived.

But while the colony continued to increase so The colony

fafl, that settlements were scattered, not only along negIeas the
the banks of James and, York Rivers, but began to necefihry for
extend to the Rapahannock, and even to the is defence
Potowmack, the Englifli, relying on their own Inaians,
numbers and deceived by this appearance ofprof.
perity, lived in full security. They neither at-
tended to. the movements of the Indians, nor
fufpeded their machinations, and; though fur-
rounded by a people whom they might have
known fromr experience to be both artful and
findiaive, they pegleted every precaution for
their own Iafety that was requisite in such afituation.
Like the peaceful inhabitants of a society com.
pletely eftabliflled they, were no Ibnger foidier&
but'citizens, and were so intent on what was
subservient to the comfort or embelliihment of
civil life/ that every martial exercise began to be
laid aside as urmeceffary. The Indians y whom
they commonly employed as hunters were fur,
aifhed. with fire-arms, and taught to use- thein with
*dexterity.. They yvere> permitted to frequent the
htabitatiots of the English at all hours',and reseiy-
ed aoa mnn centvifitants whom there was.no reason

13 Otith, F· ~u~o, Brc.

,B o O K to dread. This inconsiderate security enabled the

DxL Indians to prepare for the execution of that plan

of vengeance, which they meditated with all the
deliberate forethought which is agreeable to their
temper. Nor did they want a leader capable of

General maf- conduding their schemes with address. On the
-ri~h ofan. death of Powhatan, in the year 1618, Opech-

b
d by the In. ancanough succeeded him, not only as wirowanee
dia'' * or chief of his own tribe, but in that extensive

influence over all the Indian nations of Virginia,
which induced the English writers to diftinguilh
them by the name of Emperor. According to
the Indian tradition , he was not a native of
Virginia, but came from a difitant country to the
south-west, possibly from some province of the
Mexican Empire c4. But as he was conspicuous
for all the qualities of highest estimation among
savages, a fearless courage, great strength and
agility of body, and crafty policy, he quickly
rose toreminence and power. Soon after his ele-
vatioh to the supreme command, a general massacre
of the Engliih seems to have been resolved upon;
and during four years, the means of perpetrating
it with the greatest facility and success were con-
certed with amazing secrecy. All the tribes con-
tiguous to the Englilh settlements were successively
gained, except those on the Eastern Ihore, from
whom, on account of their peculiar attachment
to their new neighbours, every circumfitance that
znight difoover what they intended was carefully

54 Beverley, p. 51.

concealed. To each tribe its ftarion was allotted, B o 0 K
and the part it was to aa prescribed. On the

ix.

morning of the day consecrated to vengeance,
'each was at the place of rendezvous appointed,
while the English were so little aware of the im-
pending deftrudion, that they received with un-
suspicious hospitality, several persons sent by
Opechancanough, under pretext of delivering
presents of venison and fruits, but in reality to
observe their motions. Finding them perfetly fe- Executed on
cure, at mid-day, the moment that was previously ,~ ftn
fixed for this deed of horror, the Indians rushed at
once upon them in all their different settlements,
and murdered men, women, and children, with
undiftinguifhing rage, and that rancorous cruelty
with which savages treat their enemies. In one
hour, nearly a fourth part of the whole colony
was cut off, almost without knowing by whose
hands they fell. The slaughter would have been
universal, if companlion, or a sense of duty, had
not moved a converted Indian, to whom the
secret was communicated the night before the
massacre, to reveal it to his master in such time
as to save James-Town, and some adjacent fettle-
ments; and if the English, in other diftrids, had
not run to their arms with resolution prompted
by despair, and defended themselves so bravely as
to repulse their assailants, who, in the execution
of their plan, did not discover courage equal to
the sagacity and art with which they had con-
certed it (;.

(; Stith, p. 2~8, &c. Purchas, Iv. I~88, &0.

Fl

a o o K But though the blow was thus prevented from

.c descending with its full effea , it proved very

grievous to an infant colony. In some settlements
not a single Englishman escaped. Many persons
-of prime note in the colony, and among these
several members of the council, were slain. The
survivors, overwhelmed with grief, aftoniflment,
and terror, abandoned all their remote fettle-
mnents, and, crowding together for safety to James-
Town, did not occupy a territory of greater extent
than had been planted soon after the arrival of
their countrymen in Virginia. Confined within
those narrow boundaries, they were less intent on
schemes of industry than on thoughts of revenge.

Bloody war Every man took arms. A bloody war against the
with the In. Indiarls commenced; and, bent on exterminating

"the whole race, neither old nor young were spar-
ed. The conduna of the Spaniards in the Southern
regions of America was openly proposed as the
anoft proper model to imitate s.; and, regardless
like them 'of those principles of faith, honor, and
humanity, which regulate hostility among civilized
inations and set bounds to its rage, the Englilh
deemed every thing allowable that tended to ac
complifh their design. They hunted the Indians
like wild beasts, rather than enemies; and as the
pursuit of diem to their places of retreat in the
woods, which covered their country, was both
difficult and dangerous, they endeavoured to
sllure therrr from their inaccessible faftneffes, by

,e Stith, p. 33:

offers of peace and promises of oblivion , made a o o K
with' such an artful appearance of sincerity as I'
deceived their crafty leader, and induced them
to return to their former settlements, and resume
their usual peaceful occupations. The behaviour
of the two people seemed now to be perfeacly
reversed. The Indians, like men acquainted with
the principles of integrity and good faith, on
which the intercourse between nations is founded,
confided in the reconciliation, and lived in abfo-
lute security without suspicion of danger; while
the Englilh, with perfidious craft, were preparing
to imitate savages in their revenge and cruelty.
On the approach ofharveft, when they knew an
hostile attack would be most formidable and fatal,
they fell suddenly upon all the Indian plantations,
murdered every person on whom'they could lay
hold, and drove the reft to the woods, where so
many periihed with hunger, that rome of the
tribes nearest to the Engliflh were totally extirpat-
ed. This atrocious deed, which the perpetrators
labored to represent as a necessary ad of retalia-
tion, was followed by some happy effeds./ It
hlelivered the colony to entirely from any dread
'of the Indians, that its settlements began again to
"extend, and its ihduftry to revive.

But unfortunately at this jundutne the slate of Company at

'the 'otopany in England, in which'the property dm son,;
of Virginia and the government of the colony
fettled there were veiled, prevented it from fe-
conding the efforts of the planteri, by such a
reinforcement of'men, and such a supply of

F4

B o o x neceffiries, as were requisite to replace what they

U" had loft. The company was originally composed

of many adventurers, and increased so fail by
the junaion of new members, allured by the
profped, of gain , or the desire of promoting a
scheme of public utility, that its general courts
formed a numerous assembly t7. The operation
of every political principle and paflion, that
spread through the kingdom, was felt in those
popular meetings, and influenced their decisions.
As towards the close of James's reign npore just
and enlarged sentiments with refpedt to conftitu*
tional liberty were diffufed among the people,
they came to underfiand their rights better, and
to assert them with greater boldness; a diftinaion
formerly little known, but now familiar in Englilt
policy, began to be established between the court
and country parties, and the leaders of each
endeavoured to derive power and consequence
from every quarter. Both exerted themselves with
emulation, in order to obtain the direction of a
body so numerous and refpedable as the company
of Virginian adventurers. In consequence of this,
business had been conduced in every general
court for some years, not with the temperate
spirit of merchants deliberating concerning their
mutual interest, but with the animosity and
violence natural to numerous assemblies, by whicd
rivial faaions contend for superiority 68,

37 Stith, p. 272. 276.
rS Ibid. p. s:9, &c. Chalmers, p.'s9.

As the king did not often assemble the great n o o rr

council of the nation in parliament, the general Ix'.

James infml.

courts of the company became a theatre , on tuts an in.
which popular orators displayed their talents; the quiry into
proclamations of the crown, and adts of the
privy council, with refped to the commerce and
police of the colony, were canvassed there with
freedom, and censured with severity, ill-fiited
to the lofty ideas which James entertained of his
own wisdom, and the extent of his prerogative.
In order to check this growing spirit of difcuftion,
the ministers employed all their address and in-
fluence to gain as many members of the company
as might give them the direction of their deli-
berations. But so unfuccefsful were they in this
attempt, that every measure proposed by them
was reprobated by a vast majority, and sometimes
without any reason, but because they were the
proposers of it. James, little favorable to the
power of any popular assembly, and weary of
contending with one over which he had labored
in vain to obtain an ascendant, began to entertain
thoughts of dissolving the company, and of new-
modelling its confltitution. Pretexts, neither un-
plausible , nor destitute of some foundation ,
seemed to justify this measure. The flow progress
of the colony, the large sums of money expended,
and great number of men who had perilhed in
attempting to plant it, the late massacre by the
Indians, and every difafler that had befallen the
Englilh from their first migration to America,
were imputed solely to the inability of a numerous

B o o R company to conduct an enterprise so complex and

Ix. arduous. The nation felt sensibly its disappoint-

inent.in a. scheme in which it had engaged with
sanguine expectations of advantage, and wished
impatiently for filch an impartial scrutiny into
former proceedings as might suggest more salutary
measures in the future adminiflration of the co-
lony. The present state of its affairs, as well as
the wishes of the people, seemed to call for the
interposition of the crown; and James, eaget to
display the fuperioriry of his royal wisdom, in
correcting those errors into which the company
had been betrayed by inexperience in the arts of

b'3. government, boldly undertook the work of refor-

mation. Without regirding the rights conveyed
to the .company by their charter, and without
'the formality of any judicial proceeding for an-
nulling it, he, by virtue of his prerogative, issued
a commifion, empowering some of the judges,
and other persons of note, to examine into all
the trarifacions of the company from its first eftab-
lilhment, and to lay the result of their inquiries,
together with their opinion concerning the most
effectual means of rendering the colony more
prosperous s,, before the privy council. At the
fame time, by a firain of authority flill higher,
he ordered, all the records and papers of the
company to be seized, and two of its princpal
officerd to be arrefled. Violent and arbitrary as
these aRs of authority may now appear, the

ro GtitNh. ~sB.

commiIioners carried on their inquiry without B o OaK
any obflriCion but what arose from some feeble Ix.
.and ineffe)ual remonftrances of the company.
.The commiflioners, though they conduCed their
Jcrutiny with much acivity and vigor 60, did
alot communicate any of their proceedings to the
company; but their report, with refped to its
operations, seems to have been very unfavorable,
*as the king, in consequence of it, signified to the
company his intention of vesting the supreme
government of the company in a governor and on. s. Corn-
twelve assistants, to be resident in England, and Planyt eqr-
the executive power in a council of twelve, which der its hir-
Jhould reside in Virginia. The governor and ter.
alliftants were to be originally appointed by the
king. Future vacancies were to be supplied by
the governor and his assistants, but their nomi-
nlation was not to take effed until it thould be
ratified by the privy council. The twelve coun-
fellors in Virginia were to be chosen by the go-
vernor and affiflants; and this choice was likewise
fubjeded to the review of the privy council. With
an intention to quiet the minds of the colonists,
it was declared, that private property should be
deemed sacred; and for the more effedual security
of it, all grants of lands from the former com-
pany were to be confirmed by the new one. Iq
order to facilitate the execution of this plan,
the king required the company instantly to fur-.
render its charter into his hands ".

60 Smith's Travels, p. x16, &c.
6' Stith, p. 293, &c.

10 0 K But here James and his ministers encountered
, . a spirit1 of which they seem not to have been
u aware. They found the members of the com-

pany unwilling tamely to relinquilh rights of fran-
chifes conveyed to them with such legal formality,
that upon faith in their validity they had expend-
ed considerable sums 62; and fill more averse to
the abolition of a popular form of government,
in which every proprietor had a voice, in order
to fubjet a colony, in which they were deeply
interested, to the dominion of a small junto ab-
folutely dependent on the crown. Neither pro-

ea s-. mises nor threats could induce them to depart

from these sentiments; and in a general court the
king's proposal was almost unanimously rejeQed,
and a resolution taken to defend to the utmost
their chartered rights, if these Ihould be called
in question in any court ofjuffice. James, highly
offended at their presumption in daring to oppose

aov. 1o. his will, direded a writ of quo warranto to be

iftued against the company, that the validity of
its charter might be tried in the Court of King's
Bench; and in order to aggravate the charge by
colleaing additional proofs of mal-adminifiration,
he appointed some persons, in whom he could
confide, to repair to Virginia to infped the slate
of the colony, and inquire into the condua of
the company, and of its officers there.

Tia"s. h*e The law-suit in the King's Bench did not
i' Rech.ag log i It t iatd, as was al
and diolu hang long in fnTpene. It terminated, as was usual

Es Chalwrn, p. 6i.

in that reign, in a decision perfealy consonant B o o K
to the wishes of the monarch. The charter was fJ

o

forfeited, the company was dissolved , and all company.
the rights and privileges conferred upon it re- "U"' *624
turned to the king, from whom they flowed 6,

Some writers, particularly Stith, the most in- Defeas ta

telligent and best informed hiflorian of Virginia, uioan.of.
mention the dissolution of the company as a most th colonies.
difafirous event to the colony. Animated with
liberal sentiments, imbibed in an age when the
principles of liberty were more fully unfolded
than under the reign of James , they viewed his
violent and arbitrary proceedings on this occasion
with such indignation, that their abhorrence of
the means which he employed to accomplish hist
design seems to have rendered them incapable of
contemplating its effeRls with discernment and can-
dor. There is not perhaps any mode of govern-
ing an infant colony leIs friendly to its liberty,
than the dominion of an exclusive corporation,
poffeffed of all the powers which James had con-
ferred upon the company of adventurers inVirginia.
During several years the colonists can hardly be
considered in any other light than as servants to the
company, nourished out of its flores , bound
implicitly to obey its orders, and fubjeCed to the
most rigorous of all forms bs government, that
of martial law. Even after the native spirit of
Englimhmen began to rouse under opprellion, and
had extorted from their superiors the right of

£3 Ryaw?, vol. xvii. p. (z3, a.. C~lwouuu, p.~ .

B o o x enaaing laws for the government of that comma-

Ix. nity of which they were members, as no ad, though

approved of by all the branches of the provincial le-
giflature, was held to beof legal force, until it was
ratified by a general court in England, the company
fiill retained the paramount authority in its own
hands. Nor was the power of the company more
favorable to -the prosperity of the colony, than
to its freedom. A numerous body of merchants,
as long as its operations are purely commercial,
hnay darry them onrwith discernment and success,
But the mercantile spirit seems ill-adapted to con-
dul an enlarged and liberal plan of civil policy,
and colonies have seldom grown up to maturity
and vigor inder its"narrow and iterelted re-
gulations. To thd unavoidable defeQs in admi-
niftration which this occasioned, were added
errors arising from ine;cperience. The .Englilh
merchants of that age'had4 not those extensive
views which a genemal commerce opens to such
as have the direfiron of-it. When thefirft began
to venture out of the beaten track, they groped
their war with timidity) o nd hkfitations Unac-
quainted with the climate and foil of America, and
ignorant, of the productions bet fuitred to them,
they fcem to have had no fettled plan of improve-
rnent, and their schemes were continually vary-
ing. Their fyftent of government Cwas equally
flutiduating. In the tourfe of eighteen*years ten
difftgn"t persons piefided over the trovincb as
chief governors. No wonder that under such ad.
mini.ataqa, alL 'the .Jfots. to give varigbrand

flability to the colony ihould prove abortive, B o o K
or produce only slender effeQs. These efforts, t'
however, when estimated according of thg ideas
of that age, either with refped to commerce or
to policy, were very considerable, and copduded
with aftoniflling perseverance.

Above a hundred and fifty thousand. pounds Weaknef:

, .of the co.

were expended in this first attempt to plant ati ony..
JEnglifh colony in America 64; and more than nine
.thousand persons were sent out fromr the' ~nther
country to people this new fettlenlent. ,Ai the
difflolution of the compaqy, the nation, in return
for thi's waste of Ireafure and of peoplei did not
receive froyn Virginia an annual irppOrtation of
commodities exceeding twenty thpufand pounds
jn ya)ue; and the colony was so far frofn having
a4ded firength to the, slate by an increqfi of po-
pulation, that, in (he year one thquf~nd fix
hundred and twentyr-four,, fcargely tjw~ thousand
perfors survived 6*, a wretched remna#r of the
numerous emigrants who had flocjedr thither,
with sanguine expedtations of a very different fate.

The company, like all unprofperoua focietiea, Temporary.

fel4 unpitied. The violent hand with which pre- ponted R
rogative had invaded its rights was forgotten, and the govern.
.new prospects of faccefs opened, nrider a form ment of
of government exempt fromr all the Aefe~ts to
3vhiqh past disasters were, imppute~lrt The ~ing
andl the nation concur/ed wvih equalnr.dori in
resolving to encourage the colohy. Soon after

<4 Smith's Travels, p. 42. 167.
s6 Chalmers' Annals) p. 69,

s o o K the final judgment in the Court of King's Bench

Ix. against the company, James appointed a council

of twelve persons to take the tem porary direction of

Aug. *. affairs in Virginia, that he might have leisure to

frame with deliberate consideration proper regu-
lations for the permanent government of the co-
lony a. Pleased with such an opportunity of
exercising his talents as a legislator, he began to
turn his attention towards the fubjeLI; but death
prevented him from completing his plan.

ars. Charles I. on his accefion to the throne,

oao*.h,.Aeradopted all his father's maxims with refped to
His arbitrary the colony in Virginia. He declared it to be a
T" overmnt part of the empire annexed to the crown, and

immediately subordinate to its jurifdiaion: he
conferred the title of Governor on Sir George
Yardely, and appointed him, in conjunction with
a council of twelve, and a secretary, to exercise
supreme authority there, and enjoined them to
conform in every point to fnch inftrtudions as
from time to time they might receive from him 67.
From the tenor of the king's commifimon, as well
as from the known spirit of his policy, it is ap-
parent, that he intended to vest every power
of government, both legislative and executive, in
the governor and council, without recourse to
the representatives of the people, as poffefling a
right to enaat laws for the community, or to
impose taxes upon it. Yardely and his council,

who

66 Rymer, xvii 6:1, b., 47 Ibid. xviii. 72# 31g

who seem to have been fit infiruments for carrying a o o K
this system of arbitrary rule into execution, did

.

not fail to put such a conflru~ion on the words
of their commission as was most favorable to their
own jurifdiaion. During a great part of Charles's
reign, Virginia knew no other law than the will
of the sovereign. Statutes were publilhed, and
taxes imposed, without once calling the repre-
fentatives of the people to authorize them by
their fanaion. At the fame time that the co-
lonifts were bereaved of political rights, which
they deemed essential to freemen and citizens,
their private property was violently invaded. A Grants and
proclamation was issued, by which, under pre-'.0 1.
texts equally absurd and frivolous, they were
prohibited from felling tobacco to any person but
certain commifnoners appointed by the king to
purchase it on his account 68; and they had the
cruel mortification to behold the sovereign, who
thould have afforded them protedion, engross all
the profits of their industry, by seizing the only
valuable commodity which they had to *end ,
and retaining the monopoly of it in his own
hands. While the staple of the colony in Vir-
ginia funk in value under the oppression and
restraints of a monopoly, property in land was;
rendered insecure by various grants of it, -which..
Charles inconsiderately bestowed upon his fa-
vorites. There were not only of such. exorbitant
extent as to be unfavorable to the progress of

69 Rymer, xviii. i9.

a o o n cultivation; but from inattention, or imperfe8

1w. acquaintance with the geography of the country,

their boundaries were so inaccurately defined,
that large tras already occupied and planted
were often included in them.

The murmurs and complaints which such a

system of adminifiration excited, were augmented
by the rigor with which Sir John Harvey, who
succeeded Yardely in the government of the co-

U2T. lony 69, enforced every adt of power. Rapacious,

unfeeling, and haughty, he added insolence to
oppression, and neither regarded the sentiments,
nor listened to the remonftrances of the people
under his command. The colonists , far from
the feat of government, and overawed by author-
ity derived from a royal commiflion, submitted

colonist reize long to his tyranny and exadions. Their patience
on Harvey was at last exhausted, and in a transport of po-
nor. and fend pular rage and indignation, they seized their go-
o mgln"m vernor, and sent him a prisoner to England, ac-

companied by two of their number, whom they
deputed to prefer their accusations against him to
the king. But this attempt to redress their own
wrongs, by a proceeding so summary and violent
as is hardly consistent with any idea of regular
government, and can be justified only in cafes
of such urgent neceflity as rarely occur in civil
society, was altogether repugnant to every notion
which Charles entertained with refpea to the
obedience due by fubjeas to their sovereign. T6\

r9 Rymer, xviii. g~o.

him the conduC of the colonifs appeared to be B o o a
not only an usurpation of his right to judge and xx.
to punifli one of his own officers, but an open
and audacious ad of rebellion against his author-
ity. Without deigning to admit their deputies
into his presence, or to hear one article of their
charge against Harvey, the king instantly sent him Reis rrleaea
back to his former flation, with an ample renewal by the kina,

and reinstated

of all the powers belonging to it. But though in his govera.
Charles deemed this vigorous step necessary in ment.
order to assert his own authority, and to testify
his displeasure with those who had presumed to
offer such an insult to it, he seems to have been
so fenlible of the grievances under which the co-
lonifts groaned, and of thle chief source from
which they flowed, that soon after he not only z6a».
removed a governor .so jufily odious to them,
but named as a successor Sir William Berkeley,
a person far superior to Harvey in rank and abili-
ties, and still more distinguished by poffefling all
the popular virtues to which the other was a
itranger 0o.

Under his government the colony in Virginia SirW.Berke.

remained, with some short intervals of interrup- leyapint
tion, almost forty years, and to his mild apd mildandwife
prudent adminifiration its increase and prosperity adminitra
is in a great measure to be ascribed. It wap
indebted, however, to the king himself for such
a reform of its conflitution and policy, as gave
a different afped to the colony, and animate4

70 Beverley's Hilt. of Virg. p. so. Chalmers' Annals, 4,

uis, &c.

a o o K all its operations with new spirit. Though the

I. 'tenor of Sir William Berkeley's commifllion was

the fame with that of his predecessor, he received
inltruCions under the great feal, by which he
was empowered to declare, that in all its concerns,

New privie. civil as well as ecclesiastical, the colony was to

* granted be governed according to the laws of England:

he was directed to iflue writs for elecing repre-
fentatives of the people, who, in conjundtion
with the governor and council, were to form a
general assembly, and to possess supreme legislative
authority in the community; he was ordered to
eifabliih courts ofjuflice, in which all questions,
whether civil or criminal, were to be decided
agreeably to the forms of judicial procedure in
the mother country. It is not easy to difcovet
what were the motives which induced a monarch
tenacious in adhering to any opinion or fyflem
which he had once adopted, jealous to excess of
his own rights, and adverse on every occasion to
any extension of the privileges claimed by his
people, to relinquilh his original plan of admi-
niftration in the colony, and to grant such im-
munities to his fubjeds fettled there. From the
historians of Virginia, no less superficial than ill-
informed, no light can be derived with refped

Mntives that to this point. It is most probable, that dread
appertohave of the spirit then rising in Great Britain extorted

ag. from Charles concessions so favorable to Virginia.

After an intermiflion of almost twelve years , the
ntate of his affairs compelled him to have recourse
to the great council of the nation. There his

fubje61s would find a jurifdiaion independant of B o o a
the crown, and able to control its authority. x.
There they hoped for legal redress of all their
grievances. As the colonists in Virginia had applied
for telief to a former parliament, it might be
expected with certainty, that they would lay
their cafe before the first meeting of an assembly,
in which they were secure of a favorable audience.
Charles knew, that if the spirit of his adminiftra-
tion in Virginia were to be tried by the maxims
of the Englilh constitution it must be severely
reprehended. He was aware that many measures
of greater moment in his government would be
brought under a ftrid review in parliament; and,
unwilling to give malecontents the advantage of
adding a charge of oppreflion in the remote parts
of his dominions to a catalogue of domestic griev-
ances, he artfully endeavoured to take the merit
of having granted voluntarily to his people in
Virginia such privileges a& he foresaw would be
extorted from him.

But though Charles efiablifhed the internal virginiaflour

government of Virginia on a model Jimilar to the-e uo
that of the Englilh constitution, and -conferred vernment.
on his fubjeds there all the rights of freemen and
citizens, he was extremely felicitous to maintain
its connexion with the parent state. With this
view he infitrudted Sir William Berkeley ftridly
to prohibit any commerce of the colony with
foreign nations; and in order more certainly to
secure exclusive poffefflon of all the advantages
arising from the fate of its productions, he was

G3

i o o K required to take a bond from the malter of each

Ix. vessel that failed from Virginia, to land his cargo

in some part of the king's dominions in Europe n7.
Even under this restraint, such is the kindly in-
fluence of free government on society, the colony
Advanced so rapidly in indufiry and population,
that at the beginning of the civil war, the English
fettled in it exceeded twenty thousand 7-.

Remains at- Gratitude towards a monarch, from whole
c hd to th ands they had ieceived immunities which they

had long wished, but hardly expeQed to enjoy,
the influence and example of a popular governor,
passionately devoted to the interests of his master,
concurred in preserving inviolated loyalty among
the colohifts. Even after monarchy was abolished,
after one kihg had been beheaded, and another
driveh into exile, the authority of the crown

xs6o. continued to be acknowledged and revered in

Virginia. Irritated at this open defiance of its
power, the parliament issued an ordinance, declar-
ing, that as the settlement in Virginia had been
made at the cost and by the people of England,
it ought f6 be fabordinate to and dependant upon
the Engliih commonwealth, and fubjea to such
laws and regulations as are or shall be made in
parliament: that, instead of this dutiful fubmiflion,
the colonists had disclaimed the authority of the
slate, .and audaciously rebelled against it; that
6n this acaunt they were denounced notorious
traitois, and not only all vessels belonging to

71 Chalmers' Annals, p. 2t9. 233.
t Ibid. p. 2s;.

natives of England, but those of foreign nations, ,B o
were prohibited to enter their ports, or to carry
on any commerce with them,

It was not the mode of that age to wage a Parliament

war of words alone. The efforts of an high- makes war *O
spirited government in asserting its own dignity
were prompt and vigorous. A powerful squadron,
with a considerable body of land forcs , was
dispatched to reduce the Virginians to obedience.
After' compelling the colonies in Barbadoes and
the other islands to submit to the commonwealth,
the squadron entered the Bay of Chefapeak. rs&t.
Berkeley, with more courage than ptudence,
took arms to oppose this formidable arrmament;
but he could not long maintain such an unequal
contest. His gallant reliftance, however procured
favorable terms to the people under his govern-
ment. A general indemnity for all pals offences virginia is
was granted; they acknowledged the authority of f~,ed-
the commonwealth, and were admitted to a the common.
participation of all the rights enjoyed by citizens 73. wealb
Berkeley, firm to his principles of loyalt'y, dif.
dained to make any flipulation for himself; and
chufing to pass his days far removed from the
feat of a government which hedetefted, continued
to reside in Virginia as a private .man, beloved
and refpeded by all over whom he had formerly
pretided.

Not satisfied with taking measures to fubjea the Reiaiit»4a

colonies, the commonwealth turned its attention ae -er

73 Thurlow's State Papers, L 197. Chalmers' Annals,

p. 122. .Beverleys' Hist. p s33.

G4

n o b6 towards the rmoft effedlual mode of retaining them

Ix. in dependance on the parent state, and of fecur-

ing to it the benefit of their increasing commerce.

rssz. With this view the parliament framed two laws,

one of which expressly prohibited all mercantile
intercourse between the colonies and foreign states,
,and the other ordained, that no producdion of
Asia, Africa, or America, thould be imported
into the dominions of the commonwealth, but in
vessels belonging to English owners, or to the
people of the colonies fettled there, and navigated
by an English cormmander 7*, and by crews of
which the greater part must be Englinhmen. Bat
white the wisdom of the commonwealth prescribed
the 'channel in which the trade of the colonies
was toibelcarried on, it was-folicitous to encourage

ais. the cultivation of the staple commodity of Vir-

ginia by an aa of parliament, which gave legal
force to all the injuncions of James and Charles
against planting tobacco iw England 7S.

Under governors appointed by the common-

wealth, or by Cromwell, when he usurped the
supreme power, Virginia remained almost nine
years in perfet tranquillicy. During that period,
many adherents to tthe royal party, and among
these some gentlemen of good families, in order
to avoid danger and oppreflion to which they
were exposed in England, or in hopes of repairing

hre colonirs their ruined fortunes, resorted thither. Warmly
difatsfied attached to the cause for which they had fought

74 Scobel's Attu, p. 131. ~6. 7e Ibid. p. sr'.

and fuffered, and animated with all the passions a o o i
natural to men recently engaged in a fierce and wihEere".
long protraded civil war, they, by their inter- traius,
course with the colonists, confirmed them in
principles of loyalty,, and added to their impa-
tience and indignation under the refiraints imposed
on their commerce by their new masters. On
the death of Mathew', the last governor named
by Cromwell, the sentiments apd inclination of
the people, no longer under the control of au-
thority, burst out with violence. They forced *
Sir William Berkeley to quit his retireinent; they
unaninmoully eleaed him governor of the colony:
and as he refused to ad under an usurped au- Are the first
thority, they boldly ereaed. the royal flandard, to acknow-
and, acknowledging Charlea II. to be their lawful ie C.
sovereign, proclaimed him with all his titles; and
the Virginians long boasted, that as they were the
last of dthe king's fubjets who renounced their
allegiance, they were the first who returned to
their duty 7'.

Happily for the people of Virginia, a revo- Their loyalty

lution in England, no less sudden and unexpeded, illrewarded.
seated Charles on the throne of his anceflors, and
saved them from the severe chastisement, to which
their premature declaration in his favor must
have exposed them. On receiving the first ac-
count of this event, the joy and exultation of
the colony were univerial and unbounded. These,
however, were not of long continuance. Gracious,

i< Betveiey, p. g>. Chalmers, p, 14.

B o o K hut unproduaive profeffions of efleem and good.

Lx. will were the only return made by Charles to

loyalty and services, which in their own estimation
were so distinguished that no recompence was
beyond what they might claim. If the king's
negled and ingratitude disappointed all the fan-
guine hopes which their vanity had founded on
the merit of their paif condud, the spirit which
influenced parliament in its commercial delibe-
rations opened a profpedt that alarmed (hem with
refped to their future situation. In framing regu-
lations for the encouragement of trade, which,
during the convulsions of civil war, and amidlt
continual flucuations in government, had met
with such obftrudion that it declined in every
quarter; the House of Commons , instead of
granting the colonies that relief which they expeat-
ed from the reflraints in their comme~ e impoCed
by the commonwealth and Cromwell, not only
adopted all their ideas concerning this branch of

$arigationaa.legiflation, but extended them farther. This

produced the aat ofnavigation, the most import-
ant and memorable of any in the ftatnte book
with refped to the history of English commerce.
By it, belides several momentous articles foreign
to the fubjed of this work, it was enaded, that
no corrmodities thould be imported into any
settlement in Asia, Africa, or America, or export-
ed from them, but in vessels of Englilh or plan-
tation built, where-of the malter and three fourths
of the mariners ihall be English fubjeats, under
pain of forfeiting Ihip and goods; that none but

natural-born fubjeds, or such as have been natu- B o o K
ralized , shall exercise the occupation of merchant xx"
or fador in any English settlement, under pain
of forfeiting their goods and chattels ; that no
sugar, tobacco, cotton, wool, indigo, ginger,
or woods used in dying, of the growth or manu-
facture of the colonies, Thall be shipped from
them to any other country but England; and in
order to secure the performance of this, a sus-
ficient bond, with one surety, shall be given,
before failing, by the owners, for a specific fum
proportional to the rate of the vessel employed by
them 77. The produdions fubjeded to this refiric-
(tion are diftinguilhed, in the language of com-
merce and finance, by the name of enumerated
commoditiet; and as industry in its progress fur-
nifhed new articles of value, these have been fuc-
ceflively added to the roll, and fubjeded to the
fame restraint. Soon after, the ad of navigation 1as6
was extended, and additional restraints were im-
posed, by a new law, which prohibited the
importation of any European commodity into
the colonies, but what was laden in England
in vessels navigated and manned as the at of
navigation required. More effedual provision
was made by'this law for exaQing the penalties
to which the transgressors of the ad of navigation
were fubjeded; and the principles of policy, on
which the various regulations contained in both
statutes are founded, were openly avowed in a

77 is Cai(lL C. II.

B 0 0 K declaration, that as the plantations beyond seas

Lx' are inhabited and peopled by fubjeds of Eng-

land, they may be kept in a firmer dependqnce
upon it, and rendered yet more beneficial and
advantageous unto it, in the further employment
and increase of English fllipping and seamen, as
well as in the vent of English woollen and other
manufadures and commodities; and in making
England a staple, not only of the commodities
of those plantations, but also of the commodities
of other countries and places, for the supplying
of them; and it being the usage of other nations
to keep the trade of'their plantations to them-
selves 78. In prosecution of those favorite maxims,
the English legislature proceeded a step farther.
As the ad of navigation had left the people of
the colonies at liberty to export the enumerated
commodities from one plantation to another

,s7i. without paying any duty, it fubjeded them to

a tax equivalent to what was paid by the con-
fumers of these commodities in England 79.

tfeas of the By these fuccellive regulations, the plan of fe-
a'. curing to England a monopoly of the commerce

with its colonies, and of ihutting up every other
channel into which it might be diverted, was
perfeded and reduced into a complete fyflem.
On one fide of the Atlantic, these regulations
have been extolled as an extraordinary effort of
political sagacity, and have been considered as
the great charter of national commerce, to which

18 IS Car. II. . 7. 79 as Car. II. . 7.

the present slate is indebted for all its opulence a o o o
and power. On the other, they have been zx.
execrated as a code of oppreflion, more suited
to the illiberality of mercantile ideas, than to
extensive views of legislative wisdom. Which of
these opinions is best founded, I fllall examine
at large in another part of this work. But in
writing the history of the Englilh settlements in
America, it was necessary to trace the progress
of those restraining laws with accuracy , as in
every subsequent tranfadlion we may observe a
perpetual exertion, on the part of the mother-
country, to enforce and extend them; and on the
part of the colonies, endeavours no less unremit-
ting, to elude or to obftrud their operation.

Hardly was the a-t of navigation known in colonif rse.

Virginia, and its effeds begun to be felt, when monarate
the colony remonstrated against it as a grievance, a,
and petitioned earnestly for relief. But the com-
mercial ideas of Charles and his ministers coincided
so perfedly with those of parliament, that, instead
of listening with a favorable ear to their applica-
tions, they labored afliduoufly to carry the ad
into ftrid execution. For this purpose, infirudions
were issued to the governor, forts were built on
the banks of the principal rivers, and frtall vessels
appointed to cruise on the coast. The Virginians,
feeing no profped of obtaining exemption from
the ad, set themselves to evade it, and found
means, notwithstanding the vigilance with which
'they were watched, of carrying on a considerable
clandestine trade with foreigners, particula-rly with.

a o o x the Dutch fettled on Hudfon's River. Embolden.

"x, ed by observing difaffeaion spread through the

colony, some veteran soldiers who had served
under Cromwell, and had been banilhed to Vir-

is63.. ginia, formed a design of reJldering themselves

maiters of the country, and of asserting its inde-
pendance on England. This rash projea? was
discovered by one of their associates, and difcon-
certed by the vigorous exertions of Sir William
Berkeley. But the spirit of discontent, though
repressed, was not extinguilhed. Every day some-
thing occurred to revive and to nourifli it. As
it is with extreme difficulty that commerce can
be turned into a new channel, tobacco, the
flaple of the colony, funk prodigiously in value,
when they were compelled to fend it all to one
market. It was some time before England could
firnifli them regularly fill assortments of those
necessary articles, without which the indufiry of
the colony could not be carried on, or its prof-

Colony attack-perity secured. Encouraged by the symptoms
dbyh te. of general languor and despondency, which this

declining slate of the colony occalioned , the
Indians seated towards the heads of the rivers
ventured first to attack the remote settlements,
and then to make incursions into the interior
parts of the country. Unexpected as these hoftii
lities were, from a people who during a long
period had lived in friendflhip with the Englilh,
a measure taken by'the king seems to have excited
flill greater terror among the most opulent people

Dcotn in the colony. Charles had imprudently imitated

the example of his father, by granting such large n o o I
trads of land in Virginia to several of his courtiers, .he gi of
as tended to unsettle the difiribution of property land by the
in the country, and to render the title of the crown.
mnoft ancient planters to their estates precarious 167t.
and questionable. From those various caufea,
which in a greater or lesser degree affeded every
individual in the colony, the indignation of the
people became general, and was worked up to
such a pitch, that nothing was wanting to preci-
pitate them into the most desperate as , but
some leader, qualified to unite and to direct
their operations so.

Such a leader they found in Nathaniel Bacon,Aninrurreaioa

a colonel of militia, who, though he had been in Virginia.
fettled in Virginia only three years, had acquired, Bacon.
by popular manners, an insinuating address, and
the consideration derived from having been re-
gularly trained in England to the profeflion of
law, such general esteem, that he had been ad-
mitted into the council, and was regarded as one
bs the most refpedable persons in the colony.
Bacon was ambitious, eloquent, daring, and
prompted either by honest zeal to redress the
public wrongs, or allured by hopes of raising
himself to diftindcion and power, he mingled
with the malecontents, and by his bold harangues
and confident promises of removing all their griev-
ances, he inflamed them almost to madness. As
the devastations committed by the Indians was

so Chalmers' Annals, ch. o. 13, 4. passim. Beverley,

. 5«, &e.

Bo o t the calamity most sensibly felt by the people, he

KL. accused the governor of having neglcted the proper

measures for repelling the invasions of the savages,
and exhorted them to take- arms in their own
defende , and to exterminate that odious raceJ
Great numbers assembled, and chose Bacon to
be their general. He applied to the governor for
a commillion, confirming this eledtion of the
people, and offered to march instantly against
the common enemy. Berkeley, accuflomed by
long poffeflion of supreme command to high ideas
of the refped due to his flation, considered this
tumultuary armament as an open insult to his
authority, and fufpeEed that, under specious ap-
pearantes,Bacon concealqd most dangerous design?
Unwilling, however, to give farther provocation
to an incensed multitude, by a dired refusal of
what they demanded, he thought it prudent to
negociate, in order to gain time; and it was not
until he found all endeavours to sooth them
ineffetual, that he issued a proclamation, requir-
ing them, in the king's name, under the pain of
being denounced rebels, to disperse.

But Bacon, fenlible that he had now advanced

Co far as rendered it impossible to recede with
honor or safety, instantly took the only resolution
that remained in his situation. At the head of
a chosen body of his followers he marched rapidly
to James-Town, and surrounding the hoofe where
the governor and council were assembled, de-
manded the commission for which he had for-
merly applied. Berkeley, with the prou4

indignant

indignant spirit of a cavalier, disdaining the re- n o o K
quifitions of a rebel , peremptorily refused to Ix.
comply, and calmly presented his naked breast
to the weapons which were pointed against it.
The council, however, foreseeing the fatal confe-
quences of driving an enraged multitude, in whose
power they were, to the last extremities of violence,
prepared a commission, constituting Bacon general
of all the forces in Virginia, and by their entrea-
ties prevailed on the governor to sign it. Bacon
with his troops retired in triumph. Hardly was
the council delivered by his departure from the
dread of present danger, when, by a transition not
unusual in feeble minds, presumptuous boldness
succeeded to excessive fear. The commiflion grant-
ed to Bacon was declared to be null, having been
extorted by force; he was proclaimed a rebel,
his followers were required to abandon his standard,
and the militia ordered to arm, and to join the
governor.

Enraged at conduQc which he branded with Bacon forces

the name of base and treacherous, Bacon, initead SirW.Berkc.

ley and the

of continuing his- march towards the Indian conciltofly.
country, inflandy wheeled about, and advanced
with all his forces to James-Town. The governor,
unable to resist such a numerous body, made
his escape, and fled across the bay tb Acomack
on the Eastern Thore. Some of the counsellors
accompanied him thither, others retired To their
own plantations. Upon the flight of Sir William
Berkeley, and dispersion of the council, the
frame of civil government in the colony feeme4

H

a o o x to be dissolved, and Bacon became polfeffed of

I" supreme and uncontrolled power. But as lie was

sensible that his countrymen would not long fiub-
tnit with patience to authority acquired and held
merely by force of arms, he endeavoured to found
it on a more conflitutional basis, by obtaining the
(anxion" of the people's approbation. With this
view he called together the most considerable
gentlemen in the colony, and having prevailed
on them to bind themselves by oath to maintain
his authority, and to resist every enemy that thould
9ppofe it, lie from that time considered his jurif-
diCion as legally eftablilhed.

sirW.Berce- Berkeley, meanwhile, having colleced some
cy applisut forces, made inroads into different parts of the
jnglani. colony, where Bacon's authority was recognized.

Several fbarp conflicts happened with various
(nccefs, James-Town was reduced to aflles, and
the befl cultivated diftrits in the province were
laid waste, sometimes by one party, and some-
times by the other. But it was not by his own
exertions that the governor hoped to terminate
the contest He had early transmitted an ac-
count of the tranfadions in Virginia to the king,
and demanded such a body of soldiers as would
enable him to quell the insurgents, whom he
. represented as so exasperated by the restraints
imposed on their trade, that they were impa-
tient to fltake off all dependance on the parent
fiate. Charles, alarmed at a commotion no les»
dangerous than unexpected, and solicitous to
apaintain his authority over a colony, the valuq
ps which was daily increasing, and more fully

understood, speedily dispatched a small squadron, a o o K
with such a number of regular troops as Berkeley I.
had required. Bacon and his followers received
information of this armament, but were not inti-
midated at its approach. They boldly determin-
ed to oppose it 'with open, force, and declared
it to be consistent with their duty and allegiance,
to treat all who Ihould aid Sir William Berkeley
as enemies, until they should have an opportunity
of laying their grievances before their sovereign 3'.

But while both parties prepared, with equal 1677.

animolity, to involve their country in the horrors Death of Ba-

con terminates

of civil war, an event happened, which quieted the rebellion.
the commotion almost as suddenly as it had been
excited. Bacon, when ready to take the field,
sickened and died. ' None of his followers pof-
sessed such talents, or were so much obje-ts of
the people's confidence as s entitled them to aspire
to the supreme command. Destitute of a leader
to conduct and animate them , their fahguine
hopes of success subsided; miuiuil d&ltrut acc6m-n
panied this universal despondency; ali biegan to
wilh for an accommodatieon; and aftea a Ihort
negociation with Sir iiam) Ber1keley, they laid
down their arms J and ftbiaitted to hiB geaeran-
mnent, on obtaining a promise of geernarn palon.

Thus terminated am infusre61iot, Tbhich, in

the annals of Visginia is diiguilbedobs1iiha
name of Bacon's rebllion. Duying? ftevt~ernathJ
this daring leader waa niaflte t of dhet' co~oapy

II Ieverlefls HilL p. 71 (

B o o K while the royal governor was slut up in a remote

Ix and ill-peopled corner of it. WVhat were the real

motives that prompted him to take arms, and
to what length he intended to carry his plans of
reformation, either in commerce or government,
it is not easy to discover, in the scanty materials
fromnwhich we derive our information with refpet
to this tranfadion. It is probable, that his condua,
like that of other adventurers in fadion, would
have- been regulated chiefly by events; and ac-
cordingly 'as these proved favorable or adverse,
his views and requisitions would have been extend-
ed ori circumscribed.

A aIfembry Sir William Berkeley, as soon as he was re-

afi""inflated 'in his office, called together the repre-

fentatives of the people, that by their advice'and
authority public tranquillity and order might be
perfectly eftabtifhed. Though this assembly met
a few we~eks after the death of Bacon, while the
memoio9 of reciprocal injuries was flill recent,
and jwhen the passions excited by such a fierce
conteftihad but little time to subside, its proceed-
ings wera coriduced with a moderation seldom
exercised by the fuccefsful-party in a civil war.
No man fuffered capitally; a small number were
fubjeded to fines; others were declared incapable
of holding any office of trust; and with those
exceptiohs, the promise of general indemnity
war confirmed by law. Soon after, Berkeley
was recalled, -and Colonel Jefferys was appoint-
ed his successor.

From that period to the Revolution in 1688 a o o

there is scarcely any memorable occurrence in theq Ixt

State of the

hiflory of Virginia. A peace was concluded wit colony till the
the Indians. Under several successive governors, Revolution in
administration was carried on in the colony with
the fame arbitrary spirit that distinguished the
latter years of Charles II. and the precipitate
counsels of James II. The Virginians; with a
conflitution which, in form, resembled that of
England, enjoyed hardly any portion of the liberty
which that admirable system of policy is framed
to secure. They were deprived even of the last
consolation of the oppreffcd, the power of com-
plaining, by a law which, under severe penalties,
prohibited them from speaking difrefpeatfully of
the governor, or defaming, either by words or
writing, the adminiffration of the colony 8sl
Still, however, the laws restraining their com-
merce were felt as an intolerable grievance, and
nourished in fecdet a spirit of discontent, which,
from the neceflity of concealing it, acquired a
greater degree of acrimony. But notwithstanding
those unfavorable circumitances, the colony con-
tinued to increase. The use of tobacco was now
become general in Europe; and though it had
fallen considerably in price, the extent of demand
compensated that diminution, and by giving
constant employment to the industry of the plan-
ters diffufed wealth among them. At the Revo-
lution the number of inhabitants in the colony

8a Bevecrley, p. St. Chalmers, p. 341.

i o o X exceeded sixty thousand s3, and in the course of

aX twenty-eight years its population had been more

than doubled s4.

s3 Chalmers' Annals, p. 356. s4 Ibid. f. is;.

# BOOK X.

THE

HISTORY

OF

AMERICA.

BOOK X.

WHEN James I. in the year one thousand fix

B o

0 K

hundred and fix, made that magnificent partition, Hiinor of th
which has been mentioned, of a vast region in northern colo-
North America, extending from the thirty-fourth ny, an ofths
to the forty-fifth degree of latitude, between two company.
trading companies of his fubje ls, he established
the residence of the one in London, and of the
other in Plymouth. The former was authorized
to fettle ia the southern, and the latter in the
northern part of this territory, then difiinguifhed
by the general name of Virginia. This arrange-
ment seems to have been formed upon the idea
offome speculative refiner, who aimed at diffufing
the spirit of industry, by fixing the feat of one
branch of the trade that was now to be opened,
on the east coast of the island, and the other on
the well. But London poffeffes such advantageb
of situation, that the commercial wealth and

H4

r o o iK acivity of England have always centered in the

x. capital. At the beginning of the lift century,

the superiority of the metropolis in both these
refpedts was so great, that though the powers
and privileges conferred by the king on tie two
trading companies were precisely the fame, the
adventurers fettled in Plymouth fell far fllort of
those in London, in the vigor and success of their
efforts towards accomplishing the purpose of their
inflitution. Though the operations of the Ply-
mouth company were animated by the public-
spirited zeal of Sir John Popham, chief juflice of
England, Sir Ferdinando Gorges, and some other
gentlemen of the weft, all its exertions were feeble
and unfortunate.

16os. The first vessel fitted out by the company was

Tirft attempts taken by the Spaniards. In the year one thousand
ortber"oat. fix hundred and seven, a feeble settlement was

made at Sagahadoc; but, on account of the rigor
of the climate, was soon relinquilhcd, and for
some time nothing farther was attempted than a
few iflhing voyages to Cape Cod, or a pitiful

Smith surveys traffic with the natives for skins and oil. One
that oa and of the vessels equipped for this purpose was corn-
England. manded by Captain Smith, whose name has been

5614. so often mentioned with diflintion in the History

of Virginia. The adventure was prosperous and
lucrative. But his ardent enterprising mind could
not confine its attention to objets so unequal to
it as the petty details of a trading voyage. He
employed a part of his time in exploring the coast,
and in delineating its bays and harbours. On his

return, he laid a map of it before Prince Charles, B o o K
and, with the usual exaggeration of discoverers, x.
painted the beauty and excellence of the country
in such glowing colors, that the young Prince,
in the warmth of admiration, declared , that it
thould be called New England 1 : a name which
effaced that of Virginia , and by which it is still
distinguished.

The favorable accounts of the country by Firt attempts

Smith, as well as the success of his voyage, seem t fettle ufu" -
to have encouraged private adventurers to pro-
fecute the trade on the coast of New England with
greater briskness; but did not inspire the lan-
guilhing company of Plymouth with such vigor as
to make any new attempt towards eftablilling a
permanent colony there. Something more than
the profpea of distant gain to themselves, or of
future advantages to their country, was requisite,
in order to induce men to abandon the place
of their nativity, to migrate to another quarter
of the globe, and endure innumerable hardships
under an untried climate, and in an uncultivated
land, covered with woods, or occupied by fierce
anid hostile tribes of savages. But what mere
attention to private emolument or to national
utility could not effed , was accomplished by
the operation of an higher principle. Religion Religions dif-
had gradually excited among a great body of the ute gie if
people, a spirit that fitted them remarkably for England co-
encountering the dangers, and surmounting the lony.

I Smith's Trav. Book vi. p. 203, &c. Purchas, iv. p. IS37.

a o o x obstacles, which had hitherto rendered abortive

x" the schemes of colonization in that part of America

allotted to the company of Plymouth. As the
various settlements in New England are indebted
for their origin to this spirit, as in the course of
our narrative we (hall discern its influence mingling
in all their tranfations , and giving a peculiar
tinElure to the chiracler of the people, as well
as to their inftiturions, both civil and ecclesiastical,
it becomes neceflary to trace its rife and progress
with attention and accuracy.

Different fen- When the fuperflitions and corruptions of the
timents re- Romish church prompted different nations of Eu-
fpeting
church go. rope to throw off its yoke, and to withdraw from
,ernmentthat its communion, the mode as well as degree of
prevailed at
theReforma- their separation was various. Wherever reforma-
tion. tion was sudden, and carried on by the people

uwithout authority from their rulers, or in oppo-
fition to it, the rupture was violent and total.
Every part of the ancient fabric was overturned,
and a different system, not only with refpef1 to
docrine, but to church government, and the
external rites of worflip, was eftabliflied. Calvin,
who, by his abilities, learning, and austerity of
manners, had acquired high reputation and au-
thority in the Proteflant churches, was a zealous
advocate for this plan of thorough reformation.
He exhibited a model of that pure form of ecclefi-
aftical policy, which he approved in the confli-
tution of the church of Geneva. The simplicity
of its inflitutions, and still more their repugnancy
to those of the Popish church, were so much

admired by all the flriaer reformers, that it was
copied, with some small variations, in Scotland,
in the Republic of the United Provinces, in the
dominions of the House of Brandenburgh, in
those of the Elector Palatine, and in the church-
es of the Hugonots in France.

But in those countries where the fleps of de-

parture from the church of Rome were taken
with greater deliberation, and regulated by the
wisdom or policy of the supreme magifitrate, the
separation was not so wide. Of all the reformed
churches, that of England has deviated least from
the ancient inflitutions. The violent but capricious
,spirit of Henry VIII. who, though he difclainted
the supremacy, revered the tenets of 'the Papal
fee, checked innovations in dodrine or wrifhip
during his reign. When his son ascended the
throne, and the Protestant religion was established
by law, the cautious prudence of Archbifllhp
Cranmer moderated the zeal of those who had
espoused the new opinions. Though the articles
to be recognized as the system of national faith
were framed conformably to the dodrineh of
Calvin, his notions with refped to chutrh goal
vernment and the mode of worship were not
adopted. As the hierarchy in England was incot.
porated with the civil policy of the kingdoi ,
and conflituted a mnember of the legislature ,
archbifhops and bilhops, with all the subordinate
Ianks of ecclefiaftics fubjet to them, were 'con'.
tinued according to ancient form, and with
the fame dignity and jurifdidion. The pecaliar

BOO K vestments in which the clergy performed their

x. sacred funations, bowing at the name of Jesus,

kneeling at receiving the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, the sign of the Cross in baptism, the use
of the Ring in marriage, with several other rites
to which long usage had accustomed the people,
and which time had rendered venerable, were
itill retained. But though Parliament enjoined
the observance of these ceremonies under very
severe penalties , several of the more zealous
clergy entertained scruples with refpea to the law-
fulness of complying with this injuncion; and
the vigilance and authority of Cranmer and Ridley
with. difficulty flved their infant church from the
disgrace of a schism on this account.

Religious per.- On the acceflion of Mary, the furious zeal
fecution by with which she persecuted all who had adopted
)Ilary. the tenets of the reformers forced many eminent

Protestants, laymen as well as ecclefiaftics, to
seek an asylum on the continent. Francfort,
Geneva, Basil, and Strafburgh, received them
with affectionate hospitality as fufferers in the cause
of truth, and the magistrates permitttd them to
assemble by themselves for religious worlhip. The
exiles who took up their residence in the two
former cities modelled their little congregations
according to the ideas of Calvin, and, with a
Sfpirit natural to men in their situation, eagerly
adopted institutions which appeared to be farther
removed from the superstitions of Popery than-

s
i and 3 Edw4 VI. c. a.

those of their own church. They returned to B o o K
England as soon as Elizabeth re-established the x.
Protestant religion, not only with more violent
antipathy to the opinions and pradtices of that
church by which they had been oppressed, but
with a firong attachment to that mode of worfllip
to which they had been for some years accustom-
ed. As they were received by their countrymen
with the veneration due to confeffors, they exerted
all the influence derived from that opinion, in
order to obtain such a reformation in the English
ritual as might bring it nearer to the flandard of
purity in foreign churches. Some of the queen's
most confidential ministers were warmly disposed
to co-operate with them in this measure. But Queen EUza.
Elizabeth paid little regard to the inclinations of beth.
the one, or the sentiments of the other. Fond
of pomp and ceremon'y, accustomed, according
to the mode of that age, to fltudy religious con-
troverfy, and poffefling, like her father, such
confidence in her own understanding that ihe
never doubted her capacity to judge and decide
with refped to every point in dispute between
contending feds 3, ihe chose to ad according

3 Of the high idea which Elizabeth entertained with refpe6t

to her own superior skill in theology, as well as the haughty
tone in which she diaated to her fubjeas what they ought to
believe, we have a striking piture in her speech at the close
of the parliament A. D. 1585. - " One thing I may not overskip.
Religion, the ground on which all other matters ought to take
root, and being corrupted, may mar all the tree. And that
there be some fault-finders with the order of the clergy, which

a o o K to her own ideas, which led her rather to approach

x. nearer to the church of Rome, in the parade of

external worfluip, than to widen the breach by
aboliihing any rite already eftablilhed 4. An ad
of parliament, in the first year of her reign, not
only required an exact conformity to the mode
of wQrlhip prescribed in the service book, under
most rigpoous penalties, but empowered the Queen
to, enjoin the observance of such additional cere-
monies as, might tend, in her opinion, to render
thle public exercises of devotion more decent and
edifying

puritana. The advocates for a farther reformation,

notwithstanding this cruel disappointment of the

ro may make a slander to myfclf, and to the church, whole
oven- rlen Gao hath made me, whose negligence cannot be ex.
cufrd, if apy fchifms or errors heretical were fuffcred. Thus
munchi s quit fay, that some faults and negligences must grow
and be, as in all other great charges it happeneth; and what
vocation without? All which, if you my lords of the clergy
do not amend, ! mean to depose you. Look ye, therefore,
well to your charges. This may be amended without needlefrs
or opong exclamations. I am supposed to have many studies,
i sl no& philosophical. I mull yield this to be true, that I
fupj2fe few (that be not profeffors) have read more. And I
need not tell you, that I am not so limple that I underltand
not, nor so forgetful that I remember not; and yet, amidfft
eny many volumes, I hope .God's hook hath not been tny fel-
domeft &tures, in which we find that which by roafon all ought
to believe. I fee many over-bold with God Almighty, making
too many hubtle fpannings of his blefcd will. The presumption
is so great that I may not fuffer it," &o. D'Ewes's Journal,
p. 928.

4 Neals Hlift. of the Puritans, i. 138. 17.

sanguine hopes with which they returned to their B 0 o K
native country, did not relinquish their design. x.
They disseminated their opinions with great in-
duftry among the people. They extolled the
purity of foreign churches, and inveighed against
the superstitious praaices with which religion was
defiled in their own church. In vain did the
defenders of the eftablifleLfyfitem represent that
these forms and ceremonies were, in themselves,.
things perfecly indifferent, which, from long
usage, were viewed with reverence ;. and , by
their impression upon the senses and imagination,
tended not only to fix the attention, but to affea
the heart, and to warm it with devout and worthy
sentiments. The Puritans (for by that name such
as scrupled to comply with what was enjoined by
the adt ofuniformity were diftinguilied) maintain-
ed, that the rites in question were inventions of
men, fuperadded to the simple and reasonable
service required in the word of God; that from
the exceflive solicitude with which conformity to
them was exacted, the multitude must conceive
such an high opinion of their value and import-
ance, as might induce them to reft satisfied with
the mere form and shadow of religion, and to
imagine that external observances may compensate
for the want of inward fandity; that ceremonies
which had been long employed by a society
manifefily corrupt, to veil its own defetds, and
to seduce and fascinate mankind, ought now to
be rejeded as relics of superstition unworthy of
* place in a church which gloried in the name
of Reformed

a o o K The people, to whom in every religious con-
Intolerant fpi troverfy the final appeal is made, listened to the
rit of the arguments of the contending parties; and it is
church. obvious to which of them, men who had lately

beheld the superstitious spirit of Popery, and felt
its persecuting rage, would lend the most favorable
ear. The desire of a farther separation from the
church of Rome spread wide through the nation.
The preachers who contended for this, and who
refifed to wear the surplice, and other vestments
peculiar to their order, or to observe the cere-
monies enjoined by law, were followed and admir-
ed, while the ministry of the zealous advocates
for conformity was deserted, and their persons
often exposed to insult. For rome time the non-
conformists were connived at; but as their number
and boldness increased, the interposition both of
spiritual and civil authority was deemed necessary
in order to check their progress. To the disgrace
of Christians, the sacred rights of conscience and
private judgment, as well as the charity and
mutual forbearance suitable to the mild spirit of
the religion which they profeffed, were in that
age little underflood. Not only the idea oftole-,
ration, but even the word itself in the sense now
affixed to it, was then unknown. Every church
claimed a right to employ the hand of power for
the protection of truth and the extirpation of
error. The laws of her kingdom armed Elizabethl
with ample authority for this purpose, and she
was abundantly disposed to exercise it with full

vigor.

vigor. Many of the most eminent among the B o o r
Puritan clergy were deprived of their benefices, x.
others were imprisoned, several were fined, and
some put to death. But persecution, as ulually
happens, inflead of extinguishing, inflamed their
zeal to such a height, that the jurifdidion of the
ordinary courts of law was deemed infufficient to
suppress it, and a new tribunal was established
under the title of tile high commifflonfor ecclefiaf-
tical affairs, whose powers and mode of proce-
dure were hardly less odious or less hostile to the
principles of justice than those of the Spanilh in-
quifition. Several attempts were made in the
House of Commons to check these arbitrary pro.
ceedings, and to moderate the rage of perfecu-
tion; but the Queen always imposed silence upon
those who presumed to deliver any opinion with
refped to a matter appertaining solely to her
prerogative, in a tone as imperious and arrogant
as was ever used by Henry VIII. in addressing his
Parliaments; and so tamely obsequious were the
guardians of the people's rights, that they not
only obeyed those unconflitutional commands,
but' conented to an adt, by which every perfort
who thould absent limfelf from church during a
month was fubjeded to punilhment by fine and
imprisonment; and if after convidion he -did not,
within three months, renounce his-erroneous
opinions and conform to the laws, he was then
obliged to abjure the realm; but if he either
refused to comply with this condition, or returned

.'1

1o 0 0 K from banifliment, he Thould be put to death

~x as a felon without benefit of clergy 6.

Entire fepara. By this iniquitous statute, equally repugnant to
oina of tSm ideas of civil and of religious liberty, the Puritans
the church. were Cut off from any hope of obtaining either

reformation in the church or indulgence to them-
selves. Exasperated by this rigorous treatment,
their antipathy to the eflablifhed religion increased,
and, with the progress natural to violent paflions,
carried them far beyond what uwas their original
aim.. The first Puritans did not entertain any
scruples with refpecd to the lawfulness of Episcopal
government, and seem to have been very unwil-
ling to withdraw from communion with the church
of which they were members. -But when they
were thrown out of her bosom, and confirained
to hold separate assemblies for the worship of God,
their followers no longer viewed a society by which
they were oppressed with reverence or affection.
Her government, her discipline, her ritual, were
examined with minute attention. Every error was
pointed out, and every defed magnified. The
more boldly any teacher inveighed against the
corruptions of the church, he was liflened to with
greater approbation; and the farther he urged his
disciples to depart from such an impure com-
munity, the more eagerly did they follow him.
By degrees, ideas ofecclefiaftical policy, altogether
repugnant to those of the established church, gained
footing in the nation. The more sober and learned

' fl Lils. t. I.

Puritans inclined to that form whiclh 5lknb'wri by n 6 b it
the name of Presbyterian. Such as were more x.
thoroughly poffeffed with the spirit bs ihnovation,
however much they might approve' tile equality
ofpaflors which that system establishes, reprobated
the authority which it vefis in various judicatories,
descending from one to another in regular fubor-
dination, as inconsistent with Chrifliatlibefty.

These wild notions floated for-fom6tirme ini

the minds of the people, and amrufil tthm with
many ideal schemes of ecclesiastical policy. At
leingth Robert Brown, a popula- dedlainer in Brownifi.
high estimation, reduced them to 'i fyflem, on 8sso.
which he modelled his own congregation. He
taught, that the church of England was corrupt,
and antichriftian, its minifiers not lawfully ordain-
ed, its ordinances and sacraments invalid; and
therefore he prohibited his people tO 'holdc com-
munion with it in any religious furlltioh. He
maintained, that a society of Cthriftians, "niting
together to worflhip God, conItitutted a chiurch,
poffeffed of complete jurifdicion in the 'bndia
of its own affairs, independent ofany other folb ety,
and unaccountable to any luperioi; that the
priesthood was neither a'diftin& ordet" in the
church, nor conferred an indelible charadter; but
that every man qualified to teach might be set
apart for that office by the eletion of the brethren,
and byimpofition of their hands; inmike manner,
by their authority, he might be diflhdrged from
that fund1ion, and reduced to the rank of a private
Christian; that every person when admitted £

Ig

B o 0 K member ofla church ought to make a public cona

x" session of his faith, and give evidence of his being

in a slate of favor with God; and that all the
affairs 9f a church were to be regulated by the
-decifiqn of the majority of its members.

Brovniftstake This Flemocratical form of government, which
refuge in.Het-abolihied all diftinlion of ranks in the church,

and conferire an equal portion of power on every
individual, accorded so perfetly with the level-
ling genius 9f fanaticism, that it was fondly adopt-
-ed by mnany- as a complete model of Christian
policy," Frqm their founder, they were denomi-
nated Browrifts; and as their tenets were more
hostile to the established religion than those of
other feparattits, the fiercest Itorm of persecution
fell upon their heads. Many of them were fined
or imprisoned, and faome put to death; and
though Brown, with a levity of which there are
-few examples among enthusiasts whose vanity has
been soothed by being recognised as heads of a
party, abandoned his disciples, conformed to the
eftablifljedt religion, and accepted of a benefice
in the church, the fed not only subsisted, but
continued to spread, especially among persons in
the middle and lower ranks of life. But as all
their motions were carefully watched, both by
the ecclesiastical and civil courts, which, as often
as they were deteced, punished them with the
utmost rigor, a body of them, weary of living
in a (late of continual danger and alarm, fled to
JHolland, and fettled in Leyden, under the care
ps Mr. John.Robinfon, their pallor. , There they

resided for several years unmolested and obscure. a o o K
But many of their aged members dyifig, and x.
some of the younger marrying into Dutch families,
while their church received no increase, either
by recruits from England, or by profelytes gain-
ed in the country, they began to be afraid, that
all their high attainments in spiritual knowledge-
would be loft, and that perfec fabric of policy,
which they had ereCded, would be dissolved and
consigned to oblivion, if they remained longer
in a firange land.

Deeply afTeded with the profped of an event, Remove frem

which to them appeared fatal to the interests of'the"c tO
truth, they thought themselves called, in order
to prevent it, to remove to some other place,
where they might profess and propagate their
opinions with greater success. America, in which
their countrymen were at that time intent on
planting colonies, presented itfelfto their thoughts.
They flattered themselves with h6pes of being
permitted, in that remote region, to follow their
own ideas in religion without diflturbance. The
dangers and hardships to which all former emi*
grants to America had been exposed, did not
deter them. " They were well weaned, (accord-
ing to their own description) from the delicate
milk of their mother country, and inured to the
difficulties of a firange land. They were knit
together in a stria and sacred band, by virtue
of which they held themfelvea obliged to take
care of the good of each other, and of the whole.
It was not with them, as with other men, whom

13

qg J, fmralithjngs could discourage, orfmall difcontents

xi cause to wish themselves at home again 7." The

firftr objet of tReir solicitude was to secure the
free eyercife of their religion. For this purpose
they applied to the king; and though James re-
fused to give them any explicit assurance of tole-
ration, they seem to have obtained from him some
promise of his connivance, as long as they continu-
ed to demean themselves quietly. So eager were
they to accomplish their favorite scheme, that,
relying on this precarious security, they began to
negociate with the Virginian company for a traQ
of land within the limits of their patent. This
they easily procured from a society desirous of
encouraging migration to a vast country, of which
they had hitherto occupied only a few spots.

im:o. After the utmost efforts, their preparations fell

Sept. . far flhort of what was requisite for beginning the
tie in Mafa. settlement of a new colony. A hundred and
churets Bay. twenty persons failed from England in a single

ship on this arduous undertaking. The place of
their destination was Hudfon's River, where they
intende. to.fettle; but their captain having been
bribed as is said, by the Dutch, who had then
formed a Icheme which they afterwards accom-
plifhed of planting a colony there, carried them
so far towards the north, that the first land in

rov. xn. America which they made was Cape-Cod. They

were now, not only beyond the precinds of the
territory which, had been granted to them, but

?' Xutchinfon's H~ill. oE Mailich p. 4.

beyond those of the company from which they a o o K
derived their right. The season, however, was
so far advanced, and sickness raged so violently
among men unaccuflomed to the hardfliips of a
long voyage, that it became necessary to take up
their abode there. After exploring the coast, they
chose for their flation, a place now belonging to
the province of Maffachufets Bay, to which they
gave the name of New Plymouth, probably out settle at New
of refpea to that company, within whose jurif- Plymn"tL
didlion they now found themselves situated 8.

No season could be more unfavorable to fettle:.

ment than that in which the colony landed. The
winter, which, from the predominance of cold
in America, is rigorous to a degree unknown in
parallel latitudes of our hemisphere, was already
set in ; and they were slenderly provided with
what was requisite for comfortable subsistence,
under a climate considerably m'ore severe than that
for which they had made preparation. Above-
one half of them was cut off before the return
offpring, by diseases, or by famine: the fur-
vivors, inflead of having leisure to attend to the '
supply of their own wants, were compelled to
take arms againfl the savages in theirneighbourhood. Plan org.
Happily for the English, a pestilence, which raged venme±.·
in America the year before they landed, had
swept off so great a number of the natives, that
they were quickly repulsed and humbled. The
privilege of profefling their own opinions, and

S Hubard's Pret State, p. 3. Cotton's Magnalia, p. T?.

Hutchinfon's Hilt. p. 3, &c.

B o o a of being governed by laws of their own framing,

x afforded consolation to the colonists amidst all

their dangers and hardships. The constitution of
their church was the fame with that which they
had established in Holland. Their system of civil
government was founded on those ideas of the
natural equality among men, to which their eccle-
fiaftical policy had accustomed them. Every free
man, who was a member of the church, was
admitted into the supreme legislative body. The
laws of England were adopted as the basis of
their jurisprudence, though with some diversity
in the punishments infliated upon crimes, bor-
rowed from the Mosaic institutions. The executive
power was vefiled in a governor and some afliitants,
who were eleted annually by the members of the
legislative assembly 9. So far their inflitutions ap-
pear to be founded on the ordinary maxims of
human prudence. * But it wds a favorite opinion
with all the enthusiasts of that age, that the
Jcriptures contained a complete system, not only
of spiritual inftrudion, but of civil wisdom and
polity; and without attending to the peculiar
circumstances or situation of the people whole
history is there recorded, they often deduced
general rules for their own condudt, from what
happened among men in a very different fiate.
Under the influence of this wild notion, the co-
]onifts of New Plymouth, in imitation of the

commnnitaofprimitive Christians, threw all their property into
goods.

P Chalmers' Annals, p. 87.

a common flock, and, like members of one n o.o K
family, carried on every work of industry by x.
their joint labor for public behoof 0o. But,
however this resolution might evidence the fin-
cerity of their faith, it retarded the progress of
their colony. The fame fatal effecs flowed from
this community of goods, and of labor, which
had formerly been experienced in Virginia; and This inftim.
it soon became necelfary to relinquilh what was ti" hurtful

to the colony.

too refined to be capable of being accommodated
to the affairs of men. But though they built a
small town, and surrounded it with such a fence
as afforded fufficient security against the assaults
of Indians, the foil around it was so poor, their
religious principles were so unsocial, and the supply
vent them by their friends so scanty, that at the
end of ten years, the number of people belong-
ing to the settlement did not exceed three
hundred I". During some years they appear not
to have acquired right by any legal conveyance
to the territory which they had occupied. At 163o.
length they obtained a grant of property from
the council of the New Plymouth company, but
were never incorporated as a body politic by This colony
royal charter "=. Unlike all the other settlements not incorpo.

rated by char.

in America, this colony must be considered ter.
merely as a voluntary association, held together
by the tacit consent of its members to recognise
the authority of laws, and submit to the jurifdidion
of magistrates framed and chosen by themselves.

to Chalmers' Annals, p. 89. Douglas's Summary, i. p. 370.
UI Chalmersn' Annals, p. 97. i2 Ibid. p. 97. 1o7.

B O O K In this state it remained an independent, but

x. feeble community, until it was united to its more

powerful neighbour, the colony of Maffachufets
Bay, the origin and progress of which I now
proceed to relate.

Grand council The original company of Plymouth having
op 'y."oth done nothing effeflual towards eftablifning any

permanent settlement in America, James I. in the
year one thousand fix hundred and twenty, issued
a new charter to the Duke of Lenox, the Marquis
of Buckingham , and several other persons of dif-
tinlQion in his court, by which he conveyed to
them a right to a territory in America, still more
extensive than what had been granted to the
former patentees, incorporating them as a body
politic, in order to plant colonies there, with
powers and jurifdidion similar to those contained
in his charters to the companies of South and
North Virginia. This society was diflinguilhed
by the name of the Grand Council of Plymouth
for planting and governing New England. What
considerations of public utility could induce the
king to commit such an undertaking to persons
apparently so ill qualified for conduting it, or
what profped of private advantage prompted
them to engage in it, the information we receive
fronm contemporary writers does not enable us to
determine. Certain it is, that the expeatations of
both were disappointed, and after many schemes
and arrangements, all the attempts of the new
lffociates towards colonization proved unfuccefsful.

New England must have remained unoccupied, B o o K

if the fame causes which occasioned the emigration Proe. of a
of the Brownifts had not continued to operate, new colony.
Notwithflanding the violent persecution to whiclh
Puritans of every denomination were still exposed,
their number and zeal daily increased. As they
now despaired of obtaining in their own country
any relaxation of the penal flatutes enadted against
their seQ, many began to turn their eyes towards
some other place of retreat, where they might
profess their own opinions with impunity. Fromn
the tranquillity which their brethren had hithertQ
enjoyed in New Plymouth, they hoped to find
this desired asylum in New England; and by the
alivity of Mr. White, a non-conformist minister
at Dorchester, an association was formed by feve-
ral gentlemen who had imbibedPuritanical notions,
in order to conduct a colony thither. They purch-
afed from the council of Plymouth all the territory,
extending in length from three miles north of the
River Merrimack, to three miles south of Charles iatr.
River, and in breadth, from the Atlantic to the Marc. z9
Southern Ocean. Zealous as these proprietors
were to accompliflh their favorite purpose, they
quickly perceived their own inability to attempt
the population offuch an immense region, and
deemed it necessary to call in the aid of more-
opulent co-partners '3.

Of these they found, without diffculty, 4

fufficient number, chiefly in the capital, and

13 Neal', WA.R of Ncw EngL L p. sit.

B o o K among persons in the commercial and other in-

x. duftrious walks of life, who had openly joined

the fed of the Puritans, or secretly favored their
opinions. These new adventurers, with the
caution natural to men conversant in business,
entertained doubts concerning the propriety of
founding a colony on the basis of a grant from
a private company of patentees, who might convey
a right of property in the foil, but could not
confer jurifdidlion, or the privilege of governing
that society which they had in contemplatioA to
eflablifl. As it was only from royal authority
that such powers cculd be derived, they applied
for there; and Charles granted their request, with
a facility which appears aflonifluing, when we
confider the principles and views of the men who
were suitors for the favor.

Charter to the' Time has been considered as the parent of
new colony of political wisdom, but its inftrudtions are com-
Maffachu.ets .
Bay. municated slowly. Although thel experience of

above twenty years might have taught the English
the impropriety of committing the government
of settlements in America, to exclusive corpora-
tions resident in Europe, neither the king nor
his fubjeds had profited so much by what passed
before their eyes, as to have extended their ideas
beyond those adopted by James, in his first
attempts towards colonization. The charter of
Charles I. td the adventurers associated for plant-
ing the province of Maffachufets Bay, was per-
feQly limilar to those granted by his father to the
two Virginian companies 'and to the council of

Plymouth. The new adventurers were incorporat- a o o K
ed as a body politic, and their right to the ter- x.
ritory, which they had purchased from the council
of Plymouth, being confirmed by the king, they
were empowered to dispose of the lands, and to
govern the people who fllould fettle upon them,
The first governor of the company, and his
assistants, were named by the crown: the right
of electing their successors was veftied in the
members of the corporation. The executive
power was committed to the governor and aflift-
ants; that oflegiflation to the body of proprietors,
who might make flatutes and orders for the good
of the community, not inconsistent with the laws
of England, and enforce the observance of them,
according to the cotirfe of other corporations
within the realm. Their lands were to be held
by the fame liberal tenure with those granted to
the Virginian company. They obtained the fame
temporary exemption from internal taxes, and
from duties on goods exported or imported; and
notwithflanding their migration to America, they
and their descendants were declared to be entitled
to all the rights of natural-born fubjeds I'.

The manifest objed of this charter was to confer

on the adventurers who undertook to people the
territory on Maffachufets Bay, all the corporate
rights poffeffed by the council of Plymouth, from
which they had purchased it, and to form them
into a public body, resembling other great trading

1s Hutchinfon's Colle&. of Orig. Papers, p. s, &c.

B o o K companies, which the spirit of monarchy had

x. at that time multiplied in the kingdom. The

king seems not to have foreseen, or to have fufpeat-
ed, the secret intentions of those who projeded
the measure; for so far was he from alluring emi-
grants, by any hopes of indulgence with refpet
to.their religious scruples, or from promising any
relaxation from the rigor of the penal statutes
against non-conformists, that he expressly provides,
for having the oath of supremacy administered to
every person who shall pass to the colony , or
inhabit there "s.

Settlement in But whatever were the intentions of the king,
c°ure^que"efthe adventurers kept their own objed steadily in

view. Soon after their powers to establish a colony
were rendered complete by the royal charter,
they fitted out five flhips for New England; on

aH Hutchinfon's Colle&. of Orig. Papers, p. 18. - It is

surprising, that Mr. Ncal, an indultrious, and generally a
well-informed writer, should affirm, that " free liberty of
a conscience was granted by this charter to all who should
" fettle in those parts, to worship God in their own way."
Hist. of N. Engl. i. I24. This he repeats in his History of
the Puritans, ii. 210; and fubfequcnt historians have copied
him implicitly. No permission of that kind, however, is contain.

in the charter; and such an indulgence would have been

inconsistent with all the maxims of Charles and his minilters
during the course of his reign. At the time when Charles
ifued the charter, the influence bs Laud over his councils was
at its height, the Puritans were prosecuted with the greatest
severity, and the kingdom was rule4 entirely by prerogative,
This is not an era in which one can expe& to meet with con.
ceffions in favor of non-conformists, from a prince of Charles's
charader and principles.

boardofwhich embarkedupwardsofthree hundred B o o K
passengers, with a view of fettling there. These x"
were mostly zealous Puritans, whose chief induce-
ment to relinquilh their native land was the hope
of enjoying religious liberty, in a country far
removed from thie feat of government and the
oppreflion of eccleliaflical courts. Some eminent
non-conformist ministers accompanied them as
their spiritual infirudors. On their arrival in New
England, they found the wretched remainder of
a small body of emigrants, who had left England June.
the preceding year, under the condud of Endi-
cott, a deep enthuliaft, whom, prior to their
incorporation by the royal charter, the associates
had appointed deputy governor. They were
fettled at a place called by the Indians Naunekeag,
and to which Endicott, with the fond affectation
of fanatics of that age to employ the language
and appellations of scripture in the affairs of
common life, had given the name of Salem.

The emigrants under Endicott, and fitch as Begin with

now joined them, coincided perfecly in religious e"ablg
principles. They were Puritans of the ftrideft
form; and to men of this charader the inflitution
of a church was naturally of such interesting
concern as to take place of every other objedt,
In this first tranfadion, they displayed, at once,
the extent of the reformation at which they
aimed. Without regard to the sentiments of
that monarch under the fandion of whose author-
ity they fettled in America, and from whom they
derived right to ads as a body politic, an4 il,

B O O K contempt of the laws of England, with which

x. the charter required that none of their ads or

ordinances ihould be inconsistent, they adopted
in their infant church that form of policy which
has lince been diftinguiflhed by the name of In-

Aug. 6. dependent. They united together in religious

society, by a solemn covenant with God, and
with one another, and in firin conformity, as
they imagined, to the rules of scripture. They
eleRed a pastor, a teacher, and an elder, whom
they set apart for their refpedive offices, by
imposition of the hands of the brethren. All
who were that day admitted members of the
church, lignified their assent to a confeffion of
faith drawn up by their teacher, and gave an
account of the foundation of their own hopes as
Christians; and it was declared, that no person
Thould hereafter be received into communion
until he gave fatisfacion to the church with
refped to his faith and fandity. The form of
public worfllip which they inflituted was without
a liturgy , difencumbered of every superfluous
ceremony, and reduced to the lowest fandard
of Calviniftic simplicity Is.

Intolerance It was with the utmost complacence that men,
of the new passionately attached to their own notions, and
church. who had long been rcflrained from avowing them,

employed themselves in framing this model of a
pure church. But, in the first moment that they

began

is Math. Magnal. p. 18. Neal's Hist. of N. Engl. L 1:6.

Chaltmers, f. 143.

began to tafle of Christian liberty themselves, they B o o K
forgot that other men had an equal title to enjoy x
it. Some of their number, retaining an high
veneration for the ritual of the English church,
were so much offended at the total abolition of
it, that they withdrew from communion with.
the newly-inflituted church, and assembled fe-
parately for the worihip of God. With an incon-
fiflency, of which there are such flagrant inflances
among Christians of every denomination that it
cannot be imputed as a reproach peculiar to any
fed, the very men who had themselves fled from
persecution became persecutors; and had recourse,
in order to enforce their own opinions, to the
fame unhallowed weapons, against the employ-
ment of which they had lately remonfirated
with so much violence. Endicott called the two
chief malecontents before him; and though they
were men of note, and among the number of
original patentees, he expelled them from the
society, and sent them home in the flips which
were returning to England '7. The colonists were
now united in sentiments; but, on the approach
of winter, they fuffered To much from diseases,
which carried off almost one half of their number,
that they made little progress in occupying the
country.

Meanwhile the diretors of the company in Emigrations

England exerted their utmost endeavours in order increased by
to reinforce the colony with a numerous body of the intole-

* ranceof Laud.

17 Mather, p. 19. Neal, p. 129.

B o o K new settlers; and as the intolerant spirit of Laud

x. exaded conformity to all the injundions of the

church with greater rigor than ever, the condition
of such as had any scruples with refped to this
became so intolerable, that many accepted of
their invitation to a secure retreat in New England.
Several of these were persons of greater opulencq
and of better condition than any who had hi-
therto migrated to that country. But as they
intended to employ their fortunes, as well as
to hazard their persons, in eftablifling a per-
manent colony there, and foresaw many incon-
veniences from their fubjedion to laws made
without their own consent, and framed by a
society which must always be imperfedly acquaint-
ed with their situation, they insisted that the cor-
porate powers of the company should be trans-
ferred from England to America, and the govern-
ment of the colony be vested entirely in those
twho, by fettling in the latter-country, became
members of it 8a. The company had already
expended considerable sums in prosecuting the
'lefign of their institution, without having received
tlmoft any return, and had no profped of gain,
or even of reimbursement, but what was too
remote and uncertain to be suitable to the ideas
of merchants, the most numerous class of its
members. They hesitated, however, with refped
to the legality of granting the demand of the

charttorthe intended emigrants. But such was their eagerness
omapany

is Hutchinfon's Coll. of Papers, p. 3s.

to be disengaged from an unpromising adventure, B o o K
that, "by general consent, it was determined, transedto
that the charter ihould be transferred, and the the colonifs.
government be fettled in New England Is." To
the members of the corporation. who chose to
remain at home was reserved a Thare in the trad.
ing flock and profits of the company during
seven years.

In this singular tranfaflion, to which there

is nothing similar in the hiflory of English co-
lonization, two circumstances merit particular
attention: one is the power of the company to
make this transference; the other is the silent
acquiescence with which the king permitted it to
take place. If the validity of this determination
of the company be tried by the charter which
constituted it a body politic, and conveyed to it
all the corporate powers with which it was invest-
ed, it is evident that it could neither exercise
those powers in any mode different from what
the charter prescribed, nor alienate -them in fuchl
a manner as to convert the jurifdiion of a trad-
ing corporation in England into a provincial go-
vernment in America. But from the first inftitu-
tion of the company of Maffachufets Bay, its
members seem to have been animated with a
spirit of innovation in civil policy, as well as in
religion; and by the habit ofrejeting established
usages in the one, they were prepared for deviat.
ing from them in the other. They had applied

I9 Mather, p. so. hutchinfon's Hit. p. 2i. Chalmers,

I. ISo. Ka

a o o K for a royal charter, in order to give legal effefl

x. to their operations in England, as ads of a body

politic; but the persons whom they sent out to
America, as soon as they landed there, considered
themselves as individuals, united together by
voluntary association, poffeffing the natural right
of men who form a society, to adopt what mode
of government, and to exad what laws they
deemed most conducive to general felicity. Upon
this principle of being entitled to judge and to
decide for themselves, they eftablified their church
in Salem, without regard to the institutions of
the church of England, of which the charter sup-
posed them to be members, and bound of con-
sequence to conformity with its ritual. Suitably
'to the fame ideas, we shall observe them framing
all their future plans of civil and ecclesiastical
policy. The king, though abundantly vigilant
in observing and checking slighter encroachments
on his prerogative, was either so much occupied
at that time with other cares occasioned by his
fatal breach with his parliament, that he could
not attend to the proceedings of the company;
or he was so much pleased with the profped of
removing a body of turbulent fubjeds to a dif-
tant country, where they might be useful, and
could not prove dangerous, that he was disposed
to connive at the irregularity of a measure which
facilitated their departure.

coonyextend- Without interruption from the crown, the
Sadventurers proceeded to carry their scheme into

execution. In a general court, John Winthrop

was appointed governor, and Thomas Dudley B o o K
deputy-governor, and eighteen afliftants were x.
chosen; in whom, together with the body of
freemen who should fettle in New England, were isi.
veiled all the corporate rights of the company.
With such zeal and aativity did they prepare for
emigration, that in the course of the ensuing year
seventeen ships failed for New England, and
aboard there above fifteen hundred persons,
among whom were several of refpeiable families,
and in easy circumstances. On their arrival in
New England, many were so ill-fatisfied, with
the situation of Salem, that they explored the
country in quest of some better station; and
fettling in different places around the Bay, ao-
cording to their various fancies, laid the founda-
tions of Boston, Charleftown, Dorchester, Rox-
borough, and other towns , which have since
become considerable in the province. In each of
there a church was eftablilhed on the fame model
with that of Salem. This, together with the care
of making provision for their subsistence during
winter, occupied them entirely during some
months. But in the first general court, their oa. 1e:
disposition to confider themselves as members of
an independent society, unconfined by the regula-
tions in their charter, began to appear. The
election of the governor and deputy governor,
the appointment of all other officers, and, even
the power of making laws, all which were grant-
ed by the charter to the freemen, were taken
from them, and vfited in the council of affftants,

KS

a o o H But the ariftocratical spirit of this resolution did

x not accord with the ideas of equality prevalent

among the people, who had been surprised into

ust. an approbation of it. Next year the freemen,

whose numbers had. been greatly augmented by
the admiflion of new members, resumed their
former rights.

None but But , at the fame time, they ventured to
members of deviate from the charter in a matter of greater
the church ad-
mittedasfree. moment, which deeply affeted all the future
men. operations of the colony, and contributed greatly

to form that peculiar charadler by which the
people of New England have been distinguished.
A law was passed, declaring that none shall here-i
after be admitted freemen, or be entitled to any
fllare in/the government, or be capable of being
chosen magistrates, or even of serving as jurymen,
but such as kAve been received into the church
as members 9Q. By this resolution, every person
who did not hold the favorite opinions concern-
ing the doilrines of religion, the discipline of
the church, or the rites of worship, was at once
cast out of the society, and stripped of all the
privileges, of a citizen. An uncontrolled power of
approving or rejecting the claims of those who
applied for admiflion into communion with the
church being vested in the ministers and leading
men of each congregation, the most valuable of
all civil rights was made to depend on their
decilion with refped to qualifications purely

w HutlcInfou, p. s6i Chalmcrs,-p. *y3.

ecclesiastical. As in examining into there, they B o o K
proceeded not by any known or established rules, Pix.
but exercifc-d a discretionary judgment, the clergy concequences
rose gradually to a degree of influence and au- oftis'egul.-
thority, from which tile levelling spirit of the
independent church policy was calculated to ex-
clude them. Asby their determination the political
condition of every citizen was fixed, all paid court
to men poffeffed of such an important power, by
aflfuming those auflere and fanaimonious manners
which were known to be the moit certain recom-
mendation to their favor. In consequence of this
ascendant, which was acquired chiefly by the
wildest enthufiaits among the clergy, their notions
became a standard to which all fludied to con-
form, and tile singularities charaderiflic of the
Puritans in that age increased, of which many
remarkable inflances will occur in the course of
our narrative.

Though a considerable number of planters was Idian ter.

cut off by the diseases prevalent in a country so it0ori de-

populated by

imperfectly cultivated by its original inhabitants theaaull-pox.
as to be still almost one continued forest, and
several, discouraged by the hardships to which
they were exposed, returned to England, recruits sst.
fufficient to replace them arrived. At the fame
time the small-pox, a distemper fatal to the people
of the New World, swept away such multitudes
of the natives that some whole tribes disappeared;
and Heaven, by thus evacuating a country in
which the Englilh might fettle without moleftlitioa,

B 0 o K was supposed to declare its intention that they

x.

. fliould occupy it.

settlemeni of As several of the vacant Indian stations were
the cnlonifts well chosen, filch was the eagerness of the Engliflih
extended. to take poffeffion of them, that their settlements

became more numerous and more widely difperf-
ed than suited the condition of an infant colony.
This led to an innovation which totally altered
the nature and conflitution of the government.

T634. When a general court was to be held in the year

by reresne one thousand fix hundred and thirty-four, the
tires. freemen, instead of attending it in person as the

charter prescribed, eledced representatives in their
different diftrias, authorizing them to appear in
their name, with full power to deliberate and
decide concerning every point that fell under the
cognizance of the general court. Whether this
meafilre 'was f:ggefted by some designing leaders,
or whether they found it prudent to sooth the
people by complying with their inclination, is
uncertain. The representatives were admitted;
and considered themselves, in conjunation with
the governor and affifltants, as the supreme le-
giflative assembly of the colony. In assertion of
their own rights they enated, that no law should

Extent of po. be passed; no tax should be imposed, and no
J^dfe, ber'tpublic officer thould be appointed, but in the
assembly. general assembly. The pretexts for making this

new arrangement were plausible. The number
of freemen was greatly increased; many resided
at a distance from the places where the supreme
courts were held; personal attendance became

inconvenient; the form of government in their B o o0
own country had rendered familiar the idea of x.
'delegating their rights, and committing the guar-
dianihip of their liberties, to representatives of
their own choice, and the experience of ages had
taught them that this important trust might with
safety be lodged in. their hands. Thus did the
company of Maffachufets Bay, in less than fix
years from its incorporation by the king, mature
and perfeQ a scheme which, I have already ob-
served, some of its more artful and aspiring leaders
seem to have had in view when the affooiation
for peopling New England was first formed. The
colony must henceforward be considered, not as
a corporation whose powers were defined, and
its mode of procedure regulated by its charter,
but as a society, which, having acquired or
assumed political liberty, had, by its own vo-
luntary deed, adopted a constitution or govern-
ment framed on the model of that in England.

But however liberal their system of civil policy Spirit f fra.-

might be, as their religious opinions were no ati in.
longer under any restraint of authority, the spirit
of fanaticism continued to spread, and became
every day wilder and more extravagant. Williams,
a minister of Salem, in high estimation, having
conceived an antipathy to the cross of St. George
in the standard of England, declaimed against it
with so much vehemence as a relic of fuperfti-
lion and idolatry which ought not to be retained
among a people so pure and fandified, that Endi-
cott, one of the members of the court ofafilmnts,

a o ao i in a transport of zeal, publicly cut out the cross

x. from the ensign displayed before the governor's

gate. This frivolous matter interested and divid-
ed the colony. Some of the militia fcrnpled to
follow colors in which there was a cross , left
they should do honor to an idol: others refused
to serve under a mutilated banner, left they
should be fufpeded of having renounced their
allegiance to the crown of England. After a long
controversy, carried on by both parties with that
heat and zeal which in trivial disputes supply the
want of argument, the contest was terminated by
a compromise. The cross was retained in the
ensigns of forts and ihips, but erased from the
colors of the militia. Williams, on account of
this, as well as of some other dodrines deemed
unsound, was banished out of the colony as.

New settlers. The prosperous slate of New England was now

so highly extolled, and the simple frame of its
ecclesiastic policy was so much admired by all

uw,. whose affecions were estranged from the church

of England, that crowds of new settlers flocked
thither. Among these were two persons, whose
names have been rendered memorable by the
appearance which they afterwards made on a
more conspicuous theatre: one was Hugh Peters,
the enthusiastic and intriguing chaplain of Oliver
Cromwell; the other Mr. Henry Vane, son of
Sir Henry Vane, a privy counsellor, high in
office, and of great credit with the king; a young

at Neal's Hist. of N. Eng. p. z4o, &c. Hutchinson, p. 37.

Chalmers, p. x56.

man of a noble family, animated with such zeal a o o K
for pure religion and such love of liberty as in- x
duced him to relinquibh all his hopes in England,
and to fettle in a colony hitherto no farther advan-
ced in improvement than barely to afford subsist-
ence to its members, was received with the fond.
eft admiration. His mortified appearance, his de.
mure look, and rigid manners , carried even
beyond the flandard of preciseness in that society
which he joined, seemed to indicate a man of
high spiritual attainments, while his abilities and
address in business pointed him out as worthy of
the highest flation in the community. With 2s63
universal consent, and high expedtations of ad-
vantage from his adminifiration, he was eleaed
governor in the year subsequent to his arrival.
But as the affairs of an infant colony afforded not
objects adequate to the talents of Vane, his busy
pragmatical spirit occupied itself with theological
fubtilties and speculations unworthy of his atten-
tion. There were excited by a woman, whole
reveries produced such effeas both within the co-
lony and beyond its precincts, that, frivolous at
they may now appear, they must be mentioned
as an occurrence of importance in its history.

It was the custom at that time in New England, Antinomia

among the chief men in every congregation, to ea.
meet once a week, in order to repeat the sermons
which they had heard, and to hold religious confer-
ence with refped to the doctrine contained in
them. Mrs. Hutchinson, whole husband was
among the most respectable members of the colony,

B o o a regretting that persons of her sex were excluded

x. from the benefit of those meetings, assembled

statedly in her house a number of women, who
employed themselves in pious exercises iimilar
to those of the men. At first flhe satisfied herself
with repeating what flhe could recoiled of the
discourses delivered by their teachers. She began
afterwards to add illustrations, and at length
proceeded to censure some of the clergy as unsound,
and to vent opinions and fancies of her own. These
were all founded on the system which is deno-
minated Antinomian by divines, and tinged with
the deepest enthusiasm. She taught, that fandity
of life is no. evidence of justification, or of a slate
of favor with God; and that such as inculcated
the necelfity ofmanifefting the reality of our faith
by obedience, preached only a covenant of works:
She contended that the spirit of God dwelt per-
fonally in good men, and by inward revelations
and impremions they received the fullest discoveries
of the divine will. The fluency and confidence
with which the delivered these notions gained her
many admirers and profelytes, not only among
the vulgar, but among the principal inhabitants.
The whole colony was interested and agitated.
Vane, whose sagacity and acuteness seemed to
forsake him whenever they were turned towards
ireligion, espoused and defended her wildest tenets.

16?. Many conferences were held, days of falling and

'heirdorines"humiliation were appointed, a general fynrod was
condemned by
senerifynod.called, and, after dissensions so violent as threaten-

ed the dissolution of the colony, Mrs. Hutchinfon's

bpinions were condemned as erroneous, and she a o o K
herfelfbanifled. Several of her disciples withdrew x.
from the province of their own accord. Vane
quitted America in disgust, unlamented even by
those who had lately admired him; some of
whom now regarded him as a mere visionary,
and others as one of those dark turbulent spirits
doomed to embroil every society into which they
enter 21

However much these theological contests might The reaaries

disquiet the colony of Maffachufets Bay, they i"ee a
contributed to the more speedy population of Rhodeiland.
America. When Williams awas banilhed from,
Salem in the year one thousand fix hundred and
thirty-four, such was the attachment of his hearers
to a paflor whole piety they revered, that a good
number of them voluntarily accompanied him in
his exile. They direced their march towards
the south; and having purchased from the natives
a considerable trad of land, to which Williams
gave. the name of Providence, they fettled there.
They were joined soon after by some of those to
whom the proceedings against Mrs. Hutchinson
gave disgust; and by a tranfacqion with the Indians
they obtained a right to a fertile island in Narag-
anfet Bay, which acquired the name of Rhode
Island. Williams remained among them upwards
of forty years, refpeded as the father and the
guide of the colony which he had planted. His spirit
differed from that of the Puritans in Maffachufets; Their mo.

deration.

2s Mather, book vii. c. 3. Hutchinson, p. 53. 74. Neal,

p. 1. 144. i65, &c. Chalmcrs, p. 163.

o o o x it was mild and tolerating; and having ventured
x. himself to rejet eftabliflied opinions, he endea-

voured to secure the fame liberty to other men,
by maintaining, that the exercise of private judge-
ment was a natural and sacred right; that the
civil magistrate has no compulsive jurifdidion in
the concerns of religion; that the puniflhment of
any person on account of his opinions, was an
encroachment on conscience, and an a& of per-
fecution -3. These humane principles he instilled
into his followers; and all who felt or dreaded
oppression in other settlements, resorted to a
community in which universal toleration was
known to be a fundamental maxim. In the
plantations of Providence and Rhode Island ,
political union was eflablifhed by voluntary affo-
ciation, and the equality of condition among the
members, as well as their religious opinions;
their form of government was purely democratical,
the supreme power being lodged in the freemen
personally assembled. In this slate they remained
until they were incorporated by charter 24.

ColonyofCon- To similar causes the colony of Conneticut
eai~Ct. is indebted for its origin. The rivalfhip between

Mr. Cotton and Mr. Hooker, two favorite minis-
ters in the settlement of Maffachufets Bay, dif-
posed the latter, who was least fuccefsful in this
contest for fame and power, to wish for some
settlement at a distance from a competitor by

23 Neal's Hist. of N. Eng. p. 14t.
24 Hutchinson, p. 38. Neal, ii. 142. Dougl. Sum. ii

p. 76, &c. Chalmers, ch. ii.

whom his reputation was eclipsed. A good a o o
number of those who had imbibed Mrs. Hut- x
chinfon's notions, and were offended at such as
combated them, offered to accompany him. Hav-
ing employed proper persons to explore the
country, they pitched upon the weft fide of the
great river Connedicut as the most inviting fta-
tion; and in the year one thousand fix hundred
and thirty-fix, about a hundred persons, with
their wives and families, after a fatiguing march
of many days through woods and swamps, arrived
there, and laid the foundation of the towns of
Hartford, Springfield, and Weatherfield. This
fettlemept was attended with peculiar irregularities.
Part of tile diftria now occupied lay beyond the
limits of the territory granted to the colony of
Malfachufets Bay, and yet the emigrants took a
commiflion from the governor and court of affit-
ants, empowering them to exercise jurifdiaion
in that country. The Dutch from Manhados or
New York, having discovered the river Connec-
ticut, and eftablihied some trading houses upon
it, had acquired all the right that prior polTeflion
confers. Lord Say and Sele and Lord Brook,
the heads of two illufirious families, were so much
alarmed at the arbitrary measures of Charles I.
both in his civil and ecclesiastical administration,
that they took a resolution, not unbecoming young
men of noble birth and liberal sentiments, of
retiring to the New World, in order to enjoy
such a form of religion as they approved of, and
those liberties which they deemed essential to the

B o o K well-being of society. They, too, fixed on the

14 banks of the Connedicut as their place of fettle-

ment, and had taken poffeffion, by building a
fort at the mouth of the river, which, from their
united names, was called Say Brook. The emi-
grants from Maffachufets, without regarding either
the defers in their own right or the pretensions
of other claimants, kept polfeffion, and proceeded
with vigor to clear and cultivate the country. By
degrees they got rid of every competitor. The
Dutch, recently fettled in America, and too feeble
to engage in a war, peaceably withdrew from
Connedicut. Lord Say and Sele and Lord Brook
made over to the colony whatever title they might
have to any lands in that region. Society was
eftablilhed by a voluntary compaSl of the freemen;
and though they soon disclaimed all dependence
on the colony of Maffachufets Bay, they retain-
ed such veneration for its legislative wisdom, as to
adopt a form of government nearly resembling
its institutions, with refped both to civil and
ecclesiastical policy. At a fuhfequent period, the
colony of Conneticut was likewise incorporated
by royal charter 2.

OfNewHamp- The history of the first attempts to people the
hiire adMain.provinces of New Hamplhire and Main, which

form the fourth and most extensive division in
New England, is obscure and perplexed, by the
interfering claims of various proprietors. The

company

ia Hutchinson, p. 44, &c. Neal, i. 147. Douglas, ii.

s1S, $cc. Chalmers' Annals, ch; i.<.

company of Plymouth had inconsiderately par. a o o N
celled out the northern part of the territory X,
contained in its grant among different perfonsi
of these only Sir Ferdinando Gorges and Captain
Mason seem to have had any serious intention to
occupy the lands allotted to them. Their efforts
to accomplilh this were meritorious and perfever.
ing, but unfuccefsful. The expense of fettling
colonies in an uncultivated country mulf necessarily
be great and immediate; the profped of a return
is often uncertain and always remote. The funds
of two private adventurers were not adequate to
such an undertaking. Nor did the planters whom
they sent out possess that principle of enthusiasm,
which animated their neighbours of Maffachufets
with vigor, to firuggle through all the hardlhips
and dangers to which society, in its infancy, is
exposed in a savage land. Gorges and Mason, it
is probable, must have abandoned their design,
if, from the fame motives that settlements had
been made in Rhode Island and Connecdicut,.
colonills had not unexpecedly migrated into New
Hampmhire and Main. Mr. Wheelwright, a minister
of some note, nearly related to Mrs. Hutchinson,
and one of her most fervent admirers and partisans,
had, on this account, been banished from the
province of Maffachufets Bay »2. In quest of a
new itation, he took a course opposite to the'
other exiles, and advancing towards the north,
founded the town of Exeter , on a fmaU river

U. Hlutchin~on, p. 7p

i o o x flowing into Pifkataqua Bay. His followers, few

x.' in number, but firmly united, were of filch rigid

prindiples, that even the churches of Maffachufets
did not appear to them fulficiently pure. From
time to time they received some recruits, whom
love of novelty, or diffatisfancion with the eccle-
fiaftical institutions of the other colonies, prompt-
ed to join them. Their plantations were widely
dispersed, but the country was thinly peopled,
and its political slate extremely unsettled. The
colony of Maffachufets Bay claimed jurifdiacion
over them, as occupying lands situated within
the limits of their grant. Gorges and Mason assert-
ed the rights conveyed to them as proprietors
by their charter. In several diftrids, the planters,
without regarding the pretensions of either party,
governed themselves by maxims and laws copied
front those of their brethren in the adjacent co'-
o1nies -7. The first redution of the political
cin4}itution in the provinces of New Hampshire
and Main into a regular and permanent form,
Was subsequent to the revolution.

By extending their settlements, the English

became exposed to new danger. The tribes of
Indians around Maffachufets Bay were feeble and
unwarlike; yet from regard to juflice, as well
as motives of prudence, the first colonists were
ftIudious to obtain the consent of the natives before
they ventured to occupy any of their lands; and
though irt such tranfations the consideration given

27 Hutchinson, p. o103, &c. 176. Douglas's Sum. ii. 2s,

&c. Chalmers' Annals, ch. 17.

was often very inadequate to the value of the o o

0 K

territory acquired , it was fufficient to satisfy the'The ather
demands of tile proprietors. The Englifhi took encroach.
quiet pofleflion of the lands thus conveyed to "1ns Enire.
them, and no open hoflility broke out between ed by the
them and the ancient poffllors. But the colonies natives.
of Providence and Conneaticut soon found that
they were surrounded by more powerful and
martial nations. Among these the most confi-
derable were the Naraganfets and Pequods; the
former seated on the Bay which bears their name,
and the latter occupying the territory which
firetches from thle river Pequod along the banks
of the Connedicut. The Pequods were a for-
midable people, who could bring into the field
a thousand warriors, not inferior in courage to
any in the New World. They foresaw, not only
that the extermination of the Indian race must
be the consequence of permitting the Englilh to
spread over the continent of America, but that
if measures were not speedily concerted to prevent
it, the calamity would be unavoidable. With
this view they applied to the Naraganfets, request-
ing them to forget ancient animolities for a mo-
ment, and to cooperate with them in expelling
a common enemy who threatened both with
deflruQion. They represented that, when those
firangers first landed, the object of their visit
was not fufpealed, and no proper precautions
were taken to check their progress; that now,
by sending out colonies in one year towards three
different quarters, their intentions were manifest,

La

t 0 0o and the people of America must abandon their

x native feats to make way for unjust intruders.

But the Naraganfets and Pequods, like most

of the contiguous tribes in America, were rivals,
and there fubfifed between them an hereditary
and implacable enmity. Revenge is the darling
paflion offavages; in order to secure the indulgence
of which there is no present advantage that they

Warwith tib will not sacrifice, and no future consequence which
pequodatib. they do not totally disregard. The Naraganfets,

inflead of closing with the prudent proposal of
their neighbours, discovered their hoflile inten-
tions to the governor of Maffachufets Bay, and,
eager to lay hold on such a favorable opportunity
of wreaking their vengeance on their ancient foes,
entered into an alliance with the Englilh against
them. The Pequods, more exasperated than
discouraged by the imprudence and treachery of
their countrymen, took the field, and carried on
the war in the nfual mode of Americans. They
surprised fitragglers, and fcalped them; they
plundered and burnt remote settlements; they
attacked Fort Say Brook without success, though
garrisoned only by twenty men; and when the
Englilh began to aa offenfively, they retired to
faftneffes which they deemed inacceflible. The
different colonies had agreed to unite against the
common enemy, each furnilhing a quota of men
in proportion to its numbers. The troops of
Connedicut which lay most exposed to danger
.were soon assembled. The march of those from
Maffachufets, which formed the most considerable

body, was retarded by the molt singular cause a

0

that ever influenced the operations of a military .rision
force. When they were mustered previous to ofearmy.
their departure, it was found that some of the
officers, as well as of the priv4te soldiers, were
still under a covenant of works; and that the
blefling of God could not be implored or expeaed
to crown the arms of such unhallowed men with
success. The alarm was general, and many ar-
rangements necessary in order to cast out the
unclean, and to render this little band fufficiently
pure to fight the battles of a people who entertain-
ed high ideas of their own san8ity '*,

Meanwhile the Connecicut troops, reinforced Defeat of tr

by a small detachment from Say Brook, found aIdi"an
it necessary to advance towards the enemy. They
were posted on a rising ground, in the middle
of a swamp towards the head of the river Miftick,
which they had surrounded with palifadoes, the
best defence that their slender 1kill in the art of
fortification had discovered. Though they knew
that the Englilh were in motion, yet, with the
usual improvidence and security of savages, they
took no measures either to observe their progrefs,'
or to guard againht being surprised themselves.
The enemy, unperceived, reached the palifadoes, May so.
and if a dog had not given the alarm by barking,
the Indians must have been massacred without
resistance. In a moments however, they started
to arms, and raising the war-cry, prepared toa

os Neal, L. 16.

LS

a o o K repel the assailants. But at that early period of

xa their intercourse with the Europeans, the Americanl

were little acquainted with the use ofgunpowder,
and dreaded its effets extremely. While some
of the EngliIh galled them with an incessant fire
through the intervals between the palifadoes,others
forced their way by the entries into the fort, filled
only with branches of trees; and setting fire to the
huts which were covered with reeds, the confusion
and terror quickly became general. Many of the
women and children perilhed in the flames; and
the warriors , in endeavouring to escape, were
eithet slain by the English, or falling into the
hands of their Indian allies, who surrounded the
tort at a difiance, were reserved for a more cruel
fate. After the junction of the troops from Maf-
fachufets, the EngliIh resolved to pursue their
*vicor'; and hunting the Indians from one place
of retreat to another, some subsequent encounters
were hardly less fatal to them than the ation on
the Miflick. In less than three months the tribe
of Peqnods was extirpated: a few miserable fu-
gitives who took refuge among the neighbouring
Indians, being incorporated by them, loft their

Croeltle, ex. name as a diftind people. In this firfi essay of
"tesd aain their arms, the colonifis of New England feeni

to have been conduCed by flkilful and enterprising
dfficers, and displayed both courage and per.
severance as soldiers. But they flained their laurels
byt the use which they made of viaory. Infitead
oftreating the Pequods as in independent people,
who made a gallant effort to defend the property,

the rights, and the freedom of their nation, they B o o a
retaliated upon them all the barbarities ofAmerican x.
war. Some they massacred in cold blood, others
they gave up to be tortured tby their Indian allies,
a considerable number they fold as slaves in Ber-
mudas, the reft were reduced to servitude among
themselves 9.

But reprehensible as this condul of th)e Englifib Emigrations

mull be deemed, their vigorous efforts in thisfromE'glan"d
decilive campaign filled all the furrunnding tribes
of Indians with fcich an high opinion of their
valor as secured a long tranquillity to all their
settlements. At the fame time the violence of
adminiflration in England continued to increase
their population and frrength, by forcing manyr
refpeatable fubjcas to tear themselves from all
the tender connexions that bind men to their
native country, and to fly for refuge to a region
of the New World, which hitherto presented t5
them nothing that could allure them thither but
exemption from oppreflion. The number of Prohibitedby
those emigrants drew the attention of government, royal procla-
and appeared To formidable, that a proclamation
was iflued, prohibiting maiters of thips from carry-
ing passengers to New England without special
permiflion. On many occasions this injuntlion
was eluded or disregarded. Fatally for the king,
it operated with full effedT in one infl.nce. Sir
Arthur Haflerig, John Hampden,Oliver Cromwell,
and some other persons whofc principles and views

=9 Hutchinson, p. 58. 76, &c. Mather, M 'gr.-'l! , b. vii

*h. 6. Hubbard's State of N. Eng. pag. 5. 116, &c.

L4

a o o a coincided with theirs, impatient to enjoy those civil

x. and religious liberties which they struggled in vain

to obtain in Great Britain, hired some thips to
-carry them and their attendants to New England.
By order of council, an embargo was laid on
these when on the point of failing; and Charles,
far from fufpecing that the future revolutions in
his kingdoms were to be excited and direaed by
persons in such an humble sphere of life, forcibly
detained the men destined to overturn his throrie,
and to terminate his days by a violent death 3o.

But, in spite of all the efforts of government

to check this spirit of migration, the measures
of the king and his ministers were considered by
a great body of the people as so hostile to those
fights which they deemed most valuable, that
in the course of the year one thousand fix hun-
dred and thirty-eight, above three thousand
persons embarked for New England, chufing
father toexpofe themselves to all the consequences
of disregarding the royal proclamation, than to
remain longer under oppreftion. Exasperated at
this contempt of his authority, Charles had recourse
to a violent but effeaual mode of accomplilhing
what he had in view. A writ of quo warranto
was issued against the corporation of Malfachufets

colony.fMai~Bay, The colonists had conformed so little to the
1fchurets BaT terms of their charter, that judgment was giveni
sued at law,
andfoun to against them without difficulty. They were found
have forfeited to have forfeited all their rights as a corporation,
his ights.

30 Mather, Magnalia, b. L oh.

c . p. :3. Neal's Hilt. of

), Eang i. xs1. Chalmers' Annals, i.L l$$. 16o, &.

which of course returned to the crown, and Charles B o o K
began to take measures for new modelling the x
political frame of the colony, and veiling the ad-
minifiration of its affairs in other hands. But his
plans were never carried into execution. In every
corner of his dominions, the storm now began to
gather, which soon burst out with such fatal
violence, that Charles, during the remainder of
his unfortunate reign, occupied with domeltic and
more interesting cares, had not leisure to bestow
any attention upon a remote and inconsiderable
province 3'.

On the meeting of the Long Parliament, such

a Revolution took place in England, t1hat all the
motives for migrating to the new world ceased.
The maxims of the Puritans with refped to the
government both of church and state, became
predominant in the nation, and were enforced
by the hand of power. Their oppressors were
humbled; that perfed system of reformed polity,
which had long been the obje6Q of their admira-
tion and desire, was established by law; and amidst
the intrigues and confliats of an obstinate civil
war, turbulent and aspiring spirits found such full
occupation, that they had no inducement to quit
a busy theatre, on which they had risen to aG a
most conspicuous part. From the year one thou-
sand fix hundred and twenty, when the first feeble
colony was condueted to New England by the State ofthe
Brownifts, to the year one thousand fix hundred oloi ,

31 Hutcliinfon, p. 36. 501, &qc. Chialtiert' Apz'uls, I. xbx;

no o ahd forty, it has been computed, that twenty.

x. one thousand two hundred Britilh fiibjeds had

fettled there. The money expended by various
adventurers during that period in fitting out
'flips, in purchaling flock, and transporting set-
lers, amounted , on a moderate calculation ,
nearly to two hundred thousand pounds 31: a
valt rum in that age, and which no principles,
inferior in force to those wherewith the Puritans
were animated, could have persuaded men to
lay out, on the uncertain profpve of obtaining
an eftablihment in a remote uncultivatedc region,
which, from its situation and climate, could
allure them with no hope but that of finding
fubfiflence and enjoying freedom. For some years,
even fubfiflence was procured with difficulty; and
it was towards the close of the period to which
our narrative is arrived, before the produal of
the settlement yielded the planters any return.
for their flock. About that time they began to
export corn in small quantities to the Weft
Indies, and made some feeble attenipts to extend
the filhery, and to open the trade in lumber,
which have since proved the flaple articles of
commerce in the colohny s3. Since the year one
thousand fix hundred and forty, the number of
people with which New England has recruited
the population of the parent slate, is supposed

3a Mather, b. L ch. 4. P. t1. ch. ;. p. 23. Hntchinfon,

p. 193. Chalmers' Annals, p. 165.

33 Hutchinson, p. 91, 92.

at least to equal what may have been drained

, o o x

from it by occasional migrations thither. x.

But though the sudden change of system in

Great Britain flopt entirely the influx of settlers
into New England, the principles of the colonists
coincided so perfedly with those of the popular
leaders in parliament, that they were soon dif-
tingiiflicd by peculiar marks of their brodierly
aflection. By a vote of the House of Commons
in the year one thousand fix hundred and forty-
two, the people in all the different plantations Exemption
of New England were exempted from payment dui Rant
of any duties, either upon goods exported thither, edtothecolo.
or upon those which they imported into the *"is
mother country, until the House Thall take farther
order to the contrary. This was afterwards Con-
firmed by the authority of both H-loufes. Encourag-
ed by such an extraordinary privilege, indnftry is4s.
made rapid progress in all the difltrifts of New
England, and population increased along with it.
In return for those favors, the colonists applaud-,
ed the measures of parliament, celebrated its
generous efforts to vindicate the rights and liberties
of the nation, prayed for the success of its arms,
and framed regulations in order to prevent hny
exertion in favor of the king on the other fide of
the Atlantic 3.

I

. Relying on the indulgent, partiality with which
all thqir proceedings were viewed by men thus
dofcly united with them in sentiments and withes,.

p47Hutchinfon, p. -e4. ,AP pp. $. Chalmers~ Asnhaa, L

174. 176.

s o o K the people of New England ventured on a measure,

x. which not only increased their security and power,

but may be regarded as a considerable step towards
independence. Under the impreflion or pretext
of the danger to which they were exposed from
the surrounding tribes of Indians, the four colo-

i)s. hies of Maffachufets, Plymouth, Connedicut, and

c.rlrofNewhaven entered into a league of perpetual
the New Eng. confederacy, offenfive and defensive; an idea fa-
land fatcs. miliar to several leading men in the colonies, as

it was framed in imitation of the famous bond of
union among the Dutch provinces, in whose
dominions the Brownifts had long relided. It
was flipulated, that the confederates should hence-
forth be diflinguifhed by the name of the Unit-
ed Colonies of New England; that each colony
Ihall remain separate and diftina, and have ex-
clufive jurifdiaion within its own territory; that
in every war offenfive or defensive, each of the
confederates Thall furnish its quota of men, pro-
visions, and money, at a rate to be fixed from
time to time, in proportion to the number of
people in each settlement; that an assembly com-
posed of two commiflioners from each colony
thall be held annually, with power to deliberate
and decide in all points of common concern to
the confederacy; and every determination, in
which fix of their number concur, Thall be bind-
ing on the whole 3". In this tranfadion the co-
lonies of New England seem to have considered

M Neal's Hilt. of N. Eng. L ao, Se. lHutchinfoa, 0. xa4.

Chalmers' Ann. p. i77.

themselves as independent societies, poffeffing allB o o R
the rights of sovereignty, and free from the control X.
of any superior power. The governing party in
England, occupied with affairs of more urgent
concern, and no wife disposed to observe the
conduni of their brethren in America with any
jealous attention, fuffered the measure to pafi
without animadversion.

Emboldened by this connivance the sprit of

independence gathered Itrength, and soon display-
ed itself more openly : some persons of note in
the colony of Maffachufets, averse to the system
of ecclesiastical polity eftabliihed there, and pre-
ferring to it the government and discipline of
the churches of England or Scotland, having
remonfirated to the general court against the in-
justice of depriving them of their rights as freemen, s,,.
and of their privileges as Christians, because they
could not join as members with any of the con-
gregational churches, petitioned that they might
no longer be bound to obey laws to which they
had not assented, nor be fubjea to taxes im-
posed by an aflembly in which they were not
represented. Their demands were not only re- Petiion o
jeaed, but they were imprisoned and fined as the Dife" .
diflurbers of the public peace; and when they
appointed some of their number to lay their
grievankes before parliament, the annual court,
in order to prevent this appeal to the supreme
power, attempted first to seize their papers, and
then to obfitrua their embarkation for England,
But though neither of these could be accomplished,

p o o a such was the address and influence of the colonies'

x. agents in England, that no inquiry seems to have

been made into this tranfadion 36. This was
followed by an indication, flill less ambiguous,
of the aspiring spirit prevalent among the people
of Maffachufets. Under every form of govern-
ment the right of coining money has been con-
fidered as a prerogative peculiar to sovereignty,
and which no subordinate member in any slate
is entitled to claim. Regardless of this eftabliflhed
maxim, the general court ordered a coinage of

I6-. silver money at Boflon, flamped with the name

rihtfoin- of the colony, and a tree as an apt symbol of
ing afibmed by.
the colonists. its progreflive vigor 37. Even this usurpation

escaped without notice. The Independents, hav-
ing now humbled all rival feds, engrofled the
whole direiion of affairs in Great Britain; and
long accustomed to admire the government of
New England, framed agreeably to those princi-
ples which they had adopted as the most perfet
model of civil and ecclefifitical polity, they were
unwilling to slain its reputation, by censuring
any part of its condud.

Cromwell pa. When Cromwell usurped the supreme power,
tronizes the the colonies of New England continued to fland
New England
bolonies. as high in his estimation. As he had deeply

imbibed all the fanatical notions of the Inde-
pendents , and was perpetually surrounded by

36 Neal's Hist. ofN. Eng. i. 213. Hutchinfon's Hist. x14,

&c. Collea. 188, &c. Chalm. Ann. 179. Mather, Magnal.
B. iii. ch. i. p. 3o.

Ir Hutchinfoa, 177, 178 Chalmers' Aqnals, p. 181.

the most eminent and artful teachers of that fe~d, a O O K
he kept a confant correspondence with the lead- x"
ing men in the American settlements, who seem
to have looked up to him as a zealous patron 3s.
He in return considered them as his most devoted
adherents, attached to him no less by affection
than by principle. He soon gave a firiking proof
of this. On the conquest of Jamaica, he formed PropoSes rt
a scheme for the security and improvement of the ao oi0 ths
acquisition made by his vitorious arms, suited Jamaica.
to the ardor of an impetuous spirit that delighted
in accomplilhing its ends by extraordinary means.
He proposed to transport the people of New
England to that island, and employed every argu-
ment calculated to make imprefliorf upon them,
in order to obtain their consent. He endeavoured
to rouse their religious zeal by representing what
a fatal blow it would be to the man of fin, if
a colony of the faithful were fettled in the midst
of his territories in the new world. He allured
them with profpets ofimmenfe wealth in a fertile
region, which would reward the induflry of those
who cultivated it, with all the precious produc-
tions of the torrid zone, and expressed his fervent
wish that they might take poffeflion of it, in order
to fulfil God's promise of making his people the
head and not the tail. He allured them of being
supported by the whole force of his authority,
and ofvefting all the powers of government entirely
in their hands. But by this time the colonits cineaccepting

tbis offer.

38 Hutchinson, App. Iso, &c. Colle&. p. 233.

a o o K were attached to a country in which they had

x. resided for many years, and where, though they

did not attain opulence, they enjoyed the com-
forts of life in great abundance; and they dreaded
so much the noxious climate of the Weft Indies,
which had proved fatal to a great number of the
English who first fettled in Jamaica, that they
declined, though in the most respeCtful terms,
closing with the Proteaor's proposition 39.

So Hutchinson, p. sgo9 &c, Chalmers, p. xiL

THE END.
