M E M 0 R I A L

RELATING TO THE
UNIVERSITY of EDINBURGH.

E D I N B U R G H:
Printed by BALFOUR, AULD, and SMELLIE,

M. DCC. LXVIII.

M E M 0 R I A L

RelaLting to the

UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH.
T H E University of Edinburgh was founded in

the year 1582. The ground on which the build-

ings are erected belonged to the Collegiate Church of
St Mary in the Fields. It contained the houses of the
Provost and Canons of that Church, and a house per-
taining to the family of Hamilton, which falling to
the crown, was granted to the University. The ground
was purchased, and the building begun, in consequence
of a mortification made by the Biflop of Orkney, of
a certain fun of money for that purpose. Private per-
sons contributed their benefacions ; and, by a charter
of King James VI. the Royal Santion was given to
the University, the Magistrates and Council of Edin-.
burgh were declared its patrons, and houses were ap-
pointed to be erected for Professors of the several Sci-
ences, and for Students to perform their Exercises
therein.

As

4 ]

As the funds were narrow, the fabric advanced flow-

ly, and with many interruptions. A public Hall, a
Divinity School, and some other buildings were erected
by the year I617. But there buildings, poorin them-
selves, seem not to have been carried on according to
any regular plan, such as takes place in other Acade-
mical Strutures which have been erected on more
opulent foundations; and hence the whole fabric has
a mean, irregular, and contemptible appearance. Some
of the houses which were found upon the area when
it was purchased were converted, as they flood, into
a part of the Univerfity-buildings; and many of the
schools or teaching-rooms are, at this day, crowded
into what was formerly the Marquis of Hamilton's
house.

THE period at which this University was founded,

was indeed peculiarly unfavourable to such an under-
taking. The kingdom was but just beginning to re-
cover tranquillity after great convulsions both in its
religious and civil constitution. The Church was new-
ly stripped of that wealth which had contributed so
much in former times to the magnificence of Acade-
mical StruCures; and industry, trade, and manufac-
tures had scarcely begun, at that time, to open the great
springs of national affluence and prosperity.

AT

r s ]

·AT the foundation of the University, accommoda-
tion was wanted, and provision was made, for teaching
only such Sciences and Arts as were, in that age,
thought most neceflary. But as more enlarged views
of Science and Literature have gradually opened,
the number of ProfefIors has, from time to time, been
greatly increased ; new branches of Science have been
cultivated; and it is imagined that the caurfe of Aca-
demical education is now as complete in this, as in
any University of Europe. Divinity, Church Hiflory,
the Law of Nature and of Nations, Civil Law, Scotch
Law, Anatomy, Theory of Physic, Pratice of Physic,
Chymiitry, Botany and Materia Medica, Midwifery,
Mathematics, Civil History and Roman Antiquities,
Moral Philosophy, Natural History, Natural Philosophy,
Logic and Metaphysics, Rhetoric and Belles Lettres,
the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin Languages, are all
taught by diftind Professors.

FROM several causes, this University has arisen to a

high degree of reputation. The number of Students
at present belonging to it is betwixt fix and seven hun-
dred. From its situation in Edinburgh, which is the
feat of the Courts of Juflice for North Britain, it has
always been much resorted to by the nobility and gen-
try of this part of the countiy. Of late, Ifveral per-
sons of very high rank and difinelion in the kingdom
have committed the education of their bons to the

B 'University

[6]

University of Edinburgh. The complete course of Me-
dical educationwhich it affords, more complete, it is be-
lieved, than is to be found in any otherUniverfity inEu-
rope, aided too by a great Infirmary jufft adjacent to it,
where Clinical Lectures are given by the Professors of
Medicine upon the cafes of the patients, is one great
cause of the concourse of so many Students from all
the parts of Great Britain, from Ireland, America, the
Weft Indies, and even from distant parts of Europe,
to this feat of Learning.

THE buildings of the University must, on the first

infpeAion, appear to every one to be extremely unfuita-
ble, both to the rank which this University has for fe-
veral years held, and to the present advancing and
improved state of this country. They are so far infe-
rior to all other ftrutures of the fame kind in our
own, or in other countries, that they cannot fail to
prejudice every firanger against Scotland, its education,
and its manners. A stranger, when conducted to view
the University of Edinburgh, might, on feeing such
courts and buildings, naturally enough imagine them
to be alms-houses for the reception of the poor; but
would never imagine that he was entering within the
precincts of a noted and flourishing feat of learning.
An area, which, if entire, would have formed one
spacious quadrangle, is broken into three paltry divi-
sions, and encompassed partly with walls which threaten

deftrudion

[ 7 1

destruction to the passenger, and partly with a range
of low houses, several of which are now become rui-
nous, and not habitable. With the exception of one
large upper gallery, which has lately been repaired, and
made the public library, and of an anatomical theatre,
there is no room or building belonging to the Univer-
fity that has any degree of academical decency. The
teaching rooms of the Profeflors are, in general, mean,
firaitened, and inconvenient; more enlarged accommo-
dation is wanted; and some Professors, whose hours
of teaching follow immediately on one another, are
obliged to occupy the fame room.

THE places to which persons have been much ac-
:customed in their youth, generally remain conneded
in their imagination with what relates to those places,
or has been tranfaded in them. Palaces and fumptu-
ous edifices are not requisite, indeed, to support the
dignity of literature. But, surely, when ideas of po-
verty, meanness, dirtiness, and darkness, are connecd-
ed in youth with a literary education, such a debating
association is not likely to favour the proper fruits of
education in future life.

THE public buildings in any country are generally

expected to bear some proportion to the state of that
country: They are fuppoied to exhibit the public taste,
and to correspond to the degree of national advance-

nent

t s ]

ment in opulence and in arts. 'A more unfavourable
specimen of all there cannot easily be flown, thar
what is afforded by the University of Edinburgh.

THE progress of improvement, throughout the whole

country, has, of late years, been great and remark-
able. Various causes have contributed to increase the
public wealth and prosperity. An uncommon spirit
of vigour, industry, and application to every useful
art, has diffused itself through all ranks. No rational
scheme has been proposed for the public utility or ho-
nour, to which proper attention has not been paid.
Undertakings so great and extensive, that some time a-
go they would have been held impracdicable and vifiona-
ry, are now planned with judgement, and supported
with zeal. In Edinburgh, in particular, the great im-
provements which have been lately made, and are still
going forwards, large buildings arising suddenly on
all hands, a magnificent bridge, and new streets and
squares begun, carry all the marks of a country grow-
ing in arts and in industry. The Univerfity-fabric
alone remains in such a negleced state, as to be gene-
rally accounted a dishonour to the city of Edinburgh,
and to this part of the kingdom.

THE

[ '9 1

THE Magistrates and Council of Edinburgh, the

`Patrons of the University, have never been wanting in
proper attention to its interest. They have listened to
,every reasonable demand. They have studied, from
time to time, to render the accommodation of the Pro-
feffors and the students more tolerable; and have, for
this. purpose, annually expended such furns as their pu-
blic revenue could afford on there decayed buildings.

BUT there partial reparations can neither remove the

inconveniency, nor cover the deformity and meanness
of the whole. It has long been thought, and the opi-
nion is now become very general, that it is necessary to
rebuild the fabric upon a new plan. And as the Ma-
giftrates and Council of Edinburgh are altogether un-
able to execute such an undertaking, by means either
of the funds appropriated for the support of the Univer-
fity, or of the proper revenue of the Community, it
has been suggested by many, that application ought to
be made to the Public for aid. Several persons of ge-
nerofity and public spirit have testified their willing-
ness to promote such a measure; and the voice of the
public has given encouragement to hope, that if a ge-
neral subscription were opened, considerable fums
might be raised for carrying on an undertaking which
redounds so much to the public advantage and honour.
This has given occasion to the present Memorial being
offered to the public.

c WHA T

L I.o ]

WHAT is proposed, in general, is, to rebuild the

fabric of the University according to a regular plan,
and in a decent manner, on the ground where it stands
at present. The situation is in every refped commo-
dious; the area, containing above three acres, is sus-
ficiently extensive, and would afford one large, free, and
open square, around which all the buildings could be
placed to advantage.

THE chief objeA in view, is, to eret those public

buildings which are necessary for an University; a Pu-
blic Hall, a Library, a Muflsum, and convenient
Teaching Rooms for the several Professors. As there
are twenty-one of there, sixteen or eighteen diftina
appartments would be required. With refped to
dwelling-houfes for the Professors, the building of these
must depend on the extent of the funds that shall a-
rife. If they fall be such as, besides the necessary a-
cademical buildings, to afford houses for the Profef-
fors, or at least some assistance for erecing them, and
by this means to compleat the whole proposed square,
the public would reap this advantage, that the Profef-
fors could then more readily, and with much less in-
conveniency, receive young gentlemen under their im-
mediate care, and lodge them in their houses, than it
is possible for them to do at present. But no part of
the money subscribed shall be applied towards build-
ing houses for Professors, unless sufficient funds be ob-

tained

II. ]

tained for compleating the public buildings in a decent
and proper manner.

IN order that the subscribers may be fully ascertained

of the fums which they shall please to contribute being
faithfully and properly applied, it is further proposed,
that certain Administrators or Trustees shall be named.
under whose sole direction every thing shall be placed
which relates to the intended buildings, and to the ap-
plication of the funds that may arise for this purpose.

THE persons proposed to be the Trustees, are, the

Lord Provost, the fix Magistrates and Deacon Con-
veener of the Trades of the city of Edinbuirgh; the
Lord Keeper of the Great Seal; the Lord Keeper of
the Privy Seal; the Lord Register of Scotland; the Lord
Justice General; the Lord President of the Board of Po-
lice, with one of the Lords of Police to be chosen by
the court; the Lord President of the Court of Session,
and two of the Senators of the College of Justice to be
chosen by the court; the Lord Justice Clerk, and one
of the Lords of Justiciary to be chosen by the court;
the Lord Chief Baron of Exchequer, and one of the
Barons to be chosen by the court; his Majesty's Advo-
cate, and the Solicitor General; the Dean of the Fa-
culty of Advocates, with three Advocates to be cho-
fen by the Faculty; the Keeper of his Majesty's Sig-
net, with two Clerks to the Signet to be chosen by that

Society;

'-" I* ,-
.

' Society; the President of the Royal College of Phy-
ficians, with one Fellow to be chosen by the College; the
Representative of the city of Edinburgh in Parliament;
the oldest Minifterof Edinburgh, with one .f the other
Minilters to be chosen by the Ministers of Edinburgh;
the Master of the Merchant Company, with one of
the Members to be chosen by the Company; the Prin-
cipal of the University, with one Professor from the
Faculty of Theology, one from the Faculty of Law,
one from the Faculty of Medicine, and two from the
Faculty of Arts, to be chosen by the University.

U ND D the diretion of a body of gentlemenfo re-

fpeaable-.ind enlightened, no doubt can be entertained
that the most proper measures will be taken for eret-
ing the proposed buildings according to such a plan,
and in such a manner as will redound molt to the be-
nefit of the University, of the City of Edinburgh, and
of the whole united kingdom.

/~~~~
