THE

/

T O,

O F

A MiE RIC A.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,

AND HISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

CORK:
PRINTED BY THOMAS WHITE, OPPOSITE THE

EXCHIANGE.

oa
o ,u otJ.C uj ,OOOO UOOOO

M,DCC,L.XXVIII.
H I

/ I'

/1

/

.1

Ri-
-PU---·-·-- -----·--------·---·----

__.
OZ%-

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK V.

TEJE
H I S T R Y

o F
A M ER I CA.

B 0 0 K V.

W H E N Grijalva returned to Cuba, he
found the armament deitined to attempt the con- B O S

v.

qucft of that rich country which he had discovered,
almoil complete. Not only ambition, but avarice, 151'
had urged Velasquez to haften his preparations; onpofve-
and having such a profpetó of gratifying both, he afqu'tz fir

iniading

had advanced considerable fums out of his private Nc, Ssin.
fortune towards defraying the expence. At the
fame time, he exerted his influence as governor, in
engaging the most diftinguithed persons in the co-
lony to undertake the service t . At a time when
the spirit of the Spanish nation was adventurous to
excess, a number of soldiers, eager to embark in
any daring entcrprie, ibon appeared. But it was
not so cafy to find a person qualified to take lie
command in any expedition of ob In uch importance;
and the chaladter of Vclaf(luiz, who had the right
of nomination, greatly increaf:d the difficulty
of the choice. Though of mo/ alpiing ainbi-
VOL. II. B tion,

t See N 0 T' lE

B 0 0 K tion, and not destitute of talents for government, he

V. v. possessed neither such courage nor such vigour and
1518. acivity of mind, as to undertake in person the con-

duct of the armament which he was preparing. In
this embarrassing situation, he formed the chineri-
cal scheme not only of atchieving great exploits by
a deputy, but of securing to himself the glory of
conquelts which were to be made by another. In
the execution of this plan, he fondly aimed at recon-
ciling contradictions. He was solicitous to chufe a
commander of intrepid resolution, and of superior
abilities, because he knew these to be requisite in
order to ensure success; but, at the fame time, from
the jealousy natural to little minds, he wished him
to be of a spirit so tame and obsequious, asto be en-
tirely dependant on his will. But when he came to
apply those ideas in forming an opinion concerning
tle several officers who occurred to his thoughts as
worthy of being cntrufted with the command, he
iooll perceived that it was impossible to find such
incompatible qualities united in one character.
Such as were distinguished for courage and talents,
were too high--fpirited to be pafllive initruments in
his hand. Thole who appeared more gentle and
ttra;able, were dectitute of capacity, and unequal
to the charge. This augmented his perplexity and
his fears. He deliberated long, and with much so-
licitridc, and was Itill wavering in his choice, when
\mnador lde Lares, the royal treasurer in Cuba, and
An lres Due-ro, his own fecrctary, the two persons
inl whoml he chi efly confiddct, were encouraged by
this irresolution to propose a new candidate, and
fulpported tlheir recommendation with such affidulity
anrd aId ref, that,L n lcs fatally for Vclafq(uez than
hIiail,ily for their countrly, it proved fc ccefsful l .

,-,HE

. II^ , i a. Ci.

*i . C. I7
* ,

-- -
- - - -- . 1 1 - .

"`

THE man whom they pointed out to him was BOOK.

Fernando Cortes. He was born at Medellin, a
small town in Estremadura, in the year one thou-
sand four hundred and eighty-five, and descended HeSns

C) *' -He appoints

from a family of noble blood, but of very moderate Cortes conm
fortune. Being originally destined by his parents mainuer
to the study of law, as the most likely method of
bettering his condition, he was sent early to the
university of Salamanca, where he imbibed some
tincture of learning. But he was soon disgusted
with an academic life, which did not suit his ar-
dent and restless genius, and retired to Medellin,
where he gave himself up entirely to aAive sports
and martial exercises. At this period of life, he
was so impetuous, so overbearing, and so dissipated,
that his father was glad to comply with his incli-
nation, and fend him abroad as an adventurer in
arms. There were in that age two conspicuous
theatres, on which such of the Spanish youth as
courted military glory might display their valour;
one in Italy, under the command of the Great
Captain; the other in the New World. Cortes
preferred the former, but was prevented by indifpo-
fition from embarking with a reinforcemlent of
troops sent to Naples. Upon this disappointment
he turned his views towards America, whither he
was allured by the profpcet of the advantages which
he might derive from the patronage of Ovando I,
the governor of Hispaniola, who was his kinfhian.
When he landed at St. Domingo in one thoulIand
five hundred and four, his reception was such as
equalled his most sanguine hopes, and he was em-
ployed by the governor ill several honourable and
lucrative stations. Thcfc, however, did not satisfy
his ambition; and in the year one thou flnd five hun-
dred and eleven, he obtained perniifion to accompa-
ny I)icgo Vclafqucz in his expedition to Cuba. In

B 2 this
e- S$c NOTE 11.

B o0 K this service he distinguished himself so much, that,

V. {_ notwithitanding some violent contests with Velaf-
1518. quez, occasioned by trivial events, unworthy of re-

membrance, he was at length taken into favour,
and received an ample concession of lands and of
Indians, the recompence usually beflowed upon ad-
venturers in the New World t .

THOUGH Cortes had not hitherto acted in high

command, he had displayed such qualities in several
scenes of difficulty and danger, as raised uni-
versal expectation, and turned tile eyes of his
countrymen towards him, as one capable of per-
forming great things. The turbulence of youth,
as soon as he found objects and occupations suited
to the ardour of his mind, gradually subsided, and
fettled into a habit of regular indefatigable activity.
'The impetuoiity of his temper, when he came to
act with his cquals, insensibly abated, by being kept
under refiraint, and mellowed into a cordial soldier-
]y frankness. These qualities were accompanied
with calm prudence in concerting hi fchernes,
with persevering vigour in executing them, and
with what is peculiar to superior genius, the art of
gaining the confidence and governing the minds of
men. '1'o all which were added the inferior ac-
coinplifhnmcnts that firikc the vulgar, and corn-
m:rlid their r('fp d ; a graceful person, a winning
aflpl-, extraordinary ;Iddrcfs in martial exercifcfs,
;nd a confliituition of fich vigour as to be capable
of c nelldring any fatigue.

As loon as Cortes was mentionied to Velafl(uez

1v his two confidtliits, he flattcrl-d himlblf that h1
had ae t eLgt-lh folllld vh;l he Lad hitherto fought
in vain, a mni with talents for conmmand, but
Uot jtil (iobjec of jC(.lonfy. Neithcr the rank nor

the

I CGO)la.la CI'u, c,. I,
' e .

5
the fortune of Cortes, as he imagined, were such B O O K

V.

that he could aspire at independence. He had rea-
son to believe, that by his own readiness to bury Is58.
ancient animofities in oblivion, as well as his libe-
rality in conferring several recent favours, he had
already gained the good-will of Cortes, and hoped,
by this new and unexpected mark of confidence, that
he might attach him for ever to his interest.

CORTES receiving his commission with the coones ea-

warmest exprefiions of refpe& and gratitude to the lousofhim,
governor, immediately erected his standard before Oober 3
hi,s own house, appeared in a military dress, and as-
fumed all the ensigns of his new dignity. His ut-
most influence and activity were exerted in perfuad-
ing many of his friends to engage in the service, and
in urging forward the preparations for the voyage.
All his own funds, together with what money he
could raise by mortgaging his lands and Indians,
were expended in pur.chasing military stores and
provisions, or in supplying the wants of such of his
officers as were unable to equip themselves in a
manner suited to their rank * . Inoffensive, and
even laudable as this condut was, his disappoint-
ed competitors were malicious enough to give it a
turn to his disadvantage : They represented him as
aiming already, with little disguise, at cftablifling
an independent authority over his troops, and endea-
vouring to secure their refpct or love by his often-
tatious and intcrcftcd liberality. They reminded
Vclafquc; of his formcr diffcntions with the man
in whomi he now rcpofc(d to much confidence, and
foretold that Cortes would be mlore apt to avail him-
fclf of. the power, which he was inconfideratcly
putting in hi:; hiLnd(s, to avenge p;ll injuries,

than
* Sec K ®TE 1

B 0 O K than to requite late obligations. These infinuati-

V.

ons made such impreflion upon the suspicious mind
,5 l. of Velasquez, that Cortes soon observed 'ome

symptoms of a growing alienation and difiruft in
his behaviour, and was advised by his friends, Lares
and Duero, to haften his departure, before these
should become so confirmed, as to break out with
open violence. Fully sensible of this danger, h.e
urged forward his preparations with such rapidity,
that he set fail from St. Jago de Cuba on the eigh-
teenth of November, Velasquez accompanying him
to the shore, and taking leave of him with an ap-
pearance of perfect friendship and confidence,
though he had secretly given it in charge to some
of his officers, to keep a watchful eye upon every
part of their commander's conduct - .

tndeavtours CORTES proceeded to Trinidad, a small fettle-
to deprive ment on the fame fide of the illand, where he was
him of his joined by several adventurers, and received a sup-

ply of provisions and military tfores, of which his
flock was frill very incomplete. He had hardly
left St. Jago when the jealousy which had been
working in the breast of Velasquez, grew so violent
that it was impoflible to suppress it. The arma-
ment was no longer under his own eye aiid direction ;
and he felt that as his power over it ceased, that of
Cortcs became more absolute. Imagination now
aggravated every circumstance, which had formerly
excited suspicion : the rivals of Cortes inllduiioltfly
threw in rcflecions which incrcafcd his fears ; and
with no less art than malice they called fu-
perfition to their aid, employing the pi'dic-
tions of an afirologcr in order to coinpllKc l .he
alarmn. All thefc, by their united operation,
Lpoduced the deliird cftheci. Vclafqucz repent-

ed
6

sI Gomaria Clon., C, 7. B: n. z c. 7.o.

ed bitterly of his own imprudence, in having cr.m- B o o K
mitted a trust of so much importance to a person
whose fidelity appeared so doubtful, and hastily dil- 15sS.
patched instructions to Trinidad, empowering Ver-
dugo, the chief magistrate there, to deprive Cortes
of his commifllion. But Cortes had already made
such progress in gaining the esteem and confidence
of his troops, that, finding officers as well as fol-
diers equally zealous to support his authority, he
soothed or intimidated Verdugo, and was permitted
to depart from Trinidad without molestation.

FROM Trinidad Cortes failed forHavana, in order and to lay
to raise more soldiers, and to complete the viatual- him under

,

_ *' 3arrest,

li!n, of his fleet. There several persons of difPinc-
tion clicircd into the service, and engaged to supply
wlhat provisions were fill wanting; but as it was
nccc( iTa to allow them some time for performing
what tl dy had promised, Velasquez, sensible that
he o.ight no longer to rely on a man of whom he
Ih:;l so openly discovered his distrust, availed him-
i4f of the interval, which this unavoidable delay
;iiorde(l, in order to make one attempt more to
vvr» ;i the comnand out of the hands of Cortes. He
i,'dilly compllained of Verdugo's condudt, accusing
hiim either of childi-h facility, or of manifest trca-
chrcy, in suffering Cortes to escape fi-om Trinidad.
Anxious to guard againit a second difappointinent,
he f nt a person of confidence to the Havana, with
peremptory injunetions to Pcdro B3arba, his licute-
nant-(govcrnor in that colony, instantly to arreff
Cortes, to fend him prisoner to St. Jago under a
fitong guard, and to countermand the departure of
the aruiainclnt until Ic fhoiltlcl receive farther orders:
he wrote likcwilf to the principal officers, requir-
ingl them to atffif Bar-b in executii, wliat he had

given

7

B OO K given him in charge. But before the arrival of his

i_ ~messenger, a Franciscan friar of St. Jago had fe-
1518. cretly conveyed an account of this interesting

tranfation to Bartholomew de Olmedo, a monk
of the fame order, who aded as chaplain to the ex-
pedition.

Cortes de- CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time to
feats his take precautions for his own safety. His first ftep
fchemet,
and conti- was to find some pretext for removing from Havana
nues hispre- Diego de Ordaz, an officer of great merit, but in
parations. whom, on account of his known attachment to Ve-

lafquez, he could not confide in this trying and de-
licate juncure. He gave him the command of a
vessel, destined to take on board some provisions in
a small harbour beyond Cape Antonio, and thus
made sure of his absence, without seeming to fufpedc
his fidelity. When he was gone, Cortes no longer
concealed the intentions of Velasquez from his
troops; and as officers and soldiers were equally im-
patient to set out on an expedition, in preparing for
which most of them had expended all their fortune,
they expressed their aftonifhmcnt and indignation
at that illiberal jealousy, to which the governor was
about to sacrifice, not only the honour of their ge-
neral, but all their sanguine hopes of glory and
wealth. With one voice they intreated that he
would not abandon the important station to which
he had such a good title. They conjured himi not
to deprive them of a leader whom they follow-
ed with such well founded confidence, and of-
sered to shed the last drop of their blood in main-
taining his authority. Cortes was easily induced
to comply with what he fb ardently delired.
Ile swore that he would never drfert sol)diers
who had given him filch a signal proof of their
attachment, and promiifed inllantly to collluct
them to that rich country, which 1had been

I'
8

so long the object of their thoughts and withes. B o o K

V.

This declaration was received with transports of -
military applause, accompanied with threats and s518.
imprecations against all who should presume to call
in question the-jurifdition of their general, or to
obfruct the execution of his designs.

EVERY thing was now ready for their departure: The anount

but though this expedition was the united effort of ofhis force;.
the Spanish power in Cuba; though every ifttle-
ment had contributed its quota of men and provi-
sions; though the governor had laid out confidera-
ble fums, and each adventurer had exhauffed his
stock, or strained his credit, the poverty of the pre-
parations was such as muff astonish the present age,
and bore, indeed, no resemblance to an armament
destined for the conquest of a great empire. The
fleet consisted of eleven vessels; the largest of a hun-
dred tons, which was dignified with the name of
Admiral, three of seventy or eighty tons, ahd the
reft small open barks. On board of these were fix
hundred and feventecn men; of which five hundred
and eight belonged to the land service, and a
hundred and nine were seamen or artificers. The
soldiers were divided into eleven companies, accord-
ing to the number of the ships ; to each of which
Cortes appointed a captain, and committed to him
the command of the vessel while at sea, and of the
men when on shore *. As the use of fire-arms
among the nations of Europe was hitherto confined
to a few battalions of regularly disciplined infantry,
only thirteen soldiers were armed with muskets,
thirty-two were crofs-bow-men, and the reft had
swords and spears. Instead of the ufial defcnfive
armour, which muff have been cmnbcrfome in a hot

VOL. II. C climate,

* Gue NOTE 1V.

B 0 0 K climate, they wore jackets, quilted with cotton,

which experience had taught the Spaniards to be a
151s. sufficient protection against the weapons of the

Americans. They had only sixteen horses, ten
finall field pieces, and four falconets *.

Feb. io, WTITH this slender and ill-provided train did
.I5'9. Cortes set fail, to make war upon a monarch

Mis denar-
turc from whose dominions were more extensive than all the
Ctub.. kingdoms fubjeci to the Spanish crown. As reli-

gious enthusiasm always mingled with the spirit of
adventure in the New World, and, by a combina-
tion still more itrange, united with avarice, in
prompting the Spaniards to all their enterprises, a
large cross was displayed in their standards, with
this inscription, LET US FOLLOW THE CROSS
FOR UNDER THIS SIGN WE SHALL CONQUER.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followers ani-

mated with both these passions, that, no less eager
to plunder the opulent country whither they were
bound, than zealous to propagate the Christian
faith among its inhabitants, they set out, not with
the solicitude natural to men going upon dangceous
fcrvice, but with that confidence which arises from
fccurity of success, and certainty of the divine pro-
tcjLion.
T chs a As Cortes had determined to touch at every place

which Grijalva had visited, he fleered direetly to-
wards the iflind of Cozumel ; there he had tho
good fortune to redeem Jerome de Aguilar, a Spa-
niard, who had been eight years a prifoler among
the Indian1. This man was pcrfedtly acquainted
with a dialct of their language, underltood through
a large extent of country, and poffciling betides a

considerable
* B. 1Jiz. C. 19.

considerable flare of prudence and sagacity, proved B 00 K
extremely useful as an interpreter. From Cozumel, _
Cortes proceeded to the river of Tabasco, in hopes 1519.
of a reception as friendly as Grijalva had met with Mrch 4-

and at Ta-

there, and of finding gold in the fame abundance ; balfco.
but the disposition of the natives, from tome un-
known cause, was totally changed. After repeated
endeavours to conciliate their good-will, he was
constrained to have recourse to violence. Though
the forces of the enemy were numerous, and ad-
vanced with extraordinary courage, they were rout-
ed, with great slaughter, in several successive acions.
The loss which they sustained, and frill more the
astonishment and terror excited by the defl-rudive
effect of the fire-arms, and the dreadful appearance
of the horses, humbled their fierce spirits, and in-
duced them to sue for peace. They acknowledged
the king of Castile as their sovereign, and granted
Cortes a supply of provisions, with a present of
cotton garments, some gold, and twenty female
slaves *.

CORTES continued his course to the wefiward, Arrives at

keeping as near the flore as poflible, in order to StUJIua1 de
observe the country ; but could discover no proper
place for landing, until he arrived at St. Juan de
Ulua t. As he entered this harbour, a large canoe, April o.
full of people, among whom were two who feeled
to be persons of diftintion, approached his (hip,
with signs of peace and amity. They came on
board without fear or difirtuft, and addrcefld him in
a most rcfpetful manner, but in a language altoge-
ther unknown to Aguilar. Cortes was in the ut-
moit perplexity and cdiflre(s, at an event of which he

C 2 intantly

* See NOTE V.
1' B.Diaz c. 31---36. (omara Cron. c. 18---23. cirrera, dec,
2. lib. iv. c. ,&c.

II

B 0 0 K inIfantly foresaw all the consequences, and already

VLC.. felt the hesitation and uncertainty with which he
1519s fnould carry on the great schemes which he medi-

tated, if, in his tranfaccions with the natives, he
must depend entirely upon such an imperfel,
ambiguous, and conjet'ural mode of communica-
tion, as the luf of signs. But he uld not remain
long in this embarrailing situation: a fortunate ac-
cident cxtricated him, when his own sagacity could
have contributed little towards his relief. One of
the femnale slaves, whom he had received from the
cazique of Tabasco, happened to be prelent at the
firHt interview between Cortes and his new guests.
She perceived his difirefs, as well as the confusion
of Aguilar; and as ihe perfecly understood the
Mexican language, flhe explained what they said in
the Yucatan tongue, with which Aguilar was ac-
quainted. This woman, known afterwards by the
name of Donna Marina, and who makes a confpi-
cuous figure in the history of the New World,
where great revolutions were brought about by
finall causes and inconsiderable infirurents, was
bor in on

o us the provinces of the Mexican empire.

hlaving been carried off a captive by some hostile
party, after a variety of adventures she fell into the
handrs of the 'T'abafcans, and bad resided long
enoiughl anii thli iil to acquire their language,
without losing tlhe ule of her own. Though it was
both tedious and trouibletfoin to converse by the in-
tervention of tvwo diifrcnt interpreters, Cortes was
lo highlly plceafid with having difcovcred this me-
tlod of carrying on some intercourllc with the peo-
ple of a country into which he was determined to
plnctrate, that in the tralfiports of his joy he con-
Iidered it as a ;i fibl intcrpofition of Providence in
his I'avour *.

*B1. Dl)4. c. /!, 3t,

- 5. C().!JaI Cro, 5,

a G. ,'icirr.ij, dct. 2z
lib. v, c. 4.

HE now learned, that the two persons whom he B O o K

had received on board of his ship were deputies from V.
Pilpatoe and Teutile; the one governor of that r159.
province under a great monarch, whom they called Lands his
Montezuma, and the other the commander of his trPS.
forces there, and that they were sent to inquire
what his intentions were ia visiting their coast, and
to offer him what affiifance he might need, in order
to continue his voyage. Cortes, struck with the
appearance of those people, as well as the tenor of
the mefage, assured them, in refpe&ful terms, that
he approached their country with moit friendly
sentiments, and came to propose matters of great
importance to the welfare of their prince and his
kingdom, which he would unfold more fully, in
person, to the governor and the general. Next
morning, without waiting for any answer, he land-
ed his troops, his horses and artillery ; and having
chosen proper ground, began to ered huts for his
men, and to fortify his camp. The natives, in-
ftcad of opposing the entrance of those fatal guests
into their country, affited them in all their opera-
rations, with an alacrity of which they had ere long
good reason to repent.

NEXT day, Pilpatoe and Teutile entered the

Spanibh camp with a numerous retinue; and Cortes terview
confidering them as the ministers of a great mo- with the
narch, entitled to a degree of attention' very differ- M an
cnt from that which the Spaniards were accustom-
cd to pay to the petty Caziqucs, with whom they
had intcrcourfc, received them with much formal
·ceremony. lHe informed them, that he came as
anmbaflador fiom Don Carlos of Austria, king of
Castile, the grcateft monarch of the cafi, and was
inltrlflied with propositions of fitch moment, that
he could impa'rt theni to none but the emperor
Moiintl umia himself a;nd therefore required them

to

B O O K to conduct him,. without lois of time, into the pre-

fence of their master. The Mexican officers could
1519. not conceal their uneasiness at a request, which they

knew to be disagreeable, and which they foresaw
might prove extremely embarrafling to their fove-
reign, whose mind had been filled with many dif-
quieting apprehcnfions, ever since the former ap-
pearance of the Spaniards on his coasts. But be-
fore they attempted to dissuade Cortes from insisting
on this demand, they endeavoured to conciliate his
good will, by entreating him to accept of certain
presents, which, as humble slaves of Montezuma,
they laid at his feet. These were introduced with
great parade, and consisted of fine cotton cloth, of
plumes of various colours, and of ornaments of
gold and silver to a considerable value ; the work-
manship of which appeared to be as curious as the
materials were rich. The display of these produ-
ced an effect very different from what the Mexicans
intended. Instead of satisfying, it increased the
avidity of the Spaniards, and rendered them so
eager and impatient to become masters of a country
which abounded with such precious productions,
that Cortes could hardly liften with patience to the
arguments which Pilpatoe and Teutile employed
to difluade him from visiting the capital, and in a
haughty determined tone he infifed on his demand,
of being admitted to a pcrfonal audience of their
fovercigl. D)uring this interview, some painters,
in the train of the Mexican chiefs, had been dili-
gently employed in delineating, upon white cotton
cloths, figures of the flips, the horfcs, the artillery,
the bfldiers, and whatever elfc attratcd their eyes,
as singular. When Cortes obfcrvcd this, and was
informed that there pic(tures were to le f'nt to
lMontczulma, in order to convey to him a more livc-
ly idea of the nrange and wonderful olbjcts now
presented to their view, than any words couldl

conill 1u11 icate',
I4

communicate, he resolved to render the reprefenta- B 0 0 K

V.

tion frill more animated and interesting, by exhi-
biting such a fpedacle as might give both them and 119.
their monarch an awful impression of the extraordi-
nary prowess of his followers, and the irresistible
force of their arms. The trumpets, by his order
founded an alarm ; the troops, in a moment, form-
ed in order of battle, the infantry performed such
martial exercises as were best suited to display the
effect of their different weapons ; the horse, in va-
rious evolutions, gave a specimen of their agility
and strength; the artillery pointed towards the
thick woods which surrounded the camp, made
dreadful havoc among the trees. The Mexicans
looked on with that silent amazement, which is na-
tural when the mind is struck with objects, which
are both awful and above its comprehension. But,
at the explosion of the cannon, many of them fled,
some fell to the ground, and all were so much con-
founded at the fight of men whose power so nearly
resembled that of the Gods, that Cortes found it
difficult to compose and re-assure them. The pain-
ters had now many new fubjeEts on which to exer-
cife their art, and they put their fancy on the stretch
in order to invent figures and characters to represent
the extraordinary things which they had seen.

AMESSENGERS were immediately difiatchcd to Negociati-

Mlonltczuma with those pictures, and a full account os with
of every thing that had passed since the arrival of MoLatezu
the Spaniards, and by them Cortes sent a prefcnt of
ionic lEuropean curiosities to Montczunall, which,
though of no great value, he believed would be ac-
ceptable on account of their novelty. The Mexi-
can Inonarchs, in order to obtain early information
of every occurrence in all the corners of their vast
empire, had introduced a refinement in police,

ulIkno\vn,

B O K unknown, at that time, in Europe. They had

v.

couriers posted at proper stations along the princi-
1519. pal roads, and as these were trained to agility by a

regular education, and relieved one another at mo-
derate distances, they conveyed intelligence with
surprising rapidity. Though the capital in which
Montezuma resided was above a hundred and eigh-
ty miles from St. Juan de Ulua, Cortes's presents
were carried thither, and an answer to his demands
was received in a few days. The fame officers who
had hitherto treated with the Spaniards, were em-
ployed to deliver this answer; but as they knew
how repugnant the determination of their master
was to all the schemes and wishes of the Spanish
commander, they would not venture to make it
known until they had previously endeavou'red to
Hispretents. soothe and mollify him. For this purpose, they re-

newed the negociation by introducing a train of a
hundred Indians, loaded with presents sent to him
by Montezuma. The magnificence of these was
such as became a great monarch, and far exceeded
any idea which the Spaniards had hitherto formed of
his wealth. They were placed upon mats spread on
the ground, in such order, as flewed them to the
greatest advantage. Cortes and his officers viewed,
with admiration, the various manufatures of the
country, cotton fluffs so fine, and of such delicate
texture as to resemble silk ; picures of animals,
trees, and other natural objects formed with feathers
of different colours, disposed and mingled with such
skill and elegance, as to rival the works of the pen-
cil in truth and beauty of imitation. But what
chiefly attracted their eyes, were two large plates of
a circular form, one of massive gold representing the
fun, the other of silver, an emblem of the moon*.
Thecf were accompanied with bracelets, collars,

rings,
S te NOTE VI.

rings, and other trinkets of gold ; and that nothing B o o K

' v.

might be wanting which could give the Spaniards V
a complete idea of what the country afforded, with 1519.
some boxes filled with pearls, precious stones, and
grains of gold unwrought, as they had been found
in the mines or rivers. Cortes received all these
with an appearance of profound veneration for the
monarch by whom they were bestowed. But when Fobids
the Mexicans, presuming upon this, informed him Cortes to
that their master, though he desired him to accept apO
of what he had sent as a token of his regard for the
prince whom he represented, would not give his
content that foreign troops flould approach nearer
to his capital, nor even allow them to continue
longer in his dominions, Cortes declared, in a man-
ner more resolute and peremptory than formerly,
that he mule insist on his first demand, as he could
not, without dishonour, return to his own sovereign,
until he was admitted into the preftnce of the
prince whom he was appointed to visit in his name.
The Mexicans, astonished at feeing any man dare
to oppose that will, which the) wrec accuiioorrcd to
confider as supreme and irreffilible, yet afraid of
precipitating their country into an open rupture
with such formidable enemies, prevailed with
Cortes to promise, that he would not move from his
present camp, until the return of a mcffenger, whomi
they sent to Montczuma for farther inftlrutions *.

.THE firmness with which Cortes adhered to his o

S't:ate of thC

original proposal flould, naturally, have brought the MIcxicn,
negociation between him and Montezuma to a clplpile at

that p'riod«

fpecdy ifliie, as it seemed to leave the /Mexican
monarch no choice, but either to receive him with

VOL. II. D confidence

e B. Diaz, c. 39, Gomiar Cron. . 27. lerrcra, dec. a. lib. v.
c; 5, 6.

B 0 0 K confidence as a friend, or to oppose him openly as

an enemy. The latter was what might have been
1519. expected from a haughty prince in poffeflion of ex-

tensive power. The Mexican empire at this pe-
riod, was at a pitch of grandeur to which no focie-
ty ever attained in so short a period. Though it
had subsisted only a hundred and thirty years, its
dominion extended from the North to the South
Sea, over territories itretching above five hundred
leagues fiom east to weft, and more than two hun-
dred from north to south, comprehending provinces
not inferior in fertility, population, and opulence,
to any in the torrid zone. The people were war-
like and enterprising ; the authority of the monarch
unbounded, and his revenues considerable. If, with
the forces which might have been suddenly aflem-
bled in ifuch an empire, Montezuma had fallen up-
on the Spaniards while encamped on a barren un-
healthy coast, unsupported by any ally, without a
place of retreat, and destitute of provisions, it is
impoflible, even with all the advantages of their
ilperior discipline and arms, that they could have
stood the shock, and they must either have perished
in such an unequal contefl, or have abandoned the
cntcrprife.

('h:accr o As the power of Montezuma enabled him to take

-tih mIn- this spiritcd part, his own dispositions seemed natu-
j1rci. ]rally to prompt him to it. Of all the princes

who had swaycd the Mexican sceptre, he was the
nmoft haughty, the most violent, and the Inoft im-
paticit of controul. His fubjedts looked up to him
with awe, and his enemies with terror. ''he for-
ner he governed with unexamplcd rigour, but they
were inmprcfed with such an opinion of his capaci-
ty, as commanded their refpedt; anll by many vic-
tories over the latter, hie haid fprcad far the dread of
hi:; arm.n, and had added several confiderahle pro-
vincch to his ldominioJI. But though his talents

might
i8

might be suited to the tranfalions of a fiate so ir- n 0o0 K
perfectly polished as the Mexican empire, and sus- _
ficient to condu&t therm while in their accustomed 1519.
course, they were altogether inadequate to a con-
jtaunCue so extraordinary, and did not qualify him
either to judge with the discernment, or to aa with
the decision, requisite in such a trying emergence.

FROM the moment that the Spaniards appeared on His perplex,

ity and tcr-

his coat, he discovered symptoms of timidity and ror ,pon the
embarraffnent. Instead of taking such resolutions arrivalof

the Spa-.

as the consciousness of his own power, or the niards,
memory of his former exploits, might have inspired,
he deliberated with an anxiety and hesitation which
did not escape the notice of his meanest courtiers.
The perplexity and discomposure of Montezuma's
mind upon this occasion, as well as the general dif-
may of his fubjeds, was not owing wholly to the
impreflion which the Spaniards had made by the no-
velty of their appearance and the terror of their arms,
its origin may be traced up to a more remote source.
There was an opinion, if we may believe the earliest
and most authentic Spanifli historians, alnmoft uni-
versal among the Americans, that some dreadful ca-
lamity was impending over their heads, from a race
of formidable invaders who firould come from re-
gions towards the rising fun, to over-run and de-
solate their country. Whether this disquieting ap-
prehension flowed fiom the memory of some natu-
ral calamity which had afflicted that part of the
globe, and impressed the minds of the inhabitants
with fiuperfitiou.s fears and forebodi.ngs, or whether
it was an imagination accidentally fuggcfled by the
aftonifliincnt which the firt fight of a new race of
men occasioncd, it is impoflible to determine. But
as the Mexicans were more prone to superstition
trian any people in the New World, they were more

D 2 deeply

B 0.O K deeply affected with the appearance of the Spa

^^4 _ niards, whom their credulity instantly represented
1519. as the inflruments destined to bring about that fa-

tal revolution which they dreaded. Under those
circumfiances, it ceases to be incredible that a
handful of adventurers should alarm the monarch of
a great empire and all his subjects .

CtntinL:es NOTW\v rFIST ANDING the influence of this im-
' nmcoci.itc pression, when the messenger arrived from the Spa-

nilh camp with an account that Cortes, adhering
to his original demand, refused to obey the order
enjoining him to leave the country, Montezuma
assumed some degree of resolution, and in a tran-
sport of rage natural to a fierce prince, unaccuftom-
ed to meet with any opposition to his will, he
threatened to .sacrifice those presumptuous strangers
to his gods. But his doubts and fears quickly re-
turned, and instead of issuing orders to carry his
threats into execution, he again called his ministers
to confer and offer their advice. Feeble and tem-
porizing measures will always be the result when
men aficmble to deliberate in a situation where
they ought to a3ht. The Mexican council took no
cf':cIual mlcafure for expelling such troublcfome in-
truiders, and were satisfied with ifluing a more po-
fitivc injunction, reqlliring them to leave the coun-
try ; but th'n ti .y prcpo,,fllroufly accompanied with
a prcf;int ol fuich valitc, as proved a frcfh induce-
mtnt to remain there.

An11Y;t' nl I/IEAN\VIIIIr.E, the SpI)ni;-rd(s were not without
,, ^.. ..'1'- folicitlude or a variety (o' senti t lite, inll tliberating
si.^;ai.C[:. ciicerlln in tleir ownI f'ut lre colndluct. From what

thely hiad already IcLn, malny of them formed filch

extravagant

(Coti , i '.il.liii, . ' c1n,.l., p

' . iii.

t "4., i'ii. TiTicr.li,

dlrc. :,.

2 . i..

il i. ..i. i. \ ... i. l. u, vi, c. . ( Uilll,.l .i Cion,c. 66.

~z. ,4.
20

extravagant ideas concerning the opulence of the B O0 K
country, that, despising danger or hardships, when
they had in view treasures which appeared to be in- 1519.
exhaustible, they were eager to attempt the conquest.
Others, estimating the power of the Mexican em-
pire by its wealth, and enumerating the various
proofs which had occurred of its being under a well
regulated administration, contended that it would
be an act of the wildest frenzy to attack such a ifate
with a small body of men, in want of provisions,
unconnected with any ally, and already enfeebled
by the diseases peculiar to the climate, and the loss
of several of their number. Cortes secretly applaud-
ed the advocates for bold measures, and cherished
their romantic hopes, as such ideas corresponded
with his own, and favoured the execution of the
schemes which he had formed. From the time that

Schemes of

the suspicions of Velasquez broke out with open Cortes.
violence in his attempt to deprive him of the au-
thority which he had conferred, he saw the neceflity
of dissolving a connection which would obflrud
and embarrass all his operations, and watched for a
proper opportunity of coining to a final rupture
with him. Having this in view, he had laboured
by every art, to secure the esteem and afFecion of
his soldiers. With his abilities for command, it
was easy to gain their efteeln; and his followers
were quickly satisfied that they might rely, with
perfect confidence, on the conduct and courage of
their leader. Nor was it more difficult to acquire
their afleRion. Among adventurers, nearly of the
amen ranc, and fcrving at their own expencc, the
dignity of commland dtid not elevate a general above
mningling with those who actcd utlder him. Cortes
availcd himfcl f of this freedom of intcrcourfe, to in-
finuatc himclf into their favour, and by his afihble

1lalnnecrs,
1 B. Dhi. c. 43.

2I

B 00 K manners, by well-timed acas of liberality to some,

V_.^ by inspiring all with vast hopes, and by allowing
1519. them to trade privately with the natives *, he at-

tached the greater part of his' soldiers so firmly to
himself, that they alinoil forgot that the armament
had been fitted out by the authority, and at the ex-
pence, of another.

His address DURING those intrigues, Teutile arrived with
in car ying the present from Montezuma, and, together with
them on. it, delivered the ultimate order of that monarch to

depart infarntly out of his dominions; and when
Cortes, instead of complying, renewed his request
of an audience, the Mexican turned from him ab-
ruptly, and quitted the camp with looks and gef-
tures which strongly expresscd his surprise and re-
fentment. Next morning, none of the natives, who
used to frequent the camp in great numbers, in or-
der to barter with the soldiers, and bring in provi-
sions, appeared. All friendly correspondence seem-
ed now to be at an end, and it was expected every
moment that hostilities would commence. This,
though an event that might have been foreseen, oc-
cafioned a sudden confiernation among the Spa-
niards, which emboldened the adherents of Valaf-
quez not only to murmur and cabal against their
general, but to appoint one of their number to re-
nonfrtlte openly againfl his imprudence in attempt-
ing the conquefR of a mighty empire with such in-
adequate force, and to urge the nccefity of return-
ing to Cuba, in order to refit the fleet and augmnent
the army. Diego de Ordaz, one of his principal
officcr;, whom the malcontents charged with this
conmillTrn, delivered it with a soldiery freedom
and bluntliefs, allllring himn that he spoke the senti-
mcnits of the whole army. Cortes liflticcd to him

without

* Sac NTLL VII.
22

without any appearance of emotion, and as he well B 0 o K
knew the temper and wishes of his soldiers, and
foresaw how they would receive a proposition fatal 1519.
at once to all the splendid hopes and schemes which
they had been forming with such complacency, he
carried his dilimulation so far as to seem to relin-
quilh his own measures in compliance with the re-
quest of Ordaz, and issued orders that the army.fhould
be in readiness next day to reimbark for Cuba.
As soon as this was known, the disappointed adven-
turers exclaimed and threatened ; the emissaries of
Cortes, mingling with them, inflamed their rage;
the ferment became general ; the.whole camp was
alniofi in open mutiny ; all demanding with eager-
ness to fee their commander. Cortes was not flow
in appearing ; when, in one voice, they expressed
their aftonimment and indignation at the orders
which they had received. It was unworthy, they
cried, of the Castilian courage to be daunted at the
first asped of danger, and infamous to fly before
any enemy appeared. For their parts, they were
determined not to relinquish an enterprise, that had
hitherto been successful, and which tended so vifi-
bly to spread the knowledge of true religion, and to
advance the glory and interest of their country.
Happy under his command, they would follow him
with alacrity through every danger, in quest ofthofe
settlements and treafurcs which he.had so long held
out to their view ; but if he chofr rather to return
.to Cuba, and tamely give up all his hopes of dif-
tinction and opulence to an envious rival, they
would infiantly chute another general to conduc
them in that path of glory which lie had not spirit
to enter.

CoR' E.S, delighted with Iteir a:r(our, took no of-

fence at the boldners with which it was uttered.
IThe cilltiments were wilhat he himnfcilf had inspircd,

andi

B 0 0 K and the warmth of cxpreflion satisfied him that his

a__ soldiers had imbibed them thoroughly. He affelt-
1519. ed, however, to be surprised at what he heard, de-

claring that his orders to prepare for embarking
were issued from a persuasion that this was agreea-
ble to his troops ; that, from deference to what he
had been informed was their inclination, he had fa-
crificed his own private opinion, which was firmly
bent on establishing immediately a settlement on the
sea-coast, and then on endeavouring to penetrate in-
to the interior part of the country ; that now he
was convinced of his error, and as he perceived
that they were animated with the generous spirit
which breathed in every true Spaniard, he would
resume, with fresh ardour, his original plan of oper-
ation, and doubted not to conduct them, in the
career of vitory, to such independent fortunes as
their vajour merited. Upon this declaration, flouts
of applause testified the excess of their joy. The
meafuie seemed to be taken with unanimous con-
sent such as secretly condemned it, being oblig-
ed to join in the acclamations, partly to conceal
their difaffedion from the genera1l, and partly to
avoid the imputation of cowardice from their fel-
low-foldiers ".

WITHOUT allowing his men time to cool or to

l:TaiOes a refle', Cortes fct about carrying his design into
tolm ofl civ
governmcit. execution. In order to give a beginning to a colo-

ny, he assembled the principal persons in his army,
and by their fufti-age cltcted a council and magif-
trates, in whom the government was to be veiled.
As men naturally transplant the illnitutions and
forms of the mother-country into their new liettle-
ments, this was fiamed upon the model of a Spa-
nifli corporation. lThe imagiliratcs were diftin-
gui/hed by the falmne names and cnfigns of oflice,

an4

* B. Dia.. .io.4 *, 4,z. I'urnLort, ilc. a. lib. v. c. 6G 7.
24

and were to exercise a fimilarjurifdi&tion. All the B ° O K
persons chosen were moes firmly devoted to Cortes, .
and the infirument of their election was framed in 1519.
the king's name, without any mention of their de-
pendance on Velasquez. The two principles of
avarice and enthusiasm, which prompted the Spani-
ards to all their enterprises in the New World, feein
to have concurred in fuggefring the name which
Cortes bestowed on his intended settlement. He
called it, VILLA RICA DE LA VERA CRUZ ; that
is, THE RICH TOWN OF THE TRUE CROSS.

THE firif meeting of the new council was dif- Rclgns shi

tinguifhed by a tranl:action of great moment. As comnhilo''
soon as it affenbled, Cortes applied for leave to
enter ; and approaching with many marks of pro-
found refpca, which added dignity to the tribunal,
and set an example of reverence for its authority,
he began along harangue, in which, with much
art, and in terms extremely flattering to pcrfons
just entering upon their new fundtion, he oblbrved,
that as the supreme jurifdition over the colony
which they had planted was now vested in this
court, he confidered them as clothed with the au-
thority and rcpref(iting the person of their fovc-
reign; that accordingly he would communicate to
them what he deemed cili'ntial to the public iatfty,
with the famc dutiful fidclity as if he were addref-
ting his royal malter ; that. the security of a colony
fettled in a great empire, wholt iovereign had alrea-
dy difcovcred his hohile intentions, depended upon
arms, and the efficacy of thefc upon the fubordi-
nation and dilfipline preserved am1ong the troops j
that his right to command was derived from a
commission granted by the governor of Cuba ; and
as that had b, cii long since revoked, the lawfulness
of his j uri didtion might well be questioned ; that he

Ic ind.

2$
'VOL II.

E,

B 0 0 K seemcd to aA upon a defecive, or even a dubious

title; nor could they trust an army which might
1519 dispute the powers of. its general, at a juncure

when it ought implicitly to obey his orders ; that,
moved by rhlfe considerations, he now resigned all
his autiiority to them, that they, having boih ri.ht
to chufe, and pow.r to ccnlfr full jurifdiition,
nmiht appoint one, in the kinz's n:me, to commriand
tie army in its future operations; and a;s for his
own part, such was his zeal for the service in which
they were engaged, that he would mrof clcc^r-ully
take up a pike with the fthm hand that laild rovwn
t!e s eneral's truncheon, and convince hi:, f.'Qilow-
soldiers, that though accuflomed to comma:!.. he
had not forgotten how to obey. Haviing fi;iilcd
his difcourf, he laid the cominifl.,un from V'laf-
quez upon the table, and, after kiiling hi- truln-
cheon; delivered it to the chief magifrate, and
withdrew.

an. is cho- T-iHE deliberations of the council were not long,
and. is cho-
(cnhni(i as CL'rtcs had concerted this inportant measure
jitice and with his confidents, and had prepared the other
.;.c:i.. milemblcrs, with great address, for the part which

he wifilcd them to take. His resignation was ac-
ccpi:d ; and as the uninterrupted tenour of their
I)rtlpcrit) uinder his conduclt afforded the molt fa-
tisfyi ng evidenceof his abilities for command, they,
by their unanimous fufli-age, elected him chief jus-
ticc of the colony, and captain-general of its ar-
my, and appoillted his commission to be made out
ilj the king's nalme, with mofo ample powers,
wiich were to contiiiue in force until the royal
)tleaftiiie should be falr her kinown. That this (Iced
might not be ldeemed the machination of a junto,
the council called together the troops, and ac-
quainted them with what had been rcfolvcd-
'The luldiers, with eager applaufc, ratilicd their

choice

choice; the air resounded with the name of Cortes, o 0 K
and all vowed to shed theii blood in fupportof his
authority. s 159.

CORTES having now brought his intrigues to Asserts his

the desired issue. and ihaken off his mortifying de- it,
pendance on the governor of Cuba, accepted of the gour.
* commition, which vested in him supreme jurifdic-
tion, .civil as well as military, over the colony,
with many professions of refpeEt to the council, and
gratitude to the army. Together with his new
command, he assumed greater dignity, and began to
exercise more extensive powers. Formerly he had
felt himself to be only thedeputyofa subject; now
he acted as the representative of his sovereign. The
adherents of Velasquez, fully aware of what would
be the effect of this change in his situation, could
no longer continue silent and passive fpe6ators of
his actions. They exclaimed openly againtf the
proceedings of the council as illegal, and against
ehofe of the army as mutinous. Cortes, inflantly
perceiving the necefity of giving a timely check to
such seditious difcourfc by some vigorous measure,
arrefled Ordaz, Efcudero, and Velafqucz de Leon,
the ringleaders of this faction, and sent them pri-
roners aboard tie fleet, loaded with chains. Their
dependants, astonishcd and overawed, remained
quiet; and Cortes, more desirous to reclaim than
to plunifh his prisoners, who were officers of great
merit, courted their fiicndflip with such assiduity
and address, that the reconciliation was perfectly
cordial; and on the mofl: trying occasions, nei-
ther their connedction with the governor of Cuba,
nor the memory of the indignity with which they
had been treated, tempted them to iwerve from
an inviolable atta;chment to his intcref * . In this,

as

1 2

n. I)iaz. c. 42. 43. GO'nara Cron. c. 30. 31. HIerrcra, dec.
z. lib. v. c. 7.

27

00 K as well as his other negociations at this critical
V.
i__ conjunEture, which decided with refpet to his fu-
1S19. ture fame and fortune, Cortes owed much of his

success to the Mexican gold, which he distributed
with a liberal hand both among his friends and his
opponents

His fricd- CORTES, having thus rendered the union be-
ship courted
by the Zen- tween himself and his army indissoluble by those
poallan.. common aAts of disobedience, thought he might

now venture to quit the camp in which he had
hitherto remained, and advance into the country.
To this he was encouraged by an event no less
fortunate than seasonable. Some Indians having
approached his camp in a mysterious manner, were
introduced into his prelence. He found that they
were sent with a proffer of friendship from the ca-
zique of Zempoalla, a considerable town at no
great distance ; and from their answers to a variety
of queflions which he put to them, according to his
usual practice in every interview with the people of
the country, he gathered, that their master, though
fubjce to the Mexican empire, was impatient of
the yoke, and filled with such dread and hatred of
MVIontezuina, that nothing could be more accep-
ttble to him than any profpec of deliverance from
the oppreflion under which he groaned. On hear-
ing this, a ray of light and hope broke in upon the
mind of Cortes. He saw that the great empire
which he intended 'to attack was not united, nor
its fovcrcign beloved. He concluded, that the
causes of dilaf-fction could not be confined to one
province, but that in other corners there mufft be
malcontents, so weary of fubjccdion, or so desirous
of chaine, as to be ready to follow the flandard
of any protcEtor. F1ull of those ideas, on which
he began to form a scheme, that time, and more

perfct

* a. Dia. c. .44.
28

perfect information concerning the Rate of the B o o K
country, enabled him to mature, he gave a most
gracious reception to the Zempoallans, and pro- 1519.
mifed soon to visit their cazique * .

IN order to perform this promise, it was not necef- Marches to
fary to vary the route which he had already fixed for Zempoalla.
his march. Some officers, whom he had employ-
ed to survey the coast, having discovered avillage
named Quiabiflan, about forty miles to the north-
ward, which, both on account of the fertility of the
foil, and commodiousness of the harbour, seemed
to be a more proper station for a settlement than
that where he was encamped, Cortes determined
to remove thither. Zempoalla lay in his way, where
the cazique received him in the manner which he
had reason to expect; with gifts and careses,
like aman solicitous to gain his good-will; with re-
spec approaching almost to adoration, like one
who looked up to him as a deliverer. From him he
learned many particulars with refped to the cha-
racter of Montezuma, and the circumstances which
rendered his dominion odious. He was a tyrant,
as the cazique told him with tears, haughty, cruel,
and flfpicious ; who treated his own fubjets with
arrogance, ruined the conquered provinces by ex-
celfive exaaions, and often tore their sons and
daughters from them by violence ; the former, to
be offired as vidimns to his gods ; the latter, to be
reserved as concubines for himself or favourites.
Cortes, in reply to him, artfully insinuated, that
one great object of the Spaniards in visiting a coun-
try so remote from their own, was to rcdrefs gric-
vances, and to relieve the oppressed ; and hav-
ing encouraged him tohope for this interposition
in due time, he continued his march to Quiabillan.

B* . Diaz. c.. 41. Gomalra Cron. c. 28,

B O O TOIKE spot which his officers had recommended

V. _>~ aas a proper situation, appeared to him to be so well
15'9 chosen, that he immediately marked out ground for
Builds a a town. The houses to be erected were only huts;

but there were to be lirrounded with fortifications,
of fuffcicint flrcngth to refill the aflaults of an In-
dian army. As the finil!iing of thole fortifications
was essential to the exilrence of a colony, and of
no less inmportance in prosecuting the designs which
the leader and hils followers meditated, both in or-
der to secure a place of retreat, and to prefcrve
their communication with the sea, every man in the
army, officers as well as soldiers, put his hand to
the'work, Cortes himself setting them an example
of a&ivity and perseverance in labour. The In-
dians ofZempoalla and Quiabiflan lent their aid
and this petty fration, the parent of so many migh-
ty fetueients, was soon in a frate of defence .

Concludes a WHILE engaged in this necessary work, Cortes
formal al- t
liance wth had several interviews with the caziques of Zem-
fcveral ca- poalia and Quiabiflan; and availing himself of
zlqu's, their wonder and aftoniflhment at the new objcts

which they daily beheld, he gradually inspired them
with such an high opinion of the Spaniards,
as beings of a superior order, and irrcfif'-ible in
arms, that, relying on their protection, they ven-
tured to infitlt the Mecxican power, at the very name
of which they were accufloined to tremble. Some
of Montezuma's officers having appeared to levy
the ufuill tribhute, and to demand a certain number
of human victims, as an expiation for their guilt
in prcfiming to hold intcrcourfe with those firan-
gers whom the emperor had commanded to leave
his dominions, inftcad of obeying the order, they
made them priloncrs, treated then with great

indignity,

D'

B Diaz. c. 4 i, ,l.1.S. Gonar Cron. c. 32, 33. 37. ler-

rcra, iec. z. lib. v.

V . C;, 9.
3°

indignity, and, as their fuperflition was no less B 0 O K
barbarous than that of the Mexicans, they threa-
tened to sacrifice them to their gods. From this 15i9
last danger they were delivered by the interposition
of Cortes, who manifefled the utmofl horror at the
mention offuch a deed. The two caziques having
now been pufied to an aot of such open rebellion,
as left them no hope of safety but in attaching
themselves inviolably to the Spaniards, they soon
completed their union with them, by formally ac-
knowledging themselves to be vassals of the fame
monarch. Their example was followed by the
Totonaclues, a fierce people who inhab'ted the
mountainous part of the country. They Vwiling-
ly fubjel-ed themselves to the crown of C'ailEe, and
offered to accompany Cortes, with al i-her forces,
in his march towards Mexico t .

CORTES had now been above three months in pss msn'

fureta to pro -

New Spain; and though this period had not been ur.- Cantir.
dilinguifhed by martial enterprises, every moment rlO
had been employed in operations, which, tlhough b, tihnt ,
lets splendid, were more imnportant. By his ad-
dress in conducting his intrigucs wit h his own ar-
my, as well as his sagacity in carryinlg on his nego-
ci itions with the natives, he i.i;hd ;IJrc:ldy laid the
foundations of his future filcccfs. But whatever
confidence he might place in the plan 'whici he
had formed, he could not but perceive, that as his
title to command was derived frolm a idoubtful au-
thority, he held it by a precarious tenure. The inl-
jtlrieCs which Velafquc. had reccived, were iluci ai
wontl(1 naturally prompt him to apply for redress to
their common fovcrcign ; and uich a rieprelinit:liotn
might be given of his cond ut, that he had reafibo
to appl)rhenid, not only that hlc might be degraded
from his prelcnt rank, but fublje&ed to ptinilh-

nile lt.

-t 1. Di2z. c. 47. GO0inral CiOI. 35. 36. Ilcrrcrai, de .. . lii.
* C. 9, 10, i .

B °0 K ment. Before he began his march, it was neceflary

biL to take the most effectual precautions againit this
1519. impending danger. With this view, he persuaded

the magistrates of his colony to address a letter to
the king, containing a long account of their own
services; a pompous description of the country
which they had discovered; its riches, the num-
ber of its inhabitants, their civilization and arts;
a view of the progress which they had alrea-
dy made, in annexing several extensive provinces
of it to the crown of Castile, and of the schemes
which they had formed, as well as the hopes which
they entertained, of reducing the whole to subjec-
tion; and last of all, they gave a minute detail of
the motives which had induced them to renounce
all connetion with Velasquez, to fettle a colony
dependant upon the crown alone, and to vest the
supreme power, civil as well as military, in the
hands of Cortes; humbly requeting their sovereign
to ratify what they had done by his royal autho-
rity. Cortes himself wrote in a similar firain; and
as he knew that the Spanifl court, accustomed to
the exaggerated representations of every new coun-
try by its difcovercr would give little credit to
their fplcndid accounts of New Spain, if they
were not accompanied with such a specimen of
what it contained, as would excite an high idea of
its opulence, he solicited his soldiers to rclin-
quinh what they inight claim as their part of
the treafircs which lihad hitherto been collected,
in order that the whole might be sent to the king.
Such was the alccndant which he had acquired
over their nminds, alnd such their own romantic
cxpcclatiois of lfuture wealth, that an army
of indigent and rapacious adventurers was ca-
pable of this generous effort, and offired to
their fovcrcign the richci(ft prcfi:nt that had hi-
therto been tranfinrittcd from the New Worldll-l

l'.rtucatrcr o
4. sc oJ'rI V lt,

Portocarrero ahd M6ntejo, the chief magiffrates of B 0 0 K
the colony, wereappointed to carry this present to
Castile, with express orders not to touch at Cuba lsl9-
in their passage thither 1.

WHILE aveffel was preparing for their departure, A confpira.

an unexpected event occasioned a general alarm. cy agaif
Some soldiers and sailors, secretly attached to Ve-
lafques, or intimidated at the profpecl of the dan-
gers unavoidable in attempting to penetrate into
the heart of a great empire with such unequal force,
formed the design of seizing one of thebrigantines,
and making their escape to Cuba, in order to give
the governor such intelligence as might enable
him to intercept the ship which was to carry the
treasure and dispatches to Spain. This conspiracy,
though formed by persons of low rank, was con-
duted with profound fecrefy; but at the moment
when every thing was ready for execution, they
were betrayed by one of their aflbciates.

THOUGH the good fortune of Cortes interposed He dclroy0

so seasonably on this occasion, the detection of this his tkti.
conspiracy filled his mind with moit disquieting ap-
prehensions, and prompted him to execute afcheme
which he had long revolved. He perceived that the
spirit of difaffefion (till lurked among his troops;
that though hitherto checked by the uniform success
of his schemes, or kept down by the hand of autho-
rity, various events might occur which would en-
courage and call it forth. He oblcrvedi, that ma-
ny of his men, weary of the fatigue of fcrvice, lon-
ged to rcvifit their settlements in Cuba ; and that
upon any appearance of extraordinary danger, or
any reverse of fortune, it would be impoflible to rcf-
train them fiom returning thither. He was Icniible
VOL. II. F that
I1. Diaz, c. 54 Gomnrn Cron. C. 40.

B 0 K that his forces, already too feeble, could bear no
I_ ^, diminution, and that a very small defection of his
1519. followers would oblige him to abandon the enter-

prifc. After ruminating, often, and with much so-
licitude, upon those particulars, he saw no hope of
success, but in cutting off all poiTibility of retreat,
and reducing his men to the necessity of adopting
the fame resolution with which he himself was ani-
mated, either to conquer or to perish. With this
view, he determined to defiroy his fleet ; but as he
durfl not venture to execute such a bold resolution
by his single authority, he laboured to bring his fol-
dicrs to adopt his ideas with refpedt to the propriety
of this meafiure. His address in accomplishing this
was not inferior to the arduous occasion in which
it was employed. He persuaded some, that the flips
had fufFcrcd ib much by having been long at sea, as
to be altogether unfit for service; to others he point-
ed out what a seasonable reinforcement of.frength
they would derive from the junScion of an hundred
r-e', now unprofitably employed as sailors ; and
to all' he reprelnted the necessity of fixing their
eyes and wifies upon what was before them, with-
oult allowitng the idea of a retreat once to enter their
thoughts. With universal consent the ships were
drawn aftore, and after fl-ripping them of their
fils, ri^gging, iron-works, and whatever else might
be of ufi', they wrn' broke in pieces. Thus, from
an c'llrrt oi magna:ln imitr, to which there is nothing
par:llldl in history, five hundred men voluntarily
conlinteted to be shut upl in a hostile country, filled
with ploweriful and unt known nations ; and having
precllcded everxy means of clcipc, left thclfelvcs
without ;any recfuLrcc but their own valour and pcr-
t:vcLtlll cC.

NO 'ri- NG

l.s di

Cuert . RarniTTf. iii. 225. B. Diaz. C. 57, 59. IicrerCld,
34

NOTHING now retarded Cortes; the alacrity of B 0 0 K

i his troops and the disposition of his allies were

equally favourable. All the advantages, however, 1519.
derived from the latter, though procured by much
afiduity and address, were well-nigh loft in a mo-
1 mcnt by an indiscreet rally of religious zeal, which,

on many occasions, precipitated Cortes into ati-
ons inconsistent with the prudence that diftin-
guifhes his chara&er. Though hitherto he had
neither time nor opportunity to explain to the na-
tives the errors of their own superstition, or to in-
ftruct them in the principles of the Christian faith,
he commanded his soldiers to overturn the altars
and to destroy the idols in the chief temple of
Zempoalla, and in their place to erec a crucifix
and an image of the Virgin Mary. The people
beheld this with aftonifllment and horror; the
priests excited them to arms s but such was the
authority of Cortes, and so great the ascendant
which the Spaniards had acquired, that the com-
motion was appeased without bloodflied, and con-
cord pcrfecly re-established §.

COR'rES began his march from Zempoalla on

Advances

the sixteenth of August, with five hundred men, into the
fifteen horse, and fix field-pieces. The reft of his co"nt'y.
troops, consisting chiefly of such as fron age or
infirmity were lcs fit for active service, he left as
a garrifoh in Villa 'Rica, under the command of
Efcalante, an officer of merit, and warmly attach-
ed to his intercft. The cazique of Zempoalla sip-
plied him with provisions, and with two hundred
of those Indians called 'I'AMEMilS, whose office, in
a country where tame aniimals were unknown, was
to carry burdens, and perform all fcrvile labour.
'lhey were a great relief to the Spanifll soldiers,
who hitherto had been obliged, not only to car-

F 2 ry

s .r» r\* - . T , ... J~1'

j). IJ'idz C. 4 1, 42, ItCII'CIr;I, dc. z, Z lib. v. c,3) ,..
__m____ __ _1___1_

B 00 K ry their own baggage, but to drag along the artil-

_
_,_ lery by main force. IHe offered likewise a confider-
1519. able body of his troops, but Cortes was satisfied

with four hundred; taking care, however, to chufe
persons of such note as might prove hostages for
the fidelity of their master. Nothing memorable
happened in his progress, until he arrived on the
confines of Tlafcala. The inhabitants of that pro-
vince, a warlike people, were implacable enemies
of the Mexicans, and had been united in an an-
cient alliance with the caziques of Zempoalla.
Though less civilized than the fubjeas of Monte-
zuma, they were advanced in improvement far be-
yond the rude nations of America, whose man-
ners we have described. They had made con-
fiderable progress in agriculture; they dwelt in
large towns; they were not strangers to some fpe-
cics of commerce ; and in the iniperfec accounts
of their institutions and laws, transmitted to us by
the early Spanish writers, we discern traces both of
distributive justice and of criminal jurisdiction, in
their interior police. But fill, as the degree of
their civilization was incomplete, and as they de-
pended for subsistence not on agriculture alone, but
trusted for it, in a great measure, to hunting, they
retained many of the qualities natural to men in
this fiate. Like them, they were fierce and re-
vengeful ; like them, too, they were high-fpirited
and independent., In confequcnce of the former,
they were involved in perpetual hostilities, and
had but a slender and occasional intercotirfe with
neigbouring flates. The latter inspired them with
such detestation of servitude, that they not only
refuted to stoop to a foreign yoke, and maintained
an obstinate and fucccfsful contest in defence of
their liberty against the superior power of the
Mcxicai empire, but they guarded with equal
solicitude against domcftic tyranny; and dif-

daiuing
36

daining to acknowledge any mailer, they lived un- B 0 o K
der the mild and limited jurifdiaon of a council v.
eleced by their several tribes. i59

CORTES, though he had received information His war

concerning the martial character of this people, wih the
flattered himself that his professions of delivering
the oppressed from the tyranny of Montezuma, their
enmity to the Mexicans, and the example of their
ancient allies the Zempoallans, mightinduce them
to grant him a friendly reception. In order to dif-
pose them to this, four Zempoallans of great emi-
nence were sent ambassadors, to request, in his
name and in that of their cazique, that they would
permit the Spaniards to pa's through the territo-
ries of Tlafcala in their way to Mexico. But
infiead of the favourable answer which was expec-
ted, the Tlafcalans seized the ambassadors, and,
without any regard to their public character,
made preparations for sacrificing them to their gods.
At the fame time, they assembled their troops, in
order to oppose those unknown invaders, if they
should attempt to make their passage good by force
of arms. Various motives concurred in precipi-
tating the Tlafcalans into this resolution. A fierce
people, shut up within its own narrow precincss,
and little accutomned to any intercourse with
foreigners, is apt to confider evqry stranger as an
enemy, and is easily excited to artns. They con-
ciuded from Cortes's proposal of visiting Monte-
zuma in his capital, that, notwithtlanding all his
professions, he courted the fiiendflip of a monarch
whom they both hated and feared. The imprudent
zeal of Cortes in violating the temple in Zem-
poalla, filled the Tlafcalans-with horro; i and as
they were no less attached to their fitpertfition
than the other nations of New Spain, they Were im-
patient to avenge their injured gods, and to acquire

the

B O O K the merit of offering up to them as victims those

V. impious men, who had dared to profane their al-
1519. tars; the Spaniards, from the smallness of their

number, were objecs of their contempt; they had
not yet measured their own iL-rength with theirs,
and had no idea of the superiority which they de-
rived from their arms and discipline.

CORTES, after waiting some days, in vain, for

Auag 30.
Succels of the return of his ambaiiadors, advanced into the
it. Tlafcalan territories. As the resolutions ofpeo-

ple who delight in war are executed with no less
promptitude than they are formed, he found troops
in the field ready to oppose him. They attacked
him with great intrepidity, and in the first en-
counter, wounded some of the Spaniards, and kill-
ed two horses; a loss, in their fituatjon, of great
moment, because it was irreparable. From this
fpecimcn of the courage of his new enemies, Cor-
tes saw the necessity of proceeding with caution.
His army marched in close order ; le chore the fta-
tions, where he halted with attention, and fortified
every camp with extrordinary care. During four-
teen days he was exposed to almost uninterrupted
allaults; the Tlafcalans advancing with nume-
rous armies, agd renewing the attack in various
forms, with a degree of valour and perfevcrance to
which the Spaniards had icen nothiing parallel in
the New World. TIhe Spanish historians dlcfcribe
thofie flucceflive battles with great pomp, and cnter
ilto a inuiite detail of particulars, miigliing miany
el,:aggrc'itcd and incrcdible circumifl-anlces l, with
thol whichl are real and marvellous. B1ut no pow-
er of words cinl render the recital of a conbat
intt rcfliig, whlerc there is no equality oi da;n-
tcr ; and when the narrative clolfs with an ac-

counlt

l! .e N 0 ' E IX.
33

count of'thoufands slain on the one fide, while B o o K
not a single. person falls on the other, the most la- v.
boured descriptions of' the previous disposition of
the troops, or of the various vicissitudes in the I5S9.
engagement, command no attention.

THERE are some circumnfances, however, in Sotme fin-
this war, which are memorable and merit notice, 'rar cir-

culrnlt:incc

as .hey throw light upon the characer both of the in it.
people of New Spain, and of their conquerors.
Though the Tlafcalans brought into the field
such vast armies as appear sufficient to have ovcr-
whelmed the Spaniards, they were never able to
make any impression upon their finall battalion.
Singular as this may seem, it is not.inexplicable.
The Tlafcalans, though addieced to war, were,
like all unpolifhed nations, strangers to military
order and discipline, and loft all the 'advantage
which they might have derived from their numbers,
and the impetuosity of their attack by their con-
ftant solicitude to carry off the dead and wounded.
This point of honour, founded on a fcntiment
of tenderness natural to the human, .mind, and
itrengthened by anxiety to prefcrve the bodies of
their countrymen from being devoured by tihir
enemies, was universal among the people of New
Spain. Attention to this pious office occupid
them, even during the heat of conmbat§, broke their'
union, and diminifllcd the force of tlie imprcni-
on which they might have made by a joint eflort.

NoT only was their ful)criority in number of

little avail, but the imperfedion of their military
vweapons rendered their valour in a great tncalure
ilotlelnfive. After three batldes, and imany fkir-
iniflls andl anlaults, not one Spaniard was killed in

the
§ D. D)iaz. c G$,

B 0 0 K the field. Arrows and spears, headed with flint or

V.
I _,. the bones of fishes, flakes hardened in the fire, and

15s9. wooden fw6rds, though deffrudive weapons among

naked Indians, were easily turned aside by the Spa-
nifh bucklers, and could hardly penetrate the
ESCAUPILES, or quilted jackets which the soldiers
wore. The Tlafcalans advanced boldly to the
charge, and often fought hand to hand. Many of
the Spaniards were wounded, though all slightly,
which cannot be imputed to any want of courage
in their enemies, but to the defeEt of the arms with
which they assailed them.

NOTWITHSTANDING the fury with which the

Tlafcalans attacked the Spaniards, they seem to
have conducRed their hostilities with rome degree
of barbarous generosity. They gave the Spaniards
warning of their hostile intentions, and as they
knew that they wanted provisions and imagined,
perhaps, like the other Americans, that they had
left their own country because it did not afford
them subsistence, they sent to their camp alarge
supply of poultry and maize, desiring them to eat
plentifully, because they scorned to attack an ene-
my enfeebled by hunger, and it would be an affront
to their Gods to offer them famifshed victims, as
well as disagreeable to themselves to feed on such
emaciated prey .

WHEiN they were taught by the first encounter with
their new enemies, that it was not easy to execute
this threat; when they perceived, in the fubfe-
quent engagements, that' notwithstanding all the
efforts of their own valour, of which they had a very
high opinion, not one of the Spaniards was slain or

taken,

Herrera, dec. Z. lib. vi. . ó, Gemara Crux. c. 47.
40o

taken, they began to conceive them to be a superior B 0O K
order of beings, against whom human power could , .
not avail. In this extremity, they had recourse to ,19.
their priests, requiring them to reveal the mysterious
causes of such extraordinary events, and to declare
what new means they should employ in order to
repulse those formidable invaders. The prieffs as-
ter many sacrifices and incantations, delivered this
response. That these firangers were the offspring of
the fun, procreated by his animating energy in the
regions of the east ; that, by day, while cherished
with the influence of his parental beams, they were
invincible ; but by night, when his reviving heat
was withdrawn, their vigour declined and faded
like the herbs in tbe field, and they dwindled down
into mortal men ". Theories less plausible have
gained credit with more enlightened nations, and
have influenced their conduc. In consequence of
this, the Tlafcalans, with the implicit confidence
of men who fancy themselves to be under the gui-
dance of Heaven, acted in contradiction to one of
their most eftabliihed maxims in war, and ventured
to attack the enemy in the night-time, in hopes of
dcftroying them when enfeebled and furprilcd. But
Cortes had more vigilance and discernment than to
be deceived by the rude stratagems of an Indian ar-
my. The centinels at his out-'posts, obfcrving some
extraordinary ,movement among the Tafc.alans,
gave the alarm. In a moment the troops were un-
der arms, and sallying out, difpcrfed the party with
great slaughter, without allowing them to approach
the camp. Convinced, by fad experience, that
their priests had deluded them, and satisfied that
they attempted in vain, cither to deceive or to van-
quifli their enemies, the fierccleifs of the Tlafcalans
abated, and they bcgin to incline seriously to
peace.

VOL. II. a 1lug

* B. Di.i,. .. 0(,-,

41

B 0 0 K THEY were at a loss, however, in what manner

V_. to address the firangers, what idea to form of their
,.-o. character, and whether to confider them as beings

The'l Tafca- of a gentle or of a malevolent nature. There were
co peace. ciicuillances in their conduct which seemed to

favour each opinion. On the one hand, as the Spa-
niards conflantly difmified the prisoners whom they
to-ik, not only without injury, but often with pre-
sents of European toys, and renewed their offers of
peace after every vicory ; this lenity amazed peo-
pl: accustomed to the exterminating fyltem of war
known in America, and who sacrificed and devour-
ed vwii.nit inmerc' all the captives taken in battle,
and disposcd them to entertain favourable senti-
ments of their lhumanity, But, on the other hand;
as Cortes had fcized ffty of their countrymen who
bi-ouTht provisions to his camp, and supposing them
to be spics, had cut off their hands *; this bloody
fpe&acle, added to the terror occasioned by the
fire arms and horses, filled them with dreadful im-
prellions of their ferocity t. Accordingly, this
uncei-tainty was apparent in their mode of addref-
sing the Spaniards. " If, said they, you are divi-
nities of a cruel and savage nature, we present to
you five slaves, that you may drink their blood and
eat their flcfh. If you are mild deities, accept an
osi'lring of incense and variegated plumes. If you
are menL, here is mncat, and brcad and fruit, to
iourifh you

: ." 'T'he peace, which both parties

now (tcuired with equal ardour, was soon conclud-
ConlL,,,i. Cd. The Tlafc:ll; s yielded thenifelves as vaalTls

to tie crown of Castile, and engaged to arifl Cor-
tf!s in all ahis future operations. -Ic took the re-
putblic under his pi ottection, and promifd to defciid
t!.cir p m
rlolis ;Uld poilellions from injury or vio-

'Ilits

. ',

; ,t ', },' 1. 1H,1 ,ll' ;, 1.

Z'2ii . . ' . ,1n Croll. c. 4.8. *1- Seo

3I l. I'll . ; l . iJ.i,:. . 7,t ( _;.i

m ., ,I Cr)n. c. ,;.7. l' esrrt, d;h.

l l, h vi. >c. 7.
42

THIS treaty was concluded at a seasonable junc- B o o K

ture for the Spaniards. The fatigue of service a-
mong a small body of men, surrounded by such a isr5.
multitude of enemies, was incredible. Half the A.,va!;tiges

O£it tn the

army was on duty every night, and evenlthey whose Spaniards
turn it was to ret, slept always upon their arms,
that they might be ready to run to their polfs on a
moment's warning. Many of them were wounded,
a good number, and among these Cortes himself,
laboured under the difemper peculiar to the cli-
mate, and several had died since they iet out from
Vera Cruz. Notwithstanding the supplies which
they received from the Tlafcalans, they were often
in want ofprovifions, and so destitute of the necef-
saries molt requisite in dangerous service; that they
had no salve to dress their wounds, but what was
composed with the fat of the Indians whom they
had slain t. Worn out with such intolerable toil
and hardships, many of the soldiers began to mur-
mur, and when they reflected on the multitude and
boldness of their enemies, more were ready to def-
pair. It required the utmost exertion of Cortes's
authority and address to check this spirit of def-
pondency in its progress. and to reanimate his fol-
lowers with their wonted sense of their own fuperi--
ority over the enemies.with whom they had to con-
tend :t. The fubmifiion of the Tlafcalaiis, and
their own triumphant entry into the capital city,
where they were received with the reverence paid
to beings of a superior order, banished, at once,
from the minds of the Spaniards all memory of past
fuifcrinlgs, difpclcld every anxious thought with rc-
spcd to their future operations, and fully tatisficd
them that there was not now any power il Ameri-
ca able to withstand their arms §.

G 2 CORT'ES

'i n. . 6. c. .62.5. t Cortes Rclat, Ramunifi. iii. z.9 . Diaz.
ciY69. (oóa1 .CI on. C. 51. § Coltcs Rcl.t. Rd.nLul. iii. z30. IB.

;it,.. c.
c *.

B 0 0 K CORTES remained twenty days in Tlafcala, in
I _, order to allow his troops a short interval of repose

9Ig. after such hard service. During that time, he was

it5oUt employed in tranfadions and inquiries of great mo-
.,i!neheir ment with rLfped to his future schemes. In his
tonidene. daily conferences with the Tlafcalan chiefs, he re-

ceived information concerning every particular re-
lative to the State of the Mexican empire, or to the
qualities of its sovereign, which could be of use in
regulating his conduct, whether he should be oblig-
ed to ad as a friend or as an enemy. As he found
that the antipathy of his new allies to the Mexican
nation was no less implacable than had been repre-
sented, and perceived what benefit he might derive
from the aid of such powerful confederates, he em-
ployed all his powv rs of insinuation in order to gain
their confidence. Nor was any extraordinary exer-
tion of these necellary, The Tlafcalans, with the
levity of mind natural to unpolifhed men, were, of
their own accord, disposed to run from the extreme
of hatred to that of fondness. Every thing in the
appearance and conduct of their guests, was to them
matter of woice!r -. They gazed at whatever the
Spaniards did with admiration, and fancying them
to be of ha:wcnly origin, were eager not only to
comply with their demands, but to anticipate their
wiihcs. 'Ih','¥ aercTd, accordingly, to accompany
Cortes in his march to Iiexico, with all the forces
of the republic, under ihe command of their moit
experienced captainsll

rhi i lie Bur, after bclowing so much pains on cement-

1.'

r ll l; inag this union, all tie b. llcici:l fruits of it were on
,Ai ..1. the point of ibei , lult, by a new efi'ufion of that in-

tcepcr.itc zeal with wlinch Cortes was animated, 1,o

less

1- Sc NO () SI X .
44

less than the other adventurers of the age. They B 0 0 K
all confidered themselves as inffruments employed _
by Heaven to propagate the Christian faith,s and 1519.
the less they were qualified either by their know-
ledge or morals for such a function, they were more
cager to discharge it. The profound veneration of
theTlafcalans for the Spaniards, havingencouraged
Cortes to explain to some of their chiefs the doc-
trines of the Christian religion, and to insist that
they should abandon their own superstitions, and
embrace the faith of their new friends, they, ac-
cording to an idea universal among barbarous na-
tions, readily acknowledged the truth and excel-
lence of what he taught ; but contended, that the
TEULES of Tlafcala were divinities no less than the
God in whom the Spaniards believed; and as that
Being was intitled to their homage, so they were
bound to revere the fame powers which their an-
ceftors had worshiped. Cortes continued, never-
thelefs, to urge his demand in a tone of authority,
mingling threats with his arguments, until the
Tlafcalans could bear it no longer, and conjured
him never to mention this again, left the Gods
mhould avenge on their heads the guilt of having
listened to such a proposition. Cortes, aflonifhed
and enraged at their obstinacy, prepared to execute
by force what he could not accomplish by perfua-
sion, and was going to overturn their altars, and
cast down their idols with the fame violent hand as
at Zempoalla, if father Bartholemew de Olmedo,
chaplain to the expedition, had not checked his in-
considerate impetuosity. He represented the im-
prudence of such an attempt in a large city newly
icconcilcd, and filled with people no less fupcrftiti-
(us than warlike; he declared that the proceeding
at Zempoalla had always appeared to him precipi-
t:.te and lnj us ; that religion was not to be propa-
ga.td by the sword, or infidcls to be converted by

violence ;

45

B O O K violence; that other weapons were to be employed

v.

in this ministry, patient inftruAion must enlighten
1519. the underifanding, and pious example captivate the

heart, before men could be induced to abandon error
and embrace the truth t. Amidst scenes, where a
narrow-minded bigotry appears in such close union
with oppreflion and cruelty, sentiments so liberal
and humane, fodth the mind with unexpected plea-
sure ; and at a time, when the rights of conscience
were little understood in the Chriflian world, and
the idea of toleration unknown, one is astonished to
find a Spanifil monk of the sixteenth century among
the first advocates againfr persecution, and in be-
half of religious liberty. The remonstrances of an
ecclelaffic no less refpeac:ible for wisdom than vir-
tue, had their proper weight with Cortcs. He left
the Tlafcalans in the undisturbed exercise of their
own rites, requiring only that they should desist
from their horrid practice of offering human vic-
tims in sacrifice.
Advtances to CORTES, as soon as his troops were fit for service,

resolved to continue his march towards Mexico,
notwithstanding the earnct diffuaiivcs of the Tlaf-
calans, who reprcfented his defiruCtion as unavoida-
ble, if he put himself in the power of a prince so
faithless and cruel as Montezuma. As he was ac-
companied by fix thouahnd Tlafcalans, he had now
the command of forces which refrnblcd a regular
oa. ,3 arniy. T'hey directed their course towards Cholu-

la; Montezuma, who had at length consented to
admit the Spaniards into his prefi'lce, having in-
formed Cortcs, that he had given orders for his
friendly rcccption'therc. Cholula was a confidera-
ble town, and though only five leagues diflant firon
T'lafcala, was formerly an independent llitttc, but

had
.[ 13. D i az. c. 7 . 1) 5,( C. 3. p. 6 i

had been lately fubjeced to the Mexican empire. B 0 0 K

V.

This was confidered by all the people of New Spain .- .
as a holy place, the fanEtuary and chief feat of their 5ig9,
gods, to which pilgrims resorted, from every pro-
vince, and a greater number of human victims
were offered in its principal temple than even in
that of Mexico *. Montezuma seems to have in-
vited the Spaniards thither, either from. forne super-
ftitious hope that the gods would not susser this
sacred mantion to be defiled, without pouring down
their wrath upon those impious strangers, who
ventured to insult their power in the place of its
peculiar residence, or fromn a belief that he himself
might there attempt to cut them off with. more cer-
tain success, under the immediate prote&tion of his
divinities.

CORTES had been warned by the Tlafcalans, ber- The severity

fore he set out. on his march, to. keep a watchful ofhisproce
eye over the Cholulans. He himfeif, though re- drth
ceived into the town with much seeming refped
aind cordiality, observed several circumstances in
their conduit which excited fufpieion.: Two of the
Tiafcalans, who were encamped. at some distance
from the town, as the Cholulans refused to admit
their ancient enemies within its precinLcs, having
found means to enter in disguise, acquainted Cor-
tc', that they observed the women and children of
the pinicipal citizens retiring in great hurry every
nigiht ; and that fix children had been sacrificed in
the chief temple, a rite which indicated the. execu-
tion of rome warlike enterprise to be approaching.
At the faime time, Marina the interpreter received
ins frinlation from an Indian woman of distinction,
M\ lofi confidence fle had gained, that the deftruc-
tlul of her friends was concerted that a body of

Mexican

T'l l.I'' :l MnllA1Alr. Ind l. I. .z81, a.,i, 91. CuUoiaaCion. c.
61l, -lcrl ria, dec. 2z. lib. Vii c.

47

B 0 0 K Mexican troops lay concealed near the town; that

some of the fireets were barricaded, and in others,
.519. pits ordeep trenches were dug, and slightly covered

over, as traps into which the horse might fall ; that
stones and miflive weapons were collected on the
tops of the temples, with which to overwhelm the
infantry ; that the fatal hour was now at hand, and
their ruin unavoidable. Cortes, alarmed at this
concurring evidence, secretly arrested three of the
chief priests, and extorted from them a confeflion
that confirmed the intelligence which he had re-
ceived. As not a moment was to be loft, he instant-
ly resolved to prevent his enemies, and to infliA on
them such dreadful vengeance as might strike Mon-
tezuma and his fubjecrs with terror. For this pur-
pose, the Spaniards and Zempoallans were drawn up
in a large court, which had been allotted for their
quarters near the centre of the-town; the Tlafca-
lans had orders to advance; the magifirates, and fe-
veral of the chief citizens, were sent for under vari-
ous pretexts, and seized. On a signal given, the
troops ruffed out,. and fell upon the multitude,
deffitute of leaders, and so much astonished, that the
weapons dropped from their hands, and they stood
motionless, and incapable of defence. While the
Spaniards prefied them in front, the Tiafcalans at-
tacked them in the rear. The streets were filled with
bloodshed and death. The temples, which afford-
ed a retreat to the priests and fime of the leading
men, were set on fire, and they periihed in, the
flames. This scene of horror continued two days;
during which, the wretched inhabitants suffered all
that the deftruaive rage of the Spaniards, or the im-
placable revenge of thl:ir Indian allies, could infli'
At length the carnage ccalc(l, after the slaughter of
fix thousand Cholulans, without the lots of a single
Spaniard. Cortes then rclea(Cd the magistrates,
and rcproachin, them bitterly for their intended

treacheryl .

treachery, declared, that as juflice was now appeal- B 0 o K
ed, he forgave the offence, but required them to re-
call the citizens who had fled, and re-establish or- 1519.
der in the town. Such was the ascendant which the
Spaniards had acquired over this fuperititious race
of men, and so deeply were they impressed with an
opinion of their superior discernment, as well as
power, that, in obedience to this command, the ci-
ty was in a few days filled again with people, who,
amidst the ruins of their sacred buildings, yielded
refpedtful service to men whose hands were stained
with the blood of their relations and fellow-ci-
tizens t.

FROM Cholula, Cortes advanced directly towards oa-. 9.

Mexico, which was only twenty leagues distant. In towards
every place through which he passed, he was receiv- Mexico.
ed as a person pofeffed of sufficient power to deliver
the empire from the oppression under which it groan-
ed; and the caziques or governors, with the unrefer-
ved confidence reposed in superior beings, communi-
cated to him allthe grievances which they felt un-
der the tyrannical government of Montezuma,
When Cortes first observed the feeds of discontent in
the remote provinces of the empire, a ray of hope
broke in upon his mind; butwhen hedifcoveredfucli
symptoms of alienation from their monarch near the
feat of government, he concluded that the vital
parts of the constitution were affected, and concei-
ved the most sanguine expectations of overturning
a slate whose natural strength was thus divided and
impaired. While those reflec:ions encouraged the
general to perfifl in his arduous undertaking, the
foldicrs were no less animated by observations more
obvious to their capacity. In delcncling from the

VOL I. II. -I mountains

t Cortes Relat. R3muf. i, 2. . Diz

. 3..

n omI C83o.

nr Cr c.
(4. H-urrera, dec,. lib. vii. c. i, z. Sce NOTE X11.

B O 0 K mountains ofChlalco across which the road lay, the

v.

v_ V.t pl.ain ofl exico opened gradually to their view.

Tr59 When they first beheld this profped, one of the
ri-t\ic.vof i mofI fri'iLg and beautiful on the face of the

ct;ith when they obftrved fertile and cultivated
i;elds, fl-retchingi farther than the eye could reach;
when they saw a lake reflnbling the sea in extent,
encompaflTd with large towns, and difcovcred the
capital city rilnig upon an illand in the middle,
adorn d with it:, temples and turrets ; the fccne so
f.,r exceeded their imagination, that some believed
the fanciful dcf.riptions of romance were realized,
and th.t its ec hanl, :d palaces and gilded domes were
pirc'l;n:tld to dli, ir fight; others could hardly per-
fiuade tliymfelIves that this wonderful spectacle was
any thing more than a dream t. As they advanced,
their doubts were re!oved, but their amazement in-
creafied. .They were'now fully satisfied that the
cn untrv was rich beyond any conception which
t'icy had formed of it, and flattered themselves,
tliat at Icxlntth they fiould obtain an ample recom-
pence for all their services and fullferings.

Tli' lei',- No CiIenemy had vet appeared to oppose their pro-
.,,"'",- gref!;, tih:Jll
h Tfe verl ciicumnllances occurred which

n,... led thlcin tt, frifp r. thait sole design was formed to

nrnil;f aild (.ti he! im oi.ft'. any mefilengcrs arriv-
ed ficc( l3vl v fIroi I olltitezumna, permitting them
ollc day to ad vaicllce, r (luiring themn on the next to
retirl', tas his hl'!'p!'s or fears alternately prevailed;
and si, wonl erfuil vwas this infatuation, which seems
to be uln:cci. ouitable on any fuppofitiotn but that of
a fiiperllitiiolis dread of the Spaliards, as beings of
a flip'.rior liature, th;it Cortes was aloioft at the
gates of the capitail, b1 lore the monarch had deter-

iniilledu wl;ll-lienr to receive him as a friend, or tp op-
pose li ii ais anl enleily. ut as no sign of opien

hoflility
t See NOTL XIII.

hostility appeared, the Spaniards, without regard- B O O K
ing the flutuations of Montezuma's sentiments,
continued their march along the causeway which 'Ijs.
led to Mexico through the lake, with grzat circu1m-
fpedion and the strictest discipline, though without
seeming to fufpea the prince whom they were a-
bout to visit.

WHEN they drew near the city, about a thousand H fil in-

persons, who appeared to be of difiintion, came tcr\i\,i\wtlL
forth to meet them, adorned with plumes, and clad t
in mantles of fine cotton. Each of theic, in his
order, pas-ed by Cortes, and saluted him accordinlg
to the mode deemed most rcfpec'ful and fibmiilive
in their country. They announced the approach
of Montezuma himself, and soon after his harbin-
gers came in fight. There appeared first two
hundred persons in an uniform dress, with large
plumes of feathers, alike in fashion, marching two
and two, in deep silence, barefooted, with their
eyes fixed on the ground. These were followed by
a company of higher rank, in their most flowy appa-
rel, in the midst of whom was Mlontczuma, in a
chair or litter richly ornamented with gold, and
feathers of various colourl. Four of his principal
favourites carried him on their lloulders, others
supported a canopy of ctlrious workmlanl:hhi ovcr
his head. Before him marched three ol-ic,.rs with
rols of gold in their hands, which they lifted up
on high at certain intervals, and at that signal all
the people bowed their heads, and hid their faces,
as unworthy to look on so great a monarch. VWhen
he drew nca-, Cortes difilountcd, advancing to-
walrds him with officious halte, and in a rcf,'eclTul
pofiure. At tthe fae i time MIonte/zu n!a alighted
fromi his chair, and leaning on the arms of two of
his neal relations, approached with a flow and ltate-
ly l):lce, Iis ;ttcndalnts covering the fircct with cot-
ton cloths, that he might not touch the ground.

tH 2 Cortes

B 0 O K Cortes accosted him with profound reverence, as-

ter the European fashion. He returned the faluta-
1519. tion, according to the mode of his country, by

touching the earth with his hand, and then kifling
it. This ceremony, the customary expreflion of
reverence from inferiors towards those who were
above them in rank, appeared such amazing con-
descension in a proud monarch, who scarcely
deigned to confider the reft of mankind as of the
fame species with himself, that all his fubjecs firm-
ly believed those pcrfons, before whom he humbled
himself in this manner, to be something more than
human. Accordingly, as they marched through
the crowd, the Spaniards frequently, and with
much fatisfacion, heard themselves denominated
TEULES, or divinities. Nothing material pased in
this sirs interview. Montezuma conducEed Cortes
to the quarters which he had prepared for his re-
ception, and immediately took leave of him, with a
politeness not unworthy of a court more refined.
" You are now," fays he, sc with your brothers,
in your own house; refresh yourselves after your
fatigue, and be happy until I return *." The place
allotted to the Spaniards for their lodging was a
house built by the father of Montezuma. It was
fu rrounded by a Ptone-wall, with towers at proper
diltallces, which served for defence as well as for
oinament, and its apartments and courts were so
large as to accommodate both the Spaniards and
their Indian alliifs. The firit care of Cortes was to
take precauti(ons for his iccurity, by planting the
artillery fl as to command the difFerent avenues
which led to it, by appointing a large division of
his troops to he always on guard, and by posting
centinels at proper ftltions, with jnjundLions to
obiclrvc the faime vigilant diflciplinle, as if they were
within fight of an enemly's camnp.

Ir

' Cortct R .lat. R:mn. iii. 232"---35. 1 I)ia. c.

C 3 G--

8. ComaraG

Cron c, 6ti,, 65. I-lcrrcr., dcc. z. lib. vii. c. 3, , 5,
52

IN the evening Montezuma returned to visit his B O O K

guests with the fSme pomp as in their first interview,
and brought presents of such value, not only to sx9.
Cortes and to his officers, but even to the private Hisideaof

the Spani-

men, as proved the liberality of the monarch to be ards.
suitable to the opulence of his kingdom. A long
conference ensued, in which Cortes learned what
was the opinion of Montezuma with refpecI to.the
Spaniards. It was an established tradition, he told
him, among the Mexicans, that their ancestors
came originally from a remote region, and conquer-
ed the provinces now fubjedt to his dominion;
that after they were fettled there, the great captain
who conduAed this colony returned to his own
country, promising, that at some future period his
descendants should visit them, assume the govern-
ment, and reform their conflitution and laws ; that,
from what he had heard and seen of Corles and his
followers, he was convinced that th -y were the very
persons whose appearance their traditions and pro.-
phccies taught them to expet ; that accordingly
he had received them, not as firangers, but as rela-
tions of the ftine blood and parentage, and desired
that they might confider themselves as mafiers in
his dominions; for both him self and his fubjedts
should be ready to comply with their will, and even
to prevent their wiflles. Cortes made a reply in
his usual stile with reipect to the dignity and power
of his sovereign, and his intention in fending him
into that country ; artfully endeavouring so to
frame his ldilcoulfe, that it migiht coincide as much
as polihle with the idea which \lMontczuma had
frmed concerning the origin of the Spaniards.
Next mornini , Cortes and lome of his principal at-
tendllants were A;dtiitLtd to ;a public audience of the

lemperor. 'l'he three ftibliqulcnt t (lays were employ-

ed il viewiin the city ; the appearance of which,
lo f, Iiripvr in the ord(e of' itt buildings and the

number

53

B 0 O K number of its inhabitants to any place the Spaniards

had beheld in America, and yet so little resembling
1519. the ftrucThire of an European city, filled them with

furpriif and admiration.

MEXICO, TENUCHTITLAN, as it was anciently

called by the natives, is situated in a large plain,
environed by mountains of such height, that, though
within the torrid zone, the temperature of its cli-
mate is mild and hcalthful. All the moisture which
descends from the high grounds is collected in fe-
verai lIkes, the two largest of which, of about nine-
ty miles in circuit, communicate with each other.
The wai-'rs of the one are fr:ih, those of the others
brackifi. On the banks of the latter; and on lome
finall islands adjoiniig to them, the capital of
Montezumna's empire was built. The access to the
city was by artificial causeways or streets, formed of
(tones and earth, about thirty feet in breadth. As
the waters of the lake during the rainy season
overflowed the flat country, thfe causeways were
of considerable length. That of Tacuba on the
weft extended a mile and a half; that of Tezeuco
on the north-well three miles ; that of Cuoyacan
towards the south tix miles. On the east there was
no callfcway, and the city could be approached on-
ly by canoes t. In each of thelc caulcways were
openings at proper intervals, through which the
waters flow(''d ; and ouvcr thef(: beams of timber were
laid, which bking co\vcied with earth, the caufc-
way or ftrect had cvcry-w hrle an llnifiorm ap-
lpe;irince. As the nppro.act s to lhe city were i;n-
gu!;ar, its cn)l',ir11..Cion was r'll .l rkablr. Not only
the templel s (,f their {ods, ) it the Ihoufbs belonging
to tle niona1rcli, an(l to prel;fiIof ( diltiiinccion, were
of fucli dinicifiois, that, ill co pu'arifon with any
other lbildings which had been tdiiovercd in Ame-

' rigiI
1 F. Torribio

rica, they might be termed magnificent. The ha- B 0 0 K
bitatiens of the common people were mean, re-
fembling the huts of other Indians. But they were isi9-
all placed in a regular manner, ol the banks of the
canals which paflid through the city, in soli. of its
diftrirts, or on the fides of the streets which inter-
ifccted it in other quarters. in several places were
large openings or ifquares, one of whvich, alloti.d for
the great market, is said to have been so Isacious,
that forty or fifty thous!nd persons carried on traf-
sic there. In this city, the pride of the New
World, and the noblest monument of the industry
and art of man, while unacquainted with the use of
iron, and destitute of aid from any domeific animal,
the Spaniards, who arc molt moderate in their com-
putations, reckon that there were at least sixty
thousand inhabitants %.

BUT how much soever the novelty of those ob- Tr a

jets might amuse or astonish the Spaniards, they gerousfitua-
felt the utmnofc solicitude with refpe& to their own tioI-
ftiuation. F'i-oml a concurrence of circumfianices,
no less unexpcó}tcd than favourable to their progress,
they had been allowed to penetrate into the heart of
ia pow"rful king donmi and were now lodged in its
ca'pital, without havingonce met with open oppofi-
tionl fi-om its monarch. The Tlafcalans, however,
had earnicily difiadcd them from placing such con-
idelnce in /Montczumia as to entcr a city of fuich a
)pculliar situation as Mexico, where tlat prince
would have them at mercy. ihuit up as it were in a
f(lari, frc(ni which it rwas ilnpoflible to cflcape.
''ilicy .ifl'urcd hiin that the Mexican pricfls had, in
nii;tn of the Gods, counselled their lovcrcign to ad-
nit the Spaniatrds into the capital, that he might

cut

1' Coti'R!,R R .l. ..

R . i. t. ,l rll *grn tclt.i de Mexi-

t,, I' 1 u (; '.tilh LllioiI. dcl CU tcIL':. R'. 1n. ibid. 304.. E. 1Icrr .\a, Idcc.
2 . ilt \vil .

c. 1 ,
, C.

B O O K cut them off there at one blow with perfec fectiri-

V.
V__. ty *. They now perceived, too plainly, that the
1519. apprehensions of their allies were not destitute of

foundation; that, by breaking the bridges placed
at certain intervals on the causeways, or by destroy-
ing part of the causeways themselves, their retreat
would be rendered imprasticable, and they must re-
main cooped up in the centre of a hostile city, fur-
rounded by multitudes sufficient to overwhelm
them, and without a poflibility of receiving aid from
their aliies. Montczuma had, indeed, received
them with diflinguiflled refpcfC. But ought they
to reckon upon this as real, or to confider it as
feigned ? Even if it were sincere, could they pro-
mise on its continuance ? Their safety depended
upon the will of a monarch in whose attachment
they had no reason to confide ; and an order flow-
ing from his caprice, or a word uttered by him in
passion, might decide irrevocably concerning their
fate t.

Sorncitude THESE reflexions, so obvious as to occur to the
and perplex- meanest soldier, did not escape the vigilant fagaci-
ity of Cor- gad-
te. r ty of their general. Before he set out from Cho-

lula, Cortes had received advice from Villa Rica .,
that Qualpopoca, one of the Mexican generals on
the frontiers, having assembled an army in order to
attack rome of the people whom the Spaniards had
encouraged to throw off the Mexican yoke, Efca-
lante had marched out with part of the garrison to
support his allies; that an engagemcnt had cnfu-
ed, in which, though the Spaniards were victorious,
Efcalante, with f-ven of his men, had been mor-
tally wounded, his horse kIilled, and one Spa-
niard had been filrrolinded by the enemy and
taken alive ; that the head of this unfortunate cap-

tive,

" B Diaz. c. , 6.
235, G.

j Ibid. c. .. : t Relit. R-iui. iii.

tive, after being carried in triumph to different B O O K
cities, in order to convince the people that their
invaders were not immortal, had been sent to 1519.
Mexico * . Cortes, though alarmed with this in-
telligence, as an indication of Montezuma's hof-
tile intentions, had continued his march. But
as soon as he entered Mexico, he became fen-
fible, that, from an excess of confidence in the fu-
perior valour and discipline of his troops, as well
as from the disadvantage of having nothing to
guide him in an unknown country, but the de-
fetive intelligence which he received from peo-
ple with whom his mode of communication was
very imperfect, he had pushed forward into a fitua-
tion, where it was difficult to continue, and from
which it was dangerous to retire. Disgrace, and
perhaps ruin, was the certain consequence of at-
tempting the latter. The success of his enterprise
depended upon supporting the high opinion which
the people of New Spain had formed with refpet
to the irresistible power of his ardls. Upon the
firif symptom of timidity on his part, their vene-
ration would cease, and Montezuma, whom fear
alone restrained at present, would let loose upon
him the whole force of his empire. At the fame
time, he knew that the countenance of his own so-
vere;gn was to be obtained only by a series of victo-
ries, and that nothing but the merit of extraordi-
nary success could screen his conduct fiom the cen-
sure of irregularity. From all these con'fiderati-
oils, it was neceflary to maintain his flation, and to
extricate himself out of the difficulties in which
one bold fRep had involved him, by venturing
upon, another still bolder. The lituation was
trying, but his mind was equal to it ; and
after revolving the matter with deep attention, he
fixed upon a plan no less extraordinary than daring.
VOL. II. I He

II. D12z c. (3, 94. fi-creri, dec, 2. lib, viii. c., .

b

B 0 0 K He determined to seize Montezuma in his palace,

._ and to carry him as a prisoner to the Spanish quar-

1519. ters. From the superstitious veneration of the Mex-

Rci1oies to icans for the person of their monarch, aswell
seize Mon-
kezuma. as their implicit fubmiflion to his will, he hoped,

by having Montezuma in his power, to acquire
the supreme direacion of their affairs ; or at least,
with such a sacred pledge in his hands, he made
no doubt of being secure from any effort of their
violence.

His manner THIS he immediately proposed to his officers.
of executing
this. The timid fiartled at a measure so audacious, and

raised objections. The more intelligent and refo-
lute, conscious that it was the only resource in
which there appeared any profpeA of safety, warmly
approved of it, and brought over their compa-
nions so cordially to the fame opinion, that it
was agreed instantly to make the attempt. At his
usual hour of visiting Montezuma, Cortes went to
the palace, accompanied by Alvarado, Sandoval,
Lugo, Velasquez de Leon, and Davila, five of
his principal officers, and as many trusty soldiers.
Thirty chosen men followed, not in regular order,
but sauntering at some distance, as if they had no
objcct but curiosity; fmIIl parties were pofled at
proper intervals, in all the fireets leading from the
Spanifl quarters to the court; and the remainder
of his troops, with the Tlafcalan allies, were under
arms, ready to sally out on the first alarm. Cortes
and his attendants wereadmittcd without fifpicion;
the Mexicans retiring, as uftlal, out of refpet. He
addlrefl;d the monarch in a tone very different from
that which he had employed in former conferences,
rcproalching him bitterly as the author 6f the
violent aflutilt made upon the Spaniards by one
of his officers, and demanded public reparation
for the loss which he had f't slained by the death of
fomne of his companions, as well as for the in-

Jtult

fult offered to the great prince whose servants they B O O K
were. Montezuma, confounded at this unexpeced _
accusation, and changing colour either from con- 1419.
fcioufnefs of guilt, or from feeling the indignity
with which he was treated, asserted his own inno-
cence with great earnestness, and, as a proof of it,
gave orders instantly to bring Qualpopoca and his
accomplices prisoners to Mexico. Cortes replied,
with seeming complaisance, that a declaration so
refpeatable left no doubt remaining in his own
mind, but that Something more was requisite to
satisfy his followers, who would never be con-
vinced that Montezuma did not harbour hostile
intentions against them, unless, as an evidence
of his confidence and attachment, he removed from
his own palace, and took up his residence in the
Spaniih quarters, where he should be served and ho-
noured as became a great monarch. The first men-
tio0 of so strange a proposal bereaved Montezuma
of peech, and almost of motion. At length, in-
dignation gave him utterance, and he haughtily an-
fwvered, " That persons of his rank were not ac-
customed voluntarily to give up themselves as pri-
foners, and were he mean enough to do so, his
subjects would not permit such an affront to be of-
sered to their fovcreign." Cortes, unwilling to em-
ploy force, endeavoured alternately to soothe and to
intimidate him. The altercation became warm ;
an(l having continued above three hours, Velasquez
(te Leon, an impetuous and gallant young r mn, ex-
claiined with impatience, " Why waftc more time
in vain ? Let us either seize him infl-antly, or flab
him tothe heart." The threatening voice and fierce
gefllurCS with which these words were uttered, flruck
Montezuma. The Spaniards, lie was fenilble, had
no'w proceeded so far, as left him no hope that
they would recede. His own danger was immi-

J 2 nclnt,

B 0 0 K nent, the neceflity unavoidable. He saw both,

. and abandoning himself to his fate, complied with

1519. their request.

Montezuma HIs officers were called. He communicated to
carried to
the Spanii them his rcfolution. Though astonished and as-
quartes. fli&ted, they presumed not to question the will of

their mafler, but carried him in silent pomp, all
bathed in tears, to the Spanish quarters. When it
was known that the firangers were conveying away
the emperor, the people broke out into the wildest
transports of grief and rage, threatening the Spani-
ards with immediate defiruction, as the punishment
justly due to their impious audacity. But as fdon
as Montezuma appeared with a seeming gaiety of
countenance, and waved his hand, the tumult was
hushed ; and upon his declaring it to be of his own
choice that he went to reside for some time among
his new friends, the multitude taught to revere e-
very intimation of their sovereign's pleasure, quietly
dispersed .

Ti-us was a powerful prince seized by a few

firangers, in the midst of his capital, at noon-
day, and carried off as a prisoner without oppo-
fition or bloodshcd. History contains nothing pa-
rallel to this event, either with refpecd to the teme-
rity of the attempt, or the fiiccefs of the execution;
and were not all the circlinftances of this extra-
ordinary tranfalcioln authcnticated by the molt uni-
qcuefiontable evidence, they would appear so wild
and extravla';;llit, as to go far beyond the bounds of
that vcr i(irnilitudel which muil be preflrvcd even in
fictitious narr-tionls.

MONTEZUMA

' B, Do . . 9 ·. Gomnara Crnnt. c. 91. Coites Relat. Ram.
it. p. 235, i eit Icra, dcu, 2. "'h. viii' C. 2, 3.

MONTEZUMA was received in theSpanilh quar- B O O K

V.

ters with all the ceremonious refped which Cortes ,
had promised. He was attended by his own domestics, 151q.
and served with his usual frate. His principal offi- Rec''ied

with appa-

cers had free access to him, and he carried on all the rent refpe&.
functions of government as if he had been at persecd
liberty. The Spaniards, however, watched him with
all the scrupulous vigilance natural in guarding such
an important prize *, endeavouring at the fame time,
to sooth and reconcile him to his situation, by every
external demonstration of regard and attachment.
But from captive princes the hour of humiliation
and fufferiQg is never far diflant. (Qialpopoca, Subjefted

to cruel ia-

his son, and five of the principal oificeis v:hiu dignities.
served under him, were brought prisoners Lo the Dec. 4.
capital, in consequence of the orders which Mon-
tezuinia had if!!edl. The emperor gave thlr -i to
Cortes, that he miah 'ii liiui~: i:-~o the nature of
their crime, and determine ti)..ir puniihmcnt. They
were formally tried by a Spanish court-martial; and
though they had accd no other part than what be-
came loyal subjects and brave men, in beying
the orders of their lawful sovereign, and in oppo-
sing the invaders of their country, they were con-
demned to be burnt alive. The execution of such
atrocious deeds is seldom long suspended. The
unhappy victims were infl'antly led forth. The
pile on which they were laid, was composed of the
weapons colleded in the royal magazine for the
public defence. An innumerable multitude of
Mexicans beheld, in silent aftoniflmmnt, the dou-
ble infuilt oftehred to the majelty of their empire,
an officer of diftinliion committed to the flames
by the authority of Ilrangers, for having done
what he owed in (duty to his n:tural fove-
rcign ; and the armis provided by the forcfighlt of

their
* Sec NOTE'E XIV.

B OO K their anceflors for avenging such wrongs, con-

V.' fumed before their eyes.

BUT these were not the most flocking indig-

nities which they had to bear. Cortes, convinced
that Qualpopoca would not have ventured to attack
Efcalante without orders from his master, was not
satisfied with inflicting vengeance on the inftru-
ment employed in committing that crime, while
the author of it escaped with impunity. Just be-
fore Qualpopoca was led out to susser, Cortes en-
tered the apartment of Montezuma, followed by
some of his officers, and a soldier carrying a pair of
fetters; and approaching the monarch with a stern
countenance, told him, that as the persons who
were now to undergo the puniflment which they
merited, had charged him as the cause of the out-
rage committed, it was necessary that he likewise
should make atonement for that guilt ; then turning
away abruptly, without waiting for a reply, com-
manded the soldiers to clap the fetters on his legs.'
The orders were intfantly executed. The difcon-
solate monarch, trained up with an idea that
his person was sacred and inviolable, and con-
fidering this profanation of it as the prelude of im-
mediate death, broke out into loud lamentations
and complaints. I-is attendants, fpeechlcfs with
horror, fell at his feet, bathing them with their
tears; and bearing up the fetters in their hands,
endeavoured with officious tenderness to lighten
their preflurc. Nor did their grief and dcfpon-
dency abate, until Cortes returned from the ex-e
cution with a cheerful countenance, and ordered
the fetters to be taken ofl. As M/ontczum a's fpi-
rits had funk with unmanly dcjcc9ion, they now
rose into indecent joy ; and, with an unbeco.-
ming transition, he paflcd at once fromi the an-

guiflh
62

guilh of despair to transports of gratitude and B0 OK
fondness towards his deliverers.

1519.

IN those tranfaations, as represented by the Reafonsof

Spanih historians, wefearch in vain for the qualities Co ltes's
which distinguish other parts of Cortes's condu&. condui.
To usurp a jurisdiction which could not belong to
a stranger, who aflumed no higher character than
that of an ambassador from a foreign prince, and, un-
der colour of it, to inflict a capital punishment on
men whose conduc& entitled them to efleem, appears
an aA of barbarous cruelty. To put the monarch of
a great kingdom in irons, and, after such igno-
minious treatment, suddenly to release him, seems
to be a display of power no leTs inconsiderate than
wanton. According to their representation, no
account can be given either of the one action or the
other, but that Cortes, intoxicated with success,
and prefuining on the ascendant which he had ac-
quired over the minds of the Mexicans, thought
nothing too bold for him to undertake, ortoo dan-
gerous to execute. But, in one view, these pro-
ccedings, however repugnant to juflice and hu-
inanity, may have flowed from that artful po-
licy which regulated every part of Cortes's behavi-
our. The Mexicans had conceived tle Spaniards
to be an order of beings superior to men. It was
of the utinoft consequence to cherish this illu-
sion, and to keep up the vereration it inspired.
Cortes wishcd that the sledding the blood of
a Spaniard mhould be deemed the mofl: heinous of
all crimes; and nothing appeared better calcu-
lated to cftablifh this opinion, than to condemn
tihe first Mexicans who had ventured to commit it,
to a cruel death, and to oblige their monarch him-
1lrf to flibmit to a mortifying indignity, as an cx-
piation for being accefllry to their guilt *

THE
» SeC NOTE XV.

63

B 0 0 K THE rigour with which Cortes punished the

,,, unhappy persons who first presumed to lay violent
1519. hands upon his followers, seems accordingly to

The powel have mad: all the impreflion that he desired. The
which Cor- ai;-itr of Montezuma was not only overawed, but
teSaCi2r^C. l ub)dued. During fix months that Cortes remained

in Mexico, the monarch continued in the Spanish
quarters, with an appearance of as entire fatisfaai-
on and tranquility, as if he had resided there not
from constraint, but through choice. His mi-
niffers and officers attended him as usual. He took
cognizance of all affairs; every order was ifued
in his name. The external aspet of government
appearing the fame, and all its ancient forms be-
ing scrupulously obfcrved, the people were so lit-
tle sensible of any change, that they obeyed the
mandates of their monarch with the fame submissive
reverence as ever. Such was the dread which both
Montozuma and his fubjeds had of the Spaniards,
or such the veneration in which they held them,
that no attempt was made to deliver their sovereign
from confinement ; and though Cortes, relying on
this afccndant which he had acquired over their
minds, permitted him not only to visit his tem-
ples, but to make hunting excursions beyond the
lake, a guard of a few Spaniards carried with
it such terror as to intimidate the multitude, and
secure the captive monarch. -

THus, by the fortunate temerity of Cortes

in seizing M/onitez.uma, the Spaniards at once
securcd to ihemfelves more extensive authority
in the Mcxic:nn empire than it was possible to
have acquired in a long course of time by
open force; and they excrcifed more absolute
sway in the name of another than they could
have done in their own. 'lhe arts of poliflled

nations

Correi Rilat. . 2p 36. E. 13. Diaz. c. 97, 98, 99.
64

nationsin fubjeEting such as are less improved, have B O IcK
been nearly the fame in every period. The system V
of screening a foreign usurpation, under the fanEti- 15o0.
on of authority derived from the natural rulers of a
country, thedevice of employing the magil-rates and
forms already established as instruments to introduce
a new dominion, of which we are apt to boast as
sublime refinements in policy peculiar to the present
age, were inventions of a more early period, and
had been tried with success in the Welt, long be-
fore they were pradiifed in the Eart.

CORTES availed himfelfto the utmost ofth" pow- use which

er which he possessed by this means. He sent rome he makes
Spaniards, whom he judged best qualified for such Of it
commissions, into different parts of the empire, ac-
companied by persons of diftinEion, whom Monte-
zuma appointed to attend them both as guides and
protectors. They visited most of the provinces,
viewed their foil and productions, surveyed with
particular care the diftrits which yielded gold or fil-
ver, pitched upon several places as proper stations
for future colonies, and endeavoured to prepare the
minds of the people for submitting to the Spanish
yoke. While they were thus employed, Cortes, in
the name and by the authority of Montezuma, de-
graded some of the principal officers in the empire,
whose abilities or independent fpiritcxcited his jea-
lousy, and fubilituted in their place p)crlins less
capable or more obsequious.

ONE thing still was wanting to complete his fe-

curity. He wishcd to have such command of the
lake as might ensure a retreat, if, either from levity
or difgutt, the Mexicans ihould take arms againfl
him, and break down the .bridges or cauflways.
'I'his, too, his own address, and the facility of \Mon-

Vo-,. 1I. K tezuma,

65

B O O K tezuma, enabled him to accomplish. Having fre-

V.

quently entertained his prisoner with pompous ac-
152C. counts of the European marine and art of navigation,

he awakened his curiosity to fee those moving pala-
ces that made their way through the water without
oars. Under pretext of gratifying this desire, Cor-
tes persuaded him to appoint some of his fubjeC6s to
fetch part of the naval stores deposited at Vera Cruz
to Mexico, and to employ others in cutting down
and preparing timber. With their afliftance, the
Spanish carpenters soon completed two brigantines,
which afforded a frivolous anufement to the mo-
narch, and were confidered by Cortes as a certain
resource, if he fllould be obliged to retire.

Montezui.a ENCOURAGED by so many inptances of the mo-
acknowlcd-
gel himself narch's tame fiubmiflion to his will, Cortes ventu-
a va.ralof red to put it to a proof till more trying. He urged

Montezuma to acknowledge himself a vaflal of the
king of Castile, to hold his crown of him as fupe-
rior, and to fitbjec his dominions to the payment
of an annual tribute. With this requisition, the last
and nmot humbling that can be made to one polFefl-
ed of sovereign authority, Montezuma was so obfe-
quious as to comply. He called together the chief
men of his empire, and in a folcmn harangue, re-
minded them of the traditions and prophecies which
led them to expect the arrival of a people sprung
from the fnime flock with themselves, in order to
take pofl' -ion of thi( fuprlc;e power, he declared his
belief that the Spaniards were this proinifcd race;
that therefore he recognized the right of their mo-
narch to govern the Mexican empire, would lay his
crow n at his feet, and obey him as a tributary. While
ultterring th:-l words, \Montczuma difcovcrcd how
deceply he v/as assetcd in making such a sacrifice.
'rears and groans flrequently interrupted his dil-
course. ('vcrawed and broken as his spirit was, it

still
66

flill retained such a sense of dignity, as to feel that B O0O K
pang which pierces the heart of princes when con- c V.
tfrained to resign independent power. The firt 152ao
mention of such a resolution struck the assembly
dumb with astonishment. This was followed by a
fullen murmur of sorrow mingled with indignation,
which indicated some violent eruption of rage to be
near at hand. This Cortes foresaw, and feafona-
blv interposed to prevent it, by declaring that his
master had no intention to deprive Montezuma of
the royal dignity, or to make any innovation upon
the constitution and laws of the M/exican empire.
This assurance, added to their dread of the Spanish
power, and to the authority of their monarch's ex-
ample, extorted a reluctant content from the assem-
bly *. The aA of fubmifion and homage was exe-
cuted with all the formalities which the Spaniards
were pleased to prescribe t.

MONTEZUMA, at the'defire of Cortcs, accompa- The amount
nied this profeflion of fealty and .homrage with a "ft'hctrea-

furc collec-

magnificent present to his new sovereign ; and, ted bh the
after his example, his fubjcAs brought in very li- Sp:nird3.
beral contributions. The Spaniards now collecded
all the treasure which had been either voluntarily
bestowed upon them at different times by MontezIi-
ma, or had been extorted fi-om his people under va-
rious pretexts; and having mclted the gold and
silver, the value of these, without including jewels
and ornaments of various kinds, which were prc-
fcrvcd on account of their curious v'orknianlllip,
amounting to fix hlnmi(ed tho.liand PlIsos. Iihe Diviiion of
Ioldicrs were impatient to have it divided, and Col- ir,: ;,* t Le
tes complied with their delire. A fifLh of the whole i ocas,..
was fils- Ilt apart as the t;x (hir to th kingii. Ano- ci
thor fifth was allotted to CortC', as co:inmiandcr in

I. 2 ch/i,:f

' Sec N(TE X' VI. - C

siollinir, CA.0jl,c. 9j--- ' k.
d) I ~· lit. .

1 .
).4% , g

0 o K chief. The fums advanced by Velasquez, by Cor.

,_. . tes, and by bolne of the officers, towards defraying
150,. the expence of fitting out the armament, were then

deducted. The remainder was divided among the
army, including the garrison of Vera Cruz, in pro-
portion to their different ranks. After so many de-
falcations, the share of a private man did not exceed
a hundred pesos. This ium fell so far below their
sanguine expeadtions, that some soldiers rejeced it
with scorn, and others murmured so loudly at this
cruel difappointmcnt of their hopes, that it required
ail the address of Cortes, and no fiall exertion of
his liberality, to appcafe them. The complaints of
the army were not altogether deflitute of foundati-
on. As the crown had contributed nothing towards
the equipment or success of the armament, it was
not without rtgret that the soldiers beheld it sweep
away to great a proportion of the treasure purch:fcd
by their blood and toil. What fell to the fiare of
their general appeared, according to the ideas of
wealth in the sixteenth century, an enormous fum.
Some of Corris's favourites had lecretly appro-
priat, d to their own ul'e fvceral ornaments of gold,
which neith r paid the royal fifth, nor were brought
into account as part of the common flock. It was,
however, so manitcftly the intcrcfi of Cortes at this
period to make a large remittance to the king, that
it is highly probable thufl concealhecnts were not
of great co(lrcq(lucnILe.

THEi total finm am.iaed by the Spaniards bears no

h1;) g i.'l pro(portion; to te ideas which mig ht be foi rmed, ei-
\i.n '(L.!J tholr by -reflectilng onl thle dci.'ciptions given by his-

l'l i oLr'iails of the fancient fiplcndotur of Mexxico, or by
t(,i-. Coinlidcrin! the produ¢ljtions of its mines in modern

tin[es. ittt, anliog the ancient Mexicans, gold
;aiil iil\cr wi.'i not the alll-dards by which the
\.,itl; ol )f oilit commonditics was cflimatcd ; atd

dcl-itlutc

deffitute of the artificial value derived from this cir- B 0 0 K
cumfl-ance, were no farther in request than as they V.
furnifled materials for ornaments and trinkets. 1$ao.
These were either consecrated to the gods in their
temples, or were worn as marks of distinction by
their princes and tome of their most eminent chiefs.
As the consumption of the precious metals was in-
considerable, the demand for them was not such as
to put either the ingenuity or industry of the Mexi-
cans on the ftrctch, in order to augment their store.
They were altogether unacquainted with the art of
working the rich mines with which their country
abounded. What gold they had was gathered in
the beds of rivers, native, and ripened into a pure
metallic state *. The utmoff elFort of their labour
in search of it was to wafl the earth carried down
by torrents from the mountains, and to pick out the
grains of gold which subsided ; and even this simple
operation, according to the report of the persons
whom Cortes appointed to survey the provinces
where there was a profpea of finding mines, they
performed very unfkilfully t. -From all those
causes, the whole mass of gold in pofieffion of the
AMexicans was not great. As silver is rarely found
pure, and their art was too rude to conduct the pro-
c fs for refining it in a proper manner, the quantity
of this metal was still leci considerable 1:. Thus,
though the Spaniards had exerted all the power
which they pofln;lcd in Mexico, and often with in
decent rapacity, in order to gratify their predomi-
int passion, and though Montezuma had fondly
cxhaufltd his frores, in hopes of fittiting their thirst
for gold, the produ t of both, which probably in-
cludcd a great part of the bullion in the empire,
dlid not rifl in va:luc above what has been mention-
cd §.

BuT

* C(' lti. !tel.it. p } . . B. D01I .z C.

1 07, o10 . (Cminl.a Cron c.

cid '1, . Ii.a . 1. . .[

l'lIIcI. ilC. '.

1i,. :,.;.., §

Sv -"
NI 'll X '11,

69

B O 0 K BUT however pliant Montezuma might be in

V. a__ other matters, with refpec1 to one point he was in-
1520. flexible. Though Cortes often urged him, with

Montezuma the importunate zeal of a mifionary, to renounce
Inflexible
with refpea his false gods, and to embrace the Christian faith,
to religion. he always rejeted the proposition with horror.

'Superstition, among the Mexicans, was formed into
such a regular and complete system, that its inftitu-
tions naturally took fast hold of themind; and while
the rude tribes in other parts of America were eafi-
ly induced to relinquish a few notions and rites, so
loose and arbitrary as hardly to merit the name of a
public religion, the Mexicans adhered tenaciously
to their mode of worfilip, which, however barba-
rous, was accompanied with fitch order and folem-
nity as to render it the object of veneration. Cor-
tes, finding all his attempts ineffetual to shake the
contfancy of Montczuma, was so much enraged at
his obitinacy, that in a transport of zeal he led out
his soldiers to throw down the idols in the great
temple by force. But the prieils taking arms in
defence of their altars, and the people crowding with
great ardour to support them, Cortes's prudence
overruled his zeal, and induced him to desist from
his rafl attempt, after dislodging the idols from one
of the shrines, and placing in their flead an image
of the Virgin Mary M.

Schemes of FROM that moment the Mexicans, who had per-
tlie Mexi- mitted the impribfnmint of their fovc,'eign, and sus-
ctrsto d)i sered the exactions of firangers without a firugglc,
siroy the
Spani.irdi. began to meditate how they might expel or defiroy

the Spaniards, and thought themlilves called upon
to avenge their insultcd deitics. The pricfls and
leading mnin held freqlUnt conlfultations with Mon-
tczuma for this purpofi'. Blut as it might prove fa-

tal

I See NOTE XVIII,
70

tal to the captive monarch to attempt either the one B o 0 K
or the other by violence, he was willing to try more V
gentle means. Having called Cortes into his pre- x150.
fence, he observed that now, as all the purposes of
his embafy were fully'accomplithed, the gods had
declared their will, and the people signified their de-
fire that he and his followers should infiantly de-
part out of the empire. With this he required them
to comply, or unavoidable deftrucion would fall
suddenly oli their heads. The tenor of this unex-
peted requisition, as well as the determined tone in
which it wag uttered, left Cortes no room to doubt
that it was the result of some deep scheme concert-
ed between Montezuma and his subje&s. He
quickly perceived that he might derive more advan-
tage from a seeming compliance with the monarch's
inclination, than from an ill-timed attempt to
change or to oppose it, and replied, with great corn-
pofure, that he had already begun to prepare for
returning to his own country ; but as he had de-
stroyed the veflels in which he arrived, some time
was requisite for building other 1hips. This ap-
peared reasonable. A number of Mexicans were
sent to Vera Cruz to cut down timber, and some
Spanish carpenters were appointed to superintend
the work. Cortes flattered himself that during
this interval, he might either find means to avert the
threatened danger, or receive such reinforcements
as would enable him to derpifc it.

ALMOS'r ninel months were clapsed since Porto- Anxietyannd

carrcro and Moitcjo had failed with his difpatchcs ("ligO of
to Spain ; and he daily cxpetced their return with
a confirmation of his authority fiom the king.
Without this, his condition was ilnfcure and pre-
calrios, and after all the great thilgs which he had
dlor', it might be his doom to bear the naine and
fiHcr the puniihment of a traitor. Rapid and ex-

tcnfivc

71

B O O K tensive as his progress had been, he could not hope

V.

v to complete the redu5tion of a great empire with
1520. so finall a body of men, which by this time the dif-

cafes of the climate had considerably thinned ; nor
could he apply for recruits to the Spanish fettle-
mcnts in the illands until he received the royal ap-
probation of his proceedings.

The arrival WHILE he remained in this cruel situation, an-
of anear- xious about what was past, uncertain with refped
nmment. to the future, and, by the late declaration of Mon-

tezuma, opprefied with a new addition of cares, a
Mexican courier arrived with an account of tome
ships having appeared on the coast. Cortes, with
fond credulity, imagining that his messengers were
returned from Spain, and that the completion of all
his wiihes and hopes was at hand, imparted the glad
tidings to his companions, who received them with
transports of mutual gratulation. Their joy was
not of long continuance. A courier from Sando-
val, whom Cortes had appointed to succeed Efca-
lante. in command at Vera Cruz, brought certain
information that the armament was fitted out by

Fitted out Velasquez, governor of Cuba, and, instead of bring-
by Velaf- ing the aid which they expeeted, threatened them

with immediate dcfIruc-ion.

Ti-E motives which prompted Vclafqucz to this

violent measure are obvious. From the circum-
stances of Cortes's departure, it was impoflible not
to fufpecl his intention of throwing o-F all depcn-
dcnce upon him. His ncglecting to tranlinit any
account of his operations to Cuba, frrengthencd
this suspicion, which was at las confirmed, beyond
doubt, by the indiscretion of the ofliceis whom Cor-
tes sent to Spain. They, from some motive, which
is not clearly explained by the c(?ntemporary

historians,

historians, touched at the island of Cuba, contrary B o0 K
to the peremptory orders of their general ". By
this means Velasquez not only learned that Cortes 1520.
and his followers, after formally renouncing all
connection with him,; had efaablilned an indepen-
d:nt colony in New Spain, and were soliciting the
k;,i to confirm their proceedings by his authority;
btit cobtained particular information concerning:
the opulence of the ccuntry, the valuable present}
which Cortes had received, and the inviting pro-
fpc.'(s of success that opened to his view. Everv
pallion which can agitate an ambitious mind;
shame, at having been so grossly ove--reached;
indignation, ar being betrayed by the man whom
he had relecte;i as the objec- of his favotr and con-
fidence ; grief, for having wafled his fortune to ag-
grandize an enemy; and icifpair of recovering so
fir an opportunity of eftabliihing his fame and ex-
tcnding his power, now raged in the bosom of Ve-
lafquez. All there, with united force, excited him
to make an extraordinary effort in order to be
avcngcd on the author of his wrongs, and to wrefl
frolm him hi:; ufuirped authority and conqiuefts
Nor did he want the appearance of a good title to
jfllity such all attelnpt. The agent whoml he sent
to Spain with an account of Grijalva's voyage, had
met with a rnoft favourable reception ; and froni
tlia fpecimcns which he produced, such high expec-
tations were formed concerniing the opulence of
New Spain, that Velafiluez was authorified to pro-
cclute the discovery of the country, andlappointcd
governor of it during! life, wilth Ilmore extCenfive
li)wer andl privileecs than lhad bell granted to any
atdventurer from the tiime of Columbl u '. Elated

tlv olis difl:irguifhing mark of favour, :ldi( warrant-
td tcon ider Cor'es riot only as i iJi in; lupon his

VOL. II. 1 juridiitionl

n. D.i.:z. . 54, 5' H n-l'cra, ddic. , lib. v c. 1. Comnara.
^tlI,, . i t. (l t. lIt rr-er;l, ic. . lib, iii. c. ii

B O0 K jurifdiaion, but as disobedient to the royal man-

^__ date, he determind to vindicate his own rights and
I zo. the honour of his sovereign by force of arms *. His

Unlertlie arldour in carrying on his preparations was such as
Narvaez. might have been expe'Led fiom the violence of the

paniions witrh which he was animated ; and in a
short time.an arma'ucnnr ; aS completed, confiftingof
eighteen ihips, which had oni board fourscore
horlemen, eight hundred foot so l; >s, of which
eighty were musketeers, and a hunldred and twenty
crois-bow men, together with a train of twelve
pieces of cannon. As Velafqucz's experience of
the fatal consequence of committing to another
what heought to have executed himfnelf, had not
rendered him mnore ente-rprifiig, he vested the com-
mand of this formidable body, which, in the infan-
cy of the Spaiifih power in America, merits the ap-
pellation of an army, in Pamphilo de Narvaez,
with inrrudions to seize Cortes and his principal
oflicers, to fend them prisoners to him, and then to
co:iple-te the ditfovery and conquest of the country
in his name.

Thc pro- AFTER a prosperous voyage, Narvaez landed his
cNJin. of mien without oppofitioi near St. Juan de Ullua.

Airl. Three foidi-es, whom Cortes had sent to search for

minCes in that dliflri't, inmmediately joined him. By
this accident, he not only received information
conccrn iii' the piogrcfs and situation of Cortes, but
as tlhefe soldiers had made some progrcfs in the
kiiowvlcdgeoof the Mexican language, he acquired
interpreters, by whose means he was enabled to
holld iine intercourll. with the people of the coun-
try. But, according to the low cunning of defertcrs,
they framed their intelligence with more attention
to what they thought would be agreeable, than to
Wvh;it they knew to be true ; and rcprfeulnted the

fituatiln

' ,.c ,-NOT'. XIX.
74

situation of Cortes to be so desperate, and the difaf- B 0 0 K
fedion of his followers to be so general, as increaf- V
ed the natural presumption and confidence of Nar- 15o.
vaez. His first operation, however, might have
taught him not to rely on their partial accounts.
Having sent to summon the governor of Vera
Cruz to surrender, Guevara, a priest whom he em-
ployed in that service, made the requisition with
such insolence, that Sandoval, an officer of high
spirit, and zealously attached to Cortes, instead of
complying with his demands, seized him and his
attendants, and font them in chains to Mexico.

CCORTES received them not like enemies, but as Cortes deep-

friends, and condemning the severity of Sandoval, 1y alarmed.
set them immediately at liberty. By this well-
timed clemency, seconded by caresses and presents;
he gained their confidence, and drew from them
such particulars concerning the force and intenti-
ons of Narvaez, as gave him a view of the impend-
ing danger in its full extent. He had not to con-
tend now with half-naked Indians, no match 'for
him in war, and still more inferior in the arts of
policy, but to take the field against an army in
courage and martial discipline equal to his own, in
number far superior, ading under the faincion of
royal authority, and commanded by an officer of
known bravery. He was informed that Narvacz,
more solicitous to gratify the resentment of Velaf-
quez, than attentive to the honour or interest of his
country, had begun his intercourse with the natives,
bv rcpreielnting him and his followers as figitives
andl outlaws, guilty of rebellion against their own
livecreign, and of injuflice in invading the Mexican
cnlpirc, and had declared to them that his sole ob-
j(ct in visiting the country was to pL.nifh the Spa-
ialrds, and to'refcue them fiom oppression. lHe
fou., prccived that the fame unfavourable rcpre-

L 2a flctations

75

E 0 0 K Cfentations had been conveyed to Montezuma, and
-_ a. that Narvaez had found means to afiure hil, that
1520. as the conduc of thofc who kept him under re-

ftraint was highly displeasing to the king his maf-
ter, he had it in charge not only to rescue an injur-
ed monarch from confinemcnt, but to reinstate hin
ill the poiTefion of his ancient power and indepen-
dence. Animated with this profpcr& of bt-ing fct
free from fubjc&Cion to lirangers, the proviincs be-
gan openly to revolt from Cortes, and to regard
Narvacz as a deliverer no less able than willing to
lave them. Monteczuma himself kept up a fcret
intercourse with the new comnmander, anJ fIemed
to court him as a pcrfon superior in power and 'dig-
nity to those Spaniards whom he had hitherto rever-
ed as the firfr of men -.

His deiibe- SUC- were the various aspects of danger and dif-
cr""''Ws Cl- ficulty which prefcntcd themfelvcs to the view of
,..; c,,n- Cortcs. No fituaticn can be conceived more try-
duC.. ilng to the capacity and firinricfs of a general, or

where the choice of tho pl, which ought to be
adopted was more difficult. If he should wait the
approach of Nalrvaz in Mexico, deltruCtion iclnrd
to b, iinavoi:li-ic'; for \V'iic the Spaniar(ds prcfied
himl f inrom itho!i!, the inhabitints, who}e tur bulent
spirit he could hardly ir lraiii with all his authori-
ty adl :t.,i"-tdiosl, vInl ( ;i a,'riy lny hold on futch a
lfax'oil:';il', ic O) !

, I',!i !ti1 o avc nging all their

"':Iorlgs. If he siouldil don th captal, f the
captivw- l(nI11.'t'rl at1 lilbcrl.y ailil nllich out to meet
the enm('ill ; 1

hel .

1 l (>i c1 : for' o thll frulits of all

hin. to;ils and 'i \iS.l," and r:l,( ii

qs ilui advantages

which

j could Inor ble r(ove:red withouit extraordinary
ct'li-i s, aid intfi ite dan ',r. If, instead o( ci-ploy-

-s' ilste.t (i i1`ll-!plOY-
'!, i'or i'c he should h. l\'c Ie uri e to conciliatirlng

ncafuircs,
1 !: : . 1\,(I'] -. XV

measures, and attempt an accommodation with B OOK
Narvaez ; the natural haughtiness of that officer, V.
augmented by consciousness of his present fuprrio- 1520.
rity, sorbad him to cherish any sanguine hope of
success. After revolving every scheme with deep
attention, Cortes fixed upon that which, in execu-
tion was most hazardous, but, if successful, would
prove most beneficial to his country ; and with the
decisive intrepidity, suited to desperate situations,
determined to make one bold effort for vidtory un-
der every disadvantage, rather than sacrifice his own
conquests and the Spanish interest in Mexico.

BUT though he foresaw that the conteff must be His ncg.-ic

terminated finally by arm;, it would have, been not the:, -' .
only indecent, but criminal, to have marched a- ers o'Nar-
gainfc his countrymen, without attcmpting to ad- ve
jumt matters by an amic.abic negociation. In this
fcrvice he employed Olmedo, his chaplain, to whose
cha:a;ter the funcion was well suited, and who
poJlii': , befidcs, such prudencc and address as
qii:ic(ld him to carry on the fecrct intrigues in
which Cortes placbd his chief confidence. Nar-
vacz ;rjec'ted, with scorn, every fchemne of accom-
moodation that O!emdo proposcd, and was with dif-
ficultv reflrained from laying violent hands on hin
and his attendants. He met, however, with a more
favourable reception among his followers, to many
of whom he delivered letters, cither from Cortes or
his officers, their ancient friends and companions.
Cortes artfully accompanied thele with prcfents of
riln., chains of gold, and other trinkets of value,
which inspircd those needy adventurers with high
ideas of the wealth that he had acquired, and with
:nvy of their good fortune who were engaged in his
firvicc. Soine, froml hopes of becoming fllarcrs in
those rich f-,til,', l'c larlc folr a immediate accom-

lmodationi

77

B o o K modation with Cortes. Others, from public fpi-

- rit, laboured to prevent a civil war, which, what-
s520. ever party flhould prevail, muff shake, and perhaps

subvert the Spanish power, in a country where it
was so imperfectly established. Narvaez disregard-
ed both, and by a public proclamation denounced
Cortes and his adherents rebels and enemies to their
country. Cortes, it is probable, was not much fur-
prifed at the untradable arrogance of Narvaez;
and, after having given fitch a proof of his own pa-
cific disposition as might justify his recourse to
other means, he determined to advance towards an
enemy whom he had laboured in vain to appease.

Marches a- F E left a hundred and fifty men in the capital,
gMaiy. under the command of Pedro de Alvarado, an officer

of di!finguii't! courage, for whom the Mexicans
had conceived a singular degree of refpeat. To the
custody of this slender garrison he committed a
great city, with all the wealth he had amassed, and,
what was still of greater importance, the person of
the imprisoned monarch. His utmost art was em-
ployed in concealing fiom Mlbntezuma the real
cause of his march. He laboured to persuade him,
that the strangers who had lately arrived were his
friends and fellow-fubjccs ; and that, after a short
interview with them, they would depart together,
and return to their own country. The captive
prince, unable to comprehend the designs of the
Spaniards, or to reconcile what he now heard with
the declarations of Narvacez, and afraid to discover
any symptom of tUflicion or distrust of Cortes,
promlifed to rerain quietly in the Spaniih quarters,
and to cultivate the fame firiendflip with Alvarado
which he had uniformly maintained with him.
Cortes, with tfeming confidence in this promise,
but relying principally upon the injunEtions which
he had given Alvarado to guard his prisoner with

the

the moss scrupulous vigilance, set out from g O K
Mexico.

1520.

His strength, even after it was reinforced by the Number of

junaion of Sandoval and the garrison of Vera histroops.
Cruz, did not exceed two hundred and fifty men.
As he hoped for success chiefly from the rapidity of
his motions, his troops were not encumbered either
with baggage or artillery. B ut as he dreaded ex-
tremely the impreflion which the enemy might
make with their cavalry, he had provided against
this danger with the foresight and sagacity which
diftinguifl a great commander. Having observed
that the Indians in the province of Chinantla used
spears of extraordinary length and force, he armed
his obldiers with these, and accustomed them to that
dccp and conmpac arrangement which the use of this
formlidable weapon, the beif peThaps that ever was
invented for defence, enabled them to assume.

WITH this small but firm battalion, Cortes ad- Con'lues

vanced towards Zempoalla, of which Narvaez had to itgoci.lte
taken ipofleiion. During his march, he made re- as lie advi-
l,; aired attempts towards o!ne accommodation with
hl, opponent. But Narvaez requiring that Cortes
and his followers should instantly Irccognize his
title to be governor of New Spain, in virtue of the
powers which he derived from Velasquez, and
Cortes refuting to fubinit to any authority which
was not founded on a commilfion from the emperor
himtflSf, under wholi: immediate protection he and
lhis adherents had placed their infant colony, all
thelfe attempts proved fruitless. The intercourfc,
lowecvcr, which this occasioned between the two
p;arties, proved of no finall advantage to Cortes, as
it atflorded him an opportunity of gaining sone of
Na;rvacz's oficcrs by liberal prfcents, of lffteninr
others by a semblance of moderation, and of

dazzling

79

0 o K dazzling all by the appearance of wealth among his
_. troops, maof of his soldiers having converted their
15jz. share of the Mexican gold into chains, bracelets,

and other ornaments, which they displayed with
military ostentation. Narvaez and a little junto of
his creatures excepted, all the army leaned towards
an accommodation with their countrymen. This
discovery of their inclination irritated his violent
temper almoff to madness. In a transport of rage,
he set a price upon the head of Cortes, and of his
principal officers; and having learned that he was
now advanced within a league of Zempoalla with
his fmal! body of men, he confidered this as an in-
fult which merited immediate chafiifement, and
marched out with all his troops to offer him battle.

Atr.eks BUT Cortes was a leader of greater abilities and
N2:-v.ez i experience than to fight an enemy so far superior in

the nt number, and so much better appointed, on equal

ground. Having taken hi; fiation on the opposite
bank of the river de Canoes, where he knew that he
could not be attacked, he beheld the approach of the
enemy without concern, and difircgrded this vain
bravade. It was then the beginning of the wet sea-
son *, and the rain had poured down, during a great
part or the day, with the violence peculiar to the
torrid zone. The followers of Narvaez, unaccuf-
tomed to the hardships of military service, mur-
nured so much at being thus fr-uitlessly exposed,
that, from their unfoldier-like imnpatience, as well
as his own contempt of his advcrfary, their general
permitted them to retire to Zcmpoalla. 'The
very circimfanie which iiiltccd them to quit
the field, encouraged Cortes to form a fchclic,
by which he hoped a;t once to termllinlate the
war. -lc obfcrveI, that his hardy vetc-

ian1s,

o haclduyt, vol. iii. 467. Dc T act D::clc. 1i1(d. Oie.d. zzx.
So

rans, though standing under the torrents, which B 0° K
continued to fall, without a single tent or any V.
lhelter whatsoever to cover them, were so far 1520.
from repining at hardships that were become fa-
miliar to them, that they were f-ill frefl and alert
for service. He foresaw that the enemy would na-
turally give themselves up to repose after their
fatigue, and that, judging of the conduct of o-
thers by their own effeminacy, they would deem
themselves perfectly secure at a season so unfit for
action. He resolved, therefore, to fall upon them
in the dead .of night, when the surprise and terror
of this unexpected attack might more than compen-
fate the inferiority of his numbers. His soldiers,
sensible that no resource remained but in some def-
perate effort of courage, approved of the measure
with such warmth, that Cortes, in a military ora-
tion which he addressed to them before they be--
gan their march, was more solicitous to temper than
to inflame their ardour. He divided them into three
parties. At the head of the firfl he placed Sando-
val; entrusting this gallant officer with the moif
dangerous and important service, that of feiziiig
the enemy's artillery, which was planted before
the principal tower of the temple, where Nar-
vaez had fixed his head-quarters. Chrifo.val
de Olid commanded the second, with orders to
afilult the tower, and lay hold on the general.
Cortes himself conduLced the third and fivalleft di-
vision, which was to act as a body of refcrve, and
to filpport the other two as there should be occali-
on. Having )aflecl the river de Canoas,.which was
mllch swellcd with the rains, not without dif-
ficulty, the water reaching :imofl- to their chins,
tlhey advanced in profounld filcnce, without beat
of drum, or found of a;ny warlike inltlllrment;
each 1mn;1 armed withi h is dword, Iis Ldgger,
and his Chinantlin fp.icl. NuTarva/., reminfs in
VOL. II. Ml proportion

B 0 Ol K proportion to his security, had posted only two

V.

centinels to watch the motions of an enemy
-. wrhoin he had fuich good cause to dread. One of
thefi was seized by the advanced guard of Cortes's
troops, the other made his escape, and hurrying to the
town with all the precipitation of fear and zeal, gave
such timely notice of the enemy's approach, that
there was full leisure to have prepared for their re-
ccption. But, through the arrogance and infatua-
tion of Narvacz, this important interval was loft.
He imputed this alarm to the cowardice of the cen-
tinel, and treated with derision the idea of being at-
t:'ckld bhy forces so unequal to his own. The shouts
of Cortes's soldiers, rushing on to the assault, con-
\ inced him at InfO, that the danger which he dcfpi-
fed was real. The rapidity with which they advan-
ced wa', fitch, that only one cannon could be fired,
i (ufCre S:;ndoval's party closed with the enemy,
drove them from theirguns, and began to force their
wav up the fieps of the tower. Narvacz, no less
br.v-e in ation than presumptuous ih conduct, arm-
ed ; -:' f !in h:.it, and by his voice and example
;aninm',id his men to the combat. Olid advanced
to ft! iflin his comnpanions ; and Cortes himself, ruih-
ip! to the front, conduLOcd and added new vigour
to the attack. 'he compact order in which this
i'm.ill boldy lpre- on, and the impenetrable fiont
nn :' roi hi thlcy.presnted with the ir long spears, bore

r dow all opplofit lion before it. They had now reach-

ed thl-e te, anld wcere Ilr-ln linlg to hurnt it open,
when a Ildticr hl;vinv i set fire to the reds with which
the t' w'r wtas covered I, comnpelled Narvaez to sally
ou . inl tle first ie(collulter he was wounded in the
eve with Ia sp'ar, and fallinl' to the ground, was
ildr:: ?*' de down' the llcps, andi in a moment clapt in set-
ti r:. '!il cry of vitlory -rfouindld.d among the troops
ol .'ortcts. '1'hose who had ftllied out with their
11 :(lu, r nIV mal;lit:till d( tlh( confict feebly, or began
to sl'ri cr(ndtr. A .iiw]l lie reimai.idcrl of his soldiers,

flattioned

fiationed in two fialler towers of the temple, ter- 8 0 0 K
ror and confusion prevailed. The darkness was
so great, that they could not distinguish between their so.
friends and foes. Their own artillery was pointed
againfi them. Wherever they turned their eyes,
they beheld lights gleaming through the obs-curity
of night, which, though proceeding only from a va-
riety of shining infecCs, that abound in moist and
filti-ryclimatcs, their affrighted imaginations repre-
se-nted as numerous bands of musketeers advancing
with kindled matches to the attack. After a flort
resistance, the soldiers compelled their officers to
capitulate, and before morning all laid down their
arms, and submitted quietly to their conquerors.

TriIs complete victory proved more acceptable, Tile effas

as it was gained almost without bloodshed, only thi vic-
twAo soldiers being killed on the fide of.Cortcs, and
two officers, with fifteen private men, of the ad-
verse faftion. Cortes treated the vanquiShed not
like enemies, but as countrymen and friends, and
offlred either to fend them back directly to Cuba,
or to take them intohis service, as partners in his for-
ltune, on equal terns with own his soldiers. This lat-
ter proposition, fcconded by a seasonable distribution
of sonic jpreents from Cortes, and liberal promiles of
nmore, opened prolpccs so agreeable to the romantic
expect;ations which had induced them to cngage in
this ftirvice, that all, a few partizans of Narvae zcx-
c(cted, clofld with it, and vied with each other in
profellions of fidelity and attachment to a general
wholc recelt fuLcc s lhd given thim c ftilclll iikin
Iproof ef'his abilities for commanid. I'hus, by a felies
of events no Ids fortullate thain iilcollmmol, Cortes
not onlly cfiaped fromn perdtlition which tremred incvis;a-
blc, but, when he had leafc r;eaib to expet it,was plaI-
ced at the head of a thou(fiald Spanliards, ready to
follow wherever he flould lead them. Wlhoevcr re--

" A 2 {hlcl

'83

B O
n K proportion to his security, had posted only two

V.

centincls to watch the motions of an enemy
,; 5z'whom he had such good cause to dread. One of

thic e was seized by the advanced guard of Cortes's
troops, the other made his escape, and hurrying to the
town with all the precipitation of fear and zeal, gave
such timely notice of the enemy's approach, that
there was full leisure to have prepared for their re-
ception. But, through the arrogance and infatua-
tion of Narvacz, this important interval was loft.
He imputed this alarm to the cowardice of the cen-
tinel, and treated with derision the idea of being at-
t:'cked by forces so unequal to his own.' The shouts
of Cortes's soldiers, rushing on to the aftault, con-
\ inced him at IPft, that the danger which he dcfpi-
fed was real. The rapidity with which they advan-
ced wan f(ich, that only one cannon could be fired,
ib-f.re Sandoval's party closed with the enemy,
drove them from theirguns, and began to force their
-wa'. up the feps of the tower. Narvaez, no less
brv2c in a.iion than presumptuous ih conduct, arm-
ed hl';- f!FC inl h:lle, and by his voice and example
aini ri&tndC his men to the combat. Olid advanced
to ;t!ftiin his companions ; and Cortes himself, ruh-
inr to the front, condu&(ed and added new vigour
to the attack. The compact order in which this
f;.ill tlody picfTid on, and the impenetrable front

nl:' o.r·.- awhich thcv.preifentcd with their long spears, bore
Oinrl Ihim, ,down all opposition hefore it. They had nowreach-

ed the gate, and were firuggling to blur it open,
when a loldier ha;vi n frt fire to the reeds with which
the tow'r was covered(, conmpelJed Narvaez to sally
onl . In the li fit encounter he was wounded in the
eve with a s(par, and fillin> to the ground, was
d I:: ,j'l : down lie lleps, and in a moment clapt in set-
t r:.. '!'ne cry of vi ctf l' rcfolndcl d among the troops
ol ('ortcs. l'hofle who lhad1 flllied out with their
1, 1i: l'r iw m;ainit:ii t 'd tihel colnfli't feebly, or began
to l ul'r nidi. G\in
l en Itie reilaindcr of hils foldielrs,

fiationled
82

stationed in two finaller towers of the temple, tcr- B 0 o K
ror and confusion prevailed. The darkness was _
so great, that they could not diflinguif betwecn their 5 0o.
fi-iends and foes. Their own artillery was pointed
against them. Wherever they turned their eyes,
they beheld lights gleaming through the obscurity
of night, which, though proceeding only from a va-
riety of shining infects, that abound in moist and
fultry'climatcs, their affrighted imaginations repre-
iented as numerous bands of musketeers advancing
with kindled matches to the attack. After a fiort
refiflance, the soldiers compelled their oficers to
capitulate, and before morning all laid down their
arms, and submitted quietly to their conquerors.

THIS complete vicrory proved more acceptable, The efftRs

as it was gained almost without bloodshed, only s}is vic
two soldiers being killed on the fide of.Cortes, and
two officers, with fifteen private men, of the ad-
verse faction. Cortes treated the vanquished not
like enemies, but as countrymen and friends, and
offered either to fend them back directly to Cuba,
or to take them ilto his service, as partners in his for-
tune, on equal terns with own his loldiers. This lat-
ter proposition, seconded by a feaobnable distribution
of lome prefcnts friom Cortes, and liberal promiifs of
more, opened proifpects so agreeable to the romantic
cxpeltations which hlad induced them to engage in
this service, that all, a few partizans of Narvaez cx-
cepted, closed with it, and vied with each other in
profcflions of lidclity and attachment to a general
whofl recCCIlC Iicccfs had given them fulch a flriking
proof flhis abili ties ;for cotlmandll. Il'hus, by a series
of events no lecfs fortunate thaln tniconmllllno Cortes
not only cfctapedc fromi perlditionl which feemled ilneVitla-
ble, 1) ut, when e hIad lcal rcalbn to expect it, was pli-
ced at the hicad of a thouland Spaniards, ready to
follow wherever he 1hotild lead theml. 'Whlocver r.e-

'M z
2 f'l ,

B o o K flects upon the facility with which this victory was

V. obtained, or confiders with what sudden and unani-
5Szo. mous transition the followers of Narvaez ranged

themifelvcs under the standard of his rival, will be apt
to ascribe both events as much to the intrigues as to
the arms of Cortes, and cannot but fufped that the
ruin of Narvaez was occasioned, no less by the trea-
chcry of his own followers, than by the valour of his
enemy *.

The Mexi-
cans take BUT, in one point, the prudent conduc and good
arms againct b
tim Spani- fortune of Cortes were equally conspicuous. If, by
ards. the rapidity of his operations after he began his

march, he had not brought matters to such a speedy
ifue, even this decisive vicory would have come
too late to have saved his companions whom he left
in Mexico. A few days after the discomfiture of
Narvaez, a courier arrived with an account that the
Mexicans had taken arms, and having seized and
destroycd the two brigantines, which he had built in
orderto secure the command of the lake, had attack-
ed the Spaniards in their quarters, had killed fe-
vcral of them and wounded more, had reduced to
ashes their magazil[i of provisions, and carried on
hoflilities with fitch fury, that, though Alvarado
and his men defended thcmfelves with undaunted
refoluticn, they mulf cither be soon cut off by fa-
mince, or fink untler thl multitudcle of their encmies.
This revolt was excited by motives which rendered it
fiill more alarminr. On the departureof Cortes for
Zempoalla, the Mlxicans flattered thcmfelves that
the long cxpccitl opplorl tul ity of reflor ii theirfovc-
J Uc'ign to Iiberty, and of vidt(iccating their country
I'roi the odious dluiiiiion of firangers, was at
length arrived ; that while the forces of their op-
,prcllurs were divildcd, and the arms of one p;ar-

ty

* C'n 'I {:R, 1li 7.

It]). 1B,. l)i., c. i Io.---IzS. 1-iHe cria, d(c.
2. lib. ix. *. itl, &c. G(I,11A.1 CI-l. L 97, &c.

ty turned against the other, they might triumph B 0 0 K

V.

with greater facility over both. Consultations
were held, and schemes formed with this inten- 1520.
tion. The Spaniards in Mexico, conscious of
their own feebleness, fufpeaed and dreaded those
machinations. Alvarado, though a gallant officer,
pofeffed neither that extent of capacity, nor dig-
nityof manners, by which Cortes had acquired such
an ascendant over the minds of the Mexicans, as
never allowed them to form a just etimate of his
weakness or of their own strength. Alvarado knew
no mode of supporting his authority but force. In-
Read of employing address to disconcert the plans
or to sooth the spirits of the Mexicans, he waited
the return of one of their solemn festivals, when the
principal persons of the empire were dancing, ac-
cording to custom, in the court of the great tein-
'ple ; he seized all the avenues which led to it, and,
allured partly by the rich ornaments which they
wore in honour of their gods, and partly by the fa-
cility of cutting dsS at once the authors of that con-
fpiracy which he dreaded, he fell upon them, un-
armed and unfufpicious of any danger, and malfa-
cred a great number, none escaping but such as
made their way over the battlements of the temple.
An aftion so cruel and treacherous filled not only
tliecity, but the whole empire, with indignation and
rage. All called aloud for vengeance; and rc-
galdlefs of the safety of their monarch, whofc life
was at the mercy of the Spaniards, or of their own
danger in fliaultinl an enemy who had been so long
the objcce of their terror, they committed all those
aits of violelce of which Cortes received an ac-
count.

' o himll the danger appeared so ilmiiinenll t, as 1I' nmarchl s

to admit neither of deliberation nor delay. le capital.
l't out inflantly with ill his ftorces, and re-.
turned f:'uim icinoall i with no lclf rapidity

thani

B 0 o K than he had advanced thither. At Tlafcala he

was joined by two thousand chosen warriors. On
520z. entering the Mexican territories, he found that

diflaffedion to the Spaniards was not confined to
the capital. The principal inhabitants had deserted
the towns through which he passed ; no person of
note appearing to meet him with the usual refpet;
no provision was made for the fubfiRtcnce of his
troops; and though he was permitted to advance
without opposition, the solitude and silence which
reigned in every place, and the horror with which
the people avoided all intercourse with him, dif-
covered a deep-rooted antipathy, that excited the
tnoft just alarm. But, implacable as the enmity of
the Mexicans was, they were so unacquainted with
the science of war, that they knew not how to take
the proper nmafures, either for their own fafcty, or
the dcefruicion of the Spaniards. Uninftruaed b;
their former error in admitting a formidable enemy
into their capital, instead of breaking down the
causeways and bridgcs, by which they might have
inclosed Alvarado and his party, and have effe-u-
Junt 24. ally itopt the career of Cortes, they again suffered

him to march into the city without molestation, and
to take quiet pofllflion of his ancient flation.

THE transports of joy with which Alvarado and

imrporpor li' soldiers received his companions cannot be ex-
Cbrtc;. prCfcd l. Botll partics were lo much elated, the one

with their feal;naible deliverance, and the other
with tie hgreat exploits which they had atchieved,
that this intoxication of fucccls seems to have lo far
r' achcd l C:rtecs himll f, that Ie bechavted, on this oc-
callon neither wvith his LufuI:l sI' itj' 1nor attention.

it: not (only)' ili',c'tt( to visit Montecyzuma, but cm-
bi ttl-ercl i ins lt l ,v xl cprcfleons ful 1 of contempt for
lla. lt u1i, ;tiiatc^e lil:ccald hisi ,( phe. '1The forces of

wlIich
86

wvhich he had now the command, appeared to him B o o K
iso rrcfiftible, that he might alFume an higher
tone, and lay aside the mask of moderation, under 152o.
which he had hitherto concealed his designs. Some
Mexicans who understood the Spanihi language,
heard the contemptuous words which Cortes utter-
cd, and reporting them to their countrymen, kin-
;dlcd their rage anew. They were now convinced
tiat the intentions of the general were equally bloody
vwith those of Alvarado, and that his original
pur-pose in visiting their country, had not been, as
h. pretended, to court the alliance of their fove-
rcign, but to attempt the conque'f of his domini-
ons. They refunmed their arms with the additional

The violent

fury which this discovery inspired, attacked a con- oflityof
fiderable body of Spaniards who were marching to- the Meri-
waris the great square in which the public market can""
was held, and compelled them to retire with sone
loss. Emboldened by this success, and delighted to
find thait their oppreifors were not invincible, they
advanced next day with extraordinary martial pomp
to allault the Spaniards in their quarters. Their
ntiiibcr was formidable, and their undaunted cou-
r:.lr, l oill more so. Though the artillery pointed
iagailfl their numerous battalions, crollded together
inl narrow Prreets, swept off multitudes at every dif-
ch!:rgc; though every blow of the Spanish rwea-
'uns fell witll mortal effect upon their naked bo-
!ies, the impetuosity of the aftihlt did not abate.
fhi rl men ruffled forward to occupy the places of
the flaili, and mccting with tle limle fate, were
!icccecded by others no Ikfs intrepid and eager on
I ;::'r; nIcc. The utLmolt- eftrts of Cortcs's abili-
i', il( cx)epelrilence, feconI dd by tile difci i)liCned 'a-
],iir of his troops, were hardly ;futlicient to defend
i1 ir on'toiti;tinons, into which the enemy were mor-e
110.11 mnlcc on lieh point of L rcil l. heir way.

clJO'1S

B OO K CORTES beheld, with wonder, the implacable

V. V.
_ ferocity of a people, who seemed at first to submit
1szo. tamely to the yoke, and had continued so long pas-

Direfs of five under it. The soldiers of Narvaez, who fond-
the Spani-
ards. ly imagined that they followed Cortes to {hare in

the spoils of a conquered empire, were astonished to
find that they were' involved in a dangerous war,
with an enemy whose vigour was still unbroken, and
loudly execrated their own weakness, in giving such
easy credit to the delusive promises of their new
leader *. But surprise and complaints were of no
avail. Some immediate and extraordinary effort was
requisite to extricate themselves out of their present
situation. , As soon as the approach of evening in-
duced the Mexicans to retire, in compliance with
their national custom ofceafing from hostilities with
the setting fun, Cortes began to prepare for a Tally,
with such a considerable force, as might either drive
the enemy out of the city, or compel them to liften
to terms of accommodation.

Cortes at- HE conduced, in person, the troops destined for
tacks them this important service. Every invention known in
without
success. the European art of war, as well as every pre-

caution, suggested by his long acquaintance with
the Indian mode of fighting, were employed to
ensure success. But he found an enemy pre-
pared and determined to oppose him. The force
of the Mexicans was greatly augmented by fresh
troops, which poured in continually from the
country, and their animosity was in no degree
abated. They were led by their nobles, infla-
med by the exhortations of their priefis, and fought
in defence of their temples and families, under the
eye of their gods, and in presence of their wives

and

0A 13. DLi:A, c, I ii.
88

and children. NotwithRianding their numbers, and B °0 K
enthusiastic contempt of danger and death, wher- V..
ever the Spaniards could close with them, the fupe- 152o.
riority of their discipline and arms obliged them to
give way., But in narrow streets, and where many
of the bridges of communication were broken down,
they could seldom come to a fair rencounter; and
the Spaniards, as they advanced, were exposed to
showers of arrows and itones from the tops of the
houses. After a day of incessant exertion, though
vast numbers of the Mexicans fell, and part of the
city was burnt, the Spaniards, weary with the
slaughter, and harassed by multitudes which fuc-
ceffively relieved each other, were obliged at length
to retire, with the mortification of having accom-
plifhed nothing so decisive as to compensate the un-
usual calamity of twelve soldiers killed, and above
sixty wounded. Another sally, made with greater
force, was not more effectual, and in it the general
himself was wounded in the hand.

CORTES now perceived, too late, the fatal error Montezuma
into which he had been betrayed by his own con- atin.
tempt of the Mexicans, and was satisfied that he
could neither maintain his present fiation in the
centre of an hoitile city, nor retire from it without
the most imminent danger. One resource itill re-
mained, to try what effect the interposition of Mon-
tezuma might have to tooth or overaw his fubjcas,
When the Mexicans approached next morning to
renew the aflault, that unfortunate prince, at the
mercy of the Spaniards, and reduced to the fad
neceflity of becoming the inflrumint of his own
disgrace, and of the flavc!y of his people -, ad-
vanced to the battlements in his royal robes, and
with all the pomp in which he uscd to appear on

VOL. II. N folclln

I SQe NQ'ITI XXI.

B O O K solemn occasions. At fight of their sovereign,

V.- whom they had long been accuffomed to honour,

o. and almoit to revere as a god, the weapons dropt

from their hands, every tongue was silent, all
bowed their heads, and many prostrated themselves
on the ground. Montezuma addrefled them with
every argument that could mitigate their rage, or
perfuadc them to cease from hostilities. When
he ended his difcourife, a fullen murmur of
disapprobation run through the crowd; to this
succeeded reproaches and threats; and their fury
rising in a moment above every restraint of decency
or refperit, flights of arrows and volleys of stones
poured in so violently upon the ramparts, that be-
fore the Spanish soldiers, appointed to cover Mon-
twzuma with their bucklers, had time to lift them
in his defence, two arrows wounded the unhappy
monarch, and the blow of a itone on his temple
firuck him to the ground. On feeing him fall, the
Mexicans were so much atfonifhed, that, with a
transition not uncommon in popular tumults, they
paflcd in a moment from one extreme to the other,
remiorfe succeeded to insult, and they fled with hor-
ror, as if the vengeance of Heaven were pursuing
the crime which they had committed. The Spa-
niilals, without moleieation, carried Montezuma
to his apartmenlts, and Cortes hastened thither to
console him under his misfortune. But the unhap-
py montarch now perceived how low he was funk,
and the haughty spirit which leemed to have been
so long extinlt, returning, he scorned to survive this
last humiiliation, and to protract an ignominious
lift, not only as the prisoner and tool of his ene-
niic, but as the object of contempt or detestation
amonig his fubje(ts. In a transport of rage he tore
the bandages from his wounds, and refitfed, with
lsoch obliinacy, to take any nourifliment, that he
so(.n CII(Ind his wretched days, rejcqting with dif

dain
QO

dain all the solicitations of the Spaniards to em- B °0 K
brace the Christian faith. _.-.

, 5ZO.

UPON the death of Montezuma, Cortes having New con-

loft all hope of bringing the Mexicans to any ac- fl
commodation, saw no profpea of safety but in at-
tempting a retreat, and began to prepare for it. But
a sudden motion of the Mexicans engaged him in
new conflicts. They took poffeflion of a high tower
in the great temple which overlooked the Spanish
quarters, and placing there a garrison of their prin-
cipal warriors, not a Spaniard could ifir without
being exposed to their misfile weapons. From this
post it was neceflary to dislodge them at any riflk,
and Juan de Efcobar, with a numerous detachment
of chosen soldiers, was ordered to make the attack.
But Efcobar, though a gallant officer, and at the head
of troops accustomed to conquer, and who now fought
under the eyes of their countrymen, was thrice re-
pulsed. Cortes, sensible that not only the reputation
but the safety of his army depended on the success
of this assault, ordered a buckler to be tied to his
arm, as he could not manage it with his wounded
hand, and rulhed with his drawn sword into the
thickest of the combatants. Encouraged by the
pretence of their general, the Spaniards returned to
the charge with such vigour, that they gradually
forced their way up the steps, and drove the Mexi-
cans to the platform at the top of the tower. There
a dreadful carnage began, when two young Mexi-
cans of high rank, observing Cortes as he animated
his soldiers by his voice and example, resolved to
sacrifice their own lives in order to cut off the au-
thor of all the calamities which desolated their coun-
try. They approached him in a supplicant pof-
ture, as if .they had intended to lay down their
arms, and seizing him a moment, hurried hint

N 2 towaids

B 0 0 K towards the battlements, over which they threw

themselves headlong, in hopes of dragging him
3152. along to be dashed in pieces by the fame fall. But

Cortes, by his strength and agility, broke loose
from their grasp, and the gallant youths perished in
this generous, though unsuccessful, attempt to save
their country. As soon as the Spaniards became
masters of the tower, they set fire to it, and with-
out farther molestation, continued the preparations
for their retreat.

areSbPan- THIS became the more necessary, as the Mexi-
don thecity. cahs were so much aftonifled at the last effort of

the Spanish valour, that they began to change their
whole system of hostility, and instead of incessant
attacks, endeavoured, by barricading the streets,
and breaking down the causeways, to cut off the
communication of the Spaniards with the conti-
jient, and thus to flarve an enemy whom they could
not subdue. The first point to be determined, was
whether they should march out openly in the face
of day, when they could discern every danger, and
fee how to regulate their own motions, as well as
how to resist the aflaults of the enemy ; or whether
they should endeavour to retire secretly in the night.
The latter was preferred, partly from hopes that
their national superstition would restrain the Mexi-
cans from venturing to attack them in the night,
and partly from their own fond belief in the predic-
tions of a private foldicr, who having acquired
universal credit by a finattering of learning, and his
pretensions to aftrologv, boldly afrured them of
fucccfs, if they made their retreat in this manner.
They began to move, towards midnight, in three
divisions. Sandoval led the van ; Pedro Alvara-
do, anid Vclafqtucz de Leon, had the conduct of the
:.::r; and Cortes commianded in the centre, where
: placcd the prisoners, among whomll were a foil

and
92

and two daughters of Montezuma, together with B 0o0 K
several Mexicans of diftindtion, the artillery, the i
baggage, and a portable bridge of timber, intended 1520.
to be laid over the breaches in the causeway.
They marched in profound silence along the cause-
way which led to Tacuba, because it was shorter
than any of the reft, and, lying most remote from
the road towards Tlafcala and the sea coast, had
been left more entire by the Mexicans. They
reached the first breach in it without molestation,
hoping that their retreat was undiscovered.

BUT the Mexicans, unperceived, had not only A k

Attacked by

watched all their motions with attention, but had theMexi-
made proper dispositions for a most formidable at- calls.
tack. While the Spaniards were intent upon
placing their bridge in the breach, and occupied
in conducting their horses and artillery along it,
they were suddenly alarmed with the tremendous
found of warlike initrunints, and a general shout
from an innumerable multitude of enemies; the
lake was covered with canoes; flights of arrows,
and /howers of hones poured in upon them from
every quarter; the Mexicans running forward to
the charge with fearless impetuosity, as if they hop-
ed in that moment to be avcnged for all their
wrongs. Unfcrtunately the wooden-bridge, by
the weight of the artillery, was wedged so salt into
the itones and mud, that it was init)olli-le to re-
move it. Difinayed at this accident, the Spani-
ards advanced with precipitation towards the second
breach. The Mexicans hemmed them in on every
fide, and though they defended themselves with
their usual courage, yet crouded together as they
were on a narrow causeway, their discipline and
military fcill were of little avail, nor did the ob-
fcurity of the night permit them to derive great ad-
valntage from their fire-arms, or the fliperiority of
their other weapons. All Mexico was now in

arms ;

B 0 0 K. arms ; and so eager were the people on the defiruc-

V.

L-_,- tion of their oppreflors, that they who were not
15zo. near enough to annoy them in person, impatient of

the delay, prefied forward with such ardour, as
drove on their countrymen in the front with irre-
filtible violence. Freth warriors iniantly filled the
place of such as fell. The Spaniards, weary with
slaughter, and unable to sustain the weight of the
torrent that poured in upon them, began to give
way. In a moment the confusion was universal;
horse and foot, officers and soldiers, friends and
enemies, were mingled together; and while all
fought, and many fell, they could hardly diftin-
guiil from what hand the blow came.

Their dif- CORTEc, with about a hundred foot foldicrs and
aftt ', a few horse, forced his way over the two remaining

breaches in the causeway, the bodies of the dead
serving to fill up the chafns, and reached the
main land. Having formed them as soon as they
arrived, he returned with such as were yet capable
of service, to aflilt his friends in their retreat, and
to encourage thcem, by his presence and example, to
persevere in the efforts requisite to effc't it. He
met with part of his soldiers, who had broke
through the enemy, but found many more over-
whelmed by the multitude of their aggrcflbrs, or
perishing in the lake; and heard the piteous la-
mentations of others, whom the Mexicans, having
taken alive, were carrying off in triumph to be fa-
crificed to the god of war. Before day, all who
had escapcd aflkmblcd at Tacuba. But when the
morning dawned, and difcovcred to the view of
Cortes his (hattcred battalion, reduced to less than
half its number, the survivors dejctcl, and nioft of
them covered with wounds, the thoughts of what
they had (Iutfercd, and the remcnlbrance of so manly
faithful friends and gallant followers, who had fal-

len

len in that night of sorrow *, pierced his foul with B 0 0 K
such anui;h, that while he was forming their V.
ranks, and issuing some necessary orders, his fol- 1520.
dicrs observcd the tears trickling from his eyes, and
remarked, with much fatisfadtion, that while at-
tentive to the duties of a general, he was not insen-
fible to the feelings of a man.

IN this fatal retreat many officers of diftin6tion

perified t, and among thefie Velasquez de Leon, andlos.
who having forsaken the party of his kinfinan, the
governor of Cuba, to follow the fortune of his com-
panions, was, on that account, as well as for his
filperior merit, refpeded by them as the second per-
f(n in the army. All the artillery, ammunition,
and baggage, were los ; the greater part of the
horses, and above two thousand Tlafca!ans, were
killed, and only a very finall portion of the trea-
fllre which they had amafiFed was saved. This,
which had been always their .chief obje&, proved
now a great cause of their calamity; toc many of
the foldicrs having so overloaded themselves with
bars of gold as rendered them unfit for adion, and
crtarded their flight, fell, ignominiously, the vic-
tims of their own inconsiderate avarice. Amidfl so
maniy disasters, it was folme consolation to find that
Aguilar and Marina, whose funcdion as interpre-
tcrs was of such eiential importance, had made
thtei cfcape :1:.

THE first care of Cortes was to find tome fliclter

Difficult re-

for Iiis weariedl troops; for as the Mcxicans in- tr,.tofithe
fft.lcd them on every ide, alnd the people of 'acu- Spaniards.
ba began to take arms, he could not continue il his

prcecnt

N cIlE Tl i'ls' rl iS tile nane by whichl i s fiill dtliftiginueda in

N,,w} Snnin. *' Si'c NO'TE XXIIe. I
(or'. R lit. 4. S.

k.

i 1)ii 2. A iu. CS. loGoll.l

C9. c. . i-.IcrriCe dec. z. lib. K.
C II 1,'.

3 o0 K present Ration. He direced his march towards the

v.

rising ground, and having fortunately discovered a
15S0. temple situated on an eminence,' took poffeflion of

it. There he found not only the flelter for which
he wished, but, what was no lefswanted, some pro-
visions to refrelh his men ; and though the enemy
did not intermit their attacks throughout the day,
they were with little difficulty prevented from mak-
ing any impreflion. During this time Cortes
was engaged in deep consultation with his officers,
concerning the route which they ought to take in
their retreat. They were now on the weft fide of
the lake. Tlafcala, the only place where they
could hope for a friendly reception, lay about fix-
ty-four miles to the east of Mexico *; so that they
were obliged to go round the north end of the lake
before they could fall into the road which led thi-
ther. A Tlafcalan soldier undertook to be their
guide, and conduted them through a country in
some places marshy, in others mountainous, in all
ill-cultivated and thinly peopled. They marched
for fix days with little respite, and under continual
alarms, numerous bodies of the Mexicans hovering
around them, formtimes harassing them at a dif-
tance with their miflileweapons, and sometimes at-
tacking them clof:iv in front, in rear, in flank,
with great boldne-;, a; they now knew that they
were not invincible. Nor were the fatigue and
danger of those inceft!nt conflicts the worlt evils to
which they were exposcd. As the barren country
through which they I:itlld afiordcd hardly any pro-
visions, they were rediiced to feed on berries, roots,
and the stalks of gr:cn mlinze i and at the very time
that famine was dl. ,Lil: .-!l ir fpirils and wafiing
their flrength, thller litlua;oli required the most vi-
gorous and unreini iiil, ex i'tiions of courna e alnd
activity. Amidlt lhoic coin:plicated diflr; li(s,

one
Vj1I. t1 nOC Teattao Ain(:ic~irtu. 1it1. ii. .. 1 i.

one circumfiance supported and animated the Spa- B O 0 .

V.

niards. Their commander sustained this fad re-
verse of fortune with unshaken magnanimity. His 52zo.
presence of mind never forsook him ; his sagacity
foresaw every event, and his vigilance provided for
it. He was foremost in every danger, and endu-
red every hardfhipwith cheerfulness, The difficul-
ties with which he was surrounded feerned to call
forth new talents; and his soldiers, though despairing
themselves, continued to follow him with increasing
confidence in his abilities.

ON the sixth day they reached Otumba, not far Battle of O-

from the road betweeln 'Mdxico and Tlafcala. Ear- tumba.
ly next morning they began to advance towards it,
flying parties of the enemy R-ill iih ing on their
rear; and amidst the insults with which they accom-
panied their hoft-ilitiec, Ml\arina remarked that they
often exclaimed with exuitation, " Go on, robbers;
go to the place wherc you shall quickly meet the
vengeance due to your crimes." , The meaning of.
this threat the Spaniards did not comprehend, un-
til they reached the summit of an eminence before
them. There a spacious valley opened to their
view, covered with a vast army, extending as far as
the eye could reach. The Mexicans, while with
one body of their troops they harraffed the Spaniards
in their retreat, had aflcmbled their principal force
ii the other fide of the lake; and mnarching along
the road which led direcly to Tlafcala, pooted it
in the plain of Olumba, through which they knew
Cortes muff pats. At the fight of this incredible
multitude, which they could lurvcy ;It 0once Cflol
the rising; ground, the Spaniards were aflionifhcd,
iad even the boldefl began to dfll,air,. But Cortes,
without allowiing Iifi re for thelir fears to acquiire
lrcngtlh by crflecdtion, aIte.r wa rninl thi.m brie fly that
no l(tt:rn;l.tive nlow rcalluined hit to conijiqur or to

Vo. 11. O die,

97

1 0 0 K die, led them instantly to the charge. The Mex-

V.

aicns waited their approach with unusual fortitude.
x5z2. Such, however, was the superiority of the Spaniih

discipline and arms, that the impression of this small
body was irrefiflible ; and whichever way its force
was direded, it penetrated and dispersed the mofi
numerous battalions. But while these gave way in
one quarter, new combatants advanced from ano-
ther, and the Spaniards, though fuccefbful in every
attack, were ready to fink under those repeated es-
forts, without feeing any end of their toil, or any
hope of victory. At that time Cortes observed the
ri-at standard of the empire, which was carried be-
fore the Mexican general, advancing; and fortu-
nately recoliecting to have heard, that on the
f;lte of it depended the event of every battle, he as-
fcn.mbled a few of liis bravest officers, whose horses
were frill capable of service, and placing himself
at their head, puflled 'forward towards the fran-
dard with an impctuofity which bore down every
thing before it. A chofin body of nobles, who
gua;rdcd the 1iandard, made some reiftance, but
were soon broken. Cortes, with a firoke of his
lance, wounded the Mexican general, and threw
him to the ground. One of his followers alighting,
put an end to his life, and laid hold of the imperial
fl; .nrard. The moment that their leader fell, and
tlac :-;isdard, towards which all dircted their eyes,
dlrppc: -edl, an universal panic struck the Mexi-
c;anl, an!, as if the bond which held them toge-
ilethle haId been diflblved, every ensign was lowered,
each foldice threw away his weapons, and all fled
wii'i precipitation to the m(ountains, the Spaniards,
tnl.illc to piiriuc thein far, returned to collect the
spoils 'ol the field, which were so valuable, as to be
siI ( W

lnl' nalstion for the wealth which they had

1,,sl in Mtl\xico; for in the enemny's army were most
of thcir principal wanriors, drcfled out in their

richest

richest ornaments, as if they had been marching to B o0 K

V.

allured victory. Next day, to their great joy, they
entered the Tiafcalan territories. . 0.

July S.
BUT, amidst their fatisfacion in having got be- Receton

ofthe .~p--

yond the precinds of an hostile country, they ,,is ,,
could not look forward without solicitude, as tlhy Tlaiala.
were still uncertain what reception they might meet
with from allies, to whom they returned in a con-
dition very different from that in which they had
lately set out from their dominions. Happily for
them, the enmity of the Tlafcalans to the Mexi-
can name was so inveterate, their desire to avenge
the death of their countrymen so vehement, and the
ascendant which Cortes had acquired over the
chi-fs of the republic so complete, that, far from
entertaining a thought of taking any advantage of
the diftrefled firuation in which they beheld the
Spaniards, they received them with a tenderness
and cordiality which quickly diflipated all their
suspicions.

SOME interval of tranquility and indulgence New de!ibe-

was now absolutely neceflary; not only that the rtins of
Spaniards might give attention to the cure of their
wounds, which had been too long neglected, but in
order to recruit their strength, exhaufled by such a
long fiucceflion of fatigue and hardflips. During-
this, Cortes learned that he and his companions
were not the only Spaniards who had felt the effcds
of the Mexican enmity. A considerable detachment,
which was marching from Zempoalla towards the
capital, had been cut off by the people of Tepeaca.
A finaller party, returning from Tlafcala to Vera
Cruz, with the fiare of the Mexican gold allotted

02 to

Cortes R .tt. p. Z9i. B. Diaz, c. 128. Gomr ra Cron. c.
IIO. I-lcreira, dec. z. lib. x. c. 1Z, 13.

B O 0K to the garrison, had been surprised and deffroyed

V.
--._^- . in the mountains. At a juncture when the life of

L5-O. every Spaniard was of importance, such losses

were deeply felt. The fchemcs which Cortes was
mcditating rendered them peculiarly afflictive to
him. While his enemies, and even many of
his own followers, confidered the disasters which
had befallen him as fatal to the progress of his
arms, and imagined that nothing'now remained
but speedily to abandon a country which he had in-
vaded with unequal force, his mind, as eminent
for perieverance as for enterprise, was still bent on
accomplifling his original purpose, of fubjdcing
the Mexican empire to the crown of Castile. Se-
vere and uncxpeced as the check was which he
had received, it did not appear to him a sufficient
reafonl for relinquishing the conquests which he had
already made, or against his refurningi hiz operations
with better hopes of fucccfs. The colony at Vera
Cruz was not only safe, but had remained unmno-
lefted. The people of Zenpoalla and the aijacent
diftriets had discovered no symptoms of defec-ion.
TI'he rTla'alans continued faithful to their alliance.
()O their maiitial spirit, easily rouced to arms, and
inHllued with implacable hatred of the Mexicans,
he dependedt for pow rfiul aid. He had Rill the
command of a body cf Spalliards, equal in number
to that with which he had opened his way into the
centre of the empire, and had taken pofneflion of the
capital ; lo that with the beln.fit of greater experi-
encie, as well as more pertec&t knowledge of the
country, hle did not dellfair of quilckly recovering
all tlat ihe had been deprived of by untoward
CVClltS. evenits.
Tr, ,,,.,. t'"lLL, of this idea, he conlrt''l the T1ifcalan

:11,: chlci(F: with ft ch attcnltioll, aI(l (litribite among

c thelm f liberally the rich spoils of Ottumba,

that

that he was secure of obtaining whatever he should B O O K
require of the republic. He drew a s'mall supply of V_
ammunition, and two or three field-pieces, from 152o.
his stores at Vera Cruz. He dispatched an officer
of confidence with four ships of Narvaez's fleet to
Hispaniola and Jamaica, to engage adventurers, and
to purchase horss, gunpowder, and other military
stores. As he knew that it would be vain to at-
tempt the reduction of Mexico, unless he could fe-
cure the command of the lake, he gave orders to
prepare in the mountains of Tlafcala materials
for building twelve brigantines, so as they might
be carried thither in pieces ready to be put to-
gether, and launched when he flood in need of incir
service -.

BUT while, with provident attention, he was Mutinous
taking thofc necessary steps towards the execution of spirit of his

troops.

his metafures, an obstacle arose in a quarter where
it was least expected, but moit formidable. The
spirit of discontent and mutiny broke out in his
own army. Many of Narvaez's followe- were
planters rather than soldi;es, and had accompa-
nite him to New Spain with sanguine hopes of
obtaining se(ttlements, and little inclination to
cii ge, in the hardihips and dangers of war.
As the falne motives had induced them to enter
into their new engagements with Cortes, they no
sooner became acquainted with the nature of the
fcrvice, than they bitterly repented of their choice.
Such ofthtnm as had the good fortune to survive the
perilous adventures in which their own imprudcnce
had involved them, happy in having made their
escape, trembled at the thoughts of being exposed a
ftrcond time to similar calamities. As loon as they
lil'covcred the intention of Cortes, they began Ec-

crctly
Cortzs Ri lat. p. 253, E. Gimar; Cron. c. 117.

1OI

B 0 o K cretly to murmur and cabal, and waxing gradually

more audacious, they, in a body, offered a remon-
15o2. ftrance to their general against the imprudence of

attacking a powerful empire with his shattered for-
cs-, an'i to -r.ally requir' ( him to lead them back
dircctly to C..bT:. T1 louzh CorLcs, long pradifed
in the arts of conmmand, employed arguments, en-
treaties, and presents, to convince or to tooth
them; though his own soldiers, animated with the
spirit of t'.;r leader, warmly fcconded his endea-
vours; he found their fears too violent and deep-
rooted to be removed, and the utmost he could es-
sect was to prevail with them to defer their depar-
ture for some time, onl a promise that he would,
at a more proper juncture, difiifs such as fihould
desire it.

THAT the malcontents might have no leisure to

Mleans he
empinys to brood over the causes of their difaflfetion, he refol-
revive their ved inflantly to call forth his troops into action. He
confidence. proposed to cltafRife the people of Tepeaca for the

outrage which they had committed ; and as the de;
tachment which they had cut off happened to be
composed mostly of soldiers who had served under
Narvaiz, their companions, from the desire of ven-
geance, engaged more willingly in this war. He
Auguf. took the command in person, accompanied by a

numerous body of Tlafcalans, and in the space of
a few weeks, after various ncounters, with great
slaughter of the Tapeacans, reduced that province
to fiibjeetion. During several months, while he
waited for the fuipplics of men ;In(l ammunllition
which he cxpe(tcd, and was carrying on his prepa-
rations for conttrusting the brigantines, he kept his
troops collnlantly employed in various expeditions
against the adjacent provinces, ;all of which were
condliiclld witlh an unliforim tenlor of l'lccefs. By
these, hi:; nmt'n 1)ccanic again accutfliomed to victory,
and rcfimcied their wonted felnfe of f ipcriority ; the

A.exic:;i

Mexican power was weakened; the Tlafcalan B 0 0 K
warriors acquired the habit of ading in colnjunr-ti- _
on with the Spaniards; and the chiefs of the 1520.
republic delighted to fee their country en -iched with
the spoils of all the people around theln, and aflon-
ifhed every day with fresh discoveries of the irrefifti-
ble prowcfs of their allies, declined no effort requi-
site to support them.

ALL those preparatory arrangements, however, Stiengthen-

ed by feve-

thougrh the most prudent and efficacious which the ral !rivc-
situation of Cortes allowed him to make, would forcements.
have been of little. avail, without a reinforce-
ment of Spanifl soldiers. Of this he was so deeply
sensible, that it was the chief object of his thoughts
and wilhes ; and yet his only prospect of obtaining
it, from the return of the officer whom he had sent
to the ifies to solicit aid, was both distant and un-
certain. But what neither his own sagacity nor
power could have procured, he owed to a series of
fortunate and unforeseen incidents. The governor
of Cuba, to whom the success of Narvaez appeared
;,i event of infallible certainty, having sent two
finmll flips after him with new inftrudions and a
fiirply of men and military flores, the officer whom
Cortes had appointed to command on the coast, art-
full.y tlecoyed them into the harbour of Vera Cruz,
si.. il thle vessels, and easily persuadcd the soldiers
t;) follow the standard of a more able leader than
hi;m whom they were destined to join '. Soon as-
t(.r, three ihips of more considerable force came in-
to :ll h:'rbour feiparately. elhcc belonged to an
;:r:n:;lint fitted out by Francisco de (G;ray, gover-
nlr of Jamaica, who, being poflcll('d with the
1;ai( of tlil rve)r and conquefl which animated evc-
ry Si;ii;ardtl fttled in America, had long aimed at
iallridiln into fomc diftlrid of Now Spain, and di-

viding
* 1B. DIz, C. 131.

B O0 K viding with Cortes the glory and gain of an-

y.

sl nexing that empire to the crown of Castile. They
15-0. unadvisedly made their attempt on the northern pro-

vinces, where the country was poor and the peo-
ple ferce and warlike; and, after a cruel succession
of disasters, famine compelled them to venture into
Vcra Cruz, and cast themselves upon the mercy of
their countrymen. Their fidelity was not proof a-
r gailft the splendid hopes and promises which had

l-duced other adventurers, and, as if the 'pirit of
revolt had been contagious in New Spain, they
likewise abandoned the master whom they were
bound to fcrve, and inlifted under Cortes *. Nor
was it America alone that furnished fiich unexpeft-
ed aid. A ihip arrived from Spain, freighted by
some private merchants with military stores, in
hopes of a profitable market in a country, the
fame of whose opulence began to spread over Eu-
rope. Cortes eagerly purchased a cargo which to
him was invaluable, and the crew, following the
general example, joined him at Tlafcala f.

FROM those various cuarters, the army of Cor-

tes was augmented with an hundred and eighty
men, and twenty horses, a reinforcement too
inconsiderable to produce any confcquence which
,vould entitle it to have been mentioned in the
hiflory of other parts of the globe. But in that
of America, where great revolutions were brought
about by caufcs which seemed to bear no pro-
portion to their effets, such fmiall events rife
into importance, because they were fuflicient to
decide with refpec to the fate of kingdoms.
Nor is it the Icalt remarkable inflance of the
singular felicity conspicuous in any paflagcs

of
* Cortes Relat. 253, F. 1I. Diaz, c. 133. t.' Ibid. c. 136.

of Cortes's flory, that the two persons chiefly in- B o o K
ftrumental in furnihfing him with those seasonable V.
supplies should be an avowed enemy who aimed at 150o.
his deftruAion, and an envious rival who wished
to supplant him.

THE first effect of the jundion with his new fol- Number of

lowers was to enable him to dismiss such of Nar- his forces.
vaez's soldiers as remained with reluctance in his
service. After their departure, he still mustered
five hundred and fifty infantry, of which fourscore
were armedwith muskets or cross-bows, forty horse-
men, and a train of nine field pieces *. At
the head of these, accompanied by ten thouland
Tlafcalans and other friendly Indians, Cortes be-
gan his march towards Mexico, on the twenty-eighth
of December, fix months after his fatal retreat from
that city J.

NOR did he advance to attack an enemy unpre- P'eparati-

'

- - T - i r

-i ons of the

pared to receive him. Upon the death of Monte- oIcxiaa,,,
zuma, the Mexican chiefs, in whom the right of fortheir

de'ence.

elecingtheemperor was vested, had instantly raised
his brother Quletlavaca to the throne. His avowed
and inveterate enmity to the Spaniards, would have
been sufficient to gain their suffrages, although he
had been less distinguished for courage and capaci-
ty. He had an immediate opportunity of lhewing
that he was worthy of their choice, by conducting,
in person, those fierce attacks wvhich compelled the
Spaniards to abandon his capital; and as toon as
their retreat afforded him any respite fiom action,
he took measures for preventing their return to
Mexico, with prudence equal to the spirit which
he had displaycd in driving them out of it. As

VOL. II, 1' fro
1~~o~a Rel~t. iiss, L.

·1. Rulat, 2Só, A. J3 1) i~u, c. , :,,.

B 0 O K' from the vicinity of Tlafcala he could not be un-

acquainted with the motions and intentions of Cor-
s5zo. tes, he observed the storm that was gathering, and

began early to provide against it. He repairedwhat
the Spaniardshad ruined in the city, and strength-
ened it with such new fortifications as the skill
of his subjects was capable of erecting. Beside fil-
ling his magazines with the usual weapons of war,
he gave diretion to make long spears, headed with
the swords and daggers taken from the Spaniards,
in order to annoy the cavalry. He summoned the
people in every province of the empire to take arms
againlf their oppressors, and as an encouragement
toexert themselves with vigour, he promised them
exemption from all the taxes which his predecessors
had iinpofed *. But what he laboured with the
greatcft earnestness was, to deprive the Spani-
ards of the advantages which they derived from the
friendfiip ofthe Tlafcalans, byendeavouringto per-
fuade that people to renounce all conneicion with
men who were nut only avowed enemies of the gods
whom they worfliipped, but who would not fail to
subjeót thtem at lalt to the fame yoke, which they
were now inconsiderately lending their aid to impose
uponl others. These representations, no less striking
th.!n well-foundeld, were urged so forcibly by his
anihaftfiltors, that it required all the address of Cor-
tes to plrcvclt the.ir making a adangerous impression .

B>ur whulile Q(tctiavaca was arranging his plan of

defence, with ia lerce of fbrefight, uncommon in
an Amnrician, his days were cut short by the fniall-
pox, 'l'his diflc:nl]er, which ragcd at that time in
Ni'-tv Spaii witli filtal malignity, was unknown in

that

'.1:. s Rl, l.i. 1) 25;, E.. 2s4, A. B. Diaz, c. 14c.

*| 11. iiji., .. lzg. lc1:lc uie , ctc. . li. :t. c. 14. 19.
1o6

that quarter of the globe, until it was introduced B3 0 K
by the Europeans, and may be reckoned among the
greatef calamities brought upon them by their in- 150o.
vaders. In his stead the Mexicans railed to the
throne Guatimozin, nephew and fon-in-law of
Montezuma, a young man of such high reputation
for abilities and valour, that in this dangerous cri-
sis, his countrymen, with one voice, called him to
the supreme command *.

As soon as Cortes entered the enemy's territories, i.r.

he discov.ered various preparations to obitrua his Ccrtcs ad-
progress. But his troops forced their way with lit- waru.Mex-
tie difficulty, and took pofeffion of Tezeuco, the ico.
second city of the empire, situated on the banks of
the lake, about twenty miles from Mexico t.
Here he determined to etRablifh his head-quarters,
as the mos proper ltation for launching his brigan-
tines, as well as for making his approaches to the
capital. In order to render his residence there more
secure, he deposed the cazique or chief, who was
at the head of that community, under pretext of
fojne defed in his title, and substituted in his place
a person whom a faction of the nobles pointed
out as the right heir of that dignity. Attached to
him by this benefit, the new cazique and his adhe-
rents served the Spaniards with inviolable fidelity :1:.

As the confruftion of the brigantines advanced Hi5 lpat

slowly under the unskilful hands of soldiers and In- and cauti-
dians, whom Cortes was obliged to employ in assist- Uu
ing three or tour carpenters who happened fortun-
ately to be in his service, and as he had not yet re-
ceived the reinforcement which he expected from

P 2 Hifpa-

B 1. D)ia. c. 1o0. -- Villa Scgnor Theatro Ameiicano,

i. x16. t Cortes Rclat. 256, tc. B. Diaz, c. 137. Go-
llia 'rA Crlo . C. 12.l! Herrera, dec.. 3. c. 1

B 0 0 K Hispaniola, he was not in a condition to turn his

V_. asarms directly against the capital. To have attack-
1521. cd a city so populous, fowell prepared for defence,

and in a situation of such peculiar strength, must
have exposed his troops to inevitable deftruAtion.
Three months elapsed before the materials for con-
ftructing the brigantines were finiflled, and before
he heard any thing with refpec to the success of
his negociation in I-ifpaniola. This, however, was
not a season of inaction to Cortes. He attacked
fucceflivelv several of the towns situated around the
lake; and though all the Mexican power was exert-
ed to obfitua his operations, he either compelled
them to submit to the Spanish crown, or reduced
them to ruins. Other towns he endeavoured to
conciliate by more gentle means, and though he
could not hold any intercourse with the inhabitants
but by the intervention of interpreters, yet, under
all the disadvantage of that tedious and imperfect
mode of communication, he had acquired such tho-
rough Knowledge of the slate of the country, as well
as of the difpoiltions of the people, that he con-
duted his negociations and intrigues with astonish-
ing dexterity and success. Mofl of the cities adja-
cent to Mexico were originally the capitals of fniall
indllpcndcnt ilccs ; and lfiiie of them having been
but lately annexed to the Mexican empire, till re-
taillcd the remembrance of their ancient liberty,
anl bore with impatience the rigorous yoke of their
new matIlrs. Cortes having carly obfcrved fymp-
toms of their dilaflll.eion, availed himfclf of this
knowledge to gain their colnfidence and fricndfllip.
By oileriWng, with colfittlence, to deliver them fiono
the odious dominion of the IMexicans, and by li-
bera-l prmini fes of moic inJull Lient ctreatment, if they
would linite with him alalnll th ir opprLfiors, he
pIrv.iilel'd on tliC people of l:veal colnfiderable dlif-
t1.1 (. nlol only to acknowlc d etl the kingt of Cartile

as
loS

as their sovereign, but to supply the Spanish camp B O 0 K
with provisions, and to strengthen his army with V.
auxiliary troops. Guatimozin, on the first appear- Sz2I.
ance of defecion among his fubjeds, exerted him-
self with vigour, to prevent or to puniflh their re-
volt; but in spite of his efforts the spirit continued
to spread. The Spaniards gradually acquired new
allies ; and with deep concern he beheld Cortes ar-
ming against his empire those very hands which
ought to have been active in its defence; and ready
to advance againit the capital at the head of a nu-
merous body of his owvn fubjets *.

WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes was

gradually circumscribing the Mexican power, with-
in such narrow limits that his profpedt of overturn-
ing it seemed neither to be uncertain nor remote,
all his schemes were well nigh defeated, by a con-
fpiracy no less unexpeCted than dangerous. The
soldiers of Narvaez had never united perfeCtly with
the original companions of Cortes, nor did they
enter into his measures with the fame cordial zeal.
Upon every occasion that required any extraordi-
nary effort of courage or of patience, their spirits
were apt to fink; and now, on a near view of
what they had to encounter, in attempting to re-
duce a city io inacceflible as Mexico, and defended
by a numerous army, the resolution even of those
among them who had adhered to Cortes, when he
was deserted by their aflociates, began to fail.
Ihlleir fears led tllem to presumptuous and unfol-
(lier-like difculTions concerning the propriety of
their gtnieral's measures, and the improbability of
their success. From these they proceeded to cen-
flir and inveivivcs, and at lafl began to deliberate
how they miit provide for their own faifety, of

which

C
(' ltcs' I'. .t. 2z6-z6o. 1I, ])i.a', c. 137r-140. C mara
'i..11 . I. 1 ?., 123. II Ircl;l, l cc 3. lib. i. c. i, 2.

of which they deemed thleir commander to be totally
negligent. Antonio Villefagna, a private soldier,
but bold, intriguing, and Itrongly attached to Ve-
lafquez, artfully fomented this growing spirit of
difafe&tion. His quarters became the rendezvouz of
the malcontents, where, after many consultations,
they could discover no method of checking Cortes
in his career, but by assassinating him and his most
considerable officers, and conferring the command
upon some person who would relinquish his wild
plans, and adopt measures more consistent with the
general security. Derpair inspired them with cou-
rage. The hour for perpetrating the crime, the
persons whom they destined as viEtims, the officers
to succeed tlhem in command, were all named; and
the conspirators signed an association, by which
they bound themselves with most solemn oaths to
mutual fidelity. But on the evening before the ap-
pointed day, one of Cortes's ancient followers, who
had been seduced into the conspiracy, touched with
compunAion at the imminent danger of a man
whom he had long been accustomed to revere, or
struck withl horror at his own treachery, went pri-
vately to his general, and revealed to him all that
he knew. Cortes, tho' deeply alarmed, discerned
at once what condud was proper in a situation so
critical. He repaired instantly to Villefagna's
quarters, accompanied by some of his imoft trusty
officers. The astonishment and confusion of the
man at this unexpcted visit anticipated the consef-
sion of his guilt, While his attendants seized him,
Cortes finatched from his bofoin a paper containing
the association, signed by the conlpirators. Impa-
tient to know how far the dcfieClion extended, he
retired to rc;ad it, and found there names which
filled him with furprifcil andll rrow. But, aware
how dangerous a ftridtl scrutiny might prove at fuich

ajuncture,
BOOK

V.

lSz.
110

a juncture, confined his judicial inquiries to Ville- B 0O K
fagna alone. As the proofs of his guilt were ma- ,
nifeft, he was condemned after a short trial, and 15r.
next morning he was seen hanging before the door
of the houifc in which he had lodged. Cortes cal-
led his troops together, and having explained to
them the atrocious purpose of the conspirators, as
well as the jufiice of the punishment inflicted on
Villefagna, he added, with an appearance of satis-
faction, that he was entirely ignorant with refpe&t
to all the circumstances of this dark tranfadion,
as the traitor, when arrested, had suddenly torn
and swallowed a paper, which probably contained
al; account of it, and under the fevereif tortures
pofleffed such conflancy as to conceal the names
of his accomplices. This artful declaration ref-
tored tranquility to many a breast that w;:s throb-
bing, while he spoke, with contcioufiefs of guilt
and dread of detection ; and by this prudent mode-
ration, Cortes had the advantage of having disco-
vered and of being able to observe such of his fol-
lowcrs as were difaffietcd ; while they, flattering
thcmfelvcs that their pail crime was unknown, en-
deavoured to avert any suspicion of it, by rcdoub-
ling their a'tivity atnd zeal in his licrvice *.

CorlTEnsdid notallowthem leifrci to ;-lnniate on Hi0 n.oil

what had ha i.pcncd ; and as the most cftslual mnc:,ls ti,,,;, C'o
of preventing the return of a mutinous [fpirii:, he dc- h.li
tcrmincd to call forfl his troops ilnmcdi(l;ltl) to lJtlls
atc ion. IFortilnately, a prope'r occ;lion fbr thi;oc-
c' rit d withoul his 1ecnling to court it. Hc recciv-
,l init'lli.cnce, that the Inatctrials for buildingp the
bri:lntincs were at Igflth conmpletely finilhed, and
waited only for a body of" Spaiii;ards to colndu&i
theiln to I' zecu co. The omlian of lis convoy,

conlfiit-

* (or, t, RIl.it. ;. 3. C. B. l)i7, :. 146. 1-larlrce, dec..
. ill)i. i, .i.

II

B O o K consisting of two hundred foot soldiers, fifteen

v.
I..__ - horsemen, and two field pieces, he gave to Sandoval,

.521. who, by the vigilance, activity, and courage which

he manifested on every occasion, was growing dai-
ly in his confidence, and in the estimation of his
fcllow-foldiers. The service was no less singular
than important ; the beams, the planks, the masts,
the cordage, the fails, the iron-work, and all the
infinite variety of articles requisite for the conffruc-
tion of thirteen brigantines, were to be carried fix-
ty miles over land, through a mountainous coun-
try, by people who were unacquainted with the mi-
niltry of domestic animals, or the aid of machines
to facilitate any work of labour. The Tlafcalans
furnished eight thbufand TAMENES, an inferior or-
der of men destined for servile tasks, to .carry the
materials on their shoulders, and appointed fifteen
thousand warriors to accompany and defend them.
Sandoval made the disposition for their progress
with great propriety, placing the TAMENES in the
centre, one body of warriors in the front, another
in the rear, with considerable parties to cover the
flanks. To each of these he joined some Spaniards
not only to assist them in danger, but to accustom
them to regularity and sub'ordination. A body f(
Inumerous, and lo much iencumlbered, advanced lci-
surely, but in excellent ordClr ; and in tome places,
where it was confined by the woods or mountains,
the line of march extended above fix miles. Parties
of Mexicans frequently applared hovering arounti
theml oil the high ground, ; but perceiving no prof-
)pct of fucc(cfs in attacking an enemy continually
on his Iuardl, and p1ep.ned eccie them, they
lid not venture to naoril l hiin ; and Sandoval
lhad the glory of coluc(tling flatly to 'tl'ez/Ilco ;
convoy on which all the: t'tulrc oper;ltions of his
colintr'lmen depended "*.

F Coitiu Ri.at. .Gc, . C L. . Li. /, c. 14(,
I12

THIS was followed by another event of no less B O0 K

moment. Four ships arrived at Vera Cruz from V.
Hispaniola, with two hundred soldiers, eighty hor- I1,
fes, two battering cannon, and a confidcrable sup- Reei,'en a
ply of ammunition and arms '. Elevated with ob- forcement.
serving that all his preparatory schemes, either for
recruiting his own army, or impairing the force of
the enemy, had nowproduced their full effect, Cor-
tcs, impatient to begin the siege in form, hafiened
the launching of the brigantines. To facilitate
this, he had employed a vail number of Indians
for two months in deepening the finall rivulet which
runs by Tezeuco into the lake, and in forming it
into a canal near two miles in length -t; and though
the Mexicans, aware of his intentions, as well as of
the danger which threatened them, endeavoured
frequently to interrupt the labourers, or to burn the
brigantines, the work was at last completed §. On
the twenty-eighth of April, allethe Spanifli troops, The bri-

t) /.

b

... ' .'. '" ganltil,'

together with auxiliary Indians, were drawn up on launchcd.
the banks of the canal ; and with extraordinary mi-
litary pomp, heightened and rendered more solemn
by the celebration of the most sacred rites of religi-
on, the brigantines were launched. As they fell
down the canal in order, Father Olmcdo blefied
them, and gave each its name. Every eye follow-
ed theml with wonder and hope, until they entered
the lake, when they hoisted their fails, anid bore
away before the wind. A general shout of joy wt:s
rilfed; all admiring that bold inventive genius,
which, by means so extraordinary that. their fucccfs
ilmnofl excecded belief, had acqluilrd the command
VOL. I. Q. of

" Cortes Rcllt. 2z , F. 262, D. Gomara Cron. c. 129.
' Sec N OTE XXIIl. § Ii. Diaz, c. 14..

B O O K of a fleet, without the aid of which Mexico would

o_, have continued to set the Spanish power and armn
1521. at defiance. *.

Dispositions CORTES determined to attack the city from three
for the

othe different quarters ; from Tezeuco on the east fide of

the lake, from Tacuba on the weft, and from Cuy.
ocan towards the south. Those towns were fitua.
ted on the principal causeways which led to the ca-
pital, and intended for their defence. 'He appoint.
ed Sandoval to command in the sirss, Pedro de Al-
varado in the second, and Chriftoval de Olid in the
third ; allotting to each a numerous body of Indi-
an auxiliaries, together with an equal divifionof
Spaniards, who, by the junation of the troops from
Hispaniola, amounted now to eighty-fix horsemen,
and eight hundred and eighteen foot soldiers; of
whom a hundred and eighteen were armed with
muskets or cross-bows. Their train of artillery
consisted of three battering cannon, and fifteeR
field-pieces. t. He reserved for himself, as the ta-
tion of greateit importance and danger, the con-
dut of the brigantines, each armed with one of his
frnall cannon, and manned with twenty-five Spa-
niards.

As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards the

poits aligned them, they broke down the aqueducts
whit li the ingenuity of the Mexicans had erefcd
.fr conveying water into the capital, and by the
diftrcfs to which this reduced the inhabitants, gave
a beginning to the calamities which they were tlf-
tined to fuelfr I. Alvarado and Olid found the
towns of which they were ordered to take poflcfflon
dcfcrecd by their inhabitants, who had fled for safe-

ty

* Cortes Kcl:t. 266, C. Ilcricr;a,c ec. . li3 . i. c. 5. Comra
Cron. c laq. --) Coile; Renl . A 66, C.

II Cortc, Rcl .

l 67, B. B7 . 1)idz, c, 15o. lHerrcri,dcc. 3

i.c. 13.
it4.

ty to the capital, where Guatimozin had collected B 0 0 K
the chief force of his empire, as there alone he could
hope to make a successful stand against the formida- 152.
ble enemies who were approaching to assault him.

THE first effort of the Mexicans was to destroy Melican

the fleet of brigantines, the fatal effects of whose attack the
operations they foresaw and dreaded. Though the
brigantines, after all the labour and merit of Cor-
tes in forming them, were of inconsiderable bulk,
rudely conftruAed, and manned chiefly with land-
men, hardly poffefied of skill enough to conduc
them, they must have been objects of terror to a
people unacquainted with any navigation but that
of their lake, and possessed of no vessel larger than
a canoe. Necessity, however, urged Guatimozin to
hazard the attack; and hoping to supply by num-
bers what he wanted in force, he aflembled such a
multitude of canoes as covered the face of the lake.
They rowed on boldly to the charge, while the
brigantines, retarded by a dead calm, could scarce-
ly advance to meet them. But as the enemy drew Repulfci,
near, a breeze suddenly sprung up ; in a moment
the fails were spread, and thebrigantines, with irre-
fiitible impetuosity, broke through their feeble op-
ponents, overfct many canoes, and difip:itcd the
whole armament with such fiaughter, as convinced
the Mexicans, that the progress of the Europeans
in knowledge and arts rendered their superiority
greater on this new element: than they had hitherto
found it by land *.

FROM that time Cortes remained manser of the Singul. r

lake; and the brigantines not only prelerved a pl:,lut.<,r
eommunication between the Spaniards in their dif- "i l

Q 2 lecrcnt

[ Cortes Rclat, 267, C. B. Dian, c, iSo- Gonmara Crol., . 1.1.
lcrrcra, dec, 3. lib. i, c. 17,

It5

B O O K fcrent fiatiolis, though at considerable distance from

V. each other, but were employed to cover the causeways
15Z1. on each fide, and keep off the canoes, when they at-

tempted to annoy the troops as they advanced towards
the city. He formed the brigantines in threedivifions,
allotting one to each station, with orders to second
the operations of the officer who commanded there.
From all the three stations he pushed on the attack
against the city with equal vigour, but in a man-
ner so very different from that whereby sieges are
conducted in regular war, that he himself seems
afraid that it would appear no less improper than fin-
gular, to persons unacquainted with his situation t,
Each morning his troops assaulted the barricades
which the enemy had erected on the causeways,
forced their way over the trenches which they had
(dug, and through the canals where the bridges were
broken down, and endeavoured to penetrate into
the heart of the city, in hopes of obtaining some
decisive advantage, which might force the enemy
ro iur-render, and terminate the war at once; but
when the obitinate valour of the Mexicans render-
ed the efforts of the day ineffetual, the Spaniards
retired in the evening to their former quarters.
Thus their toil and danger were, in tome measure,
continilally renewed ; the Mexicans repairing in
the nilht what the Spaniards had dcftroyed through
the dav, and recovering the pofis from which they
Jiad driven them. But ncccflity prescribed this
flow andl untoward mode of operation. The nunm-
1( c- of his troops was so filall, that Cortes durst
Iot, with a: h;l:ilnf(l of lnmn, attcmpt to make alodg-
mncnt iln a city where he might be surroundcd and
;in: oyctd ly fich a

11 nultit ulde of enemies. The re-

iiieinlcllbrie of what he already tuf-fi-cd by the ill-
jludgeld , confid(lece with lwhich he had ventured into

fulch

-t t

cl L c h Re ]At. 270, F.
ii6

such a dangerous situation, was fill fresh in his B 0 0 K

V.

mind. The Spaniards, exhausted with fatigue,
were unable to guard the various ports which they I521.
daily gained; and though their camp was filled
with Indian auxiliaries, they durst not devolve this
charge upon them, because they were so little accuf-
tomed to discipline that no confidence could be
placed in theirvigilance. Besides this, Cortes was
extremely solicitous to preserve the city as much as
poflible from being destroyed, both as he destined it
to be the capital of his conquests, and wished that it
might remain as a monument of his glory. From
all these considerations, he adhered obstinately, for
a month after the siege was opened,.to the system
which he had adopted. The Mexicans, in their
own defence, displayed valour which was hardly in-
ferior to that with'which the Spaniards attacked
them. On land, on water, by night and by day,
one furious conflic succeeded to another. Several
Spaniards were killed, more wounded, and all were
ready to fink under the toils ofunintermitting ser-
vice, which were rendered more intolerable by the
injuries of the season, the periodical rains being
now set in with their usual violence :.

ASTONISHED and disconcerted with the length Ei.lc:vour.

and difficulties of the siege, Cortes determined to to take the
make one great effort to get poffefiion of the city be- a0.by
fore herelinquifled the plan which he had hitherto
followed, and had recourse to any other mode of
attack. With this view, he sent inRfructions to
Alvarado and Sandoval to advance with their divi-
sions to a general afflult, and took the conmmand in
pcrfon of that posted on the causeway of Cuyocan.
Animated by his presence, and the cxpcdCation of July 3,
fonc decisive event, the Spaniards pullhcd forward

with
B. Di;z,c. 15I.

B 0 0 K with irrefitible impetuosity. They broke through

one barricade after another, forced their way over
1521. the ditches and canals, and having entered the ci-

ty, gained ground incessantly, in spite of the mul-
titude and ferocity of their opponents. Cortes,
though delighted with the rapidity of his progress,
did not forget that he might still find it necessary to
retreat; and in order to secure it, appointed Julian
de Alderete, a captain of chief note in the troops
which he had received from Hispaniola, to fill up
the canals and gaps in the causeway as the main
body advanced. That officer, deeming it inglori-
ous to be thus employed, while his companions
were in the heat of acion and the career of viaory,
negleAed the important charge committed to him,
and hurried on inconsiderately to mingle with the
combatants. The Mexicans, whose military atten-
tion and skill were daily improving, no sooner ob-
served this, than they carried an account of it to
their monarch.

GUA'rIMOZiN instantly discerned the confe-
ReFulfed, quences of the error which the Spaniards had com-

mitted, and, with admirable presence of mind, pre-
pared to take advantage of it. He commanded the
troops posted in the front to flacken their efforts,
in order to allure the Spaniards to push forward,
while he dispatchcd a large body of chosen warriors
through differcnt streets, tome by land, and others
by water, towards the great breach in the cause-
way, which had been left open. On a signal which
he gave, the priefrs in the principal temple firuck
the great drum consecratcd to the god of war. No
sooner did the Mexiciims hear its doleful solemn
found, calculated to inflirc them with contempt of
death and enthifiaftic ardour, than they rufshed up-
on the enemy with frantic rage. 'I'he Spaniards,
unable to refifl men urged on no lefi by religious

fury

fury than hope of success, began to retire, at first B o0 K
leisurely, and with a good countenance ; but as the v.
enemy pressed on, and their own impatience to es- 152.
cape increased, the terror and confusion became so
general, that when they arrived at the gap in the
causeway, Spaniards and Tlafcalans, horsemen and
infantry, plunged in promiscuously, while the Mex-
icans rushed upon them fiercely from every fide,
their light canoes carrying them through shoals
which the brigantines could not approach. In vain
did Cortes attempt to fop and rally his flying
troops ; fear rendered them regardless of his intrea-
ties or commands. Finding all his endeavours to
renew the combat fruitless, his next care was to
save some of those who had thrown themselves into
the water; but while thus employed, with more at-
tention to their situation than to his own, fix Mex-
ican captains suddenly laid hold of him, and were with on
hurrying him off in triumph; and though two of derable loss.
his officers rescued him at the expence of their own
lives, he received several dangerous wounds before
he could break loose. Above sixty Spaniards per-
ifhed in the rout; and what rendered the difaffer
more affliting, forty of there fell alive into the
hands of an enemy never known to shew mercy to a
captive *.

THE approach of night, though it delivered the

dejected Spaniards from the attacks of the enemy, were taken
ushered in, what was hardly less grievous, the noise iclifit(i to

the god of

of their barbarous triumph, and of the horrid fcf- war.
tival with which they celebrated their victory.
Every quarter of the city was illuminated; the
great temple shone with such peculiar splendour,
that the Spaniards could plainly fee the people in
motion, and the priests busy in hallcning the pre-

parations

* Cortes Relat. p. 273. B. Diaz, c. 152. Cuiomarl Cron. c. 138.
lHcieri, dec. . 3 b. . . . 20.

B 0 O K parations for the death of the.prifoners. Through

V.

the gloom, they fancied that they discerned their
1521. companions by the whiteness of their skins, as they

were stript naked and compelled to dance before the
image of the god to whom they were to be offered.
They heard the shrieks of those who were sacrificed,
and thought that they could diftinguifheach unhap-
py victim, by the well-known found of his voice.
Imagination added to what they really saw or heard,
and augmented its horror. The most unfeeling
melted into tears of compassion, and the Itouteft
heart trembled at the dreadful spectacle which they
beheld t.

New CORTES, who, besides all that he felt in com-
schemes and
effortsofthe monwith his foldiers,was opprefled with the addi-
Mexicans. tional load of anxious reflections natural to a gene-

ral on such an unexpected calamity, could not, like
them, relieve his mind by giving vent to its an-
guifh. He was obliged to assume an air of tranqui-
lity, in order to revive the spirit and hopes of his
followers. The juncdure, indeed, required an ex-
traordinary exertion of fortitude. The Mexicans,
elated with their victory, sallied out next morning
to attack him in his quarters. But they did not
rely on the efforts of their own arms alone. They
lent the heads of the Spaniards whom they had fa-
crificed to the leading men in the adjacent provin-
ces, and assured them thatthe god of war, appeased
by the blood of their invaders, which had been flied
so plentifully on his altars, had declared with an
audible voice, that in eight days time those hated
enemies flhould be finally dcfl roycd, and peace and
profpcrity re-cflablillcd in the empire.

A PRE-

-I] SeeNOTEXXIV.
120

A PREDICTION uttered with 'such confidence, B o o K

and in terms so void of ambiguity, gained univer-
fal credit among a people prone to superstition. 1sz1.

C t,::, de-

The zeal of the provinces, which had already de- sertd' by
clared against the Spaniards, augmented, and feve- many .f his
ral, which had hitherto remained inadcive, took Les.
arms with enthusiastic ardour to execute the decrees
of the gods. The Indian auxiliaries who had join-
ed Cortes, accustomed to venerate the fame deities
with the Mexicans, and to receive the responses of
their priests with the fame implicit faith, abandon-
ed the Spaniards as a race of men devoted to certain
deftruscion. Even the fidelity of the Tlafcalans
was shaken, and the Spanish troops were left almost
alone in their Prations. Cortes finding that he at-
tempted in vain to dispel the superstitious fears of
his confederates by argument, took advantage,
from the imprudence of those who had framed the
prophecy, in fixing its accomplishment so near at
hand, to give them a striking demonstration of its
falsity. He suspended all military operations dur-
ing the period marked out by the oracle. Under
cover of the brigantines which kept the enemy at a
distance, his troops lay in safety, and the fatal term
expired without any disaster *.

His allics, afllamed of their own credulity, return- He rpgans
ed to their flation. Other tribes, judging that the tlhir friend-
gods, who had now deceived the MIexicans, had
decreed finally to withdraw their protection from
them, joined his fiandard ; and such was the levi-
ty of a simple people, moved by every flight im-
prcflion, that, in a short time after such a general
dletition of his confederates, Cortes saw himself,
if we may believe his own account, at the head of
a hundred and fifty thou sand Indi; ns. Even with

VoL. I1. R such

* B. Diz. c. 153. Gonvira Cron. c. 139.

121

B O O K such a numerous army, he found it necefiary to a.

v.

dopt a new and more wary system of operation. In-

i151. flead of renewing his attemrpts to become master of

and dots a the city at once, by such bold but dangerous efforts
o'a~tt;~k. of valour as he had already tried, he made his ad-

vances gradually, and with every pofible precau-
tion againll exposing his men to any calamity fimi-
lar to that which they frill bewailed. As the Spa-
niards pushed forward, the Indians regularly re-
paired the causeways behind them. As soon as
they got pofcfion of any part of the town, the
houses were instantly levelled with the ground.
Day by day, the Mexicans, forced to retire as their
enemies gained ground, were hemmed in within
more narrow limits. Guatimozin, though unable
to stop the career of the enemy, continued to de-
fend his capital with obftirnate resolution, and dif-
puted every inch of ground. But the Spaniards,
having not only varied their mode of attack, but,
by orders of Cortes, having changed the weapons
with which they fought, were again armed with
the long Chinantlan spears, which they had em-
ployed with such success against Narvaez, and, by
the firm array in which this enabled them to range
tlhemfelves, they repelled, with little danger, the
loose aslault of the lcxicans : incredible numbers
of them fell in the conflicts which they renewed
every day *. While war wafted without, famine
bcgan to confuIme them within the city. The Spa-
nifh brigantiies, having the entire command of the
lake, rendered it inpofliblc to receive any supply of
provisions by water. The vailt niimhcr of his In-
dian auxiliaries enabled Cortes to lhut up the ave-
nues to the city by land. The tolres which Guati-
inozin had lalid uip were exhanutl}cd, by the multi-
tudes which croudcd into the capital, to defend

their

-0u I ( ui eit. j, .1 '7 ; C, z -; ó, F. 13 I ) a , c.

.
122

their sovereign and the temples of their gods. Not B o o K

V.

only the people, but persons of the highest rank
felt the utmost distresses of want. What they sus- 15Zl.
sered brought on infectious and mortal distempers,
the last calamity that visits besieged cities, and
which filled up the measure of their woes .

BUT, under the pressure of so many and such va- Courage ind

constancy of

rious evils, the spirit of Guatimozin remained firm Guanimo-
and unfubdued. He rejected, with scorn, every zin.
overture of peace from Cortes, and disdaining the
idea of submitting to the oppressors of his country,
determined not to survive its ruin. The Spaniards July 2z
continued their progress. At length all the three
divisions penetrated into the great square in the
centre of the city, and made a secure lodgment
there. Three-fourths of the city were now redu-
ced, and laid in ruins. The remaining quarter was
so closely pressed, that it could not long withstand
alfailants who attacked it from their new Ration
with superior advantage, and more aflured expecta-
tion offuccefs. The Mexican nobles, solicitous to
save the life of a monarch whom they revered, pre-
vailed on Guatimozin to retire from a place where
refifance was now vain, that he might rouze the
more diflant provinces of the empire to arms,
and maintain there a more successful firuggle with
the public enemy. In order to facilitate the execu-
tion of this measure, they endeavoured to amuife
Cortes with overtures of submission, that, while his
attention was employed in adjusting the articles of
pacification, G uatimozin might escape unperceived.
But they made this attempt upon a leader of greater
sagacity and difccrnnmnt than to be deceived by
their arts. Cortes, fufpcciting their intention, and
aware of what moment it was to defeat it, appoint-

R 2 cd

* Cocs Rctlat , It. 277,
E F, B. Diaz, 155, GeCnaa Cro0. c. 14).

123

124 H S b'' 1

U Y U f A M J K 1I ; JA.
B 0 0 K ed Sandoval, the officer on whose vigilance he could

V..i . most perfc&ly rdy, to take the command of the
15z1. brigantines, with firic injunctions to watch every

motion of the enemy. Sandoval, attentive to the
charge, observing some large canoes crouded with
people rowing across the lake with extraordinary
rapidity, instantly gave signal to chace. Garcia
Holguin, who commanded the fleetest brigantine,
soon overtook them, and was preparing to fire on
the foremost canoe, which seemed to carry some

e is taken perrfon wholm all the reft followed and obeyed. At
prilone;.

once thc rowers dropt their oars, and all on board,
thlrowino dov-:l their arms, conjured him with cries
and tears to forbear, as the emperor was there,
Holguin eagerly teized his prize, and Guatimozin,
with a dignified composure, gave himself up into
his hands, requeiling only that no insult might be
o.i-frcd to the empress or his children. When con-
du tcd to Cortes, he appeared neither with the ful-
lIn fierconefs of a barbarian, nor with the dejedion
of a fupplicmnt. " I have done," said he, addref-
sing himself to the Spanish general, "' what be-
came a monarchl. i hiavc d1fe.ide(l my people to the
lalt extreml ity. Nothing now remains but to die.
Take dxis dagger," laying his hand on one which
Cortes wore, 'c plant it in my breast, and put an
end to a life which can no longer be of use -*."

Aug. 13. As f(ton as the fate of their foiercign was known,
IIC city the rcfil'aii:e of the Mexicans, ceascd ; and Cortes

took p oflcilion of' that finall part of the capital
which yet remained lnd( flroyed. 'Thus termina-
ted the ficge of 4Mexico, the riloft niemorable event
in th ccri qtrlc ,iof An'rica. It con('inucd fcventy-
fivc days, hIrdly onc oi wlich i)aifl;cd without foic

cxtraordinary

* C'-,'r,'- lte'it 2.7). .11. Diaz. . Gon.im; l.t rn. c. 142'
jlcr*'r.l, <lU. 3' litl. ii (. 7.

extraordinary effort of one party in the attack, or B o 0 K
of the other in the defence of a city, on the fate of
which both knew that the fortune of the empire de- 151.
pended. As the f-ruggle here was more obstinate,
it was likewise more equal, than any between the
inhabitants of the Old and New Worlds. The
great abilities of Guatimozin, the number of his
troops, the peculiar situation of his capital, so far
counterbalanced the superiority of the Spaniards in
arms and discipline, that they must have relin-
auifhed the enterprise, if they had trusted for fuc-
cess to themselves alone. But Mexico was over-
turned by the jealousy of neighbours who dreaded
its power, and by the revolt of fubj,eds impatient
to shake off its yoke. By their effetual aid, Cor-
tes was enabled to accumpliih what, without such
support, he would hardly have ventured to attempt.
How much fov.er this account of the reduc(ion of
IM.exico may letr:'t, on the one hand, from the
marv-llous i lations of some Spanish writers, by
:ascribing that to fimpii and obvious causes which
they attribute to the romantic valour of their coun-
tryln'n, it adds, on the other, to the merit and
,bilities of Cortes, vwho, under every disadvantage,
acquired such an alcendant over unknown nations;
a. to render them inslruments towards carrying his
fchelnes into execution *.

'THI exultation of the Spaniards, on accom- smalinefsoC

pl; liiiig this arduous cntcrpri.'e, was at firt cxcef- tlic bio'y,
Ii'.c. But this ws quickly d.niiped by the cruel lnijtllr
(dil ,lpoilntmient of those (;niiuinie hopes, which haLd o tlie Spa-

,iiirdq.

anlliitatcd themll ail-jt ll o many hardihips and dan-
ygrs. l(inl'ad of the inexhaustible wealth which
tlhly ,'xp.ccld fiom becominpg mallers of Montezu .

ma s
v S ce N 0 'F E XX'V,

B 0O K ma's treasures, and the ornaments of so many

V.

__, temples, their rapaciousness could collect only an
1521. inconsiderable booty amidst ruins and desolation t.

Guatimozin, aware of his impending fate, had or-
dered what remained of the riches amaffeed by his
ancestors to be thrown into the lake. The Indian
auxiliaries, while the Spaniards were engaged in
confilct with the enemy, had carried off the moss
valuable part of the spoil. The fum to be divided
among the conquerors was so small, that many of
them disdained to accept of the pittance which fell
to their share, and all murmured and exclaimed;
some, against Cortes and his confidents, whom they
fiufpeted of having secretly appropriated to their
own use, a large portion of the riches which should
have been brought into the common fRock; others,
against Guatimozin, whom they accused of obftina-
cy, in refusing to discover the place where he had
hidden his treasure.

ARGUMENTS, entrcaties, and promises were

Cuatimozln
t,,rtrcd. employed in order to sooth them, but with so little

effect, that Cortes, from folicitudcs to check this
growing spirit of difcuntent, gave way to a deed
which slained the glory of all his great actions.
Without regarding the former dignity of Guati-
mozin, or feeling any, revternce for those virtues
which he had difplayi)l , he fblbjcIted the unhappy
monarch, together wilth his chief favourite, to tor-
ture, in order to force from them a difovcry of the
royal treasures, which it was supposed they had
concealed. G(uatimozinii bore vwhatever the refined
cruelty of his tormentors could inflict, with the in-
vincible fortitude of ;in American warrior. His
fcllow-fuftlrer, ovcicom!le by the violence of the

anguinfl,

'' The gold nnd silver, accrill;n, to C 'rc*s, .moiunl.d only t(

Izoooo ,(:xrfs, R(clar. z8t1, A. .1 1um i

', r illn'ciol t thll Wl.liCi ther

SpdInIardi hat tort:merly divictd iL icici,.
I26

anguifl, turned a dejeted eye towairds his marser, B 0° K
which seemed to implore his permission to reveal all ..,
that he knew. But the high-fpirited prince, dart- 1521.
ing on him a look of authority mingled with scorn,
checked his weakhefs by asking, " Am I now re-
posing on a bed of flowers ?" Overawed by the
reproach, he persevered in his dutiful silence, and
expired. Cortes, aihamed of a scene so horrid,
rescued the royal vicim from the hands of his tor-
turers, and prolonged a life reserved for new indig-
nities and fuiTerings .

THE fate of the capital, as both parties had fore- All the pro

seen, decided that of the empire, The provinces vincesof
submitted one after another to the conquerors. thelnpi're
Small detachments of Spaniards marching through
them without interruption, penetrated in diflerent
quarters, to the great Southern Ocean, which, ac-
cording to the ideas of Columbus, they imagined
would open a short as well as easy paf'age to the
East Indies, and- secure to the crown of Castile all Cortes
the envied wealth of those fertile regions t; and forms

schemes of

the active mind of Cortes began already to form new dilco-
schemes for attempting this important° disco- veries,
very 4:.

HE did not know, that during the progress of his which are

vitorious arms in M4exico, the very fchemc, of
comn!letc,

by Magoi-

which he began to form some idea, had been un- lai.
dertaken and accomplished. As this is one of the
niof fplelnd(id events in the hiffory of the Spanifl
lilcoverics, and has been productive of effects pe-
cllliarly intcrefling to thofc extensive provinces
which Cortes had now fubjl(cd to the crown of
Catlilc, the account of its r.ilf and progrcfs merits a
particular detail.

IFERDINAND

* nDia:, c. 157. Gom na Cron. c. .16. 14errcr, decc .

3. lib.

;;. c . RToIpit i dn. Mond1(. Il .

l ,; ' Cot te Relat. zo, O),
&c. II. I)ia. c. 157. tI Ierrea, dec, 3. lib. ii. . 17. Goimirt

C1). , I i(),

B 0 0 K FERDINAND MAGALHAENS, or Magellan, a Por-
t,_ - tuguefe gentleman of honourable birth, having

lisz. served several years in the East Indies, with dif-

tinguifhed valour, under the famous Albuquerque,
demanded the recompence which he thought due to
his services, with the boldness natural to a high-
spirited soldier. But, for ofme reason which
is not explained, both his general and his fove-
reign rejected his suit with a disdainful coldness,
that was intolerable to a man conscious of
what he had done, and of what he deserved.
In a transport of rcfentment, he formally re-
nounced his allegiance to an ungrateful maf-
ter, and fled to the court of Castile, in hopes that
there his worth would be morejujily estimated. Hz
endeavoured to recommend himself by proposing to
execute a scheme, the accon-ihitne:nt of which,
he knew, would wound the moinarc-h, against whom
he was exafpetrated in the most tender part. He re-
vived Columbus's original and favourite projecEt, of
discovering a paflage to Indial hy a westerly course,
and without cncroiiching on thal: portion of the
globe which was allotted to the Po;turiw : fe by the
line of demarcation. He founded his hopes of sic-
ccfs on the ideas of that gre:it navigator, confirmed
by many obfcrvatiois, the rcfult of his own naval
experience, as well as that of his countrymcn, in
their intercourte with theEaft. The undcerttking,
lie acknowledged, was both arduous and expcnfive,
as it could not be attempted but with a squadron of
confideiable force, and victualled for at leart two
years. Fortunately, he applied to a miniffer who
was iot apt to be deterred, either by the boldnelfs of
a (etcign, or the expence of carrying it into exe-
cution. Cardinal Ximencs, who at that time di-
rcted the aflairs of Spain, discerning at once what
an increafl of wealth and glory would accrue to
his country by the filecefs of MlIagcl;ins's propolitl,
liticncd to it with a mollt favourable car. Charles V.

ill
128

on his arrival in his Spanish dominions, entered in- B 0 o K
to the measure with no less ardour, and orders V.
were iflued for equipping a'proper squadron at the I5jz.
public charge, of which the command was given
to Magellan, whom the king honoured with the
habit of St. Jago and the title of Captain Ge-
neral *.

ON the tenth of Augufl one thousand five hun- His voyage.

dred and nineteen, Magellan failed from Seville
with five ships, which, according to the ideas of
the age, were deemed to be of considerable force,
though the burden of the largest did not exceed one
hundred and twenty tons. The crews of the whole
amounted to two hundred and thirty-four men,
among whom were some of the most (kilful pilots
in Spain, and several Portuguese sailors, in whose
experience, as more extensive, Magellan placed still
greater confidence. After touching at the Cana-
ries, he flood directly south towards the equinoc-
tial line along the coast of America, but was so long
retarded by tedious calms, and spent so much time
in searching every bay and inlet for that communi-
cation with the Southern Ocean which he wised to
discover, that he did not reach the river De la
Piata till the twelfth of January. That fpacioius
opening through which its vast body of water pours
into the Atlantic, allured him to enter ; but, after
failing up it for fomc days, he concluded, from the
lhallownels of the fircam and the freflinef' of the
water, that the wifllcd-for Itrait was not situated
th're, and continued his course towards the south.
(n the thirty-firft of March he arrived in the port
tf St. Julian, about forty-eight degrees south of tllh
line, where he rcfolved to vwilnter. In this uncoii-
sortable fLation he loft one of his squadron, and the
Spaniards fufIllrcd I', Iucli fromi the excellive ri gour

VOL. 11. S ot
* lQrter.,td Jc~ li ii, c, i , iibI). i v c. q. ;o l.I Hill. c. yjr.

729

B o o K of the climate, that the crews of three of his ships,

headed by their officers, role in open mutiny, and
15s1. infifled on relinquishing the visionary project ofa

desperate adventurer, and returning directly to
Spain. This dangerous infurretion Magellan sup-
pressed, by an effort of courage no less prompt than
intrepid, and inflicted exemplary punifimenton the
ringleaders. With the remainder of his followers,
overawed but not reconciled to his scheme, he con-
ti nued his voyage towards the south, and at length
discovered, near the fifty-third degree of latitude,
the mouth of a strait, inlto which he entered, not-
withflanding the murmurs and remonstrances of the
people under his command. After failing twenty
days in that wind:ng dangerous channel, to which
he gave his own name, and where one of his ships
deserted him, the great Southern Ocean opened to
his view, and with te:rs of joy he returned thanks
to Heaven for having thus far crowned his endea-
vours with success t.

BuTr he was frill at a greater diflance than he

imagined from the objcct of his wishes. He.failed
during three months and twenty days in an uniforn
ditretion towards the north-west, without disco-
vering land. In this voyage, the longest that had
ever been made in the unbounded ocean, he suffered
incredible hlit ref . His stock of provisions was al-
most exhausted, the water became putrid, the men
were reduced to th shortest allowance with which
it was p'olible to fIlftain life, and the feurvy, the
molt dreadfll of all the maladies with which sea-
fating people ;tre al litrdl, began to spread among
the. crew. (ne cilcumfiance alone afforlded them
foime consolation ; they enjoyed an uninterrupted
courfc of fair weather, with such favourable winds,

that

* Illerrr, irc( . lib. iv r In. l.l) ix.c, Ir, &c. ComartaHill. i '

9,, )'i;gal :.ft V..I;ilio.ip. .l 'uI.,i . ii. p. 357., &4.
130

that Magellan bestowed on that ocean the name of B O 0 K
Pacific, which it still retains. When reduced to V.
fueh extremity that they must have funk under their 15.
fuf'erings, they fell in with a cluster of small but
fertile islands, which afforded them refrefhmelnts in
such abundance, that their health was soon re-el- MrIrc 6.
tablifhed. From these isles, to which he gave the
name of DE LOS LADRONES, he proceeded on his
voyage, and soon made a more important discovery
of the islands now known by the name of the PrI-
LIPPINES. In one of these he got into an unfor-
tunate quarrel with the natives, who attacked him
with a numerous body of troops well armed ; and
while he fought at the head of his mfien with his
usual valour, he fell by the hands of those barbari-
ans, together with several of his principal oficers. April 26

THE expedition was prosecuted under other com-

manders. After visiting many of the fimaller isles
scattered in the eastern part of the Indian ocean,
they touched at the great island of Borneo, anll at
length landed in Tidore, one of the Moluccas, to Nov. L
the astonishment of the Portuguese, who could not
comprehend how the Spaniards, by holding a wef-
tcrly course, had arrived at that fcquefcered feat of
their moll valuable commercc, wich they thell-
selves had ditcovered by failing in an oppolite di-
rection. There, and in the adjacent isles, they
found a people acquainted with the benefits of ex-
tenlive ti;ade, and willing to open an intercourfewith
a new lntion. They took in a cargo of the preci-
ous ipices, which arc the difinguilhcd produdcion
of thufe islands, and with that, as well as with fpe-
ciinens of the rich commodities yielded by the other

,oulltries which they had viiited, the VIcToRY,

which, of the two lhips that remincd of the fqua-
dron, was molt fit for a long voyage, ft fail for Jn.

S Eulrop Ja

I3I

B 0 O K Europe, under the command of Juan Sebastian del

-V.

Cano. He followed the course of the Portuguese
s15:. by the Cape of Good Hope, and, after many difaf-

tcrs and fufterings, he arrived at St. Lucar on the
fevcnth of September one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty-two, having failed round the globe
in the ipac of three years and twenty-eight days *.

THOU(GH an untimely fate deprived Magellan of

the fatistC6tion of accompliflling this great under-
tckinv', his contemporaries, just to his memory and
talcnts, ascribed to him not only the glory of having
formed the plan, but of having furimounted almof
every obtilcle to the completion of it; and in the
present age his name is flill ranked among the high-
cit in the roll of eminent and successful navigators.
The navawl glorv of Spain now eclipsed that of eve-
ry other inatior, and by a singular felicity Cie had
the merit, in the courfi- of a iew years, of discover-
ilg a new con:inent alrmor as large as that part of
the earth which was formerly known, and of afcer-
taining by expcrience the form and extent of the
whole terraqucous globe.

THE Spaniards were not fatisfi'd with the glory

of having first encompailed the carth ; they cxpec-
ttl to dccr;iv' great cmmcrci il advantages from this
nIvw ;ind boldcl efilrt of their n.aritinie fliill. The
men of ftienc amciing them corn dei(lcd, that the
fpicc i'lnlands, and si. 'ral of the richclfi countries in
the Eafi, w;ere o I itlatcd a; to b1lllon ol- rioht to
the crown of Caflile, in conofqic'lc': . of the partiti-
oni inade by Alexander Vi. 'I 'he nrlclchlntts, with-
out .Itttrc(idiir to this (liltlilon, (igla; 'd

ei, tcr-ly in
thatl l a and allniing conlll'lti(tt', which was

l Hre er.d 'i r * lihl. i. ( . (C. li). iv.c. 1. (.;ontl.l Clan . nc. 93

Sc. I):i;/lt. a Mp t,,11.. 11 Ai. p. 6) , &,c.
1 2

now opened to them. The Portuguese, alarmed at B O K
the intrusion of such formidable rivals, remonftrat- tL,
ed and negociated in Europe, while in Asia they 15zL.
obflrutced the trade of the Spaniards by force of
arms. Charles, not sufficiently instruCted with re-
fpca to the importance of this valuable branch of
commerce, or diftradted by the multiplicity of his
schemes and operations, did not afford his fubjeas
proper protection. At last, the low frate of his
linances, exhausted by the efforts of his arms in
every part of Europe, together with the dread of
adding a new war with Portugal to those in which
he was already engaged, induced him to make over
his claim of the Moluccas to the Portuguese for
three hundred and fifty thousand ducats. He re-
served, however, to the crown of Cafrile the right
,f reviving its pretensions on repayment of that
fum ; but other objects engroiled his attention and
that of his fucceflbrs, and Spain was finally ex-
cluded from a branch of commerce in which it was
cnaaging with sanguine expectations of profit t.

THoUGHi the trade with the Mloluccaswaas relin-
quihced, the voyage of Magellan was followed by
commercial effic.ls of treat moment in Sp;ain. Phi-
lip ii. in the year one thousand five hundred aind
iixly-lour, reduced those islands which he discover-
1c in the Ealiern Ocean to fuljcction, and etla-
bliflicd lettlceents there ; between' which and the
kiil,-lom of New Spa:in, a regular intercourse, the
Ilnure of which flhall be explained in its proper
l'acc, is carried on. I return now to the tranfac-
tiouis in: New Spain.

A r the timle th;it Corte ws as cquiring flCch vas' An orl,

tcr'llior ics for- his native country, and preparing the sup il,'.f-
\0wy fur Iuture coiilutlts, it was his lingular fate to

not

4 1I~eH cc,~. Ub. u. .5, 'I,-- (ki C, n:v .

I ,
i . ', &-~.

£ 0 0 K not on!y to be destitute of any commission or au-

V.
_^ thority from the sovereign whom he was serving

with such successful zeal, but to be regarded as an
undutiful and seditious subjea. By the influence
,of Fonseca, bishop of Burgos, his conduct in aflum-
ing the government of New Spain was declared to
be an iriegular usurpation, in contempt of the royal
authority; and Chriitoval de Tapia received a com-
mifiion, impowering him to supersede Cortes, to
seize his person, to confiscate his effects, to make a
flrit ifcria i;Ly into his proceedings, and to transmit
the refilt of his inquiries to the council of the In-
dies, of which the bilhop of Burgos was president.
A few weeks aittcr the redution of Mexico, Tapia
landed at Vera Cruz with the royal mandate to itrip
its conqueror of his power, and to treat him as a
criminal. But Fonseca had chosen a very im-
proper infRrumrnt to wreak his vengeance on
Cortes. Tapia had neither the reputation nor
the talents that suited the high commiand to which

which he he was appointed. Cortes, while he publicly ex-
cludes. presscd the moil refpec'ful veneration for the em-

peror's authority, fecretlv took measures to defeat
the effect of his commiflion ; and having involved
Tapia and his followers in a multiplicity ofnego-
ciations and conferences, in which he sometimes
had recourse to threats, but more frequently em-
ployed bribes and piomnlifes, he at length prevailed
on that wctlc mnan to abandon a province which he
was unworthy of governing 1.

AppiC a- BuT notwithilanding the fortunate dexterity

gain to the with which lie had eluded this blow, Cortes was fb
court, sensible of the precarious tenure by which he held
Mly ;5 his power, that ihe dispatched deputies to Spain

with

t1- Herrera, dec, 3. lib. iii. c. 6. dec. iv. c. I. Cort. Rclat. z8i. E.
B. Diaz.c. c. 58.

with a pompous account of the success of his arms, B °0 K

V.

with farther specimens of the produAions of the
country, and with rich prefcnts to the emperor, as 157.
the earnefI of future contributions from his new
conquef ; requefling, in r:compence for all his
ferviccs, the approbation of his proceedings, and
that he might be entrutled with the government of
those territories, which his conduct, and the valour
of his followers had added to the crown of Castile.
The juncture in which his deputies reached the
court was favourable. The internal commotions
in Spain, which had disquieted the beginning of
Charles's reign were jus appeased t. The minis-
ters had leisure to turn their attention towards
foreign affairs. The account of Cortes's victories
filled his countrymen with admiration. The ex-
tent and value of his conquests became the objeEt of
rxaft and interesting hopes. Whatever stain he
might have contrated, by the irregularity of the
fleps which he took in order to attain power, was
so fully effaced by the splendour and merit of the
great actions which this had enabled himn to perform,
that every heart revolted at the thought of inflicing
any censure on a man, whose services entitled him
to the highcft marks of diflinction. The public
voice declared warmly in tIvour of his pretensions,
and Charles arriving in Spain about this time,
adopted the sentiments of his fubjcts with a youth-
ful ardour. Notwithstanding the claims of Velaf-
quez, and the partial rcprefentations of the bishop
ot Burgos, he appointed Cortes captain general and
governo- r of New Spain, judging that no person ot.a

fv.:; lo capable of maintaining the royal authority, Captiil-

,1 ,t'cltabhlilillng good order b oth among his Spanifil ;oelondf
;nd In iianl subjects, as the commander whom the New Spain.

former
'I 1 11A. led V. vol. li. 1) 5.

B 0 0 K former would willingly obey, and the latter had

long been accuaomred to fear and to refpeL&t t.

15zz.

His rfhemes EVEN before his jurifdidion received this legal
and arrange- fantion, Cortes ventured to exercise all the powers
ments.

of a governor, and, by various arrangements, en-
deavoured to render his conquest a secure and bene-
ficial acquisition to his country. He determined
to establish tie feat of government in its ancient
fation, and to raise Mexico again fromn its ruins;
and having conceived high ideas concerning the
future grandeur of the ktate of which he was laying
the foundation, he began to rebuild its capital on a
plan which hath gradually formed the most magni-
ficent city in the New World. At the fame time,
he employed skilful persons to search for mines in
different parts of the country, and opened some
which were found to be richer than any which the
Spaniards had hitherto discovered in America. He
detached his principal officers into the remote pro-
vinces, and encouraged them to fettle there, nct
only by bestowing upon them large tracts of land,
but by granting them the fame dominion over the
Indians, and the fame right to their service, which
the Spaniards had afinumed in the islands.

Infnrir;i- IT was not, however, without difficulty that the
rls of tie Mexican empire could be entirely reduced into the
andm ct'ltity forml of a Spanifli colony. lEni.agcd and rendered
oftlhe Spt- desperate by oppreflion, the natives often forgot tlih

lfupcrority of their enemies, :and rn11 to arms in de-
fence of their liberties. In every contetfl, however,
the 'European valour alnd dlif plile pre:vailed. But,

fatally

I- Herrr, dec. 3. Iil,.;v. 3. o. '.C u s, ' . W ii
167, I({3.

fatally for the honour of their country, the Spani- B °0 K

V.

ards sullied the glory redounding from these repeat-
ed viEtories by their mode of treating the vanquish- 152
ed people. After taking Guatimozin, and becom-
ing masters of his capital, they supposed that the
king of Caflile entered on pofleflion of all the rights
of the captive monarch, and affected to confider
every effort of the Mexicans to assert their own in-
dependence, as the rebellion of vassals againQ their
sovereign, or the mutiny of saves againit their
master. Under the fanEtion of those ill-founded
maxims, they violated every right that should be
held sacred between hostile nations. After every
infurreAion, they reduced the common people in
the provinces which they subdued, to the most hu-
miliating of all conditions, that of personal fervi-
tude. Their chiefs, supposed to be more criminal,
were punished with greater severity, and put to
death in the molt ignominious or the molt excruci-
ating form, that the insolence or the cruelty of their
conquerors could devise. In almost every province
of the Mexican empire, the progress of the Spanish
arms is marked with blood, and with deeds so atro-
cious as disgrace the enterprising valour that con-
ducted them to success. In the province of Panuco,
sixty caziques, or leaders, and four hundred nobles,
were burnt at one time. Nor was this shocking
barbarity perpetrated in any sudden sally of rage,
or by a commander of inferior note. It was the
adt of Sandoval, an ofliccr whose name is entitled
to the second rank in the annals of New Spain,
executed after a folcmn confultration with Corres ;
and to complete the horror of the fcenle, the chil-
dren and relations of the wretched victims were
aflmbled, and compelled to be li)ec-ators of tLi'ir
dying agonies*. It ccnms hardly possible to cxceed
in horror this dreadful example of icverity ; but it
was followed by another, which aflfeacd the Mexi-

VOL. II. I cans

* Curcrts R l.t. 291, (2. C;u.omrl a( 'ruii. . 15 ,S

B 0 0 K cans flill more sensibly, as it gave them a most feel

ing proof of their own degradation, and of thefmall
3522i reg:-rd that their haughty malers retained for the

ancient dignity and splendour of their f-ate. Oh
a flight suspicion, confirmed by very imperfect
evidence, that Guatiiozin had formed a scheme
to flike ofl the yoke, and to excite his former sub-
jelcs to take arms, Cortes, without the formality of
a trial, ordered the unhafpy monarch, togetherwith
the caziques of Tezeuco and Tacuba, the two
persons of greatest eminence in the empire, to be
hanitre ; and the Mexicans, with aftoniflment
and horror, beheld this ignominious punishment
inflicted upon perftns, to whom they were accuf-
tocned to look up with reverence, hardly inferior
to that which thev paid to the gods themselves'.
The example ot Cortes and his principal officers,
encoura-gd and jiiftiied persons of subordinate
rank. to vrnt!!re upon committing greater excesses.
N uno de (Gi7,z:ln;, in particular, itained an illrf-
trious naill by deds of peculiar etormity and ri-
gour, in various expeditions which he conducted:l:

O,,: circunftian(c, however, saved the Mexicans

froim arih.r ' c'nfui:nption, perhaps from one as
con:pl,..te a.; that swhich had depopulated the illands.
'Tir. firlt· c:Inq Ci r:<,.s did nut attempt to search for
the prtccio;L m'lt;ls in the bowels of tile earth.
ThI(y were lcit hcer fuflicicntly wealthy to carry on
the experlfive work¢, which are requisite for open-
ing, tholi; d ic' ri'c(lcs where Nature has concealed
thel v(eills of !olt( ;a1l silver, nor fuitcicntly fkilfill
to perlform rh ith ,niiiiis operations by wlich they
a-e clparated ifrom their rlei)pcAtive ores. l' hey we'e

satisfied

* .11.u11:1 C ro . c. 'o. . I)it.z. c. 177. FHcrlre,, de. 3.

lii.. ii L. 9. Sec N OT'E XX VI. Hellrerai, dec. 4 "nJ 5'
pas 1i.
I38

iatisfied with the more simple method, practilfd by B O O K
the Indians, of washing the earth carried down ri-
vers and'torrents from the mountains, and collect- isz.
ing the grains of native metal deposited there. The
rich mines of New Spain, which have poured forth
their treasures with such profusion on every quar-
ter of the globe, were not discovered for several years
after the conquest*. By that time, a more orderly
government and police were introduced into the co-
lony; experience, derived from former errors, had
suggested many useful and humane regulations ior
the protection and preservation of the Indians ; and
though it then became necessary to increa.i the
number of those employed in the mines, and they
were engaged in a species of labour more pernicious
to the human constitution, they suffered leis hard-
lhip or diminution than from the ill-judged, but
less extensive, schemes of the first conquerors.

THIS extraordinary mortality among the Indians,
disappointed the hopes of their new masters. Few
seem to have derived any considerable wealth from
their ill-conducled researches. According to the
usual fate of first settlers in new colonies, it was
their lot to encounter danger and to flruggle with
difficulties; the fruits of their vicories and toils
were reserved for times of tranquillity, and reaped
by successors of greater indufiry, but of inferior
merit. The early hifforians of America abound
with accounts of the fuffcrings and of the poverty
of its conquerors:-:. In New Spain, their condi-
tion was rendered more grievous by a peculiar ar-
ralrgement. When Charles V. advanced Cortes
to the government of that country, he, at the fluien
time, appointed certain comminifioners to recciv

T 2 and

4I errera, (lcc. S. lib. c. C, 21.
13. Diaz. C. 209.

s Cortc RcIt t. 7`3. I'.

B 0 0 K and adminiitcr the royal revenue there, with inde-

V.
L-- jpendent jurifdialion*. These men, chosen from
I52zz inferior stations in various departments of public

bufincfs at Madrid, werd so much elevated with
their promotion, that they thought they were called
to aat a part of the first consequence. But being
accustomed to the minute formalities of office, and
having contraded the narrow ideas suited to the
sphere in which they had hitherto moved, they were
astonished, on arriving in Mexico, at the high au-
thority which Cortes exercised, and could not con-
ceive that the mode of admiinifration, in a coun-
try recently subdued and fettled, muff be different
from that which took place in one where tranquil-
lity and regular government had been long eita-
blilhed. In their letters, they represented Cortes
as an ambitious tyrant, who having usurped a ju-
rifdi'dion superior to law, aspired at independence,
and by his exorbitant wealth and extensive influ-
ence, might accomplish those disloyal schemes
which he apparently meditatedt. Thefc infinu-
ations made such deep impieffion upon the Spanish
miniftiers, mofl of whom had been formed to bufi-
ness under the jealous and rigid administration of
Ferdinand, that unmindful of all Cortes's past
friean rvice1,

and retardlcfs of what he was then susser-

ing in co!ndllLucig that extraordinary expedition,
in which ha advanced from the lake of Mexico to
the wtflcrn extremities of Hondurast, they infuscd
the fiane fuifpicions into the mind of their maitcr,
and prevailed on himn to order a folenin inqucif to
be made into his condut,, with powers to the li-
ccnciatc 'Ponce de Tcon, entniflcd with that corm-
m'' ili(n lre, Io i ze his per son, if' he should find that
cxpcdient, and fend him prifoncr to Spain§.

I!rrcrC , :!ec. . . libi. ;v. c . Id. ec

. 3

I . lit .

. C. . 14.
Su: NO I'E XXVII. § I-lcicr.i, dec. 3. li. viii. c. I4, 15.

THE sudden death of Ponce de Leon, a few days B °V0 K

-after his arrival in New Spain, prevented the exe-
cution of this commission. But as the objet of his 1Sz5-
appointment was known, the mind of Cortes was
deeply wounded with this unexpected return for
services which far exceeded whatever any subjed
of Spain had rendered to his Sovereign. He endea-
voured, however, to maintain his station, and to
recover the confidence of the court. But every
person in office, who had arrived from Spain since
the conquest, was a spy upon his condusr, and with
malicious ingenuity gave an unfavourable reprefen-
tation of all his actions. The apprehensions of
Charles and his ministers increased. A new corn- 158.
mission of inquiry was issued, with more extensive
powers, and various precautions were takei to pre-
vent or to punish him, if he should be so prefump-
tuous as to attempt what was inconsistent with the
fidelity of a fubjeat*. Cortes beheld the approach-
ing crisis of his fortune with all the violent emoti-
ons natural to a haughty mind, conscious of high
desert, and receiving unworthy treatment. But
though iome of his desperate followers urged him
to aflert his own rights against his ungrateful coun-
try, and, with a bold hand, to seize that power
which the courtiers meanly accused him of covet-
ingt, he retained such felf-command, or was actu-
ated with such itntiments of loyalty, as to reject
their dangerous counsels, and to chufe the only
course in which he could secure his own dignity,
without departing from his duty. HIe resolved not
to expose himself to the ignominy of a trial, in
that country which had been the fccne of his tri-
u;phs ; but, without waiting for the arrival of his

judges,

* r e , c. . . viii. . dec. e, ib . ii . .

i, . iv. c. 9.

'c 1,. Diaz, c. 1 . r d C.

t6. Goiaut,'

. C. 16. 'ó I . D.iz.
'. 194.

HIS rORY OF AMERICA.
B O K judges, to repair direcly to Cafile, and commit

V. a n

v- himself and his cause to the justice and generosity
1S5-. of his sovereign*.

CORTES appeared in his native country with the

splendour that suited the conqueror of a mighty
kingdom. He brought with him a great part of
his wealth, many jewels and ornaments of great va-
lue, several curious productions of the countryt,
and was attended by binme Mexicans of the first
rank, as well as by the most considerable of his own
officers. His arrival in Spain removed at once e-
very suspicion and fear that had been entertained
with refpea to his intentions. The emperor, hav-
ing now nothing to apprehend from the designs of
Cortes,. received him like a person whom confci-
oufnefs of his own innocence had brought into the
presence of his master, and who was intitled, by
the eminence of his services, to the highest marks
of diftincion and refp.ec. The order of St. Jago,
the title of Marquis del Valle de Guaxaca, the
grant of a vaif territory in New Spain, were fuc-
ceffively beffowed upon him; and as his manners
were correct and elegant, although he had passed
the greater part of his life among rough adventur-
ers, the emperor admitted him to the fame familiar
intercourse with himself, that was enjoyed by no-
blemen of the first rankT.

BuTr, aniidlf those external proofs of regard,

symptoms of remaining distrust appeared. Though
Cortes earneffly solicited to be reinflated in the go-
vernment of New Spain, Charles, too sagacious to
commit such ;in important charge to a man whom
he had once fufplc(ted, peremptorily refused to in-
reft him again with powers which he might find

it

'* I1errtra, sdcrc. !i!.i .c.8. *1| Sec N()'lE XXVIIIs

Ic rrfr, Ic . 3 . li)i. 1.. D. 1.

vi . z. 6. GC)I.
C(on. c. dz.;

it impoflible to controul. Cortes, though dignified B 0 0 K
with new titles, returned to Mexico with diminilh- _,
ed authority. The military department, with pow- 1530.
ers to attempt new discoveries, was left in his
hands; but the fuprelme diretion of civil affairs
was placed in a board called THE AUDIENCE OF
NEW SPAIN. At a subsequent period, when, upon
the increase of the colony, the exertion of authori-
ty more united and extensive became necessary, An-
tonio de Mendoza, a nobleman of high rank, was
sent thither as VICEROY, to take the government
into his hands.

Tlts divilion of power in New Spain proved,

;a; was unavoidable, the source of perpetual diffen-
tion, which embittered the life of Cortes, and
:hwartcd all his schemes. As he had now no op-
iporttnitv to display his active talents but in at-
tcllmpting new discoveries, he formed various
;.:hemes for that purpose, all of which bear impref-
lions of a genius that delighted in what was bold
:.nd iplendid. He early entertained an idea, that,
,ithe- by ftecring through the gulf of Florida along
the c; lt coast of North America, some firait would

,tilond that communicated with the weffcrn o-

i il ; or that, by examiniing the ifthlnus of Iarien,
;,,lie jpailgc would be (lilcovcred between the North
a;nd South Seas'. iBut having been difappoitced
in lis expectations with rcfpcct to both, he now
conflinedl his views to such voyages of discovery as
hr could miake fronm thce ports of New Spain in the
:ittili S'a. There he fitted out ticccflivcly feve-
:; lna.ll tfqul'lronts, which either perilhed in tile
;uiti'lllpr, or rcturnc(d without making any discovery
,1 iiioit)11ctii. Cortles, weary of entruiting tlhe con-'

(i .'t (' liis o)peratiolls to others, took the command

1
il it \Iv I ll;acllt ill pcrlfo, anJ, after enduring 1536.

incredible

143
4 C-t.. Rellc. 17 till. i:i. z('4, 0.

B O O K incredible hardships, and encountering dangers of

V'. every species, he discovered the large peninsula of
*536. California, and surveyed the greater part of the

gulf which separates it from New Spain. The
discovery of a country of such extent would have
reflected credit on a common adventurer; but it
could add little new honour to the name of Cortes,
nor satisfy the sanguine expectations which he had
formed*. Disgusted with ill success, to which he
had not been accustomed, and weary of contesting
with adversaries to whom he confidered it as a dif-
grace to be opposed, he once more fought for re-
,540.

dress in his native country.

BUT his reception there was very different from

that which gratitude, and even dcccncy, ought to
have secured for hin. The merit of his ancient
exploits was already, in a great measure, forgotten,
or eclipsed by the fame of recent and more valua-
ble conquests in another quarter of America. No
service of moment was now expected fiom a man
of declining years, and who began to be unfortu-
nate. The emperor behaved to him with cold civi-
lity; his minilters treated himi, sometimes with
neglect, sometimes with insolence, Hiis grievances
received.no redress; his claims were urged without
effed; and after several yelars fpcnt in fruitless ap-
plication to ministers and judges, an occupation the
most irksome and moi tilying to a man of high fpi-
rit, who had moved ill a flihere where lie was more
accustomed to comnltald than to bolicit, Cortes
ended his days on the 'ccond of December one
thousand five hunldrcd and forty-cfven, in the
fixty-tecond year of his iag. HIis fate was

the

'* Herera, dlec. 5. lib. v ii. , . dl,

1 . f-. lib. vi. c. 14.. 'e-

neg.s Hiilt.of g l^i'orii. i. J .:: 1l ,. i.: i fl p.

:i;2, &:c.
144

the fame with that of all the persons who diftin- B O O K
guilhed themselves in the discovery or conquest of , .
the New World. Envied by his contemporaries, 15;6.
and ill requited by the court which he served, he
has been admired and celebrated by succeeding ages.
Whichhas formed the moftjuft estimate of his cha-
rater, an impartial consideration of his aaions nuft
determine.

T H E.
VOL II.

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VI.

THE
H I S T 0 Y

0 F
A M E R I CA.

B O 0 K VI.

FROM the time that Nugnez de Balboa disco- B o K
vered the great Southern Ocean, and received the VI.
firit obscure hint concerning the opulent countries 1z3.
with which it might open a communication, the Schemesfor
wishes and schemes of every enterprising person in pnirri
the colonies of Darien and Panama were turned to-
wards the wealth of thofc unknown regions. In an
age when the spirit of,adventure was so ardent and
vigorous, that large fortunes were wafted, and the
most alarming dangers braved, in pursuit of disco-
vcries merely possible, the faintest ray of hope was
followed with eager expectation, and the slightest
information was sufficient to inspire such pcrfcd&
confidence, as conducted men to the most arduous
undertakings *.

U 2 ACCORDINGLY,
·I- Sec NOTE XXIX,

0 0 K ACCORDINGLY, several armaments were fitted
VI.

out in order to explore and take pofleffion of the

1523. countries to the east of Panama, but under the con-

fulforfoe ducdt of leaders whose talents and resources were
time. unequal to the attempt *. As their excursions did

not extend beyond the limits of the province to
which the Spaniards had given the name of Tierra
Firme, a mountainous region covered with woods,
thinly inhabited, and extremely unhealthy, theyre-
turned with dismal accounts concerning the dif-
trefes to which they had been exposed, and the
unpromising afpecd of the places which they had vi-
fited. Damped by there tidings, the rage for dif-
covcry in that direction abated ; and it became the
general opinion, that Balboa had founded visionary
hopes, on the tale of an ignorant Indian, ill under-
stood, or calculated to deceive,

Undertaken
.[ ppzrrr, BUT there were three persons fettled in Pana-
Almiago ma, on whom the circumstances which deterred

uque. others made 1') little impression, that, at the very
3524. moment when all confidered Balboa's expectations

of discovering a rich country, by steering towards
the east, as chimerical, they rciflvcd to attempt the
execution us his scheme. The rintmes of those ex-
traordinary men were Francisco Pizarro, Diego de
Almagro, and Hernando Luque. Pizarro was the
natural Ton of a gentlenan of an honourable fa-
mily by a very low woman, and, according to
the cruel fate which often attends the offspring
of unl.awful love, had been to totally neglected
in his youth by the author of his birth, that he
cenms to have defiined him never to rife beyond
the condition of his mother. In confequencc of
tllis ungenerous idea, he flt him, when border-
ilig oil iiinhood, to keep hogs. But the afpiriilg

mind
' Calandain Coronkical . ioo.

I49

mind of young Pizarro disdaining that ignoble oc- B o o K
cupation, he abruptly abandoned his charge, enlist- VJ.
ed as a soldier, and after serving some years in Ita- 15z4.
ly, embarked for America, which, by opening such
a boundless range to active talents, allured every ad-
venturer whose fortune was not equal to his ambi-
tious thoughts. There, Pizarro early distinguish-
cd himself. With a temper of mind no less daring
than the constitution of his body was robust, he
gas foremost in every danger, patient under the
greatest hardships, and unfubdued by any fatigue.
Though so illiterate that he could not even read,
he was soon confidered as a man formed to com-
mand. Every operation committed to his conduct
proved successful, as, by a happy but rare conjunc-
tion, he united perseverance with ardour, and was
as cautious in executing, as he was bold in form-
ing his plans. By engaging early in ative life,
without any resource but his own talents and
inldufry, and by depending on himself alone in
his struggles to emerge from obscurity, he acquir-
ed such a thorough knowledge of affairs, and of
men, that he was fitted to affuine a superior part in
conducLing the one, and in governing the other *.

ALMVAGRO had as little to boast of his descent

as Pizarro. The one was a balsard, the other
foundling. Bred, like his companion, in the camp,
he yielded not to him in any of the soldierly quali-
ties of intrepid valour, indefatigable activity, or in-
surmountable constancy in enduring the hardfiips
infcpcrable from military service in the New
World. But in Almagro these virtues were ac-
companied with the openness, generosity, and can-

dour

1' IIlrri . & , afCim.

Ie

& pa ci . 4de. lib. vi. c. 107. GCOm.

i 4ll
. . 144. Z.atl c, lib. iv. c. 9.

B O K dour natural to men whose profession is arms; in

_ Pizarro, they were united with the add refs, the craft,
15z4. and the dissimulation of a politician, with the art

of concealing his own purposes, and with sagacity
to penetrate into those of other men.

HERNANDO DE LUQUE was an ecclesiastic, who

acted both as priest and schoolmaster at Panama,
and, by means which the contemporary writers
have not described, had amassed riches that infpir-
ed him with thoughts' of rising to greater emi-

nence.

Terms of SUCH were the men destined to overturn one of
their afOci- the most extensive empires on the face of the earth.
ation.

Their confederacy for this purpose was authorised
by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama. Each
engaged to employ his whole fortune in the ad-
venture. Pizarro, the leaf wealthy of the three,
as he could not throw so large a fum as his affoci-
ates into the common flock, engaged to take the
department of greatest fatigue and danger, and to
command in person the armament which was to go
first upon discovery. Almagro offered to condui
the supplies of provisions and reinforcements of
troops, of which Pizarro might fland in need. Lu-
qlue was to remain at Panama to negociate with
the governor, and superintend whatever was carry-
ing on for the general interest. As the fpiritof
cnthufiafi uniiformly accompanied that of adven-
ture in the New World, and by that strange union
both acquired an incrcafc of force, this confedera-
cy, formed by ambition and avarice, was confirm-
cd by the mol fo(leln acd: of religion. Luquc cele-
brated mass, divided a confecracted host into three,
and rclfrving one pa;t to himself, gave the other
two to his aflociates, of which they partook; and

thuls,

thus, in name of the Prince of Peace, ratified a con- °0 0 K
trafc of which plunder and bloodshed were the ob-
jes *. 1524.

Their firRf

THE attempt was begun with a force more fult- attpt

ed to the humble condition of the three adventu-
rers, than to the greatness of the enterprise in which Nov. r4.
they were engaged. Pizarro set fail from Panama
with a single vessel, of small burden, and a hundred
and twelve men. But in that age, so little were
the Spaniards acquainted with the peculiarities of
climate in America, that the time which Pi-
zarro chose for his departure was the most impro-
p.r in the whole year ; the periodical winds, which
were then set in, being directly adverfeto the course
which he purposed to steer t. After beating about
for seventy days, with much danger and inceflant
fatigue, Pizarro's progress towards the south-east S25
was not greater than what a skilful navigator will
now make in as many hours. He touched at feve-
ral places on the coaff of Tierra Firme, but found
every where the fame uninviting country which
former adventurers had described; the low grounds
converted into swamps by the overflowing of rivers;
the higher, covered vwith impervious woods; few
inhalbitilnts, and those fierce and hostile. Famine,
f* atig , frequent rencounters with the natives, and,
s ab,;.c :ll, the diftcmpcrs of a moilt, sultry climate,
;i cimbined in wahinig his flendcr band of followers.

ArtcAtende

T '1ihe ltundauntted relllution of .their leader con- with litt

' tlliel, however, for folne time, to sustain their Illccl's.

)lits, althouigh no figni had yet appeared of
('li:'ovcriip! thoif golden. regions to which he
1t1 "lll omifed to cond ucti them. At lenglth, he was
Ob1i(d to abandon that ilnhofpitable coast, and retire

to

* Ticrtcrn, ,ldc . i. C. . 3. Z.r.te, lib. i.. i. I. r-

!n*' . 4., ib.
l i. c. g. XerC , p. 179.)

B 0 K to Chuchama, opposite to the pearl islands, where

i_\_ l he hoped to receive a supply of provisions and troops
1525. from Panama.

BUT Almagro having failed from that port

with seventy men, stood directly towards that
part of the continent where he hoped to meet with
his associate. Not finding him there, he landed his
soldiers, who, in searching for their companions,
underwent the fame distresses, and were exposed to
the fame dangers, which had driven them out of
the country. Repulsed at length by the Indians in
a sharp confliit, in which their leader loft one of
his eyes by the wound of an arrow, they likewise
were compelled to reimbark. Chance led them to
the place of Pizarro's retreat, where they found
Jun 14..

ome consolation in recounting their adventures,
and comparing their sufferings. As Almagro had
advanced as far as the river St. Juan, in the pro-
viiice of Popayan, where both the country and in-
habitants appeared with a more promising aspet,
that dawn of bettcr fortune, was sufficient to deter-
mine fich sanguine prcjt:ctors not to abandon their
fchcme, notwithBi-anding all that they had suffered
il- profccuting it ".

They re- ALMAGRO repaircd to Paiama, in hopes of re-
fumrne the
,llidert- c-riting their flattered troops. But what lie and
ki,,g. Pizarrohad fufltcrcd, gave his countrymen flch an

unf.vourable idea of the fcrvice, that it was with
difficulty he could levy fourfcorc men -ll. I'cCl')
as this reinforcement was, they did not hcfitate a-
bout refunilng their operations. After a longr fIri
ofdifafters and difappointmcnt:., not inferior to tholc
which they had already expericnced, pairt of tlhe a-
nmamcnt renched the bay ol S t. M:tt lhw, on thle coait

ol

lr!,:.rrJ a adc. % it,

vi , ,. Yv, . ;ec NO'.'. XX
'1 /.zrrtc', lit. i. ,, ).

of Quito, and landing at Tacamez, to the south 'B O O K

Vi.

of the river of Emeraulds, they beheld a country _ ,
more champaign and fertile than any they had yet i5:6.
discovered in the Southern Ocean, the utives clad
in garments of woollen or cotton fluff, and adorn-
ed with several trinkets of gold and silver.

BUT notwithstanding those favourable appearan-

ces, magnified beyond the truth, both by the vanity
of those who brought the report from Tacamez, and
by the fond imagination of those who listened to
them, Pizarro and Almagro durst not venture to
invade a country so popuious with a handful of
men, enfeebled by fatigue and diseases. They re-
tired to the mnall island of Gallo, where Pizarro
remained with part of the troops, and his aflociate
returned to Panama, in hopes of bringing such a
reinforcement, as might enable them to take pof-
session of the opulent territories whose existence
seemed to be no longer doubtful *.

BUT some of the adventurers, less enterprising, Pizarro re-

or less hardy than their leaders, having secretly called by the
conveyed lamentable accounts of their sufferings ov'rno of
and losses to their friends at Panama, Almagro met
with an unfavourable reception from Pedro de los
Rios, who had succeeded Pedrarias in the govern-
ment of that settlement. After weighing the mat-
ter, with that cold oconomical prudence, which
appears the first of all virtues to persons whose li-
mited faculties are incapable of conceiving or
executing great designs, he concluded an expe-
dition, attended with such certain waste of men,
to be so detrimental to an infant and feeble colony,
that he not only prohibited the raising of new levies,

VOL. II. X but

' Xcrcz, iSi. H-crrcIa, tcc. 3. lib. viii. c. 13.

I53

B 0 0 KI but dispatched a veflcl to bring home Pizarro and

his companions from the island of Gallo. Alma-
15z6. gro and Luquc, thoug h deeply affected with these

ncalurces, which they could not prevent and durst
not oppose, found means of communicating their
fcntinments privately to Pizarro, and exhorted him
lnot to relinquifll an enterprise which was the foun-
iaition of all their hopes, and the only means of re-
establishing their reputation and fortune, that were
both on the decline, Pizarro's mind, bent with
inflexible obstinacy on all its purposes, needed no

i' i.'isin incentive to perlift in the scheme. He peremptori-
!is ^e'ign. ly refused to obey the governor of Panama's orders,

and employed all his address and eloquence in per-
fuading his men not to. abandon him. But the in-
credible calamities to which they had been exposed
were fiill so recent in their memories, and the
thoughts of revisiting their families and friends as-
ter a long abfcnce, ruffled with such joy into their
minds, that when Pizarro drew a line upon the
land with his ftword, permitting such as wished to
return home to pass over it, only thirteen of all the
d.aring lvctcr; ns in his f.rvice had resolution to re-
main with their commander -.

Tr- s finall, buit dcitclr'niicdl band, whose names

the Spailiflh hit',ai :-:c, with derferved praise,
;as th' pl.rlulns to whole perlcverinr fortitude their
countrv is inilebted for the nioil valuable of all its
A.\icrican ponflEfioils, nxed tlleir rcfidence in the
illIa(n of ( orgona. riThis, as it was farther removed
rlin the coAst than (:;illo, iI

an uninhabited, they

c,'nlilrt'd ,is a lllolr fciC(ret: Ictrelat, where, unmolel-
teld, they might wlit for fuipplics from Panama,
vlwhich they tru led that the activity of their aflociatcs

there

4 1' ,~* '. lb. X. e. :t, 7,j it,,ib. i. C. z. Xe>
: i. 1 ,i. ( ,ill Li. £W c. ic-nj.

there would be able to procure. Almagro and Luque B o0 K

v1.

were not inattentive or cold solicitors, and their in-
ceffant importunity was seconded by the general voice 1526.
of the colony, which exclaimed loudly against the
infamy of exposing brave men, engaged in the pub-
lic service, and chargeable with no error but what
flowed from an excess of zeal and courage, to perish
like the most odious criminals in a desert island.
Overcome by those intreaties and expostulations, the
governor at last consented to fend a finall vessel to
their relief. But that he might not seem to encou-
rage Pizarro to any new enterprise, he would not
permit one land-man to embark on board of it.

BY this time, Pizarro and his companions had iJTcalfsd

remained five months in an ifiand, infamous for the
most unhealthy climate in that region of America*.
During all this period, their eyes were turned to-
wards Panama, in hopes of succour from their
countrymen, but worn out at length with fruitless
expectations, and dispirited with suffering hardships
of which they saw noend, they, indefpair, came toa
resolution of committing themselves totheocean on
afloat, rather than continue in that deteilable abode.
But, on the arrival of the vessel from Panama, they
were transported with fuchjoy, that all their fileffr-
ings were forgotten. Their hopes revived], and,
with a rapid tranfitioin, not uninatura.; among
men accustomed by their mode of life to fuidden vi-
ciflitudes of fortune, high confidence fuccecding to
extreme dejection, Pizarro easily induced tllhc- to
relume their former fchelle with frifh ardolur. In-.
ftcad of returning to Parania, they flood towards
the foutli-cafi and, n more fortunate in this than in

X 2 any'
" Sc N 0 'L' tL X X XI

1 o0 K of their palft efforts, they, on the twentieth day as-

, ter their departure from Gorgona, discovered the

1526. coall of Peru. After touching at some places of less
) I rs note, they landed at Tumbez, a place of some note,

above three degrees south of the line, distinguished
for its tlately temple, and a palace of the INCAS or fove-
reigns of the country*. There the Spaniards feast-
ed their eyes with the firif view of the opulence and
civilization of the Peruvian empire. They beheld
a country fully peopled, and cultivated with an ap-
pearance of regular industry; the natives decently
clothed, and poieffed of ingenuity so saP furpatffiig
the other inhabitants of the New WVord, as to have
the ule of tame domcific animals. But what chief-
ly attracted their notice, was such a show of gold
anld ilver, not only in the ornaments of their
persons and temples, but in several vfeiels and
utensils for common use, formed of the fame preci-
ous nctals, as left no room to doubt that they
abounded with profusion in the country. Pizarro
and his companions seemed now to have attained to
the completion of their most sanguine hopes, and
fanci.d Lha.L all thleir wishes and dreams of rich do-
mains, and incxhaullibil treasures, would soon be
realized.

Rell,,,n, o Bu'r with the slender force then under his com-
,tin,.i. manid, Pizarro could only view the rich country of

which he hoped hereafter to obtain poileflion. He
ranged, hIowever, for some time along the coast,
laintailling every where a peaceable intercouric
with the natives, no le( aftonifliedl at their new vi-
5 527 lit:its, than thle Spanliadl wr were with the uni-

-formi appCaralie of opulence and cultivation
which they beheld. Illvinlg explored the country

as
1' C-;Iii AIvi ,, P. 1 C 3.

as far as was requisite to ascertain the importance of B °0 K
the discovery, Pizarro procured from the inhabi- i
tancs rome of their LLAMAS or tame cattle, to which 1527.
the Spaniards gave the name of sheep, some vefels
of gold and silver, as well as some specimens of
their otler works of ingenuity, and two young men,
whom he proposed to inftruc in the Catilian lan-
guage, that they might serve as interpreters in the
expedition which he meditated. With these he ar-
rived at Panama, towards the close of the third
year from the time of his departure thence *. No
adventurer of the age suffered hariJfr'ips or encoun-
tered dangers which equal thole to which he was ex-
pofld during this long period. The patience with
which he endured the one, and the fortitude with
which he furnmounted the other, cxcetd whatever is
recorded in the hit'orv of the New World, where so
many romantic ifpilays of those virtues occur.

NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro gave 15z8.

of the incredible opulence of the country which he s of
had discovered, nor his bitter complaints on ac- theaffoci-
count of that unseasonable recal of his forces,
which had put it out of his power to attempt
making any settlement there, could move the go-
verxor of Panama to swerve from his former pur-
pose. HIe rfill contended, thai the colony was not
in a condition to invade fich a mighty empire, and
refufted to authorise an expedition which he foresaw
would be to alluring that it might ruin the pro-
vince in which he preiided, by an cflort beyond its
flrcngth. His coldncfs, however, did not in any
Uc luce abate the ardour of the three afbciates ; but
'h: y perceived that they could not carry their
Ihc!imene into execution without the countenance of
ifperior authority, and mniur olicit their fovercigct

to

*I-IT'vel, dcc.. 3. lib. x. c. 3--6. dcc. 4. . l ili. c. 7, S.

', 'b .

' i'lb i. c. o 0--14. Z,,ai.ic, lib. i. c. L

Bc ln o llill.
NU.l Uib, lib. iii. C. 1.

B 0 0 K to grant that permission which they could not

vI.

extort from his delegate. With this view, after
1528. adjusting among themselves that Pizarro should

claim the Ration of Governor, Almagro that of
lieutenant-governor, and Luque the dignity ofbi-
shop in the country which they purposed to con-
quer, they sent Pizarro as their agent to Spain,
though their fortunes were now so much exhaflled
by the repeated efforts which they had made, that
they found some difficulty in borrowing the small
fum requisite towards equipping him for the
voyage *.

Pizarro fnt PIZARRO loft no time in repairing to court, and
to Spain to
negociate. new as the scene might be to him, he appeared be-

fore the emperor with the unembarraffed dignity of
a man, conscious of what his services merited ; and
he conducted his negociations with an insinuating
dexterity of address, which could not have been
expected either from his education, or former ha-
bits of life. His feeling description of his own
sufferings, and his pompous account of the country
which he had discovered, confirmed by the fpeci-
mens of its productions which he exhibited, made
such an impression both on Charles and his mi-
nifters, that they not only approved of the in-
tended expedition, but seemed to be interested in
the success of its leader. Presuming on those dif-
positions in his favour, Pizarro paid little attention
an;ilates. to the interelt of his aflociattes. As the pretensions

of Luque did not interfere with his own, he ob-
tained for him, the ecclcfi;afical dignity to which
he aspircd. For Almagro, he claimed only the
command of the Iortrlcfs which should be ercted
at Tumbcz. T'o himii;lf he fccurcd whatever his
boundless anmbit.ion could desire. -Ie was appoilt-

cd

, lIcrrelb, 1;.' 4. ll,.11b ..

i; . ]. Ve atJ z, , lilb. i.e. »4,'
I58

ed governor, captain general, and adelantado of all B o0 K
the country which he had discovered, and hoped to
conquer, with fipreme authority, civil as well as I5Z8.
military ; and a full right to all the privileges and July 26.e
emoluments usually granted to adventurers in the the supreme
New World. His jurildidion was declared to ex- mfelndto
tend two hundred leagues along the coast to the
south of the river St. Jago, to be independent
of the governor of Panama; and he had power to
nominate all the officers who were to serve under
him. In return for those concessions, which cost
the court of Spain nothing, as the enjoyment of
them depended upon the success of his own efforts,
Pizarro engaged to raise two hundred and fifty
men, and to provide the ships, arms, and warlike
stores requisite towards fubjealing, to the crown
of Castile, the country of which the govern-
ment was allotted him.

INCONSIDERABLE as the body of men was, which slnd er

force he was

Pizarro had undertaken to raise, his funds and cre- able toraife.
dit were so low that he could hardly complete half
the number; and after obtaining his patents from
the crown, he was obliged to steal privately out of
the port of Seville, in order to elude the scrutiny
of the officers who had it in charge to examine
whether he had fulfilled the stipulations in his con-
traclt . Before his departure, however, he received
;,mec flupply of money from Cortes, who having re-
turned to Spain about this time, was willingr tocon-
tribute his aid towards enabling an ancient compa-
;ion, with whole talents and courage he was well
ac(lluainted, to begin a career of glory similar to
til:tt which he himnfelf had finified §.

Ih-I
I- Iltitr.i. deic, A. li,. vii, c. 9. § Ibid. lib. vii. c. 1o,

B 0 0 K HE landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched

VI. V_^. acrcfs the islhmus to Panama, accompanied by his
5zg9. three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gonzalo,

of whom the first was born in lawful wedlock,
the two latter, like himself, were of illegitimate
birth, and by Francisco de Alcantara, his mother's
brother. They were all in the prime of life, and
of such abilities and courage, as fitted them to
take a distinguished part in his subsequent tranfac.
tions.

ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found Al-

Hisrecon- magro, tb much cx:fperated at the manner in
clat hion which he had condutcd his negociation, that he
with Al.
magro. not only refused to ac& any longer in concert with

a man by whose perfidy he had been excluded from
the power and henours to which he had a juit
claim, but laboured te form a new association, in
order to thwart or to rival his former confederate
in his discoveries. Pizarro, however, had more
wisdom and address than to susser a rupture so fa-
tal toall his fcliemcs, to become irreparable. By
offering voluntarily to relinquish the office of ade-
lantado, and promising to concur in soliciting that
title, with an independent government for Alma-
gro, hc gradually mitigated the rage of an open-
hearted soldier, which had been violent, but was
not implacable. Luquc, highly satisficd with hav-
ing been fuccefslul in all his own pretensions,
cordially secondcd Pizarro's endeavours. A re-
conciliation was effetcd ; and the confederacy
renewed on its original terms, that the enter-
prise flhouid be carried on at the common ex-
pence of the anflciates, and the profits accruing
from it flould be equally divided among them*.

EV.EN

# Hcrrera, dec, 4. lib. I. c. 9. Zi,.iat, lib). I. c. 3. Vci',

?.. lib . C.

c .

tt.. /
i6o

EVEN after their re-union, and the utmost efforts B o o K

of their interest, three small veflels, and a hundred V
and eighty soldiers, thirty-fix of whom were horse- 1530.
men, composed the armament which they were able Theirarma-
to fit out. But the astonishing progress of the Spa-
niards in America had inspired them with such
ideas of their own superiority, that Pizarro did not
hesitate to fail with this contemptible force to in-.
vade a great empire. Almagro was left at Panama, I531
as formerly, to follow him with what reinforcement February.
of men he should be able to mufler. As the season
for embarking was properly chosen, and the course
of navigation between Panama and Peru was now
better known, Pizarro completed the voyage in
thirteen days ; though, by the force of the winds
and currents, he was carried above an hundred
leagues to the north of Tumbez, the place of his
destination, and obliged to land his troops in the
bay of St. Matthew. Without losing a moment,
he began to advance towards the south, taking care, Pands in
however, not to depart far from the sea-shore, both
that he might easily effet a junction with the sup-
plies which he expeced from Panama, and secure a
retreat in cafe of any disaster, by keeping as near as
possible to his ships. But as the country in fevcral
parts on the coast of Peru is barren, unhealthful,
and thinly peopled ; as the Spaniards had to pals all
the rivers near their mouth, where the body of wa-
ter is greatest ; and as the imprudence of Pizarro,
in attacking the natives when he flould have ftudi-
ed to gain their confidence, had forced them to aban-
don their habitations ; famine, fatiguc, and difealtt'
of various kinds, brought upon him and his fol-
lowers calamities hardly inferior to tllolc which
they had endured in their former ex-pedition. W\hat
they now experienced co-rrfplondtcd ito ill with the
alliring dcifcription of the country given by Pizarro,(
that iany began to reproach lhiin., and cver'y f;l-

VOL. II. VY dir

i6i

B O O K dier must have become cold to the service, if, even

VI.
._ _ iin this unfertile region of Peru, they had not met
1531. with rome appearances of wealth and cultivation,

which seemed to justify the report of their leader,
At length they reached the province of Coaque;
April 14 and, having surprised the principal settlement of the

natives, they seize4 there vessels and ornaments of
gold and silver, to the amount of thirty thousand
pesos, with other booty of such value, as dispelled all
their doubts, and inspired the most desponding with
languine hopes *.

His "nca- PIZARRO himself was so much delighted with
fures s'r
ob.aininy a this rich spoil, which he confidered as the first
arinbforc- fruits of a land flowing with treasure, that he in-

ffantly dispatched one of his ships to Panama with
a large remittance to Almagro; and another to
Nicaragua with a considerable fum to some per-
ibns of influence in that province, in hopes of al-
luring adventurers, by this early display of the
wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile, he
continued his march along the coast, and disdain-
ing to employ any means of reducing the natives
but force, he attacked them with fuich violence in
their flcattered habitations, as compelled them ei-
ther to retire into the interior country, or to sub-
mit tu his yoke. This sudden appearance of iii-
vatlers, whose afpecad and manners were so firange,
;iidl whole power icemed to be so irrefiflible, made
te I illme dreadful impression as in other parts of
Ainrnica. P'izarro hardly met with resistance until
he .ittaclked tile illand of Puna in the bay of Guay-
<iil. As that was better peopled than the country
lliouiuh lwhici hie had )pafllcd, and its inhabitants
Ji. ticri .Iltl 1'. civilizedl than those of the conti-
1k Ini, Ilt'v idefended thtenilvct' with such obfiinatc
v.tloul, til:.t l'i,.arro l)cllt fix months in rcducing

, 1Kthem

*g1.s' 9*
hi . ii. . . iS

them to fubjedion. From Puna he proceeded to B1 0 K
Tumbez, where the distempers that raged among _.
his men compelled' him to remain for three 15j32.
months *

WHILE he was thus employed, he began to reap rPcceives

advantage from his own attention, to spread the continus'
fame of his first success at Coaque. Two different toadvinc.
detachments arrived from Nicaragua, which,
though neither exceeded thirty men, he confidered
as a reinforcement of great consequence to his fee-
ble band, especially as the one was under the com-
mand of Sebastian Benalcazar, and the other of
Hernando Soto, officers not inferior in merit and
reputation to any who had served in America.
From Tumbez he proceeded to the river Piura, y i6.
and in an advantageous station near the mouth of
it, he established the firfi Spanifli colony in Peru;
to which he gave the name of St. Michael.

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the

centre of the Peruvian empire, he gradually re-
ceived more full information concerning its extent
and policy, as well as the situation of its affairs at
that juncture. Without some knowledge of there,
he could not have conducted his operations with
propriety; and without a suitable attention to thefc,
it is impossible to account for the progress which
the Spaniards had already made, or to unfold the
causes of their fubfequnt fucccfs.

AT the time when the Spaniards invaded Peru, Stac oh

the dominions of its sovereigns extended in length, Pcrllviuii
from north to south, above fifteen hundred miles em'r1e.
along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth, fiom ean f to
welt, was much less confidcrable ; being uniformly

Y 2 bounded

. i' Sancho ap. Rnmuf. iii. p. 371, F. Herrer:, dec. ., lii. vii. c.
18, i). ix. c. i. Zarate, lib. ii. c. z, 3. Xcrcz, p. iz2, &c.

B 0 0 K dier must have become cold to the service, if, even

V'. in this unfertile region of Peru, they had not met
1531. with some appearances of wealth and cultivation,

which seemed to justify the report of their leader.
At length they reached the province of Coaque;
April J4. and, having surprised the principal settlement of the

natives, they seized there vessels and ornaments of
gold and silver, to the amount of thirty thousand
petos, with other booty offuch value, as dispelled all
their doubts, and inspired the most desponding with
1inguinc hopes *.

His mCa- PIZARRO himself was so much delighted with
furcS for b;ininr a tthis rich spoil, which he confidered as the first
sinforcr- ffruits of a land flowing with treasure, that he in-

fiantly dispatched one of his {hips to Panama with
a larre remittance to Almagro; and another to
Nicaragua with a considerable fum to some per-
ibns of influence in that province, in hopes of al-
luring adventurers, by this early display of the
wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile, he
continued his march along the coast, and disdain-
ing to employ any means of reducing the natives
but force, he attacked them with such violence in
their scattercd habitations, as compelled them ei-
ther to retire into the interior country, or to sub-
mit to his yoke. This sudden appearance of ii-
vaders, whose aspec and manners were so firange,
:tid whole power teemed to be so irrefifible, made
the fliie dreadful impreflion as in other parts of
Aijeri *al. Pizal rro hardly met with resistance until
he attacked thec illand of Puna in the bay of Guay-
quil. As tlhat was better peopled than the country
liitouillh which he had paflcd, and its inhabitants
Jitllc .rland Icfli civiliz.ed than thoee of the colti-
iu t1, lti' d endlcf-nled themlflvcs with such obstinate
v.iloulr, til:lt l'i/.ro lfpent fix Imonths iln reducilng

r'(~ Lcthen
"' slv ri 4 . ). I i ), v ii. e. q. Ii b, ii. C.i. X rcz, ,Sz.

HISTORY OF AMERICA.

them to fubjeaion. From Puna he proceeded to B o0 K
Tumbez, where the distempers that raged among ,_
his men compelled him to remain for three 1532.
months *.

WHILE he was thus employed, he began to reap RPeceives

advantage from his own attention, to spread the contie,.nd
fame of his first success at Coaque. Two different to ,dvainc.
detachments arrived from Nicaragua, which,
though neither exceeded thirty men, he confidered
as a reinforcement of great consequence to his fee-
ble band, especially as the one was under the com-
mand of Sebastian Benalcazar, and the other of
Hernando Soto, officers not inferior in merit and
reputation to any who had served in America.
From Tumbez he proceeded to the river Piura,
and in an advantageous station near the mouth of
it, he eflablilhed the firif Spanish colony in Peru;
to which he gave the name of St. Michael.

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the

centre of the Peruvian empire, he gradually re-
ceived more full information concerning its extent
and policy, as well as the situation of its afflairs at
that juncure. Without some knowledge of these,
he could not have conducted his operations with
propriety; and without a suitable attention to these,
it is impoflible to account for the progress which
the Spaniards had already made, or to unfold the
caufcs of their subsequent success.

AT the time when the Spaniards invaded Peru, stacnftlh
the dominions of its sovereigns extended in length, Pctrvian
fhom north to south, above fifteen hundred miles em'
along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth, from calf to
welt, was much Icls considerable ; being uniformly

Y 2 bounded

P. Sancho ap. Ramuif. ili. p. 371, F. Hererai, dec. 4. lib. vi'. c.
18. lib. ix. L . i. Zaratc, lib. ii. c. z, 3. Xcrcz, p. i2, &c.

o 0 K bounded by the vast ridge of the Andes, stretching

from its one extremity to the other. Peru, like the
1 53. ress of the New World, was originally poffeficd by

fiall independent tribes, differing from each other
in manners, and in their forms of rude policy.
All, however, were so little civilized, that, if the
traditions concerning their mode of life, preserved
among their descendants, deserve credit, they must
be classed among the most unimproved savages of
America. Strangers to every species of cultivation
or regular industry, without any fixec residence,
and unacquainted with thofe\fentiments and obli-
gations which form the first bonds of social union,
they are said to have roamed about naked in the so-
rcets, with which the country was then covered,
more like wild bcafts than like men. After they
had ltruggled for several ages with the hardships and
calamities which are inevitable in this barbarous
state, and when no circumstance seemed to indicate
the approach of any uncommon effort towards im-
provement, we are told that there appeared on the
banks of the lake Titiaca, a man and woman of
majestic form, and clothed in decent garments.
They declared themselves to be the children of the
Sun, sent by their beneficent parent, who beheld
with pity the miseries of the human race, to in-
firu&t and to reclaim them. At their persuasion,
enforced by reverence for the divinity in whose
name they were supposed to speak, several of the
difpecrlcd savages united together, and receiving
their commands as heavenly injunctiions, followed
them to Cuzco, where they fettlcd, and began to
lay the foundations of a city.

MANCO CAPAC and Mama Ocollo, for such

were the names of those extraordinary pcrfonages,
having thus collected fonim wandering tribes, form-
ed that social union, which, by multiplying the de-
fires, and uniting the efforts of the human species,

excites

excites industry, and leads to improvement. Man- B 00 K
co Capac initruaed the men in agriculture, and t .,
other useful arts. Mama Ocollo taught the wo- 153z.
men to spin and to weave. By the labour of the one
sex, subsistence became less precarious ; by that of
the other, life was rendered more comfortable. As-
ter securing the objects of firt necessity in an infant
itate, by providing food, raiment, and habitations
for the rude people of whom he took charge, Man-
co Capac turned his attention towards introducing
such laws and policy as might perpetuate their hap-
piness. By his institutions, which shall be more
particuJarly explained hereafter, the various relati-
ons-in private life were eftablified, and the duties
resulting from them prescribed with such propriety,
as gradually formed a barbarous people to decency
of manners. In public administration, the funEti-
ons of persons in authority were so precisely defined,
and the subordination of those under their jurifdidii-
on maintained with such a Rfeady hand, that the
society in which he presided, soon assumed the as-
pet of a regular and well-governed state.

THUS, according to the Indian tradition, was
founded the empire of the INCAS or LORDS of Peru.
At first, its extent was small. The territory of
Manco Capac did not reach above eight leagues
from Cuzco. But within its narrow precinces, he
ex(ercised absolute and uncontrolled authority.
His fucceflbrs, as their dominions expanded, arro.'
gatcd a similar jurisdiction over their fubjcets : the
(lrftotifin of Asia was not more complete. The
uIcas were not only obeyed as monarchs, but re-
vered as divinities. Their blood was held to be
sacred, and, by prohibiting intermarriages with the
people, was never contaminated by mixing with
that of any other race. The famiily, thus fepara-
tel flrom the r-ftof the nation, was distinguishcd

by

165

B O o K by peculiarities in dress and ornaments, which it

·VI.

V was unlawful for others to assume. The monarch
531. himself appeared with ensigns of royalty reserved

for him alone; and received from his fubjeds,
marks of obsequious honmitge and refpec, which ap-
proached almost to adoration.

BUT, among the Peruvians, this unbounded

power of their monarchs is said to have been uni-
formly accompanied with attention to the good of
their fubjeds. It was not the rage of conquest, if
we may believe the accounts of their countrymen,
that prompted the Incas to extend their dominions,
but the desire of diffusing the bleflings of civilizati-
on, and the knowledge of the arts which they pofl'-
efied, among the barbarous people whom they re-
duced. During a fuccelfion of twelve monarchs,
it is said that not one deviated from this beneficent
charater -.

WHEN the Spaniards first visited the coast of

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-fix, Huana Capac, the twelfth monarch
from the founder of the slate, was feated on the
throne. IIc is represented as a prince diftinguiflled
not only for the pacific virtues peculiar to the race,
but eminent for his martial talents. By his victori-
ous arms the kingdom of Quito was fubjeted, a
c.onqucft of such extent and importance as almost
doubled the power of the Peruvian empire. He
was fond of residing in the capital of that valuable
province, which he had added to his dominions;
and, notwvithftanding the ancient and fundamental
law of the monarchy against polluting the royal blood

by

t Cicca d.e I.con, COhron. c, l. rri era, loc 3. lib. x, c. 4. (cC, 5'

li). ni, c. z7.
x66

by any foreign alliance, he married the daughter of B o OK
the vanquished monarch of Quito. She bore him a vI_
lon named Atahualpa, whom, on his death at Qui- 1-53".
to, which seems to have happened about the year
one thousand five hundred and twenty-nine, he ap-
pointed his fuccefbr in that kingdom, leaving the
reft of his dominions to Huafcar, his eldest son, by
a mother of the royal race. Greatly as the Peruvi-
ans revered the memory of a monarch who had
reigned with more reputation and splendour than
any of his predecessors, the destination of Huana
Capac concerningr the fucceflion, appeared so re-
pugnant to a maxim coeval with the empire, and
founded on authority deemed sacred, that it was no
sooner known at Cuzco than it excited general dif-
gust. Encouraged by those sentiments of his sub-
jets, Huafcar required his brother to renounce the
government of Quito, and to acknowledge him as
his lawful superior. But it had been the first care
of Atahualpa to gain a large body of troops which
had accompanied his father to Quito. These were
the flower of the Peruvian warriors, to whose va-
lour Huana Capac had been indebted for all his
viftories. Relying on their support, Atahualpa
iirft eluded his brother's demand, and then marched
againfli him in hostile array.

'li-us the ambition of two young men, the title

of the one fouiided on ancient usage, and that of the
other afierted by the veteran troops, involved Pcru in
civil war, a calainity, to which, under a fuccefcion
,f virtuous princes, it had hitherto been a tralngcr.
I11 such a contcft, the ifuic was obvious. The
olcec of arlns triumphed over the authority of laws.
Ai:;altallpa remained viilorious, aind made a cruel
tul, of hi.s viStory. Conlcious of the defcet in his
'Ww lit(;t to tlhec 'owI, i' attlempted toCxtCerlil:tc
tL lioy'.il r1.c , lIy puttin , to deatlh all tlhe cllildrei n

of

B O 0 K of the Sun descended from Manco Capac, whom he

Vi,. Ccould seize either by force or stratagem. From a
1532. political motive, the life of his unfortunate rival

Huafcar, who had been taken prisoner in the battle
which decided the fate of the empire, was saved for
some time, that, by issuing orders in his name,
the usurper might more easily establish his own au-
thority *.

Favourable WHEN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Mat-
to the pro-
grefs of thew, this civil war raged between the two brothers
'izarro. in its greatest fury. Had he made any hostile at-

tempt in his former visit to Peru in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty-feven, he must
then have encountered the force of a powerful state,
united under a monarch, possessed of capacity and
courage, and unembarraffed with any care that
could divert him from opposing his progress. But
at this time, the two competitors, though they re-
ceived early accounts of the arrival and violent
proceedings of the Spaniards, were so intent upon
the operations of a war, which they deemed more
interesting, that they paid no attention to the mo-
tions of an enemy, too inconsiderable in number, to
excite any great alarm, and to whose career it would
be easy, as they imagined, to give a check when
more at leisure.

He avails BY this fortunate coincidence of events, whereof
hitilof Pizarro could have no forcfight, and of which,
it, and ad-
~anecs. from his defective mode of intcrcourfe with the peo-

ple of the country, he remained longw ignorant, he
was permitted to carry on his operations unmolcfl-
ed, and advanced to the centre of a great empire be-
fore one efFort of its power was exerted to 1top his
progress. During their progrcs, the Spa.niards had
acquired some inmpertcdt knowledge of this f{.uggle
betweenl the two contendinlg atioiis. 'l'ilc irfl coin-

plcte

* Z rate,lib.i.c.l5. Vcgl, i. lib. i.. , .1.ai; 1d...- .1). I1'c
ran de, 5. hib. i. i. :.. lli,. il;. i. i,.

plete information, with refped to it, they received B °o K
from messengers whom Huafcar sent to Pizarro, in
order to solicit his aid against Atahualpa, whom he 1532.
represented as a rebel and an usurper §. Pizarro
perceived at once the importance of this intelligence,
and foresaw so clearly all the advantages which
might be derived from this divided slate of the
kingdom which he had invaded, that, without wait-
ing for the reinforcement which he expected from
Panama, he determined to push forward, whixe in-
teftine discord put it out of the power of the Peru-
vians to attack him with their whole force, and
while, by taking part, as circumstances should in-
cline him, with one of the competitors, he might be
enabled with greater ease to crush both. Enterprif-
ing as the Spaniards of that age were in all their
operations againfi Americans, and distinguished as
Pizarro was among his countrymen for daring cou-
rage, we can hardly suppose, that after having pro-
ceeded hitherto slowly, and with much caution, he
would have changed at once his system of operation,
and have ventured upon a measure so hazardous,
without some new motive or profpeA to justify it.

As he was obliged to divide his -troops, in order State ofl is

to leavea garrison in St. Michael, fuficient.to de- forces.
fend a station of equal importance as a place of re-
treat in cafe of any disaster, and as a port for re-
ceiving any supplies which should come from Pa-
nama, he began his march with a very slender and
ill-accoutred train of followers. They confifled
of fixty-two horsemen 1. and a hundred and two
foot-foldiers, of whom twenty were armed with
cross-bows, and three with muskets. He dirc-ted
his course towards Caxamalca, a small town at the
VOL. II. Z diflance,

f Str NOTE XXXP.
j Zarate clib. ii. c.,3.

B 0o K distance of twelve days march from St. Michael,

vI. _.-, where Atahualpa was encamped with a confidera-
1532. ble body of troops. Before he had proceeded far,

an officcr dispatchcd1 by the Inca met him with a
valuable prefcnt from that prince, accompanied
with a prosier of his alliance, and assurances of a
friendly reception at Caxamalca. Pizarro, accord-
ing to the usual artifice of his countrymen in Ame-
rica, pretended to come as the ambaflador of a very
powerful monarch, and declared that he was now
advancing with an intention to offer Atahualpa
his aid against those enemies who disputed his title
to the throne +.

Ideas of the As the objea of the Spaniards in entering their
>Pruviun5 country was altogether incomprehensible to thePe-
conccrning
te. ,rdc ruvians, they had formed.various conjeclures con-

"igns. cerning it, without being able to decide whether

they should confider their new guests as beings of a
superior nature, who had visited them from some
beneficent motive, or as formidable avengers of
their crimes, andc enemies to their repose and liber-
ty. 'T'he continual professions of the Spaniards,
that they came to enlighten them with the know-
leldge of t-uth, and lead them in the way of happi-
ness, favoured the former opinion ; the outrages

lwhich they committed, their rapacioufilefs and

cruelty, were awful confirmations of the latter.
Wlhile in this state of uncertainty, Pizarro's decla-
ration of his pacific intentions so far removed all
lihe Inca's; fears, that lie determined to give himn a
fricnidll rlccptiol. In collfeq(inclce of this rcfolu-
tion, lhi- Spalli:.ls were allowed to march in tran-

ulility acrofi thle falndy desert between St. Michacl
andl Mlot:upL, where the mllof feeble effort of an ene-
my, alddlcd to thle lluavoid;lble diffrefics which they
ull'c red iln lafling through that coinfortlcs region,

t ILC; , ih.c. v. l;b. .. C. . Xric , p.l ';9.

must have proved fatal to them . From Motiupe B O o
they advanced towards the mountains which en-
compass the low country of Peru, and paficd 153z.
through a defile so narrow and inaccefiibl]e :hat a
few men might have defended it against a niimc irious
army. But here likewise, fiom the fame inconfi-
dcrate credulity of the Inca, the Spaniards met
with no opposition, and took quiet poflfefion of a
fort erelced for the fecu.!iy of that important flati-
on. As they now approached near to Caxamaica,
Atahualpa renewed his profcllions of friendship;
and as an evidence of their sincerity, fcnt them pre-
sents of greater value than the former.

ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took pofeffion Arive at

of a large court, on one fide of which was a house Caxamalca.
which the Spanish hiflorians call a palace of tle
Inca, and on the other a temple of the Sun, the
whole surrounded with a {frong rampart or wall of
earth. When he had posted his troops in this ad-
vantageous station, he dispatched Hernando Soto,
and his brother Ferdinand, to the camp of Atahu-
alpa, which was about a league ditant friom the
town. He inftrutded them to confirm the declara-
tion which he had formerly made of his pacific dif-
position, and to desire an interview with the Inca,
that he Iight explain morre fully the intc:ltion of
the Spaniards in visiting his country. Th'ily twre
treated with all the rcfpectful hcfpitaliiy uifual
among the Peruvians in the reception of their most
cordial friends, and Atahualpa promised to visit the
Splinifil commander next day in his quarters. The
decent deportment of the Peruvian monarch, the
order of his court, and the reverence with which his
fubjc(ts approached his person and obeyed his com-
nmnds, aftoniflhed those Spaniards, who had never

Z 2 met
Sec NOTE XXXIII.

B 0 0 K met in America with any thing more dignified than

V_1 the petty cazique of a barbarous tribe. But their
1532. eyes were still more powerfully attracted by the

vast pr6fufion of wealth which they observed in the
Inca's' canmp.. The rich ornaments worn by him
and his attendants, the vessels of gold and silver in
which the repast offered to them was served up, the
multitude of utensils of every kind formed of those
precious metals, opened profpeas far exceedingany
- idea of opulence that a European of the sixteenth

century could form.

P-rfi.ious. ON their return to Caxamalca, while their minds
f(hene ofr
p izirro. were yet warm with .admiration and desire of the

wealth which they had beheld, they gave such a
description of it to their countrymen, as confirmed
Pizarro in a resolution which he had already taken.
From his own observation of American manners
during his long service in the New World,'as well
as from the advantages which Cortes had derived
from seizing Montezuma, he knew of what con-
Ifquence it was to have the Inca in his power.
For this purpose, he formed a plan as daring asit
was pcrfidiout. Notwithstanding the charater he
had affumedl of an ambassador from a powerful mo-
narch, who courted an alliance with the Inca, and
in violation of the repeated offers which he had
miade to hi, of his own friendship and afliftancc,
he deternined to avail hiinfelfof the unfufpicious
llmplicitv with which Atahualpa relied on his pro-
fcflions, and to feizc his pcrfon during the interview
to which he had invited him. He prepared for the
execution of his scheme with the fame deliberate
arrangement, and with as little compunction, as if
it lhad rcfc(tcd no disgrace on bhinfelf or his coun-
try. He divilded his cavalry into three finall fqua-
droons, under the command of his brother Fcrdi-
ilandt, Soto, and Ilnalcazar ; his infantry were

formled
172

formed in one body, except twenty of most tried B 0 0 K
courage, whom he kept near his own person to sup- .---,
port him in the dangerous service which he referv- 1532.
ed for himself; the artillery, consisting of two
field-pieces * and the crofs-bowmen, were placed
opposite to the avenue by which Atahualpa was to
approach. All were commanded to keep within
the square, and not to move until the signal for
ation was given.

EARLY in the morning the Peruvian camp was fit. d.y

all in motion. But as Atahualpa was solicitous to the Inca.
appear with the greatest splendour and magnifi-
cence in his first interview with the strangers, the
preparations for' this were so tedious, that the day
was far advanced before he began his march. Even
then, left the order of the procession should be de-
ranged, he moved so slowly, that the Spaniards be-
caime impatient and apprehensive that some fufpici-
on of their intention might be the cause of this de-
lay: In' order to remove this, Pizarro dispatched
one of his officers with fresh aflurances of his
friendly disposition. At length the Inca approach-
ed. First of all appeared four hundred men, in an
unifornndrefs, as harbingers to clear the way before
him. He himself, fitting on a throne or couch,
adorned with plumes of various colours, and almost
covered with plates of gold and silver enriched with
precious stones, was carried on the shoulders of his
principal attendants. Behind him came some chief
officers of his court, carried in the fame manner.
Several bands of fingers and dancers accompanied
this cavalcade ; and the whole plain was covered
with troops, almouting to more than thirty thou-
flnd ien.

As
Xe1, P* 9I1

174 HI 1 U K Y U t1 AV M IVL 1 A.
B O O K As the Inca drew near the Spanish quarters, fa-

ther Vincent Valverde, chaplain to the expedition,

153z. advanced with a crucifix in one hand, and a brevi.

Strangc- a ary in the other, and in a long difi-ourfe explained
rangue ofC
Ifther Val- to him the dotrine of the creation, the fall of A-
verdc. dam, the incarnation, the futFerings and refurredi.

on cf Jesus Christ, the appointmnent of St. Peter as
God's vicegerent on earth, the tranfiniffion of his
apostolic power by fuccefiion to the popes, the do.
nation made to the king of Castile by pope Alexan-
der of all the regions in the New World. In con-
sequence of all this, he required Atahualpa to em-
brace the Christian faith, to acknowledge the fu-
preme jurisdiction of the pope, and to fubimit to the
king of CafI'ile as his lawful sovereign, promising,
if he con-.p:'id infalnily with this requisition, that
the C.:-:ilian n-onnrch would protec? his dominions,
and permit him to continue in the exercise of his
royal authority ; but if he should impiously refuse
to obey this summons. he denounced war against
him in his master's namc, and threatened him with
the mofl dreadful cfftdts of his vengeance.
R'-pl 't!, 'TFl-IIS firange harangue, unfolding deep myfle-

ries, and alluding to unknown faAs, of which no
prwcr of eloquence could have conveyed at once a
ditind& idea to an American, was so lamely tranf-
lated by an unflkilful interpreter, little acquainted
with the idiom of the Spanifi tongue, and incapa-
ble of exprcfling himself with propriety in the lan-
ouaogC of the Inca, that its general. tenor was alto-
gether inconprlehclnfible to Atahualpa. Some parts
in it, of more obvious meaning, filled hiln with
aftonifillmetit and ilndignation. Hlis reply, lowcver,
was temperate. le began with observing, tltC IC
w.1S lord of the dominions over which lie reigned
by hereditary fuccflion ; and added, thait 1Cl couil(
not conceive how a frccign pricft fhouild prctcrtl

to

to diipofe of territories which did not belong to B 0 K
him ; that if such a prepofierous grant had been
made, he, who was the rightful poffefior, refused to 153z.
confirn it; that he had no inclination to renounce
the religious inflitutions established by his ancef-
tors ; nor would he forsake the service of the Sun,
the immortal divinity whom he and his people re-
vered, in order to worship the God of the Spani-
ards, who was subject to death; that with refpet
to other matters contained in his discourse, as he
had never heard of them before, and did not now
uriderfland their meaning, he dcired to know
where he had learned things foextraordinary. " In
this book," answered Valverde, reaching out to him
his breviary. The Inca opened it eagerly, and
turningover theleaves, lifteditto his ear: " This,"
fays he, " is silent ; it tells me nothing ;" and
threw it with difdain.to the ground. The enraged
monk, running towards his countrymen, cried out,
" To arms, Cbriftians, to arms ; the word of God
is insulted ; avenge this profanation on those impi-

llus dogs '*."

PIZARTRO, who, during this long conference, had Piza'roat-
with difficult) restrained .his foldicrs, cager to seize tacks the

Pcruviana,

the rich spoils of which they had 'now so near a
view, immediately gave the fignai of assault. At
once the martial mnufic firuck up, the cannon and
iufkc'ts began to fire, the horfc fidllied out fi:l-cely
to the charge, the infantry ruffced on sword in
l':nl. 'FTle Peruvians, aftonifhncd at the suddenness
,l ;:i ;itt.ick which they did not expeL, and dif-
inw(cd with the dcfltrunive efli(Is of the firc-allls,
:!,l tlhe ilrrefifl'ihi impreflion of the cavalry, fled
\vithl uiiiverfIl conficrnation on every fide, with-
,lt :'tt'n:ptin~l cithcr to annoy thl enemy, or to dc-

fcnd,
* 5 c N(j' 'E X (XIV,

B O O K fend themselves. Pizarro, at the head of his cho.

V.' fen band, advanced dire&ly towards the Inca ; and
1531. though his nobles crowded around him with offi-

cious zeal, and fell in numbers at his feet, while
they vied one with another in sacrificing their own
lives, that they might cover the sacred person of
their Sovereign, the Spaniards soon penetrated to

and seizes the royal feat; and Pizarro seizing the Inca by the
ihe Inca.

e arm, dragged him to the ground, and carried him as

a prisoner to his quarters. The fate of the mo-
narch increased the precipitate flight of his follow-
ers. The Spaniards pursued them towardsevery
quarter, and with deliberate and unrelenting bar-
barity continued to slaughter wretched fugitives,
who never once offered at resistance. The carnage
did not cease until the close of day. Above four
thousand Peruvians were killed. Not afingle Spa-
niard fell, nor was one wounded but Pizarro him-
self, whose hand was slightly hurt by one of his
own soldiers, while firuggling eagerly to lay .hold
on the Inca t.

THE plunder of the field was rich beyond any

idea which the Spaniards had yet formed concern-
ing the wealth of Peru, and they were so tranf-
ported with the value of the acquisition, as well as
the greatness of their success, that they passed the
night in the extravagant exultation natural to indi-
gent adventurers on such an extraordinary change
of fortune.

Dejein;o of AT first the captive monarch could hardly be-
the nlca. lieve a calamity which he lo little expected to be

real. But he soon felt all the misery of his fate,
and the dejedion into which he funk was in pro-
portion to the height of grandeur from which he
had fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing all the advanl

' Sce NO'I XXXV.
176

tages which he hoped to derive from the poffefll'on B 0 K
of such a prisoner, laboured to con ole him with .;
professions of kindness and refpea, that correfpon- .s3.
ded ill with his actions. By residing among the
Spaniards, the Inca quickly discovered their ruling
pafiion, which, indeed, they were no-wise folici-
tous to conceal, and by applying to that, made an
attempt to recover his liberty. He offered as a ran- His offer of
fom what aftonifled the Spaniards, even after all a ransom.
they now knew concerning the opulence of his
kingdom. The apartment in which he was con-
fined was twenty-two feet in length and sixteen in
breadth ; he undertook to fill it with vessels of gold
as high as he could reach. Pizarro closed eagerly
with this tempting proposal, and a line was drawn
upon the walls of the chamber, to mark the ftipu-
lated height to which the treasure was to rife.

ATAHUALPA, transported with having obtained

some profpec of liberty, took measures instantly
for fulfilling his part of the agreement, by fending
messengers to Cuzco, Quito, and other places,
where gold had been amassed in largest quantities,
either for adorning the temples of their gods, or the
houses of the Inca, to bring what was neceflary for
completing his ransom dircEtly to Caxamalca.
'Though Atahualpa was now in the custody of his
enemies, yet so much were the Peruvians accustom-
ed to respect every mandate issued by their fove-
reign, that his orders were executed with the grcat-
eit alacrity. Soothed with hopes of recovering his
liberty by this means, the fubjecs of the Inca
were afraid of endangering his life by forming any
other fchemc for his relief; and though the force
of the empire was fill entire, no preparations were
made, and no army aflcmbled, to avenge their
own wrongs or those of their monarch: . The
vo0-. IT. A a Spaniards

177
'I Xcelr, z05,

Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil and
unmolested. Small detachments of their number
marched into remote provinces of the empire, and
instead of meeting with any opposition, were every
where received with marks of the most submissive
refpeAt ;.

INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and de!

firous as Pizarro might be to obtain some know-
ledge of the interior slate of the country, he could
not have ventured upon any diminution of his main
body, if he had not about this time received an ac-
count of Almagro's having landed at St. Michael
with such a reinforcement as would almost double
the number of his followers t. The arrival of
this long-expeAted succour was not more agreeable
to the Spaniards, than alarming to the Inca. He
saw the power of his enemies increase ; and as he
knew neither the source whence they derived their
supplies, nor the means by which they were con-
veyed to Peru, he could not foresee to what a
height the inundation that poured in upon his do-
minions might rife. While disq.uieted with such
apprehensions, he learned that some Spaniards, in
their way to Cuzco, had visited his brother Huaf-
car in the place where he kept him confined, and
that the captive prince had represented to them the
justice of his own cause, and as an inducement to
efpoufc it, had promised them a quantity oftreafure
vastly exceeding what he had engaged to pay for his
ran Is(m. If the Spaniards should litlen to this pro-
pofal, he perceived his own defiru6tion to be ine-
vitable ; and fufpectllg that their insatiable thirst
for gold would tempt them to lend a favourable car
to it, he determined to sacrifice his brother's life,
that he might lave his own ; and his orders for

this

j Xrs ci, Pr4t, Hcrrcir, dcc. lib'

1i%

B 0 OK
BOOK.

VI.

1532.

The Spani -
ards vilit
different
provinccs.

AlmIgro ar-
rives with a
rcinforce-
ment.
Dectmber.

1533.

Huafcar put
to death.

1 ~ c,..N ') 1' EX XX V I
iii, .. - ' ·

this purpose were executed, like all his other corn- 1 0 0 K
mands, with scrupulous puncuality I1. -V

i533-
MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxamal- The Spani-

ards makc a

ca from different parts of the kingdom, loaded with division of
treasure. A great part of the stipulated quantity the sPoil.
was now amassed, and Atahualpa assured the Spa-
niards, that the only thing which prevented the
whole from being brought in, was the remoteness
of the provinces where it was deposited. But such
vast piles of gold, presented continually to the view
of needy soldiers, had so inflamed theiravarice, that
it was impossible any longer to refirain their impa-
tience to obtain poffeflion of this rich booty. Or-
ders were given for melting down the whole, except
some pieces of curious fabric, reserved as a present
for the emperor. After setting apart the fifth due
to the crown, and a'hundred thousand pesos as a
donative to the soldiers which arrived with Alma-
gro, there remained one million five hundred and
twenty-eight thousand five-hundred pesos to Pi-
zarro and his followers. The festival of St. James, July z5.
the'patron faint of Spain, was the day choien for
the partition of this vast fum, and the manler of
conducting it strongly marks that strange -alliance of
fanaticism with avarice, which I have more than
once had occasion to point out as a firiking feature
in the charater of the conquerors of the New
World. Though assemblcd to divide the spoils of
an innocent people, procured by deceit, extortion,
and cruelty, the tranfation began with a folenin
invocation of the name of God :1:, as if they could
have expeetd the guidance of Heaven in diftribut-
ing thole wages of iniquity. In this division above
eight thousand pclbs, at that time not inferior in
value to as many pounds flcrling in the preecnt

A a 2 century,

Ztat, il. ii. r. 6. Gomiar t. omc. l l. Ilerrcra, dec. 5.1 1i. iii
c. .' t llerrera, dec. 5, ib. ill. i . c 3.

B 0° K century, fell to the share of each horseman, and halt

VI.

.-_ , , that fum to each foot soldier. Pizarro himself, and
'533. his officers, received dividends in proportion to the

dignity of their rank.
The e:fta THERE is no example in hiflory of such afudden

acquisition of wealth by military service, nor was
ever a fum so great divided among so small a num-
ber of soldiers. Many of them having received a
recompence for their services far beyond their most
sanguine hopes, were so impatient to retire from fa-
tigue and danger, in order to spend the remainder
of their days in their native country, in ease and
opulence, that they demanded their discharge with
clamorous importunity. Pizarro., sensible that from
such men he could exped neither enterpri.se in affi-
on, nor fortitude in suffering, and persuaded that
wherever they went, the display of their riches
would allure adventurers, less opulent but more
hardy, to his standard:, granted their suit without
reluEtance, and permitted above sixty of them to
accompany his brother Ferdinand, whom he sent
to Spain with an account of his success, and the
present destined for the emperor '*

The Inca TiiE Spaniirds having divided among them the
hit ii,: -1s trcafure anmalled for the Inca's ranforn, he insisted
in. v;4,,. with them to fuliil their pilomifeof setting hinm at

liberty. But nothing was farther from Pizarro's
thoughts. Durin g

his lonrg f{rvicc in the New

World, he had imnbibed thohl ideas and msxins of
his fellow-fuldicers, which led thcm to colfiler its
inlhabitants as an inf:rior racc, nicithcr worthy (f
the Irrlm, nor intitlcd to the rights, of men. I hihis
colimpat with Atahualptal, he had no other ol)jel
than to amtntL C his captive with such pr )fpc& o(

recovering

' Ins r dec. 1. 5 LI. iii. c 'I., Vcp, p. z. lib. i. j. 3~ ,
I8o

recovering his liberty, as might induce him to lend B o o K

VI.

all the aid of his authority towards collecing the .
wealth of his kingdom. Having now acconiplifh- 1533.
ed this, he no longer regarded his plighted faith,
and at the very time when the credulous prince ho-
ped to be replaced on his throne, he had secretly re-
solvcd to bereave him of life. Many circumflances
seem to have concurred in prompting him to this
adion, the mos criminal and atrocious that stains
the Spanifi name, amidst all the deeds of violence
committed in carrying on the conquefi of the New
World.

THOUGH Pizarro had seized the Inca, in imita- He andtthe

tion of Cortes's conduct towards the Mexican. mo- Sutuailly
narch, he did not possess talents for carrying on the jealous.
fame artful plan of policy. Deflitute of the temper
and ad:dress requisite for gaining the confidence of
his prisoner, he never reaped all the advantages
which might have been derived from being malter
of his person and authority. Atahualpa was, indeed,
a prince of greater abilities and discernment than
Montezuma, and seems to have penetrated more
thoroughly into the character and intentions of the
Spaniards. Mutual suspicion and diftcuft accord-
ingly took place between them. The ifridc atten-
tion with which it was necessary to guard a captive
offuch importance, greatly increased the fatigue
of military duty. The utility of keeping him ap-
pearcd inconsiderable ; and Pizarro felt him as an
incunibc-rance from which he wiflhed to be dcli-
vered *('.

ALMAGRO and his followers had made a demand: Alm'gr"

an, his fol..

of an equal share in the Inca's ransom; and though towrs dc-
Pizarro had bcftowcd upon the private men the large mand llss

gratuity
.1 TIcriira, dcc. 5. lib. i1i. c. 4.

i8i

B 0 0 ;K gratuity which I have mentioned, and endeavoured

VI.

to sooth their leader by presents of great value, they
3533. frill continued diflatisfied .They were apprehensive,

that as long as Atahualpa remained a prisoner, Pi-
zarro'sfoldierswould apply whatever treasure should
be acquired, to make up what was wanting of the
quantity stipulated for his ransom, and under that
pretext exclude them from any part of it. They
insisted eagerly on putting the Inca to death, that
all the adventurers in Peru might thereafter be on
an equal footing t.

fotiv-s PIZARRO himself began to be alarmed with ac-
which in..
ducedPi- counts of forces assembling in the remote provinces

rro fto. of the empire, and suspected Atahualpa of having
consent.

ifued orders for that purpose. There fears and sus-
picions were artfully increased by Philippillo, one
of the Indians whom Pizarro had carried off from
Tumbez in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty, and whom he employed as an interpreter.
The function which he performed admitting this
man to familiarintercourfe with the captive mon-
arch, he presumed, notwithifanding the meanness of
his birth, to raise his affections to a COYA, or def-
cendant of the Sun, one of Atahualpa's wives;
and feeing no profped of gratifying that passion du-
ring the life of the monarch, he endeavoured to fill
the ears of the Spaniards with such accounts of his
fecrct dcfigns and preparations, as might awaken
their jealousy and incite them to cut him off.

WHILE Almagro and his followers openly de-

manded the life of the Inca, and Philippillo labour-
ed to ruin him by private machinations, that un-
happy prince inadvcrtlntly. contributed to haften
his own fate. During his confinement he had at-

tached

s Z.airlre, lib. ii. c. 7. V'egp, . llb. i. c. 7. Hcrrera, dlcc.

5. lib. ill. c. 4.
182

tached himself with peculiar affection to Ferdi- B 0°o K
nand Pizarro and Hernando Soto; who, as they -_
were persons of birth and education superior to the r533.
rough adventurers with whom they served, were
accuflomed to behave with more decency and at-
tention to the captive monarch. Soothed with this
respect from perforns of such high rank, he delight-
ed in their society. But in the presence of the go-
vernor hewas uneasy, and overawed. This dread soon
came to be mingled with contempt. Among all the
European arts, what he admired most was that of
reading and writing; and he long deliberated with
himself, whether he should regard it as a natural
or acquired talent. In order to determine this, he
desired one of the soldiers, who guarded him, to write
the name of God on the nail of his thumb. This
he shewed fucceflively to several Spaniards, asking
its meaning; and to his amazement, they all,
without hesitation, returned the fame answer. At
length Pizarro entered ; and on presenting it to
him, he blushed, and with some confusion was ob-
liged to acknowledge his ignorance. From that
moment, Atahualpa confidered him as a mean per-
son, less inftruded than his own soldiers; and he
had not address enough to conceal the sentiments
with which this discovery inspired him. To be
the objet of a barbarian's scorn, not only mortified
the pride of Pizarro, but excited such resentment in
his breast, as added force to all the other confi
derations which prompted him to put the Inca to
death ::.

BuT in order to give rome colour ofjuftice to this
violent adtion, and that he hinlfclf might be exempt-
ed from stand ing singly refpoiifible for the corn- i tr
nfiliol of it, Pizarro rclflved to try the Inca with

all
t. Herrera, ILe. 5. 1h. !I;. C. +.· VL:CA, P. a 1. 1;, i, C. 11X.

B °0 ° all the formalities observed in the criminal courts

1,' oi Spain. Pizarro hiimfelf, and Almagro, with two
1533. afliftants, were appointed judges, with full power

to acquit or to condemn ; an attorney-general was
named to darry on the prosecution in the king's
name; counsellors were chosen to aflift the prison-
cr in his defence; and clerks were ordained to re-
cord the proceedings of court. Before this firange
tribunal, a charge was exhibited still more ama-
zing. It consisted of various articles; that Atahu-
alpa, though a bastard, had difpoffefled the rightful
owner of the throne, and usurped the regal power;
that he had put his brother and lawful foveieign to
death; that he was an idolater, and had not only
permitted, but commanded the offering of human
sacrifices; that he had a great numberofconcubines;
that since his imprisonment he had wafted and em-
bezzled the royal treasures, which now belonged
of right to the conquerors; that he had incited his
fubjecs to take arms against the Spaniards. On
these heads of accusation, some of which are so lu-
dicrous, others so absurd, that the effrontery of Pi-
zarro, in making them the foundation of a serious
procedure, is not less surprising than his injuitice,
did the court go on to try the sovereign of a great
empire, over whom ii had no j urifdic'ion. With rcf,
pee toeach of the articles, witnefl;s were examined;
but as they dclivecd their evidence in their native
tongue, Philippillo had it in his power to give their
words whatever turn bllft fitited his malevolent in-
rentions. 'To j.t lg.- {ircedcterniincd in their opini-
on, tilis cvidncce lippca;cd sufficient. They pro-
noul-cd Atahlltu;p;a ;,ti'iiy, :ild condcmned him to

I-e ii con- be burnt aliv,. li;al \ al crdc proffitutcd the ail-
demncd. tholity of his lcrt'l ullioll tO
COi to co h tis fen-

tence, and 1)b hi i:: llt;(tllr' warrantred it to be jult
Aitonif ihd ut t, !'it ', Atahuallpa cntlceivoiircd
t', n. relt it. i.; i;', i<' .l's, by iruoiiliS) and

by

by entreaties, that he might be sent to Spain, where B °0 K
a monarch would be the arbiter of his lot. But VI
pity never touched the unfeeling heart of Pizarro. 1533.
He ordered him to be led instantly to execution;
and what added to the bitterness of his last mo-
ments, the fame monk who had just ratified his
doom, offered to console, and attempted to convert
him. The most powerful argument Valverde em-
ployed to prevail with him to embrace the Christian
faith, was a promise of mitigation in his punilh-
ment. The dread of a cruel death extorted from
the trembling victim a desire of receiving baptism.
The ceremony was performed ; and Atahualpa, in- and execut-
stead of being burnt, was strangled at the flake *

HAPPILY for the credit of the Spanish nation, Several

even among the profligate adventurers which it sent Suniards
forth to conquer and desolate the New World, there gai'fita
were persons who retained some tinfture of the
Castilian generosity and honour. Though, before
the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdinand Pizarro had set
out for Spain, and Soto was sent on a separate corn-
mand at a distance from Caxamalca, this odious
transaction was not carried on without censure and
opposition. Several officers, and among those fo(ie
of the greatest reputation and most refpedtable fami-
lies in the service, not only remonstrated, but pro-
tefied against this measure of their general, as dif-
graceful to their country, as repugnant to every
maxim of equity, as a violation of public faith, and
an usurpation of jurifdlidtion over an independent
monarch, to which they had no title. But their
cndeavours were vain. Numbers, and the opini-
on of such as held every thing to be lawful which

VOL. II. B1 b they

Z '.lcl lib). ii. c . X

erY. r, p. .233. Vega, p. 11. libi. c. 36, , -
CGo llai, H fli.c. 117. Hlercra. dec. . 'll). iii. .. 4.

B OO they deemed advantageous, prevailed. History,

however, records even the unsuccessful exertions of
1;33. virtue with applause; and the Spanish writers, in

relating events where the valour of their nation is
more conspicuous than its humanity, have not failed
to preserve the names of those who made this lauda-
ble effort to save their country from the infamy of
having perpetrated such a crime *.

Diflilution
or govetn- O the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro invetfed one
nllnt aild of his sons with the ensigns of royalty, hoping that
order in
Peru. a young man without experience might prove a;

more pallive instrument in his hands, than an ambi-
tious monarch, who had been accustomed to inde-
pendent command. The people of Cuzco, and
the adjacent country, acknowledged Manco Capac,
a brother of Huafcar, as Inca -. But neither pof-
sessed the authority which belonged to a sovereign of
Peru. The violent convulsions into which theem-
pirc had been thrown, first by the civil war between
the two brothers, and then by the invasion of the
Spaniards, had not only deranged the order of the
Peruvian government, but almost difllved its
frame. When they beheld their monarch a cap-
tive in the power of fl-rangers, and at last suffering
an ignominious death, the people in several pro-
vinces, as if they had been set free from every re-
itraint of law and decency, broke out into the most
licentious exceflcs :.. So many descendants of the
Sun, after being treated with the utmost indignity,
had been cut off by Atahualpa, that not only their
influence in the slate dirninifled with their num-
ber, but the accuflomed reverence for that sacred
race fcnfibly decreased. In conlcqulencc of this

slate

' V`.I, p. 1 .

l i. i. c. 7. Xcrez, i. 235. IH rrel , e c, de. i il. ii.

r. .

t VcG .l

' .

I, .

1 i. i i. i . 7, ll cliicr., dcc. 5. lib. ii. c. 12I
hb . ,,. t. 5.

fate of things, ambitious men in different parts of B 00 K
the empire aspired to independent authority, and ._.
usurped jurifdition to which they had no title. 1533.
The general who commanded for Atahualpa in
Quito, seized the brother and children of his maf-
ter, put them to a cruel death, and disclaiming any
connection with either Inca, endeavoured to efta-
blifh a separate kingdom for himself*.

THE Spaniards, with pleasure, beheld the spirit Prro ad-

of discord diffufingitfelf, and the vigour of govern- cuzco,
ment relaxing among the Peruvians. They con-
fidered those disorders as symptoms of a Rtate has-
tening towards its diffilution. Pizarro no longer
hesitated to advance towards Cuzco, and he had
received such considerable reinforcements, that he
could venture, with little danger, to penetrate so
far into the interior part of the country. The ac-
count of the wealth acquired at Caxamalca, oper-
ated as he had foreseen. No sooner did his brother
Ferdinand, with the officers and soldiers, to whom
he had given their discharge after the partition of
the Incas's ranfomr arrive at Panama, and display
their riches in the view of their astonished country-
men, than fame spread the account with such exag-
geration through all the Spanish settlements on the
South Sea, that the governors of Guatimala, Pa-
nama, and Nicaragua, could hardly restrain the
people under their jurifdiation, from abandoning
their )poeflions, and crowding to that inexhaufti-
ble luurce of' wealth which seemed to be opened in
P'eru . In spite of every check and regulation,
such nmumbers retorted thither, that Pizarro began
his inarch at the head of five hundred men, after

B b 2 leaving

Zar;ilr, lib. ii. 8. . Vega, p . II. i. ii. c. 3, 4. t Gomara Hist.

t iZ5. Vegl, p. 1i. lib. ii. . . l
H inrert, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 5.

B o0 K leaving a considerable garrison in St. Michael, un.

der the command of Benalcazar. The Peruvians
1533. had assembled some large bodies of troops tooppofe

his progress. Several fierce encounters happened.
But they terminated, like all the actions in Ameri-
ca; a few Spaniards were killed or wounded ; the
natives were put to flight with incredible slaughter.
At length Pizarro forced his way to Cuzco, and
took quiet poffcffion of that capital. The riches
found there, even after all that the natives had car-
ried off and concealed, either from a superstitious
veneration for the ornaments of their temples, or
out of hatred for their rapacious conquerors, ex-
ceeded in value what had been received as Atahual-
pa's ransom. But as the Spaniards were now ac-
customed to the wealth of the country, and it came
to be parcelled out among a greater number of ad-
venturers, this dividend did not excite the fame fur-
prise either from novelty, or the largeness of the
fum that fell to the fhlare of each individual *.

DURING the march to Cuzco, the son of Atahu-

alpa whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died, and as the
Spaniards substitutcd no person in his place, the
title of Manco Capac teems to have been universal-
ly recognized t.

itn
, Wn- HIILE his fcllow-foldiers were thus employed,

Bc^ y cnalcazar, governor of St. Michael, an able and
lcn:i..iv,..r. cntcrprifing officer, was ashamed of remaining inac-

tive, and ilmpaticnt to have his narnc diffinguiflcd
among the difcovercrs and conquerors of the
New World. 'I he 1aifoniablc arrival of a frcflh bo-
dy of recruits from Panama and Nicaraguai, put
it in his power to gratify this passion. Leavig 1

iffilcicnt

I-Icrrerd, cc. S. lib. v. c. 2.

e.%;c1 ,1

', NC X v
xv 1 .

sufficient force to protect the infant settlement en- B 0 0 K
trusted to his care, he placed himself at the head of
the reft, and set out to attempt the redu&cion of 1533.
Quito, where, according to the report of the natives,
Atahualpa had left the greatest part of his treasure.
Notwithstanding the vast distance of that city from
St. Michael, the difficulty of marching through a
mountainous country, covered with woods, and
the frequent and fierce attacks of the best troops in
Peru, commanded by a skilful leader, the valour,
good conduCt, and perseverance of Benalcazar fur-
mounted every obstacle, and he entered Qulito with
his victorious troops. But they met with a cruel
mortification there. The natives, now acquainted,
to their sorrow, with the predominant passion of
their invaders, and knowing how to disappoint it,
had carried off all those treasures, the prospect of
which had prompted them to undertake this ardu-
ous expedition, and had supported them under all
the dangers and hardflips wherewith they had to
firuggle in carrying it on ±.

BENALCAZAR was not the only Spanish leader Alvarad 's

who attacked the kingdom of Quito. The fame of c\pedition.
its riches attracted a more powerful enemy. Pedro
de Alvarado, who had diftinguifllcd himself lo emi-
nently in the conquest of Mexico, having obtained
the government of Guatimala as a recompcnce for
his valour, soon became disgusted with a life of
uniform tranquility, and longed to be again engaged
in the bustle of military service. The glory and
wealth acquired by the conquerors of Peru heigh-
tened this paflion, and gave it a determined di-

reli on.

-I- 7 )i, e,.ihAI. c. c). \cga, p. 1

. hi. . ii. c, j. llcricnr:, dec. 5.
lib. 'v, c. H , J z. lib. v. c. Z. 3. lib. vi. c. 3.

B 0 0 K reAion. Believing, or pretending to believe, that
L-</-,, the kingdom of Quito did not lie within the limits

1533. oo the province allotted to Pizarro, he resolved to

invade it. The high reputation of the commander
allured volunteers from every quarter. He em-
barked with five hundred men, of whom above two
hundred were of such diitinction as to serve on horse-
back. He landed at Puerto Viejo, and Without sus-
ficient knowledge of the country, or proper guides
to conduct him, attempted to march diretly to
Quito, by following the course of the river Guay-
quil, and crossing the ridge of the Andes towards
its head. But in this route, one of the most im-
pracicable in all America, hi<; troops endured such
fatigue in forcing their way through forefis and
marshes on the low grounds, and suffered so much
from excellive cold when they began to afeend the
rmountains, that before they reached the plain of
Quito, a fifth part of the men and half of their
horses died, and the refi were so much dispirited and
worn out, as to be almost unfit for service t.
There they met with a body, not of Indians but
of Spaniards, drawn up in hostile array against
them. Pizarro, having received an account of Al-
varado's armament, had detached Almagro with
some troops to oppose this formidable invader of his
jurifldiction; and these were joined by Bcnalcazar
and his victorious party. Alvarado, though fur-
prifcd at the fight of enemies whom he did not cx-
pct, advanced boldly to the charge. But, by the
interposition of some moderate men in each party,
an amnicable accommodation took place; and the
fatal period, when Spaniards suspended their
conuc:(ls tto cimbrue their hands in the blood of their
counltrymlil( , was po)fltoned a few years. Alvarado
enag,'.'d to return to his governmcnt, upon Alma-

gro's

1 SeC NOTE XXXVIII.
190go

gro's paying him a hundred thousand pesos to de- B 0 0 K
fray the expence of his armament. Most of his
followers remained in the country; and an expedi- 1534.
tion, which threatened Pizarro and his colony with
ruin, contributed to augment its ftrcnith *.

BY this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in ITovurs

Spain. The immense quantities of gold and silver o 'ns,,ro
which he imported 1, filled the kingdom with no and Alma-
less aftonithmeit than they had excited in Panama gro'
and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro was r-ceived
by the emperor with the attention due to the bearer
of a present so rich as to exceed any idea which the
Spaniards had formed concerning the value of their
acquisitions in America, even after they had been
ten years malters of Mexico. In recompence of his
brother's services, his authority was confirmed with
new powers and privileges, and the addition of fe-
venty leagues, extending along the coast, to the
southward of the territory granted in his former pa-
tent. Almagro received the honours which he had
so long desired. The title of Adelantado, or go-
vernor, was conferred upon him, with jurifdiEtion
over two hundred leagues of country, firetch-
ing beyond the fouthcrn limits of the province al-
lotted to Pizarro. Ferdinand himself did not go
unrewarded. He was admitted into the military
o rder of St. Jago, a distinction always acceptable to
a Spanish gentleman, and soon fit out on his re-
turn to Peru, accompanied by many persons of
h igher rank, than had yet served in that coun-

SOME

, 'trat, lib. , c. 10--13. Vegl, p. x. lib. il. c. 1, &2. , c.
; '"mii,: l c. z6, ,:c. l eRciiel'l Hill. ;u.itirim l lib. iii. c. 6.
l 'r lcr, . c jib. vi. c. 1,S

7, . e
Sec NO''E XXXIX.

*'/.l·.
tc, P

l ,. 'li b.

i. C.

' ,pI. Ie

b. i.c.9. l cia c. 5.

"b 'v'c' li, li. ~

'
,^,,J.~~l

B V. K SOME account of his negociations- reached Peru

VI. ..._s. before he arrived there himself. Almagro no fooln
5s34. er learned that he had obtained the royal grant of

Beginning
ofJisnenci- an independent government, than, pretending that
ons between Cuzco1 the imperial residence of the Incas, lay
Pizarro and
Almagro. within its boundaries, he attempted to render him-

self master of that important station. Juan and
Gonzalez Pizarro prepared to oppose him. Each
of the contending parties was supported by power-
ful adherents, and the dispute was on the point of
being terminated by the sword, when Francis
Pizarro arrived in the capital. The reconciliation
between him and Almagro had never been cordial.
The treachery of Pizarro in engrossing to himself all
the honours and emoluments, which ought to have
been divided with his associate, was always present
in both their thoughts. The one, conscious of his
own perfidy, did not expec forgiveness ; the other,
feeling that he had been deceived, was impatient to
be avenged; and though avarice and ambition had
induced them not only to difl'emble their sentiments,
but even to aft in concert while in pursuit of wealth
and power, no sooner did they obtain pofflffion of
these, than the famepailions which had formed this
temporary union, gave rife to jealousy and discord.
To each of them was attached a small band of il-
tcrefted dependents, who, with the malicious art,
peculiar to such men, heightened their fufpiciolns,
and magnified every appearance of offence. Blt1
with all those feeds of enmity in their minds, al'd
thus assiduously cherified, cach was so thoroughly
acquainted with the ahiliti.s anid courage of his Ii-
val, that they equally drtcllcd the conl.cqtiices of
an open rupture. T'hc forttl.unte arriv;l of Piz;ar
ro at Cuzco, and the aldrclls minglcd with firmnelf,
which he mianifetlle in his cxpoitlulations with Al-
magro and his partilzn,;s, averted tihat evil for the
prcfi:nt. A I'ewV rcconLiiiatii)io t(uk pl:tcc thlc chli

article
____I____ __ _____

article of which was, that Almagro should attempt B 0 0 K
the conquest of Chili ; and if he did not find in VI
that province an establishment adequate to his me- '$34,
rit and expectations, Pizarro, by way of indemni-
fication, should yield up to him a part of Peru.
This new agreement was confirmed with the fame June iz.
sacred folemnities as their first contract, and
observed with as little fidelity *.

SooN after he concluded this important tranfac-
tion, Pizarro marched back to the countries on the Rf'Iatino"s

of Pizarro.

sea-coast and as he now enjoyed an interval of
tranquillity, undisturbed by any enemy, either Spa-
nifh or Indian, he applied himself with that perse-
vering ardour, which diftinguiihes his character,
to introduce a form of regular government, into the
extensive provinces subjeA to his authority. Tho'
ill qualified by his education to enter into any dif-
quifition concerning the principles of civil policy,
and little accustomed by his former habits of life
to attend to its arrangements, his natural sagacity
supplied the want both of science and experience.
He distributed the country into various diftrits;
he appointed proper magistrates to preside in each
and established regulations concerning the admii-
nifration of justice, the collecion of the royal re-
venue, the working of the mines, and the treatment
of the Indians, extremely simple, but well calcula-
ted to promote the public prosperity. But, though,
for the present, he adapted his plan to the infant
Late of his colony, his aspiring mind looked forward
to its future grandeur. He confidered himself as
laying the foundation of a great empire, and deli-
berated long, and with much solicitude, in what Fundatilo

of Liaini.

VoL.II. C c place

Zrate, lib. ii . e . . Vcea, I . i1. lib. ii. c, 19. B nzo,
i,. C. 6. dec. l. lib. vii. c. 8.

E °ov K place he should fix the feat of government. Cuzco,

the imperial city of the Incas, was situated in a cor-
1534- ner of the empire, above four hundred miles from

the sea, and much farther from Quito, a province of
whose value he had formed an high idea. No other
settlement of the Peruvians was so considerable as
to merit the name of a town, or to allure the Spa-
niards to fix their residence in it. But, in marching
through the country, Pizarro had been irruck with
the beauty and fertility of the valley of Rimac, one
of the most extensive and best cultivated in Peru.
Fhere, on the banks of a small river, of the fame
name.with the vale which it watersand enriches,
at the diflance of fix miles from Callao, the most
commodious harbour in the Pacific Ocean, he foun-
ded a city which he destined to be the capital of his
Januair i. government. He gave it the name of Ciudad de

los Reyes, either from the circumfiance of having
laid the first stone, at that fcafln when the church
celebrates the festival of the Three Kings, or, as is
more probable, in honour of Juanna and Charles,
the sovereigns of Cafsile. This name it fill re-
tains among the Spaniards, in all legal and formal
deeds ; but it is better known to foreigners by
that of LIMA, a corruption of the ancient appel-
lation ofthe vall.'y, in which it is situated. Under
his ilnfpeCion, the buildings advanced with lilch
rapidity, that it soon aflumcd the folrm of a city,
which,by a magnificcnt palace that he crcclcd for
him fils, and by the f eately hou is built by several of
his officers, Vc,;avei, eve in its ilnfacy, f doc indica-
tion of its fublcqucnt grandctr :1.

A I confcq1lneCce of what lia.l lbcn aigrccl vwith Pi-
vIl^i>,. I/,11'ro, AI ':1,"r bc;;an |his marcht towards Chili

and as he pollbillcd in an eminent degree the vir-

tues

' 1h (er ',C.i, ic . ib v.

I -

i .

vi .

T3.. li. i.

Yij, . 3 C!altcl0 Co-

roni. t, lib. i. . 37. U.l, u ,)) L:ll fa J lad.i, ii. 94.
194

tues most admired by soldiers, boundless liberality B 0 0 Kr
and fearless courage, his flandard,was followed by V
five hundred and seventy men, the greatest body of 1535.
Europeans that had hitherto been assembled in Pe-
ru. From impatience to finith the expedition, or
from that contempt of hardship and danger acquired
by all the Spaniards who had served long in Ame-
rica, Almagro, inflead of advancing along the level
country on the coast, chose to march across the
mountains by a route that was ihorter indeed, but
almost impracicable. In this attempt his troops
were exposed to every calamity which men can sus-
ser from fatigue, from famine, and from the rigour
of the climate in those elevated regions of the torrid
zone, where the degree of cold is hardly inferior to
what is felt within the polar circle. Many of them
perished; and the survivors, when they descended
into the fertile plains of Chili, had new difficulties
to encounter. They found there a race of men
very different from the people of Peru, intrepid,
hardy, independent, and in their bodily conftituti-
on, as well as vigour of spirit, nearly resembling
the warlike tribes in North America. Though fil-
led with wonder at the first appearance of the Spa-
niards, and still more aftoniflied at the operations
of their cavalry, and the effecs of their fire-arms,
the Chilefe soon recovered so far from their furprilc,
asnot only to defend themselves with obstinacy, but
to attack their new enemies with more determined
fierccnefs than any American nation had hitherto
discovered. The Spaniards, however, continued
to penetrate into the country, and collccted onme
conliderable quantities of gold ; but were so far from
thinking of making any f(ttlement anmidt fuich
formiidable neighbours, that, in fpitc of all the expe-
rience and valour of their leader, the final issue of
tllh: xpctdition still remained extremely dubioiu,

C c 2 wha

n o 0 K when they were recalled from it by an- unexpe&ed

V!.

revolution in Peru . The causes of this I ihall

1535. cndeavourto trace to their source.

reAtn inir So many adventurers had flocked to Peru from
rhP Pertivi- ever) Spanish colony in America, and all with such
ans. high expectations of accumulating independent for-

tunes at once, that, to men poffcflfed with notions
so extravagant, any mention of acquiring wealth

draduall, and by schemes of patient industry, would

have been not only a disappointment, but an insult.
In order to find occupation for men who could not
with safety be allowed to remain ina&tive, Pizarro
encouraged some of the moss diflinguifhed officers
who had lately joined him, to invade different pro-
vinces of the empire, which the Spaniards had not
hitherto visitcd. Several large bodies were formed
for this purpose ; and about the time that Almagro
fct out for Chili, they marched into remote diftrits
It rife of the country. No sooner did Manco Capac, the

Inca, observe the inconsiderate security of the Spa-
niards in thus difpcrfing their troops, and that on-
ly a handfiul of men remained in Cuzco, under Ju-
On and Gonzales Pizarro, than he thought that the
h,pply period was at length come for vindicating
his own rights, avenging the wrongs of his country
and cxtirpa:ing its .opplrcfors. Though firidly
watched by the Spaniardl who allowed him tore-
fide in the iilace of his anceflors at Cuzco, he found
mntans ocf com-inlliicating his fclhcne to the persons
who were to be cntrnfled with the execution of it.
Among people accufl(,med to revere their bovereign
;,s a divinity, every hint of his will carries the au-
thority of a commanlld ; and( they themfelvcs were
now con\ incced, hy the daily illcreafe in the number

If their invaders, that the fond hopes which they

Ihad

* . mr.,lil, i;i. c. ,. ¢ ;,rnr ti HTfl c. TI1. VelO, P. 7.- lb.

ili. c.
'I. I(.~ l*l, (ltli. C(1nre, lib. iv. . 15, &C. Illcrira (ec

' lbi. ii. ' . i. ILb. K. c. I, Sec.
i g6

had long entertained of their voluntary departure B o 0 Kx
were altogether vain. All perceived that a vigo- ._
rous effort of the whole nation was requisite to ex- 1535.
pel them, and the preparations for it were carried
on with the secrecy and silence peculiar to Ameri-
cans.

AFTER some unsuccessful attempts of the Inca

to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happening to r 36.
arrive at that time in Cuzco, he obtained permifli-
on from him to attend a great feflival which was
to be celebrated a few leagues from the capital.
Under pretext of that solemnity, the great men of
the empire were assembled. As soon as the Inca
joined them, the flandard of war was erected ; and
in a short time all the fighting men, from the con-
fines of Quito to the frontier of Chili, were in arms.
Many Spaniards, living securely on the settlements
allotted them, were massacred. Several detachments,
as they marched carelessly through a country which
feermed to be tamely submissive to their dominion,
were cut off to a man. An army amounting (if
we may believe the Spani writers) to two hund-
red thousand men attacked Cuzco, which the three
brothers endeavoured to defend with only a hundred
and seventy Spaniards, Another formidable body
invested Lima, and kept the governor closely shut
up. There was no longer any communication be-
t'veen the two cities; the numerous forces of the
Peruvians spreading over the country, intercepted
every mefienger ; and as the parties in Cuzco and
lima were equally unacquainted with the fate of
their countrymen, each boded the worst concerning
the otiher, and imagined that they themselves were
"th only perfolns who had iuirvived the general cx-
tinIlion1 of the Spanifl name in Peru "

Ir

,' ; h.

,.', at.

sl.
l ii.

i . Z te, ii c. . Cicca de Leon,

, 'iL. I ; GuiIIuaIilt. c, 135. lIcrlir;i, dec. v. lib. viii. . $.
$;

B O O K IT was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded in

VI person, that the Peruvians made their chief effort.
1536. During nine months they carried on the siege with

Siege of inceflant ardour, and in various forms ; and though
Cuzco.

they dlifplayed not the fame undaunted ferocity as
the Mexican warriors, they conduced some of
their operations in amanner which discovered great-
er sagacity, and a genius more susceptible of im-
provement in the military art. They not only ob-
served the advantages which the Spaniards derived
from their discipline and their weapons, but they
endeavoured to imitate the former, and turn the lat-
ter against them. They armed a considerable body
of their bravest warriors with th2 swords, the spears,
and bucklers, which they had taken from the Spa-
nifh soldiers whom they had cut off in different parts
of the country. These they endeavoured to mar-
fhal in that regular compaa order, to which expe-
rience had taught thnmi that the Spaniards were in-
debted for their irrefif-ible force in acion. Some
appeared in the field with Spanish muskets and had
acquired skill and rcfolution enough to use them.
A few of the boldest, among whom was the Inca
himself, were mounted on the horses which they
had taken, and advanced briskly to the charge like
Spanish cavaliers, with their lances in the red. It
was more by their numlbers, however, than by thofc
imperfect eflays to imitate }uropean arts, and em-
ploy European arns, that the Peruvians annoyed
the Spaniards t-. In spite of the valour, heightcn-
ed by despair, with which the three brothers defend-
ed Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered pofleflion0f
one half of his capital ; aIlld blfOre the Spaniards
could drive himi out of it, they loft Juan Pizair(',
the best beloved of ;ll the brothers, together
with lfome other pirlons of note. Worn out
with the fationlvc of lnc
l i'fint duty, diflrc'fil

witli
tp vt~ N O~T XL.

with want of provisions, and despairing of being B o o K
able any longer to resist an enemy whose numbers V
daily increased, the soldiers became impatient to 1536.
abandon Cuzco, in hopes either of joining their
countrymen, if any of them yet survived, or of
forcing their way to the sea, and finding some
means of escaping from a country which had been
so fatal to the Spanish name *. While they were
brooding over those desponding thoughts, which their
officers laboured in vain to dispel, Almagro appear-
ed suddenly in the neighbourhood of Cuzco.

THE accounts tranfinitted to Almagro concern- Arrival of

ing the general insurrection of the Pcruvians, were
such as would have induced him, without hesitation,
to relinquih the conquest of Chili, and hasen to
the aid o'i his counitrymen. But in this resolution
he was confirmed by a motive less generous, but and motives
more interering. By the fame messenger who ofhiscon-
brought him intelligence of the Inca's revolt, he dua-
r,:ceived the royal patent creating him governor of
Chili, and defining the limits of his jurifdidion.
Upon confidering the tenor of it, he deemed it ma-
nifcfi beyond contradiction, that Cuzco lay within
the boundaries of his government, and he was
equally solicitous to prevent the Peruvians from re-
covering poffelTion of their capital, and to wrest it
out of the hands of the Pizarros. From impatience
to accomplish both, he ventured to return by a new
route; and in marching through the sandy plains
of the coast, he fuffrced, from heat and drought,
c:il;iaitics of a new species, hardly inferior to those
i:x which he had been involved by cold and famine
on I.hc iiihimmits of the Andes.

0 1I c, 1 : , (,(:c. S. jib. v!iii. c,. 4

B O O K IT was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded in

vI.

person, that the Peruvians made their chief effort.

1536. During nine months they carried on the siege with
Siege of inceflant ardour, and in various forims; and though

they displayed not the fame undaunted ferocity as
the Mexican warriors, they conductd some of
their operations in amanner whioh discovered great-
er sagacity, and a genius more susceptible of im-
provement in the military art. They not only ob-
served the advantages which the Spaniards derived
from their discipline and their weapons, but they
endeavoured to imitate the former, and turn the lat-
ter against them. They armed a considerable body
of their bravest warriors with the swords, the spears,
and bucklers, which they had taken from the Spa-
nifh soldiers whom they had cut off in different parts
of the country. These they endeavoured to mar-
flhal in that regular compat order, to which expe-
rience had taught thlm that the Spaniards were in-
debted for their irresistible force in action. Some
appeared in the field with Spanish muskets and had
acquired Ikill and rcfolution enough to use them.
A few of the boldest, among whom was the Inca
himself, were mounted on the horfcs which they
had taken, and advanced briskly to the charge like
Spanish cavaliers, with their lances in the refl. It
was more by their numbers, however, than by those
imperfec eflays to imitate European arts, and em-
ploy European arms, th;t the Peruvians annoyed
the Spaniards t-. In fpitc of the valour, heighten-
ed by dcfpair, with which the three brothers defcnd-
ed Cuzco, Manco Capac recovered poflTcfion of
one half of his capital ; and before the Spaniards
could drive him out of it, they loft Juan Pizarrl
th es bl d o

e

b b the brothers, together

with fomc olhtr pc( rlns of note. Worn olt
with the fatigiLc, of in:celliant duty, dinr1cni'

*I P i iO[L X L~with
'l' .ik'e NOT I; XI,.

with want of provisions, and despairing of being B 0 0 K
able any longer to resist an enemy whose numbers _
daily increased, the soldiers became impatient to 1536.
abandon Cuzco, in hopes either of joining their
countrymen, if any of them yet survived, or of
forcing their way to the sea, and finding some
means of escaping from a country which had been
so fatal to the Spanish name *. While they were
brooding over those desponding thoughts, which their
officers laboured in vain to dispel, Almagro appear-
ed suddenly in the neighbourhood of Cuzco.

THE accounts tranfinitted to Alnagro concern- Arrival of

Almagro,

ing the general infurreftion of the Pcruvians, were
fuchas would have induced him, without hesitation,
to reliJ;qi!ih the conquest of Chili, and haren to
the ai ', of his countrymen. But in this resolution
he was confirmed by a motive less generous, but and motives
more interesting. By the fame messenger who ofhiscon-
brought him intelligence of the Inca's revolt, he dun
rceived the royal patent creating him governor of
Chili, and defining the limits of his jurifdiltion.
Upon confidering the tenor of it, he deemed it ma-
nifcft beyond contradiction, that Cuzco lay within
the boundaries of his government, and he was
equally solicitous to prevent the Peruvians from re-
covering poffelfion of their capital, and to wrest it
out of the hands of the Pizarros. From impatience
to accomplish both, he ventured to return by a new
route; and in marching through the sandy plains
of the coast, he suff'ercd, from heat and drought,
c:il;i;nitics of a new species, hardly inferior to those
i: which he he d been involved by cold and famine
i' i .hel Ic Iminits of the Andes.

*~ Ilciivti.i, ,r-c. 5 II)b. viil. C. 4 .

199

B 0OO K HlS arrival at Cuzco was in a critical momeht.

VL ' The Spaniards and Peruvians fixed their eyes up6i:
1537. him with equal solicitude. The former, as he did
His operati- not fudy to conceal his preterfions, were at a loft.

ons. whether tbwelcome him as a deliverer, or to take

precautions against him as an enemy. The latter,
knowing the points in contest between him and his
countrymeni flattered themselves that they had
more to hope than to dread fr6m his operations.
Almagro himself, unacquainted with the detail bs
the events which had happened in his absence, and
solicitous to learn the precise posture of affairs, ad-
vancedl towards the capital slowly, and with great
circumfpe6tion. Various negociations with both'
parties were set on foot. The Inca coinduted them
on his part with much address. At firfl he endea-
voured to gain the friendship of Almagro ; and after
many fruitless overtures, defpaiiihg of any cordial
union with a Spaniard, he attacked him by fur-
ptife with a numrietoust body of chosen troops. But
the Sphiiifh dlfcipliie anid valour maintained their
w6rrted superiority. The Peruvians were repulsed
with such slaughter, that a great part of their army
dispersed, and Alrnagro proceeded to the gates
of Cutco without interruption.

Takes pof- THE Pitarros, as they had no longer to ffiake head
fezco.f against the Peruvians, direced all their attention

towards their new enemy, and took measures to
obftru& his entry irito the capital. Prudence,
however, restrained both parties soir ome time from
turning their arims against one anlother, while fur-
rounded by comnion enemies, who would rejoic0
in the mutual slaughter. Different schemes of ac-
commodation were proposed. Each endeavoured
to deceive the other, or to corrupt his followers.

The
200

The generous, open,: affable temper of Almagro B 0 0 K
gained many adherents of the Pizarros, who were --_.'
disgusted with their har{h domineering manners.' 1537.
Encouraged by th is defetion, he advainced towards
the city by night, surprised the ccntinels, or wa;s
admitted by them, and invefling the house where
the two brothers resided, compelled them, after an
obstinate defence, to 'urrender at discretion. Al-
magro's-claim of jurifdiaion over Cuzco was uni-
verfally acknowledged, and a form of r.dmirnjfr:iti-
on established in his name *.

Two or three persons only were killed in :'.is c;vil..-;:
ir t aa of civil Ihoii:ity; but it was sIon foll)ow- * "":""-:"
ed by scenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro li;ling nl,, -o,
dispersed the Peruvians who had invef-led ' in,
and received some considerable reinfor t

or- ni' f! .nm

Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered fiv. un.hi:,.l
men, :under tihe command of Alonfo de Ai var.td;,
to march to Cuzeo, in hopes of relieving hi's lro-
thers, if they and their garrison were not ai r:.d'
cut off by the Peruvians. This body, whici, ;i
the infancy of the Spanifli power in America, n.t,
be deemed a considerable force, advanced n.ear to
the capital before they.knew that th!ey lhad aly ne-r
my more fornidable than Indians toc'ncounter. I:
was with aftoni.hment that they beheld their couin-
trymen pofted.on the banks of the river Abancay to
oppose their progress. Almagro, however, vwiJhcd
rather to gain than to conquer them, and by brib'cs
and promises endeavoured to feducc their leader.
'I'he fidelity of Alvarado remained unfl:ken ; but
his talents for war were not equal to his virtue.
Almagro ainufed him with various movements, of
which he did not comprehend the meaning, while
VOL. II D d a large

*Zaratc, lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. I1. lib. i. c. z9, 31. uo-
mnara Hil. c. 134. Herrera, dcc. 6. lib. ii. c. -5.

201

B O O K a large detachment of chosen soldiers passed the

vi.

river by night, fell upon his camp by surprise,
1537. broke his troops before they had time to form, and

took him prisoner, together with his principal of-
ficers t.

but does not By the sudden rout of this body, the contest be-
iTinnrove liys
ady.itcs. tween the two rivals muff have been decided, if Al-

magro had known as well how to improve as how
to gain a victory. Rodrigo Orgogonez, an officerof
great abilities, who having served under the confla-
ble Bourbon, when he led the imperial ..my to
Rome, had been accuffomed to bold and decisive
counsels, adviled him initantly to issue orders for
putting to death Ferdinand and Gonzalo Pizarros,
Alvarado, and a few other persons whom he could
not hope to gain, and to march direcly with his
'vicorious troops to Lima, before the governor had
time to prepare for his defence. But Almagro,
though he discerned at once the utility of the
counsel, and had courage to have carried it into ex-
tcution, suffercd himself to be influenced by senti-
ments unlike those of a soldier of fortune grown
old in iervice, and by scruples which suited not the
chief of a party who had drawn his sword in civil
war. Feelings of humanity restrained him fiom
shedding the blood of his opponents ; and the dread
of being deemed a rebel deterred him from enter-
ing a province which the king had allotted to ano-
ther. Though he knew that arms mufl- terminate the
difputc between him and Pizarro, and relolved not
to Iliun that miode of dccilionl, yet, with a timid de-
licacy preposterous at fuich a junLturc, he was so so-
licitous that his rival ihould be conlidercd as the

aggreflbr,

·1 i

,' ute, li i .

iii. t.

6. (ntn, lift. c. 138. Vcga, p. '.
hi, . i, ; :;,' 3'1. Icll ci.i , dec. o. lib. ii.c . 9.

aggyreffor, that he marched quietly back to Cuzco, B O K
to wait his approach t.

1537-

PIZARRO was still unacquainted with all the in- DiRfrec of

teresting events that had happened near Cuzco. Pizarro.
The account of Almagro's return, of the loss of
the capital, of the death of one brother,' of the im-
prifonment of the other two, and of the defeat of
Alvarado, were brought to him at once. Such a
tide of misfortunes almost overwhelmed a spirit
which had continued firm and erect under the ru-
deft shocks of adversity. But the n-ceffity of at-
tending to his own fafcty, as well as the desire of
revenge, preserved him from finking under it. He
took measures for both with his wonted sagacity.
As he had the command of the sea-coast, and ex- His artful
peeed considerable supplies both of men and of condud.
military ftorcs, it was no less his interest to gain
time, and to avoid action, than it was that of Al-
magro to precipitate operations, and bring the con-
test to a speedy issue. He had recourse to arts
which he had formerly praAifed with success, and
Almagro was again weak enough to fuffcr himself
to be amused with a profpea of terminating their
differences by some amicable accommodation. By
varying his overtures, and flifting his ground as
often as it suited his purpose, fomctimcs feeminrr
to yield every thing that his rival could desire,
and then rctrading all that he had granted, Pizar-
ro dexterously protracted the negociation to such a
lengt, that though every day was precious to Al
marIr, fcvcral months clapscd, without coming to
an) final agreement. While the attention of AI-
inagro, alnd of the officers with whom he consulted,
was occupied in detcting and eludtiing the fraudu-
lent intentions of the governor, Gonzalo Pizarro
lndl Alvarado foulnd means to corrupt the loldiers

D d 2 to
i[ Hicrrici, (IcC, 6. lili. ii. c. 10, 11.

203

t.
B 0 0 K to whole custody they wcre committed, and not

only made their escape th'emselves, but perfliaded
S3?7. sixty of the men who' formerly guarded them to

accompany their flight *. Fortune having thus de-
livered one of his brothers, the governor scrupled
not at one act of pcrfidy more to procure the release
of the other. Hie proposed, that every point in con.
troverfy between Almagro and himself fiouldbe
submitted to the decision of their sovereign; that
until his award was known, each should retain un-
disturbed poflflion of whatever part of the country
he now occupied; that Ferdinand Pizatro should
be set at liberty; and return inflantly to Spain, to-
gether with the officers, whom Almagro purposed
to fend thither to represent the'juftice of his claims.
Obvious as the design of Pizarro was in those pro-
positions, and familiar as his artifices might now have
been to his opponent, Almnagro, with a credulity
approaching to infatuation, relied on his sincerity,
and concluded an agreement on these terms t.
'tis prcp.rar- THrE momerit that Ferdinand Pizarro recovered

tios for his liberty, the ;overnor, no longer fettered-in his

* c: C)erations br anxicty about his brother's life, threw

c tliv ly d if ui f whichthis concern for ithad obli-
ged him to afiline. The treaty was forgotten;
pAcific and conciliating measures were no more
i. nt-.:e..1 ; it wats in the field, he openly decla-
Iv.ii, .r'i ir.. in the cabinet ; by arms, and not by
ngc,(i.:aon; tlhat it mufl now be determined who
floultl b in;ifler of Peru. The rapidity of hispre-
parittions I.itcct such a decisive resolution. Seven

5,
3 hlindred men were 'toon ready to march towards

Cuzco: The comn;and of these was given to his

two

* Zar-, 11ih. iii. c. S. Herrcra, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 14.

't Ierrcre. , ler. . ib. iii. c. 9 Zarate, lib. ii.c. 9. Goman

Hiil. c. 1.'-,. Vcsa,'p. xs lib. ii. c. 35.
-ao4

two brothers, in whom he could perfectly.confide B °0 K
for the execution of his most violent schemes, as .
they were urged on not only by the enmity flowing 1538.
from family rivalihip, but animated with the desire
of vengeance, excited by recolletion of their re-
cent disgrace and sufferings. After an urifwccefs-
ful attempt to cross the mountains in the diret
road between Lima and Cuzco, they marched to-
wards the south along the coast as far as 'Nafca,
and then turning to the left, penetrated through
the defiles in that branch of the Andes which lay
between them and the capital. Almagro, inflead
of hearkening to rome of his officers, who advised
him to attempt the defence of those difficult passes,
waited the approach of the enemy in the plain.of
Cuzco. Two reasons seem to have induced him
to take this resolution. His followers amounted
hardly to five hundred, and he was afraid of weak-
ening such a feeble body, by fending any detach-
ment towards the mountains. His cavalry far
exceeded that of the adverse party, both in number
and discipline, and it was only in an open country
that he could avail himself of that advantage.

THE Pizarros advanced without any obftruiai, His army
on, but what arose from the nature of the de- Cmrches to
fert and horrid regions through which they march-
ed. As loon as they reached the plain, both
facions were equally impatient to bring this long-
protra&ed, contest to an issue. Though. country-'
men and friends, the fubjeds of the fame sovereign,
and each with the royal standard displayed; and
though they beheld the mountains that surrounded
the plain in which they were drawin t., . covered
with a vast multitude of Indians, assemble.d to
enjoy the f'peaacle of their mutual carr;nage, and
prepared to' attack whatever party remained maf-
ter of the field ; so fell and implacable was the

rancour
- - k - -- - - .- - - - - _.

B 0 K
R rancour which had taken poflcffion of every breat,

that not one pacific counfei, not a single overture
1538. towards accommodation proceeded from either fide,

Unfortunately for Allagro, he was so worn out
with the fatigues of service, to which his advanced
age was unequal, that, at this crisis of his fate, he
could not exert his wonted aAivity; and he was
obliged to commit the leading of his troops to Or-
gognez, who, though an officer of great merit, did
not possess the fame ascendant either over the spirit
or affdeions of the soldiers, as the chief whom they
had long been accustomed to follow and revere.

April z6. THE confli was fierce, and maintained by each
Almagro party with equal. courage. On the fide of Almagro,
defeated,

were more veteran soldiers, and a larger proportion
of cavalry ;-but theie were counterbalanced byPi-
zarro's superiority in numbers, and by two conpa-
nies of well-difciplined musketeers, which, on re-
ceiving an account of the infurreclion of the Indi-
ans, the emperor had sent from Spain *. As the
use of fire-arms was not frequent among the adven-
turers in America§, hastily equipped for service,
at their own expcnce, this finall band of fol-
diers, regularly trained and armed, was a novelty
in Peru, and decided the fate of the day. Where-
ever it advanced, the weight of a heavy and well-
sustained fire bore down horse and foot before it;
and Orgognez, while he endeavoured to rally and
animate his troops, having received a dangerous
wound, the rout became general. The barbarity
of the conquerors fiaiiled the glory which they ac-
quired by this complete vidory. The violence of
civil rage hurried on some to slaughter their coun-
trymen with indifcrliminate cruelty; the mcanncfsl
of private revenge instigatcd others to single out in-
dividuals as the objeds of their vengeance.. r-

gogóla'C

IHlerrera, dec. 6. iib. iii. c. 8. § Zaiato, lib. iii, c. 8.
206

gognez and several officers of difincion were maf- B O0 K
sacred in cold blood; above a hundred and forty _
soldiers fell in the field ; a large proportion, where 153s.
the number of combatants was few, and the hcac of
the contest soon over. Almagro, though so feeble
that he could not bear the motion of a horse, had
infited on being carried in a litter to an eminence
which overlooked the field of battle. From thence,
in the utmost agitation of mind, he viewed the vari-
ous movements of both parties, and at last beheld
the total defeat of his; own troops, with all the pal-
iornate indignation of a veteran leader long acc.uf-
tomed to victory. He endeavoured to save hiinfelf
by flight, but was taken prisoner, and guarded with and taken.
the ftridefR vigilance §.

THE Indians, instead of executinn the resolution
which they had formed, retired quietly after thc
lattle was over ; and in the history of the New
World, there is not a more striking inflance of the
wonderful afccndant which the Spaniards had ac-
quirei( over its inhabitants, than thar after secing
oneof the contending parties ruined and dispersed,
and the other weakened and fatigued, they had not
courage to fall upon their enemies, when fortune
priclcteal an opportunity of attacking them with
Illch advantage :.

Cu .co was pillaged by the vicQorious troops, who
f)UIUi there a considerable booty, coniifting partly ditIonl
f ti gleIani ngsr of the I ndlian trcafircs, and partly
o the wealth amallied by their antagonifs from
tlile )poils of Peru and Chili. But lo far did

tlis,

I; I,' ' *,

h, ll) ii ,.
I, -12. l i,. ii . -... -- .

"' ' ·j

l' ** . u c. V'c p 1' 1·. lib. ii. c. 3S.
it c

B O O K this, and whatever the bounty of their leader could

VI' add to it, fall below the high ideas of the recom.
J5 3. pence which they conceived to be due to their me-

tit, that Ferdinand Pizarro, unable to gratify such
cxtravagant expec-ations, had recourse to tohe fane
expedient which his brother had employed on a si-
milar occasion, and endeavoured to find occupation
for this turbulent assuming spirit, in order to pre-
vent it fron breaking out into open mutiny. With
this view, he encouraged his moil- adiive officcrs to
r.ttempt the discovery and reducion of various pro-
vinces which had not hitherto fubnitted to the
Spaniards. To every standard credcd by the lea,-
crs who undertook any of those new expeditions,
volunteers resorted with the ardour and hope pecu-
liar to the age. Several of Almagro's fuldiers joilcd
them, and thus Pizarro had the fatisfatlion of beii;
delivered both from the importunity of his dii'oni
tented friends, and the dread of his ancient enc-
mies .

Almagro ALMAGRO himself remained for several imonths
t:'id, in custody, under all the anguish of fufpence. For

although his doom was determined by the Pizarros
from the moment that he fell into their hands, pru-
dence constrained them to defer gratifying thcir
vengeance, until the soldiers who had served under
him, as well as several of their own followers in
whom they could not perfecily confide, had left
Cuzco. As soon as they fct out upon their difle-
rent expeditions, Alinagro was impeached of trc.-
.ondinnecd, son, formally tried, and condemned to die. rThe

fcntcnce aloniifhied him, and though he had often
braved death with an und;atnted fpi rit in the field,
its at)llproachli under this igno nilliots formi, app;:!lcd
him ol much, that he had reco iu rfl to abjcd flpplllicati-

ti()liS,

* Z :r;ittr ,. li. G.

i., Ili. c. 141. ich{r.i, ,c,
4. lib. iv. t. 7.

tidns, unworthyof his former fame. He besought B o0 K
the Pizarros to remember the ancient friendthip j
between their brother and him,-and how much he iS3.
had contributed to the success and prosperity of
their family ; he reminded them of the humanity
with which, in opposition to the repeated remon-
ftrances of his own most attached friends, he had
spared their lives when he had them in his power;
he conjured them to pity his age and infirmities, and
to susser him to pass the wretched remainder of his
days in bewailing his crimes, and in making his
peace with Heaven. The intreaties, fays a Spa-
nifh historian, of a man so much beloved, touched
many an unfeeling heart, and drew tears from ma-
ny a hard eye. But the brothers remained inflexi-
ble. As soon as Almagro knew his fate to be in-
evitable, he met it with the dignity and fortitude
of a veteran. He was stranglcd in prison, and as-
terwards publicly beheaded. He suffered in the and put to
feventy-fifth year of his age, and left one son by an
Indian woman of Panama, whom, though at that
time a prisoner in Lima, he named as successor to
his government, pursuant to a power which the
emperor had granted him*.

As, during the civil difrentions in Peru, all in- .

tercourfe With Spain was suspended, the detail of Dclibrr.ni-
the extraordinary transactions there did not soon court of
reach the court. Unfortunately for the victorious Spain cnn-

cernig I-

fa&ion, the firit intelligence was brought thither fateotlci'i
by some of Almagro's officers, who left the country
upon the ruin of their cause; and they related what
h;d happened, with every circutlftance unfavoura-
ble to Pizarro and his brothers. Their ambition,
their breach of the most solemn engagements, their
violence and cruelty, were painted with all the
VOL. II. E e malignity

* Zar;atc, lib. ;ii c. . Com,

' G il . c. 141. Vega, p. x1. lib.

i, c. 39. lHerrera, dec. 6. lib. iv . .
. lib. v. c. I.

B 0 0 K malignity and exaggeration of party hatred. Ser-

bv-c dinand Pizarro, who arrived soon after, and appear- .:
s539. ed in court with extraordinary splendour, endea- 'i

voured to efface the impreflion which their accufa-
tions had made, and to justify his brother and him-
self by representing Almagro as the aggressor. The
emperor and his ministers, though they could
not pronounce which of the contending fations
was most criminal, clearly discerned the fatal ten-
dency of their dissentions. It was obvious, that
while the leaders, entrusted with the conduc of
two infant colonies, employed the arms which
should have been turned against the common ene-
my, in destroying one another, all attention to the
public good muff cease; and there was reason to
dread that the Indians might improve the advan-
tage which their disunion presented to them, and
extirpate both the vitors and the vanquished. But
the evil was more apparent than the remedy.
Where the information which had been received
was so defetive and suspicious, and the scene of
action so remote, it was almost impoflible to chalk
out the line of conduct that ought to be followed;
and before any plan that Should be approved of in
Spain could be carried into execution, the situation
of the parties, and the circumstances of affairs,
might alter so entirely as to render its effects ex-
tremely pernicious.

VacadeCa- NOTHING therefore remained but to fend aper-
ftio frnt son to Perti, vestcd with extensive and difcrctionary
hthr with
amlec pow- power, who, after viewing deliberately the posture
crs. of affairs with his own qyes, and enquiring upon

the spot, into the conduci of the different leaders,
should be authorised to eflablifh the government
in that form which he deemed most coiiducive
to the interest of the parent ftatc, and the wel-
fare of the colony. The man fclccecd for this im-

portant

1
210

portant charge was Chriftoval Vaca de Cafiro, B 0 0 K
a judge in the court of royal audience at Valla- vl.
dolid; and his abilities, integrity, and firmness, 1539.
justified the choice. His inftrutions, though am-
ple, were not such as to fetter him in his operati-
ons. According to the different afpeEc of affairs, he
had power to take upon him different characters. If
he found the governor fill alive, he was to assume
only the title of judge, to maintain the appearance
of afting in concert with him, and to guard against
giving any jucf cause of offence to a man who had
merited so highly of his country. But if Pizarro
was dead, he was entrusted with a commiflion,
that he might then produce, by which he was ap-
pointed his successor in the government of Peru.
This attention to Pizarro, however, seems to have
flowed rather from dread of his power, than from
any approbation of his measures; for at the very
time that the court seemed so solicitous not to ir-
ritate him, his brother Ferdinand was arrested at
Madrid, and confined to a prison, where he re-
mained above twenty years*.

WHILE Vaca de Castro was preparing for his
voyage, events of great moment happened in Peru. Pizarrodi-
The governor, confidering himself, upon the death vides Peru

amriong, his

of Almagro, as the unrivalled poffeflbr of that vast followers.
enmpire, proceeded to parcel out its territories among
the conquerors ; and had this division been made
with any degree of impartiality, the extent of
country which he had to bestow was sufficient to
have gratified his friends, and to have gained his
Cnemies. But Pizarro conducted this tranfaldion
"ot with the equity and candour of a judge atten-
tive to diicover and to reward merit, but with the
il'libral Ipirit of a party leader. Large diftri-is,

E e 2 in

d * ,"ar,, Hl. c. 142. Vqea, p. I .lib. ll . c.4r. Ilc.rc a,

dec, .ib. ii. o_
c. o , lib, . c. .

211

B ov K in parts of the country most cultivated and po.

V__ pulous, were set apart as his own property, or
1540. grailted to his brothers, his adherents and favou.

rites. To others, lots less valuable and inviting
were assigned. The followers of Almagro, amongst,
whom were many of the original adventurers.to
whose valour and perseverance Pizarro was indebt-
ed for his success, were totally excluded from any
portion in those lands, towards the acquisition of
which they had contributed so largely. As thevani-
ty of every individual set an immoderate value up-
on his own services, and the idea of eachconcern-
ing the recompence due to them, rose gradually to,
a more exorbitant heigh/in proportion as.their con-
quetls extended, all who were disappointcd in their
expectations exclaimed loudly againft.:the rapaci-
ouihlfs and partiality of the governor. The par-
tifans of Almagro murmured in secret, and.medi-
tated rcvenge*.

Progrefsof RAPiD as the progress of the Spaniards in South
tlitr l" America had been since Pizarro -landed in Peru,

their avidity of dominion was not yet. satisfied. The
officers to whom Ferdinand Pizarro gave the com-
mand of different detachments, penetrated into fe-
veral new provinces, and though rome of them were
exposed to great hardlhips in the cold and barren
regions of the Andes, and others suffered diitrefs
not inferior amlidf{ the woods and marihes of the
plains, they nadle discoveries and conquests which
extended their knowledge of the country as well as
.lddcdl to their power. Pedro de Valdivia re-aflmn-
*d Alinagro's fchCmeI of invading Chili, alid not-
withflanling the fortitude of the natives in defend-
ing their pofllniiois, niade such progress in the
conquefr of the con ltry, that he foundced the city
of St. Jago, and gave a beginning to the eflabliflh

IBCnf,

a Vctt, I. iv. lib. iii. c. z. fiCIrent, dcC. 6. lib. Vili. c. 5
212

ment of the Spanish dominion there*. But of all B 0 0 K
- the enterprizes undertaken about this period, that a_

of Gonzalo Pizarro was the most remarkable. The 1540.
governor, who seems to have resolved that no per- Remarkable

expedition

ion in Peru /hould possess any station of distinguish- of Gonzalo
ed eminence or authority but those of his own Pizarro.
family, had deprived Benalcazar, the conqueror
of Quito, of his command in that kingdom, and
appointed his brother Gonzalo to take the govern-
ment of it. He initruded him to attempt the dif-
covery and conquest of the country to the east of
the Andes, which, according to the information of
the Indians, abounded with cinnamon and other
valuable spices. Gonzalo, not inferior to any of
his brothers in courage, and no less ambitious of
acquiring diftindion, eagerly engaged in this diffi-
cult service. He set out from Quito at the head of
three hundred and forty soldiers, near one half of
whom were horsemen, with four thousand Indians
to carry their provisions. In forcing their way
through the defiles, or over the ridges of the Andes,
excess of cold and fatigue, to neither of which they
were accustomed, proved fatal to the greater part
of their wretched attendants. The Spaniards, Hardships
though more robust, and inured to a variety of cli- they endure.
mates, fuftered considerably, and loft fonle men;
but when they descended into the low country
lheir distress increased. During two months it
rained inceflhntly, without any interval of fair
weather long enough to dry their cloathst. The
vast plains upon which they were now entering,
either altogether without inhabitants, or occupied
by the rudeftl and least industrious tribes in the New
World, yielded little fubfiftcncc. They could not
advance a Ilep but as they cut a road through woods,
or mlde it through marshes. Such incessant toil,

and

Ziv1 ill

, H iii. C, 13. Oville, lib. ii. c.. , &c. t ZaLate,
W,, iv. k.

213

B OO K and continual scarcity of food, seem more than

VI.

_ sufficient to have exhausted and dispirited any
1540. troops. But the fortitude and perseverance of the

Spaniards in the sixteenth century were infupera-
ble. Allured by frequent but false accountsof
rich countries before them, they perfiited in firug.
gling on, until they reached the banks of the Coca
or Napo, one of the large rivers whose waters pour
into the Maragnon, and contribute to its grandeur.
There, with infinite labour, they built a bark,
which they expeded would prove of great utility,
both in conveying them over rivers, in procuring
provisions, and in exploring the country. This
was manned with fifty soldiers, under the com-
mand of Francis Orellana, the officer next in rank
to Pizarro. The stream carried them down with
such rapidity, that they were soon far a-head of
their countrymen, who followed slowly and with
difficulty by land.

(Pferted by Ar this distance from his commander, Orellana,
OUclisai.

a young man of an aspiring mind, began to fancy
himself independent, and transported with the pre-
dominant pailion of the age, he formed the scheme
of distinguishing himself as a discoverer, by follow-
ing the course of the Maragnon, until itjoined the
ocean, and by surveying the vast regions through
which it flows. This scheme of Orellana's was
as bold as it was treacherous. For, if he be charge-
able with the guilt of having violated his duty to
his commander, and with having abandoned his
fcllow-foldicrs in a pathless defcrt, where they had
hardly any hopes of success, or even of safety, but
what were founded on the service which they cx-
peced fron the bark; his crime is, in Come nca-
sure, balanced by the glory of having venttttrel,
upon a navigation of near two thousand leagu:'i.
through unknown nations, in a vcffel haflily C("-

flru~yd

ftruced with green timber, and by very unskilful BO 0O K
hands, without provisions, without a compass, or
a pilot. But his courage and alacrity supplied 1540.
every defec. Committing himself fearlessly to Sails dowa
the guidance of the stream, the Napo bore him a- non.
long to the south, until he reached the great chan-
nel of the Maragnon. Turning with it towards
the coast, he held on his course in that direction.
He made frequent descents on both fides of the ri-
ver, sometimes seizing by force of arms the provi-
sions of the fierce savages feated on its banks, and
sometimes procuring a supply of food by a friendly
intercourse with more gentle tribes. After a long
series of dangers which he encountered with ama-
zing fortitude, and of difireffes which he supported
with no less magnanimity, he reached the oceant,
where new perils awaited him. These he likewise
surmounted, and got safe to the Spanish settlement
in the island Cubagua, from thence he failed to
Spain. The vanity natural to travellers who visit
regions unknown to the refi of mankind, and the
art of an adventurer, solicitous to magnify his own
merit, concurred in prompting him to mingle an
extraordinary proportion of the marvellous in the
narrative of his voyage. He pretended to have dif-
covered nations so rich, that the roofs of their tem-
les were covered with plates of gold; and described
a republic of women lo warlike and powerful, as
to have extended their dominion over a confidera-
ble trat of the fertile plains which he had visited.
Extravagant as those tales were, they gave rife to
an opinion, that a region abounding with gold,
diflinguifhed by the name of EL DORADO, and a
community of Amazons, were to be found in this
P:et of the New-World ; and fiuch is the propenfi-
ty of omanilcind to believe what is wonderful, that
it has been slowly and with difliculty, that reason

and
1-. Sec N 0 T E XLI.

B o O K and observation have exploded those fables. The

V1. voyage, however, even when stripped of everyro.
1540. mantic embellishment, deserves to be recorded,

not only as one of the most memorable occurences
in that adventurous age, but as the firif event that
led to any certain knowledge of those immenfere.
gions that stretch eastward from the Andes tothe
ocean*.

Didfrefs of No words can describe the conflernation of Pi.
Pizarro. zarro, whn he did not find the bark at the confu.

ence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he had
ordered Orellana to wait for him. He would not
allow himself to fufpec that a man, whom he had
entrusted with such an important command, could
be so base and so unfeeling, as to desert him at
such a jun&ure. But imputing his absence from
the place of rendezvous to some unknown accident,
he advanced above fifty leagues along the banks
of the Maragnon, expecting every moment to fee
the bark appear with a supply of provisions. At
length he came up with an officer whom Orellana
had left to perish in the desert, because he had the
courage to remonstrate against his perfidy. From
him he learned the extent of Orellana's crime;
and his followers perceived at once their own def-
perate situation, when deprived of their only re-
source. The spirit of the flouteft hearted veteran
funk within him, and all demanded to be led back
instantly. Pizarro, though he assumed an appear-
ance of tranquillity, did not oppose their inclina-
tion. But he was now twelve hundred miles
from Quito; and in that long march the Spaniards
encountered hardfliips greater than those they hadt
endured in their progress outward, without the al-

luring

* Zarare. lib. iv. c. 4 omrnr: Hist. c. 86. Vega, p. tI .1

iii. c. 4. Herrcria dec. 6. llh, ix. c. z, -- . Roduiguez ai a''
non y Amazonas, lib . i. c3.
2i6

luring hopes which then toothed and animated them B o0 ' K

VI.

under their sufferings. Hunger compelled them to I
feed on roots and berries, to eat all their dogs and 1541.
horses, to devour the most loathsome reptiles, and
even to gnaw the leather of their faddies and sword-
belts. Four thousand Indians, and two hundred
and ten Spaniards, perished in this wild disastrous
expedition, which continued near two years ; and as
fifty iitn were aboard the bark with Orellana, on-
ly) fourscore got back to Quito. These were naked
like savages, and so emaciated with famine, or worn
out with fatigue, that they had more the appear-
ance of fpeetres than of nen *.

BUT, inRfead of returning to enjoy the repose Number of

which his condition required, Pizarro, on entering in Perl.
Quito, received accounts of a fatal event that threa-
tened calamities more dreadful to him, than those
through which he had passed. From the time that
his brother made that partial division of his
conquests which has been mentioned, the adherents
of Almagro, confidering themselves as proscribed
by the party in power, no longer entertained any
hope of bettering their condition. Great numbers
in despair retorted to Lima, where the house of young
Almagro was always open to them, and the ilender
portion of his father's fortune, which the governor
allowed him to enjoy, was spent in affording them
subsistence. The warm attachment with which
every person who served under the elder Almagro
devoted himnlelf to his intercfts, was quickly trans-.
ferrcd to his son, who was now grown up to the
ag, of manhood, and ponfllltd all the qualities
which captivate the affections of soldiers. Of a

VOL. 1I. F f graceful

Z:lr.tc,lib. iv.c.z---5. Vega, p. r. libi. iii.c. 3. 5, 4, 5, 4.
' x .

r, .lc i..vi . i.ili. viii-

c.

7, .

l ix ib
... J' l1'i/,aL V.igl'onc Illutl'. 349, Hc:.

217

B O0 K
i graceful appearance, dextrouts at all martial ex-

V/.
.--. ercifes, bold, open, generous, he seemed to be
i,4,1. formed for command ; and as his father, conscious
Cvir'r of his own inferiority fiomn the total want ofeduca-

y ,j"3z Al-
M;lrt,) :i cation, had been extremely attentive to havehim in-
tUiil [-det. firuted in every science becoming a gentleman;

the accomplishments which he had acquired heigh-
tened the refppca of his followers, as they gave him
diltindtion and eminence among illiterate adventu-
rers. In this young man the Almagrians found
a point of union which they wanted, and looking
up to him as their head, were ready to undertake
any thing for his advancement. Nor was affedion
for Almagro their only incitement, they were
urged on by their own diftreffcs. Many of them,
detitute of common neceflaries *, and weary of
loitering awa.'y life, a burden to their chief, or
to fich of their afrociates as had :aved some rem-
nant of their fortune from pillage and confiscation,
longed impatiently for an occasion to exert their
acivity and coulrae, and began to deliberatehow
they might be avenged on the author of all their
Cmife'ry. Their frequent cabals did not pass unob-

g,:. "tc lezrved ; and the g!ove:rnor was warned to be on
liic ,i l'i- his guard againit men who meditated some defpe-
zalrr, rate deed, and had rciolution to execute it. But

either fiom the native intrepidity of his mind, or
from contempt of plirfons whose poverty rendered
their machinaltions of little confequencc, he difre-
gardtd the admonitions of his friends. " Be in no
pain, said he carclefsly, about try life, it is
p(rf i-ftly sa;le, as long as every man in Peru knows
that I can in a momlent put him to death who dares
to harbour a thought againli it." 'This security
gave the Alnm;lyi;iis full leiflire to digest and ripel
every pal;t of their fchelice; and JanL de Hcrrada,

* See NOT£ Xl.ll,

H ISTORY O F AMERICA.

an officer of great abilities, who had the charge of B 0 0 K
Almagro's education, took the lead in their consul- V.
tations, with all the zeal which that connection 1541.
inspired, and with all the authority which the as-
cendant that he was known to have over the mind
of his pupil gave him.

ON Sunday, the twenty-fixth of June, at mid- and kill

day, the feafonoftranquility and repose in all sultry him.
climates, Herrada, at the head of eighteen of the
moss determined conspirators, sallied out of Alma-
gro's house in complete armour; and drawing their
Pvords, as they advanced hastily towards the go-
vernor's palace, cried out, " Long live the king,
but let the tyrant die." Their associates, warned
of their motions by a figral, were in arms at diffe-
rent flations ready to support them. Though Pizar-
rowas usually surrounded by such a numerous train
of attendants as suited the magnificence of the most
opulent subjed of the age in which he lived, yet as
he wasj uft risen from table, and most of his domestics
had retired to their own apartments, the conspirators
passed through the two outer courts of the palace
unobserved. They were at the bottom of the flair-
cafe, before a page in waiting could give the alarm
to his master, who was conversing with a few
friends in a large hall. The governor, whose flea-
dy mind no form of danger could appal, starting
up, called for arms, and commanded Francisco
de Chaves to make faff the door. But that of-
sicer, who did not retain so much presence of mind
as to obey this prudent order, running to the top of
the flair-cafe, wildly asked the con fpirators what they
meant, and whither they were going. Inflead of an-
IwCering, they stabbcd him to the heart, and burf in-
to the hall. Some of the persons who were there
threw themselves from the windows ; others attempt-
d to fly ; and a few drawing their swords, followed

F f 2 their

B o o K their leader into an inner apartment. The confpi.

rators, animated with having the object of their ven.
154i. geance now in view, rufled forward after them. Pi-

zarro with no other arms than his sword and buckler,
defended the entry, and supported by his half-bro-
ther Alcantara, 'md his little knot of friends, he
maintained the unequal conteftwith intrepidity wor-
thy of his past exploits, and with the vigour of a
youthful combatant. "' Courage, cried he, compa.
nions, we are yet enow to make those traitors re-
pent of their audacity." But the armour' of the
conspirators protected them, while every thrust they
made took effecd. Alcantara fell dead at his bro-
ther's feet; his other defenders were mortally
wounded. The governor, so weary that he could
hardly wield his sword, and no longer able to parry
the many weapons furiously aimed at him, received
a deadly thrust full in hi5 throat, funk to the ground,
and expired.

A!'ngazro As soon as he was slain, the aflaffins ran out
icl,,o4lkd. - into the fireets, and waving their bloody swords,
god ;3 his
fuccLcoTr. proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above two

hundred of their aflociates having joined them, they
conducted young Almagro in solemn proceflion
through the city, and affenmbling the magiftratesand
princip:al citizens, compelled them to acknowledge
him as lawful fi(ccenllr to his father in his govern-
ment. 'lhe palbcc of Pizarro, together with the
holses of several of hi; adherents, were pillaged by
the folliers, who had the fltisfation at once ofbc-
ing avenged on their enemies, and of enriching
thcminflvcs by the spoils of thole through wllofe
hands all the wealth of' Peru had paflUe(d 1-

Znr;lt, ilb.1 iv. C. 6---8. (ominarj I-iRf. c. Tl4, T4..

g;., p . Il. l iii. c c -7 . I-lcrrtra, dc. 6,lib. x. ..4---7 1
7arro Var. Illus. .

p . 13
220

THE boldness and success of the conspiracy, B 0 K
as well as the name and popular qualities of Al- i
magro drew many soldiers to.his standard. Eve- 1541.
ry adventurer of desperate fortune, all who were Ntewsapefdi
dissatisfied with Pizarro, and from the rapacious- cord,
ness of his government in the latter years of his
life, the number of malcontents was considerable,
declaredwi.thout hesitation, in favour of Almagro,
and he was soon at the head of eight hundred, of the
most gallant veterans in Peru. As his youth and
inexperience disqualified him from taking the com-
mand of them himself, he appointed Herrada to ad as
general. Pizarro had left many friends to whom his
memory was dear ; the barbarous assassination of a
man to whom his country was so much indebted,
filled every impartial person with horror. The ig-
nominious birth of Almagro, as well as the doubt-
ful title on which he founded his pretensions, led
others to confider him as an usurper. The officers
.who commanded in some provinces refused to re-
cognize his authority, until it was confirmed by
the emperor. In others, particularly at Cuzco, the
royal fiandard was erecCed, and preparations made to
revenge the murder of their ancient leader.

THOSE feeds of discord, which could not have

lain long dormant, acquired greater vigour and ac- VacadeCaf-
tivity, when tle arrival of Vaca de Castro was tro,
known. After a long and disastrous voyage, he
was driven by lterfs of weather into a finall harbour
in the province of Popayan; and proceeding from
thence by land, after a journey no less tedious than
difficult, he reached Qulito. III his way he reci-
vtd accolults of Pizarro's death, and of the events
which fol]lowd U)poa it. H-e immediately produ-

ced

22i.

HIS TORY OF AMERICA.
BO0 OK ced the royal commission appointing him governor

a of Peru, with the fame privileges and authority ;

15-1. and his jurifdi&ion was acknowledged without he-

who taitles fitation by Benalcazar, Adelantado, or lieutenant-
the title of
governor. general for the emperor in Popayan, and by Pedro

de Puelles, who, in the absence of Gonzalo Pizar-
ro, had the command of the troops left in Quito.
.Vaca de Castro not only assumed the supreme au-
thorit), but flewed that he possessed the talents
which the exercise of it at that junEture required.
By his influence and address he loon afiembled such
a body of troops, as not only set him above all fear
of being exposed to any insult from the adverse
party, but enabled him to advance from Quitowith
the dignity that became his character. By dispatch-
ingperfons ofconfidence to the different settlements
in Peru, with a formal notification of his arrival and of
hiscommiffion, he communicated to his countrymen
the royal pleasure with refpet to the government of
the country. By private emissaries, he excited such
officers as had discovered their disapprobation of
Almagro's proceedings, to manifest their duty to
their sovereign by supporting the person honour-
ed with his commission. Those measures were
produdive of great effects. Encouraged by the
approach of the new governor, or prepared by his
machinations, the loyal were confirmed in their
principles, and avowed them with greater boldnces f
the timid ventured to declare tleir sentiments;
the neutral and wavering, finding it neceflary to
chufe a fide, began to lecw to that which now ap-
peared to be the safest as well as the Imofi just t.

Conducl of ALMAGRO obfcrvcd the rapid. progref of this
Alma'ro. ifpirit of difafffedlion to his cause, and in order to

give an cfftetual check to it before the arrival of

Vaca

t Benzon, lil. iii, c. (. Zarat, lib iv. c.. r. Corn.L , c. 14G6
14,7. Ilirreij, dec. 6. lib. x. c. I, 2, 3> 7> &c.

Vaca de Castro, he set out at the head of his B 0 K
troops for Cuzco, where the most considerable bo- v.
dy of opponents had erected the royal tandard, un- i5z.
der the command of Pedro Alvarez Holguin. Du-
ring his march thither, Herrada, the fkilfiu guide
of his youth and of his counsels, died ; and from
that time his measures were conspicuous for their
violence, but concerted with little sagacity, and
executed with no address. Holguin, with for-
ces far inferior to thoie of the opposite party, was
descending towards the coafs at the very time that
Almagro was on his way to Cuzco. By a very
simple itratagem, he deccived his unexperienced ad-
verfary, avoided an engagement, and effleted a junc-
tion with Alvarado, an officer of note, who had
been the first to declare against Almagro as an ufur-
per.

SOON after, Vaca de Castro entered the camp Progress of

with the troops which he brought from Quito, and aca ie
ereting the royal standard before his own tent, he
declared, that, as governor, he would discharge in
perfoi all the fundions of general of their combi-
ned forces. Though formed by the tenour of his
pait life to the habits of a fedenttary anil pacific pro-
feflion, hc at once assumed the activity and disco-
vered the decision of an oficcr- long accustomed
to command. Knowing his strength to be noxr
lar ulperior to that of the enemry, hle was impatient
to tLrminate the contelt by a battle. Nor did the
floi0wcrs of Almagro, who had no hopes of ob-
taiiiiig p:ardon for a crime lb atrocious as the mur-
der of the governor, ldclinec that mode of decision.
Ihecy met at Chupas, about two hundred miles
frtml Cuzco, and fought with all the fierce animo- Sept. 16
ly ilpircu by the violenct of civil rae, the ra.n-

o'"r of private enmity, the eagcrnefs of revenge,
;lal the lall (tfOrts of dcti.ir. Viaory, after re-

Inajnling

B O O K maining long doubtful, declared at last for Vaca de

I__, Castro. The superior number of his troops, his
154z. own intrepidity, and the martial talents of Francis-

Defats Al- co de Carvajal, a veteran officer formed under the
macro.

great captain in the wars of Italy, and who on
that day laid the foundation of his future fame in
Peru, triumphed over the bravery of his opponents,
though led on by young Almnagro with a gallant
spirit, worthy of a better cause, and deserving ano-
ther fate. The carnage was great in proportion
to the number of the combatants. Many of the
vanquished, especially such as were conscious that
they might be charged with being acceflary to the
aflaffination ofPizarro, rushing on the swords of the
enemy, chose to fall like soldiers, rather than wait an
ignominious doom. Of fourteen hundred men, the
total amount of combatants on both fides, five hun-
dred lay dead on the field, and the number of the
wounded was tfill greater.

Severity of IF the military talents displayed by Vacade
isproceed- Caffro, both in the council and in the field,

surprised the adventurers in Peru, they were
frill more aflonithed at his condudt after the
victory. As he was by nature a rigid difpen-
ser ofjuftice, and persuaded that it required exam-
ples of extraordinary severity to restrain the licen-
tious spirit of soldiers so far removed from the seatos
government, he proceeded diredtly to try his prifo-
ners as rebels. Forty were condemned to susser the
death of traitors, others were banished from Peru.
Their leader, who made his escape from the bat-
tle, being betrayed by some of his officers, was

publicly

'1' Zarate, lib. iv. c. Gr.---1 O. Oomara, c. 148. Viet, "

lib. iii.c. 11--I8. Hernera, dec. 7. lib. i. c. l, , 3.1ib. iii. .
' --' t.

publicly beheaded in Cuzco ; and in him the name B O0 K
of Almagro, and the spirit of the party, was ex- .
tinEtt. I'5s"

DURING those violent convulsions in Peru, the Confultati-
emperor and his ministers were intently employed in emperort
preparing regulations, by which they hoped not concerning

his domini-

only to re-establish tranquility there, but to intro- ons inA-
duce a more perfect system of internal policy into merica.
all their settlements in the New World. Rapid and
extensive as the Spanish conquefis in America had
been, they were not carried on by any regular exer-
tion of the national force, but by the occasional es-
forts of private adventurers. After fitting out a few
of the first armaments for discovering new regions,
the court of Spain, during the busy reigns of Ser-
dinand and of Charles V. the former the most intri-
guing prince of the age, and the latter the most am-
bitious, was encumbered with such a multiplicity of
schemes, and involved in war with so many nations
of Europe, that it had not leisure to attend to distant
and less interesting objects. The care of profecut-
ing discovery, or of attempting conquefl, was
abandoned to individuals; and with such ardour
did men push forward in this new career, on which
novelty, the spirit of adventure, avarice, ambition,
and the hope of meriting heaven, prompted them
with combined influence to enter, that in less than
ialf a century almost the whole of that extensive
empire which Spain now poffefles in the New
World was fubjcded to its dominion. As the Spa-
1jnl court contributed nothing towards the various
xlpeditions undertaken in America, it was not in-
titled to claim much from their success. The so-
V'Cigity of the conquered provinces, with the fifth
of tlhe golad a silver, was reficrved for the crown;

VOL. II. G g every

CI Z.-,'te, c
l.l . C. 2.1. 1omnara, C . 150. Ic Hcrrra, doc. 7. ib. iii.

225

B 0 0 K every thing else was seized by the associates as their

VI.
V_ right. The plunder of the countries which they
154z. invaded served to indemnify them for what they had

expended in equipping themselves for the service,
and the conquered territory was divided among
them, according to rules which custom had intro-
duced, as permanent establishments which their fuc-
cefsful valour merited. In the infancy of those
settlements, when their extent as well as their
value were unknown, many irregularities escaped
obfcrvation, and it was found necessary to connive
at many cxccffes. The conquered people were
pillaged with deftrucaive rapacity, and'their coun-
try parcelled out among its new masters in exorbi-
tant shares, far exceeding the highest recompence
due to their services. The rude conquerors of
America, incapable of forming their establishments
upon any general or extensive plan of policy, atten-
tive only to private interelt, unwilling to forego
prefllnt'gain from the prospect of remote or public
benifit, seem to have had no objed but to amass
sudden wealth, without regarding what might be
the confelqutences of the means by which they ac-
quired it. But when time at length dificovered to
thli Sp:nifh court the importance of its American
pOflcfilonis, the neccciity of new-modelling their
whole frame became obvious, and in place of the
maxims and praLiccs prevalent among military ad-
vlntulrers, it was found requisite to substitute the
inltitutions of regular government.

(C)N evil in particular called for an immediate

ren!dy. 'The conquerors of Mexico and Peru
initated the f.atal exa;ml(le of their countrynlen set-
tled in the islands, and emplloyed themfclves in
rfiarchin. , (fr' gold and 1ilvcr with the fame inconfi-
t(crat, :i; c;l s

t-i'('!. Simiil.lr elfc.Cll s followed. '11'h
nativcss employed in this labour by maIters, wlo in

im n l)pof
226

imposing their tasks had no regard either to what B °0 K
they felt or to what they were able to perform,
pined away and perished so fast, that there was rea- 1542.
son to apprehend that Spain, instead of pofeffing
countries peopled to such a degree as to be fufcepti-
ble of progreflive improvement, would soon remain
proprietor only of a vast uninhabited desert.

THE emperor and his ministers were so sensible
of this, and so solicitous to prevent the extinction
of the Indian race, which threatened to render their
acquisitions of no value, that from time to time
various laws, which I have mentioned, had been
made for securing to that unhappy people more
gentle and equitable treatment. But the distance
of America from the feat of empire, the feebleness
of government in the new colonies, the avarice and
audacity of soldiers unaccustomed to restraint, pre-
vented these salutary regulations from operating
with any considerable influence. The evil conti-
nuted to grow, and at this time the emperor found
an interval of leisure from the affairs of Europe to
take it into attentive consideration. He consulted The prefons
not only with his miniftcrs and the members of the with whom

he adv'ilCs.

council of the Indies, but called upon fcvcral per-
sons who had rcfided long in the New WVorlld, to
aid them with the result of theirexperience and ob-
fcrvation. Fortunately for the people of America,
:mong these was Bartholomew de las Calas, who
happened to be then at Madrid on a mifflion fron a
chapter of his order at Chiapa §. Though, since
the miicarriagc of his formnr lfhelnes for the relief
"f the Indians, he had continued fliut up in his
(loiler, or occupied in religious funsions, his zcal
i behalf of the former objcSts of his pity was so far
from abating, that, from an increased knowledge of

G g 2 their
§ leincfa1 fliflt de Chialm, p. Y4.j.

B OO K their sufferings, its ardour had augmented. He

vI.

seized eagerly this opportunity of reviving his fa-
15.2. vourite maxims concerning the treatment of the

Indians. With the moving eloquence natural to a
man on whose mind the scenes which he had beheld
had made a deep impression, he described the irre-
parable wafe of the human fpecits in the New
World, the Indian race almost totally swept away
in the islands in less than fifty years, and haflening
to extinction on the continent with the fame rapid
decay. With the decisive tone of one itrongly
prepoffefed with the truth of his own fyftein, he
imputed all this to a single cause, to the exacions
and cruelty of his countrymen, and contended that
nothing could prevent the depopulation of Ameri-
ca, but the declaring of its natives to be freemen,
and treating them as fubjeAs, not as slaves. Nor
did he confide for the success of this proposal in the
powers of his oratory alone. In order to enforce
them, he composed his famous treatise concerning
the destruction of America 11, in which he relates,
with many horrid circumliances, but with apparent
marks of exaggerated defcrii)tion, the devaitation of
every province which had been vilited by the Spa-
niards.

Ilis frlic- THE emperor was deeply affliced with the reci-
,.adu~n to umanity. IBLit
t'"'oduce a tal of so many acions fiLo_'Siing to humanity. But
gcieral ra- as his views extended far beyond thofc of Las Ca-
tortnItinn of fas, he perceived that relicving the Indians from

S'vot. I.ppreffion was but one fl'ep towards rendClring his

poffcffions in the New Word a valuable acquisition,
and would be of little avail, unless he could circllinl-
fcribc the power and iu Cfurpations of his own l't,-
jelts there. The conquerors of America, how\c\'Cr
great their merit had becnl towards their tcuwo:n',Y
were rnoltly pcrlbns of such mean birth, alnd o i(,'i
abjedt rank in focicty, as give no diftindtioll ill til

g{ Rctncfil, p. 19x, 199.
228

eye of a monarch. The exorbitant wealth with B 0O K
which some of them returned, gave umbrage to an
age not accustomed to fee men in inferior conditi- 1541-
on elevated above their level, and rising to emulate
or tofurpafs the ancient nobility in splendour. The
territories which their leaders had appropriated to
themselves were of enormous extent § ; and if the
country should ever be improved in proportion to
the fertility of the foil, they must grow too wealthy
and too powerful for fubjecs. It appeared to
Charles, that this abuse required a remedy no less
than the other, and that the regulations concerning
both must be enforced by a mode of government
more vigorous than had yet been introduced into
America.

WITH this view he framed a body of laws, con- New rcgu-

taining many salutary appointments with refpeA to ltis purpor
the constitution and powers of the supreme council
of the Indies; concerning the itation and jurif-
diction of the royal audiences in different p .rts of
America, the admniniftration ofjuftice, the order of
government, both ecclesiastical and civil. These
were approved of by all ranks of men. But toge-
ther with them were ifilted the following regulati-
ons, which excited universal alarm, and occasioned
the molt violent convulsions :--" That as the RE-
PARTIMIENTOS or liares of land seized by several
persons appeared to be exceflive, the royal audiences
are empowered to reduce them to a moderate extent:
That upon the death of any conqueror or planter,
the lands and Indians granted to him flall not de-
sccnd to his widow or children, but return to the
crown : That the Indians flhall henceforth be ex-
emnptcd fromperlfonal fcrvice, and ihall not be com-
pelled to carry the baggage of t;-avcllcrs, to labour in
tle mines, or to dive in the pearl fitheries : That the

flitcd
§ Sec NOTrE XLIII.

B 0 0 K stated tribute due by them to their superior lhall

VI.

,-_w_ be ascertaincd, and they shall be paid as servants
1542. for any work they voluntarily perform : That all

persons who are or have been in public office, ec-
clefiafics of every denomination, hospitals and
monasteries, shall be deprived of the lands and In-
dians allotted to them, and these be annexed to the
crown: That every person in Peru, who had any
criminal concern in the contests between Pizarro
and Almagro, Ihould forfeit his lands and In-
dians t"

ALL the Spaniih ministers who had hitherto been

teCrs renon- entrusted with the direation of American affairs,

cr tc a- and who were best acquainted with the state of the
1tlit in. * country, remonstrated agailft those regulations, as

ruinous to their infant colonies. They represented,
that the number of Spaniards who had hitherto
emigrated to the New World was so extremely
small, that nothing could be expected from any es-
fort of theirs towards improving the vast regions
over which they were scattered; that the success
of every scheme for this purpose must depend upon
the miniffry and service of the Indians, whose na-
tive indolence and avcrfion to labour, noprofpcd of
benefit or promise of reward could surmount; that
the moment the right ofimpofing a talk, and exacing
the performance of it, was taken from their maf-
ters, every work of indutfry must cease, and all the
fourccs from which wealth begun to pour in upon
Sp;tin x.murt be tfopt for ever. But Charles, tena-
cious at all times of his own opinions, and so much
inmprcfled at prefcnt with the vievr of the ldilrders
which reignred in Amcric:a, that: he was willing to
hazardl the application even of a dangerous remedy,
ptr-fiftced iln his rclflutionl of publlifhilng the laws.
'That they might be carried into execuitoll with

greatcl
-1) HiclIra, dec, 7. till. vi, c. 5' Fcrniuiz IliHl. Iib. i. c. 1'

greater vigour and authority, he authorised Fran- B 0 o K
cisco Tcllo de Sandoval to repair to Mexico as V.
VISITADOR or superintendent of that country, and 154z
to co-operate with Antonio de Mendoza, the vice-
roy, in Enforcing them. He appointed Blasco Avieroy
Ntgnez Vela to be governor of Peru, with the appintd

tOi h~~is~

* for Peru.

title of Viceroy; and in order to itrengthen his J543.
adminitlration, he eftabliflled a court of royal
audience in Lima, in which four lawyers of emi-
nence were to preside as judges *.

THE viceroy and superintendent failed at the 544.
fame time ; and an account of the laws which they EffeCt of

the regula-

were to enforce reached America before them. tionin New
The entry of Sandoval into Mexico was viewed as Spain.
the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited grant
of liberty to the Indians affected every Spaniard in
America without diflindion, and there was hardly
one who might not on some pretext be included
under the other regulations, and susser by them.
But the colony in New Spain had now been so
long accustomed to the restraints of law and autho-
rity under the steady and prudent administration of
Mcndoza, that how much soever the spirit of the
new flatutes was deteited and dreaded, no attempt
was made to obilruic the publication of them by any
act of violenc unbecoming fubjecdts. The ma-
ifltrates and principal inhabitants, however, prc-
f'ntcd dutiful addrefcis to the viceroy and fuperin-
tendent, representing the fatal consequences of
eInforciIg them. Happily for thein, Mendoza, by
l.'g irfidence il the country, was so t horoughly
:cqtaiitcd witlh its flatc, that he knew what was
lr ils intcicft as well as what it could bear ; andl
Salndoval, though new in office, displayed a (legree
of molcrlil ioln i:ldom pollnfled by prrfons juflt cntcr-
lig u pon the cX(rcifi of power. 'lhey engaged to
l"lci(end, fo1r linc tilme, ltie execution of what was

oflin five

7/. '.:", ,
lil i'i. c, 2^. (, m.ii.'a, ¢. ;i,. Ve a':I, p. 2, |il. iii

B OO K offensive in the new laws, and not only consented

VI.
L-.- that a deputation of citizens flould be sent to Eu-
s544. rope to lay before the emperor the apprehensions of

his fubjets in New Spain with refped to their ten-
dency and effets, but they concurred with them in
supporting their sentiments. Charles, moved by
the opinion of men whose abilities and integrity in-
titled them to decide concerning what fell immedi-
ately under their own view, granted such a relaxa-
tion of the rigour of the laws as re-established the
colony in its former tranquility §.
In Peru. In Peru the tform gathered with an aspect still

more fierce and threatening, and was not so soon
dispersed. The conquerors of Peru, of a rank
much inferior to those who had fubjeed Mexico
to the Spanish crown, farther removed from the in-
fpeecion of the parent slate, and intoxicated with
the sudden acquisition of wealth, carried on all their
operations with greater licence and irregularity
than any body of adventurers in the New World.
Amidit the general subversion of law and order, oc-
cafioned by two successive civil wars, when each
individual was at liberty to decide for himself,
without any guide but his own interest or pailons,
this turbulent spirit rose above all sense of fubordi-
nation. To men thus corrupted by anarchy, the
introduction of regular government, the power of a
viceroy, and the authority of a refl)pcrale court of
judicature, would have appeared formidable re-
flraints, to which they would have submittcd with
reluctance. But they revolted with indignation
againfi the idea of complying with laws, by
which they were to be ilrippcd at once of all
they had earned so hardly during many years
of service and fufl(cring. As the account of the

neW

§ Fernandez llifl, li. i c. .,4, q. Vega, p. l.l ib iil.c. .l2, "

lIcrrera, d(ec. 7. .

li . C. 7. 11,. vii c. l, 1 .

5. 'ulilltlu Mol. Ind.
lib. v.c. . 3.

new laws spread successively through the different B °0 K
settlements, the inhabitants run together, the wo- V1.
men in tears, and the men exclaiming against the 1544.
injustice and ingratitude of their sovereign in de-
priving them, unheard and unconviaced, of their
poffeflions. " Is this, cried they, the recompence
due to persons, who, without public aid, at their
own expence, and by their own valour, have sub-
jected to the crown of Castile territories of such
vast extent and opulence ? Are these the rewards
bestowed for having endured unparralleled distress,
for having encountered every species of danger in
the service of their country ? Whose merit is so
great, whose conduct has been so irreproachable,
that he may not be condemned by some penal clause
in regulations, conceived in terms as loose and com-
prehenfive, as if it had been intended that all should
be entangled in their snare ?-Every Spaniard of
note in Peru has held some public office, and all,
without distinction, have been confirained to take
an active part in the contest between the two rival
chiefs. Were the former to be robbed of their
property because they had done their duty ? Were
the latter to be punished on account of what they
could not avoid ? Shall the conquerors of this
great empire, instead of receiving marks of diflinc-
tion, be deprived of the natural consolation of pro-
viding for their widows and children, and leave
them to depend for fubfiffcncc on the scanty sup-
ply they can extort fiom unfeeling courtiers': ? We
are not able now, continued they, to explore un-
known regions in qucft of more fccure fcttlernents;
our conflitutions, debilitatcd with age, and our bo-
dies covered with wounds, are no longer fit for ac-
tive service; but flill we pofcfs vigour fflicient

VOL. II. H h to

6 Herrerzi, doe. 7. 11L. vii, c. 11;, 1.5.

B 0 O K to afert our just rights, and we will not tamely

VL . susser them to be wrested from us*."

1544

An infur- BY discourses of this fort, uttered with vehe-
redlion pre-
vntedI^ '

i mence, and litlened to with universal approbation,

the modera- their palioons were inflamed to such a pitch, that
tionoCaf- they were prepared for the most violent measures;

and began to hold consultations in different places,
how they might oppose the entrance of the viceroy
and judges, and prevent not only the execution
but the promulgation of the new laws. From
this, however, they were diverted by the address of
Vaca de Castro, who fattered them with hopes,
that, as soon as the viceroy and judges should ar-
rive, and had leisure to examine their petitions and
rcmonflrances, they would concur with them in
endcavouring to procure some mitigation in the
rigour of laws which had been framed without
due attention either to the state of the country, or
to the Sentiments of the people. A greater degree
of accommodation to there, and even some conceffi-
ons on the part of government, were now become
requisite to compose the present ferment, and to
tooth the coloniets into submission, by inspiring
them with confidence in their fiperiors. But
without profound discernment, conciliating man-
ners, and flexibility of temper, such a plan could

Th·
rec t not be carried on. The viceroy poffefled none of
of dififrfti- these. Of all the qualities that fit men for high
o incrC'cd conmmlland, he was endowed only with integrity
iy. and courage; the former harsl and uncomplying,

the latter bol(rdrinlg so frequenltly on raflnefs or
o)itinlac, that in his situation they were defects
Ma.i1 4, rather than virtues. From the moment that he

landed

* s;i m.l (. l.l c.

2. II,.eri, ec. 7 vi. .

. ic.10o, 1 Vcea,

Vr . 1l .

l . I...

ii 2 .
c. li2 i. C. 3, 4.

landed at Tumbez, Nugnez Vela seems to have B O K
cjonfidered himself merely as an executive officer, _-
without any discretionary power; and, regardlep s 1544.
of whatever he observed or heard concerning the
state of the country, he adhered to the letter of
the regulations with unrelenting rigour. In all
the towns through which he passed, the natives
were declared to be free, every person in public of
fice was deprived of his lands and servants; and as
an example of obedience to others, he would not
fiiffer a single Indian to be employed in carrying
his baggage in his march towards Lima. Amaze-
ment and contfernation went before him as he ap-
proached ; and so little solicitous was he to prevent
them from augmenting, that on entering the ca-
pital, he openly avowed that he came to obey the
orders of his sovereign, not to dispense with his
laws. This harsh declaration was accompanied
with what rendered it flill more intolerable, haugh-
tiness in deportment, a tone of arrogance and de-
cifion in discourse, and an insolence of office griev-
ous to men little accustomed to hold civil autho-
rity in high refped. Every attempt to procure a
suspension or mitigation of the new laws, the vice-
roy confidered as flowing from a fpiritofdifaffetMon
that tended to rebellion. Several persons of rank
were confined, and some put to death, without
any form of trial. Vaca de Castro was arrested,
and notwithstanding the dignity of his former rank,
and his merit in having prevented a general infur-
recfion in the colony, he was loaded with chains,
and shut up in the common jail*.

lur r however general the indignation was against Th mnl-
'uch proceedings, it is probable that the hand of cons'l.t

HI-I~ .~ . cf~chufe Gon.
H h 2 authority zaio Piza

to be tht
leader.

*

Zal tt', llh. iv. c. 23, 24, 5. Giomara c. i53---153. Vc-

aP' .x. lib. ,iv ,
5c. . Fermnaniez , lib. I. c. 6-- -o.

235

E o o K authority would have been strong enough to sup.

V1.
_,- . press it, and to prevent its burfning out with open
1544. violence, if the malcontents had not been pro.

vided with a leader of credit and eminence to u.
nite and to direct their efforts. From the time
that the purport of the new regulations was known
in Peru, every Spaniard there turned his eyes tow-
ards Gonzalo Pizarro, as the only person able to
avert the ruin with which they threatened the co-
lony. From all quarters, letters and addrefes
were sent to him, conjuring him to stand forth as
their common protector, and offering to support
him in the attempt with their lives and fortunes.
Gonzalo, though inferior in talents to his other
brothers, was equally ambitious, and of courage
no lcfs daring. The behaviour of an ungrateful
court towards his brothers and himself, dwelt con-
tinually on his mind, Ferdinand a state prisoner in
Europe, the children of the governor in custody of
the viceroy, and sent aboard his fleet, himself re-
duced to the condition of a private citizenina
country, for the discovery and conquest of which
Spain was indebted to his family. Thefethoughts
prompted him to seek for vengeance, and to afflrt
the rights of his family, of which he now confider-
cd hiilncflf as the iguardian and the heir. But as no
SI:tniard can catily furniount that venerationfor
his tbvcrcign which is interwoven in his fiame, the
idea of rnarching in arms against the royal ftan-
dard filled him with horror. He hesitated long and
was still unrcfolved, wrhen the violence of the vice-
ioy, the univit. il call of his countrymen, and the
certainty ot becoming toon a victtim him flf to tlh
tcverity of the new laws, rmoved him to quit his
icfidl.ccc ;t Cllhu(lui faca de la Plata, and repair to
(Cuzco. All the inlhabit;uats went out to meet
himi, a;i l c ivcd( hiln with tlranllolts of joy, s
the deliverer of tlhe colony. In the fcrvour of

their
236

their zeal, they ele&ed him procurator general of B o0 K
the Spanish nation in Peru, to solicit the repeal of 1
the late regulations. They authorised him to lay 1544.
their remonfirances before the royal audience in
Lima, and upon pretext of danger from the Indi-
ans, authorised him to march thither in arms. Un-
der fantion of this nomination Pizarro took pof-
session of the royal treasure, appointed officers, le-
vied soldiers, seized a large train of artillery which
Vaca de Castro had deposited in Guamanga, and
set out for Lima, as if he had been advancing
against a public enemy. Difaffeicion having now
aflumed a regular form, and being united under a
chief of such a diflinguifhed name, many persons
of note resorted to his fiandard ; and a considerable
part of the troops raised by the viceroy to oppose
his progress, deserted to him in a body*.

BEFORE Pizarro reached Lima, a revolution had Difentions
happened there, which encouraged him to proceed of the vice-

success. The iolence roy and

with almolt certainty of success. The violence urfau-
of the viceroy's administration was not more for- dience.
midable to the Spaniards of Peru than his overbear-
ing haughtiness was odious to his associates, the
judges of the royal audience. During their voy-
age from Spain, some symptoms of coldness began
toappeart. But as soon as they entered upon the
cxercife of their refplctive offices, both parties
were so much exafpcrated by frequent contests,
arising from interfcrence of jurifdidion and
contrariety of opinion, that their mutual disgust
soon grew into open enmity. The judges thwart-
ed the viceroy in every meflure, set at liber-
ty prisoners whom he had confined, justified the
malcontcnts, an aapplauded their remonstrances.

At

* 7.nr;te, lil,. v. c. . Go c. I5ó,, 1 7. Veg:t, p. I1.

ij iv..( *.--- .. Fcci

: l. ii , lib, I. .. z---17. 11r-rve a (, ec.

. lib. il. .

C g, &c. lib. viii. c. 1---5
- - C(oinara, c. 171.

B o O K At a time when both departments of government

__, should have united against the approaching ene.
1534. my, they were contending with each other for

TohimVr-e superiority. The judges at length prevailed. The
toned. viceroy, universally odious, and abandoned even
Sept. IS. by his own guards, was seized in his palace, and

carried to a desert island on the coafl, to be kept
there until he could be sent home to Spain.

THE judges, in consequence of this, having as.
Views of fumed the supreme diretion of affairs into their

own hands, issued a proclamation suspending the
execution of the obnoxious laws, and sent a mef-
sage to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever he could rcqueft, to difinifs his
troops, and to repair to Lima with fifteen or twen-
ty attendants. They could hardly expect that a
man so daring and ambitious would tamely com-
ply with this requisition. It was made, probably,
with no such intention, but only to throw a decent
veil over their own conduct; for Cepeda, the pre-
sident of the court of audience, a pragmatical and
aspiring lawyer, seems to have held a secret corref-
pondencewith Pizarro, and had already formed the
plan, which he afterwards executed, of devoting
himself to his service. The imprisonment of the
viceroy, the ufirpation of the judges, together
with the universal confusion and anarchy confe-
quent upon events so singular and unexpected, o-
pened new and vait profpeds to Pizarro. He now
beheld the supreme power within his reach. Nor
did he want courage to pufl on towards the object
which fortune preilntcd to his view. Carvajal, the
prompter of his rclflutions, and guide of all his
actions, had long fixed his eye upon it as the onlly
end at which Pizarro ought to aim. Inflcad of the
inferior function of procurator for the Spanifil ft-
tiements in l'ertu, he openly demanded to be gover-

nor

nor and captain general of the whole province, B °0 K

VI.

and required the court of audience to grant him
a commiflion to that effec. At the head of twelve s144-
hundred men, within a mile of Lima, where there
was neither leader nor army to oppose him, such a
requeif carried with it the authority of a command.
But the judges, either from unwillingness to relin-
quilh power, or from a desire of preserving some at-
tention to appearances, hesitated, or seemed to he-
litate, about complying. Carvajal, impatient of He afumes
delay, and impetuous in all his operations, marched thegvern
into the city by night, seized several officers of dif-
tinAion obnoxious to Pizarro, and hanged them
without the formality of a trial. Next morning
the court of audience issued a commission in the
emperor's name, appointing Pizarro governor of
Peru, with full powers, civil as well as military,
and he entered the town that day with extraordi-
nary pomp, to take poffeflion of his new dignity*.
BUT amidst the disorder and turbulence that ac- oa. 2g

The viceroy

companied this total dissolution of the frame of recovers hi'
2overnmcnt, the minds of men, set loose from the liberty.
ordinary restraints of law and authority, aced with
such capricious irregularity, that events no less
extraordinary than unexpected followed in a rapid
succession. Pizarro had scarcely begun to exercise
the new powers with which he was invested, when
he beheld formidable enemies rife up to oppose
him. The viceroy having been put on board a
viffcl by the judges of the audience, in Qrder that
ie might be carried to Spain under cufltody of Juan
Alva rez,,o one of their own number ; as soon as they
were out at feia, Alvarez, either touched with re-
norlle: or moved by fear, fell at the feet of his pri-

soner,

* /.lrte ii .

Ci . c _.-- o.

V.-- ega, p. i ,. lib. iv. c. r3---19. Go-

'.,'';,, (, ._.ó)--3' . l3 crniandLz, lib.i. c. 1S---25. Ht:lera, .lc.
.' »lll, vii .. 1o. --10.

239

B o 0 IC soner, declaring him from that moment to be free,

and that he himself, and every person in the hip,
3544. would obey him as the legal representative of their

sovereign. Nugnez Vela ordered them to seer to
Tumbez, and landing there, erected the royal ftan-
dard, and resumed his functions of viceroy. Seve-
ral persons of note, to whom the contagion of the
seditious spirit which reigned at Cuzco and Lima
had not reached, instantly avowed their resolution
to support his authority*. The violence of Piz-
arro's government, who observed every individual
with the timid jealousy natural to usurpers, and pu.
nified every appearance of disaffection with rigour,
soon augmented the number of his adherents, as it
forced some leading men in the colony to fly to
him for refuge. While he was gathering such
strength at Tumbez, that his forces began to as-
fume the appearance of what was confidered as an,
army in America, Diego Centeno, a bold and ac-
tive officer, exasperated by the cruelty and oppreflion
of Pizarro's lieutenant-governor in the province
of Charcas, formed a conspiracy against his life,
cut him off, and declared for the viceroyt.

PIZARRO, though alarmed with those appcaran-

Pizarro ces of hostility in the opposite extremes of the en-
narchles pire, was not disconcerted. He prepared to allert
againist im.

the authority to which he had attained, with the
spirit and conduet of an officer accustomed to co0m
mand, and marched clirectly against the viceroyaS
the enemy who was ncareft as well as most formiania
ble. As he was mailer of the public revenues in Pe-
ru, and nmof of the nil itary men were attached tolhis
family, his troops wcrlc i;) ntlllCrouls, that the viceC
roy, unable to face then,, retreated towards (QitO.

pizarro

* Zaat, lib. v . .

G ar,

c. 165. Fi.clno.ndc,

ib.

. I c, .il.c, l '

Jlirler; Iec. 7. libi viii.c. 15. t Zaate, lib. v.c. IS' ('
ni.ra. c. 16i . I-errcra., cc. 7. iib. ix. c. ;7.
240

Pizarro followed him, and in that long march,
through a wild mountainous country, both suffered
hardships and encountered difficulties, which no
troops, but those accustomed to serve in America,
could have endured or surmounted*. The viceroy
had scarcely reached Quito, when the van-guard
of Pizarro's forces appeared, led by Carvajal, who,
though near fourscore, was as hardy and aAive as
: any young soldier under his command. Nugnez

Vela instantly abandoned a town incapable of de-
fence, and with a rapidity more resembling a flight
than a retreat, marched into the province of Popa-
van. Pizarro continued to pursue, but finding it
impossible to overtake him, returned to Quito.
From thence he dispatched Carvajal to oppose Cen-
teno, who was growing formidable in the southern
provinces of the empire, and he himself remained
there to make head against the viceroy-[.

BY his own alcivity, and the afiftance of Benalca-
zar, Nugnez Vela Toon assembled fourhundred men
in Popayan. As he retained, amidst all his difaftcrs,
the fame elevation of mind, and the fame high sense
of his own dignity, he rejected with disdain the ad-
vice of fomeof his followers, who urgedhim to make
overtures of accommodation to Pizarro, declaring
that it was only by the sword that a context with re-
bels could be decided. With this intention he
marched back to Quito. Pizarro, relying on the fu-
perior number, and frill more on the discipline and
valour of his troops, advanced rcfolutely to meet
lhim. The battle was fierce and bloody, both parties
fighting like men who knew that the pofieflion of a

VoL. II. I i great

'' Se NOTE XLIV. 1- Z;aare, lib. v. c. i 5, 16-24.
omlra. c. 167. Vega, p. xI. il ). iv. cz-z8. l. crinil:m C
.' 1 ca. 34, 40. IHcirra, dec. 7. lib. viii, c. 16, zo---27.

241
BOOK.

VI.

1545.-

The viceroy
defeated,

1546.
January 1..

B 0 0 K great empire, the fate of their leaders, and their own

_ future fortune depended upon the iflue of that day,
1546. ButPizarro's veterans pushed forward with fuchre.

gular and well-directed force, that they soon began
to make impreflion on their enemies. The viceroy
by extraordinary exertions, in which the abilities
of a commander and the courage of a soldier were
equally displayed, held victory for some time in sus
and alnn. penfe. At length he fell, pierced with many

wounds; and the rout of his followers becamege.
neral. They were hotly pursued. His head was
cut off, and placed on the public gibbet in Quito,
which Pizarro entered in triumph. The troops
affiembled by Centeno were dispersed soon after by
Carvajal, and he himself compelled to fly tothe
mountains, where he remained for several months
concealed in a cave. Every person in Peru, from
the fro!lticrs of Popayan to those of Chili, submit-
red to Pizarro; and by his fleet, under Pedro de
Hinojofa, he had not only the unrivalled command
of the South-Sea, but had taken pofleffion of Pana.
ma, and placed a garrison in Nombre de Dios, on
the opposite fide of the ifl-hmus, which rendered
him master of the usual avenue of communication
between Spain and Peru.

P;z,|To I- AFTER this decisive vic'ory, Pizarro and his fol-
Q,, '1',' 'n lowers remained for some time at Quito, and dur.
\ricignty us in g the firlt transports of their exultation, they nri
1;',"' into every cxcels of licentious indulgence, with

the riotous spirit ufuilc aimong low adventurers
1up1on cxtriaordinaii)ry fucccCls. But, amidiftthisdil'
1il)atioin, their chits and, his confidents were obliged
tto tl

t hLu'ir thiI ghts fomcietimes to what waitSe'
rious, and dcliberaited with much folicitudecoJi

ccrniO"g

* Zarati, lib. v. . 31, 3z. Gom.amr c. 170. Vega, p. I'b

v c. c.

',, , ( I.

' lrrlldl iz, li. i. 5I---54. lercre, lec, 7.l

i '
., c. l . 19---z . Icc. l. i. i. i, c. 1---3. Benzo, lib. iii. c. 1,

cerning the part that he ought now to take. Car- B O O K
vajal, no less bold and dccifise in council than in
the field, had from the b,'ginning warned Pizarro, 1546.
that in the career on which he was entering, it was
vain to think of holding a middle courf ; that
he must either boldly aim at all, or attempt nothing.
From the time that Pizarro obtained poffeflion of
the government of Peru, he inculcated the fame
maxim with greater earncftnefs. Upon receiving
an account of the victory at Quito, he rcmonftrat-
ed with him in atone still more peremptory. " You
" have usurped (said he, in a letter written to Pi-
zarro on that occasion) the supreme power in this
country, in contempt of the emperor's commission
to another. You have marched, in holtile array,
acainft the royal flandard; you have attacked the
representative of your sovereign in the field, have
defeated him, and cut off his head. Think not
that ever a monarch will forgive such insults on
his dignity, or that any reconciliation with him
can be cordial or sincere. Depend no longer on
the precarious favour of another. Afluine your-
self the sovereignty over a country, to the domi-
nion of which your family has a title founded on
the rights both of discovery and conquest. It is in
your power to attach every Spaniard in Peru of any
consequence inviolably to your intercelt by liberal
grants of lands and of Indians, or bv inlilittitinlr
ranks of nobility, and creating titles of honour fim i-
lar to those which are courted with so much cagcr-
ncfs in Europe. By eftablifling orders of knight-
hood, with privileges and difltineions rcfembling
those in Spain, you may bcftow a gratification tp-
on the officers in your service, suited to the ideas
of military men. Nor is it to your countrymen
only that you ought to attend ; endcavour to gain
the natives. By marrying the Coya, ordaughter
of the Sun next in fucceflion to the crown, you

I i 2 will

2 43

B o o K will induce 'the Indians, out of veneration for the

vI. V__} blood of their ancient princes, to unite with the
1546. Spaniards in support of your authority. Thus, at

the head of the principal inhabitants of Peru, as
well as of the new settlers there, you may set at de-
fiance the power of Spain, and repel with ease any
feeble force which it can fend at such a distance,"
Cepeda, the lawyer, who was now Pizarro's con-
fidential counsellor, warmly seconded Carvajal's
exhortations, and employed whatever learning he
poffeflid in demonstrating, that all the founders of
great monarchies had been raised to pre-eminence,
not by the antiquity of their lineage, or the validity
of their rights, but by their own enterprising va-
lour and personal merit*.

But chufes PIZARRO listened attentively to both, and could
to negociate
with the not conceal the fatisfacion with which he contem-
coLiIt of plated the objeEt that they presented to his view,
Sp"in, But happily for the tranquillity of the world, few

men possess that superior strength of mind, and ex-
tent of abilities, which are capable of forming and
executing such daring schemes, as cannot be ac-
complifhed without overturning the established or-
der of society, and violating those maxims of duty
which men are accustomed to hold sacred. The
mediocrity of Pizarro's talents circumscribed his
ambition within more narrow limits. Initead of
aspiring at independent power, he confined his views
to the obtaining from the court of Spain a confir-
mation of the authority which he now poffeficd;
and for that purpose, he sent an officer of diftinfEi-
on thither, to give f4ch a representation of his con-

dud,

VeL , p. X I. lili . iv c. 40. Fern ldcz, lib, it c, 34, lib. iic.
3. 4'9. Illcrrcra,dlcc, S. lib. ii, c. 0o.

duA, and of the state of the country, as might in- B o o K
duce the emperor and his ministers, either from V.
inclination or from neceflity, to continue him in 1546.
his present station.

WHILE Pizarro was deliberating with refpeat to Confultati-
the part which he lhould take, consultations were osp of the
held in Spain, with no less solicitude, concerning ministers.
the measures which ought to be pursued in order to
re-establish the emperor's authority in Peru.
Though unacquainted with the last excesses of out-
rage to which the malcontents had proceeded there,
the court had received an account of the infurrec-
tion against the viceroy, of his imprisonment, and
the usurpation of the government by Pizarro. A
revolution so alarming, called for an immediate in-
terpofition of the emperor's abilities and authority.
But as he was fully occupied at that time in Ger-
many, in conducting the war against the famous
league of Smalkalde, one of the molf interesting
and arduous enterprises in.his reign, the care of
providing a remedy for the disorders in Peru devolv-
ed upon his son Philip, and the counsellors whom
Charles had appointed to aflifi him in the govern-
ment of Spain during his absence. At first view,
the acions of Pizarro and his adherents appeared
so repugnant to the duty of fubjcois towards their
fovcreign, that the greater part of the ministers in-
iflted on declaring them inflantly to be guilty of
rebellion, and on proceeding to punish them with
exemplary rigour. But when the fervour of their
zeal and indignation began to abate, innumerable
obftaclcs to the execution of this measure presented
tiemilves. The veteran bands of infantry, the
itrcngth and glory of the Spanifl armies, were then
enl)loyed in Germany. Spain, exhaustcd of men
and money by a long series of wars, in which she
)';td bcen involvel by the rcftlefs ambition of two

fucccffive

245

B o O K fuccefiive monarchs, could not easily equip an ar-

V mament of sufficient force to reduce Pizarro. To
1546. transport any respectable body of troops to acoun-

try so remote as Peru, appeared almost impoflible.
While Pizarro continued maRter of the South-Sea,
the direct route by Nombre de Dios and Panama
was impraAicable. An attempt to march to Quito
by land through the new kingdom of Granada, and
the province of Popayan, across regions of vai ex-
tent, desolate, unhealthy, or inhabited by fierce
and hostile tribes, would be attended with unfur-
mountable danger and hardships. The passage to
the South-Sea by thp Straits of Magellan was so
tedious, so uncertain, and so little known in that
age, that no confidence could be placed in any es-
fort carried on in a course of navigation so remote
and precarious. Nothing then remained but to
relinquish the system which the ardour of theirloy-
alty had first fuggefled, and to attempt by lenient
meafurcs what could not be effeted by force. It
was manifest from Pizarro's solicitude to represent
his conduct in a favourable light to the emperor,
that, notwithstanding the cxcefles of which he had
been guilty, lhe fill retained sentiments of venerati-
on for his fovercign. By a proper application to
thefc, together with some fiuch concessions as should
discover a spirit of moderation and forbearance in
government, lie might be yet reclaimed, or the
ideas of loyalty natural to Spaniards might so far
revive among his followers, that they would no
longer lend their aid to uphold his usurpcd autho-
rity.

Caf.^ Pj'- TnI-I fuccCfs, however, of this ncgociation, no

poil tei o les d(elicatP than it was important, depended en-
Iar.i .1i ic- tircly on the abilities and addrcfs of the person to
(idcnt. whom it should be committed. After weighingi

with limch attention the colmparative merit of va-

rioils

rious persons, the Spanish ministers fixed with una- B O KR
nimity of choice, upon Pedro de la Gafca, a priest V .-,
in no higher flation than that of counsellor to the 1546.
inquisition. Though in no public office, he had
been occasionally employed by government in as-
fairs of trust and consequence, and had conducted
them with no less skill than success; displaying a
gentle and insinuating temper, accompanied with
much firmness ; probity, superior to any feeling of
private interest; and a cautious circumspection in
concerting meafurcs, followed by such vigour in
executing them, as is rarely found in alliance with
the other. These qualities marked him out for
the fun&ion to which he was dcftined. The em-
peror, to whom Gafca was not unknown, warmly
approved of the choice, and communicated it to him
in a letter, containing cxpreffions of good-will and
confidence, no lets honourable to the prince who
wrote, than to the subjed who received it. Gas-
ca, notwithstanding his advanced age and feeble
constitution, and though, from the apprehensions
natural to a man, who, during the course of his
life, had never been out of his own country, he
dreaded the effects of a long voyage, and of an un-
healthy climate*', did not hesitate a moment about
complying with the will of his obvcreign. In order Hismode-
to fhcw that it was from this principle alone that t"'"ti.
he atced, he rcfutcd a bishopric which was offlred
to him, in order that he might bear a more dignified
ch;ll;l.cr ; lie would accept of no higher title than
that of prcident of til court of audience in Lima;
;in(l declared that he would receive no Iflary on ac--
counlt or his dtilfhagigiig lic duties of that office.
All he required was, tihat the expence of lfpport-
ing his falily illould be defrayed by the public,
and as he was to go like a minister of peace witlh

his
% Z.HIJ(c z Jib. Ii C. 1. i

B O 0 K his gown and breviary, and without any retinue

but a few domestics, this would not load the reve.
1546. nue with any enormous burden * .

BUT while he discovered such difintereited mo.

The potvers deration with refped to whatever related perfo.
committed
to him. nally tb himself, he demanded his official powers in

a very different tone. He insisted, as he was to be
employed in a country so remote from the feat of
government, where he could not have recourse to
his sovereign for new instructions on every emer-
gence; and as the whole success of his negociati-
ons mft depend upon the confidence which the
people with whom he had to treat could place in
the extent of his powers, that he ought to be in-
veiled with unlimited authority, that his jurifdic-
tion muff reach to all persons and to all causes;
that he must be empowered to pardon, to punish,
or to reward, as circumitances and the behaviour of
different men might require; that, in cafe ofre-
fiftance from the malcontents, he might be autho-
rifed to reduce them to obedience by force of arms,
to levy troops for that purpose, and to call for
afliftance from the governors of all the Spanish
settlements in America. These powers, though
manifestly conducive to the great objects of his mif-
sion appeared to the Spanish miniflers to be inalie-
nable prerogatives of royalty, which ought not
to be delegated to a lubjed,, and they refused to
grant them. But the emperor's views were more
enlarged. As from the nature of his employments,
Gafca must be entrufled with discretionary power
in several points, and all his efforts might prove
ineffec'ual if he was circuifcribcd in any one

particular,

Zarate,lib. vi.c.6s. C(mar:l,c. 174. Fernandez, lilb ii. C 14
-. -16 V . VI, lib. v v.c.. I-leera, dlec, .llb.i, c.,'

particular, Charles scrupled not to invest him with B O 0 K
authority to the full exent that he demanded. I
Highly satisfied with this fresh proof of his master's 1546.
confidence, Gafca hastened his departure, and
without either money or troops, set out to quell a ay 26.
formidable rebellion *.

ON his arrival at Nombre de Dios, he found July27.

Hernan Mexia, an officer of note, posted there, by His arrival
order of Pizarro, with a considerable body of men,
to oppose the landing of any hostile forces. But
Gafca appeared in such pacific guise, with a train
folittle formidable, and with a title of no such dig-
nity as to excite terror, that he was received with
much refped. FromnNombre de Dios he advanced
to Panama, and met with a similar reception from
Hinojofa, whom Pizarro had entrusted with the
government of that town, and the command of his
fleet Rtationed there. In both places he held the
fame language, declaring that he was sent by their
sovereign as a messenger of peace, not as a minister
of vengeance; that he came to redress all their grie-
vances, to revoke the laws which had excited alarm,
to pardon past offences, and to re-elfabl'ifh order
and justice in the government of Peru. His mild
deportment, the simplicity of his malners, the fanc-
tity of his profession, and a winning appearance of
candour, gained credit to his declarations. The
veneration due to a person clothed with I (al au-
thority, and aAing in virtue of a royal conmiflnion,
began to revive among men accuiftonied for foire
time to nothing more rcfpec'able thann an furpcd
jurisdiction. Hinojofa, Mcxia;, and teveral other
officers of diflini'ion, to each of whom G;afca ap-
plied fcparatcly, were gained over to his intercft, and

VOL. II. K l waited

V Fcrn0ndez, lib. ii. c. 1 5--i8.

249

B O O K waited only for some decent occasion of declaring
. . openly in his favour .

i .46.

Volent pro- THIS the violence of Pizarro soon afforded them.
Ceedings of
Pizalrr'o. As soon as he heard of Gafca's arrival at Panama,

though he'received, at the fame times an account
of the nature of his comtniffion, and was informed
that he offered to render every Spaniard in Peru ea-
fy concerning what was palt, by an ac of general
oblivion ; and fecurewith refpe&t to the future, by
repealing the obnoxious laws ; instead of accepting
with -ratitude his fovereil's gracious concessions,
he was to much exasperated on finding that he was
not to be continued in his station as governorofthe
country, that he instantly resolved to oppose the
prefidcnt's entry into Peru, and to prevent his ex-
ercifing any jurifdiAion there. To this desperate
resolution he added another as highly preposterous.
He sent a new deputation to .Spain to justify
this condlud, and to insist, in name of all the com-
munities in Peru, for a confirmation of the govern-
ment to himself during life, as the only means of
prcferving tranquillity there. The persons entrust-
ed with this strange conminifon, intimated the in-
tention of Pizarro to the president, and required
him, in his name, to depart from Panama and re-
turn to Spain. They carried likewise secret in-
fRlructions to Hinojof., directing him to offer Gafca
a prclcnt of fifty thoufiand pesos, if he would com-
ply voluntarily with what was demanded of him;
andl if he fliould continue obftinatc, to cut him off
either by aflhflination or poison t.

* lFcIr;nlr«l ; lib ii.c. 21, &c. Zaratte, lib, vi. c. 6, 7 c1

I 1r>dI, I, l. iis . Vegi , p. Il . 8lil.v.a.3. t Zirate, lib'. vi. c.9 .
I i'tmailc rz, lib ii. i 5 , . I-lerrcar, dec 8. .lib. ii. c- 91 e0

pizarro to those wild measures. Having been once
accustomed to the pre-eminence of supreme corn- 1;46.
mand, he could not bear the thoughts of defcenc- cafi nei""
int to a private Ration. Conscious of his own de-
merit, he suspected that the emperor studied only
todeceive him, and would never pardon the.outra-
ges which he had committed. His chief confidents,
no less guilty, entertained the fame apprehensions.
The approach of Gafca without any military force
excited no terror. There were now above fix
thousand Spaniards fettled in Peru §; and at the head
of these he doubted not to maintain his own in-
dependence, if the court of Spain fllould refute to
grant what he required. But he knew not that a
spirit of defection had already begun to spread
among those whom he trusted molt. Hinojofa,
amazed at his precipitate resolution of setting him-
felfin opposition to the emperor's commission, and
disdaining to be his instrument in executing the
odious crimes pointed out in his secret inftrutions,
publicly recognized the president as his only lawful
superior. The officers under his command did the
fame. Such was the contagious influence of the ex-
ample, that it reached even the deputies who had been
sent from Peru ; and at the time when Pizarro ex-
peceed to hear either of Gafcgm's return to Spain, or
of his death, he received an account of his being
maftcr of the fleet, of Panama, and of the tJ;oops
stationcd there.

IRRITATED almost to madness by an event Pizarro re-
so unexpeced, he openly prepared for war; Cfoveson
and in order to give so'ne colour of justice to 1547.
his arms, he appointed the court of audience in

K k 2 Lima

. Ilclrela, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. I.
IIISTORY OF AMERICA.,

25r

B 0 0 K Lima to proceed to the trial of Gafca, forthe

. V_, crimes of having seized his ships, seduced his offi.
1547. cers, and prevented his deputies from proceeding

on their voyage to Spain. Cepeda, though ating
as a judge in virtue of the royal commiflion, did not
scruple to prostitute the dignity of his function by
finding Gafca guilty of treason, and condemning
him to death on that account *. Wild, and even
ridiculous, as this proceeding was, it imposed on
the low illiterate adventurers, with whom Peru was
filled, by the semblance of a legal fanetion warrant-
ing Pizarro to carry on hostilities against a convift-
ed traitor. Soldiers accordingly resorted from eve-
ry quarter to his standard, and he was soon at the
head of a thousand men, the best equipped that had
ever taken the field in Peru.

Preparati- GASCA, on his part, perceiving that force must
ons'of Gas- be employed in order to accomplish the purpose of

ca. his miflion, was no less afliduous in collecting

troops from Nicaragua, Carthagena, and other set-
tlements on the continent; and with such success,
that he was soon in a condition to detach a fqua-
dron of his fleet, with a considerable body of fol-
April. diers to the coast of Peru. Their appearance ex-

cited a dreadful alarm ; and though they did not
attempt for tome time to make any descent, they
did more effectual service, by setting ashore in dif-
ferent places persons who dispersed copies of the aft
of general indemnity, and the revocation of the
late edicts; and who made known every where the
pacific intentions, as well as mild temper, of the
president. The efltc of fprcading this infor-
mation was wonderful. All who were dilfltisficd
with Pizar-o's violent aclinifi.litioll, all who re-
tained any fcntiments of fidelity to their fovcrcign,

began

* FcIrn.Imi',, 1;1. i. . 556 Vega, p. II. lib. v, c.. 7. Hcrrc
ta, dec. 8. lib, i. . 6.

began to meditate revolt. Some openly deserted a B 0 0 K
cause which they now deemed to be unjust. Cen-
teno, leaving the cave in which he lay concealed, 1547.
assembled about fifty of his former adherents, and on of Cen-
with this feeble half-armed band advanced boldly teno
to Cuzco. By a sudden attack in the night-time,
in which he displayed no less military skill than va-
lour, he rendered himself rhafter of that capital,
though defended by agarrifon of five hundred men.
Molt of these having ranged themselves under his
banners, he had soon the command of a respectable
body of troops §.

PIZARRO, though astonished at beholding one agalna

whom Pi-

enemy approaching by sea, and another by land, at zarromar-
a time when he trusted to the union of all Peru in ches,
his favour, was of a spirit more undaunted, and
more accustomed to the vicissitudes of fortune,
than to be disconcerted orappalled. As the danger
from Centeno's operations was the most urgent, he
instantly set out to oppose him. Having provided
horses for all his soldiers, he marched with ama-
zing rapidity. But every morning he found his
force diminished by numbers who had left him du-
ring the night; and though he became suspicious
toexcefs, and punished without mercy all whom
he fifpeeted, the rage of desertion was too violent
to be checked. Before he got within fight of the
enemy at HIuarina, near the lake Titiaca, he could
not muster more than four hundred soldiers. But
these he justly confidered as men of tried attach-
ment, on whom he might depend. They were in-
dced the boldest and nmot dctperate of his followers,
conlfcious like himself of crimes for which they
couild hardly expedc forgiveness, and without any

hope

§ /.ralc, li.; vi. c. i3---16. Gomnara c. 18o , I81. Fernan-
ritz, lih. i c. ;xS, (q., h'c.

B 0 0 K hope but in the success of their arms. With these

VI.

he did not hesitate to attack Centeno's troops,

1547. though double to his own in number. The royal-
ta. `a. itls did not decline the combat. It was the most
and defeats obflinate and bloody that had hitherto been fought
him. in Peru. At length the intrepid valour of Pizarro,

and the superiority of Carvajal's military talents,
triumphed over numbers, and obtained a complete
vidory. The booty was immense t, and the treat-
ment of the vanquished cruel. By this signal fuc-
cess the reputation of Pizarro was re-eflablifhed,
and being now deemed invincible in the field, his
army increased daily in number §.

BUT events happened in other parts of Peru,

which more than counterbalanced the splendid vic-
tory at Huarina. Pizarro had scarcely left Lima,
when the citizens, weary of his opprcilve domini-
on, ereced the royal standard, and Aldana, with a

acad detachment of soldiers from the fleet, took pofleei-
in Peru.

on of the town. About the fame time 11, the prefi-
dent landed' at Tumbez with five hundred men.
Encouraged by his presence, every settlement in
the low country declared for the king. The situ-
ation of the two parties was- now perfectly reverted;
Cuzco and the adjacent provinces were poflcflcd by
Pizarro; all the reft of the empire, fromn Quito
southward, acknowledged the j urifklidioh of Gafca.
As his numbers a.ugmented fast, Gafca advanced
into the interior part of the country. His behavi-
our still continued to be gentle andl unafliminig
he cxprcfle:d, on every occasion, his ardent wifnl of
terminating the contcfl without bloodflicd. More
solicitous to reclaim than to punish, he upbraided

110

+ See NOTE XLV. § Z7.lte, lil. vii. c. ., 3. omIInl'a C

I''l Vc eg, p. . i

b,

I . C.

. c. 18, &-c. Ilicl c, li. i. c. 79'

H-Irrer., ldec. 8. lib. iv. . 1, . ' iar.atc, libi. vl. c. 17.
254

no man for past offences, but received them as a fa- B 0 0 K
ther receives penitent children returning to a sense
of their duty. Though desirous of peace, he did 1547.
not flacken his preparations'for war. He appoint-
ed the general rendezvous of his troops in the ser-
tile valley of Xauxa, on the road to Cuzco *. Advances
There he remained for some months, not only that tiords
he might have time to make another attempt to-
wards an accommodation with Pizarro, but that he
might train his new soldiers to the use of arms, and
accustom them to the discipline of a camp, before
he led them against a body of victorious veterans.
Pizarro intoxicated with the success which had hi-
therto accompanied his arms, and elated with hav-
ing again near a thousand men under his command,
refu'ed to liften to any terms, although Cepeda,
together with several of his officers, and even Car-
vajaI himself $, gave it as their advice to close with
the president's offer of a general indemnity, and the
revocation of the obnoxious laws §. Gafca having
tried in vain every expedient to avoid imbruing his Dec. 19.
hands il the blood of his countrymen, began to
move towards Cuzco at the head of sixteen hun-
dred men.

PIZl/,RRO, confident of victory, suffered the roy- Botl3parteis

alilts to pass a.lltherivers that lie between Guaman- Preal tor
ga and Cuzco without opposition, and to advance
within four leagues of that capital, flattering him-
fClf that a defeat in such a situation as rendered a
retreat impracicable would at once terminate the
war. He then marched out to meet the enemy, and
Carvajal clihoc his ground, and made the difpofiti-
011 of the troops with the discerning eye, and Aril 9
profound knowledge in the art of war, con-

fi)icuous

narat,., lih.tvii. c. i. Fcrnandez, lib. Hi. c. 77, 82. J Sec
NOl'I XLVI, § Zaraitc, lib. 7. c. 6. Veg;, p. II. lib. v. c. 27.

B K ' fpicuous in all his operations. As the two armies

VI.

moved forward slowly to the charge, the appearance
1548. of each was singular. In that of Pizarro, compo-

fed of men enriched with the spoils of the most
opulent country in America, every officer, and al-
most all the private men were clothed in fluffs of
silk, or brocade, embroidered with gold and fil-
ver; and their hdrfes, their arms, their flandards,
were adorned with all the pride of military pomp*.
That of Gafca, though not so splendid, exhibited
what was no less firiking. He himself, accompa-
nied by the archbishop of Lima, the bishops of Qui-
to and Cuzco, and a great number of ecclefiafics,
marching along the lines, blessing the men, and en-
couraging them to arefol ute discharge of their duty.

Pizarrode- WHEN both were just ready to engage, Cepeda
trotpsed his set spurs to his horse, galloped off, and surrendered

himself to the president. Garcilaffo de la Vega,
and other officers of note, followed his example.
The revolt of persons of such high rank firuck all
with amazement. The mutual confidence on which
the union and strength of armies depend, ceased at
once. Difiruff and conflernation spread firom rank
to rank. Some silently flipped away, others threw
down their arms, the greatest number went over to
the royalists. Pivarro, Carvajal, and tome leaders,
employed authilicy, threats, and entreaties to
flop them, but in vain. In less than half an
hour, a body of men, which might have deci-
ded the fate of the Peruvian empire, was totally dif-
perfed. Pizarro, i;eing all irretricvably loll, cried
out in amazeneint to a few officers who still faith-
fully adhered to hin, ' What remains for us to
do?" "' Lct us ruflh, rcplicd one of them, upon
the enemy's firtlmf{ battalion, and die like Ro-
mans." jcdcjed with luch a icvcri.i of fortune, he

.hat
· Ziriai, lilb. vi. c. 1i.

had not spirit to follow this soldierly counsel, and B O O K
with a tameness disgraceful to his former fame, he
surrendered to one of Gafca's officers. Carvajal, 1548.
endeavouring to escape, was overtaken and seized. taken,

GASCA, happy in this bloodless vitory, did not and put to

death.

stain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, and a
small number of the most distinguished or noto-
rious offenders, were punished capitally. Pizarro
was beheaded on the day after he surrendered. He
submitted to his fate with a composed dignity, and
seemed desirous to atone by repentance for the
crimes which he had committed. The end of
Carvajal was suitable to his life. On his trial he
offered no defence. When the sentence adjudging
him to be hanged was pronounced, he carelessly
replied, " One can die but once. " During the
interval between the fcntence and execution, he
discovered no sign either of remorse for the past,
or of solicitude about the future; scoffing at all
who visited him, in his usual sarcastic vein of mirth,
with the fame quickness of repartee and gross plea-
fantry as at any other period of his life. Cepeda,
more criminal than either, ought to have shared
the fame fate; but the merit of having deserted
his associates at such a critical moment, and with
such decisive effect, saved him fiom immediate pu-
niflment. He was sent, however, as a prisoner to
Spain, and died in confinement :.

IN the minute detail which the contemporary

historians have given of the civil difienfions that
raged in Peru, with little interruption, during ten
years, many cirumfiances occur so itriking, and

which

VOL.II. L

t Zalrte, lih. vii. c. 6, 7, S. Gomara, c. 18S, 186. Veca,
Pl . ib. v. c. 30, &c. 1ernandcz, lib. ji. c. S6, &c. Har-

tel, dec, 8. lib. iv. a. 14, &c,

B O O K which indicate such an uncommon fate of manners,

VI. a+,_ as to merit particular attention.

548.

No merce- THOUOH the Spaniards who firit invaded Peru
nary soldi were of the lowest order in society, and the greater
ersin the
civil wars part of those who afterwards joined them were per-
s Peru. infons of defpcrate fortune, yet in all the bodies of

troops brought into the field by the different leaders
who contended for superiority, not one man acted
as a hired soldier, that follows his standard for pay.
Every adventurer in Peru confidered himfelfasa
conqueror, entitled, by his services, to an establish-
ment in that country which had been acquired by
his valour. In the contests between the rival chiefs,
each chose his fide as he was directed by his own
judgment or affc tions. Hejoined his commander
as a companion of his fortune, and disdained to de-
grade himself by receiving the wages of a mercena-
ry. It was to their swords, not to pre-eminence in
office, or nobility of birth, that most of the leaders
whom they followed were indebted for their eleva-
tion; and each of their adherents hoped, by the
fame means, to open a way for himself to the pofcif-
sion of power and wealth*.

Armis im- Bu'r tho' the troops in Peru served without any
nieilrc) ex- regular pay, they were railed at immense expence.
'reni'vc' Among men accustomed to divide the spoils of an

opulent country, the dc(ire of obtaining wealth ac-
quired incredible force. The ardour of pursuit
augmented in proportion to the hope of fuccces.
Whcre all were intent on the fame object, and un-
dle the dominion of the fanme pallion, there was but
one mode of gaining mcri, or of lIcuring their at-
t,.chmcnt. Officers oft nalme and influence, berides

the
'A Veg~t, ). 1 . lib iv. c. 39, 4,11

the promise of future erfablinlments, received in B 0 0 K

vI.

hand large gratuities from the chief with whom
they engaged. Gonzalo Pizarro, in order to raise 1548.
a thousand men, advanced five hundred thousand
pesos*. Gafca expended on the troops which he
led againlt Pizarro nine hundred thousand pefost.
The dittribution of property, bestowed as the re-
ward of success, was still more exorbitant. Ce- Andim-
peda, as the recompence of his perfidy and address, mense re-
in persuading the court of royal audience to give dvidualstin
the fandion of its authority to the usurped jurif-
dition of Pizarro, received a grant of lands which
yielded an annual income of a hundred and fifty
thousand pefost. Hinojofa, who, by his early de-
fe6tion from Pizarro, and iurrender of the fleet to
Gafca, decided the fate of Peru, obtained a diftri&c
of country affording two hundred thousand pesos
of yearly value §. While such rewards were dealt
out to the principal officers, with more than royal
munificence, proportional shares were conferred
upon those of inferior rank.

SUCH a rapid change of fortune produced its na- Their pro.
tural effecs. It gave birth to new wants, and new frfion and
dcefres. Veterans long accustomed to hardship and Luxury.
toil, acquired of a sudden a tatfe for profuse and
inconsiderate diflipation, and Indulged in all the
cxccfles of military licentioufncfs. The riot of
low debauchery occupied lome ; a rclifl for expen-
five luxuries fprcad among othersll. The meanest
foldicr in Peru would have thought himfclf degrad-
cd by marching on foot, and at a time when the
prices of hrfics in that country were cx(orbitant,
each infilled on being furnifilcd with one before he

L 1 2 would

Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 54. '- Zarate, lib. vii. c. o1. Her-

c'"', (.cS. S. lib. v.c. 7. 1 Gon0 ial , c. 164. § VcC;, p.
1 ib. vi. c. 3. 1 l-lcrrerl, dec. 5. lib. ii. c. 3. dec. 8. lib. viii.
*. 1k.

B 0 0 K would take the field. But though less patient un-

der the fatigue and hardships of service, they were
1548. ready to face danger and death with as much in-

trepidity as ever, and animated by the hope of new
rewards, they never failed, on the day of battle, to
display all their ancient valour.

Ferocity TOGETHER with their courage, they retained all
with which the ferocity by which they were originally diftin-
tefi-sere guifhed. Civil discord never raged with a more
carried on. fell spirit tha: among the Spaniards in Peru. To

all the paflions which usually envenom contests
among countrymen, avarice was added, and ren-
dered their enmity more rancorous. Eagerness to
seize the valuable forfeitures expeced upon the
death of every opponent, slut ihl dour ngaila;i
mercy. To be wealthy, was of itt'-li ifufcie-it to
expose a man to accusation, or to ifujeA him to
punishment, On the slightest fufpiciolls, Pzarrro
condemned many of the most opulent inhabitants
in Peru to death. Carvajal, without searching For
any pretext to justify his cruelty, cut olf many
more. The number of those who sufFercd by the
hand of the executioner, was not much inferior to
what fell in the field* ; and the greater part was
condemned without the formlali ty of any legal trial.
And want THE violence with which the contending parties

t stl. treated their opponents was not accompanied with

its usual attendants, attachment and fidelity to thole
with whom they aftcd. T'he ties of honour which
are held sacred among soldiers, and the principle of
int(grity, interwoven as thoroughly in the Spanifil
characcr as in that of any nation, seem to have
been equally forgotten. Even regard for decency,

alnd

§ Sec NOTE XLVII.
26o

their difientions, there was hardly a Spaniard in
Peru who did not abandon the party which he had 1548.
originally espoused, betray the associates with whom
he had united, and violate the engagements under
which he had come. The viceroy Nugnez Vela,
was ruined by the treachery of Cepeda and the other
judges of the royal audience, who were bound
by the duties of their function to have supported his
authority. The chief advisers and companions of
Gonzalo Pizarro's revolt, were the first to forlake
him, and fubmnit to his enemies. His fleet was gi-
ven up to Gafca, by the man whom he had fingied
out amrong his officers to entrust with that impor-
tant command. On the day that was to decide
his fate, an army of veterans, in fight of the enemy,
threw down their arms without firiking a blow,
and deierted a leader who had often conducted them
to v!ctory. Infl-ances of such general and avowed
contempt of the principles and obligations which
attach man to man, and bind them together in so-
cial union, rarely occur in history. It is only where
men aic far removed from the feat of government,
whe-c the rcftraints of law and order are little felt,
where the prospect of gain is unbounded, and im-
m'ncfe wealth may cover the crimes by which it
is acquiri'd, that we can find any parallel to the
levity, the rapacioufncfs, the perfidy and corruption
prcvalent among the Spaniards in Peru.

ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in eve- Gafca dre
ry corner of Peru laid down their arms, and traln- vifts cl--
qnillit)y fcemcd to be perlfely rc-cflablifled. But for his lbldi
tvwo very intcrteilng olbjcc.s tfill remained to occu- eTs"
py the prefidcnt's attention. The one was to find
imicdi;.tdyc flc'h employment for a multitude of

turbulent
HQISTORY OF

AMR· E R I C A.

26i,

B 0 0 K turbulent and daring adventurers with which the

... country was filled, as might prevent them from ex,
1548. citing new commotions. The other, to bestow

proper gratifications upon those to whose loyalty
and valour he was indebted for his success. The
former of these was in fume measure accomplished,
by appointing Pedro de Valdivia to prosecute the
conquell of Chili; and by empowering Diego Cen-
teno to undertake the discovery of the vast regions
bordering on the river De la Plata. The reputa-
tion of those leaders, and the hopes of bettering
their condition in a new country, alluring many
of the most indigent and desperate soldiers to follow
their standards, drained off no inconsiderable por-
tion of that mutinous inflammable spirit which
Gafca dreaded.

i4s dvirion THE latter was an affair of greater difficulty, and
ctthe c'n'g to be adjufled with a more attentive and delicate
his tbll0wers hand. The REPARTIMIENTOS, or allotments of

lands and Indians which fell to be difiributed, in
consequence of the death or forfeiture of the for-
mer possessors, exceeded two millions of pesos of
yearly rent*. Gafca, when now absolute nafter
of this immcnfe property, retained the fame difinte-
reftcd sentiments which he had originally profefled,
and refused to reserve the finalleft portion of it for
himself. But the number of claimants was great;
and whilil the vanity or avarice of every individual
fixed the value of his own services, and estimated
the recollpence which he thought due to him, the
pretensions of each were so extravagant, that it was
imlpofible to satisfy all. Galca liftcned to them
one by one, with the nioft patient attention, and
that he might have Icifure to weigh the compara-
tive merit of their fcvcral claims with accuracy, ll

retired

Vepi, p. li. Ci. c.
262

retired, with the archbishop of Lima and a single B 0 0 K
secretary, to a village twelve leagues from Cuzco. VJ
There he spent several days in allotting to each a 154.
distriCt of lands and number of Indians, in propor-
tion to his idea of their p.'t services, and future im-
portance. But that he might get beyond the reach
of the fierce storm of clamour and rage, which he
foresaw would burst out on the.publication of his
decree, notwithstanding the impartial equity with
which he had framed it, he set out for Lima, leav-
ing the infirument of partition fealed up, with
orders not to open it for some days after his de-
parture.

THE indignation excited by publiflling the de- Aug. 24.
cree of partition was not less than Gafca had ex- The ifton-

tent it occa-

peeed. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy, hamne, sions.
rage, and all the other pafilons that mol- vehement-
ly agitate the minds of men when both their ho-
nour and their interest are deeply afFected, conspired
in adding to its violence. .It broke ouc with all the
fury of military insolence. Calumny, threats, and
curses were poured out openly upon the president.
He was accused of ingratitude, of partiality, and
of inijuflice. Among soldiers prompt to acion,
Ilch ieditious discourse would have been boon fol-
lowed by deeds no less violent, and they already
1)bgan to turn their eyes towards tome discontented
leader;,, cxpering theml to tland forth in redress
Of their wrongs. By oine vigorous interpositions
of gov\ernlent, a timely check was given to this
nitinous lpirit, anl the dan ger of another civil
wair was averted for the prefclnt.
C(A:CA, however, perceiviingl that the flame was 1q49-

·----------o Re-cniab-
f"'iprtilcd rather than cxtillntuiifled, laboured with lilce oIrder

the and govern-

mcnt,

t *rite, l; li. vii. c. 9q Gonair, c. 17-. Veg:, Ip. l. llb. vii.

;' i, .

I, er i3ndiz,

L cp. l lib i. c. , &c. I crlc;a, dcc. 8. lib.
iv. C. 17, &c,

B O O K the utmost afliduity to soothe the malcontents, by

VI' beflowing large gratuities on some, by promising RE-
549,' PARTIMIENTOS, when they fell vacant, to others,

and by caressing and flattering all. But that the
public security might refl on a foundation more
fiable than their good aftfection, he endeavoured to
strengthen the hands of his successors in office, by
re-establishing the regular adminiitration of justice
in every part of the empire. He introduced order
and simplicity into the mode of co!leding the royal
revenue. He issued regulations concerning the
treatment of the Indians, well calculated to protect
them from oppression, and to provide for their in-
ftruscion in the principles of religion, without de-
priving the Spaniards of the benefit accruing from
their labour. Having now accomplished every ob-
1550. jeet of his miflion, Gafca, longing to return again

to a private station, committed the government of
Peru to the court of audience, and set out for Spain.

Feb. i. As, during the anarchy and turbulence of the four
and sets out
foand ets last years, there had been no remittance made of

the royal revenue, he carried with him thirteen
hundred thousand pesos of public money, which the
economy and order of his adminifiration enabled
him to save, after paying all the expences of the
war.

HE was received in his native country with uni-
tion there. versal admiration of his abilities, and of his virtue.

Both were, indeed, highly confpicuons. Without
army, or fleet, or public funds; with a train so
simple, that only three thoutfand ducats were ex-
pended in equipping himn, lie fct out to oppofc a
formidable rebcllion. By his addrcft s and talents
he supplied all thofC dlcfets, and ieemed to clrate
infiruments for executing his dcfigns. lIc ic-
quired such a naval force, as gave him the coil-

n 11lll

Feirnaznde.', lil. ii. c. IX.
264

mand of the sea. He raised a body of men able to B o O K
cope with the veteran bands which gave law to Pe- V.1
ru. He vanquished their leader, on whose arms 15o.
vicory had hitherto attended, and in place of anar-
chy and usurpation, he eftabliihed the government
oflaws, and the authority of the rightful sovereign.
But the praise bestowed on his abilities was exceeded
by that which his virtue merited. After refidirg in
a country where wealth presented allurements
which had seduced every person who had hitherto
possessed power there, he returned from that trying
station with integrity not only untainted but un-
fufpecaed. After distributing among his country-
men poffelfions of greater extent and value than had
ever been in the disposal of a fubje& in any age or
nation, he himself remained in his original slate of
poverty; and at the very time, when he br0ught
such a large recruit to the royal treasury, hi was
obliged to apply by petition for a finall fum to dif-
charge rome petty debts which he had contracted
during the course of his service t. Charles was not
insensible to fiich disinterested merit. Gafca was
received by him with the molt distinguishing marks of
efleem, and being promoted to the bishopric of Pa-
lencia, he pagfed the remainder of his days in the
tranquillity of retirement, refpeetcd by his country,
honoured by his fovercign, and beloved by all.

NOTWITHSTSANDING all Gafca's wife regulati-
Ons, the tranquillity of Peru was not of long conti-
nuance. In a country, where the authority of go-
vernment was almofl forgotten during the long pre-
valence of anarchy and mil-rule, where there were
dia'ppointcd leaders ripe for revolt, and seditious
1)ldiers ready to follow them, it was not difficult
to kindile comnbuftion. Scveral fucccflive infurrec-

VoL, II. M mn tions

265
·II 1JS, Pene, xi;,,.

B 0 K tions desolated the country for some years. But as

V,_ those, though fierce, were only transient florms,
s550. excited rather by the ambition and turbulence of

particular men, than by general or public motives,
the detail of them is not the object of this history.
These commotions in Peru, like every thing of ex-
treme violence either in the natural or political bo-
dy, were not of long duration, and by carrying off
the corrupted humours which had given rife to the
disorders, they contributed in the end to strengthen
the society which at first they threatened to deitroy.
During their fierce contests, several of the first in-
vaders of Peru, and many of those licentious ad-
venturers whom the fame of their success had allur-
ed thither, fell by each other's hands. Each of the
parties, as they alternately prevailed in the struggle,
cleared the country of a greater number, by execu-
ting, proscribing, or banishing their opponents.
Men less enterprising and desperate, and more ac-
customed to move in the path of fober and peacea-
ble industry, fettled in Peru ; and the royal autho-
rity was gradually eftablifiled as firmly there as in
the other Spaniih colonies.

I H E
266

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VII.

THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
A M E R I C A.

B O OK VII.

A S the conquest of the two great empires of B 0 O K
Mexico and Peru forms the most splendid and in- viI.
terefling period in the history of America, a view of '-
their political institutions, and a description of their
national manners, will exhibit the human species
to the contemplation of intelligent observers in a
very singular stage of its progress t,

WHEN compared with other parts of the New Mexko and

Peru more

World, Mexico and Peru may be confidered as po- polilhed
lifhed states. Instead of small, independent, hoItile than other
tribes, struggling for fubfiftcnce amidst woods and Prsofa,
marshes, strangers to induitry and arts, unacquaint-
ed with subordination, and almost without the ap-
pearance of regular government, we find countries
of great extent fubjeded to the dominion of one so-

M m 2 vereign,
,[ Sec N 0 T B XLVIII.

B 0 0 K vercign, the inhabitants collected together in cities,

the wifdon and foresight of rulers employed in pro-
viding for the maintenance and security of the peo-
ple, the empire of laws in some measure established,
the authority of religion recognized, many of the
arts effcntial to life brought to some degree of ma-
turity, and the dawn of such as are ornamental be-
ginning to appear.

Theirinfc- BUT if the comparison be made with the people
riority to
the nations of the ancient continent, the inferiority of Ameri-
snt conti- ca in improvement will be conspicuous, and neither
asnt. the Mexicans nor Peruvians will be entitled to

rank with those nations which merit the name of
civilized. They, like the rude tribes around them,
were totally unacquainted with the useful metals,
and the progress which they had made in extending
their dominion over the animal creation was incon-
fiderable. The Mexicans had gone no farther than
to tame and rear turkeys, ducks, a species of finall
dogs, and rabbits §. By this feeble essay of inge-
nuity, the means of fubfiiltcce were rendered forne-
what more plcntiful and fccure, than when men
depend solely on hunting ; but they had no idea of
'attempting to subdue the more robufl: aniiials, or of
deriving any aid sion their mini{fry in carrying on
works of labour. I' he Peruvians feecm to have nc-
glcAc-d the inferior animals, and had not rendered
any of them domeflic except the duck; but they
were more fortu ate in taming the LIamai,an aimiiin
peculiar to their country, in tform rcfembling a c;-
rnel, :and of a size nfomewihat l rger than a iheep.
IUndcr the protcition of mian, tills Ipccics iiulti-
plied grcatly. Its wool fmi-ii'ed tlh P'cruvi;ils
with clothing., its flCia wiith food. It was eve"n

,employed1

& .k] U[rI j4 a, d cc. xiA. Ilib. A'ii. L. a .
z68

employed as a beast of burden, and carried a moder- B 0 0 K
ate load with much patience and docility t. It Vi-.
was never used for draught; .and the breed being
confined to the mountainous country, its service,
if we may judge by incidents that occur in the ear-
ly Spmnifh writers, was not very extensive among
the Peruvians in their original state.

IN tracing the line by which nations proceed to-
wards civility, the discovery of the ifeful metals;
and the acquisition of dominion over the animal
creation, have been marked as steps of capital im-
portance in their progress. In our continent, so-
ciety continued in that state which is denominated
barbarous, long after men had attained both. Even
with all that command over nature which these
confer, many ages elapse, before industry becomes
so perfect as to render subsistence secure, before the
arts that supply the wants and furnish the accom-
modations of life are invented, and before any
idea is conceived of the various institutions re-
quifite in a well-ordered society. The Mexicans
and Peruvians, without knowledge of the useful
metals, or the aid of domestic animals, laboured
under disadvantages which must have greatly re-
tarded their progress, and in their highefi f-ate of irm-
provcmcnt, their power was so limited, and their
operations lb feeble, that they can hardly be con-
fidered as having advanced beyond the infancy of
civil life.

AFT ER this general observation concerning the View of the
nmoft singular and diltinguifhing circuimftance in the iniitutions

and man-

s{it(e of both the great empires in America, I lhall nersofcach.
endcavotii to give such a view of the conflitu-
tlicl and interior police of each, as may enable us to

alGertain
I 1cg. P. l. ib. viii. c. ió. Zarate, lit.. i. c. i4.

a69

B O O K ascertain their place in the political scale, to allot

VII.
(vii them their proper station between the rude tribes

in the New World, and the polished flates of the
ancient, and to determine how far they had risen
above the former, as well as how much they fell
below the latter.

Imperfeat MEXIco was first fubjeced to the Spanish crown.
information But our acquaintance with its laws and manners is
concerning
thGfe of not, from that circumfiance, more complete.
Mexico. What I have remarked concerning the defective

and inaccurate information on which we must rely
with refped to the condition and customs of the fa-
vage tribes in America, may be applied likewise to
our knowledge of the Mexican empire. Cortes,
and the rapacious adventurers who accompanied
him, had not leisure or capacity to enrich either ci-
vil or natural history with new observations.
They undertook their expedition in quest of one ob-
je&t, and seem hardly to have turned their eyes to-
wards any other. Or, if during some short inter-
val of tranquillity, when the occupations of war
ceased, and the ardour of plunder was suspended,
the inflitutions and manners of the people whom
they had invaded drew their attention, the inqui-
ries of illiterate soldiers were conduEted with ol
little sagacity and precision, that the accounts gi-
ven by them of the policy and order established in
the Mexican monarchy are superficial, confused,
and inexplicable. It is rather from incidents which
they relate occasionally, than from their own deduc-
tions and remarks, that we are enabled to form
some idea of the genius and n)anners of that people.
The obscurity in which the ignorance of its con-
querors involved the annals of Mexico, was aug-
mented by the superstition of those who fuccecdcd
them. As the memory of past events was prcfervcd
among the Mexicans by figures painted on skins, 0o

cottoll

cotton cloth, or on the bark of trees, the early miC- B o0 K

VII.

fionaries, unable to comprehend their meaning, and
struck with theiruncouth forms, conceived them to
be monuments of idolatry which ought to be def-
troyed, in order to facilitate the conversion of the
Indians. In obedience to an edid issued by Juan
de Zummaraga, a Franciscan monk, the first bishop
of Mexico, all those records of the ancient Mexi-
can story were collected and committed to the flames.
In consequence of this fanatical zeal of the monks
who first visited New Spain, and which their fuc-
cefiors soon began to lament, whatever knowledge
of remote events such rude monuments contained
was entirely loft, and no information remained con-
cerning the ancient revolutions and policy of the
empire, but what was derived from tradition, or
from tome fragments of their historical paintings
that escaped the barbarous researches of Zummara-
ga t. From the experience of all nations it is ma-
nifeft, that the memory of pall tranfadions can
neither be long preserved, nor be tranfinitted with
any fidelity by tradition. The Mexican paintings
which are supposed to have served as annals of their
empire, are few in number, and of ambiguous
meaning. Thus amidst the uncertainty of the for-
mer, and the obscurity of the latter, we muff glean
what intelligence can be collected from the scanty
materials scattered in the Spani/h writers.

ACCORDING to the account of the Mexicans Origin of
themselves, their empire was not of long duration. the Mcxi-

can mo-

lhcir country, as they relate, was originally pof- oarchy.
fefled, rather than peopled, by finall independent
tribes, whose mode of life and manners refcmbled
those of the rudcft savages which we have described.
uit about a period corresponding to the beginning
of the tenth century in the Chriflian rera, several

tribes

t Acofli, ib. vi. c. , Torquen. Proem. lib .

ii b. iii. c. 6, lib xiv..
¢,6

B O O K tribes moved in successive migrations from un-

vnI. known regions towards the north and northwest,
^v" and fettled in different provinces of ANABAC, the

ancient name of New Spain. These, more civiliz-
ed than the original inhabitants, began to form
them to the arts of social life. At length, towards
the commencement of the thirteenth century, the
Mexicans, a people more polished than any of the
former, advanced from the border of the Californian
gulf, and took possession of the plains adjacent to a
great lake near the centre of, the country. After
residing there about fifty years, they founded a
town, since distinguished by the name of MEXICO,
which from humble beginnings soon grew to be
the most considerable city in the New World. The
Mexicans, long after they were established in their
new possessions, continued, like other martial tribes
in America, unacquainted with regal dominion,
and were governed in peace and conduced in wai
by such as were entitled to pre-eminence by their
wisdom or their valour. But among them, as in
other flates whose power and territories become ex-
tensive, the supreme authority centered at last in a
single person ; and when the Spaniards under Cor-
tes invaded the country, Montezuma was the ninth
monarch in order who had swayed the Mexican
sceptre, not by hereditary right, but by election.
Vcry recent. SUCH is the traditional talc of the Mexicans

concerning the progress of their own empire. Ac-
cording to this, its duration was very flhort. From
the first migration of their parent tribe, they can
reckon little more than three hundred years. From
the eftabliflment of monarchical government, not
above a hundred and thirty-years, according to one
account *, or a hundred and ninety-feveln, accord-
ing to another computation l, had elaplcd. If,
on one hand, we fupl)of the Mexican slate to

' Acof. Hist.

b. vi. c.S.&c. P lLPilll'. 3have

'Acoft. Hill. 1ib. v~i c. S. &c. t PAr h;s Pilbl.
27t

have been of higher antiquity, and to have subsist- B K
ed during such a length of time as the Spanish ac- v
counts of its civilization would naturally lead us
to conclude, it is difficult to conceive how, among
a people who possessed the art of recording events
by pictures, and who confidered it as an essential
part of their national education, to teach their chil-
dren to repeat the historical songs which celebrated
the exploits of their ancestors *, the knowledge of
past tranfaftions should be so slender and limited.
If, on the other hand, we adopt their own system
with refped to the antiquities of their nation, it is
no less difficult to account either for that improved
slate of society, or for the extensive dominion to
which their empire had attained, when first visited
by the Spaniards. The infancy of nations is so
long, and, even when every circumstance is fa-
vourable to their progress, they advance so slowly
towards any maturity of strength or policy, that the
recent origin of the Mexicans seems to be a strong
presumption of exaggeration, in the splendid def-
criptions which have been given of their govern-
ment and manners.

BUT it is not by theory or conjectures that his- Fóts ,hich
tory decides, with regard to the slate or character of prove their

progrefq in

nations. It produces sacs as the foundation of civli;.ation.
every judgment which it ventures to pronounce. In
colleting those which niuft regulate our opinion
in the prefcnt inquiry, ronme occur that fuggcfl an
idea of considerable progress in civilization in the
Mlexican empire, and othcrs vwliicll fcemn to indi-
cate that it had advanced but little beyond the fa-
vage tribes around it. Both fllall be exhibited to
the view of the reader, that, from comlparing them,
he may determine on which fide the evidence pre-
pondcrates.

VOL. II. N , TllI

- HIcrrera, dec. 3. ib. ii, c. iS,

B 0 0 K THE right of private property was perfealy un.

VII^. derftood, and established in its full extent. A.

The right of mong several savage tribes, we have seen, that the
'yt 1rblif- idea of a title to the separate and exclusive posses.
ed. lion of any object was hardly known ; and that

among all, it was extremelylimited and ill-defined.
But in Mexico, where agriculture and industry had
made fomie progress, the diftindion between real and
moveable poflefiions, between property in land and
property in goods, had taken place. Both might
be transferred from one person to another by sale or
barter; both might descend by inheritance. Eve-
ry person who could be denominated a free man
had property in land. This, however, they held by
various tenures. Some pofleffed. it in full right,
and it descended to their heirs. The title of others
to their lands was derived from the office ordignity
which they enjoyd ; and when deprived of the lat-
tcr, they loft pofflffion of the former. Both thfee
modes of occupying land were deemed noble, and
peculiar to citizens of the highest class. The te-
nure, by which the great body of the people held
their property, was very different. In every dif-
trid a certain quantity of land was measured out,
in proportion to the number of families. This was
cultivated by the joint labour of the whole; its
produce was dcpofited in a common ltorehoufe, and
divided among them according to their rcflpctive
exigencies. I'he members of the CALPULLEE, or
afocia.tions, could not alienate their share of the
common citate; it was an indivisible permanent
property, defined for the support of their families t.
n11 conllclucnce of this distribution of the territory
of the lI;tc, every man had an intcrcft in its cl-
fLrc, and the happincls of the individual was con-
nLtled with the public security.

t- Iletrral, l (c. 3. lib. iv. c. 15. Torqtecm. M lo. Idlild. , iv. c'7
Co,ita, M.S.

THE number and greatness of the cities in thie B 0 O ;c

Mexican empire is one of the most firiking cir-
cumitances, that diflinguifh it from those nations in Tle number
America which we have already dcfcribed. While e'"i:og'their
society continues in a rude ifate, the wants of men cities.
are so few, and they stand so little in need of mutual
afiiftance, that tieir inducements to crowd to-
gether are extremely feeble. Their induflry at the
fame time is so imperfec, that it cannot secure sub-
fiftence for any considerable number of families
fettled in one spot. They live dispersed, at this
period, from choice as well as from necessity, or at
the utmost assemble in fiall hamlets on the banks
of the river which supplies them with food, or on
the border of some plain left open by nature, or
cleared by their own labour. The Spaniards, ac-
customed to this mode of habitation among all the
savage tribes with which they were then acquainted,
were astonished, on entering New Spain, to find
the natives residing in towns of such extent as re-
fembled those of Europe. In the firfR fervour of their
admiration, they compared Zempoalla, though a
town only of the fccond or third size, to the cities
of greatest note in their own country. When, as-
terwards, they visitcd in fuccefion T'lafcala, Cho-
lula, Tacuba, Texcuco, and Mexico itself, their
am:zement increased so much, 'lhat it led them to
convey ideas of their magnitude and populoufltifs
bordering on what is incredible. Even where there
is lcifurc for obfcrvation, and no inturefl: that leads
to Ieceive, conjcScural cflimates of the number of
people in cities are extremely loofc, and usually
much exaggerated. It is not lur-prifing, then, that
Cortes and his companions, little accuflomcd to fich
computations, and powerfully tempted to magnify,
in order to exalt the merit of their own (lilcovcrics
and conqucits, fioul l have been betrayed into this
Common error, and have raised their dcfcriptions

N ni 2. conlidcrably

B O 0 K considerably above truth. For this reason, some

Vii. considerable abatement ought to be made from their

calculation of the number of inhabitants in the
M\exican cities, and we may fix the standard
of their population much lower than they have
done; but still they will appear to be cities of such
consequence, as are not to be found but among peo-
ple who have made some considerable progress in the
arts of social life +.

The fepara- THE separation of profeflions among the Mexi-
tion of pro-
fcflions. cans is a symptom of improvement no less remarka-

ble. Arts, in the early ages of society, are so few
and so simple, that each man is sufficiently mafterof
them all, to gratify every demand of his own limi-
ted desires. The savage can form his bow, point
his arrows, rear his hut, and hollow his canoe,
without calling in the aid of any hand more skilful
than his own. Time must have augmented the
wants of men, and ripened their ingenuity, before
the productions of art become so complicated in
their ftru&ure, or so curious in their fabric, thata
particular course of education is requisite towards
formingi g the artificer to expertness in contrivance
and wuorkmanfllip. In proportion as refinement
fprc;ads, the diftinLtion of profcflions increases, and
they branch out into more numerous and minute
subdivisions. Among the Mexicans, this feparati-
on of the arts ncccffary in life had taken place to
a considerable extent. The functions of the mason,
the weaver, the goldfimith, the painter, and of fe-
veral other crafts, were carried on by different per-
ions. Each was regularly infirulted in his calling.
I'o it alone his indlfl-y was confined ; aldl by as-
tiduoiis application to one object, together with,
the persevering patience peculiar to Americans,
their artizans attained to a degree of neatness irnd

pcrfecSion:

I Sc NOTE XLIX,
276

perfecion in work far beyond what could have been B O K
expected from the rude tools which they employed. . o
Their various productions were brought into com-
merce; and by the exchange of them in the Rfated
markets held in the cities, their mutual wants were
: supplied *, in such orderly intercourse as charac-
I terizes an improved state of society.

°"·  , ,.n i * i- TIT * ~~~The diltinc-

THE difiinsion of ranks established in the Mexi- i onof
can empire is the next circumstance that merits at- ranks.
. tention. In surveying the savage tribes of Ameri-

ca, we observed, that consciousness of equality, and
impatience of Subordination, are sentiments natural
to man in the infancy of civil life. During peace,
}the authority of a superior is hardly felt among
| them, and even in war it is but little acknowledge
L, ed. Strangers to the idea of property, the difsr-
S ence in condition resulting from it is unknown.
I Birth or titles confer no pre-eminence ; it is' only
t by personal merit and accomplishments that it can
i be acquired. The form of society was very dgffer-

ent among the Mexicans. The great body of the
i people were in a mnft humiliating slate. A confi-
: dcrable number, known by the name of MAYEQUES,

nearly refcmbled in condition those peasants who,
i' inder various denominations, wereconfidered, dur-
; ing the prevalence of the feudal system, as inftru-
, ments of labour attached to the foil. The MAYE-
i QUES could not change their place of residence

without permission of the superior on whom they
dcpended. They were conveyed, together with the
lands on.which they were fettled, from one proprie-
tor to another ; and were bound to cultivate the
grlondl, and to performi several kinds of servile
Work i-. Others were reduced to the loweit form

of

l' CtocRclt. ap R.muf, iii. .39, &c. Com. Cron.c. 79. Tor-
pIWm lil .xiii . r

34. H vcrlrra, tloc.
d . lib. vii. cI . 5 &c, Hcrcraw

3.ib, l iv. c , 17 Corit., MS.

278
B o O K of fubjetion, that of doneftic servitude, and felt

_ the utmost rigour of that wretched state. 'Their

condition was held to be so vile, and their lives
deemed to be of so little value, that a person who
killed one of those saves was not fubjecded to any
punifilmncnlt *. Even those confidered as freemen
were treated by their haughty lords as beings of an
inferior fpeciLs. The nobles, possessed of ample
territories, were divided :,:co vr-iouS clailes, to each
of which peculiar titles o0 honour belonged. Some
of these titles, like their lands, desccnded from fa-
ther to son in perpetual succession. Others were
annexed to particular offices, or conferred during
life as marks of personal diftinc'ion §. The mo-
rarch, exalted above all, enjoyed extclfive power,
and supreme dignity. Thus the diftindion of ranks
was completely eftabliihed, in a line of regular sub-
ordination, reaching from the highest to the lowell
member of the community. Each of these knew
what he could claim, and what he owed. The
people, who were not allowed to wear a dress of
the fame fashion, or to dwell in houses of a form
similar to those of the nobles, accosted them with
the molt submissive reverence. In the prcfencc o
their sovereign, they durst not lift their eyes from
the ground, or look him in the face ::. The nobles
themselves, when admitted to an audience of theil
sovereign, entered bare-footed, in mean garncnts,
and, as his fl.ves, paid him homage approaching to
adoration. This refe due from inferiors to th
above them in rank, was eftabliflled with such ccrc-
monious accuracy, that it incorporated with their
language, and influenced its genius and idiom. 1'h.
Mexican tongue abounded in cxprcflions of revle
cnce and courtesy. The flile and appcllationls, ed

* HI-lrrr'r, dclr. . lih. iv. c. 7. § I1Tc*lr n, cc, 3. lib iv

' 5
Corita, M s. lcircr.l , dlec. 3. lib. li. c. 1 ..

in the intercourse between equals, would have been B 0 0 K
so unbecoming in the mouth of one in a lower V
sphere, when he accosted a person in higher rank,
as to be deemed an insult t. It is only in societies,
which time and the institution of regular government
have moulded into form, that we find such an or-
derly arrangement of men into different ranks, and
such nice attention paid to their various rights.

THE spirit of the Mexicans, thus familiarized Theirpoli-
and bended to subordination, was prepared for sub- ti.t .nti-
mitting to monarchical government. But the def- tution,
c:iptions of their policy and laws, by the Spaniards
who overturned them, are so inaccurate and contra-
dictory, that it is difficult to delineate the form of
their conflitution with any precision. Sometimes
they represent the monarchs of RMexico as abfolule,
deciding according to their pleasure, with relpet to
every operation of the state. On orher.occafions,
we discover the traces of cftablifled customs and
laws, framed in order to circumfiribe the power of
the crown, and we meet witli rights and privileges
of the nobles which seem to be opposed as barriers
against its crcroachments. This appearance of in-
confii'ecncy has arifeil from inattention to the inno-
vations of RIont'zuma utpon the Mexican policy.
His afpr;ing anl:biion rubvcrtcd the ancient fyit-ce
of govtrnll:nint, and introduced a puire defpotilfm.
IIl dirfi-c;iard(i tli'ir laws, violated thl. ir privileges,
a.d rcluccdl his fubjclcs of every ordci to the level
"of s.tvcs §. 'I'h t;icls, or nobles of the firll rank,
lub;nitctd to tlie v ,kec witi such retelIancLc, t!iit
r1)mI1 ilnl)atielce to fliake it ofi' aind hope of rco--
v'criiy tIheir oriSii. ll righis, many of Lhcnm ourt:d

the

I S(. NT 1F C. § dcn., .

l .

Jir,' ii. c. 'i.. 'Iqo,qucnm. lib,
.li. ~. b9.

Bn o K the proteaion of Cortes, and joined a foreign power

VI_, againif their domestic oppressor t. It is not then

under the reign of Montezumna, but under those of
his predecessors, that we can discover what was the
original form and genius of Mexican policy. From
the foundation of the monarchy to the elecion of
Montezuma, it seems to have subsisted with little
variation. That body of citizens, which may be
distinguished by the name of nobility, formed the
chief and most refpe&able order in the state. They
were of various ranks, as has already been observed,
and their honours were acquired and transmitted
in different manners. Their number seems tohave
been great. According to an author accustomed
to examine with attention what he relates, there
were in the Mexican empire thirty of this or-
der, each of whom had in his territories about
a hundred thousand people, and subordinate to these,
there were about three thousand nobles of a lower
class t. The territories belonging to the chiefs of
Tezeuco and Tacuba, were hardly inferior in ex-
tent to those of the Mexican monarch §. Each of
there poffefled complete territorial jurifdicion, and
levied taxes from their own vassals. But all follow-
ed the standard of Mexico in war, serving with a
number of men in proportion to their domain, and
moif of them paid tribute to its monarch as their
fupcrior lord.

IN tracing those great lines of the Mexican con-

Rtitution, an image of feudal policy in its most ri-
gid form rites to view, and we difcerl its three
diftinguifling chara(tcrilfics, a nobility pol01c
sing almost independent authority, a pcople tle-

prellcl

- Herrera, dec. z. lib. v.c. c , , r. Torqtuen.lib. iv c. 49.
HI4rrera, dcc. z,. I., viii. c. 2 . § Iuorq: ll". lil. ini. 5'
Corit4, MS.

i pressed into the lowest slate of fubjetion, and a B o o K
| king entrusted with the executive power of the .

fate. Its spirit and principles seem to have opera-
ted in the New World in the fame manner as in
I the ancient. The jurisdiction of the crown was
, extremely limited. All real and effective authority
| was retained by the Mexican nobles in their own
| hands, and the shadow ofit only left to the king.
| Jealous to excess of their own rights, they guarded

with molt vigilant anxiety against the encroachments
of their sovereigns. By a fundamental law of the
empire, it was provided that .the king should not
determine concerning any point of general import-
ance, without the approbation of a council compos-
ed of the prime nobility *. Unless he obtained
their content he could not engage the nation in war,
nor could he dispose of the most inconsiderable
branch of the public revenue at pleasure; it was
appropriated to certain purposes from which it
could not he diverted by the regal authority t. In
order to secure full effect to those constitutional re-
liraints, the Mexican nobles did not permit their
crown to descend by inheritance, but disposed of it
by election. The right of election seems to have
been originally vested in the whole body of nobility,
but was afterwards committed to fix electors, of
whom the chiefs of Tezeuco and Tacuba were al-
ways two. From refpet for the family of their
monarchs, the choice fell generally upon tome per-
[ (n sprung from it. But as the activity and valour
oftheir prince was of greater moment to a people
er)pctually engaged in war, than a ftrit adherence
to tthe order of birth, collaterals of nature age or
difingttifhced merit were often preferred to those who

Vti.. II. 0 o were
Ilerrcrl, ilcc. t. lib. ii. c. 1. II. dec. 3. llb, iv. c. 16. Corita,

't Ibid. c, 17.

B 0 0 Kw were nearer the throne in diret descent *. To

.-l-r . this maxim, in their policy, the Mexicans appear

to be indebted for such a fucceflion of able andwar.
like princes, as raised their empire in a short period
to that extraordinary height of power, which it
had attained when Cortes landed in New Spain.

Power and
fpnlur'a WHILE the jurifdilion of the Mexican mon-
Of t'cir archs continued to be limited, it is probable that it

Ii.cis. was exercised with little ostentation. But as their

authority became more extensive, the fplendourof
their government augmented. It was in this last
state that the Spaniards beheld it, and {truck with
the appearance of Montezuma's court, theydef-
cribe its pomp at great lentth, and with much ad-
miration. 'The numnber of his attendants, theor-
de'r, the silence, and the reverence with which they
firved him ; the varf extent of his royal mansion,
the variety of its apartments allotted to different of-
ficers, and the ofcentation with which his grandeur
waq displayed, whenever he permitted his fubjels
tc behold him, fcem to resemble the magnificence
of the ancient monarchies in Asia, rather than the
finpiicity of the infant flates in the New World.
oi.er BUT it was not in the mere parade of royalty

ti:- that the Mexican potentates exhibited their power,
vi n r they manieftl:ed it more beneficially in the order and

re'rularity with which they conducted the internil
adiniiltration and police of their dominions. Com-
plete juri(liction, civil as well as criminal, over its
own inlnediate vaflals, was vetcd in the crown.
Jtudges were appointed for each department, ald
if we may rely on the account which the Spanifl
writers give of the maxims and laws upon which tile

founlcdi

Acll:,, li . vi . 24. F4 -lrrcra, dec. . 3 Ilib ii. c. 13
Colit., MiS.

founded their decisions with respect to the ditri- B 0 0 K
bution of property and the punilhment of crimes,
jutice was administered in the Mexican emipire,
with a degree of order and equity, resembling what
takes place in societies highly civilized.

THEIR attention in providing for the support of ov"ifn
government was not less sagacious. Taxes were port of it.
I laid upon land, upon the acquisitions of induffry,
and upon commodities of every kind exposed to sale
in the public markets. These duties, though con-
fiderable, were not arbitrary, or unequal. They
were imposed according to established rules, and
each knew what share of the common burden he
hadto bear. As the use of money was unknown,
all the taxes were paid in kind, and thus not only
the natural productions of all the different provin-
ces in the empire, but every species of manufacture,
and every work of ingenuity and art were collet-
ed in the public storehouses. From those the em-
peror supplied his numerous train of attendants in
peace, and his armies during war, with food,
with cloaths, and ornaments, People of inferior
condition, neither poffefling land nor engaged in
commerce, were bound to the performance of vari-
ous services. By their stated labour the crown-lands
were cultivated, public works were carried on, and
the various houses belonging to the emperor were
built, and kept in repair *.

'he'ir po-

TIHE improved Riate of government among the licei
Mexicans is conspicuous not only in points efien-
tial to the being of a well-ordered society, but in
fevcral regulations of inferior consequence with

0 o 2 refpet

i rl.. r;i, idc. z. lib. vii. c. 13. dcc. 3. lib. iv. c. I , 17,
Sec NOTE LI.

O 0 0 K refpeE to police. The inflitution, which I have

VII. already mentioned, of public couriers, flationed at

proper intervals, to convey intelligence fromone
part of the empire to the other, was a refinement in
police not introduced into any kingdom of Europe
at that period. The itrudure of the capital city in
a lake, with artificial dykes, and causeways of great
length, which served as avenues to it from different
quarters, erected in the water with no less ingenuity
than labour, seems to be an idea that could not
have occurred to any but a civilized people. The
fame observation may be applied to the firudure of
the aqueduas, or conduits, by which they convey-
ed a stream of fresh water, from a considerable dif-
tance, into the city, along one of the causeways .
The appointment of a considerable number of per-
sons to clean the streets, to light them by fires kind-
led in different places, and to patrole as watchmen
during the night f, discovers a degree of attention
which even polished nations are late in acquir-
ing.
Their arts. THE progrcfs of the Mexicans in various arts is

confidered as the most decisive proof of their fupe-
rior refinement. Cortes, and the early Spanish au-
thors, describe this with rapture, and maintain,
that the most celebrated European artists could not
surpass or even equal them in ingenuity and neat-
nels of workmianfllip They represented men, ani-
ilals, and other objeAs, by such a disposition ofva-
rious coloured feathers, as is said to have produced
all the effedts of light and (hade, and to have imita-
ted nature with truth and delicacy. Their orna-
inents of gold and filvcr have been delkribcdto
be of a fabric no letk curious. But in formillg
;any idea, from general dcfcriptions, Co IceI;i

the

S Se. NOTE LII. . lcrrera. dec. %. lib. viii. c. 4. or
lihio, MS.

285

the state of arts among nations imperfeEly polish- B 0 K
ed, we are extremely ready to err. In examining t__.
the works of people whose advances in improve-
ment are nearly the fame with our own, we view
them with a critical, and often with a jealous eye.
Whereas, when conscious of our own superiority,
we survey the arts of nations comparatively rude,
we are aflonifhed at works executed by them under
such manifest disadvantages, and in the warmth of
our admiration, are apt to represent them as pro-
ductions more finished than they really are. To
the influence of this illusion, without supposing any
intention to deceive, we may impute the exaggera-
tion of some Spanish authors, in their accounts of
the Mexican arts.

IT is not from those descriptions, but from con-

fidering fulch specimens of their arts as are ifill pre-
served, that we must decide concerning their de-
gree of merit. As the hip in which Cortes sent
to Charles V. the most curious productions of the
Mexican artisans, which were collected by the
Spaniards when they first pillaged the empire, was
taken by a French corsair *, the remains of their
ingenuity are lets numerous than those of the Pe-
ruvians. Whether any of their works with feathers,
in imitation of painting, be frill extant in Spain, I
have not learned ; but many of their ornaments in
gold and silver, as well asvarious utensils employed in
common life, are deposited in the magnificent cabinet
of natural and artificial productions, lately opened
by the king of Spain ; and I am informed by per-
lons on whose judgment and taftc I can rely, that
these boasted efforts of their art are uncouth repre-
lnlt'ations of common objects, or very coaris images
of the human and folic animal forms, deflitute of

grace
* Relac. de Cort. Ramus. iii. z94. F.

o 0 o K grace and propriety 1. The justness of these ob-

VI servations is confirmed by infpccIing the wooden

prints or copper-plates of their paintings, which
have been publifled by various authors. In them
every figure of men, of quadrupeds, or birds, as
well as every representation of inanimated nature,
is extremely rude and aukward. The hardef Egyp,
tian stile, stiff and imperfect as it was, is more ele-
gant. The scrawls of children delineate objects al-
most as accurately.

BUT however low the Mexican paintings may be

ranked, when viewed merely as works of art, a very
different station belongs to them, when confidered as
the records of their country, as historical monuments
of its policy and tranfaaCions; and they become
curious as well as interesting objects of attention.
The noblest and most beneficial invention of which
human ingenuity can boast, is that of writing.
But the first efays of this art, which hath contri-
buted more than all others to the improvement of
the species, were very rude, and it advanced towards
perfection slowly, and by a gradual progression.
When the warrior, eager for fame, wifled to tranf-
mit some knowledge of his exploits to succeeding
ages; when the gratitude of a people to their fovc-
reign prompted them to hand down an account of
his beneficent deeds to posterity; the first method of
accomplishing this, that seems to have occurred to
them, was to delineate, in the best manner they
could, figures representing the adion of which they
were solicitous to prefcrve the memory. Of this,
which has very properly been called PlCTURE-WRI-
TING §, we find traces among tome of the moin fa-
vngc tribes in America. When a leader returns
fronm the field, he ti ps a tree of its bark ,and witllicd

paint
M1 . NOTE 1.111.

§ 1)ivine Leat.. of N1Jes. 15i. 73

paint scratches upon it some uncouth figures, which O O o K
represent the order of his march, the number of his

-

followers, the enemy whom he attacked, the scalps
and captives which he brought home. To those
simple annals he trusts for renown, and soothes him-
self with hope, that by their means he shall receive
praise from the warriors of future times -.

COMPARED with those aukward essays of their

savage countrymen, the paintings of the Mexicans
may be confidered as works of composition and de-
sign. They were not acquainted, it is true, with
any other method of recording transactions, than
that of delineating the objects which they wished to
represent. But they could exhibit a more complex
series of events in progressive order, and describe,
by a proper disposition of figures, the occurrences
of a king's reign fiom his accession to his death ;
the progress of an infant's education from its birth
until it attained to the years of maturity ; the diffe-
rcnt recompences and marks of diftinsdion confer-
red upon warriors, in proportion to the exploits
which they had performed. Some singular fpeci-
mens of this picturc-writing have been preserved,
which are justly confidercd as the moftcurious mo-
numents of art brought from the New World.
The iooft valuable of these was publifeld by l'ur-
chas in fixty-fix plates. It is divided into three
pa ts. T'he firlt contains the hiltory ofthe Mexi-
can clnpire uinder its ten monarchs. The second
is a trilbute roll, reprefcnting what each conquered
tov.ii paid into the royal trcafury. The third is
iL code of their ilntillutions, doineftic, political, ;Ind
lmilitary. Another fpecimeni of /IMexic;in painitingll
hlia been published in thirty two-plates, by the pre-

I '1 tV. Joh si n', Iliil l'. Tranftl. Vol. I ii i. p. ,.,;. M -li i-
' ^Iltl*J . - A;. i[. L la , M 'ur: JduS ;uv ii. 4;.

287

B O K. sent archbishop of Toledo. To both are annex-

V. _ ed a full explanation of what the figures were intend,

ed to represent, which was obtained by the Spa-
niards from Indians well acquainted with their
own arts. The flyle of painting in all these is the
fame. They represent THINGS, not WORDS. They
exhibit images to the eye, not ideas to the under-
fianding. They may, therefore, be confidered as
the earliest and nmot imperfet efiay of men in their
progress towards discovering the art of writing.
The defects in this mode of recording tranfacions
muff have been early felt. To paint every occur-
rence was, from its nature, a very tedious operati-
on; and as affairs became more complicated, and
events multiplied in any society, its annals mufr
have swelled to an enormous bulk. Besides this,
no objects could be delineated but those of sense;
the conceptions of the mind had no corporeal form,
and as long as picture-writing could not convey an
idea of these, it must have been a very imperfect art.
The necessity of improving it muff have rouzed and
sharpened invention, and the human mind hold-
ing the fame course in the New World as in the
Old, might have advanced by the fame successive
steps, first, from an actual picture to the plain hie-
roglyphic; next, to the allegorical symbol, then to
the arbitrary character; until, at length, an alpha-
bet of letters was discovered, capable of exprcffing
all the variety of combinations of found employed
in speech. In the paintings of the Mexicans we,
accordingly, perceive, that this progress was begun
among them. Upon an attentive ilnfpeciion of the
plates, which I have mentioned, we may observe
lome approach to the plain or simple hieroglyphic,
where fomc principal part or circumflance in the
subject is made to stand for the whole. In the ln-
nals of their kings, publilhctd by Purchal, the
towns conquered by each are uniformly rcprc-

sented
288

f ented in the fame manner by a rude delineation of B O O K
a house; but in order to point out the particular « .
towns which submitted to their victorious arms,
peculiar emblems, fonmetimes natural objects, and
fomwtimes artificial figures, are employed. In the
tribute-roll, published by the archbishop of Tole-
do, the house, which was properly the picure of the
town, is omitted, and the emblem alone is employed
to represent it. They seem even to have made
. ome advances beyond this, towards the use of the
more figurative and fanciful hieroglyphic. In or-
der to describe a monarch, who had enlarged his
dominions by force of arms, they painted a target
ornamented with darts, arid placed it between him
and those towns which he subdued. But it is only
in one instance, the notation of numbers, that we
discern any attempt to exhibit ideas which had no
corporeal form. They had invented artificial
marks, or SIGNs OF CONVENTION, for this purpose.
By means of there, they computed the years of
their kings reigns, as well as the amount of tribute
to be paid into the royal treasury. The figure of
a circle represented unit, and in small numbers,
the computation was made by repeating it. Larger
numbers were exprefled by a peculiar mark, and
they had such as denoted all integral numbers froln
twenty to eight thousand. The ihort duraltioln of
their empire prevented the Mexicans from advancinll
farther in that long course which cond ltts men
froin the labour of delineating real objets, to the
inmplicity and care of alphabetic writing. Their
records, notwith(landing tome dawn of tfuch ideas
as might have led to a more pcrfci flyle, can be
coifilcrced as nothin: more- than a: fpccics of pic-
turc-writing , fb lar imiproved as to mark their fu-
lriority over the fIvae tribes of America, but still
'o (leldiivc as to prove tlhat they had not procced-.

vol. .. 1' P e

289

B 0 0 K ed far beyond the firif stage in that progress which

I muf be cornpleted, before any people can be ranked
among polifled nations *.

Their mode THEIR mode of computing time may be confi.
ring time. dered as a more decisive evidence of their progress in

improvement. They divided their year into eigh-
teen months, each consisting of twenty days,
amounting in all to three hundred and sixty. But
as they observed that the course of the fun was not
completed in that time, they added five days to the
wlear. These, which were properly intercalary days,
they termed SUPERNUMERARY or WASTE ; and as
they did not belong to any month, no work was
done, and no sacred rite performed on them ; they
were devoted wholly to fefiivity and pastime t.
'Ihis near approach to philosophical accuracy is a
riunarkable proof that the Mexicans had bestowed
some attention upon inquiries and speculations, to
which men in a very rude Rtate never turn their
thoug.hts.

Faa iri;i- SUCH are the most striking particulars in the
ca'-!.g . manners and policy of the Mexicans, which exhi-
' pro-,'' bit them to view as a people considerably refined.

grcs. 1i1 ci-
V;i..aLiut. From other circumaniances, one is apt to fufpea that

their charalcter, and many of their inifitutions, did
not differr greatly from those of the other inhabitants
of America.
Thr';r w.,ls I.IKE the rude tribes around them, the Mexicans

". '

inrili swere inceflatl'lv cingagtd in war, and the motives
BU . cwhilch prompted them to hostility tcem to have

been the falme. 'hey foiught, in order to gratify
ticir VLuiictranc:, by lheddini the blood of their ellc-

mics.

NtL Acona, lib. vi. c. z.

v t T~ r_ x
0 Sc.. NOTL` LIV.

^ s x . .

mies. In battle they were chiefly intent on taking B o O K
prisoners, and it was by the number of there that
they eftinated the glory of victory. No captive
was ever ransomed or spared. All were sacrificed
without mercy, and their flesh devoured with the
fame barbarous joy as among the fiercest savages.
On some occasions it rose to even wilder excesses
Their principal warriors covered themselves with
the skins of the unhappy vidims which they had
slain, and danced about the streets, boasting of their
own valour, and exulting over their -enemies ±.
Even in their civil institutions we discover traces
of that barbarous difpolition which their system of
war inspired. The four chief counsellors of the
empire were diflinguifhed by atrocious titles, which
could have been assumed only by a people who dc-
lighted in blood t. This ferocity of charalcer
prevailed among all the nations of New Spain.
The Tlafcalans, the people of Mechoacan and o-
ther itates at enmity with the Mexicans, delighted
equally in war, and treated their prisoners with the
fame cruelty. In proportion as mankind combine
in social union, and live under the influence of
equal laws and regular policy, their manners soften,
sentiments of humanity arise, and the rights of the
fpccies come to be underflood ; thefiercencfs of war
abates, and even while engaged in hostility, men re-
member what they owe one to another. The fai-
vage fights to destroy, the citizen to conquer.
The former neither pities nor spares, the latter has
acquired sensibility that tempers his rage. To this
fenilbility the Mex;cans teem to have been perfec&
frrangers, and among thcm war was carried on with
so much of its original barbarity, that we cannot
b)ut t'ui)ct their degree of civilization to have been
Ve1ry imperlect.

P p 2 TMHEI

' llr rea, dec. 3 lib. ii. c. S1. Com. Cron. c. z17, t See
IqOT1 Lv.

291

B 0 0 K THEIR funeral rites were not less bloody than

VI. thofeof the most savage tribes. On thedeath ofany

Their fune- distinguished personage, especially of the Emperor,
ral rites. a certain number of his attendants were chosen to

accompany him to the other world, and thofeunfor-
tunate victims were put to death without mercy,
and buried in the fame tomb t.

Their agri- THOUGH their agriculture was more extensive
culture im-
perfea. than that of the roving tribes who trusted chiefly

to their bow for food, it seems not to have supplied
them with such fubiiftence as men require when en-
gaged in efforts of a&ive industry. The Spaniards
! appear not to have been struck with any superiority
of the Mexicans over the other people of America
in bodily vigour. Both, according to their obfer-
vation, were of such a feeble frame as to be unable
to endure fatigue, and the strength of one Spaniard
exceeded that of fevcral Indians. This they im-
puted to their scanty diet, on poor fare, sufficient
to preserve life, but not to give firmness td the con-
ftitution ¢. Such a remark could hardly have been
made with refpea to any people furnished plentiful-
vl with the neceflaries of life. The difficulty
which Cortes fouind in procuring fubfitfence for his
finall body of soldiers, who were often constrained
to live on the fpontancous produ(ctions of the earth,
tlcmis to confirm the remark of the Spanifi writers,
and gives no high idea of the state of cultivation ill
the Mexican empire.

A PRACTICE that was universal in New Spain

prof ,f appears to favoulr this opinion. The Mexican wo-
thiss. 1men 1gave fuck to their children for several years,

all dt

+ Herrern, tdec, q. l. ii. c. il. Corm Clhrn. c. 02. 1 Rl
.p)R. Rlln l. iii. 306. A. Ilrrciac dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 17. dcc. l, vi.
c. 1J.
:z92

and during that time they did not cohabit with B O 0 K
their husbands *. This precaution against a bur- Vii.
denfome increase of progeny, though necessary, as I
have already observed, among savages, who, from
the hardships of their condition, and the precarious-
ness of their subsistence, find it impossible to rear a
numerous family, can hardly be supposed to have
continued among a people who lived at ease and in
abundance.

THE vast extent of the Mexican empire, which Doubts conn
has been confidered, and with justice, as the most cerning the

extent of

decisive proof of a considerable progress in regular the empire.
government and police, is one of those fats in the
history of the New World which seems to have
been admitted without due examination or sufficient
evidence. The Spanish historians, in order to mag-
nify the valour of their countrymen, are accuffom-
ed to represent the dominion of Montezuma as
stretching over all the provinces of New Spain
from the North to the Southern Ocean. But
a great part of the mountainous country was
polfefled by the OTOMIES, a fierce uncivilized peo-
ple, who seem to have been the residue of the origi-
nal inhabitants. The provinces towards the north
and weft of Mexico were occupied by the CHI-
CHEMECAS, and other tribes of hunters. None of
there recognized the Mexican monarch as their fu-
perior. Even in the interior and more level coun-
try, there were several cities and provinces which
had never submitted to the Mexican yoke. Tlafca-
la, though only twenty-one leagues from the capi-
tal of the empire, was an independent and hostile
republic. Cholula, though still nearer, had been
fLubjlced only a ihort time before the arrival of the

Spaniards.
* (Soin. C`on. c' 20S. lIerrcrl, dec. 3. lib. !v. c j6.

B O K Spaniards. Tepeaca, at the distance of thirty

_v1. leagues from Mexico, seems to have been a separate

Itate, governed by its own laws t. Mechoacan, the
frontier of which extended within forty leagues of
Mexico, was a powerful kingdom, remarkable for
its implacable enmity to the Mexican name t. By
these hostile powers the Mexican empire was cir-
cumfcribed on every quarter, and the high ideas
which we are apt to form of it from the'defcription
of the Spanish historians, Ihould be considerably
moderated.

Little in- IN consequence of this independence of several flates
tercouie a- in New Spain upon the Mexican cinpi re, there vra
mnn g it
several pro- notany considerable intercourse between its variocs
vinces. provinces. Even in the interior country, not far

distant from the capital, there seem to have been no
roads to facilitate the communication of one diftric
with another; and when the Spaniards first at-
tempted to penetrate into it, they had to open their
way through forests and marshes §. Cortes, in his
adventurous march from Mexico to Honduras in
3525,-met with obftrudions, and endured hard-
ships little inferior to those with which he mufr
have struggled in the motl uncivilized regions of
America. In some places, he could hardly force a
passage through impervious woods, and plains over-
flowed with water. In others, he found so little
cultivation, that his troops were frequently in dan-
ger of perishing by famine. Such fads corrcfpond
ill with the pompous description which the Spa-
nifh writers give of Mexican police and indufiry,
and convey an idea of a country nearly similar to
that poflUfed by the Indian tribes in North Anmri-
ca. Here and there a trading or a war-path, as

they

t I-erreri, decls 3. ib. xi . c. oI. D1 . n. ri.z. 1.

2o.

Hcrrcra, dec. 3. lib,. ii. c . Dlo.0,
. l U. i;, c. 16 . C 76

they are called in North America, led from one set- B 0 0 K
tlement to another *, but generally there appear-
ed nofiign of any established communication, few
marks of industry, and no monument of art,

A NO less {friking proof of this imperfecion in Farther

their commercial intercourse is their want of mo- proof Qs
ney, or some universal standard by which to effi-
* mate the value of commodities. The difcoveryof

this is among the fleps of greatest consequence in
;: the progress of nations. Until it has been made,

all their tranfaEtions must be so aukward, so operose,
and so limited, that we may boldly pronounce that
they have advanced but a little way in their career.
The invention of such a commercial standard is of
such high antiquity in our hemisphere, and rites so
far beyond the zera of authentic history, as to ap-
pear almoff coeval with the exiftenrce of society.
The precious metals seem to have been early em-
ployed for this purpose, and from their permanent
value, their divisibility, and many other qualities,
they are better adapted to serve as a common stand-
ard, than any other fubefance of which Nature has
given us the command. But in the New World,
where these metals abound moSt, this use of them
was not known. The exigencies of rude tribes, or
of monarchies imperfecCly civilized, did not call for
it. All their commercial intercourse was carried
on by barter, and their ignorance of aly common
standard by which to facilitate that exchange of
tonmmodities which contributes so much towards
the comfort of life, may be justly mentioned as an
evidence of the infant slate of their policy. But
even in the New World the inconvenience of want-
ilg IOnme general inflrumncnt of commerce began
to be felt, and some cfforts were made towards

fupplyinll

* ill:rrcr i, ..

d .
' Iib.vii. c, 8.

B 0 0 K supplying that defet. The Mexicans, amono-

aVI. whom the number and greatness of their cities gave

rife to a more extended commerce, than in any part
of America, had begun to employ a common ifand-
ard of value, which rendered smaller transaCtions
much more easy. As chocolate was the favourite
drink of persons in every rank of life, the nuts or al-
monds of cacao, of which it is composed, were of
such universal consumption, that, in their RIated
markets, these were willingly received in return for
commodities of small price. Thus they came to
be confidered as the instrument of commerce, and
the value of what one wihed todifpofe of, was efti-
mated by the number of nuts of the cacao, which
he might expect in exchange for it. This seems to
be the utmost length which the Americans had ad-
vanced towards the discovery of any expedient for
supplying the use of money. And if the want of it
is to be held, on one hand,, as a proof of their bar-
barity, this expedient for supplying that want,
should be admitted on the other, as an evidence no
less satisfying, of the superior progrcfs which the
Mexicans had made in refinement and civiliza-
tion.

Doubts con- IN such a rude flatc were many of the Mexican
rerningthe'
re gs their provinces when filft visited by their conquerors.
Eitics. Even their cities, extensive and populous as they

were, fccm rather to be the habitation of men just
emerging from barbarity, than the rcfilence of a po-
liflied people. lThe dJeflri ption of Tlafcala ncally
resembles that of an Indian village. A number of
low firaggling huts., fiattcred about irregularly, ac-
cording to the caprice of each Iproprietor, built witl
turf and ftonc, and thatched with reeds, without
any light but what they received by a door, lb
low that it could not be entered uprlight '. J1

Mecxico,

Fluriocrit, dec. x. lI's. vi, -. - .
296

Mexico, though from the peculiarity of its fituati- B O0 K
on, the disposition of the houses was more order-
ly, the fPrudture of the greater part was equally
mean. Nor does the fabric of their temples and Teples,
other public edifices seem to have been such as en-
titlcd them to the high praises bestowed upon them
by many Spanish authors. As far as one can ga-
ther from their obscure and inaccurate descriptions,
the great temple of Mexico, the most famous in
New Spain, which has been represented as a mag-
nificent building, raised to such a height, that the
ascent to it was by a flair-cafe of a hundred and
fourteen fetps, was a solid mass of earth of a square
form, faced partly with tfone. Its base on each
fide extended ninety feet, and decreasing gradually
as it advanced in height, it terminated in a quadran-
gle of about thirty feet, where were placed a shrine
of the deity, and two altars on which the victims
were facrificedt. All the other celebrated temples
of New Spain exacly resembled that of Mexico..
Such structures convey no high idea of progress in
art and ingenuity; and one can hardly conceive
that a fo.rm more rude and simple could have oc-
curred to a nation, in its first efforts towards erec-
ting any great work.

GREATER skill and ingenuity were displaycd, and other
if we may believe the Spanifhi hiflorians, in the public

buildings.

houses of the emperor and in those of the prin-
cipal nobility. There, bome elegance of dcfign
was visible, and a commodious arrangement of the
apartments was attended to. But if buildings
corrcfpondiiig to such descriptions had ever existcd
in the Mexican cities, it is probable that obme re-
mains of them would flill be visible. From the
manner in which Cortes conducted the siege of

VOL. II. Q q Mexico,
t Hencrera, dec, 2. lib. vii. c. 17. S See NOTE LVI.

B 0 O K Mexico, we can indeed easily account for the to-

VIIt tal deftrudion of whatever had any appearance of

splendour in that capital. But as only two centu-
ries and a half have elapsed since the conquest of
New Spain, it seems altogether incredible, that in
a period so short, every vestige of this boasted ele-
gance and grandeur should have disappeared; and
that in none of the othercities, particularly in those
which did not susser by the dettrucive hand of the
conquerors, there are not any ruins, which can be
confidered as monuments of their ancient magnifi-
cence.

EVEN in a village of the rudest Indians there are

buildings of greater extent and elevation than com-
mon dwelling-houfes. Those which are destined
for holding the council of the tribe, and in which
all assemble on occasions of public festivity, may
be called stately edifices, when compared with the
reft. As among the Mexicans the diftinctionof
ranks was established, and property was unequally
divided, the number of diftinguifiled ftrucures in
their towns would of course be greater than in
other parts of America. But these seem not to
have been either so solid or magnificent as to merit
these pompous epithets which some Spanifil authors
employ in describing them. It is probable that,
though more ornamented, and built on a larger scale,
thcy were erected with the fame flight materials
which the Indians employed in their common
buildings*, and Time, in a lpace much less than
two hundred and fifty years, may have swept away
all rcmains of thuim§.

FROM this enumteration of fads, it feclls, upon

the whole, to b;: cvident, h that the ite of f)cicty
in Mexico was confidcrably advanced beyond that

of

§ See NOTE LVIII.
298

* 5ce, NOTIE LY11.I~

of the savage tribes which we have delineated. B o o K
But it is no less manifest, that with respect to- ma-
ny particulars, the Spanish accounts of their pro-
grefs appear to he highly embellished. There is
not a more frequent or a more fertile source of de-
ception in describing the manners and arts of fa-
vage nations, or of such as are imperfecly civilized,
than chat of applying to them the names and phrafcs
appropriated to the institutions and refinements of
polished life. When the leader of a finall tribe, or
the head of a rude community, is dignified with
the title of king or emperor, the place of his refi-
dence can receive no other name but that of his pa-
lace; and whatever his attendants may be, they
must be called his court. Under such appellations
they acquire an importance and dignity which
does not belong to them. The illusion spreads,
and giving a false colour to every part of the nar-
rative, the imagination is so much carried away
with the resemblance, that it becomes difficult to
discern objects as they really are. The Spaniards,
when they first touched on the M xican coast, were
so much struck with the appearance of attainments
in policy and in the arts of life, far superior to those
of the rude tribes with which they were hitherto
acquainted, that they fancied they had at length
discovered a civilized people in the New World.
This comparison between the people of Mexicoand
their uncultivated ncighbours they seem to have
kept constantly in view, and obfcrving with admi-
ration many things which marked their pre-emi-
nencc, they employ in dcfcribing their imiperfet
policy and infant arts,'fuch terms as are applicable
to the institutions of men far beyond them in im-
provemlent. B1oth tllelc circumlliances concur in
dctradi lg from the credit due to the carly Spanlifh
dltfcriptions of Mexican manners. By drawing a
parallel betweecc them land those of prople so nmuch

Q : :' lelcK;

B O O K Icrs civilized, they raised their own ideas too high.

Vt. By their nmode of defciibing them, they conveyed

ideas to others no less exalted above the truth.
Later writers have adopted the style of the original
hiitorians, and improved upon it. The colours
with which De Solis delineates the character of
Montezuma, the splendour of his court, the laws
and policy of his empire, are the fame that he must
have employed in exhibiting to view the monarch
and institutions of an highly polithed people.

Bu'r though we may admit, that the warm ima-

gination of the Spanish writers has added some em-
belliihment to their descriptions, this will not
justify the decisive and peremptory tone, with
which fcveral authors pronounce all their ac-
counts of the Mexican power, policy, and laws, to
be tlih fiotions of men who wifled to deceive, or
who delighted in the marvellous. There are few
historical facts that can be ascertained by evidence
more unexceptionable, than may be produced in
support of the material articles, in the description
of the Mexican conflitution and manners. Eye-
witneflfs relate what they had beheld, men who
had refidled among the lMexicans both before
and after the coil(,uelt, dcfcribe infitutions and
cultoins which were familiar to them, persons of
such diflr'nct nlmfetlions that objects mull have
prdclintcd thelmfilves to their view under every
various afprect, soldiers, pricfis, and lawyers, all
concur ill thtiir tclliiony. HIad Cortes ventured
to inpot( upon1" hi f'jvcrci n, by exhibiting to him
a pic'ir'-e of inm:i:inl.ry manllners, there wanted not
tn. mli':s atand rivals who were qualificd to detect his
d(' (cit, alnd( who wo ul d halive rejoiced in exposing it.

i ;ut lacc(iii l

tol th le jutft remark of an author,

whol inli'nltilv has illufl '

rated atnd wliof elo-

ql(u'tc h' , adoioicnd the hilftory of Amleric:l:, this
sliipolitljn/ i. in i tfiif as iiprobabtle) , as tlic at-

1 MN. l \ib

t I. il.

t-lj. ,
I>lilu. & IfJl.& .iii' IZ7.

7 TT 1 l!'0--%'n .7 C' L

A A/s
)r 'D T r' A

. tempt would have been audacious. Who among the B 0 o K
r: de4ioyers of this great empire was so enlightened V, .
I: by fcieinc, or so attentive to the progress and ope-
' rations of men in social life, as to frame a fictirious

It vm of policy, Co well combined and so consist-
Cn,, as that which they delineate, in their accounts
. of the Mexican government ? Where could they

have borrowed the idea of many institutions in le-
' ifation and police, to which, at that period, there
? ws nothing parallel in the nations with which

thiey were acquainted ? There was not at the be-
i.- ginnin, of the fixtecnth century, a regular efta-
i blijhnient of pols for conveying intelligence, to the
fuv fvcrcign of any kingdom in Europe. The fame
b obfeiration will apply to what they relate, with
rti'pec to the structure of the city of Mexico, the
regulations concerning its police, and various laws
efRablifhed for the administration of justice, or fe-
curing the happiness of the community. Whoever
is accullomed to contemplate the progress of na-
I tions, will often, at very early stages of it, discover

a piLmature and unexpected dawn of those ideas,

i which give rife to institutions, that are the pride
; ind ornalncnt of its molt advanced period. Even
iln ;i htce as imperfcctly poliihcd as the Mexican
mlpirel, the happy genius of some sagacious obfcr-
cr, excited or aided by circunftances unknown to
s, S: ny ha:ve introduced institutions which are ficl-
1 liln lu ul but in focicties highly rcfined. But it
,'; iilnofll imlponilble that the illitelr.te conquerors

i tht, CNew 'World should have formed in ally one
Iit;lacc ; c oliceptioll ofl cuftloms and laws, beyond

t

I1 ;idtlr;nl of iinl)rovemenlt ill their own age and
Cntiyt( . ()ir if Cortes and his followers had been
c I:.',llo (,of thi.,, what inducement had thole by

-h!iiii tl'were fvc Ipcrl.i-dcd to continue the deccp-
tin i \\Vii u liuid Curlia, or Motolinca, or Acof-

tl,

B O 0 K ta, have arnufed their sovereign or their fellow.

VII.
_1- _ citizens with a tale purely fabulous ?

RelJg;,n of IN one particular, however, the guides whom we
the lcxi- must follow have represented the M\4exicans to he
'lls. more barbarous p2rhaps than they really were,

Their religious tenets, and the rites of their wor
ship, are d-fcrib.:d by them as wild and cruel in an
extreme d-gree. Religion, which occupies no con-
fiderablk place in the thoughts of a fav:;oe, whose
conceptions of any superior power are obscure, and
hi, ' fcred rites frw and simple, was formed, amon,
the Mexicans, into a regular fyft-cl, with its com-
plete train of pricfs, temples, vicimns, and festivals,
Thi, of itself, is a clear proof that the flateof the
Mexicans was very different from that of the ruder
American tribes. But from the extravagance of their
religious notions, or the barbarity of their rites, no
conclusion can be drawn with certainty concerning
the degree of their civilization. For nations, lon;
after their ideas begin to enlarge, and their manners
to refine, adhere to systems of cfLipflition founded
on the rude conceptions of early ages. From the
genius of the Mexican religion we may, however,
form a molt just conclusion with rcfpe& to its in-
flucce upon the charaStcr of the people. Ihe
afprct of fIuperftition in VMexico was gloomy and
atrocious. Its divinities were clothed with terror,
and eiclighted in vengeance. 'J'hcy were exhi-
bited to the people under dtc. flable forms that
created horror. The fig res of flrpento, of tygcr,
;and of other deflructiv anillmalls, decorated their
tnelpl es. F'ear was the only p1rincipal that illfpircd
their votaries. Fasts, Inortilications, and peii'i;'C'(
all rigid and many of them cxcrtciating to anL'l
trcmc degrcc, were the mcan-l. wh'lih lIcyv c11-
ployed to appe)ase their wrath, and they never:l'

proached
302

proached their altars without sprinkling them with B 0 0 K
blood drawn from their own bodies. But, of all VII.
offerings, human sacrifices were deemed the molt
acceptable. This religious belief, mingling with
the implacable spirit of vengeance, and adding new
force to it, evcry captive taken in war was brought
to the temple, was devoted as a victim to the ueIry,
and sacrificed with rites nolefs solemn than cruel.
The heart and head were the portion coiiecrac d to
the gods ; the warrior by whole prowtis tic pri-
soner had been fcized, ca'-rid ofi-cne !ody to seass
upon it with his friends. Under tne inmprclion of
ideas so dreary and terrible, and accullomcd daily
to scenes of bloodlhed rendered awful by religion,
the heart of man must harden, and be iteeled to
er-:-y ilnt;mrnt of humanity. The spirit of the
;Mexicans wa!- *.tcct,;lil) u*ns;eling and atrocious.
The genius of their religion so far counterbalanced
the influence of policy and arts, that, notwith-
fianding their progress in both, their manniers, in-
flead of softening, became more fierce. To what
cirli ;.-lanrces it was owing that superstition aflum-
c', (clh a dicadful form among the M/lexicas, we
hitc noti fuliiricnt knowledge of their hifitry to
dtcrminie. L1 i its influence is visible, and produ-
ced Ian ciTct that i:, 1ingular in the history of the
hlumln species. The nianners of the people in tlie
'New World who had mnade the grcateft progress in
the arts of policy, were tihe mot ferocious, and
the halbarrity of some of their customs excccded
t en t thol i

of the savage ilate.

7'rII. cnipi e of Pci-r boafls of an hlighe- anti(q i-l P,.l ;rt;,
ty th;lu tllat of M1xico. According to the tiaditi- "l't"

i , onan y tiqtitT,
I

( r

' r

t 1 .

R',1t. p. R:,muTf ' .

i , ,

24 .& . B. Diaz, c. ,. A-

ii,. v. ' ,', ' lr:,

'Sc. E 3. ib. ii. C. 15, &c. Gui,;-
"''t~s".c 'd .c c. S NOTI , LIX.

B 0 0 K onary accounts collecfed by the Spaniards, it had
lii. fubfiflcd four hundred years, under twelve fuccef-

five nmonarchs. But the knowledge of their ancient
story, which the Peruvians could communicate to
their conquerors, muff have been both imiperfed
uncertain. and uncertain*. Like the other American nations,

they were totally unacquainted with the art of wri-
ting, and deflitute of the only means by which the
memory of pals tranfadions can be preserved with
any degree of accuracy. Even among people to
whom the ife of letters is known, the aerawhere
the authenticity of history commences, is much
posterior to the introduStion of writing. That
noble invention continued long subservient to the
common business and wants of life, before itwas
employed in recording events, with a view of con-
veying information from one age to another. But
in no country did ever tradition alone carry down
historic knowledge, in any full continued fiream
during a period of half the length that the monar-
chy of Peru is said to have subsisted.

Drfrasin THIE QUIPOS, or knots on cords of different
ther recorrds colours, which are celebrated by authors fond of

the marvellous, as if they had been regular annals
of the empire, imperfcctly supplied the place of
writing. According to the obscure description
of them by Acofta 11, which Garcilaflo de la Vega
has adopted with little variation and no improve-
ment, the quipos feeml to have been a dcvice for
r(enlcring calculation more expeditious and accu-
rate. By the various colours diffierent objects were
denoted, and by each knot a diflincct nulmbr. Thus
an account was taken, and a kind of rcgiftcr kct,
of the in habitants in each province, or of the fevcdll
productions collected there for public use. But ;li'y
these knots, however varied or combined, no noralnr

abftradt
s^rr svr_s .* .-

* Se NOTEB LX.

11 I-Issi. lib. vi. C. 8.

abftrat idea, no operation or quality of the mind B o o K
could be represented, they contributed little to- ~
wards preserving the memory of ancient events and
institutions. The Mexican paintings and symbols,
rude as they were, conveyed to them more know-
ledge of remote tranfa'tions, than the Peruvians
could derive from their boasted quipos. Had they
been even of more extensive use, and better adapted
to supply the place of written records, they periihed
so generally, together with the other monuments
of the Peruvian ingenuity, in the general wreck oc-
cafioned by the Spanish conquest, and the civil wars
subsequent to it, that no accession of light or know-
ledge comes from them. All the zeal of Garcilaf-
so de la Vega for the honour of that race of mo-
narchs from whom he descended, all the industry
of his researches, and the superior advantages with
which he carried them on, opened no source of in-
formation unknown to the Spanish authors who
wrote before him. In his ROYAL COMMENTARIES,
he confines hinfelf to illustrate what they had re-
lated concerning the antiquities and institutions of
Peru *; and his illuitrations, like their accounts,
are derived entirely from the traditionary tales cur-
rent among his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute de-
tails which have been given of the exploits, the
battles, the conqlueRs, and private characer of the
early Peruvian monarchs. We can reftl upon no-
thing in their story, as authentic, but a few fats,
so interwoven in the fyfiten of their religion and
policy, as preserved the memory of them from be-
in loft ; and upon the description of filch customs
and institutions as continued in force at the time of
thl conquest, and fell under the inmmediate obfctva-

VOL. I. R r tion

4 Lib. i. c. io.

B O O K tion of the Spaniards. By attending carefullyto

Vll. there, and endeavouring to separate them from what

appears to be fabulous, or of doubtful authority, I
have laboured to form an idea of the Peruvian go-
vernment and manners.

Or;;in of THE people of Peru, as I have already observed*,
tl.. .C;Vil had not advanced beyond the rudest form of savage
Se"i''" life, when Manco Capac, and his consort Mama

Ocollo, appeared to inftrud and civilize them.
Who these extraordinary personages were, whe-
ther they imported their system of legislation and
knowledge of arts from f'.me country more impro-
vtd, or, if natives of Peru, how they acquired ideas
lo far superior to those of the people whom they ad-
d 'eiliu, are circuinttances with refped to which the
Peruvxian tradition conveys no information. Man-
co Capac and his consort, taking advantage of the
propenlity in the Peruvians to superstition, and par-
ticularly of their veneration for the Sun, pretended
to be children of that glorious luminary, and to de-
li\er their iln-tructions in his name and authority.

h'Fie multitude litcened and believed. Whatre-

formaltion in policy and manners the Peruvians as-
cribe lo thof tl founders of their empire, and how,
from1 tl h)I cCCept)s of the Inca and his contort, their
anceitors; i.radtl;lly acquired fobme knowledge of
those arts, and t some relifl for that induflry, which
render Iflbliftince fltcurc, 1and lift comfortable, hath
b',e:n tfrm erlmy real:aed. Thoafe blcfings were origi-
naally confin ed within narrow )prcinlts; for the
autllority of the fillJ Inca did not reach mirliy
CeaiC ue I,) ,lly tlnd C co. But, in process of timc,
hisI fitlccel;,rIs extended their dominion over all tile
regions that. itretch to the weft of the Andes Iro"1

Chili

* Boul vi. p. 163, &c.
306

Chili to Quito, eftabliflhing in every province their B O o K1
peculiar policy and religious inflitutions.

THE most singular and fRriking circumfiancei iln lhiin

the Peruvian government, is the influence of reli-
p'c.n upon its genius and laws. Religious ideas

. R e such a feeble impression on the mind of a fa-
vace, that their eftfct upon his fentimcnts and man-
nrr are hardly perceptible. Among the Mexicans,
religion, reduced into a regular system, and holding
a considerable place in their public institutions,
operated with conspicuous efficacy in forming the
prculiar charaAer of that people. But in Peru, the
whole system of civil-policy was founded on religi-
on. The Inca appeared not only as a legislator,
but as the messenger of Heaven. His precepts were
received not merely as the injunEtions of a superior,
but as the mandates of the Deity. His race was
held to be sacred ; and in order to preserve it dif-
tinit, without being polluted by any mixture of in-
feriorblood, the sons of Manco Capac married their
own filcers, and no person was ever admitted to the
throne who could not claim it by such a pure def-
cent. To those CHILDREN OF THE SUN, (for that
was the appellation bestowed upon all the offspring
of the first Inca) the people looked up with the re-
verence due to beings of a superior order. They
were deemed to be under the immediate protection
of the D-ity fi-om whom they ifi'eud, and by him
cvery order of the reigning Inca was supposcd to bc
dil5ated.

FROM those ideas two confecqucnccs rcfulted. Tw,,
The authority of the Inca was unlimited and abfo- ln, r.-
lute, in the most cxtenfive meaning of the words. this,.
Whenever the decrees of a prince are confidered as
the commanlds of the Divinity, it is not only an

R r 2 a t

B O O K afe of rebellion, but of impiety, to dispute or op.

VII.

pose his will. Obedience becomes a duty of reli.

The ablo- gion; and as it would be profane to controula
lute power monarch under the guidance of Heaven, and pre-
of the Inca.

sumptuous to advise him, nothing remains but to
submit with implicit respect. This mufR neceffari-
ly be the cffect of every government established on
pretensions of intercourse with superior powers.
Such accordingly was the blind submission which
the Peruvians yielded to their sovereigns. The
persons of highest rank and greatest power in their
dominions acknowledged them to be of a more ex-
alted nature; and in testimony of this, when ad.
mitted into their presence, they entered with a bur-
den upon their shoulders, as an emblem of their
servitude, and willingness to bear whatever the In-
ca was pleased to impose. Among their fubjeds,
force was not requisite to second their commands.
Every officer entrusted with the execution of them
was revered, and, according to the account of an
intelligent observer of Peruvian manners t, might
proceed alone from one extremity of the empire to
another, without meeting opposition; for, on pro-
ducing a fringe from the royal BORLA, an ornament
peculiar to the reigning Inca, the lives and for-
tunes of the people were at his disposal.

All cri;ns ANOITHER consequence of establishing govern-
riThcu,- ment in Peru on the foundation of religion, was,
itall)y. that all crincs were punifllcd capitally. They

were not confidercd as transgr-essions of human laws,
but as insults oficrcd to the Deity. Each, without
any diflinction between such as were flight and such
as were atrocious, called for vengeance, and could
be expiated only by the blood of the offender. Con-
fonantly to the fame ideas, puniflmnent followed
the trespass with inevitable certainty, becaufc 1:;

offence
'I Zairate, lib. i. c. 13.

offence against Heaven was deemed such an high B °0 K
enormity as could not be pardoned *. Among a V
people of corrupted morals, maxims of jurifpru-
dence so revere and unrelenting, by rendering men
ferocious and desperate, would be more apt to mul-
tiply crimes than to refRrain them. But the Peru-
vians, of simple manners and unfufpicious faith,
were held in such awe by this rigid discipline, that
the number of offenders were extremely small.
Veneration for monarchs, enlightened and directed,
as they believed, by the divinity whom they adored,
prompted them to their duty ; the dread of punish-
ment, which they were taught to confider as una-
voidable vengeance inflicted by offended Heaven,
withheld them from evil.

THE system of superstition on which the Incas Mild genius

ingrafted their pretensions to such high authority, gion.
was of a genius very different from that established
among the Mexicans. Manco Capac turned the
veneration of his followers entirely towards natu-
ral objects. The Sun, as the great source of light,
of joy, and fertility in the creation, attracted their
principal homage. The Moon and Stars, as co-
operating with him, were entitled to secondary ho-
nours. Whcrever the propensity in the human
mind to acknowledge and to adore Come superior
power, takes this direcion, and is employed in con-
templating the order and beneficence that really
cxift in nature, the spirit of fuperflition is mild.
Wherever imaginary beings, created by the fancy
iand the fears of men, arc supposed to preside in na-
ture, and become the objects of worship, fuperititi-
on always aflunies a wilder and more atrocious
form. Of the latter we have an example among

the
* Vc,, l;b. ii. c. 6.

B o O K the Mexicans, of the former among the people of

VII- Peru. They had not, indeed, made such progress
--1" jinl obfcrvation or inquiry, as to have attained just

conceptions of the Deity ; nor was there in their
language any proper name or appellation of the
Supreme Power, which intimated that they had
formed any idea of him as the Creator and Gover-
nor of the World -. But by directing their vene-
ration to that glorious luminary, which, by its uni-
vcrfal and vivifying energy, is the belt emblem of
divine beneficence, the rites and observances which
they deemed acceptable to him were innocent and
humane. They offered to the Sun a part of those
productions which his genial warmth had called
forth from the bosom of the earth, and reared to
maturity. They sacrificed, as an oblation of gra-
titude, some of the animals who were indebted to
his influence for nourihmennt. They presented to
him choice specimens of those works of ingenuity
which his light had guided the hand of man in
forming. But the Incas never stained his altars
with human blood, nor could they conceive that
their beneficent father the Sun would be delighted
with such horrid victims 1. Thus the Peruvians,
unacquainted with those barbarous rites which ex-
tinguifh sensibility, and suppress the feelings of na-
ture at the fight of human fufterings, were formd,
by the spirit of the superstition which they had
adopted, to a national character more gentle than
that of any people in America.

Itoitinicn'e .ITS influence operated even upon their civil
licy, inflitutions, and tended to corlrdct in them any

thing that was advcrfe to gentlcnefs of char.acCer.
The dlominion of the Incas, though the molt abro-
lute of all dcfpotifins, was mitigated by its allia"ce
with reli.ion. Thel mind was not humnbled and

dcprcflcd

-I- Scec NOTd LXe'
* Acuol, lib. v. c. 3.

deprelred by the idea of a forced fubjedion to the B 0 o K
will of a superior ; obedience, paid to one who was i__
believed to be clothed with divine authority, was
willingly yielded, and implied no degradation. The
sovereign, conscious that the fubmiflive reverence
of his people flowed from their belief of his heaven-
ly descent, was continually reminded ofa diftinccti-
on which prompted him to imitate that beneficent
power which he was supposed to represent. In con-
icquence of those impressions, there hardly occurs in'
the traditional history of Peru, any instance of re-
bellion against the reigning prince, and, among
twelve fuccefive monarchs, there was not one ty-
rant.

EVEN the wars in which the Incas engaged, were and use on

carried on with a spirit very different from that of theirmili-
other American nations. They fought not, like tar i)le.m,
savages, to destroy and exterminate; or, like the
Mexicans, to glut blood-thirsty divinities with hu-
man sacrifices. They conquered, in order to rc-
claim and civilize the vanquished, and to difl'ufe the
knowledge of their own institutions and arts. Pri-
loners seem not to have been exposed to the insults
and tortures, which were their lot in every other
part of the New World. Tlhe Incas took the peo-
ple whom they subdued under their proteccion, and
admitted them to a participation of all the advan-
tages enljoyed by their original fubjcls. This
p'ra:tice, Io repugnant to American ferocity, and
rlirlnbling the humanity of the nofi polifhcl nations,
nl:t be alriibed, like other peculiarities which we

l\ae oblt _rve.d in the Peruvialn manners, to the gc-
"Ilss of their religion. 'I he Incas, conlidering the
lomlllge [)paid to any objedt but the heavenly powers

) liCh tIlv ado-ted, ias impioLus, wer fond of gainll-
il' ptru:y tcs to toheir favourite tici'm. 'T'he idols

of

B O O K of every conquered province were carried in

vil. triumph to the great temple at Cuzco *, and placed

there as trophies of the superior power of the divi.
nity who was the protecor of the empire. The
people were treated with lenity, and initrulted in
the religious tenets of their new masters t, that the
conqueror might have the glory of having added to
the number of the votaries of his father the Sun.

Peculiar THE state of property in Peru was no less fin-
perty.r gular than that of religion, and contributed, like,

wife, towards giving a mild turn of character to the
people. All the lands capable of cultivation were
divided into three shares. One was consecrated to
the Sun, and whatever it produced was applied to-
wards the erection of temples, and furnishing what
was requisite towards celebrating the public rites of
religion. The other belonged to the Inca, and was
set apart as the provision made by the community
for the support of government. The third and
largest flare was reserved for the maintenance of the
people, among whom it was parcelled out. No
person, however, had a right of exclusive property
in the portion allotted to him. I-Ie poffefied it only
for a year, at the expiration of which a new divifiol
was made in proportion to the rank, the number,
and exigencies of each family. All thole lands
were cultivated by the joint industry of the commu-
nity. The people, fulinioned by a proper officcr,
repaired in a body to the fields, and performed their
common task, while songs and musical inftrulmclts
cheered them to their labour :. By this fingo-

Effr.ta of lar diRfiibution of territory, as well as by the nmocd
this. of cultivating it, the idea of a common inier"l,

land

-lerrern, dec. 5. lil. iv . 4. Vel:, lii. v. c. 2. t

de-. s. lib, iv. c. 8. ¢ -lciicr., ldc. . lib. iv. . v. '''
V. c. S.

and of mutual subserviency was continually incul- B o o K
cated. Each individual felt his connection with i_.
those around him, and knew that he depended
on their friendly aid for what increase he was to
reap. A state thus constituted may be confidered
as one great family, in which the union of mem-
bers was so complete, and the exchange of good of-
sices so perceptible, as to create stronger attach-
ment, and to bind man to man in closer intercourse,
than subsisted under any form of society effabliihed
in America. From this resulted gentle manners,
and mild virtues unknown in the savage state, and
with which the Mexicans were little acquainted.

BUT, though the institutions of the Incas were Inequality

so framed as to strengthen the bonds of affeti- ofraaks.
on among their fubjeas, there was great inequa-
lity in their condition. The diftintion of ranks
was fully established in Peru. A great body of the
inhabitants, under the denomination of YANACO-
NAS, were held in a state of servitude. Their
garb and houses were of a form different from those
of free-men. Like the TAMEMES of Mexico, they
were employed in carrying burdens, and in per-
forming every other work of drudgery t. Next to
them in rank, were such of the people as were
free, but diftinguilhed by no official or hereditary
honours. Above them were raised, those whom the
Spaniards call OREJONES, from the ornaments
worn in their ears. They formed what may be
denominated the order of nobles, and in peace,
as well as war, held every office of power or
trust I. At the head of all were the children of the
Sun, who, by their high descent, and peculiar pri.

VOL. II. S i vileges,

JIc "1ei"ret dec. 5. lib, iii. c. ., liib. x, c. 8. 1 Hcuren, dC. 5. Ilib,
iy, t, I.

B 0 O K vileges, were as much exalted above the Orejones,

-__^ as these were elevated beyond the people.

SUCH a form of society, from the union of
State ofts. its members, as well as from the diftindion in their

ranks, was favourable to progress in the arts. Blot
the Spaniards having been acquainted with the im-
proved slate of various arts in Mexico, several
years before they discovered Peru, were not fomuch
struck with what they observed in the latter coun-
try, and describe the appearances of ingenuity
there with less warmth of admiration. The Peru-
vians, nevertheless, had advanced far beyond the
Mexicans, both in the neceflary arts of life, and in
such as have some title to the name of elegant.

Improved IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary ne-
late of agri-
cultuire. ceffity in locial life, was more extensive, and car

ried on with greater skill than in any part of Ame-
rica. The Spaniards, in their progress through the
country, were so fully supplied with provifionsof
every kind, that in the relation of their adventures
we meet with none of those dismal scenes of difrrefs
occasioned by famine, in which the conquerors of
Mexico were fb often involved. The quantity of
foil under cultivation was not left to the discretion
of individuals, but regulated by public authority
in proportion to the exigencies of the community.
Even the calamity of an unfruitful season was but
little felt, for the produit of the lands consecratcd
to the Sun, as well as those set apart for the Inca,
being depolited in the TAMBOS, or public ftorehou-
fes, it remained there as a stated provilion for
times of scarcity *. As the extent of cultivation
was detcrmined with such provident attention

Z.Lrtc.~ lib.

i. c. 14. Vn'it, Illi., C.

c to
Zar~tc, lib. i. c, 14. Veg.'l sllb. . c. 8.

to the demands of the state, the invention and B o o K

vnI.

industry of the Peruvians were called forth to ex- V_.
traordinary exertions, by certain defects peculiar to
their climate and foil. All the vast rivers that flow
from the Andes take their course eastward to the
Atlantic Ocean. Peru is watered only by tome
streams which ruih down from the mountains like
torrents. A great part of the low country is fan-
dy and barren, and never refreshed with rain. In
order to render such an unpromising region fertile,
the ingenuity of the Peruvians had recourse to va-
rious expedients. By means of artificial canals
conducted, with much patience and considerable
art, from the torrents that poured across their
country, they conveyed a regular supply of moif-
ture to their fields*. They enriched the foil by
manuring it with the dung of sea-fowls, of which
they found an inexhaustible store on all the islands
scattered along their coasts t. In describing the
customs of any nation thoroughly civilized, such
practices would hardly draw attention, or be men-
tioned as in any degree remarkable, but in the his-
tory of the improvident race of men in the New
World, they are entitled to notice as singular
proofs of industry and of art. The use of the plough,
indeed, was unknown to the Peruvians. They
turned up the earth with a kind of mattock of
hard wood ;. Nor was this labour deemed to de.
grading as to be devolved wholly upon the wo-
men. Both sexes joined in performing this necef-
fary work. Even the children of the Sun set an
example of industry, by cultivating a field near
Cuzco with their own hands, and they digni-
sied this function by denominating it their triumph
over the earth §.

S f 2 THIE

* Zarate, lib. i. c. 4. Veg., lib. v. e. i. & 24, . Acofia, lb.
iv.C. 7 Veg. lib. v. c. 3. Sec NOTE LXII. t Zarate,
lib.ic. 8. Vega, lib. v. c. 2.

Bo o K THE superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is ob-

VI. vious, likewise, in the conftrution of their houses

Their buil- and public buildings. In the extensive plains
"ings. which stretch along the Pacific Ocean, where the

sky is perpetually serene, and the climate mild,
their houses were very properly of a fabric ex-
tremely flight. But in the higher regions, where
rain falls, where the vicissitude of seasons is known,
and their rigour felt, they were conftrufed with
greater solidity. They were generally of a square
form, the walls about eight feet high, built with
bricks hardened in the fun, the door low and frait,
and without any windows. Simple as these fruc-
turcs were, and rude as the materials may seem to
be of which they were formed, they were so dura-
ble, that many of them still subsist in different
parts of Peru, long after every monument that
might have conveyed to us any idea of the domefiic
frate of the other American nations has vanished
from the face of the earth. But it was in the tem-
ples consecrated to the Sun, and in the buildings
.destined for the residence of their monarchs, that
the Peruvians displayed the utmost extent of their
art and contrivance. The descriptions of them by
such of the Spanifi writers as had an opportunityof
conternplating them while, iln ome measure, entire,
might have appeared highly exaggerated, if the ruins
which still remain, did not vouch the truth of their
relations. These ruins of sacred or royal buildings
are found in every province of the empire, and by
their frequency dcmonfirate that they are monu-
ments of a powerful people, who must have
subsistcd, during a period of some extent, in a slate
of no inconsiderable improvement. They appear
to have hcen edifices various in their dimenflons.
Some of a moderate size, many of immense extent.
all remarkable for solidity, and refemblilg each
other in the stile of architct-urc. The temple of

Pacha-
316

HI1 1UKY Ux A IVl . K 1 A. 317

Pachacamac, together with a palace of the Inca, B o o K
and a fortress, were so connected together as to _
form one great structure, above half a league in

i circuit. In this prodigious pile, the fame fingu-
* lar tatle in building is conspicuous as in other

works of the Peruvians. As they were unacquain-
ted with the use of the pulley, and other me-
; chanical powers, and could not elevate the large

htones and bricks which they employed in building
to any considerable height, the walls of this edi-
fice, in which they seem to have made their great-
eft effort towards magnificence, did not rife above
twelve feet from the ground. Though they had
not discovered the use of mortar or of any other ce-
ment in building, the bricks or stones were joined
with so much nicety, thaLtthe seams can hardly be
discerned t. The apartments, as far as the diftri-
bution of them can be traced in the ruins, were ill-
idifpofed, and afforded little accommodation. There
was not a single window in any part of the build-
ing, and as no light could enter but by the door,
all the apartments of largest dimension mufl either
have been perfestly dark, or illuminated by some
other means. But with all there and many other
! imperfealions that might be mentioned, in their art
of building, the works of the Peruvians which frill
remain muff be confidered as stupendous efforts of
a people unacquainted with the use of iron, and
, convey to us an high idea of the power pofeffcd by
,their ancient monarchs.

* THESE, however, were not the noblest or most Their pub-
WUfeul works of the Incas. The two great roads lic roads,
rom Cuzco to Quito, extending in an unintcrrup-
ted f-rctch above five hundred leagues, arc entitled
Xo sll higher praise. The one was conduced

· t s.,,, n Or F r .rr t1hrough
, ..... Nsl.. x, b ,AJ
. -- -' ** *^ J1 AlJ ,

B O I K through the interior and mountainous country, the
, _ >I. other through the plains on the sea-coast. From

the language of admiration in which some of the
early writers express their astonishment when they
first viewed those roads, and from the more pom-
pous descriptions of later writers, who labour
to support Come favourite theory concerning Ame-
rica, one might be led to compare this work
of the Incas to the famous military wayswhich
remain as monuments of the Roman power: But
in a country where there was no tame animal
except the Llama, which was never used for
draught, and but little as a beast of burden, where
the high roads were seldom trod by any but a human
foot, no great degree of labour and art was requisite
in forming them. The Peruvian roads were only
fifteen feet.in breadth*, and in many places so
slightly formed, that time soon effaced every ve(t
tige of the course in which they ran. In the low
country little more seems to have been done, than
to plant trees or to fix ports at certain intervals, in
order to mark the proper route to travellers. To
open a path through the mountainous countrywas
a more arduous tafl. Eminiencies were levelled,
and hollows filled up, and for the preservation
of the road, it was fenced with a bank of turf. At
proper distances, TAMBOS, or storehouses were
erected for the accommodation of the Inca and his
attendants, in their progress through his dominions.
From the manner in which the road was originally
formed in this higher and more impervious region,
it has proved more durable; and though, fir01
the inattention of the Spaniards to everyobjetbUt!
that of working their mines, nothing has beeln lo"ne
towards keeping it in repair, its courfc may flill 'e
traced t. Such was the celebrated road of the

Incas;

v Cicca, c. 60. f Xcrcz, p. Io. 191. pj *"t, li. i .,1t 1

14. Vcgga, lib. i c. .13. Bougucr Vo).i, p. 11 5 L ll.
tcellcnientos, p. 3(j5.
318

Incas; and even from this description, divested of B o00 K
everycircumitance of manifest exaggeration, or of __t
suspicious asped, it must be confidered as a striking
proof of an extraordinary progress in improvement
and policy. To the savage tribes of America, the
idea of facilitating communication with places at a
distance had never occurred. To the Mexicans it
was hardly known. Even in the mofr civilized
countries of Europe, men had advanced far in re-
finement, before it became a regular objedc of nati-
onal police to form such roads as render intercourse
commodious.

THE formation of those roads introduced ano- an brids.
ther improvement in Peru equally unknown over
all the retl of America. In its course from south
to north, the road of the Incas was interfered by all
the torrents which roll from the Andes towards the
Western Ocean. From the rapidity of their course,
as well as from the frequency and violence of their
inundation, there were unnavigable. Some expe-
dient, however, was to be found for passing them.
The Peruvians, from their unacquaintance with
the use of arches, and their inability to work in
wood, could not conftrul bridges either of ffone or
timber. But necessity, the parent of invention,
figgefted a device which supplied that defer.
They formed cables of great strength, by twisting
together some of the pliable withs or osiers, with
which their country abounds; fix of which they
Itfetched across the itream parallel to one another,
alld made them fats on each fide. These they bound
flrmly together by interweaving finaller ropes so
cl[(c, as to forln a compact piece of net-work, which
tb'ing covered with branches of trees and earth, they

paflcd

B O O K passed along it with tolerable security §. Proper

VII persons were appointed to attend at each bridge,

t"^
' to keep them in repair, and to assist passengers t.

In the level country, where the rivers became
deep and broad and still, they are passed in BALZAS,
or floats ; in the conftruaion, as well as navigati.
on of which, the ingenuity of the Peruvians ap.
pears to be far superior to that of any people in
America. These had advanced no farther in naval
ikill than the use of the paddle, or oar; the Peru-
vians ventured to raise a mast, and spread a fail, by
means of which their BALZAS not only went nim-
bly before the wind, but could veer and tackwith
great celerity II.

Mode of re- NOR were the ingenuity and art of the Peruvians
fining iiver confined solely to objeEts ofeffential utility. They

".e. had made some progress in arts, which may be cal-

led elegant. They possessed the precious metals in
greater abundance than anypeople of America,
They obtained gold in the fame manner with
the Mexicans, by searching in the channels of
rivers, or washing the earth in which particles
of it were contained. But in order to procure
silver, they exerted no inconsiderable degree of
skill and invention. They had not, indeed, at-
tained the art of finking a shaft into the bowels
of the earth, and penetrating to the riches con-
cealed there; but they hollowed deep caverns
on the banks of rivers, and the fides of moun-
tains, and emptied fucll veins as did not dip
suddenly beyond their reach. In other places,
where the vein lay near the surface, they dug
pits to such a depth, that the pcrfon who
worked below could throw out the ore, or h;:uid
it up in baskets §§. They had discovered the art

of

§ NOTE IX1V. 1 Sandco) a. .

R 1. i. 376, 1. Zne'. ,'

i. c. 14. Vega, lib. iii c. 7, S. Her cr.:, d,1 . . Aib V.

.

4. 11 Ulloa Vuy. i. 167, <,:. §§ RAiulio, iii. 4z1>, A.
-32

of finelting and refining this, either by the simple B o o K
application of fire, or where the ore was more stub. VII
| born, and impregnated wiih foreign fubflances, by
placing it in finall ovens or furnaces on high
; grounds, so artificially conftrucRed, that the draught

of air performed the funrcion of a bellows, a ma-
chine with which they were totally unacquainted.
By this limple device, the purer ores were smelted
with such facility, that the quantity of silver in Pe-
ru was so considerable, that many of the utensils
employed in the functions of common life
were made of it t. Several of those vessels and
trinkets are said to have merited no finall degree of
efitimation, on account of the neatneis of the work-
- manship, as well as the intrinsic value of the ma-
;terials. But as the conquerors of America were
well acquainted with the latter, but had scarcely
any conception of the former, most of them were
mnelted down, and rated according to their weight
and fineness in the division of the spoil.

IN other works of mere curiosity, or ornament, Mrrka of
their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. Man;r eli'cn'
Of those have been dug out of the GUACAS, oi
mounds of earth, with which they covered the
bodies of the dead. Among these arc mirrors of va-
rious dimensions, of hard lhining stones h:ghly po-
liled ; veffcls of earthen ware of different forms
hatchets, and other inftrumcnts, some defiined for
war, and others for labour. Some were of flint,
slone of copper, hardened to fucl a degree by an
K unknown process, as to supply the place of iron on
5 vcral occafioiln. Had the use of these tools formed
of c()pplcr bccn general, the progress of the Peruvi-
ns in the r might have been liuh, as to cmu-
Vtl.. I. 'T t late
' \' O lihl ' c . i,5 Vta, lp.ilib. viii. c, 5. L'. lluA Enitrtc

321

322 H1 1 M

1 U C I U J! Alv r. 1 ; A.
B O O K late that of more cultivated nations. But either

VII. the metal was so rare, or the operation by which it

was hardened so tedious, that their instruments of
copper were few, and so extremely small, that they
seem to have been employed only in flighter works.
But even to such a circumscribed use of this imper-
fed metal, the Peruvians were indebted for their
superiority to the other people of America in vari-
ous arts *. The fame observation, however, may
be applied to them, which I formerly made with
respect to the arts of the Mexicans. From several
specimens of Peruvian utensils and ornaments,
which are deposited in the royal cabinet in Madrid,
and from some preserved in different collectionsin
other parts of Europe, I have reason to believe, that
the workmanship is more to be admired on account
of the rude tools with which it was executed, than
on account of its intrinsic neatness and elegance,
and that the Peruvians, though the most improved
of all the Americans, were not advanced beyond the
infancy of arts.

An imper- BUT notwithiranding so many circumstances,
sec l.vll- which seem to indicate an high degree of improve-

atmnt in Peru, others occur that suggest the ideaof
a focietv frill in the first fages of its transition from
barbirifmn to civilization. In all the dominionsof

No citice the Incas, Cltzco was the only place that had the
but Cutco. appearance, or was entitled to the name of a city

Every where clfe, the people lived mostly inde-
tacted habitations, difperficd over the country, or,
at the utmofl, fettled together in finall villagest
But until men are brought to assemble in Ilnul
rotin bodics, andl incorporated in such clofB union,' a
to enjoy frequent intercolilfc, and to feel nluttl
(dle)cndlnce, they never imbibe perfeiStly the fiPirit

Ullo IaVw.v tln i.,lEtren. 3f,&. I6d Etten. p. X6, &c.
't '-.Al,>t, lib, i. c. y. I- rel l ., ticc. v. lib. vi.. c.4

oraflume the manners of social life. In a country B o 0 K
of immense extent, with only one city, the progress a__
of manners, and the improvement either of the ne-
ceffary or more refined arts, must have been o flow,
and carried on under such disadvantages, that it is
more surprising the Peruvians should have advanced
so far in refinement, than that they did not proceed
farther.

IN consequence of this fRate of imperfec union, No perfea
the reparation of professions in Peru was not so feirrationof

profefiions.

complete as among the Mexicans. The less close-
ly men associate, the more simple are their manners,
and the fewer their wants. The crafts of common
and most necessary use in life do not, in such a itate,
become so complex or difficult, as to render it re-
quifite that men should be trained to them by any
particular course of education. All those profeflions
were accordingly exercised by every Peruvian indif-
criminately. None but the artists, employed in
works of mere curiosity or ornament, constitutcd a
separate order of men, or were diftinguilhed from
other citizens a.

FROM the want of cities in Peru, another eonfe- Little com-
quence followed. There was little commercial in- merci.alin-
tercourfe among the inhabitants of that great em- telc')L'rr
pire. The activity of commerce is co-eval with
the foundation of cities ; and fiom the moment that
the members of any community fettle in confidera-
ble numbers in one place, its operations become vi-
gorous. The citizen must depend for fubfiftcnce
on the labour of those who cultivate the ground.
T'hey, in return, muff receive some equivalent.

T t 2 Thus

; Acolff, lib. vi.c. 15. Vega, lib. v, c. . Ilercera, dec. v. lib.
Iv. C 4.

B O 0 K Thus mutual intercourse is ectablifled, and the

^_ , produetions of art are regularly exchanged for the

fiuits of agriculture. In the towns of the Mexican
empire, flated markets were held, and whatever
could supply any want or desire of man was an ob-
jct of commerce. But in Peru, from the singular
mode of dividing property, and the manner in which
the people were fettled, there was scarcely any fpe-
cies of commerce carried on between different pro-
vinces *, and the community was less acquainted
with that active intercourse, which is at once a
bond of union, and an incentive to improvement.

UnwVr!;ke BUT the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians was the
fpidit of the
Peruvians. most remarkable, as well as most fatal defect in their

character t. The greater part of the rude nations
in America opposed their invaders with undaunted
ferocity, though with little conduc or success. The
Mexicans maintained the ftrugglein defence oftheir
liberties, with such persevering fortitude, that it
was with difficulty the Spaniards triumphed over
them. Peru was subdued at once, and almost
without reficance ; and the most favourable oppor-
tunities of regaining their freedom, and ofcruifling
their opprcfbors, vcre loft through the timidity ol
the people. ''hough the traditional hifory of the
'Peruvian: rcpref ents all the Incas as warlike princes,
frequently at the head of armies, which they led to
victory and conquest ; few fyipltotns of such a
m:artial spirit appear in any of their operations lfub-
fcqucnt to the inlvafion of the Spaniards. I1he in-
fltuc ce, pCerlhaps, of thlolc inflittutions which ren-
krcdl tllir lli;llllnrS gcntlc, gave their milnds this

iullnniailly

* V',,1, 1:,.' c?,. -' Xerez, TJod. SmCllo ;p. Ran'. iii' 371

IJc,, , , ,c x., lai.

\ .c. i.
324

unmanly softness; perhaps, the conflant serenity B OV0 K
and mildness of the climate may have enervated the
vigour of their frame ; perhaps,. some principle in
their government, unknown to us, was the occasion
of this political debility. Whatever may have been
the cause, the fad is certain, and there is not an
infallce in history of any people so little advanced
in refinement, so totally destitute of military talents
and cnterprize. This character hath descended to
their posterity. The Indians of Peru are now more
tame and depresscd than any people of America.
Their feeble spirits, relaxed in lifeless inadtion,
seem hardly capable of any bold or manly exertion.

BUT, besides those capital defeCts in the political

state of Peru, some detached circumstances and fads
occur in the Spanifl writers, which discover a con-
fiderable remainder of barbarity in their manners.
The fame cruel custom, that prevailed in some of
the mofr savage tribes, fubfified among the Peru-
vians. On the death of the Incas, and of other
eminent persons, a considerable number of their at-
tendants were put to death, and interred around
their Guaca, that they might appear in the next
world with their former dignity, and be served with
the fame refipedL. On the death of Huana-Capac,
the molt powerrful of their monarchs, above a thou-
f.ind victims were doomed to accompany him to the
tolnb t. In one particular, their manners appear
to have been more barbarous than those of moif
r"de tribes. Though acquainted with the ife of
fie in preparing maize, and other vegetables for
sod ; they devoured both flcfh and fih perfctly

raw,
Acofl b. lit, '. c. 7

B 0 0 K raw, and astonished the Spaniards, with a prafice

<_} repugnant to the ideas of all .civilized people t.

Oter do- BUT though Mexico and Peru are the poles-
minions of sions of Spain in the New World, which, on ac-
SAmrican count both of their ancient and present state, have

attra&ted the greatest attention ; her other domi-
nions there are far from being inconsiderable, either
in extent or value. Most of them were reduced to
fubje&tion during the first part of the sixteenth cen-
tury, by private adventurers, who fitted out their
fiall armaments either in Hispaniola, or in Old
Spain, and were we to follow each leader in his pro-
grefs, we should discover the fame daring courage,
the fame persevering ardour, the fame rapacious de-
fire of wealth, and the fame capacity of enduring
and surmounting every thing in order to attain it,
which distinguished the operations of the Spaniards
in their greater American conquests. But, inflead
of entering into a detail, which, from the similarity
of the tranfations, would appear almofi a repetiti-
on of what has been already related, I shall satisfy
myself with such a view of those provinces of the
Spaniih empire in America, which have not hither-

A brief fur- to been mentioned, as may convey to my readers a
vcy of more adequate idea of its greatness, fertility, and
them, opulence.

I BEGIN with the countries contiguous to the two

Sjchelt to great monarchies, of whose history and institutions
the empire I have given tome account, and lhall then briefy
ofMcxico. defcribc the other diftriEs of Spanish America

The jurifdiaion of the viceroy of New Spain cx-
tends over several provinces, which were not fib-
jcet to the dominion of the Mexicans. Thecoun-
tries of Cinaloa and Sonora, that itretch along the
cinalona ln ecafl fide of the Vermilion efa, or gulf of California,

as well as the immcnfe kingdoms of New Nav'arr
1 Xcrez, p. 19o, Slncl o, It.lill ii. 37z. C. I-Iereray, dec. v, lib, i.' 1'

and New Mexico, which bend towards the weft and B 00 K
north, did not acknowledge the sovereignty of vI.
Montezuma, or his predecessors. These regions,
not inferior in magnitude to all the Mexican em-
pire, are reduced more or less completely under the
Spanish yoke. They extend through the most de-
lightful part of the temperate zone; their foil is, in
general, remarkably fertile, and all their produc- c
tions, whether animal or vegetable, are most per-
feet in their kind. They have all a communica-
tion either with the Pacific Ocean, or with the
Gulf of Mexico, and are watered by such rivers as
not only enrich them, but may become subservient
to commerce. The number of Spaniards fettled in
those vast countries, is indeed extremely final].
They may be said to have subdued, rather than to
have occupied them. But if the population in their
ancient eflablifhments in America shall continue to
increase, they may gradually spread over those dif-
triCts, of which, however inviting, they have not
hitherto been able to take poffefiion.

ONE circumstance may contribute to the speedy
population of some diftrids. Very rich mines both
of gold and silver have been discovered in many of Rch mine".
the regions which I have mentioned. Wherever
these are opened, and worked with success, a multi-
tuld of people resort. In order to supply them with
the Ineccfliajies of life, cultivation mufl be increased,
artif;ns of various kinds must afemble, and indus-
try as well as wealth will be gradually diffu-sed.
Many exanplcs of this have occurred in different
parts of America since they fell under the domini-
0 of" the Spaniards. Populous villages and large
t(lwns have suddenly arisen am idfl uninhabited wilds
;ad mountains ; and the working of mines, though
far hrol being the most proper objea towlard
Whcld tile attention of an infant society fhlould

be

B 0 0 K be turned, may become the means both of promot.

V. i'"ing useful activity, and of augmenting the number

of people. A recent and singular instance of this

and ren has happened, which, as it is but little known in
markable Europe, and may be productive of great effeds,
ilncovery. merits attention. The Spaniards fettlcd in the pro-

vinces of Cinaloa and Sonora, had been long dif-
turbed by the depredations of some fierce tribes of
Indians. In the year 1765, their incursions became
so frequent, and so deftrufive, that the inhabitants,
in despair, applied to the Marquis de Croix, vice-
roy of Mexico, for such a body of troops as might
enable them to drive those formidable invaders from
their places of retreat in the mountains. But the
treasury of Mexico was so much exhausted by
the vaif fulns drawn from it, in order to support the
late war against Great Britain, that the viceroy
could afford them no aid. The respect due to his
virtues, ::ccomplifhed what his official power could
not ectuL. He prevailed with the merchants to ad-
vlacIc aLout two hundred thousand pesos for defray-
i'. r :.x' cxp)cnce of the expedition. The war was
ca, . iLtecd by an officer of abilities; and after being
pl<:rti ted for three years, chiefly by the difficulty
of ,:'irfuing the fugitives over mountains and
through defiles which were almofi impaflable, it
terminated in the year 1771, in the final fubmilfi0o
of the tribes, which had been so long the object
of terror to the two provinces. In the courfeof
this iervice, the Spaniards marched through coun-
tries into which they seem not to have penetrated
before that time, and difcovcred mines of such va-
luc, as was alionifhing even to men acquainted with
the riches contained in the mountains of the lcNe
World. At Cineguilla, in the province of Sonori,
they entered a plain of fourteen lealgues in extent, ia
which they found gold in graiin, at the d(tth
of only sixte inches, of furch a fiz, that foUm

of

of them weighed nine marks, and in such quanti- B 0 0 K

ViI.

ties, that in a short time, with a few labourers, they v.
colleded a thousand marks of gold in grains, even
without taking time to wash the earth that had
been dug, which appeared to be so rich, that
persons of skill computed that it might yield
what would be equal in value to a million of
pesos. Before the end of the year 1771, above two feaso this.
thousand persons were fettled in Cineguilla, under
the government of proper magistrates, and the in-
fpection of several ecclefiatics. As several other
mines, not inferior in riches to that of Cine-
guilla, have been discovered, both in Sonora
and Cinaloa*, it is probable that these neglet-
ed and thinly inhabited provinces, may loon become
as populous and valuable as any part of the Spanish
empire in America.

THE peninsula of California, on the other Califlrni,
fide of the Vermilion sea, seems to have been its iate;
less known to the ancient Mexicans than the
provinces which I have mentioned. It was dif-
covered by Cortes in the year 1536 (Book V. p.
143). During a long period it continued to be so
little frequemned, that even its form was unknown,
and in most charts it was represented as an island,
not as a peninsula t. Though the climate of this
country, if we may judge fiom its situation,
mult be very desirable ; the Spaniards have made
finall progress in peopling it. Towards the close
of the last century, the Jesuits, who had great
merit in exploring this neglected province, and in
civilizing its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly ac-
'quircd a dominion over it as complete as that
which they pofleflied in their missions in Para-
VOL. II. U u guay,

NI- See N 0 T E LXVI,
'I See NO TE LYCV.

B OO K guay, and they laboured to introduce into it

- the fame policy, and to govern the natives by

the fame maxims. In order to prevent the court
of Spain from conceiving any jealousy of their de-
signs and. operations, they seem fludioufly to
have depreciated the country, by representing the
climate as lo disagreeable and unwholesome, and
the foil as so barren, that nothing but their zealous
desire of converting the natives, could have indu-
ced them to fettle there *. Several public-fpirited
citizens endeavoured to undeceive their sovereigns,
and to give them a better view of California ; but

and probbi- in vain. At length, on the expulsion of the Je-
litv of its suits from the Spanish dominions, the court of
improing. Madrid, as prone at that juncture to fufpe the

purity of the Order's intentions, as formerly to
confide in them with implicit trust, appointed Don
fofeph Galvez, whose abilities have since raised
him to the high rank of minister for the Indies,
to visit that peninsula. His account of the coun-
try was favourable ; he found the pearl fifheryon
its coasts to be valuable, and discovered minesof
gold of a very promising appearance t. From its
vicinity to Cinaloa and Sonora, it is probable,that
if the population of these provinces shall increase in
the mainner which I have supposed, California
may, by degrees, receive from them such a recruit
of inhabitants, as to be no longer reckoned among
the dclolate and ufclefs districts of the Spaniih em-
pire.
5V n-.,. n O (N the cafl of Mexico, Yucatan and Honduras

are coirmprelendled in the government of New
Spain, though anciently they can hardly be said to
have formed a part of the Mcxican cmpirc. Thefr
large provinces, firetching froml the Bay of Cami-
peachy beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do not, like

the
* Venice~A, iil i. of Caitfornia, i. z6. j- Lorcil/islo, 319' 350'

the other territories of Spain in the New World, B O 0 K
derive their value either from the fertility of their _
foil, or the richness of their mines, but they yield,
in greater abundance, than any part of Ameri-
ca, the logwood tree, which, in dying some colours,
is Co far preferable to any other material, that the
consumption of it in Europe is considerable, and it
has become an article in commerce of great value.
During a long period, no European nation intruded
upon the Spaniards in those provinces, or attempt-
cie to obtain any share in this branch of trade. But
after the conquefi of Jamaica by the English, it
soon appeared what a formidable rival was now
feated in the neighbourhood of the Spanish territo-
ries. One of the first objects that tempted the En-
glifh, was the great profit arising from the log-
wood trade, and the facility of wresting some por- Theirde-
tion of it from the Spaniards. Some adventurers ciine,
from Jamaica made the first attempt at Cape Ca-
toche, the south-east promontory of Yucatan, and
by cutting logwood there, carried on a gainful
traffic. When most of the trees near the coafl in
that place were felled, they removed to the island
of Trift, in the Bay of Campeachy ; and, in later
times, their principal fiation has been in the Bay of
Honduras. The Spaniards, alarmed at this en-
croachment, endeavoured by negociation, remon-
ftrances, and open force, to prevent the Englihl
from obtaining any footing on that part of the A-
merican continent. But after struggling against it
for more than a century, the difaflers of last war
extorted from the court of Madrid a reluctant con-
sent to tolerate this settlement of foreigners in the
heart of its territories §. The pain which this
hlinbling conceflion occasioned, feccs to have fug-
geted a method of rendering it of little confequencc,
more cfcqtual than all the efforts of negociation or

U u 2 violence.
§ Treaty of 'aris, Art. xviii.

B O O K violence. The logwood produced on the weft coast

of Yucatan, where the foil is drier, is in quality far
superior to that which grows on the marfhygrounds
where the Engliih are fettled. By encouraging
and revival, the cutting of this, and permitting the importation

of it into Spain without paying any duty *, such
vigour has been given to this declining branch of
commerce, and the logwood which the Englilh bring
to market has funk so much in value, that their
trade to the Bay of Honduras has gradually de-
clined t since it obtained a legal sanction; and, it
is probable, will soon be finally abandoned. In that
event, the provinces of Yucatan and Honduras
will become pofleffions of considerable importance
to Spain.

Coita Rc1a STILL farther east than Honduras lie the two pro-
and Vein- vinces of Costa Rica and Veragua, which likewise
Ua.- belong to the vice-royalty of New Spain; but

both have been so much neglected by the Spaniards,
and are apparently of such finall value, that they
merit no particular attention.
Cill. TrTHE most important province depending on

the vice-royalty of Peru, is Chili. The Incas
had efltablihed their dominion in 'ome of its south-
ern diftrics; but in the greater part of the coun-
try, its gallant and high spirited inhabitants main-
tained their indepndence. The Spaniards, allured
by the fame of its opulence, early attempted the
conqucft of it under Diego Almagro; and after
his death, Pedro de Valdivia resumed the design.
Both met with fierce opposition. The former re-
linquifllcd the cnterprize in the manner which I
have mentioned §. The latter, after having givIe
many displays, both of courage and military skill,

was

* Real Cedula, Cam)polmaiics iii. 145. t Sec NOTE LXVI'
§ Book vi. p. 195, &,

was cut off with a considerable body of troops un- B 0 0 K
der his command. Francisco de Villagra, his lieu-

. 1-J

tenant, byhis spirited conduct, checked thenatives
in their career, and saved the remainder of the Spa-
niards from deftruation. By degrees, all the cham-
paign country along the coast was fubjeEted to the
Spanish dominion. The mountainous country is
RIill pofiefled by the Puelches, Araucos, and other
tribes of its original inhabitants, formidable neigh-
bours to the Spaniards ; with whom, during the
course of two centuries, they have been obliged to
maintain perpetual hostility, suspended only by a
few intervals of insecure peace.

THAT part of Chili then, which may properly Excellence
be deemed a Spanifl province, is a narrow district, ofits climate
extending along the coast from the desert of Ataca- and foil.
imas to the island of Chiloe, above nine hundred
miles. Its climate is the most delicious in the
New World, and is hardly equalled by that of any
region on the face of the earth. Though border-
ing on the Torrid Zone, it never feels the extremi-
ty ofheat, being screened on the east by theAndes,
and refi-ehed from the weft by cooling fea-breezes.
The temperature of the air is so mild and equable,
that the Spaniards give it the preference to that of
the southern provinces in their native country.
he fertility of the foil corresponds with the
nignity of the climate, and is wonderfully accom-
modated to European producaions. The most va-

lubleof there, corn, wine, and oil, abound in
Chli-, as if they had been native to the country. All
thefruits imported from Europe attain to full ma-
tllty there. The animals of our hemisphere not
Y1y multiply, but improve in this delightful re-
i '. Ihe horned cattle are of larger size than
Iho' of Spain. Its breed of horlis fiurpafles,
0l in beauty and in spirit, the famous Anda-

lufian

B O 0 K lufian race, from which they sprung. Nor has

VII. Nature exhaufled her bounty on the surface of

the earth ; she has stored its bowels with rich-
es. Valuable mines of gold, of silver, of cop.
per, and of lead, have been discovered in various
parts of it.

Cause of its A COUNTRY diflinguifhed by so many blessings,
being ne-
glededby we may be apt to conclude, would early become a
theSpani- favourite station of the Spaniards, and must have'
ars. 'been cultivated with peculiar prediledion and care.

Instead of this, a great part of it remains unoccu-
pied. In all this extent of country, there are not
above eighty thousand white inhabitants, and about
three times that number of negroes and peopleofa
mixed race. The moss fertile foil in Americalies
uncultivated, and rome of its most promising mines
remain unwrought. Strange as this negleCt of the
Spaniards to avail themselves of advantages, which
seemed to court their acceptance, may appear, the
causes of it can be traced. The only intercourse
of Spain with its colonies in the South Sea, was
carried on during two centuries by the annual flet
to P.orto-bello. All the produce of the colonies
were shipped in the ports of Callao, or Arica
in Peru, for Panama, and carried from thence
across the Isthmus. All the commodities which
they received from the mother-country, were con-
veyed from Panama to the fame harbours. Thus
both the exports and imports of Chili passed through
the hands of the merchants of Peru. These had ofI
course a profit on each; and in both tranfaalionls
the Chilcfe felt their own subordination ; and hav
ing no direc&- intcrcourfe with the parent state, they
depended upon another province for the disposal of
their proludiions, as well as for the supply of tl'ir
wants. Under fitch discouragements, ,popul)[tl°
could not incrcafl , and induliry was dcllitutc of

oile

one chief incitement. But now that Spain, from B OO K
motives which I lhall mention hereafter, has adop-
ted a new system, and carries on her commerce with Profpea of
the colonies in the South Sea, by ships which go itmprove-
round Cape Horn, a dire&t intercourse is opened
I between Chili and the Mother-country. The

g(old, the silver, and the other commodities of
the province will be exchanged in its own har-
bours for the manufactures of Europe. Chili
may speedily rife into that importance among the
Spanish settlements to which it is entitled by its
natural advantages. It may become the granary
of Peru, and the other provinces along the Pacific
Ocean; it may supply them with wine, with
- cattle, with horses, with hemp, and many other
articles for which they now depend upon Eu-
rope. Though the new system has been establish-
ed only a few years, those effects of it begin alrea-
dy to be observed *. If it shall be adhered to
with any steadiness for half a century, one may
, venture to foretell, that population, industry
and opulence, will advance in this province with
rapid progress.
To the cafl of the Andes, the provinces of Tu- .uPvinc"'of

Tucumnan
cumian and Rio de la Plata, border on Chili, and Rio de

larid like it were dependent on the Vice-royalty of laI Pilta.

Per-. These regions of immnenrif extent stretch
i len1gth from north to south above thirteen hun-

Northern

d rd miles, and in breadth more than a thousand. and roth-
1 his country, which is larger than most European cn division.
kingdoms, naturally forms itself into two great
difionls, one on the north, and the other on the
fruth of Rio de ]a Plata. The former comprehends
* P'raguliy, the famous miflions of the Jesuits, and
si'l':Il other dliflrics. But as disputes have long
ublilled between the courts of Spain and Portugal,

coln-
* Cjampoimanes, ii. 157.

B O 0 K concerning its boundaries, which, it is proba.
i _, ble, will be soon finally ascertained, either amica.

bly, or by the decision of the sword, I chufeto
reserve my account of this northern division, until
I enter upon the history of Portuguese America,
with which it is intimately connected ; and, in're
lating it, I shall be able from authentic materials,
supplied both by Spain and Portugal, to give afiill
and accurate description of the operations and
views of the Jesuits, in rearing that singular fa-
bric ,of policy in America, which has drawn so
much attention, and has been so imperfectly under-
flood. The latter division of the province contains
the governments of Tucuman and Buenos-Ayres,
and to these I shall at present confine my observations.

View of the THE Spaniards entered this part of America
hatter. by the river De la Plata ; and though a fucceflion

of cruel disasters besel them in their early at-
tempts to establish their dominion there, they were
encouraged to persist in the design, at first by
the hopes of discovering mines in the interior coun-
try, and afterwards by the neceflity of occupying
it, in order to prevent any other nation from set-
tling there, and penetrating by this route into
their rich poffefions in Peru. But exceptBuenos-
Ayres, they have made no settlement of any confe-
quence in all the vast space which I have mention-
ed. There are, indeed, scattered over it, afcev
places on which they have beflowcd the nameof
towns, and to which they have endcavoured toadd
foinc dignity, by creding them into biflopricks;
but they are no better than paltry villages, each
with two or three hundred inhabitants. Olcci r'
cumflance, however, which was not originally fore
fecn, has contributed to render this ditridC, tholio
thinly peopled, of confidcrable importancec. Th
province of Tucuman, together with the cCul'
try to the south of the Plata, initead of lein

Coyvete

I covered with wood like other parts of America, B o K
formsonevaft open plain, almot withouta tree. The V11.
foil is a deep fertile mold, watered by many fireams
descending from the Andes, and clothed in perpe-
tual verdure. In this rich pasturage, the horses
and cattle imported by the Spaniards from Europe
have multiplied to a degree which almost exceeds
belief. This has enabled the inhabitants not only
to open a lucrative trade with Peru, by supplying it
with cattle, horses, and mules, but to carry on a
commerce no less beneficial, by the exportation of
I hides to Europe. From both the colony has deri-
| ved great advantages. But its commodious fituati-
on for carrying on contraband trade, has been the
chic' source of its prosperity. While the court of
| Madrid adhered to its ancient system, with refpea
to itC communication with America, the river De
la Plata lay To much out of the course of Spanish
i navigation, that interlopers, almost without any
rnfque of being either observed or obftrulted, could
pour in European manufacures in such quantities,
that they not only supplied the wants of the colony,
| but were conveyed into all the eastern districts of
Peru. When the Portuguese in Brasil extended
their settlements to the banks of Rio de la Plata, a
new channel was opened, by which prohibited com-
modities flowed into the Spanish territories, with
V ii more facility, and in greater abundance. This
illigal traffic however detrimental to the parent

|it, contributed to the increase of the fettlemernt,

which had (he immediate benefit of it, and Buenos
A)jies becclnr gradually a populous and opulent
:town. Whlat may be the effed of the alteration
:l".ly mad. in the government of this colony, the
.*t ."e of which flall be described in the fubfcqucnt
l3uk, ca:tniot hitherto be known.

X x

B 0 O K ALL the other territories of Spain in the New

V1' W'vorld, the islands excepted, of whose discovery

oth- i- and i-re.luion I have formerly given an account,
tovieio't are colmprehended under two great divisions the
Spai"n. former dcnominated tile kingdom of Tierra Firme,

tile provinces of which stretch along the Atlantic,
from the caftern frontier of New Spain to the mouth
of the Orinoco ; the latter, the New Kingdom of
Granada, situated in the interior country. With a
short view of thele I shall close this part of my
work.

To the cast of Veragua, the last province subjed
Darien. to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the isthmus of Da-

rien. Though it was in this part of the continent,
that the Spaniards first began to plant colonies, they
have made no considerable progress in peopling it.
As the country is extremely mountainous, deluged
with rain during a good part of the year, remarka-
bly unhealthful, and contains no mines of great va-
lue, they would probably have abandoned it altoge-
ther, if they had not been allured to continue by
the excellence of the harbour of Porto-bello on the
one sea, and that of Panama on the other. These
have been called the keys to the communication
between the north and south fca, between Spain
and hcr moftl valuable colonies. In confequenceof
this advantage, Panama has become a considerable
and thriving town. 'The peculiar noxioufilefsof
its climate has prevented Porto-bello from increaf
ing in tht- fame proportion. As the intercourte
with the fettlcmnents in the Pacific Ocean, is "oWV
carricd on by another channel, it is probable that
both P'orto-hcllo :and Panama will decline, wcill 10
longer lnoutrilled anld enriched by that comltlmce,
to which they were indebtcd for their profp"eity
and Lcvl e their xiftence.
338

THE provinces of Carthagena and Santa Martha, B 0 ) K

stretch to the eastward of the isthmus of Darien.
The country still continues mountainous, hut its C':*lt!iena
vallies begin to expand, are well watered, and ex- A sl-
tremely fertile. Pedro de Heredia subjected this
part of America to the crown of Spain, about the
year 1532. It is thinly peopled, and of courfl ill
cultivated. It produces, however, a variety of va-
luable drugs, and some precious lfones, particular-
ly emeralds. But its chief importance is derived
from the harbour of Carthagena, the safest and best
fortified of any in the American dominions of Spain.
In afituation To favourable, commerce Toon began
to flourish. As early as the year I544, it teems to
have been a town of some note. But when Cartha-
gena was chosen as the port in which the galeons
should first begin to trade on their arrival from Eu-
rope, and to which they were directed to return, in
order to prepare for their voyage homeward, the
commerce of its inhabitants was To much favoured
by this arrangement, that it soon became one of the
most populous, opulent, and beautiful cities in A-
merica. There is, however, reason to apprehend,
that it has reached its highest point of exaltation,
and that it will be so far affected by the change in
the Spanish system of trade with America, which
has withdrawn from it the desirable visits of the
galcons, as to feel at least a temporary decline. But
the wealth now collected there, must find or create
employment for itself; and may be turned with ad-
valntage into foine new channel. Its harbour is to
{il'e, and so conveniently situated for receiving com-
moditics from Europe, its merchants have been so
long accuflomed to convey these into all the adja-
cent prov'inces, that it is probable they will still re-
tin this branch of trade, and Carthagena continue
to be :a city of 'reat importance.

X X 2

THE

B O O K THE province contiguous to Santa Martha on

_s ' the east, was firif visited by Alonfo de Ojeda, in
Venezuela. the year I499 *; and the Spaniards, on their land.

ing there, having observed some huts in an Indian
village built upon piles, in order to raise them a-
bove the stagnated water which covered the plain,
were led to bestow upon it the name of Venezuela,
or little Venice, by their usual propensity to find a
resemblance, between what they discovered in A-
merica, and the objects which were familiar to
them in Europe. They made rome attempts to
fettle there, but with little success, The final re-
duction of the province was accomplished by means
very different from those to which Spain was in-
debted for its other acquisitions in the New World.
The ambition of Charles V. often engaged him in
operations of such variety and extent, that his reve-
nues were not sufficient to defray the expence of car-
rying them into execution. Among other expedi-
ents for supplying the deficiency-of his funds, he
had borrowed large fums from the Velfers of Augf-
burgh, the most opulent merchants at that time in
Europe. By way of retribution for there, or in
hopes, perhaps, of obtaining a new loan, hebe-
stowcd upon them the province of Venezuela, to be
held as an hereditary fief of the crown of Castile,
on colndlition that within a limited time they ihould
render thelnfelves mailers of the country, and efta-
blifh a colony there. Under the direction offucli
persons, it rnight have been expeced, that a fettle-
mcnt would have been established on maxims very
diiffrent from thole of the Spaniards, and better
calculated to encourage such uftful industry, as
they might have known to be the only certain foluce
of proflcprii and opulence. But iulfortiunltcly
they colnmittcd the execution of their plan, to s0ome

of
340

0 ii. P. 143.

of those soldiers of fortune with which Germany B °o K
abounded in the sixteenth century. These adven- V_
turers, impatient to amass riches, that they might
speedily abandon a station which they soon disco-
vered to be very uncomfortable, instead of planting
a colony that might have cultivated and improved
the country, wandered from difirid to diftrid in
search of mines, plundering the natives with un-
feeling rapacity, or oppressing them by the impofi-
tion of intolerable talks. In the course of a few
years, their avarice and exactions, in comparison
with which those of the Spaniards were moderate,
desolated the province so completely, that it could
hardly afford them subsistence, and the Velfers re-
linquihled a property, from which the inconsiderate
conduct of their agents left them no hope of ever
deriving any advantage §. When the wretched re-
mainder of the Germans deserted Venezuela, the
Spaniards again took poflhflion of it; but, notwith-
standing many natural advantages, it is one of their
most languishing and unproductive settlements.

THE provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are the Caraccas

last of the Spanish territories on this coast; but in and Cuma-
relating the origin and operations of the mercantile
company, in which an exclusive right of trade with
them has been vested, I hall hereafter have occasion
to confider their state and productions.

THE new kingdom of Granada is entirely an in- New klng.

land country of vat extent. This important addi- don of Gra
tion was made to the dominions of Spain about the nada.
year 1536, by Sebastian de Benalcazar and Gonza-
lo Ximenes de (ucfada, two of the bravest and most
accomlliflced officers employed in the conquest of

America.
§ Ov~c(1 y Isictis Isisl. Us Venezucla, p. iI, &.c.

B 0 0 K America. The former, who commanded at that time

in Quito, attacked it from the south ; the latter
made his invasion from Santa Martha on the north
As the original inhabitants of this region were far-
ther advanced in improvement, than any people in
America but the Mexicans and Peruvians §, they
defended them selves with great resolution and good
conduc. The abilities and perseverance of Benal-
cazar and Quefada surmounted ail opposition,
though not without encountering many dangers,
and reduced the country into the form of a Spaniih
province.

THE new kingdom of Granada is so far elevated

above the level of the sea, that though it approaches
aln;oft to the equator, the climate is remarkably
temperate. The fertility of its vallies is not inftri-
or to that of the richest difrrils in America, and
its higher grounds yield gold and precious stones of
various kinds. It is not by digging into the bowels
of the earth that this gold is found ; it is mingled
with the full near the surface, and separated from it
by repeated wafling with water. This operation
is carried on wholly by negroe saves ; for though
the chill subterranean air has been discovered, by
experience, to be so fatal to them, that they cannot
be employed in the deep lilver mines, they are more
capable of performing the other fpecics of labour
than Indians. As the natives in the new kingdom
of Granada are exempt from that fervicc, which
has watled their race bo rapidly in other parts of
America, it is remarkably populous. Some (if-
tricts yield gold with a profulion no leis wonderful
than thatn t the vale ofCincgiiilla, which I have for-
merly mentioned, and it is often found in pEPITAS,
or grains, which manifcft the abunlance in which

it

§ Book iv. p. 345, &c.
342

it is produced. On a rising ground near Pampelona, B 0 0 K
single labourers have collected in a day what was a__
equal in value to a thousand pesos t. A late go-
vernor of Sante Fe brought with him to Spain a
lump of virgin gold, estimated to be worth seven
hundred and forty pounds sterling. But without
founding any calculation on what is rare and ex-
traordinary, the value of the gold usually collect-
in this country, particularly in the provinces of
Popayan and Choco, is ofconfiderable amount. Its
towns are populous and flourilhing. The number
of inhabitants in almoit every part of the country
daily increases. Cultivation and induitry of vari-
ous kinds begin to be encouraged, and to prosper.
A conliderable trade is carried on with Carthagena,
the produce of the mines, and other commodities,
being conveyed down the great river of St. Magda-
len to that city. On another quarter, the new
kingdom of Granada has a communication with the
Atlantic by the river Orinoco; but the country
which itretches along its banks towards the east, is
little known, and imperfectly occupied by the
S paniards.

1 Picnra.iit.i Hit. del N. Reyno, p.,48r, MS. pcnes me.

T' HE

# THE HISTORY OF AMERICA. BOOK VIII.

THE
H I S T O R Y

O F
A M E R I CA.

B O K VIII.

A FTER tracing the progress of the Spaniards in B o K
their discoveries and conquefis during more than vll.
half a century, I have conducted them to that peri- ie o
od when their authority was established over almost policv and
all the vast regions in the New World still subjei Spaifl o
to their dominion. The effect of their settlements luniis.
upon the countries of which they took poffeflion,
the maxims which they adopted in forming their
new colonies, the interior structure and policy of
thefc, together with the influence of their progreflive
improvement upon the parent slate, and the conm-
nercial intercourse of nations, are the objects to
which we now turn our attention, and they are no
Icfs intcrefting than important.

THE first visible consequence of the cftablifl- Dclpopul;ti
ments made by the Spaniards in America, was the of Aifni-
(liillution of the ancient inhabitants, to a degree ,itell

VOL. IL. Y y equally thcn.

BOO K equally aitonifhing and deplorable. I have already,

V.ll. on different occasions, mentioned the disastrous in.

fluence under which the connecion of the Ameri.
cans with the people of our hemisphere commenced,
both in the islands, and in several parts of the con.
tinent, and have touched upon various causes of
their rapid consumption. Wherever the inhabitants
of America had resolution to take arms in defence
of their liberty and rights, many perished in the
unequal contest, and were cut off by their fierce in.
vaders. But the greatest desolation followed after

ies of the sword was sheathed. and the conquerors were

this in the fettled in tranquillity. It was in the islands, and in
ilainds, and those provinces of the continent which stretch from
of the con- the Gulf of Trinidad to the confines of Mexico,
tilellt. that the fatal effects of the Spanish dominion were

first and most sensibly felt. All these were occupi-
ed either by wandering tribes of hunters, or by such
as had made but small progress in cultivation and
industry. When they were compelled by their new
masters to take up a fixed residence, and toapply
to regular labour ; when tasks were imposed upon
them disproportioned to their strength, and were
exaced with unrelenting severity ; they pofeffed
not vigour either of mind or of body to fuftainthis
unulual load of oppression. Dejection and despair
drove many to end their lives by violence. Fatigue
and famine destroyed more. In all those extensive
regions, the original race of inhabitants wafted
away ; in rome it was totally extinguished. I"
Mexico, where a powerful and martial people dif-
tinguifhcd their opposition to the Spaniards, by es-
forts of courage worthy of a better fate, great nuIln
hecs fell in the field ; and there, as well as in Pcri,
still greater numbers periflhed uinder the hardflips
of attending the Spanish armies in their various ex
ptlitionls and civil wars, worn out with the inccf

sant
346

sant toil of carrying their baggage, provisions, and B 0 0 K
military stores. VI.

BUT neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spani- I Neuw

ards were so deftrusive to the people of Mexico and Spain and
Peru, as the inconsiderate policy with which they Peru-
eftabliihed their new settlements. The former were
temporary calamities, fatal to individuals; the lat-
ter was a permanent evil, which, with gradual con-
fumption, wafted the nation. When the provinces
of Mexico and Peru were divided among the con-
querors, each was eager to obtain a diftri&, from
which he might expec an inflantaneous recom-
pence for all his services. Bold adventurers, accuf-
tomed to the carelessness and dissipation of a mili-
tary life, had neither induitry to carry on any plan
of regular cultivation, nor patience to wait for its
flow, but certain returns. Inffead of fettlilig in the
vallies occupied by the natives, where the fertility
of the foil would have amply rewarded the dili-
gence of the planter, they chose to fix their ilations
in rome of the mountainous regions, frequent both
in New Spain and in Peru. To search for mines of
gold and silver, was the chief objec of their activi-
ty. The vail prospects which this opens, and the
alluring hopes which it continually presents, cor-
rcfpond wonderfully with the spirit of enterprize
and adventure that animated the first emigrants to
America in every part of their conduct. In order
to push forward those favourite projecs, so many
hands were wanted, that the service of the natives
became indispensably requisite. They were, ac-
cordingly, compelled to abandon their ancient ha
bitations in the plains, and driven in crowds to the
mountains. This sudden transition from the filltry
climate of the vallies, to the chill penetrating air
peculiar to high lands in the torrid zone; the

Y y 2 fatigue

B 0 0 K fatigue of exorbitant labour, scanty or unwhole.
i___ fomenourifhnent, and the despondency occasioned

by a species of oppreflion to which they were not
accustomed, and of which they saw no end, affeEted
them nearly as much as their less industrious coun.
trymen in the islands. They funk under the united
pressure of those calamities, and melted away with
almost equal rapidity 4. In consequence ofthis,
together with the introduction of the fmall-pox,a
malady unknown in America, and extremely fatal
to the natives *, the number of people, both in New
Spain and Peru, was so much reduced, that in a few
years the accounts of their ancient population ap-
peared almost incredible t,

Not the re- SUCH are the mopt considerable events and cau-
fulte o ny fes, which, by their combined operation, contribut-
system of
policy, ed to depopulate America. Without attendingto

these, many authors aftojrfhed at the fuddennefsof
the desolation, have ascribed this unexampled event
to a scheme of policy no less profound than atroci-
ous. The Spaniards, as they pretend, confciousof
their own inability to occupy the vafiregions which
they had discovercd, and foreseeing the impofllbili-
ty of maintaining their authority over a people in-
finitely fulperior to themselves in number, in order to
preserve America, elbolved toexterminate the inh'-
bi tants, and by converting it into a desert, endeavour-
cd to fccure their own dominion over it §. But nati-
ons seldom extend their views to.obje&s so remote,
or lay their plans so deep ; and, for the honour of
humanity, we may obfcrvc, that no nation ever de-

l ibcraty)'

t Tor(iic:ld i:cl. 6r

. r B. Di.z. c. 1z4.. HCrrCrJ

ldec. ii. lil. x. c. .

4 ITII,. Entrcten. 7206o . 'Tlrq
b!5. 6.42, 643. Sec NOTE LXVI1. § Sec NOTE LXl'

; liberately formed such an execrable scheme. The B 0 0 K
i' Spaniih monarchs, far from acting upon any such vII

system of deftrutioh, were uniformly solicitous
for the preservation of their new fubjeds. With
Isabella, zeal for propagating the chriitian faith,
and the desire of communicating the knowledge of
truth, and the consolations of religion to people
destitute of spiritual light, were more than oftenfi-
ble motives for encouraging Columbus to attempt
his discoveries. Upon his success, she endeavoured
to fulfil her pious purpose, and manifested the most
tender concern to secure not only religious infitruc-
tion, but mild treatment, to that inoffensive race
of men fubjeled to her crown*. Her successors
adopted the fame ideas; and, on many occasions,
which I have mentioned, their authority was inter-
posed in the most vigorous exertions, to prote& the
people of America from the oppreflion of their
Spanish fubjeds. Their regulations for this pur-
pose were numerous, and often repeated. They
were framed with wisdom, and dictated by huma-
nity. After their poffeiions in the New World
became so extensive, as might have excited some
apprehensions of difficulty in retaining their do-
minion over them, the ipirit of their regulations
was as mild as when their settlements were confin-
ed to the islands alone. Their solicitude to protect
the Indians fecms rather to have augmented as their
acquisitions increased ; and from ardour to accom-
plilh this, they enacted, and endeavoured to enforce
the execution of laws, which excited a formidable
rebellion in one of their colonies, and spread alarm
and difaff(cdtion through all the refi-. But the ava-
rice of indlividuals was too violent to be controuled
ly the authority of laws. Rapacious and daring
idvlenturcls, far removed from the feat of govern-

mce/t,
* Sec NOTE LXX.

B 0 0 K ment, little accustomed to the restraints of military

discipline while in service, and till less difpofedto
refped the feeble jurifdicion of civil power in an
infant colony, despised or eluded every regulation
that set bounds to their exations and tyranny.
The parent state, with persevering attention, iflued
edics to prevent the oppression of the Indians;
the colonists, regardless of these, or truftingto their
distance for impunity, continued to confider, and
treat them as slaves. The governors themselves,
and other officers employed in the colonies, several
of whom were as indigent and rapacious as the ad-
venturers over whom they presided, were too apt to
adopt their contemptuous ideas of the conquered
people; and, instead of checking, encouragedor
connived at their exccffes. The desolation of the
New World ihould not then be charged onthe
court of Spain, or be considered as the effec of any
system of policy adopted there. It ought to be
imputed wholly to the conquerors and firrf planters
of America, who, by measures no less inconfide-
rate than unjust, counterated the edics of their
sovereign, and have brought disgrace upon their
country.

nlnr tlh es- WI'H still greater injustice, have many authors
frof li- reprefcnted the intolcrating spirit of the Roman
gI . Catholic religion, as the cause of exterminating

the Americans, and have accused the Spanifllec'
clefiaftics of animating their countrymen to the
slaughter of that innocent people, as idolaters and
enemies of God. 3But the firfl miffionarieswlho
visited America, though weak and illiterate, Were
pious men. IThey carly espoused the dcfence of
the natives, and vindicated their charalcr fr0
the afpcrfions of their conquerors, who, defcrilbig
them as incapable of being formed to the otices 0f
civil life, or of comprehending the dodriIcs f
rcligion, contended, that they were a fubordoidt

rare

race of men, on whom the hand of nature had set B 0 o K
ithe mark of Servitude. From the accounts which I
I have given of the humane and persevering zeal
of the Spanish miflionaries, in protecting the help-
less flock committed to their charge, they appear
in. a light which reflects lustre upon their fundion.
They were miniiters of peace, who endeavoured
to wrest the rod from the hands of oppressors.
To their powerful interposition, the Americans
were indebted for every regulation tending to mi-
tigate the rigour of their fate. The clergy in the
Spanish settlements, regular as well as secular, are
still confidered by the Indians as their natural
guardians, to whom they have recourse under the
hardships and exacions to which they are too of-
ten exposed*.

BUT, notwithifandingr the rapid depopulation The m

ber of Indi-

of America, a very considerable number of the ansltil re-
native race still remains both in Mexico and Peru, ma""ing.
especially in those parts which were not exposed to
the first fury of the Spanish arms, or desolated by
the firfi efforts of their induifry, still more ruinous.
In Guatimala, Chiapa, Nicaragua, and the other
delightful provinces of the Mexican empire that
stretch along the south-sea, the race of Indians is
fill numerous. Their settlements in tome places
are so populous, as to merit the name of citiess.
In the three audiences into which New Spain is
divided, there are at leafs two millions of Indians ;
a pitiful remnant, indeed, of its ancient population,
but such as fill forms a body of people superior in
number to that of all the other inhabitants of this
v;ai countryll. In Peru several difiriAs, particu-
larly in the kingdom of Quito, are occupied almofr
entirely by Indians. In other provinces, they are

mingled

* See NOTE LXXI. tI- Sec NOTE LXXII.
II Se NOTE LXXIII.

B O O K mingled with the Spaniards, and in many of their

VI11' settlements pracife the mechanic arts, and fillmof

b ~d ~of the inferior fRations in society. As the inhabi-

tants, both of Mexico and Peru were accustomed
to a fixed residence, and to some degree of regular
industry, less violence was requisite in bringing
them to some conformity with the European modes
of civil life. But wherever the Spaniards fettled
among the savage tribes of America, their attempts
to incorporate with them have been always fruit-
less, and often fatal to the natives. Impatient of
refiraint, and disdaining labour as a mark of fervi-
lity, they either abandoned their original feats,
and fought for independence in mountains and so.
refts inacceflible to their oppressors, or perifled
when reduced to a slate repugnant to their ancient
ideas and habits. In the difiricts adjacent to Car-
thagena, to Panama, and to Buenos-Ayres, the
desolation is more general than even in those parts
of Mexico and Peru, of which the Spaniards have
taken moil full possession.

General BUT the establishments of the Spaniards in the
idea of the New World, though fatal to its ancient inhabi-
plainits tants, were made at a period when that monarchy
coloniea. was capable of forming them to best advantage.

By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
become a powerful slate, equal to so great an
undertaking. Its monarchs, having extended
their prerogative far beyond the limits which
once circumscribed the regal power in every king-
dom of Europe, were hardly subject to controul,
either in concerting, or in executing their mea-
furcs. In every wide extended empire, the form
of government must be simple, and the autho-
rity of the sovereign absolute, that his refolu-
tions may be taken with promptitude, a"d
pervade the whole with undiminified forcc
Such was the power of the Spanifli monarcis,

when they were called to deliberate concerning B O 0 K
the mode of eltablifhing their dominion over the V_<_
moRs remote provinces, that had ever been sub-
jeaed to any European slate. In this deliberation,
they felt themselves under no constitutional re-
firaint, and that as independent masters of their
own resolves, they might issue the edicts requisite
for modelling the government of the new colonies,
by a mere at of prerogative.

THIS early interposition of the Spanifl crown,

in order to regulate the policy and trade of its colo- pEaly intf
nies, is a peculiarity which diftinguilhes their pro- the regal
grefs from that of the colonies of any other Euro- aithor'y
pean nation. When the Portuguese, the English,
and French, took possession of those regions in
America which they now occupy, the advantages
which they promised to yield were so remote and
Uncertain, that they were. suffered to flruggle
through a hard infancy, almost without guidance
or protection from the parent state. But gold and
silver, the fir4t producions of the Spanihi fettle-
ments in the New World, were more alluring, and
immediately attracted the attention of their mo-
narchs.' Though they had contributed little to
the discovery, and.almoft nothing to the conquest
of the New World, they intfantly aflumned the
function of its legislators; and having acquired
a species of dominion formerly unknown, they form-
ed a plan for exercising it, to which nothing flni-
lar occurs in the history of human affairs.

THE fundamental maxim of Spanifil jurifpru- All p
denc with refped to America, is to confider arldproprty
What has been acquired there as vested in the crown vcittd i\1
rather than in the state. By the bull of Alexa t- l
der VI. on which, as its great charter, Spain
fuunded its right, all the regions that had been, or
VOL. II. Zz ztho l

1l o o K should be discovered, were bestowed as a free gift

-n.} upon Ferdinanandnd Isabella. They and theirfuc.

ceifors were uniformly held to be the universal pro.
prietors of the vast territories, which the armsof
their fubje&rs conquered in the New World. From
them, all grants of land there flowed, and tothem
they finally returned. The leaders who condufed
the various expeditions, the governors who prefid.
ed over the different colonies, the officers of jus
tice, and the iminifiers of religion, were allap.
pointcd by their authority, and removable at their
plc.ifure. The people who composed infantset.
tlements were iniided to no privileges independent
of the fivercign, or that served as a barrier againll
the power of the crown. It is true, thatwhen
townS were built, and formed into bodies corpo.
rate, theI citizells We.re permitted to eled theirown
mae<ifrrates, who governed by laws which the com-
munlity enitcd. Evcn in the most despotic fates,
this feeble spark of liberty is not extinguiheid
But in the citics of Spanifil America, thisjurifdic-
tion is merely municipal, and is confined tothe
regulation of their own interior commerce andpo-
lice. In whatever re!ates to public government,
and the gen:ral intcerei, the will of the fovereignis
law. No politic:il povwer originates from the peo-
plc. All centrcs in the crown, and in the officers
of its lnoinaltion.

A'I te ,Iw W V rI .N the cl:nqueftl of the Spaniards in Anec
ot 'd,,i'i iricei wcer cC(mi leted, their monarchs, in formiln

i ..io0 tlathe plan of intelriqr palicy for their new domini-
r 011 lon, divided t1hem into i.wo imnmenfe governlllllts

one lubjcct to the vic( roy of New Spain, the otier
to the vic( rov of Pere:. The juriftliictiol of the
foi mn-r extenled over all the provinces belongilng t
Spa:in in the northern division of the Amncric(;
continent. Under that of the latter, was co01'

pLrclleillid

prehended whatever she poftlefed in South America. B O ( K
This arrangement which, from the beginning, L
was attended with many inconveniencies, became
intolerable when the remote provinces of each vice-
royalty began to improve in ilduftry and popula-
tion. The people complained of their subjection
to a superior, whose place of residence was so dif-
-tant, or so inaccessible, as almost excluded them
from any intercourse with the feat of government.
The authority of the viceroy over districts so far re-
'moved from his own eye and observation, was un-
: avoidably both feeble and ill-direaed. As a re-
medy for those evils, a third viceroyalty has been
established in the present century, at Santa Fe de
Bogota, the capital of the new kingdom of Granada,
the jurisdiction of which extends over the whole
kingdom of Tierra FirmE, and the province of
IQuito * Those viceroys not only represent the Their pow-
p-eron of their sovereign, but poflefs his regal pre- ers.
roratives within the precincts of their own govern-
.ments, in their utmost extent. Like him, they ex-
ercife supreme authority in every department of
government, civil, military, and criminal. They
may preside in every tribunal. They have the sole
right of nominating the persons who hold many
offices of the highest importance, and the occasional
privilege of supplying such as are in the royal gift,
until the fuccellbr appointed by the king flia]l ar-
rive. The external pomp of their government is
suited to its real dignity and power. Their courts
are formed upon the model of that at Madrid, with
;horse and foot guards, a household regular ly c fia-
blilfhd, numerous attendants, and ensigns of com-
lmand, displaying such magnificence, as hardly
retains the appearance of delegated authority .

BUr

Zz2

'Voy. dcUllo, i. 23.' 55 ' 1 Ullon,,Voy. i. 432. Gage, 61.
i ;B U

_ r

B O O K .BUT as the viceroys cannot discharge in person

V_ the functions of a supreme magistrate in every part

Courts of of their extensive jurifdidion, they are aided in
Audience. their government by officers and tribunals similar

to those in Spain. The conduac of civil affairs in
the various provinces and diftrias, into whichthe
Spanim dominions in America are divided, is com.
mitted to magiffrates of various orders and denomi.
nations; some appointed by the king, others by
the viceroy, but all fubje& to his command, and
amenable to his jurifdi6tion. The administration
ofjuftice is veffed in tribunals, known bythe
name of AUDIENCES, and formed upon the model of
the court of Chancery in Spain. These are eleven
in number, and difpenfejuftice to as many diitrids,
into which the Spanish dominions in Americaare
divided § . The number of judges in them isva-
rious, according to the extent and importance of
their jurifdition. The station of a judgeinthe
court of Audience is no less honourable than lucra-
tive, and is commonly filledl by persons offuch;
abilities and merit, as renders this tribunal ex-
tremely refpedable. Both civil and criminal cau
fes come under their cognizance, and for each pe-

Tieirjurif- culiar judges are iet apart. Though it is only in
dictioi. the imoff despotic governments that the sovereign

exercises in person the formidable prerogative of.
administering justice to his fubjeds, and in abfolv-
ing, or condemning, consults no law but what is
deposited in his own breast ; though, in all the nlo
narchies of Europe, judicial authority is com1 t
ted to magifirates, whose decisions arc regulated by
known laws and established foiems, the Spanlilhvicc
roys have often attempted to intrude thelclve s
into the feat of justice, and with an ambition which
their diftancc from the controul of a fuperior,l ten

dered
§ See N, o rE LXXIV.

dered bold, have aspi.red at a. power which their B 0 o K

VIII.

master does not venture to. assume. In order to.
check an usurpation which must have annihilated.
justice and security in. the Spanifli colonies, by
fubje&ing the lives and property of all to the will
of a single man, the viceroys have been prohibited,
in the most explicit terms, by repeated laws, from
interfering in the judicial proceedings of the courts
of Audience, or from delivering an opinion, or
giving a.voice, with refpe& to any point litigated
before them *. In rome particular cafes, in which
any question of civil right is involved, even the po-
litical regulations of the viceroy may be brought
under the review of the court of Audience, which,
in those instances, may be deemed an intermediate
power placed between him and, the people, as ,a
constitutional barrier to circumscribe his jurifdic-
tion. But as legal reitraints, on a person wha&re-
presents the sovereign, and is clothed-.with his au-
thority, arIe little suited to the. genius of Spaniih,
policy; the hesitation and: reserve, with:which it
confers this power on the courts of Audience, are.re-
markable. They may advise, they may remoniirate,.
but in the event of a direat collision between their,
opinion and the will of the viceroy, what hedeter-
mines must be carried into execution, and nothing..
remains for them, but to lay the matter before the
king and the council of the.Indies t . But to be.
intitled to remonstrate, and inform against a person,
before whom all othersmuft be silent, and tamely.
submit to his decrees,. is a privilege which adds:
dignity to the courts of Audience. This is far-
ther augmented by another circunmitance. Uponl
the death of a viceroy, without. any provision
of a ficceffor by. the king, the. supreme. power

* RecVpi, .

li D.

i . i. 39. 44. .i. .

x ,.

. 44., li. it. ii. . 36,

Ibil t Solorz. Dejure lnd. ih. iv. c. 3. n. 4.o 41. Iecop.
ib, 11, tit, x, 1.
1 36. li iii. tit. iii 1. 34. Lib. v. tit. ix. 1. I.

B 0 o K is vested in the court of Audience resident in the

a^_ _ capital of the' viceroyalty, and the feniorjudge,

afifted by his brethren, exercises all the funStions
of the viceroy while the office continues vacant*.
In matters that come under the cognizance of the
Audiences, in the course of their ordinaryjurif-
diaion, as courts of justice, their sentences are
final in every litigation concerning property of less
value than fix thousand pesos; but when the sub-
jed in dispute exceeds that fum, their decisions are
subjcd to review, and may be carried by appeal be-
fore the royal council of the Indies ±.

Council of Ir; this council, one of the most considerable in
the Indie¢. the monarchy for dignity and power, is vested the

supreme government of all the Spanifhl dominions
in America. It was first established by Ferdinand,
in the year 15tI, and brought into a more perfec
Its power. form by Charles V. in the year 1524. Its jurif-

dition extends to every department, ecclesiastical,
civil, military, and commercial. All laws and or-
dinances relative to the government and policeof
the colonies originate there, and mufft be approved
of by two-thirds of the members, before they are
ifluel in the name of the king. All the offices, of
which the nomination is reserved to the crown, are
confcrred in this council. To it each person em-
ployed in America, from the viceroy downwards, is
accountable. It reviews their condul, rewards
their services, and inflicts the pun ifhments due to
their malvrfations :t . Before it, is laid whatever
intelligence, either public or fccrct, is received
from America, and every scheme of improving
the adminiffration, the police, or the commrrce
of the colonies, is submitted to its confidlcratio1'

From

* Rrcop. lib. ii, ti. xv. 1. 57, &c. 1I Rccop, lilb, v. tit. xi',i
I. x, &c. t, Rccop. lib, ii. tit. ii. 1. I, 2,' &c.

From the firif inflitution of the council of the B o oK
Indies, it has been the constant objet of the ca- -
tholic monarchs, to maintain its authority, and to
make such additions from time to time, both to its
' power and its splendour, as might render it formi-
dable to all their subje&s in the New World.
Whatever degree of public order and virtue still re-
mains in that country, where so many circumftan-
ces conspire to relax the former, and to corrupt
the latter, may be ascribed in a great measure to
the wife regulations and vigilant infpeaion of this
refpedable tribunal *

As the king is supposed to be always present in Coa de

his council of the Indies, its meetings are held in the cion.
place where he resides. Another tribunal has been
infl-ituted, in order to regulate such commercial
affairs, as required the immediate and personal in-
'pection of those appointed to superintend them.
This is called CASA DE LA CONTRATACION, or
the house of trade, and was eltablifhed in Seville,
to whose port commerce with the New World was Its func-
confined, as early as the year I501. It may be tions.
confidered both as a board of trade, and as a court
of judicature. In the former capacity, it takes cog-
nizance of whatever relates to the intercourse of
Spain with America, it regulates what commodities
fihould be exported thither, and has the infpecion
of such as are received in return. It decides con-
cerning the departure of the fleets for the Weft
Indius, the freight, and burden of the flips, their
t[uilipment, and destination. In the latter capacity,
Itjudtges with rcitpet to every queflion, civil, conm-

i crcial, or ci miinal, arising in conifequence of the
traliflltions of Spail with America; and in both

thlef
b Soltjrz. dr Itone hid. lib. iv. i. 2R~

B O o K these departments, its deciiorns are exempted from

vIII. the review of any court but that of the council of

the Indies .

SUCH is the :great outline of that system 6f go-

vernment, which Spail has efablilhed in'her Ame-
rican colonies. To enumerate the various fubor.
dinate boards and 'officers employed 'in the admihi-
itration of justice, in collecting the public revenue,
,s ~ and in regulating the interior police of the coun-

try, to describe their different funtions, and to in.
quire into the mode and effect of their operations,
would prove a detail no less intricate than minute
and uninteresting.

Firftob- THE sirs obje& of the Spaniih monarchswas
je, to fe- to fecpre the productions of the colonies tothe
excluive parent state, by an absolute prohibition of any in-
rade, tercourfe with foreign nations. They took pof-

session of America by right ofconqueft, and con-
fcious of the feebleness of their infant settlements,
and aware of the difficulty in establishing their
dominion over such vast regions, or of retaining lo
many reluEtant nations under the yoke, they dread-
ed the intrusion of firangers; they even flunned
their infpeaion, and endeavoured to keep them at
a distance from their coasts. This spirit of jealousy
and exclusion, which at firfi was natural, and per-
haps necessary, augmented as their poffeflionsin
America extended, and the value of them came to
be more fully understood. In consequence of it,
a system of colonizing was introduced, to which
there had hitherto been nothing similar among
mankind In the ancient world, it was not
uncommon to fend forth colonies. But they
were of two kinds only. They were cither
migrations, which served to difburdcn a ate

of

Re.oo. lib. ix tit. i. ','itia Noite J la Coqtrataci[~, ,Ji,c. I,
A.

of its superfluous fubjeóts, when they multiplied B O K

VIII.

too salt for the territory which they occupied: or
they were military detachments stationed, as garri-
sons, in a conquered province. The colonies of
rome Greek republics, and the swarms of northern
barbarians which fettled in different parts of Eu-
rope, were of the firfl species. The Roman colo-
nies were of the second. In the former, the con-
nedion with the mother-country quickly ceased,
and they became independent fiates. In the latter,
as the disjuncxion was not complete, the depen-
dence continued. In their American settlements, Regulations
the Spanish monarchs took what was peculiar to forthatpur-
each, and studied to unite them. By fending co- Pae.
lonies to regions so remote, by establishing in each
a form of interior policy and administration, under
diftind governors, and with peculiar laws, they
disjoined them from. the mother-country. By re-
taining in their own hands the rights of legislation,
as well as that of imposing taxes, together with the
ipower of nominating the persons who filled every
department, civil or military, they secured their
dependence. Happily for Spain, the situation of her
colonies was such, as rendered it poflible to reduce
this new idea into praacice. Almost all the coun-
tries which she had discovered and occupied, lay
within the tropics. The productions of that large
portion of the globe, are different from those of
Europe, even in its most southern provinces. The
qualities of the climate and of the foil naturally
turn the industry of those who fettle there into new
channels. When the Spaniards first took pofieflion
of their domains in America, the precious metals
which they yielded, were the only obje& that at-
tratcd their attention. Even when their efforts
began to take a better direction, they employed
themfllves almofl wholly in rearing such peculiar
pro'dutions of the climate, as, from their rarity or
VOL. I A a a value,

B o o K value, were of chief demand in the mother-country

1 Allured by vast profpeAs of immediate wealth, they

disdained to waste their industry on what was less
lucrative, but of superior moment. In order to
render it impossible to correct this error, and to
prevent them from making any efforts that might
interfere with those of Spain, the eftablilhmentof
several species of manufatures, and even the cul.
ture of the vine, or olive, are prohibited in the co-
lonies*, under severe penaltiest. They must trust
entirely to the mother-country for the objecs of
primary necessity. Their clothes, their furniture,
their instruments of labour, their luxuries, and
even a considerable part of the provisions which
they consume; are import d from Spain. Dur-
ing a great part of the sixteenth century, Spain
pofeffing an extensive commerce and flourishing
manufactures, could supply with ease the growing
demands of her colonies, from her own stores,
The produce of their mines and plantations was
given in exchange for there. But all that the co-
lonies received, as well as all that they gave, was
conveyed in Spanish bottoms. Noveffel belonging
to the colonies was ever permitted to carry the com-
niodities of America to Europe. Even the com-
mercial intercourse of one colony with another,
was either absolutely prohibited, or limited bymna-
ny jealous reftricrions. All that America yields
flows into the ports of Spain; all that it contlines
muit iflue from them. No foreigner can eliterone
of its colonies without express pcrmiflion ; no velc
of any foreign nation is received into theirhar-
hours ; tand the pains of death, with conflfcatiotlof
moveablcs, are denounced againfl every inhabitant
who prefumcs to trade with them:1:. Thus the
colonies are kept in a state of perpetual ptlpilllgc;

and

e
Se.e NOT1 LXXV. t B. Ullon Retab. des Manll(.t'c

p 6.

2)6. I Kc il. lib. i. tit. xxvii. 1. 1. 4. 7' &c.
362

i and by the introduction of this commercial depen- B 0 o K

dence, a refinement in policy of which Spain set
the firif example to the European nations, the ru-
premacy of the parent state hath been maintained
over remote colonies during two centuries and a
half.

SUCH are the capital maxims to which the Spanish slow pro-
monarchs seem to have attended in forming their pulationf
new settlements in America. But they could not from Europe
plant with the fame rapidity that they had destroy-
ed; and, from many concurring causes, their pro-
grefs was extremely flow, in filling up the immense
void which their devafuations had occasioned. As
soon as the rage for discovery and adventure began
to abate, the Spaniards opened their eyes to dangers
and diftrefle, which at first they did not perceive,
or had despised. The numerous hardships with
which the members of infant colonies have to ftrug-
gle, the diseases of unwholfome climates, fatal to
the constitution of Europeans; the difficulty of
bringing a country, covered with forests, into cul-
ture; the want of hands neceflary for labour in
some provinces, and the flow reward of induffry in
all, unless where the accidental discovery of mines
enriched a few fortunate adventurers, were evils
universally felt and magnified. Discouraged by the
view of there, the spirit of migration was so much
damped, that sixty years after the discovery of the
New World, the number of Spaniards in all its
provinces is computed not to have exceeded fifteen
thloufalnd*.

TIE mode in which property was distributed in Dilcourage.
the Spanifl colonies, and the regulations ci-ablifll- 1') tlhe tIte

' nil '^1 r r-k . - 01 props ' tD
cd with refpcd to the tranfnillion of it, whether

Aaa 2 by
* SeC NOTE LXXVI.

o o0 K by descent, or by sale, were extremely unfavoura.
VI1I. ble to population. In order to promote a rapid in.

crease of people in any new settlement, property in
land ought to be divided into small shares, and the
alienation of it ihould be rendered extremely easy*.
But the rapacioufiefs of the Spanish conquerorsof
the New World paid no regard to this fundamen.
tal maxim of policy; and, as they poffefled power,
which enabled them to gratify the utmost extrava.
gance of their wishes, many of them seized difirils
and provinces of vast extent, and held them as EN-
COMIENDAS. By degrees they obtained the privi-
lege of converting a part of these into MAYORAS-
cos, a species of fief, introduced into the Spanil
system of feudal jurifprudencet, which can neither
be divided nor alienated. Thus a great portion of
landed property, under this rigid form of entail, is
withheld from circulation, and descends from fa-
ther to son unimproved, and of little value either
to the proprietor or to the community. In the ac-
count which I have given of the reduction of Peru,
various examples occur of enormous tracts of coun-
try occupied by some of the conquerors§. The
excesses in other provinces were similar, for as the
value of the lands which they acquired, was origi-
nally estimated according to the number of Indians
which lived upon theni, America was in general
so thinly peopled, that rnly difRrics of great extent
could afford such a numbler of labourers, as might
be employed in the mines with any profpe&tofcon'
fiderable gain. The pernicious effets of those ra-
dical errors in the difiribution and nature ofproper-
ty in the Spanish settlements, are felt through evc'
ry department of industry, and may be confidered

. Dr. Smith' Inquiry, ii. 16G. . RCcop. lib: j' i
1. 24. § Book vi . p a59.

as one great cause of a progress in population so B v) 0 K

VIII.

much flower than that which has taken place in _
better constituted colonies*.

To this we may add, that the support of the enor- and thena-
mous and expensive fabric of their ecclesiastical tureoftheir
eflablifhment, has been a burden on the Spanilh policy.
colonies, which has greatly retarded the progress
of population and industry. The payment of
tythes is a heavy tax on industry; and if the exac-
tion of them be not regulated and circumscribed
by the wisdom of the civil magifsrate, it becomes
intolerable and ruinous. But, instead of any re-
ftraint on the claims of ecclesiastics, the inconfide-
rate zeal of the Spanish legislators admitted them
into America in their full extent, and at once im-
posed on their infant colonies a burden which is in
no flight degree opprefiive to society even in its
most improved slate. As early as the year 15ox,
the payment of tythes in the colonies was enjoined,
and the mode of it regulated by law, and every ar-
ticle of primary necessity, towards which the atten-
tion of new settlers mutl naturally be turned, is
fiubjeded to that grievous exacdiont. Nor were
the demands of the clergy confined to articles of
simple culture. Its more artificial and opeofe
produEtions; such as sugar, indigo, and cochineal,
were soon declared to be tythabc :t ; and thus
the industry of the planter was taxed in every fllge
of its progress, from its rudest essay to it' highefl
improvement. To the weight of this legal impo-
fition, the bigotry of the American Spaniards has
made many voluntary additions. From lhcii f:)id
delight in the external pomp and parade of religion,
and from fuperfRitious reverence for ccclefiaftic:; of

every

' Sec NOTE I.XXVII. 1 Recop. lib .

i. tit. xvi. 1. a.
i Ibid. 1, 3 and 4.

B O O K every denomination, they have bestowed profufedo.

*VII. natives on churches and monasteries, and have un.

profitably wafted a large proportion of that wealth,
which might have nourished and given vigourto
productive labour in growing colonies.

Various or- BUT so fertile and inviting are the regions of A-
ders of peo- ,
ple in theo - merica, which the Spaniards have occupied, that
colonies. notwithstanding all the circumstances, which have

checked and retarded population, it has gradually
increased, and filled the colonies of Spain with ci-
tizens of various orders. Among there, the Spa-
niards, who arrive from Europe, diftinguithed by

Chapetones the name of CHAPETONES, are the first in rank and
the first. power. From the jealous attention of the Spanilh

court to secure the dependence of the colonies,
every department of consequence is filled by per-
sons sent from Europe; and in order to prevent
any of dubious fidelity from being employed, each
must bring proof of a clear descent from a family
of OLD CHRISTIANS, untainted with any mixture
of Jewish or Mahometan blood, and never difgra-
ced by any censure of the inquilition*. In such
pure hands, power is deemed to be safely lodged,
and almoff every public funAion, from the viceroy-
alty downwards, is committed to them alone. Eve-
ry person, who by his birth, or residence in Amne
rica, may be fufpcdCcd of any attachment or interest
adverse to the mother-country, is the objed of
diftrufl to such a drgrec, as amounts nearly to "
exclusion from all otfices of confidence orauthori-
tyt. By this confpicuouls prediledcion of the court,
the Chapetoncs arc railed to fucl pre-emincllcc 1i
America, that they look down with difidain on eve-
ry other order of men. - .

6 Recopil. lib ix. tit. xxvi. 1. 1 , a 6. j See T LY 1
366

THEcharacEerand state of the CREOLES,or defcen- B O0 K
dants of Europeans fettled in America, the second i_>,
class of fubjeds in the Spanifl colonies, has ena- Creoles the
bled the Chapetones to acquire other advantages, cond.
hardly less considerable than those which they de-
rive from the partial favour of government.
Though some of the Creolian race are descended
from the conquerors of the New World ; though
others can trace up their pedigree to the noblest fa-
milies in Spain; though many are possessed of am-
ple fortunes, yet, by the enervating influence of a
sultry climate, by the rigour of a jealous govern-
ment, and by their despair of attaining that diftinc-
tion to which mankind naturally alpire, the vi-
gour of their minds is so entirely broken, that a
great part of them waste life in luxurious indulgen-
ces, mingled with an illiberal fuperflition fill more
debating. Languid and unenterprizing, the ope-
rations of an a&ive extended commerce would be
to thenm o cumbersome and opprcflive, that in al-
most every part of America they decline engaging
in it. The interior traffic of every colony, as well
as its trade with the neighbouring provinces, and
with Spain itself, are carried on chiefly by the
Chapetonest; who, as the recompence of their
indifl-ry, ama1s immense wealth, while the Cre-
oles, funk in sloth, are satisfied with the revenues
of their paternal cftates.

IROM this stated competition for power and wealth, Rivalitli
between those two orders of citizens, and the vari- etween
ous paflions excited by a rivallhip so interesting,
their hatred is violent and implacable. On every
occasion, fymptolms of this averlion break out, and
thle COommon appellations which each beflows on
tle other, are as contemptuous as sthofe which flow

from
j Vry. de Ullo0;, . 27. 251. Voy. de Frezier, z7.

B 0 o K from the most deep-rooted national antipathy*.

VIII. The court of Spain, from a refinement of distrust.

ful policy, cherishes those feeds of difcord,and so.
ments this mutual jealousy, which not only pre.
vents the two most powerful classes of its fubjeas
in the New World from combining against the
parent Rate, but prompts each with the moftvi-
gilant zeal, to observe the motions and to counter.
act tihe schemes of the other.

A mixed THE third class of inhabitants in the Spanilh
race forms colonies is a mixed race, the offspring either of an
the third or-
der of citi- European and a negroe, or of an European and In-
zens. dian, the former called MULATTOES, the latter

MESTIZOS. As the court of Spain, folicitousto
incorporate its new vassals with its ancient fubjels,
early encouraged the Spaniards fettled in America
to marry the natives of that country, several allian-
ces of this kind were-formed in their infant colo-
niest. But it has been more owing to licentious
indulgence, than to compliance with this injunc-
tion of their sovereigns, that this mixed breed has
multiplied so greatly, as to constitute a considerable
part of the population in all the Spanish settlements.
The several lages of descent in this race, and the
gradual variations of ihade until the African black,
or the copper-colour of America, brighten into al
European complexion, are accurately marked by
the Spaniards, and each distinguished by a peculiar
name. Those of the first generation are confidered,
and treated as Indians and negroes; but.in the
third descent, the charaacriftic hue of the formuer
disappears; and in the fifth, the -deeper tint of
the latter is so entirely effaced, that they can no
longer be diflinguifhed from Europeans, and are

entitled

* Gage'o Survey, p. 9. Frezier, ai6. i Recpil. ibvi,

tit. i.. . Herrcra, dec. i. lib, v. c. I2. Dec. iii.ib .

v i '
368

titled tr all their privileges*. It is chiefly by BO K
}this mked race, whose frame is remarkably robust ,
?.nd hardy, that the mechanic arts are carried on,

id other acive fundions in society are discharged,
iich the two higher classes of citizens, from
He, or from indolence, disdain to exercise t ·

,iE negroes hold the fourth rank amonr the f grl he

in"t:tants of the Spanish colonies. The intro- t,mrhsr-
dtl.{ Of that unhappy part of the human fp;cies dr
into Aerica, together with their services and 'u.s-
feringshere, fball be fully explained in anothrr
place; 'Le they are mentioned chiefly, in order tn
point out peculiarity in their fitnation under the
Spanish donion. In several of their settlements,
particularly, New Spain, negroes are chiefly em-
ployed in tion1ftic service. They form a principal
part in the tral of luxury, and are cherished and
caressed by their- iperiors, to whose vanity and plea-
fures they arc eqilly subservient. Their dress and
appearance is hard),lefs splendid than that of their
maflers, whose maners they imitate, and whose
paflions they imbibe :, Elevated by this diftincti-
on, they have affumedfuch a tone of superiority
over the Indians, and ti-at them with such info-
lencc and scorn, that the aitipathy between the two
races has become implacable. E, en in Peru, where
negroes are more numerous, and employed in field-
work as well as domestic service, they maintain
their ascendant over the Indians, and their mutual
hatrred fubfifs with equal violence. The laws have
indlufrioufly fomented this avorfion, to which acci-
tcnt gave rife, and, by most rigorous injunctions,

have

VoL. I[. B b b

" Vly. dlc Ull., i.p. 27. f Tbit p,. 29. Voy. dc foigier,
P. 14. Mcirdlez, Teforos, Vcrdtladiot, i. 354, t ;.age.
P * 6. Voy. de Ullo, i. 4.51.

B O 0 K have endeavoured to prevent every intercourfethat

might form a bond.of union between the two races.
Thus, by an artful policy, the Spaniards derive
strength from that which is the weakness ofothe
European colonies, and have secured as afflciati
and defenders, those very perfonswhoelfevfirc.
are obje qs of jealousy and terror*.

The Indians THE Indians form the last, and the moftepref-
form the faf fed order of men in that country, which belonged
order of ci- trace/t
tizens. to their ancestors. I have already traced/the pro.

grefs of the Spanish ideas with refped to the con.
dition and treatment of that people, and have men-
tioned the most important of their more early regu-
lations, concerning a matter of fomuchconfe-
quence in the administration of their new domini-
ons. But since that period to which 1 have brought
down the history of America, theinformation and
experience acquired during tro centuries, have
enabled the court of Spain to ,nake such improve-
ments in this part of its Arrerican system, thata
short view of the present ccndition of the Indians
may prove both curious ard interesting.

Their pre- BY the famous regulations of Charles V. in 1542,
fcnLtcondi which have been to oftfn mentioned, the highpre-

tinw. tensions of the conqlil crors of the New World, who

confidered its inhabitants as slaves, to whose ser-
vice they had acquired a full right of property,
were finally abrogated. From that period, the In
dians have been reputed freemen, and intitledto
the privileges of fubjeas. When admitted into
this rank, it was deemed just, that they should coll
tribute towards the support and imlprovclment o

· Recopil, lib. vii. tit .

v .

1. 7 Herrera, dec. viii. lib- vii, t
Jz. Frczicr, 244.

the society, which had adopted them as members. B 0 0 K
i But as no considerable benefit could be expeced VI

from the voluntary efforts of men, unacquainted
with regular industry, and averse to labour, the
court of Spain found it necessary to fix and secure,
by proper regulations, what it thought reasonable
to exa6t from them. With this view, an annual Tax impof-
tax was imposed upon every male, from the age of ed on them.
eighteen to fifty; and, at the fame time, the nature
as well as the extent of the services which they
might be required to perform, were ascertained with
precision. This tribute varies in different provin-
ces, but if we take that paid in New Spain as a
medium, its annual amount is nearly four lhillings
a head, no exorbitant fum in countries where, as
at the source of wealth, the value of money is ex-
tremely low*. The right of levying it likewise
varies. In America, every Indian is either an im-
mediate vaflal of the crown, or depends upon some
fubjeEt to whom the diftriat, in which he resides,
has been granted for a limited time, under the de-
nomination of ENCOMIENDA. In the former cafe,
about three-fourths of the tax are paid into the roy-
al treasury ; in the latter, the fame proportion of
it belongs to the holder of the grant. When Spain
first took possession of America, the greater part of
it was parcelled out among its conquerors, or those
who first fettled there, and but a fiall portion
reserved for the crown. As those grants, which
were made for two lives onlyt, reverted fuccefively
to the (overeign, he had it in his power either to
diffuse his favours by grants to new proprietors,
or to augment his own revenue by valuableu ancx-

B b b 2 ations.

X Sec NOTE LXXIX. Recopil, lib. vi.tit. v.. 4. I-lack-

luyt, vol..iii p. 46I . e Kecopil. lib, vi. tit viii. 1. 43, Solora.
dc Ilid.jtc, lib,. ii. c. i6.

B 0 K justice, transmitted to them by tradition from their

ancestors. To the Indians, this jurifdidion, lodg-
ed in such friendly hands, affords some consolation;
and so little formidable is.this dignity to their new
masters, that they often allow it to descend by he-
reditary right*. For the farther relief of men so
much exposed to oppression, the Spaniih court has
appointed an officer in every diftria, with the title
of Protector of the Indians. It is his function, as the
name implies, to assert the rights of the Indians, to
appear in their defence in the courts ofjuftice ; and,
by the interposition of his authority, to set bounds
to the encroachments and exations of his country-
ment. A certain portion of the reserved fourth of
the annual tribute, is destined for the salary of the
caziques and protecors, another is applied to the
maintenance of the clergy employed in the inftruc-
tion of the Indians T. Another part seems to be ap-
propriated for their support, and the payment of
their tribute in years of famine, or when a particu-
lar diftrift is affected by any extraordinary calami-
ty §. Besides this, provision is made by various
laws, that hospitals shall be founded in every new
settlement for the reception of Indiansll. Such
hospitals have accordingly been erected, both for
the indigent and infirm in Lima, in Cuzco, and in
Mexico, where the Indians are treated with ten-
dernefs and humanity ::.

SucH is the great outline of tle jurifprlldellc

and policy by which the Indians are now governed
in the provinces belonging to Spain. In those re-

gulations

· Solorz. de jure Ind. lib. i. c. A6. Rccopil. lib . tit. vii.

- Solorz. lib. i. c. 27. p.

p ol. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. Vi. I R-

copil. lib. vi. tit. v. 1.

1 30. Tit. xvi. i. - 5. , § ltccopi,

lib. vi. tit. iv. 1. 1 . 11 Recopil. lib. i. tit. iv. 1. , &c. Vy
de Ulloa, i. 429. 5p. Cihu chill, iv. 496.

gulations of the Spanish monarchs, we discover no B 0 0 K
traces of that cruel system of extermination, which I
they have been charged with adopting; and if we
admit, that the neceflity of securing subsistence for
their colonies, or the advantages derived from
working the mines, give them a right to avail them-
selves of the labour of the Indians, we muff allow,
that the attention with which they regulate and
recompence that labour, is provident and sagacious.
In no code of laws is greater solicitude displayed,
or precautions multiplied with more concern for
the preservation, the security, and the happiness
of the subject, than we discover in the collecdion
of the Spanish laws for the Indies. But those la-
ter regulations, like the more early edics which
have been already mentioned, have too often proved
ineffectual remedies against the evils which they
were intended to prevent. In every age, if the fame
causes continue to operate, the fame effecs muff
follow. From the immense distance between the
power entrusted with the execution of laws; and
that, by whose authority they are enadted, the vi-
gour even of the most absolute government muff
relax, and the dread of a superior too remote to
observe with accuracy, or to punish with dispatch,
muff insensibly abate. Notwithstanding the nu-
merous injuncions of the Spanish monarchs, the
Indians iill fuffler, on many occasions, both fiom
the avarice of individuals, and from the exacions
of the magiftratcs, who ought to have protetecd
them; unreasonable talks arc imposed; the term
of their labour is prolonged, and they groan under
all the insults and wrongs which are the lot of a
dependent people*. From some information on
which I can depend, such opprcflion abounds more
in Peru, than in any other colony. But it'is not
general. According to the accounts, even of those

authors
See N 0 T E LXXXIV.

B O O K authors who are the most disposed to exaggeratethe

VII. sufferings of the Indiians, they, in several provin.

ces, enjoy not only cafe, but affluence; they possess
large farms ; they are masters of numerous herds
and flocks ; and, bythe knowledge which they have
acquired of European arts and industry, are sup-
-plied not only with the necessaries, but with many
luxuries of lifet.

Ecclefi1Ri- AFTER explaining the form of civil policy inthe
cal cc.i.itu- Spanish colonies, and the frate of the various or(rs
tion of the
colonies, of persons subjeC to it, the peculiarities in their

ecclefiallical conftitu.ton merit consideration,
NotwithAfanding the fupecrtitious veneration with
which Atie Spaniards are devoted to the Hly See,
thc vigilant, and jealou' policy of Ferdinand .,irly
prom;pted him to.take precautions againlt the in-
trodufion of the papal d(minion into Ar,cerica,

Restraints With this view, he solicited Alcxander VI. fora
juridn thep grant of the ryiLes in all the newly-difcovered

countries:t, which he obtained on condition of his
making provision for the religious infirution of
the natives. Soon after, Julius II. conferred on
him the right of patronage, and absolute disposal
of all eccletiaffical benefices there§. Both there
pontiffs, unacquainted with the value of what he
demanded, bestowed those donations with an incon-
fidcrate liberality, which their fucceflbrs have of-
ten lamcnted, and wifled to recal. III confe-
quence of thoft grants, the Spanifl monarchs
have becomc, in cfl-ecl, the heads of the Ameri-
can church. In them the administration of its
revenues is veftled. Their nomination of persons t
flpply vacant benefices is infltantly confirllecd by

the

f Ggce's Survey, p. 8 . o0. 4 19, &c. t 1 Illa Akle

VI. A. 1). 5ol. ;1a Solzor. dic jure Ind. il. p. 4.9'
Julii, ii. 1508. Ibid. 509.
376

1. the pope. Thus, in all Spanish America, autho- B o K

rity of every species centers in the crown. There
, no collision is known between spiritual and tempo-

ral jurifdi&ion. The king is the only superior, his
name alone is heard, and no dependence upon any
foreign power has been introduced. Papal bulls
cannot be'admitted into America, nor are they of
any force there, until they have been previously ex-
amined, and approved of by the royal council of
the Indies *; and if any bull should be furreptiti-
pufly introduced, and circulated in America with-
out obtaining that approbation, ecclesiastics are re-
quired not only to prevent it from taking effect,
but to seize all the copies of it, and transmit them
to the council of the Indies t. To this limitation
of the papal jurifdition, equally singular whether
we confider the age and nation in which it was de-
vised, or the jealous attention with which Ferdi-
nand, and his successors, have studied to maintain it
in full force $, Spain is indebted, in a great mea-
sure, for the uniform tranquillity which has reigned'
in her American dominions.

THE hierarchy is efcablifhed in America in the FQrmand1

fame form as in Spain, with its full train of arch- e"ndow-
bishops, billops, deans, and other dignitaries. The urch in
inferior clergy are divided into three classes, under the Spa"nif
the denomination of CURAS, DOCTRINEROS, and cni.
MISSIONERos. The first are parifh-pricits in those
parts of the country where the Spaniards have set-
tled. The second have the charge of such diftricls
as are inhabited by Indians subjected to the Spanish
governlment, and living under its protection. The
third are employed in converting and initrud-ing

VOL. II. c thole

tLx 1

Recopi . ib. i. tit xl. . a l Aut-is Il Conrfeio (ie laq Inias,

clxi. 'l Rccop lb tl. V". i. 55. Rccop. hb.
i, pallira.

378 H IST U K u r a IvI L- . , A.

B o o K those fiercer tribes, which disdain fubmiflion to the
~vnL^ Spanish yoke, and live in remote or inacceflible

regions, to which the Spanish arms have not pene-
trated. So numerous are the 'ecclesiastics of all
those various orders, and such the profuse liberali-
ty with which many of them are endowed, that
therevenues of the church in America are immense.
The superstition of Rome appears with its utmost
pomp in the New World. Churches and convents
there are magnificent and richly adorned; and
on high festivals, the display of gold and silver,
and precious stones, is such as exceeds the concep-
tion of an European *. An ecclesiastical eftablif-
ment so splendid and expensive, is unfavourable, as
has been formerly observed, to the progress of rising
colonies; but in countries where riches abound,
and the people are so delighted with parade, that
religion must assume it, in order to attrad their
veneration, this propensity to ostentation has been
indulged, and becomes less pernicious.

Pernicious THE early inflitution of monasteries in the Spa-
etsChs or
inonatic ih- nifh colonies, and the inconsiderate zeal in multi-
litutioll.- plying them, have been attended with confequen'

ces niore fatal. In every new fcttlement, the sirs
object is to encourage population, and to incite
every citizen to contribute towards augmenting
the strength and number of the community. Du
ring the youth and vigour of society,' while there
is room to fpr)ad, and fuftcnance is procured
with facility, nankind increase with amazing ra-
pidity. But the Spaniards had hardly taken pol
ficfion of America, when, with a noft prepcoli
rous policy, they began to crc-c convents whcreper
sons of both fexcs were shut up, under a vow to dc
feat the purlpolf of nature, and to countcrala the

sirjl
* Vuy. de Ulloa, i. 4.30.

first of her laws. Influenced by a misguided piety, B, o Kc
which ascribes transcendent merit to a itate of
celibacy, or allured by the profped of that lift-
less ease, which, in sultry climates, is deemed fu-
preme felicity, numbers crowd into those mansions
of sloth and superstition, and are loft to society. As
none but persons of Spanish extract are admitted
into the monasteries of the New World, the evil is
more sensibly felt, and every monk or nun, may
be confidered as an active member withdrawn from
civil life. The impropriety of such foundations
in any situation where the extent of territory re-
quires additional hands to improve it, is To obvious,
that some catholic fiates have expressly prohibited
any person in their colonies from taking the monaftie
vows *. Even the Spanish monarchs, on rome oc-
cafions, seem to have been alarmed with the
spreading of a spirit so adverse to the increase and
prosperity of their colonies, that they have endea-
voured to check it t. But the Spaniards in Ame-
rica, more thoroughly under the influence of fu-
perftition than their countrymen in Europe, and
dirctted by ecclesiastics more bigotted and illite-
rate, have conceived such an high opinion of mo-
nastic fanclity, that' no regulations can restrain
their zeal; and, by the excess of their ill-judged
bounty, religious houses have multiplied to a de-
gree no less amazing than pernicious to society ::.

IN viewing the state of colonies, where the'
number and influence of ecclefiafrics is so great, the c
character of this powerful body is an objed that i" sli"'ill
merits particular attention. A considerable part At '
of the fccular clergy in Mexico and Peru are

C cc 2 na-

Voy. de ITllan , ii. 124. t HIerera, dec. v. lib. ix. c. i, i.

Reco1ilX. i. .tit i.

ii . Tit. iv. c. 2. Solonz lib. iii.
C, 23. SCee NOTE LXXXV.

380 HIST UR KY UP r ILK ;A,
B 0 0 K natives of Spain. As persons accufiomed by

VIII. their education to the retirement and indolence

of academic life, are more incapable of aetive
-enterprize, and less disposed to strike into new
paths, than any order of men, the ecclesiastical ad-
venturers by whom the American church is re-
cruited, are commonly such as, from merit or rank
in life, have little profpet of success in their own

ofthe fcu- country. Accordingly, the secular priets in the
siers; e- New World are still less distinguished than their'

brethren in Spain, for literary accomplishments of
any species; and though, by the ample provision
which has been made for the American church, many
of its members enjoy that ease and independence
which is favourable to the cultivation of science;
the body of secular clergy has hardly, during two
centuries and a half, produced one authorwhofe
works convey such useful information, or po0sess
such a degree of merit, as to be ranked among those
which attract the attention of enlightened nations,
But the greatest part of the eclefiaftics in the Spa-
nifh settlements are regulars. On the discovery
fth rCUs. u of America, a new field opened to the pious zeal

of the monaffic orders ; and, with a becoming ala-
crity, they immediately sent forth nifflionaries tola-
bour in it. The firt attempt to inftlruc and convert
the Americans, was made by monks ; and, as soon
as the conquctl of any province was completed,
and its ecclcliailical ellablllhment began to affne
some form, the popes, as a reward of their service,
permitted the millionarics of the four mcndicallt
orders, to accept of parochial charges in Ale-
rica, to perforlm ll firitual funtlionls, and to rc
ceive the tythcs, atid other emoluments of the be
ncficc, without depending on the jurifdidion 0fthe
bilhop of the diocefl, or being fubjcl t to his ce
fures. In confequenceof this, a new career of 01e
fulncfs, as well as new objctts of ambition prc[en'

ted

ted themselves. Whenever a call is made for a fresh B °o K
supply of mifionaries, men of the most ardent and
aspiring minds, impatient under the restraint of a
cloister, weary of its insipid uniformity, and fa-
tigued with the irksome repetition of its frivolous
functions, offer their service with eagerness, and
repair to the New World in quest of liberty and
diflindion. Nor do they pursue them without
success. The highest ecclesiastical honours, and
most lucrative preferments in Mexico and Peru,
are often in the hands of regulars; and to them
chiefly the Americans are indebted for any portion
of science that is cultivated among them. They
are almost the only Spanish ecclesiastics, from
whom we have received any accounts either of the
civil or natural history of the various provinces in
America. Some of them, though deeply tinged
with the indelible fuperilition of their profefflon,
have published books which give a favourable idea
of their abilities. The natural and moral history
of the New World, by the Jesuit Acofta, contains
more accurate observations, perhaps, and more found
science, than are to be found in any'defcription of
remote countries published in the sixteenth century.

BuT the fame difguftwithmonafticlife, to which Diflolute
America is indebted for some initruAors of worth manners of
and abilities, filled it with others of a very diffe- them.
rent character. The giddy, the profligate, the ava-
ricious, to whom the poverty and rigid discipline of
a convent are intolerable, confider a mission to
America as a release from mortification and bon-
dage. There they soon obtain some parochial
clargc, and far removed, by their situation, fiom
the infpcdion of their monastic superiors, and ex-
empt, by their characler, from the jurifdidtion of
their dioccfan §, they are hardly subject to any

controul.
6 Avtenldno Thllc. Indlic. ii. 253.

B 0 0 K controul. According to the testimony of the moR

I zealous catholics, manyof the regular clergy in the

Spanish settlements, are not only destitute of the
virtues becoming their profeflion, but regardless of
that external decorum and refpeca for the opinion
of mankind, which preserve a semblance of worth,
where the reality is wanting. Secure of impunity,
some regulars, in contempt of their vow of poverty,
engage openly in commerce ; and are so rapacious-
ly eager in amassing wealth, that they become the
most grievous oppreflbrs of the Indians, whom it
was their duty to have protected. Others, with no
less flagrant violation of their vow of chastity, in-
dulge with little disguise in the most dissolute li-
centioufnefs t.

VARIOUS schemes have been proposed for redref

sing enormities so manifest and offensive. Several
persons no less eminent for piety than discernment,
have contended, that the regulars, in conformity to
the canons of the church, ought to be confined
within the walls of their cloisters, and fhouldno
longer be permitted to encroach on the funcionsof
the secular clergy. Some public-fpirited magistrates,
friom conviction of its being necessary to deprive the
regulars of a privilege, bestowed at firt with good
intention, but of which time and experience had
discovered the pernicious cffects, openly counten-
anccd the secular clergy in their attempts to aflrt
their own rights. The Prince D'Efquilache, vice-
68 roy of Peru under Philip III. took meaures so dc-

cifive and efflctual for circumscribing the regulars
within their proper fpherc, as itruck them with gc.
neral conftcrnation l:. They had recourfc to their

ustla[

t See NOTE LXXXVI.
382

1 see 1,X.XXVII,

usual arts. They alarmed the superstitious, by B o I K
representing the proceedings of the viceroy as _
innovations fatal to religion. They employed all
the refinements of intrigue, in order to gain per-
sons in power ; and seconded by the powerful in-
fluence of the Jesuits, who enjoyed all the privile-
ges which belonged to the Mendicant orders in
America; they made a deep impreflion on a bi-
goted prince, and a weak minister. The ancient
practice was tolerated. The abuses which it oc-
cafioned continued to increase, and the corruption
of monks, exempt from the restraints of difci-
pline, and the inspection of any superior, became
a disgrace to, religion. At last, as the veneration of
the Spaniards for the monastic orders began to
abate, and the power of the Jesuits was on the
decline, Ferdinand the VI. ventured to apply the June 23..
only effectual remedy, by ifluing an ediAt, prohi- 1 j75
biting Regulars of every denomination from taking
the charge of any pariih with the cure of fouls;
and declaring, that on the demise of the present in-
cumbents, none but secular priests, subject to the
jurifdition of their diocesans, shall be presented to
vacant benefices -. If this regulation is carried
into execution with steadiness, in any degree pro-
portional to the wifdoin with which it is framed,
a very considerable reformation may take place in
tle ccclefiaf-ical state of Spanifhl America, and the
fccular clergy may gradually become a rcfpectable
body of men. The dcportment of many ecclesias-
tics, even at present, fcenm. to be decent and
cxllplar-y, otherwise they would not be held in
fuchi high eflimnation, and poflcfs flich a wonderful
sa'Icndl;nt over the minds of their countrymen,
thioughout all the Spanish fettlemcnts.

' Real Cedula MS. pcnes inc.

B o O BUT whatever merit the Spanish ecclesiastics

VIII- in America may possess, the success of their en-

Small pro- deavours in communicating the knowledge of
grefsincon- true religion to the Indians, has been more imper.
verting the h b

-

Indians to sea than might have been expeeted, either from
Chritiani- the degree of their zeal, or from the dominion
ty' which they had acquired over that people. For

this various reasons may be assigned. The firlt
missionaries, in their ardour to make proselytes,
admitted the people of America into the chriitian
church, without previous inftruaion in thedoc-
trines of religion, and even before they themselves
had acquired such knowledge of their language, as
to be able to explain to them the myiteries of faith,
or the precepts of duty. Refling upon a subtle
diftincion in scholastic theology, they adopted
this strange praAice, no less inconfifrent with the
spirit of a religion, which addresses itself to the un.
derfianding of men, than repugnant to the dicates
of reason. As soon as any body of people, over-
awed by dread of the Spanish power, moved by
the example of their own chiefs, incited by levity,
or yielding from mere ignorance, expressed the
slightest desire of embracing the religion of their
conquerors, they were instantly baptized. While
this rage of conversion continued, a tingle cler-
gyman baptized in one day above five thou-
sand Mexicans, and did not desist until he was
so exhauflcd by fatigue, that he was unable to lift
his hands. §. In the course of a few years, after the
reduction of the Mcxican empire, the sacrament of
baptifin was administered to more than four milli-
ons II. Proselytes adopted with such inconsiderate
haftc, and who were neither inftruted in the nature
of the tenets, to which it was supposed they had
given their affcnt, nor taught the absurdity of thof

which

6 P. T'orribio, MS. Torqucm. Mon. Indl.lib. xvi. c. 6.

P. To.ibi. Ibid. 'liquclu . lib. xvi. c. 8.
384

which they were required to relinquifl, retained B 0 0 K
their veneration for their ancient superstitions in A
full force, or mingled an attachment to its doctrines
i and rites, with that slender knowledge of Chriftiani-

ty which they acquired. These sentiments they
transmitted to their posterity, into whose minds
-they have funk so deep, that the Spanish eccleiaf-
tics, with all their industry, have not been able to
eradicate them. The religious institutions of their
ancestors are rtill remembered, and held in honour
by the Indians, both in Mexico and Peru; and
whenever they think themselves out of reach of
infpeAion by the Spaniards, they assemble and cele-
brate their idolatrous rites .

BUT this is not the most unsurmountable obfta-
cle to the progress of Christianity among the In-
dians. The powers of their uncultivated under-
standings are so limited, their observations and re-
:fletions reach so little beyond the mere objets of
sense, that they seem hardly to have the capacity of
forming abffract ideas, and poflefs not language to
express them. To such men, the sublime and fpi-
ritual doctrines of Christianity muff be incompre-
.'henfible. The numerous and splendid ceremonies
of popish worflip, as they catch the eye, please and
interest them ; but when their initrudtors attempt
toexplain the articles of faith, with which those
,external observances are connested, though they
liften with patience, they so little conceive the
nmeaning of what they hear, that their acquiescence
! does not merit the name of belief. Their indiffer-
encei is ill greater than their incapacity. Atten-
tive only to the present moment, and ingrofll:d by
the oljedts before them, the Indians so se:ldom

VO' L. II. d d rcflecd

3,

Voy. dc Ulloa, i. 341. Tor]u<m,!ib. xv. r. ,3, [,i4 x'i. c, z$.
I'

B o OK BUT whatever merit the Spanish ecclesiastics

vIII- in America may possess, the success of theiren-

Sma pro deavours in communicating the knowledge of
grefsincon- true religion to the Indians, has been more imper.
verting the
Indian6s t sea than might have been expeEted, either from
Chritiani- the degree of their zeal, or from the dominion
ty* which they had acquired over that people. For

this various reasons may be assigned. The first
miflionaries, in their ardour to make proselytes,
admitted the people of America into the christian
church, without previous inftrustion in thedoc-
trines of religion, and even before they themselves
had acquired such knowledge of their language, as
to be able to explain to them the mysteries of faith,
or the precepts of duty. Refting upon a subtle
diftinftion in scholastic theology, they adopted
this strange pracice, no less inconfihient with the
spirit of a religion, which addresses itself to the un-
derifanding of men, than repugnant to the disates
of reason. As soon as any body of people, over-
awed by dread of the Spanish power, moved by
the example of their own chiefs, incited by levity,
or yielding from mere ignorance, expressed the
slightest desire of embracing the religion of their
conquerors, they were instantly baptized. While
this rage of conversion continued, a single cler-
gyman baptized in one day above five thou-
sand Mexicans, and did not desist until he was
so exhaufled by fatigue, that he was unable to lift
his hands. §. In the course of a few years, after the
reduction of the Mexican empire, the sacrament of
baptifin was adlminiftered to more than four milli-
ons 11. Proselytes adopted with such inconsiderate
haRfc, and( who were neither instructed in the nature
of the tenets, to which it was lfuppofcd they had
given their af;lnt, nor taught the absurdity of thoil

which

P. Torribio, MS. Torquem. Mon. Ind. llb. xvi. c. 6.
P. TorAiib. Ibid. 'Tolqncun i .

li vi. c. S.
384

, which they were required to relinquish, retained B o o K

VIII.

. their veneration for their ancient superstitions in
. full force, or mingled an attachment to its doctrines
; and rites, with that slender knowledge of Chriitiani-
ty which they acquired. These sentiments they
transmitted to their posterity, into whose minds
they have funk so deep, that the Spanish ecclesias-
tics, with all their industry, have not been able to
eradicate them. The religious inititutions of their
ancestors are fill remembered, and held in honour
by the Indians, both in Mexico and Peru; and
whenever they think themfa-lves out of reach of
infpeaion by the Spaniards, they assemble and cele-
brate their idolatrous rites *

BUT this is not the most unsurmountable obfta-
cle to the progress of Christianity among the In-
dians. The powers of thcir uncultivated under-
standings are so limited, their observations and re-
fletions reach so little beyond the mere objedts of
sense, that they seem hardly to have the capacity of
forming abstract ideas, and poflefs not language to
express them. To such men, the sublime and fpi-
ritual doctrines of Christianity mufl be inconpre-
henfible. The numerous and fplendLd ceremonies
of popish worflhip, as they catch the eye, please and
interest them ; but when their infirudtors attempt
toexplain the articles of faith, with which those
.external observances are connected, though they
liften with patience, they so little conceive the
meaning of what they hear, that their acquiescence
does not merit the name of belief. Their indiffir-
ence is still greater than their incapacity. Attcn-
tivc only to the prefcnt momcnt, and ingroflcd by
the objedts before them, the Indians to seldom

VOL.. II. ) d d rtfled
Voy. dUllo, i. 341. Tor(uCm>!ib, xv.c. 3. Li., xvi. c t.

Gag% ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ " ^"/j.S

B O O K reficEt upon what is pafl, or take thought for what

VIII. is to come, that neither the promises, nor threats of
k'c -- religion, make much impression upon them; and

while their foresight rarely extends so far as the
next day, it is almost impossible to inspire them
with solicitude about the concerns of a future world,
Af-oniihed equally at their slowness of comprehen-
sion, and at their insensibility, some of the early
miflionaries pronounced them a race of men so bru-
tifh, as to be incapable of undertlanding the firlt
principles of religion. A council held atLima
decreed, that, on account of this incapacity, they
ought to be excluded from the facramcnt of theEu.
charift . And though Paul III. by his famous
bull, issued in the year 1537, declared them tobe
rational creatures, entitled to all the privileges of
chritiians t ; yet, after the lapfc of two centuries,
during which they have been members of the
church, so imperfcit are their attainments in know.
ledge, that very few poflefs such a portion offpiri
tual discernment, as to be deemed worthy of being
admitted to the holy communion t. From thisideaof
their incapacity and imperfect knowledge ofreligion,
when the zeal of Philip I1. eflablifhed the inquifi'
tion in Americ a in the year J 570, the Indians were
excerpted front the jurifd iion of that severe tribu'
nal §, and tit continue under the infpeaionfl
their diocesans. Even after the most perse2 i1.'
firu6tion, their faith is held to be feeble anl dubi'
ous; and though some of them have been taughl
the learned l;lnguaes, and have gone through th
ordinary courli: of academic education withlaP
plause, their frailty is itill so mluch fufpeltedll'
no Indianl is either ordained a priest, or receivedil
to any religious order . ]'

' l
T quenli lib. xvi. c. o. l-

' T, i. xvi. , 5 i,

ri, oi - ,

1 . 't Voy de U ll(a, i. 343 . lt. I.E LX 11
tit. i.I. 35. ii Toilucm, lib,. vii. . 13. Sc NOe LXX

FROM this brief survey, some idea may be formed B 0 0 K.

of the interior slate of the Spanish colonies. The vim.
various productions with which they fiupply anden- Produations
rich the mother-country, and the system of commer- nif hc'olo
cial intercourfr between them, come next in order nies.
to be explained. If the dominions of Spain in the
New World, had been of such moderate extent, as
bore any proportion to the parent state, the progrcfis
of her colonizing might have been attended with
the fame benefit as that of other nations. But when,
in less than half a century, her inconsiderate
rapacity had seized on countries larger than
all Europe, her inability to fill such vast regions,
with a number of inhabitants fuflicient for the cul-
tivation of them, was so obvious, as to give a wrong
direcion to all the efforts of the coloniess. They
did not form compa& settlements, where industry,
circumscribed within limits, both in its views and
operations, is condu&ed with that fober persevering
spirit, which gradually converts whatever is in its
poffefion to its proper use, and derives from it the
greatest advantage. Instead of this, the Spaniards,
seduced by the boundless profped which opened to
them, divided their poffeflions in America into go-
vernments of vafl extent. As their number was
too final to attempt the regular culture of the im-
mense provinces, which they occupied rather than
peopled, they bent their attention to a few objects,
that allured them with hopes of sudden and exorbi-
tant gain, and turned away with contempt from the
humbler paths of industry, which lead more slowly,
but with greater certainty, to wealth and increase
of national ffrength.

i OF all the methods by which riches may be ac-
Lquilr, that of searching for the precious metals is in
"ne of the mnolt inviting to men, who are either un-
accultlomed t to he regular assiduity with which

D d d 2 the

__

B 0 0 K the culture of the earth, and the operations of com-
,_11 merce muff be carried on, or so enterprising and

rapacious, as not to be satisfied with the gradual
returns of profit which they yield. Accordingly,
as Coon as the several countries in America Were
fubjeted to the dominion of Spain, this was almost
the only method of acquiringwealth which occurred
to the adventurers, by whom they were conquered,
Such provinces of the continent as did not allure
them to fettle, by the profpet of their affording
gold and silver, were totally neglected. Thofe,in
which they met with a disappointment of the fan-
guine expectations they had formed, were abandon-
ed. Even the value of the islands, the first fruits of
their discoveries, and the first objea of their
attention, funk so much in their estimation,
when the mines which they had opened there were
exhausted, that they were deserted by many of the
planters, and left to be occupied by more induftri-
ous possessors. All crowded to Mexico and Peru,
where the vafi quantities of gold and silver found
among the natives, who searched for themwith lit-
tle industry, and less skill, promised an unexhauted
store, as the recompence of more intelligent and
persevering efforts.

Difcovey ,,f DURING several years, the ardour of their re-
thnfe ot' Po-
toil and S - searches was kept up by hope, rather than success.
cotecOa, At length, the rich silver mines of Potofi, in Peru,

were accidentally discovered in the year 1545t'
by an Indian, as he was clambering up the moun-
tain, in pursuit of a Llama which had flrayed fromn
his flock. Soon after the mines of Sacotecas, l
New Spain, little inferior to the other in valle'
were opened. From that time, fucceflive difcove-
rics have bcea made in both colonies, and flier

miles
.. IFcrnandIcz, p. i, lii. xi. c. II.

mines are now so numerous, that the working of B o o K
them, and of rome few mines of gold in the pro- ,_
vinces of Tierra Firme, and the new kingdom of
Granada, has become the capital occupation of the
Spaniards, and is reduced into a system no less com-
plicated than interesting. To describe the nature
of the various ores, the mode of extracting them
from the bowels of the earth, and to explain the
several processes by which the metals are Separated
from the substances with which they are mingled,
either by the acion of fire, or the attractive powers
of mercury, is the province of the natural philofo-
pher or chymift, rather than of the hiitorian.

THE exuberant profusion with which the moun- Riches

tains of the New World poured forth their trea- which they
fures, astonished mankind, accustomed hitherto to
receive a penurious supply of the precious metals,
from the more scanty itores contained in the mines
of the ancient hemisphere. According to principles
of computation, which appear to be extremely mo-
derate, the quantity of gold and silver that has been
regularly entered in the ports of Spain, is equal in
value to four millions sterling annually, reckoning
from the year 1492, in which America was disco-
vered to the present time. This in two hundred
and eighty-three years, amounts to eleven hundred
and thirty-two millions. Immense as this fum is,
the Spanilh writers contend, that as much more
ought to be added to it, in consideration of the
treasure which has bccn extradcd from the mines,
without paying duty to the king. By this account,
Spain has drawn from the New World a supply of
wealth, amounting at least to two thoulland mil-
lions of pounds ftcrling §.

IJ/t.ri , viIhCar. Y. I' . dl Comrrcr, c. 3. H-erIre., dec. viii.
i. x. c. .15 Ste NOTE LXXXIX.

B 0 0 K TlHE mines, which have yielded this amazing

10 . quantity of trealture, are not worked at the expence

Spirit t; of the crown, or of the public. In order toencou.
whikh this riag private adventurers, the person who discovers a
gives rile. :D

new vein, is entitled to the property of it. Upon
laving his claim before the governor of the province,
a certain extent of land is measured off, and a cer-
tain number of Indians allotted him, under the ob-
ligation of his opening the mine within a limited
time, and of nis paying the customary duty to the
king, for what it lhall produce. Invited by the fa-
cility with which such grants are obtained, anden-
couraged by Tome striking examples of success in
this line of adventure ; not only the sanguine and
the bold, but the timid and diffident enter upon it
with astonishing ardour. With vast objets always
in view, fed continually with hope, and expecting
every moment that fortune will unveil her secret
stores, and give them up to their withes, they deem
every other occupation insipid and uninteresting.
The charms of this pursuit, like the rage for deep
play, is so bewitching, and take such full poffeflion
of the mind, as even to give a new bent to the na-
tural temper. Under its influence, the cautious
become enterprizing, and the covetous profile.
Powerful as this charm naturally is, its force is
augmented by the arts of an order of men known
in Peru, by the cant name of SEARCHERS. Thele
arc commonly persons of desperate fortunes, who,
availing themselves of tome skill in mineralogy,
accompanied with the insinuating manner, and col-
sident pretensions peculiar to projecors, addrcfs the
wealthy and the credulous. By plausible defcrip-
tions of the appearances which they have discovercd
of rich veins hitherto unexplored; by producing
when requisite, specimens ofpromifing ore; by as-
firming, with an imposing afiurance, that flccrcf i
certain, and th;at the expence must be trifling

they

they seldom fail to persuade. An afliciation is B 0 0 K
formed ; a small fum is advanced by each co-part- ^ l
ner; the mine is opened ; the SERCHER is entrust-
ed with the sole direction of every operation; un-
foreseen difficulties occur ; new demands of money
are made ; but amidst a succession of disappoint-
ments and delays, hope is never extinguifled, and
the ardour of expectation hardly abates. For it is
observed, that if any person once enter this seducing
path, it is almost impoflibie to return ; his ideas
alter, he seems to be pofliiTcd with another spirit,
visions of imaginary wealth are continually t:efore
his eyes, and he thinks, and fpcaks, and dreams of
nothing else .

SUCH is the spirit that must be formed, wherever Fatalecf'te

of it.

the acive exertions of any society are chiefly em-
ployed in working mines of gold and silver. No
spirit is more adverse to such improv-ment in agri-
culture and commerce, as render a natlDn really
opulent. If the system of administration in the
Spanifi colonies had been founded upon principl-:s
of found policy, the power and ingenuity of thi: le-
giflature would have been exerted with as much ar-
dour, in reitraining its fuiljeds fiom such pernici-
ous industry, as is now employed in alluring them
towards it. " Projects of mining (fays a good judge
"of the political conduct of nations) infl-ad of
t replacing the capital employed in them, togethcr

with the ordinary profit of stock, conmmonly ab-
' sorb both capital and profit. 'I'hey are the pro-
"jcels, therefore, to which, of all ol:hers, a pru-

dent law-giver, who desired to incrcafe the capi-
tal of his nation, would least chufc to give any
"extraordinary encouragement, or to turi1 towards

' themi
0 Ullog En~tretell, I. 2:3l

B O O tK C them a greater share of that capital than would

o P_ " oo to t hem of its own accord. Such, in reality

" is the absurd confidence which all men have in
" their own good fortune, that wherever there is

the leafi probability of success, too great a share

" of it is apt to go to them of its own accord '."
But in the Spanish colonies, government is studious
to cherish a spirit which it should have laboured to
depress, and by the fanrion of its approbation aug.
ments that inconsiderate credulity, which has turn-
ed the aaive indufiry of Mexico and Peru into such
an improper channel. To this may be imputed
the slender progress which they have made during
two centuries and a half, either in useful manufac-
tures, or in those lucrative branches of cultivation,
which furnifhi the colonies of other nations with
their staple commodities. In comprrifon with the
precious metals, every bounty of nature is so much
despised, that this extravagant idea of their value
has mingled with the idiom of the language in A-
merica, and the Spaniards fettled there denominate
a country, RICH, not from the fertility of its foil,
the abundance of its crops, or the exuberance of its
pastures, but on account of the minerals which its
mountains contain. In quest of these, they aban-
don the delightful plains of Peru and Mexico,
and retort to barren and uncomfortable regions,
where they have built some of the largest towns
which they poficfs in the New World. As the
activity and enterprise of the Spaniards originally
took this dirc'tioln, it is now lo difficult to bend
them a different way, that although, friom various
caufcs, the gain of working ines is much decreaf
ed; tih f.ifcinaition continues, and almolft every
perfion, 'who takes any atctive part in the commerce
of New S.laili or 'PruL, is till engl:ged in tomc ad
ventutc of tiis kind . I ;'

* D~1. J:d:CI.
ILY. 3,'~. A

1 !.oec N (T EL X C

,uT th6oigh mines are the chief objet of at- B °0 K.

tention to the Spaniards, and the precious metals _-
which they yield, form the principal article in Other com-
their commerce ; the fertile countries which they the S'panif
possess, supply them with other commoditiesoffuch colonies.
value or scarcity, as to attract a considerable degree
of attention. Cochineal is a production almost pe-
culiar to New Spain, of such demand in commerce,
that the sale is always certain, and it yields such
profit, as amply rewards the pains and attention
employed in rearing the curious infedcs of which
this valuable drug is composed, and preparing it for
the market. Quinquina, or Jesuits Bark, the most
salutary simple, perhaps, and of most restorative
virtue, that Providence, in compaflion for human
infirmity, has made known unto man, is found
only in Peru, to which it affords a lucrative
branch of commerce §. The indigo of Guati-
mala is superior in quality to that of any pro-
vince in America, and cultivated to a confide-
rable extent. Cacao, though not peculiar to the
Spanish colonies, attains to its highefl state of per-
feetio there, and from the great colnfulnption of
chocolate in Europe, as well as in America, is a
valuable commodity. The tobacco of Cuba, of
more exquisite flavour than any brought from the
NewWorld ; the sugar raised in that island, in -if-
panliola, and in New Spain ; together with drugs of
various kinds, may be mentioned among the natu-
ral prodtucions of America, which Cnrich the Sp-..
nifh commerce. To there muff be added an article
of no ilconfiderable account, the exportation of
h1dcs; fiol which, as well as for 'an'y of thoC'L
which i have elncnrated, the Spaniards are nmoi
indcbtcd to the wonderful fertility of tie coun-
try than to their own tfrcefght ail indllyli. The
oftic animls of l urop(., p;rticulrly lhorned

*

See NC E, X'e cttle
§ lit* KNo'T: XCI.

B 0 0 K cattle, have multiplied in the New World with a
,___^ rapidity which almost exceeds belief. A few years

after the Spaniards fettled there, the herds of tame
cattle became 'so numerous, that their proprietors
reckoned them by thousands *. Less attenti.
on being paid to them, as they continued to
increase, they were suffered to run wild, and
spreading over a country of boundless ex-
tent, under a mild climate, and covered with
rich pasture, their number became immense,
They range over the vafi plains which extend from
Buenos Avyres, towards the Andes, in herds of
thirtv or fortv thousand ; and the unlucky travel-
ler who once falls in among them, may proceed
several days before he can disentangle himself
from among the crowd that covers the face of the
earth, and ieems to have no end. They are hardlylefs
numerous in New Spain, and in several other pro-
vinces : these are killed merely for the fakeof their
hides; and the slaughter at certain seasons is so
great, that the stench of the carcases, -which are
left in the field, would affect the air, if large
packs of wild dogs, and vast flocks of GALLINAZOS,
or American vultures, the moit voracious 'of all
the feathetred kind, did not inltantly devourthem.
The number of those hides exported in every feet
to Europe is prodigious, and is a lucrative bran'c
of commerce ~.

ALMOST all those articles may be confideredas
aple commolndities peculiar to America, and difle
rent, if we except that last mentioned, from the
productions of the mother country.

;,,hi,},>,,s W/HEN the importation into Spain of thofe0va
d(1". " rious articles froln her colonies, first becanme live
ti. Lli.iic-, . alld

* Ovir;do ; p. Rtliuis iii. o01, B. HI-:clurvt,

i;. 4- 66 5'',,'

1 , i.,t )i, li . c.

ii . (.

3. Ov:llo ifli. of (C"i'l .Cl i

i;i , ,. fep lbid. v. p. 68o. 69z. Lcttres ,dif: xiii. i'
irc ill¢C. i. "49.

___^_______ _____

and confilerable, her interior induifry and manu- O O K
fa1ltres were in a state so prosperous, that with the I_
produ& of there, the was able both to purchase the
commodities of the New World, and to answer its
growing demands. Under the reigns of Ferdinand
and Isabella, and Charles V. Spain was one of the
mol- industrious countries in Europe. Her manu-
f.iu!cr; in wool, and flax, and silk, were so exten-
five, as not only to furnith what was filfficient for
her own consumption, but to afford a surplus for
exportation. When a market for them, formerly
unknown, and to which nte alone had access,
opened in America, she had recourse to her do-
meftic store, and found there an abundant supply*.
This new employment must naturally have added
Vivacity to the spirit of industry. Nourished and
invigorated by it, the manufactures, the popula-
tion, and wealth of Spain might have gone on in-
creating in the fame proportion with her colonies.
Nor was the slate of the Spanith marine at this pe-
riod less flourishing than that of its manufactures.
In the beginning of the sixteenth century, Spain is
fai to have poffeflcd above a thousand merchant
ships t, a number probably far superior to that of
any nation in Europe. By the aid which foreign
trade and domestic industry give reciprocally to
each other in their progress, the algmentation
of both mufft have been rapid and extensive, and
Spain might have received the fame acceflion of
opulence and vigour fromn her acquisitions in the
New WVorld, that other powers have derived from
their colonies there.

BUT various causes prevented this. It is with why ae

nations as with individuals, when wealth flows in docs n
gradually, and with moderate increase, it feeds I';Itdive1
;nd nouriflics that adcivity which is friendly to

I e c 2 COIl-
't Sec NOTE XCII. Cnmpom.ancs, ii. 14.o.

B O O K merce, and calls it forth into vigorous and well

VIm. conduced exertions ; but when it pours in fud.

denly, and with too full a stream, it overturns all
fober plans of induitry, and brings along with it a
taste for what is wild, and extravagant, and daringin
business or in action. Such was the great and fud.
den augmentation of power and revenue, that the
pofl'elon of America brought into Spain, and some
symptoms of its pernicious influence upon the poli-
tical operations of that monarchy ibon began toap.
pear. For a considerable time, however, the sup.
ply of treasure from the New World was scanty
and precarious, and the genius of Charles V. con-
duced public measures with such prudence, that
the effects of this influence were little perceived.
But when Philip II. ascended the Spanish throne,
with talents far inferior to those of his father, and
remittances from the colonies became a regularand
vast branch of revenue, the fatal operation of this
rapid change in the state of the kingdom, both on
the monarch and his people, was at once conlpicu-
ous. Philip, poneffi'ng that lpirit of unceafingaf-
fiduity, which often characterizes the ambitionof
men of moderate talents, entertained such an high
opinion of his own resources, that he thought no-
thing too arduous for him to undertake. Shut
up hifIelf in the folitudc of the Escurial, he trou-
bled and annoyed all the n:itions around him. Hi
waged open war with the Dutch and Englifll; he
encouraged and aided a rebellious faicioni
France; he conquered Portugal, and ininitil'"
cd armies and garrisons in Italy, Africa, and boih
the Indies. By such a multiplicity of grcat and conl
plicatcd operations, pursued with ardour durigl
the cou rfe of a long reign, Spain was drained bot
of men and money. Under the weak adminisl''
on of his fucceflhr Ph ilip 11.1. the vigour of thncla'
tion continllud to dccrcise, and frulnk into the lowd'

decline, when the inconsiderate bigotry of thatmo- B O O K
narch expelled at once near a million of his most in- VII.
duiRrious subje&s, at the very time when the exhaust- A. D. xAxi.
ed state of the kingdom required fomne extraordina-
ry exertion of political wisdom to augment its
numbers, and to revive its strength. Early in the
seventeenth century, Spain felt such a diminution
in the number of her people, that from inability to
recruit her armies, she was obliged to contract her
operations., Her flourishing manufactures were
fallen into decay. Her fleets, which had been the
terror of all Europe, were ruined. Her extensive
foreign commerce was loft. The trade between
different parts of her own dominions was interrup-
ted, and the ships which attempted to carry it on,
were taken and plundered by enemiies, whom they
once despised. Even agriculture, the primary ob-
je& of indufiry in every prosperous state, was ne-
gle6ted, and one of the most fertile countries
in Europe hardly raised what was sufficient for the
support of its own inhabitants.

IN proportion as the population and manu- Rapid dec

fa8tures of-the parent state declined, the demands dine of its
of her colonies continued to increase. The Spa-
niards, like their monarchs, intoxicated with the
wealth which poured in annually upon.them, de-
fertcd the paths of industry, to which they had
been accustomed, and repaired with cagernefs to
those regions from which this opulence issued. By
this rage of emigration, another drain was opened,
and the strength of the colonies augmented by ex-
haufting that of the mother-country. All those
emigrants, as well as the adventurers, who had
;Lt first fettled in America, depended abfollutcly up-
on Spain for almnoft every article of neceflal-y coh-
fumption. Engaged in Imore alluring and Ilucrative
pursuits, or prevented by rcflraints which govern-

Incllt

B O O K ment imposed, they could not turn their own atten.

tion towards establishing the manufactures requisite
for comfortable -subsistence. They received (as
have observed in another place) theirclothing, their
furniture, whatever ministers to the ease or luxury
of life, and cvcn their instruments of labour from
Europe. Spain, thinned of people, and void of n-
duftry, was unable to supply their increafingde-
mands. She h.ad recourse to her neighbours. The
manufactures of the Low Countries, of England,
of i rance, and of Italy, which, her wants called
into exiiftnce, or animated with new vivacity, fur-
niihed in abundance whatever Phe required. In vain
did t;i fundamcntal law, concerning the exclusion
of foreigners from trade with iAm erica, oppofethis
innovation. Nece:llty, more powerftil than anylh-
tute, defcatcd its operations, and constrained the
Spaniards thefekl;es to concur in eluding it. The
Engliih, the French, and Dutch, relying on the
fidelity and honour of Spanish merchants, wholend
their names to cover the deceit, fend out their
manufacures to America, and receive the exorbi-
tant price for which they are fold there, either in
specie, or in the rich commodities of the New
World. Neither the dread of dan r, nor the al-
lurement of profit, ever induced ;i Spanish factorto
betray or defraud the person who confidcd in him i
and that probity, which is the pride and diltil i-
on of the nation, contributes to its ruin. In1
short time, not above a twentieth part of thc com-
modities exported to Amcricawas of Spanih growth
or fabric t, All the rift was the property ol forcir;;
Inerchants, though entered in the name of Spani-
ards. The trcafure of the New WVorld mia)b'
said henceforward not to have belonged to Sainl
Before it reached Europe, it was anticipated as the

price

* Z isil.i R,.:'icC , .B )l p. 226. .1 C,~iii)on~fl es)

h
398

price of goods purchased from foreigners. That B °0 K

VIII.

wealth, which, by an internal circulation, would
have spread through each vein of industry, and have
conveyed life and acAivity to every branch of ma-
nufacture, flowed out of the kingdom with such a
rapid course, as neither enriched nor animated it.
On the other hand, the artisans of rival nations,
encouraged by this quick sale of their commodities,
improved so much in flill and indufiry, as to be able
to afford them at a rate so low, that the manufac-
tures of Spain, which could not vie with theirs,
either in quality or cheapness of work, were fill
farther deprefled. This deftrudive commerce
drained off the riches of the nation faster and more
completely, than even the extravagant schemes of
ambition carried on by its monarchs. Spain was
so much astonished and diftrelfed, at beholding her
American treasures vaniflh almost as soon as they
were imported, that Philip III. unable to supply
what was requisite in circulation, issued an edit,
by which he endeavoured to raise copper money, to
a value in currency nearly equal to that of silver § ;
and the lord of the Peruvian and Mexican mines
was reduced to a wretched expedient, which is the
la's resource of petty impoveriflcd states.

I'HUS the pofleffions of Spain in America have

not proved a source of population and of w:c'.th to
her, in the fame manner as those of other nations. In
the countries of Europe, where the spirit of indus-
try 'ubfi fs in full vigour, every person fettl: d in
fitch colonies as are similar in their situation to
tllhte of Spain, is supposed to give employment to
'itce or four at home in fu pplying his wants '.
lilt wherever the mother-country cannot afford this

fupt)ly
§ Ult'll' cC. 1C4.

-I Cllild on trandc acni colouies.

490
B O K supply, every emigrant may.be confidered as aciti.

VIW_. Zen loft to the community, and strangers mut reap

all the benefit of answering his demands.

Increafedby SUCH has been the internal frate of Spain
the mode of from the close of the sixteenth century, and such
ts inntei- her inability to supply the growing wants of her co.
,ourfe with lonies. The fatal effects of this disproportion be,
America. tween their demands, and her capacity of answering

them, have been much increased by the mode in
which Spain has endeavoured to regulate the inter-
course between the mother-country and the colo-
nies. It is from her idea of monopolizing the trade
with America, and debarring her fubjeds therefrom
any communication with foreigners, that all her
jealous and systematic arrangements have arisen.
These are so singular in their nature and confequen-
ces, as to merit a particular explanation. In order
to secure the monopoly at which the aimed, Spain
did not vest the trade with her colonies in an exclu-
five company, a plan which has been adopted by
nations more commercial, and at a period when
mercantile policy was an objet of greater attenti-
on, and ought to have been better underltood. The
Dutch gave up the whole trade with their colonies
both in the East and Well Ind ies, to exclusive com-
panies. The English, the French, the Danes, have
imitated their example with refped to the East In-
dian commerce; and the two former have laid afimi,
lar refiraint upon rome branches of their trade with
the NewWorld. The wit of man cannot, perhaps,
devise a meth9d for checking the progress of indus-
try and population in a new colony more cffeEtual
than this. The interest of the colony, and the ex
clufive company, must in every point be dianetri-
cally opposite ; and as the latter poflcfls such ad-
vantages in this unequal contest, that it ca"
prefaribe at pleasure the terms of intercourlfl

the

the former must not only buy dear and fell cheap, B 0 0 K
I but susser the mortification of having the increase _

of their surplus fock discouraged by those very per-
sons to whom alone they are permitted to dispose of
itt.

SPAIN, it is probable, was preserved from falling This confin.
into this error in policy, by the high ideas which ed to one

port in

The early formed concerning the riches of the New Spain.
World. Gold and silver were commodities of'too
high value to veRf a monopoly of them in private
hands. The crown wished to retain the direcion
of a commerce so inviting; and in order to secure
that, ordained that the cargo of every ihip fitted dut'
for America, should be infpeded by the officers of
the CASA DE CONTRATACION in Seville, before it
could receive a licence to make the voyage ; and
that on its return, a report of the commodities which
it brought should be made to the fame board, be-
'fore it could be permitted to land them. In con-
sequence of this regulation, all the trade of Spain
'with the New World centered in the port of Se-
ville, and was gradually brought into a form, in
which it has been conducted, with little variation,
from the middle of the sixteenth century alinot to
our own times. For the greater fectliity of the va-
'luable cargoes sent to America, as well as for the
more easy prevention of fraud, the commerce of
Spain with its colonies is carried on by fleets, which
fail under firong convoys. These fleets consisting
of two squadrons, one lifliilguiihed by the name of
GALEONS, the other by that of the FLOTA, are
equipped annually. Formerly they took their de-
parture from Seville; but as the port of Cadiz has
been found more commodious, they have failed from
it since the year 1720.

VOL. II. F f f T

t Snith>~ IquIl'Y, ii. 17x.

B 0 0 K THE Galeons destined to supply Tierra Firme,

VIII. and the kingdoms of Peru and Chili, with almost
Caried'on every article of luxury, or necessary consumption,
by the that an opulent people can demand, touch firfiat
CGalens, Carthagena, and then at Porto-bello. To the for.

mer, the merchants of Santa Martha, Caraccas,
the New kingdom of Granada, and several other
provinces resort. The latter is the great martfor
the rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At the sea.
son when the Galeons are expected, the product of
all the mines in these two kingdoms, together with
their other valuable commodities, is tranfportedby
sea to Panama. From thence, as soon as the ap.
pearance of the fleet from Europe is announced,
they are conveyed across the isthmus, partly on
mules, and partly down the river Chagre toPorto.
bello. This paltry village, whose climate, from
the pernicious union of excessive heat, continual
moisture, and the putrid exhalations arising froma
rank foil, is more fatal to life than any perhapsin
the known world, is immediately filled with
people. From being the residence of a few negrocs
and mulattoes, and of a miserable garrison relieved
every three months, its streets are crowded with
opulent merchants from every corner of Peru, and
the adjacent provinces. A fair is opened, the wealth
of America is exchanged for the manufaaures of
Eu ople, and during itsprcfcribed term of fortydays,
the richetf traffic on the face of the earth is begun
and finifled, with that simplicity of tranlfaaion aid
unbounded confidence, which accompany cxtcnliv
,d t. commerce :[:. The Flota holds its course to Vcr

Cruz. Tlhe treasures and commodities of Nce
Spain, and the depending provinces, which were
dUpofited at Los Angeles in expctation of its arri,
val, are carried thither, and the commercial opera

tions
1 See NOTE XCIII.

! tions of Vera Cruz, conducLed in the fame manlner o ( K

with those of Porto-bello, are inferior to them only ,
in importance and value. Both fleets, as soon as
they have completed their cargoes from America,
rendezvous at the Havanna, and return in compa-
ny to Europe.

THE trade of Spain with her colonies, while thus adaoffetof

this ar-

fettered and restricted, came necessarily to be con- rangement.
duted withthe fame spirit, and upon the fame prin-
ciples, as that of an exclusive company. Being
confined to a single port, it was of course thrown
into a few hands, and almost the whole of it was
gradually engrossed by a small number of wealthy
houses, formerly in Seville, and now in Cadiz.
These by combinations, which they can easily form,
may altogether prevent that competition which
preserves commodities at their natural price; and
by acing in concert, to which they are prompted
by their mutual interest, they may raise or lower
their value at pleasure. In qonfequence of this,
the price of European goods in America is always
high, and often exorbitant. A hundred, two hun-
dred, and even three hundred per cent. are profits
not uncommon in the commerce of Spain with her
colonies*. From the fame engrofling spirit it fre-i
quently happens, that traders of the second order,
whose warehouses do not contain a complete assort-
ment of commodities for the American market,
cannot purchase from the more opulent merchants,
such goods as they want, at a lower price than that
for which they are fold in the colonies. With the
fame vigilant jealousy that an exclufivc company
guards againfl the intrusion of the siee trader, thofi
overgrown monopolists endeavour to check the
progress of every one whose cncroachments

F f f 2 they
* B. Ulloa Retablifl; part ii. p. 19g.

B o I K meftic as well as foreign, languished. These evils

l^_^ continued to increase, and Spain, with dominions

more extensive and more opulent than any Euro.
pean state, possessed neither vigour, nor monoy t,
nor industry. At length, the violence of agreat
national convulsion rouzed the flumberinggenius
of Spain, and the efforts of the two contending
parties in the civil war, kindled by the dispute con-
cerning the fucceflion of the crown at the begin-
ning of this century, called forth, in Tome degree,
the ancient spirit and vigour of the nation. While
men were forming, capable of adopting more liberal
sentiments, than those which had influenced the
councils of the monarchy during the course of a
century, Spain derived from an unexpected source
the means of availing itself of their talents. The
various powers who favoured the pretensions either
of the Austrian or Bourbon candidate for the Spa.
nifh throne, sent formidable fleets and armies to
their support. France, England, and Holland re-
mitted immense fums to Spain. These were spent
in the provinces which became the theatre of war.
Part of the American treasure, of which they had
drained the kingdom, flowed back thither. From
this aera, one of the most intelligent Spanish au-
thors, dates the revival of the monarchy; and,
however humiliating the truth may be, he acknow-
ledges, that it is to her enemies his country is in-
debted for the acquisition of a fund of circulating
specie, in some measure adequate to the exigencies
of the public :.

Steps to- As soon as the Bourbons obtained quiet pofefi-
w.vrds irn on of the throne, they discerned this change in the

Titcome 8Ur- spirit of the people, and in the PtIte of the natiol,

hy time Bour i o
Icon ino- and took advantage of it ; for although that fatni-
lltrchls, l

'I- See NOTE XCIV.

t. CampOlT"sll cs i 42O.

ly has not given monarchs to Spain, remarkable
for superiority of genius, they have all been bene-
ficent princes, attentive to the happiness of their
fubjeds, and solicitous to promote it. It was, ac-
cordingly, the first object of Philip V. to suppress
an innovation which had crept in during the course
of the war, and overturned the whole system of the
Spanish commerce with America. The Engliih
and Dutch, by their superiority in naval power,
having acquired such command of the seas, as'to
cut off all intercourse between Spain and her colo-
nies, Spain, in order to furnish them those neceffa-
ries of life, without which they could not exifr,
and as the only means of receiving from thence any
partof their treasure, departed so far from the usual
rigour of its maxims, as to open the trade with
Peru to her allies the French. The merchants of
St. Malo, to whom Louis XIV. granted the privi-
lege of this lucrative commerce, engaged in it with
vigour, and carried it on upon principles very dif-
ferent from those of the Spaniards. They supplied
Peru with European commodities at a more mode-
rate price, and not in stinted quantity; the goods
which they imported were conveyed to every pro-
vince of Spanish America, in frich abundance as
had never been known in any former period. If
this intercourse had been continued, the exportati-
on of European commodities from Spain must have
ceased, and the dependence of tile colonies on the
mother-country have been at an end. The most
pe(remptory injundions were therefore issued, pro-
hibiting the admission of foreign veflels into any
port of Peru or Chili :, and a Spanilh squadron
was cemployed to clear the South Sea of intruders,
whose aid was no longer neccfary.

IT14,111 Voy. 256. B. LI10o RQdLb, ii. 104 &-C, Akcedoy Ilc-Itc
N Alvii',,&, 36,

4o7
B 0.0 K

VIII.

by exclud-
ing foreig-
nerg from {'
trade with
Peru ;

Z7x1;

B 0 0 K BUT though, on the cessation of the war, which

aV ,. was terminated by the treaty of Utrecht, Spain

by checking obtained relief from one encroachment on her com-
£ontraband mercial system, ihe was exposed to another which

the deemed hardly less pernicious. As an induce.
ment that might prevail with Queen Anne to con.
elude a peace, which France and Spain defiredwith
equal ardour, Philip V. not only conveyed to Great

particuarly Britain the ASSIENTO, or contract for supplying
oftheEng- the Spanish colonies with negroes, which had for.
lifhAffinto merly been enjoyed by France, but granted it the
company,

more extraordinary privilege of fending annually to
the fair of Porto-bello a ship of five hundred tons,
laden with European commodities. In confe.
quence of this, British satories were eflablifiedat
Carthagena, Panama, Vera Cruz, Buenos Ayres,
and other Spanish settlements. The veil with
which Spain had hitherto covered the slate and
tranfadions of her colonies was removed. The
agents of a rival nation, residing in the towns of
most extensive trade, and of chief retort, had the
best opportunities of becoming acquainted with the
interior condition of their provinces, of observing
their flated and occasional wants, and of knowing
what commodities might be imported into them
with the greatest advantage. In consequence of
information so authentic and expeditious, the mer-
chants of Jamaica, and other Engliih colonies who
traded to the Spalifih main, were enabled to afort
and proportion their cargoes, so exactly to the de-
mands of the market, that the contraband commerce
was carried on with a facility, and to an extent ua-
known in any former period. This, however, was
not the most fatal conlequence of the Afliellt to
the trade of Spain. The agents of the Britifll
South Sea Company, under cover of the imlpor-
tation which they were authoriled to make by the
hfip sent annually to Porto-bello, pourctl 1i
their commnoditics on the Spanifli colitillnt"

without
480

withoutlimitation or restraint. InfRcad of a ship of B 0 0 K
five hundred tons, as flipulated in the treaty, they , ,,
usually employed one which exceeded nine hundred
tons in burden. She was accompanied by two or
three smaller vessels, which mooring in some neigh-
bouring creek, supplied her clandestinely with fresh
bales of goods, to replace such as were fold. The
infpeótors of the fair, and officers of the revenue,
gained by exorbitant presents, connived at the
fraud*. Thus, partly by the operations ofthecom-
pany, and partly by the acdivity ofprivate interlo-
pers, almost the whole trade of Spanish America
was engrossed by foreigners. The immense com-
merce of the Galeons, formerly the pride of Spain,
and the envy of other nations, funk to nothing, and 1737.
the squadron itself, reduced from fifteen thousand
to two thousand tons t, served hardly any purpose
but to fetch home the royal revenue arising from
the fifth on ilver.

WHILE Spain observed those encroachments, CuardaCof-

and felt so sensibly their pernicious effeds, it was fS ctlpi','c
impossible not to make some effort to restrain them. poic.
Herfirft expedientwas to flation ships of force, un-
der the appellation ofGuARnDA CoT'rAs, upon the
coaffs of those provinces, to which interlopers most
frequently resorted. As private interest concurred
with the duty which they owed to the public, in
' rendering the officers who commannJed them vigi-

lant and adcive, some check was ,iven to the pro-
' grcf of the contraband trade, though in dominiiions
f' cxtcnfive, and so accessible by Tea, no number of
cruizers vwas sufficient to guard against its inroads
in every quartCr'. This interruption of ;an ilnter-
course, which had been carried on with lt much
facility, that the mlerchallts in the Britih colonies
wcer accuflomcd to confider it almolt as ani allowred

VoL. II. G g g branch
Sc. NOT'E XCV. 1 Alcedo y lirrcila, P. 359. Ca*nlr-

* lrlc%, i. 436.
r.\

B O 0 K branch of commerce, excited murmurs and cor.

Vil, plaints. These authorised, in some measure, and

rendered more interesting, by feverableunjuftifiable
aCts of violence committed by the captains of the
1739. Spanish Guarda Costas, precipitated Great Britain

into a war with Spain, by which the latter obtain.
ed a final release from the Affiento, and was leftat
liberty to regulate the commerce of her colonies,
without being restrained by any engagement with a
foreign power.

The use of As the formidable encroachments of the Englifi
re.itrc (hips on their American trade, had discovered tothe Spa-

iitr ed. niards the vafi consumption of European goods in

their colonies, and taught them the advantageof
accommodating their importations to the occasion-
al demand of the various provinces, they perceived
the neccffity of devising some method of supplying
their colonies, different from their ancient one, of
fending thither periodical fleets. This modeof
communication was not only uncertain, as thede.
parture of the Galeons and Flota was sometimes
retarded by various accidents, and often prevented
by the wars which raged in Europe, but was ill
adnpted to afford America a regular and timely up
ply of what it wanted. The scarcity of Europeol
goods in the Spanish fetttlements fiequently became
exceflive ; their price rose to an enormous height;
the vigilant eye of mercantile attention did notfail
to oliferve this favourable opportunity,, an ample
supply was poured in by interlopers from the Ell'
glihl, the French, and the Dutch inands; and
when the (Galcons at length arrived, they s0o
the markets to glutted by this illicit comlmerc'
that there was no demand for the conmmoditiesxvit
which they were loaded. In order to rmci(!y this
Spain permitted a considerable part of her co0"'

1 11ncrc
+10

inerce with America, to be carried on by RE- B O O K
GISTER SHIPS. These are fitted out during the in- V-
tervals between the itated seasons when the Gale-
ons and Flota fail, by merchants in Seville or Ca-
diz, upon obtaining a licence from the council of
the Indies, for which they pay a very high premi-
um, and are destined for those ports where any
extraordinary demand is foreseen or expeted. By
this expedient, such a regular supply of fresh com-
modities is conveyed to the American market, that
the interloper is no longer allured by the fame prof-
peat of exceflive gain, or the people in the colonies
urged by the fame necessity, to engage in the hazar-
dous adventures of contraband trade.

IN proportion as experience manifelted the ad- The galeons

vantages of carrying on trade in this mode, the abotfi'l'cd
number of register hips increased ; and at length,
in the year 1748, the Galeons, after having been
employed upwards of two centuries, were finally
abolished. From that period there has been no in-
tercourfe with Chili and Peru but by single fllips,
dispatched from time to time as occasion requires,
and when the merchants expeLt a market will open.
These fail round Cape Horn, and convey directly
to the ports in the South Sea the productions and
manufactures of Europe, for which the people set-
tled in those countries were formerly obliged to
repair to Porto-bello or Panama. These towns,
as has been formerly observcd, muff gradually dc-
cline, when deprived of that commerce to which
they owed their exiffence. This disadvantage how-
cver is more than compcnEfated, for the whole con-
tinent of South America receives supplies of Euro-
pean commodities, with so much regularity, and in
such abundance, as must contribute greatly to the
halpinefi andI prosperity of all the colonies fettled
there. But as all the register ships defincd for the

G g g z2 South

4II

3 0 0 K South Seat, must fill take their departure from Cadiz,

and are obliged to return thither *, this branch of
the American commerce, even in its new and im-
proved form, continues subjed to the restraints of a
species of monopoly, and feels those pernicious
efifces of it, which I have already described.

Schemes for NOR has the attention of Spain been confined
reviving to regulating the trade with its flourishing colonies,
Culmincre, .
rc C)

it has extended likewise to the reviving commerce
in those settlements where it was neglected, or had
decayed. Among the new taftes which the people
of Europe have acquired, in consequence of their
intcrcourfc with the natives of those countries
which they conquered in America, that for choco-
late is one of the most universal. The use of this
liquor made with a paste, formed of the nut, or al-
mond of the cacao-tree, compounded with various
ingredients, the Spaniards first learned from the
Mexicans; and it has appeared to them, and to
the other European nations, so palatable, so nou-
rifhing, and so wholesome, that it has become a
commercial article of considerable importance.
The cacao-tree grows spontaneously in several
parts of the torrid zone ; but the nuts of the best
quality, next to those of Guatimala, on the South
Sea, are produced in the rich plains of Caraccas,
a province of J'iierra Firmc. In consequence of
this acknowled(cd superiority in the quality of
cacao in that province, and its communication
with the Atlantic, which facilitates the convey-
ance to Europe, the culture of the cacao there is
more cxtenllive than in any distriCt of America.
But the Dutch, by the vicinity of their fettlc-
ments in the fimall ifil:lls of Curazoa and Bucn-
Ayrc, to the coall of Cairaccas, gradually ingrofihl
thel reate t p'art of the cacao trade. TI'he trattic
with the nmther-country for this valuable conmmio-

dity

* C.' ilp),i,, .iii:,3, 4i .

43 0, 11°.
412

dity ceased almost entirely; and such was the B 0 0 K
supine negligence of the Spaniards, or the VIII
defeas of their commercial arrangements, that they
were obliged to receive from the hands of foreigners
this production of their own colonies, at an
exorbitant price. In order to remedy an evil by efablilh-
no less disgraceful, than pernicious to his fubjeds, i"ng th
Philip V. in the year 1728, granted to a body of Caraccas.
merchants, an exclusive right to the commerce
with Caraccas and Cumana, on condition of their
employing, at their own expence, a sufficient num-
ber of armed vessels to clear the coast of interlopers.
This society, distinguished sometimes by the name
of the Company of Guipufcoa, from the province of
Spain in which it is established, and sometimes by
that of the Company of Caraccas, from the diffric
of America to which it trades, has carried on its
operations with such vigour and success, that Spain
has recovered an important branch of commerce,
which ihe had suffered to be wrested fiomi her, and
is plentifully supplied with an article of extensive
consumption at a moderate price. Not only the
parent state, but the colony of Caraccas, has derived
great advantages from this institution; for al-
though, at the firfl- asped, it may appear to be one
ofthofe monopolies, whose tendency is to check
the spirit of industry, inficad of calling it
forth to new exertions, it has been prevented from
operating in this manner, by several salutary regu-
lations, framed upon foresight of such bad effWes,
and of pllrpofe to obviate them. The planters
in the Caraccas are not left to depend entirely on
the company, either for the importation of Euro-
pean commodities, or the file of their own pro-
ldutions. The inhabitants of the Canary Islands
have the privilege of feindiing thither annually a rc-
gillelr flhi of considerable burden ; and from Venra
Ctuz ill New Spain, a free trade is permittcd in eve-

ry

4r3

B O O K ry port comprehended in the charter of the come
ó._ __ pany. In consequence of this, there is such a com-

petition, that both with refpeDt to what the colo-
nies purchaf.i, and what they fell, the price teems
to be fixed at its natural and equitable rate. The
company has not the power of raising the former,
or degrading the latter at pleasure; and according.
ly, since it was eflablifhed, the increase of culture,
of population, and of live stock, in the province of
Caraccas has been very confideralie *.

Enlarge- BUT as it is slowly that nations relinquish any
meat of fyffem whlchi time has rendered venerable, or that
ide-s in commerce can be diverted from the channel in
spain. which it has been accuffomed to flow; Philip V.

in his new regulations concerning the American
trade, paid such deference to the ancient maxim of
Spain, concerning the limitation of all importation
from the New World to one harbour, as to oblige
both the register ships which returned from Peru,
and those of the Guipufcoan Company from Ca-
raccas, to deliver their cargoes in the port of Ca-
diz. Since his reign, sentiments more liberal
and enlarged began to spread in Spain. The spirit
of philosophical enquiry, which it is the gloryof
the prefeit age to have turned from frivolous or ab-
firufe speculations, to the business and affairs of
men, has extended its influence beyond the Pyre-
nees. In the refcarchcs of ingenious authors, con-
cerning the police or commerce of nations, the er-
rors and defcds of the Spaniflh fyftcl with refpcl
to both met every eye, and have not only been cx-
poled with severity, but are held up as a warnilig
to other fiates. Tlhe Spaniards, stung with their
reproaches, or convinced by their argumenlts, a"
adnoniflled by several enlightened writers of their
own country, fecm at length to have difcovcrcd
the dei utlivc tendency of thofc narrow maxim'

e whiNO

* S.:c NOlTE XCVI,
414

which, by cramping commerce in all its operations, B 0 0 K
have so long retarded its progress. It is to the mo- I-i
narch now on the throne, that Spain is indebted for
the first public regulation formed in consequence of
those ideas.
WHILE Spain adhered with rigour to her an- El;erft1h-

.ment of re-

cient maxims concerning her commercewith Ame- gular packet
rica, she was so much afraid of opening any chan- boats.
nel, by which an illicit trade might find ad-
mission into the colonies, that she almost shut her-
self out from any intercourse with them, but that
which was carried on by ler annual fleets. 1 here
was no establishment for a regular communication
of either public or private intelligence, between
the mother-country and its American settlements.
From the want of this necessary institution, the
operations of the state, and the business of indivi-
duals, were retarded or conducted unfkilfully, and
Spain often received from foreigners her first infor-
mation with refpea to very interefling events in her
own colonies. But though this defeat in police was
sensibly felt, and the remedy for it was obvious,
that jealous spirit with which the Spanifl monarchs
guarded the exclusive trade, reitrained them from
applying it. At length Charles III. surmounted
those cnfiderations which had deterred his prede-
ceflbrs, and in the year 1 764, appointed,packet-boats
to be dispatched on the firt day of each month,
from Corugna to the Havanna or Porto-Rico.
'Irm thetnce letters are conveyed in fnallcr vefilels
to Vera Cruz and Porto-bello, and tranfinitted by
polt through the kingdomrs of Tierra Firmc, Gra-
";lda, Peru, and New Spain. With no less regu-
:it)y packet-boats fhil once in two months to Rio
1I 1i Platl, for the accommodation of the provinces
1t the call of the Andes. Thus provision is made
I' i) (pi'dy aind ccrtali circull.tion of iintlligence(

througliout

415

B o o K throughout the vast dominions of Spain, from

which equal advantages must redound to the poli-
tical and mercantile interest of the kingdom*.
With.this new arrangement, a-fcheme of extending
commerce has been more immediately conneced.
Each of the packet-boats, which are vessels of some
considerable burden, is allowed to take in halfa
loading of such commodities as are the product of
Spain, and most in demand in the ports whither
they are bound. In return for these they may bring
home to Corugna an equal quantity of American
productions t. This may be confidered as the first
relaxation of those rigid laws, which confined the
trade with the New World to a single port, and
the first attempt to admit the reft of the kingdom
to some ihare in it.

Free trade IT was soon followed by one more decisive.
permitted to
several pro- In the year 1765, Charles III. laid open the trade
vinces. to the windward islands, Cuba, Hispaniola, Por-

to-Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad, to his sub-
jeas in every province of Spain. He permitted
them to fail from certain ports in each of these,
specified in the edit, at any season, and with what-
ever cargo they deemed most proper, without any
other warrant than a finple clearance from the
custom-house of the place whence they took their
departure. He released them from the numerous
and oppreflive duties imposed on goods exported to
America, and in place of the whole substituted a;
moderate tax of fix in the hundred on the commo-
ditics sent fiom Spain. He allowed them to return
either to the falme port, or to any other where
they might hope for a more advantageous mar-
ket, and there to enter the homeward cargoe, 01
payment of tce a lufal duties. This ample privilege

which

# I'onri Viagn de s i'.a;na, v;. Prol, i>j. . Append, ii. ' I1Elald
Pv )P 3 i1.
416

which at once broke through all the fences, which B o o K
thejealous policy of Spain had becn labouring for l
two centuries and a half to throw round its com-
mercial intercourse with the New World, was soon
after extended to Louiiiana, and to the provinces of
Yucatan and Campeachy §.

THEr propriety of this innovation, which may Bereficia
be confidered as the mofl- liberal effort of Spa- efsicas ofit.
nifh legislation, has appeared from its effecs.
Prior to the edic- in favour of the free trade, Spain
derived hardly any benefit from its neglecied colo-
nies in Hispaniola, Porto-Rico, MDargareta, and
Trinidad. Its commerce with Cuba was inconfi-
derable, and that of Yucatan and Campeachy was
ingroffed almost entirely by interlopers. But as
soon as a general liberty of trade was permitted, the
intercourse with those provinces revived, and has
gone on with a rapidity of progreflion, of which
there are few examples in the hilfory of nations.
In leTs than ten years, the trade of Cuba has been
more than tripled. Even iln Lhofc settlements where,
from the languiihing lfite of indurrry, preatcr cf-
iorth w\re rcq uiitc to reltore its ac'ivit, thecir com-
mercehas been doubled. It is computed, that such
2 nltiulber of flhips is alrcadvy emplloyed in the free
trad;, th;t the trln:'al'e ( ,f thlC fie r (.xceeds that of
lhc ' (ileois and Flota, at tli moil flourilhing ai ra
of th ir conmncrcc. T'lie benefits of this arrainge-
mUlt n r: not confined to a few nmerchant.s, cii.-
ilifilKd i a allva , rite port. 'lhey are difl'uit'd
tlillr1 1h evely provinle of the kingdom ; and( by
[priairn a lnew market for their various prodtlutions

311[ " 'i.l;I iti aes,

mull-c coura

c ;( ad :d i vivacity

t' tihe itiluf!-y oi the fair.eLr and artificer. N1rt
/dt1n l,: knludoin profit onily 1by what it exports, it

'L. II. 11 h 1 dcriv'es

~ Aven . i. 1 L iuc. P(Oj). 3 7's).(1

I
1

417

B o 0 K derives advantage likewise from what it receives ia
I_<_ , return, and has the profpea of being soon able to

supply itself with several commodities of extensive
consumption, for which it formerly depended on
foreigners. The confimption of sugar in Spain is
perhaps as great in proportion to the number of its
inhabitants, as that of any European kingdom. But
though possessed of countries in the New World,
whose foil and climate are most proper for rearing
that valuable plant, though the domestic culture of
the sugar-cane in the kingdom of Granada wasonce
confidcrable, such has been the fatal tendency of its
intlitutions in America, and such the pressure of
injudicious taxes in Europe, that Spain has loft
alnoft entirely this branch of industry, which has
enriched other nations. This commodity, which
has now become an article of primary neceflity in
Europe, the Spaniards were obliged to purchase of
foreigners, and had the mortification to fee their
country drained annually of an immenfefumon
that account §. But if that spirit, which the per-
niflion of free trade has put in motion, ihall perse-
verc in its cfiorts with the fame vigour, the cultiva-
tion of sugar in Cuba and Porto Rico, may increase
so much, that in a few years their growth may be
equal to the demand of the kingdom.

Fire tra.ic HER experience of the beneficial consequences re-
r:r--:rt;-: f
llrint firom having relaxed somewhat of the rigotir

b, t-,c t'e of her ancient laws with refpedc to the commerce of

the mother-conitry with the colonies, has induced
Spain to pernuit a more liberal intercourse of one co-
lony wirli another. By one of the jealous maxims
of the oldl fltem, all communication between the
variouJs pr(ovinces situated on the South Seas,

waS'

§ tJlt3Vir, " . M
418

was prohibited under the most severe penalties. o o 0.
Though each of these yield peculiar productions,
the reciprocal exchange of which might have added
to the happiness of their refpetive inhabitants, or
have facilitated their progress in industry, so folici-
tous was the council of the Indies, to prevent their
receiving any supply of their wants, but by the pe
riodical fleets from Europe ; that in order to guard
against this, it cruelly debarred the Spaniards in
Peru, in New Spain, in Guatimala, and the New
Kingdom of Granada, from such a correspondence
with their fellow-fubjeds, as tended manifestly to
their mutual prosperity. Of all the numerous re-
ltridions devised by Spain for securing the exclu-
five trade with her American settlements, none per-
hapswas more illiberal, none seems to have been
more sensibly felt, or to have produced more hurt-
ful effets. This grievance coeval with the fettle-
ments of Spain in the New World, is at last re-
dressed. In the year I774, Charles III. published
an edid, granting to the four vast provinces which
I have mentioned, the privilege of a free trade with
each other §. What may be the effects of opening
this communication between countries deflined by
their situation for reciprocal intcrcourfe, cannot yet
be determined by experience. They can hardly fail
of being beneficial and extensive. The motives for
granting this permifion are manifestly no leis lau-
dable, than the principle on which it is founded is
liberal ; and both difcovcr the progress of a spirit
in Spain, far elevated above the narrow prejudices
and maxims on which their fyltcm for regulating
the trade, and conducting the government of their
colonies, was originally founded.

H h h 2 Ar

KRel1 Cetlul penes me. Pont Viage de Efpagna, vi. I'rologo, p. 2.
OrLxevIi.

B O 0 K AT the fame time that Spain has been inehit 6o

Xill' introducing regulations, suggested by more eiilarg.

Ncwreuia- ed views of policy, into her system of American
t,,:, ~n,- commerce, she has not been inattentive to the'interi-
ceriinL;j the
6o,\: :unzllt or government of her colonies. Here too therewas
ot thc colo- much room for reformation and improveiment, and

Don Joseph Galvez, who has now the direction of
the department for Indian alt'airs in Spain, has en-
joyed the best opportunities, not only of bolferving
the defects and corruption in the political frame of
the colonies, but of discovering the sources of those
evils. After being employed seven years in the
New World on an extraordinary mifion, and with
very extensive powers, as infpeator-ge'neral of New
Spain ; aftervifiting in person the'iremote provinces
of Cinaloa, Sonora, and California, and niaking
several important alterations ih the -fate of their po-
lice and revenue ; he began his ministry with a ge-
neral reformation of the tribunals of jufti'e in A-

RK-nrmati- merica. In consequence of the progress of popu-
clof :llc lation and wealth in the colonies, the business of
CU lce, the Courts of Audience has increased so much, that

the number of ju'ld'cs of which they were originally
composld, has been found inadequate to the grow-
ing labours and duties of the ofice, and the salaries
fettled upon them, inferior to the dignity of the fta-
tion. As a remnedy sori both, he obtained a royal
dict", cftablifling an addliional number of judges
in each court of Auditence, with higher titles, and
more amplc appoinLuents '.

New d;iihi- To the fame intelligont minificr Spain is indebt-
L'iO) l ) ed for a new diltribution of govcriilmcilt in its Anc-

nrm,. ricall provinces. Elven fiiice the cftabl ifiimnt of a

third vice-iroyalty in thc Ncw Kingdom of'Girna-

d a,

(-i.zetat de Matdrld, i9th Mrcch, 1776.
420

da, so prodigious is the extent of the Spariih do- B 0 o K
minions in the New World,, that several places ,
subjeCt to the jurifdidtion of each of the viceroys,
were at such an enormous difrance from the capitals
in which they resided, that neither their attentioni
nor their authority, could reach them. Some pro0-
vinces fubordiriate to 'the viceroy of New Spain,
lay above two thousand miles from Mexico. There
are countries subjet tothe viceroyof Peru fill far-
I ther from Lima. The people in those remote dif-

tricts, could hardly be said to enjoy the benefit of
| civil government. The oppression and insolence of
its inferior mini'fers they often feel, and rather
submit to these in silence, than involve themselves
in the expence and trouble of resorting to the dif-.
tant capitals, where alone they can find redreifs.
As a remedy for this, a fourth vice-royalty has been New viCe-
erected, to the jirifdiction of which are fubjeceded gu
the Provinces of Rio de la Plata, Buenos-Ayres,- 1776,
Paraguay, Tucuman, Potofi, Santa Cruz de la atiodea
Sierra, Charcas, and the towns of Mendoza and
St. Juan. By this well-juldged arrangemient, two
advantages are gained. All 'the inconvcnieicics
occasioned by the remote situation of'thofe provin-
ces, which had been long felt, and long complaified
of, are removed. The countries molt distant froin
Lima are separated from the vice-royalty of'Peru,
anll united under a superior, wvhofe feat of govcrn-
"'Snt at Buenos-Ayres will be commodious and
,cceffible. Tlhe contraband trade with the Portu-
Ctlef, which was become so cxtenfive, as mitrft have
utt a final PRop to the exportation of commodities
from Spain to her southern colonies, may be check-
(tll ore thoroughly, and with greatCr facility,
w'henthc supreme magiflratc, by his vicinity to the
i'lccs in which it is carried on, can view its pro-
PilS ald effcies with his own eyes. ])on Pedro
,v;illhs, who has been rai;sed tio tis new dignity,
itih apuilltmients equal to tlihof of the otht.r vice-

royss

.421

B 0 0 K roys, is well acquainted both with the fiate. and
ViII. the interest of the countries over which he is to pre.

fide, having served in them long, an'd with diftilic.
tion. By this dismemberment, fuccecding that
which took place at the erection of the vice-royalty
of the New Kingdom of Granada, almost two-
third parts of the territories originally; subjed to the
viceroys of Peru, are now lopped off from their
jurifdiftion.

New go- 'TIHE.limits of the vice-royaltyofNew Spain have
vernmcntin likewise been considerably circumscribed, and with
proovie&csf no less propriety and discernment. Four of its mofi

remote provinces, Sonora, Cinaloa, California, and
New Navarre, have been formed into a separate go-
vernment. The Chevalier de Croix, who is in-
trusted with this command, is not dignified with the
title of viceroy, nor does he enjoy the appointment3
belonging to that rank, but his jurifdietion and au-
thority is altogether independent on the vice-royalty
of New Spain. The erection of this last govern-
ment seems to have been suggested, not only by the
consideration of the remote situation of those pio-
vinces from Mexico ; but by attention to the late
discoveries made there, which I have mentioned ".
Countries containing fich riches, and which pro-
bab!y may rife into such importance, required the
immediate infpetion of a governor, to whom thcy
were specially committed. As every confideratinll
of duty, of intcreft, and of vanity, must concur i'
prompting those new governors to cncourage such
exertions as tend to diffuse opulence and prosperity
through the provinces committed to their charge,
the beneficial effcets of this arrangcment may 1)
considerable. Many (liftri6cs in Amnerica, long dc-
prcffed by the langour and tceblencfs natural to pro-
vinces which compotc the extremitics of all over-

growr

* l ~ook vii°

~g. 3l7.'O
* Bo(0. Vii. j'. 327.

grown empire, may be animated with vigour and B 0 0 K
acivity when brought so near the feat of power, as _
to feel its invigorating influence.

SUCu, since the acceflion of the Bourbons to the Attempts to
throne of Spain, has been the progress of their re- reform do-

reeftic poll-

ngulations, and the gradual expansion of their views cy.
with rcfpcct to the commerce and government of
their American colonies. Nor has their attention
been so entirely engrossed by what related to the
more remote parts of their dominions, as to render
them neglecful of what was fill more important,
the reformation of domestic errors and defects in
policy. Fully sensible of the causes to which the
declenion of Spain, from her former prosperity,
ought to be imputed ; they have made it a great ob-
ject of their policy, to revive a spirit of industry
among their fubjeas, and to give such extent and
perfection to their manufactures, that they may be
able to supply the demands of America from their
owxn flock, and to exclude foreigners from a branch
of commerce which has been so fatal to the king-
dom. This they have endeavoured to accomplish,
by a variety of edicts ifiued since the peace of
Utrccht. They have granted bounties for the en-
courageimcnt of some branches of induifry; they
have lowered the taxes on others ; they have pro-
hibited, or have loaded with additional duties, such
foreign manufalctures as come in competition with
them; they have inffitutcd fdcieties for the im-
provement of trade and agriculture ; they have
plhnlted colonies of hufbandlmen in foine unculti-
vaiteld diricis of Spain, and divided among them
the waile ields ; they have haid recourse to every
Expedicnt, dcvifed by conmlercial wifdoln, or com-
Iercial jcalouify, for reviving their own induflry,
;111( dlilcouuntcina[ilcing that of other nations, These,

however,
!j

423

B 0 0 K however, it is not my province to explain, or to in-
a____ quire into their propriety and efftecs. There is no

effort of legislation more arduous, no experiment in
policy more uncertain, than an attempt to revive the
spirit of industry where it has declined, or to intro-
duce it where it is unknown. Nations already
possessed of extensive commerce, enter into competi-
tion with such advantages, derived from the large
capitals of their merchants, the dexterity of their
manufacturers, the alertness acquired by habit 'in
every department of business, that the state which
aims at rivalling, or supplanting them, must expec
to struggle with many difficulties, and be content
to advance slowly. If the quantity of producive
industry now in Spain, be compared with that of
the kingdom under the last listless monarchs of the
Austrian line, its progress mufl appear considerable,
and is fufficientto alarm the jealousy, and call forth
the most vigorous efforts of the nations now in
poffeflion of the lucrative trade which the Spaniards
aim at wresting from them. One circumitance
may render those exertions of Spain an object of
more serious attention to the other European pow-
ers. They are not to be ascribed wholly to the
influence of the crown and its ministers. The fen-
timents and spirit of the people seem to second the
provident care of their monarchs, and to give it
greater effcct. They have adopted more liberal
ideas, not only with refpe&t to commerce, but do-
meflic policy. In all their later writers, defectsin
their arrangements concerning both are acknow-
ledged, and remedies piopofed, which pride would
not have allowed their ancestors to confess, and
ignorance rendered them incapable of discern-
ing .. But after all that the Spaniards have done,
much remains to do. Many pernicious institutions

and
1 Sue NO'ITL XCVIII.

and abuses, deeply incorporated with the fyfrem of B o o K
internal policy and taxation, which has been long V1II.
established in Spain, must be abolished before in-
dufiry and manufactures can recover an extensive
acqivity.

STILL, however, the commercial regulations of Contraband
Spain with refpec to her colonies, are too rigid and trade.
systematical to be carried into complete execution.
The legislature that loads trade with inipofitions too
heavy, or fetters it by reftricrions too severe, defeats
its own intention ; and, in truth, is only multiply-
ing the inducements to violate its flatutes, and pro-
poling an high premium to encourage illicit traffic.
The Spaniards, both in Europe and America, cir-
cumfcribed in their mutual intercourse by the jea-
lousy, or opprelfed by the exations of the crown,.
have their invention continually on the stretch how
toclude its edidts. The vigilance and ingenuity of
private interest discover means of effecding this,
which public wisdom cannot foresee, nor public
authority prevent. This spirit, counteraEcing that
of the laws, pervades the commerce of Spain with
America in all its branches ; and from the higcft
departments in government, descends to the lowelt.
The very officers appointed to check contraband
trade, are often employed as instruments in carry-
ing it on ; and the boards instituted to restrain and
punlifh it, are the channels through which it flows.
1'he king is supposcd to be dcfiauded by various
artifices, of more than one half of the revenue
which he ought to receive from America *; and as
long as it is the interelt of so many persons to screen
th;'lc artifices from dttcction, the knowledge of
them will never reach the thronc. ' IIow many ordi-
YOL. I1. I i i "nances

1 Solora de Ind. jurc, ii. 11. v.

-425

B 0 o K " nances, fays Corita, how many inftrudions, how

VIII. Vil_, " many letters from our sovereign, are sent in order

" to correct abuses, and how little are they observed,
"l and what finall advantage is derived from them.
" To me the old observation appears just, that
" where there are many physicians, and many me-
" dicines, there is a want of health; where there
" are many laws, and many judges, there is a want
" of justice. Wte have viceroys, presidents, go-

vernors, oydors, corrigidors, alcaldes, and thou-

" sands ofalguazils abound every where ; but not-
"withstanding all these, public abuses continue to
' multiply '." Timne has increased the evils which
he lamented as early as the reign of Philip II. A
spirit of corruption has infeEted all the colonies of
Spain in America. Men far removed from the feat
of governmlcnt, impatient to acquire wealth, that
they may return speedily from what they are apt to
confider as a state of exile in a remote unhealthful
country, allured by opportunities too tempting to
be refitled, and efduced by the example ofthofe
around them, find their sentiments of honour and
of dJtv gradually relax. In private life, they give
theCnlclves up to a dissolute luxury, while in their
public conduc t they become unmindful of what they
owe to their sovereign and their country.
Ta,,tj I,,-- BEFORE I close this account of the Spanish trade

t, v,.lv- in Ainerica, there remains one detached, but im-

portant branch of it, to be mentioned. Soon after
I""c. his accelon to the throne, Philip II. formed a

fclhemlc of planting a colony in the Philippine if-
lands, which had been neglected since the time of
15:4.. their dis-covery t-; and he accomplif ed it by means

of an armunlcnt fitted out from New Spain T.
M/lanila, in the island of Luconia, was the fation

chosen
* MVIS, pench Ine, 1 hookc v. p. 127, &c. 1 T'orquem. i. lib. v.C. 14

chosen for the capital of this new eflablifhment. B o o K
From it an ative commercial intercourse began Vil.
with the Chinese, and a considerable number of
that industrious people, allured by the profpec of
gain, fettled in the Philippines under the Spanish
protetion. They supplied the colony so amply
with all the valuable productions and manufactures
of the East, as enabled it to open a trade with Ame-
rica, by a course of navigation, the longest from
land to land on our globe. In the infancy of this
trade, it was carried on with Callao, on the coast of
Peru; but experience having discovered many
difficulties in this mode of communication, the
fraple of this commerce between the east and weft
was removed from Callao to Acapulco, on the coast
of New Spain.

AFTER various arrangements, it has been brought
into a regular form. One or two ships depart an-
nually from Acapulco, which may carry out silver
to the amount of five hundred thousand pesos t,
but have hardly any thing else of value on board;
in return for which, they bring back spices, drugs,
china, and japan wares, calicoes, chintz, muffins,
silks, and every precious article, with which the be-
nignity of the climate, or the ingenuity of its people,
have enabled the East to supply the relt of the world.
For some time the merchants of Peru were admit-
ted to participate in this traffic, and might fend an-
nually a ship to Acapulco, to wait the arrival of
the velels from Manila, and receive a proportional
fiare of the commodities which they imported. At
Itngth, the Peruvians were excluded by nmoft rigor-
uis edits, and all the commodities from the East
referred bolcly for the consumption of New
Spaiin.

I i i2 IN
9 RccOp. li,. ix. c. 45. 1. 6.

B O O K IN consequence of this Indulgence, the inhabi-

Vil. tants of that country enjoy advantages unknown in

the other Spanish colonies. The manufactures of
the East are not only more suited to awarm climate,
and more showy than those of Europe, but can be
fold at a lower price ; while, at the fame time, the
profits upon them are so conliderabIe, as to enrich
all those who are employed, either in bringing them
from Manila, or vending them in New Spain. As
the interest both of the buyer and feller concurred
in favouring this branch of commerce, it continu-
ed to extend in spite of regulations, concerted with
the most anxious jealousy to circumscribe it. Un-
der cover of what the laws permit to be imported,
vast quantities of India goods are poured into the
markets of New Spain t, and when the flota ar-
rives at Vera Cruz, it often finds the wants of the
people a!rcady supplied by cheaper and more ac-
ceptable commodities.

THERE is not in the commercial arrangements of

Spath, any circumflance more inexplicable than
the pcrmiflion of this trade between New Spain and
the Philippines, or more repugnant to its funda-
mental maxim of holding the colonies in perpetual
dependance on the mother-country, by prohibiting
any commercial intercouref that might suggest to
them the idea of receiving a supply of their wants
from an) other quarter. 'I'his permiflion must ap-
pear lill more extraordinary, froin confidering that
Spain herself carries on no diiret trade with her set-
tlemncnts in the Philippines, ?.nd grants a privilege
to one of her American colonies, which Ihe denies
to her fl)bjeds in Europe. It is probable, that the
cr'],liills which origina;lly took pofllefiion of the
1'i ililppintc, lhaving been C-Clt out from New Spain,

begun
t Sc, NOTE XCIX.

begun this intercourse with a country which they B o o K
confidered, in ofme measure, as their parent fate, Vl.
before the court of Madrid was aware of its confe-
quences, or could establish regulations in order to
prevent it. Many remonstrances have been present-
ed against this trade, as detrimental to Spain, by
diverting into another channel, a large portion of
that treasure which ought to flow into the kingdom,
as tending to give rife to a spirit of independence
in the colonies, and to epcourage innumerable
frauds, against which it was impossible to guard,
in transactions so far removed from the infpe&ion
of government. But as it requires no flight effort
of political wisdom and vigour to abolish any prac-
tice, which numbers are interested in supporting,
and to which time has added the sanction of its au-
thority, the commerce betwixt Acapulco and Ma-
nila seems to be as considerable as ever, and may be
confidered as one chief cause of the elegance and
splendour conspicuous in this part of the Spanish
dominions.

Bu'r, notwithlranding this general corruption in Publicreve-
the colonies, and all the defalcations of the public nuefromA-

merica.

revenue, by the illicit importation of fo-eign com-
modities, or by the fraudulent arts of its own sub-
jcds, the Spanish monarchs receive a very confidcr-
able fui from their American dominions. This
nriles from taxes of various kinds, which may be
divided into three capital branches. T'he firt con-
t;ins whalt is paid to the king, as fovercign, or fu-
' rior lord of the New World : to this cl;is belongs
t'1' duty on the gold and silver i rilfcd from the
niels, ;nldl the tribute exaClctd from the Indians ;
Ihe forlnlr is termed by the Spaniards the RiIGH-T OF
N'';NIORy, the latter is the nU)rTY OF VASSALAG E.
The iccorid branch conipirehc'ids the numnlrous dli-
i'S IIupol commerceCC , which accoipanly and oppress
i i I cviey flcp of its progrtcs, fromi the greatefl

tra n il6tions

42q

B 0 O K tranfadions of the wholesale merchant, to the petty

vi-. traffic of the vender by retail. The third includes

what accrues to the king, as head of the church,
and adininiftrator ofeccleliadtical funds in the New
World. In consequence of this he receives the first
fruits, annats, spoils, and other spiritual revenues,
levied by the apostolic chamber in Europe ; and is
entitled, likewise, to the profit arising from the sale
of the bull of Cruzado. This, which is published
every two years, contains, an absolution from past
offences by the.pope, and, among other immunities,
a permission to eat several kinds of prohibited food,
during Lent, and on meagre days. The monks
employed in dispersing those bulls, extol their vir-
tues with all the fervour of interested eloquence;
the people, ignorant and credulous, lifen with im-
plicit assent; and every person in the Spanish colo-
nies, of European, Creolian, or mixed race, pur-
chafes a bull, which is deemed essential to his falva-
tion, at the rate set upon it by government :.
Its amount. WHAT may be the amount of those various

funds, it is almost impossible to determine with pre-
cifion. The extent of the Spanimf dominions in
America, the jealousy of government, which ren-
ders them inacceflible to foreigners, the mynterious
silence which the Spaniards are accustomed to ob-
serve with refpec to the interior state of their colo-
nies, combine in covering this subjed with a veil
which it is not easy to remove. But an account,
apparently no less accurate, than it is curious, has
lately been publiflhed of the royal revenue in New
Spain, from which we may form some idea with rc-
fpc- to what is colleted in the other provinces.
According to that account, the crown does not re-

ceive
1 See NOTE C.

ceive from all the departments of taxation in New B O O K
Spain, above a million of our money, from which V'.'
one half must be deducted as the expence of the pro-
vincial eflablilhment t. Peru, it is probable, yields
a fum not inferior to this, and if we suppose that
all the other regions of America, including the if-
lands, furnish a third share of equal value; we shall
not perhaps be far wide from the truth, if we con-
clude, that the net public revenue of Spain, raised
in America, does not exceed a million and a' half
sterling. This falls far short of the immense fums,
to which suppositions, founded upon conjecture,
have raied the Spanish revenue in America $. It
is remarkable, however, upon one account. Spain
and Portugal are the only European powers, who
derive a direct revenue from their colonies, as their
quota towards defraying the general expence of go-.
vernment. All the advantage that accrues to other
nations, fiom their American dominions, arises
from the exclusive enjoyment of their trade ; but
betide this, Spain has brought her colonies to con-
tribute to increase the power of the state; and in re-
turn for protection, to bear a proportional share of
the common burden.

ACCORDINGLY, what I have computed as the
amount of the Spanish revenue from America, com-
prehends only the taxes collected there, and is far
from being the whole of what accrues to the king
froim his dominions in the New World. The
heavy d(lties imposed on the commodities exported
frmll Spain to America §, as well as what is paid by
those which she fends home in return ; the tax up-
0i the cgroe-fiaves, with which Afiica supplies

the
1 5,cNOTj. CI. , s Sc NOTE CII.

§ SceNOTE CIII.

B OO K the New World, together with several smaller

branches of finance, bring large furns into the
treasury, the precise extent of which I cannot pre-
tend to ascertain.

Pxpence of BUT if the revenue which Spain draws from A.
adminiftra- merica be great, the expence of administration in
i0Bo. her colonies bears proportion to it. In every de-

partment, even of her domestic police and financesl
Spain has adopted a system more complex, and more
encumbered with a variety of tribunals, and a mul-
titude of officers, than that of any European nations
in which the sovereign possesses such extensive
power. From the jealous spirit with vhich (he
watches over her American settlements, and her
endeavours to guard againfl fraud in provinces so
remote from infpetion ; boards and officers have
been multiplied there with still more anxious atten-
tion. In a country where the expence of living is
great, the salarie's allotted to every person in pub-
lic office must be high, and must load the revenue
with an immense burden. The parade of govern-
ment greatly augments the weight of it. The vice-
roys of Mexico, Peru, and the New Kingdom of
Granada, as representatives of the king's person,
among people fond of ostentation, maintain all the
fRate and dignity of royalty. Their courts are
formed upon the model of that at Madrid, with
horse and foot guards, a household regularly efta-
blifhed, numerous attendants, and ensigns of power,
displaying fich pomp, as hardly retains the ap-
pearance of delegated authority. All the expence
incurred by supporting the external and permanent
order of government is defrayed by the crown.
The viceroys have besides peculiar appointments
suited to their exalted station. The salaries fix-
ed by law are indeed extremely moderate, that
of the viceroy of Peru is only thirty thousand du-
cats; and that Ms the viceroy of Mexico, twenty

thiull2U4

thousand ducats *. Of late, they have been raised B 0 K
to forty thousand. -.

THESE salaries, however, constitute but a fiall
part of their revenue. The exercise of an absolute
authoriy. c::cnding to every department of govern-
ment, ani t!ice power ofdifpofing of many lucrative
offices, affbrds to thcrn innunlrableie opportunities
of -ccuinul:iting wealth. To thcfe, which may be
confidcred as legal and allowed emoluments, vast
fums are often added by exaitions, which in coun-
tries so far removed from the feat of government, it
is not easy to discover, and impolible to restrain.
By monopolizing some branches of commerce, by
a lucrative concern in others, by.conniving at the
frauds of merchants, a viceroy may raise such an
annual revenue, as no fubjecf of any European
monarch enjoys t. From the fingie article of pre-
sents made to him on the anniversary of his NAME-
DAY (which is always observed asan high festival),
I am informed that a viceroy has been known to
receive fixtythoufand pesos. According to a Spa-
nifh faying, the legal revenues of a viceroy are
known, his real profits depend upon his opportuni-
ties and his conscience. Conscious of this, the
kiigs of Spain, as I have formerly observed, grant
a comniflion to their viceroy only for a few )ears.
This circuimflancc, however, renders them often
more rapacious, and adds to the ingenuity and ar-
dour wherewith they labour to improve every mo-
ment of power which they know is hattening fast
toa period ; and flort as its duration is, it ufllially
affords fufficilnt time for repairing a fliattered for-
tune, or creacting a new one. But even in fituati-
oils so trying to human fiailty, there are inlfances
of virtue that remaini uniiduced. In the year 1772,
Vol.. 1. K k k the

Rtvcop. lib. iii. tit, iii. c, 72.

.1. See NOTE C1V.

Bo o K the Marquis de Croix finished the term of his vice.

VI. royalty in New Spain with unfufpeded integrity;

and instead of bringing home exorbitant wealth,
returned with the admiration and applause of a
grateful people, whom his government had render-
ed happy.

NOTE,
434-44b

T

S

AND
ILL U S T RAT I ON S,

Kkk 2

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O TE S

A N D
ILLUS TRATI ONS.

NOTE I. p. I.

OUR knowledge of the events which happened in
the conquest of New Spain, is derived from sources of in-
fcrmation more original and authentic than that of any
tranfation in the hiltory of America. The letters of
Lortes to the Emperor Charles V. are the most valuable
(ifthefe, and the fir't in order of time. As Cortes early
aflumed a command independent of Velaiquez, it be-
came neccflhry to convey such an account of his operati-
ois to Madrid, as might procure him the approbation of
his sovereign.

THE sirs: of his dispatches has never been made pub-
lic. It was sent from Vera-Cruz, July 16, 1519. It
mullt have come to the Emperor's hands while he was in
Gemanlly, as lie left Spain on the zzd of May in that
y'ear, in order to receive the imperial crown. I have made
dlii ent fce;rch for a copy of this dispatch, both in Spain
anld in Germany, but without fucccfs. This, however,
i5 of Icfs conelquence, as it could not contain any thing
eCry material, being writtc3 so soon after Cortes arrived
iN New Spain. The second dispatch, dated Otober
30t!1, 1520, was published at Seville, A. 1). 1522, and
tlie thirld and fourth toon after they were received. A

Latilt

A Latin translation of them appeared in Germany A,
D. 1532. Ramufio soon after made them more gene-
rally known, by inkrting them in his valuable colleti-
on. They contain a regular and minute history of the
expedition, with many curious particulars concerning
the policy and manners of the Mexicans. The work
does honour to Cortes ; the style is simple and perfpicu-
ous ; but as it was manifestly his interest to represent his
own adions in the fairest light, his vi&ories are probab-
ly exaggerated, his loses dinlniflied, and his ats of ri-
gour and violence somewhat softened.

THE next in order is the Cronica de la Nueva Es-

pagna, by Francisco Lopes: de Gomara, published A.
D. 1554. Gomara's historical merit is considerable.
His mode of narration is clear, flowing, always agreea-
ble, and Sometimes elegant. But he is frequently inac-
curate and credulous; and as he was the domestic chap-
lain of Cortes after his return from New Spain, and
probably composed his work at his desire, it is manifest
that he labours to magnify the merit of his hero, and
to conceal or extenuate such tranfations as were unfa-
vourable to his char:tter. Of this Herrera accuses him
in one inflance, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. z. and it is not once
only that this is conspicuous. He writes, however, with
so much freedom concerning several measures of the
Spanish court, that the copies both of his Hiftoria de las
Indias, and of his Cronica, were called in by a decree
of tne council ,f the Indies, and they were long confi-
dered as prohibited books in Spain, though of late
licence to print them has been granted. Pinelo Bib-
Jioth. 589.

TH E Chronicle es Gomara induced Bernal Diaz del

Callillo to conl9uoe his Ililloria Verdadera de la Con-
quilla de la N ucva I.,fpagnai. He had been an adveil-
turer in each of the expeditions to New Spain, and was
the companion of Cortes in all his battles and perils.
When he found that neither he hinmfelf, nor manyOf
his fcllow-oldlicrs weie once menltioned by Gomara, but
thlt the flnle of all lhnir exploits wai alfcribcd to Cortes

the
444

the gallant old veteran laid hold of his pen with indig-
nation, and composed his true history. It contains a
prolix, minute, confused narrative of all Cortes's opera-
tions, in such a rude vulgar Ityle as might be expe&ted
from an illiterate soldier. But as he relates tranfaci-
ons of which he was witness, and in which he performed
a considerable part, his account bears all the marks of
authenticity, and is accompanied with fuclh a pleasant
naivefe, with such intereiting detaris, with such amusing
vanity, and yet si pardonable in an old sidcier who had
been (as he boasts) in a hundred and nineteen battless
as renders his book one of the most singular that is to be
found in any language.

PET. MARTYR ab Anglsriain a Treatise de Infulis
nuper inventis, added to his Decades de rebus Oceanicis
& novo orbe, gives some account of Corres's expedition.
But he proceeds no farther than to relate what happened
after his firIf landing. This work, vwhich is brief and
flight, seems to contain the information tranfmlitted by
Cortes in his first dispatches, embellilhed with several
particulars communicated to the author by the officers
who brought the letters fiom Cortes.

BUT the book to which the greater part of mo-
dern historians have had recourse for information con-
cerning the conquest of New Spain, is I-iftoria de la
Conquilta de Mexico, per D. Antonio de Solis, fillr
publilhcdA. D. 1684. I know no author in any lan-
guage whose litcraly fame has risen so far beyond his
real merit. Dc Solisis ireckoned by his countrymen
"neof the purell writers in the Caflilian tongue; and
if a fi)eigne-r may venture to give his opinion concern-
ilg a matter of which Spaniards alon are qualified to
judge, hc isintitled to that praiic. But, though his lan-
gua:te le corrc't, his t;ill in composition is far firom bc-

gjil . His tperiods arc so nmuch laboured as to be of-
tli1 lif;, ;and iOlaCtiimes llilid; the figures, which he
C'"ploys by way ofornanic nt, are trite or improper, and
his (o)rv;ttions fiiperficial. '1'hilcl blcuilics, hlowever,
"fight eifily be overlooked, if lie were not defcicive
witl refpct to all the grcat qualities of an hiltorian.

Dcllitute

Destitute of that paticnt induilry in research, which con-
ducs to the knowledge of truth; a itranger to that im-
partiality which weighs evidence with cool attention,
and ever eager to establish his favourite system of exalt-
ing the charaCter of Cortes into that of a perfect hero,
exempt from error, and adorned with every virtue, he is
less solicitous to discover what was true, than to relate
what might appear splendid. When he attempts any
critical difcuilion, his reasonings are fallacious, and
founded upon an imperfect view of fats. Though he
sometimes quotes the difatches of Cortes, he seems not
to have consulted them ; and though he sets out with
some censure on Gcmara, he frequently prefers his au-
thority, the molt doubtful of any, to that of the other
contemporary hiitorians.

BUT of all the Spanish writers, Herrera furnifhesthe

fulleRi and most accurate information concerning the
conquest of Mexico, as well as every other tranfaEtion in
America. The industry and attention with which he
consulted not only the books, but the originalpapers
and public records, which tended to throw any light
upon the subjec of his enquiries, were so great, and he
usually judges of the evidence before him with so much
impartiality and candour, that his decads may be rank-
ed among the molt judicious and useful historical col-
letions. If, by attempting to relate the various occur-
rences in the New World in a itlicd chronological order,
the arrangement of events in his work had not been ren-
dered so perplexed, difconneLed, and obfcurc, that itis
an unpleasant tafl to colledt fiom diflercnt parts' of his
book, and piece together the detached fhlreds of a tlory,
he might jullly have been ranked among the molt emli-
nent hiflorians of his country. lHe gives an accountof
the materials from which he composed his work, Dec
vi. lib. iii. c. 19.

N T' Ir
446

NOTE II. p.3.

CORTES purposed to have gone in the train of
Ovando when he set out for his government in the year
1502, but was dctained by an accident. As he was at-
tempting in a dark night to scramble up to the window
of a lady's bed chamber, with whom he carried on an
intrigue, an old wall, on the top of which he had
mounted, gave way, and he was so much bruised by the
fall as to be unfit for the voyage. Gomara, Cronica de
la Nueva Efpagna, cap. i.

NOT E III. p. 5.

CORTES had two thousand pesos in the hands of
AndrewDuero, and he borroved four thousand. These
fums are about equal in value to fifteen hundred pounds
sterling; but as the price of every thing was extremely
high in America, they made but a scanty flock when
applied in this manner. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c.
z. B. Diaz. c. 20.

N O T E IV . 9.

T HE names of those gallant officers which will of-
ten occur in the fubfequcnt flory, were Juan Valafquez
de Leon, Alonfo Hernandez Portocarrero, Francisco
dc Montejo, Chriltoval de Olid, Juan de Efcalante,
Francisco do- Morla, Pedro de Alvarado, Francisco de
Salcc(la, Jtuan de licobar, Gincs de Nortes. Cortes
hin:l' lfcornmm.ndcd the C'apitana, or Admiral. Fran-
cisco dlc Orozco, an officer formed in the wars of Italy,
l;ad the command of the artillery. The experienced
Al ,nninos a&cd as chief pilot.

NOT LE

447
Vol. 11.

L 11

NOTE V. p. ii.

IN those different conflicts, the Spaniards loft only
two men, but had a coniiderable number wounded.
Though there be no occasion for recourse to any super-
natural cause to account either for the greatness of their
vitories, pr the smallness of their loss ; the Spanish his-
torians fail not to ascribe both to the patronage of St,
Jao, the tutelar Saint of their country, who, as they
relate, fought at the head of their countrymen, and by
his prowess giave a turn to the fate of the battle. Go-
mira is the firit who mentions this apparition of St.
James. It is amusing to observe the embarrafinent of
B. Diaz de Caltillo, occasioned by the struggle between
his superstition and his veracity. The former disposed
him to beli:.'e this miracle, the latter restrained him
fromn a'firming it. " I acknowledge, fays he, that all
our exploits and ictories are owing to our Lord Jesus
ChritI, and that in this battle there was such a number
of Indians to every one of us, that if each had thrown a
handful of earth they might have buried us, if by the
great mercy of God we had not been proteAed. It
mny he that the pcrmln whom Gomara mentions as hav-
ini, appeared on a mottled grey horse, was the glorious
ap r;tie Signor St. Jago or Signor St. Pedro; and that
I, ;s b)in; a 'inner, wva not wortlh to fee him. This I
know, th:.t I f;iw Francir.:o de Morla on such a horse,
but as ;.n un'.vcrth trailglrefior, did not defervc to fee
any of the hilv ;ipollles. It may have been the willof
(;od, th:it it w (s To as Gomara relates, but until I read
ii: C'!- '

ni'le f

, lv, 1r h;ird among any cf the conque-
rors that i il' ii t lling thli hlappened." Cap. 34.

N 0 T E VI. .

p. 16.

F ,''.\lc.',,RA Sn ,inibh lhii},tins rielate t'his occulrrlece

in f,,rh :er'. itn, i. ('tlcv wlicd it IhoulI be bC. licveld,
tlu the hIdianui ioadlcid si the prclcents, had carri(l

th1cln
448

them from the capital in the fame short space of time
that the couriers performed that journey. This is in-
credible, and Gomara mentions a circumnitance which
fliews, that nothing extraordinary happeted on this oc-
cafion. This rich prelent had been prepared for Gri-
jalva, when he touched at the fame place some inontls
before, and was now ready to be delivered, as toon as
Montezuma sent orders for that purpose. Gnmara,
Cron. c. xxvii. p. 28.

ACCORDING to B. Diaz del Castillo, the value of the

filrer plate representing the moon, was alone above
twenty thousand pesos, about five thousand pounds
sterling.

N O T E VII. p. 22.

HIS private traffic was direaly contrary to the in-

flruicions of Velasquez, who enjoined, that whatever
was acquired by trade should be thrown into the com-
mon stock. But it appears, that the soldiers had each
a private assortment of toys, and other goods proper for
the Indian trade, and Cortes gained their favourby en-
couraging this underhand barter, B. Diaz, c. 41.

N O T E VIII. p. 3z.

GOMARA has publihed a catalogue ofthe various
articles of which this present confllcd. Cron . c. 49,
P. Martyr ab Anglcria, who saw them after they were
biought to Spain, and who seems to have examined
tlhen wvith great attention, gives a description ofeach,
ivhiicl is curious, as it conveys onme idea of the progress
wlhici he Mexicans had made in fevcral arts of ele-
gance. Dc infulis nuper inventis liber, p. 354, &c.

NOTE

449
LI 1 2

NOT E IX. p. 38.

T HERE is no circumstance in the history of the con-
quest of America, which is more questionable than the
account of the numerous armies brought into the field
.against the Spaniards. As the war with the Tlafcalans,
though ofihort duration, was one of the most corifidera-
ble which they waged in America, the account given of
their forces merits some attention. The only authentic
information. concerning tliis is derived from three au-
thors. Cortes, in his second dispatch to the emperor,
dated at Segurade la Frontera, Otober 30, 15zo, thus
estimates the number of their troops in the firit battle
60co; in the second battle ioo,ooo .in the third battle
150,000. Relat. ap. Ramus, iii. 228. Bernal Diaz
del Cafiillo, who was an eye-witness, and engaged in
all the actions of this war, thus. reckons. their numbers;
in the first battle 3000, p. 43.; in the second: battle
6000, ibid. in the third battle 5oooo, p. 45. Goma-
ra, who was Cortes's chaplain afterhis return to Spain,
and published his Cronica in 15 2, follows the. computa-
tion of Cortes, except in the second battle, where he
reckons the Tliacalans at 8o,ooo, p. 4:o. It was mani-
fefly the interest of Cortes to magnify his own dangers
and exploits. For it was only by the fherit of extraor-
dinary services, that he could hope to atone for his irre-
gular condu&l, in afi;:min.. an independent command.
Bern. Diaz, though abuond.antly disposed to place his
own prowess, and that of his fellow-conquerors in.the
most advantageous point of light, had not the fame
temptation to exaggerate ; and, it is prqbable, that his
account of the numbers approaches nearer to the truth.
The assembling of an army of 15o,oo6 men requires
many previous arrangements, and such provision for
their fubfiffcnce a.s' eems to be beyond the forefightdo
Americans. The degree of cultivation in Tlafcala
does not seem to have been so great, as to have furnifl-
cd such a vast army with provisions Though this pro-
vince was so much better cultivated than other regions
of New Spain, that it was called the country of bread;

yet
45o

yet the Spaniards in their march suffered; firch want,
that they were obliged to subsist upoina T'uas, a species
of fruit which grows wild in the fields. Herrera, Dec.
ii. lib. vi. c. 5. p, 18z.

NOTE X. p. 42.

T HESE unhappy vicims are said to be persons of
dillinction. It seems improbable that so great a num-
ber as fifty mhould be .employed as spies. So many pri-
foners had been taken and dismissed,. and the Tlafcalans
had sent so many. messages to the Spanish quarters, that
there appears to be no reason for hazarding the lives of
so many considerable people, in order to procure infor-
mation about the position anditate of their camp. The
barbarous manner in which Cortes treated a people un-
acquainted with the laws of war eflablithed among po-
lilhed nations, appears so fnocking to: the later Spanilh
writers,. that they dimi.nilh the. number of those. whom
he puniflhed so cruelly. Herrera fays, that he cut off
the hands of seven, and the thumbs of some more. Dec.
ii. lib. ii. c. 8. De Solis relates, that, the hands .of four-
teen or fifteen. were cut off, andthe. thumbs of all the
reft. Lib. ii. c. 20. But Cortes himself, Relat. p..
228, b. and after him Gom.ra, c. 48, affirm, that the
hands of all the fifty were cut off.

NOTE XI. p. 44.

T HE horses were objets of the greatest allonifh-
ment to all the people of New Spain. At firlf they ima-
gined the horse and his rider, like the centaurs of the
"alcicnts, to be .Tome monstrous animal of a terrible
form; and supposing, that their food was the fame as
that of men, brought flelh and bread to nourifli them.
Even after they discovered ther: mistake, they believed
the horses devoured men in battle, and when they neigh-
ed, thought that they were demanding their prey. It

was

E4r

was not the interelt of the Spaniards to undeceive them.
Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. vi. c. I.

NOTE XII. p. 49.

1A~CCORDING to Bart. de las Caias, there was no
reason for this massacre, and it was an ad of wanton
cruelty, perpetrated merely to firike terror into the peo-
pleof New Spain. Relac. de la Deliuv!c. p. 17, &c.
But the zeal of Las Casas often leads him to exaggerate.
In oppolition to him Bern. Diaz, c. 83, asserts, that the
firfl miflionaries sent into New Spain by the.emperor,
made a judicial inquiry into this tranfaltion ; and hav-
ing examined the priess and elders of Cholula, found
that there was a real conspiracy to cut off the Spa-
niards, and that the account given by Cortes was exactly
true. As it was the object of Cortes at that time, and
manifestly his intereit, to gain the good-will of Monte-
zuma, it is improbable, that he would have taken a flep
which tended so viilbly to alienate him fiom the Spa-
niards, if he had not believed it to be necessary for his
own preservation. At the fame time, the Spaniards
who served in America had such contempt for the na-
tives, and thought them so little entitled to the common
rights of men, that Cortes might hold the Cholulans as
guilt) upon flight and imperfect evidence. The feveri-
ty of ihe punilhment \ as certainly ecxceflive and atro-
cious.

N () T F XrI. p. p.

fl HIS descr-iption i. tlaken almoift li;crally from Bcr-
nal Diaz dtl Calllilo, who was so una:cquait;inted wit
the lart of co)mpoition, as; to be incapabl' of eilbelli~l'
ing his, narrative. lie r'l;att., in a frlt and 1rud
ty lc, what pas'kd in hiS; (;\ewn nind, and tlilat of li: f"'
low-foldicrl; on tlhat occtilOn l; ' ' e:ndl t it not l
thought fi1ange, i ls;s he, t:at I fliuuti write in tllb

lll',[1111'1'
45 2

manner of what then happened, for it ought to be con-
fidered, that it is one thing to relate, another to have
beheld things that were never before seen, or heard, or
ifoken of among men." Cap. 86. p. 64. b.

NOTE XIV. p. 61.

Be Diaz del Cailillo gives us some ideaof the fatigue
a.ild ardluhips they underwent in performing this, and
ther prts of dutr. During the nine months that they
remained in Mexico, every man, without any diflinstion
between olficers and soldiers, slept on his arms, in his
quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on mats, or straw
fxoead on the floor, and each was obliged tohold himself
a alert as if he had been on guard. " This, adds he,
I)ccame tb hai tual to me, thateven now in my advanc-
ed ac, I always sleep in mycloaths, and never in any
bed. \Wh1en I xvifit my Encomionaz, I reckon it suitable
to a\ rank. to have a bed carried along with my other
b,;-.ae, but I never go into it; but, according to cuf-
t!n, I lie in mv cloaths, and walk frequently during
the night into the open air, to view the rtars as I was
wont when in service." Cap. 108.

N O T E XV. p. 63.

CORTES himnfef, in his second dispatch to the cm-
ptrlr, d(cs not explain the motives which induced him
':hicr to condemn Qlalpopoca to the flames, or to put
1iinte.zunla in iron.. Ramluf. iii. 236. B. Diaz is
Ilclt 'vitl rcfrpect to his reaCliobn fi)r the fo1rmcr ; and the
(""1 c.iufc he afijns for the latter was, that le might

ci'lfth no

ii ointelrriotion iln xecutting the fenrtnce pro-
I',"'"lccd ;:!'.inll Q( a]lpopoca, c. xcv'. p. 75. IBut as

'.l1tt'/ll e; was hi's pl rifoi er, and ;absolutely in uis

}v.'l, thle itilult osiered tt) that o111olarch could( have no

c(ulk i}t Ut il it'riati liin tiunniecellhrilyv. (omiara lup-
l'"':'''",i C.,rtl.-, had ooe other olject tihai) to occupy

M/ (ilttcZtlllila

453y

Montezuma with his own dilerefs and sufferings, that
he might give less attention to what besel Qualpopoca.
Cron. c. 09. Hcrrera adopts the fame opinion. Dec,
ii. lib. viii. c. n. But it seems an odd expedient, inor.
der to make a pcrfcni bear one injury, to load him with
another that is g reater. Dc Solis imagines, that Cor-
tes had noting eiie in view than to intimidate Monte.
zuma, so that he might make no attempt to rescue the
vitims from their fate ; but the spirit of that monarch
was so fulbmiffive, and he had so tamely given up the
prisoners to the disposal of Cortes, that he had little to
dread from him. If the explanation which I have at-
tempted to give of Cortes's proceedings on this occasion
be not admitted, it appears to me, that theymuft be
reckoned among the wanton and barbarous ats of op.
preflion which occur too often in the history of thecon-
quest of America.

NOTE XVI. p. 67.

BD E Solis afTerts, lib. iv. c. 3. that the propofitionof
doing homage to the King of Spain, came from Monte-
zuma himself, and was made in order to induce the
Spaniards to depart out of his dominions. He describes
his condu& on this occasion, as if it had been founded
upon a scheme of profound policy, and executed sith
such refined addrefi;, as to deceive Cortes himself. But
there is no hint or circumitance in the contemporary hi-
torians, Cortes, Diaz, or Gomara, to justify this theory.
Montezuma, on other occasions, discovered no fucl ex-
tent of art and abilities. The anguish which he felt in
performing this humbling ceremony is natural, if we
suppose it to have been involuntary. But, accordilng
to the theory of De Solis, it would have been prepoller.
ous and inconsistent with his own dcdign of deccivi"l
the Spaniards.

N OT '
454

NOTE XVII. p. 69.

IN several of the provinces, the Spaniards, with all
their indultry and influence, could colled no gold. In
others, they procured only a few trinkets of small value.
Montezuma assured Cortes, that the present which he
offered to the King of Caltile, after doing homage,
confiled of all the treasure amalTed by his father; and
told him, that he had already distributed the reit of his
gold and jewels among the Spaniards. B. Diaz, c. io4.
Gonara relates, that all the silver colleded amounted
to 500 marks. Cron. c. 93. This agrees with the ac-
count given by Cortes, that the royal fifth of silver was
loo marks. Relat. 239. B. So that the fum total of
silver was only 4000 ounces, at the rate of eight ounces a
mark, which demonltrates the proportion of silver to
gold to have been exceedingly small.

N O T E XVIII. p. 70.

D E Solis, lib. iv. c. i. calls in queflion the truth of
this tranfacion, from no better reason than that it was
inconfillent with that prudence which dillinguif&es the
character of Cortes. But lie ought to have recollected
the impetuosity of his zeal at Tlafcala, which was no leis
imprudent. He asserts, that the evidence forit rclts
upon t te tllimonv of B. Diaz del Callillo, of Gromara,
Indl of lerrera. They all concur indeed, in mention-
ing this inconsiderate Itep which Cortes took, and they
h;id good reason to do so, for Cortes himself relates t!hi
exploit in his fccond difpaltch to the lEmperor, lan
fecms to glory in it. C(n. Itelat. Ramu! iii. i.p. 1)
'lhis is one iillnce, aioi many, of lD) Solis's having
con fi11ted with Iittle atttisonl te letctrs of (ortes to

IhaIrles V. s)on which the tol aithen tie iluisolriiz:ti(sl
Vrith re fpcdlto hii opl .ltiols in ill he dIcived.

455
Vol.. 11.

N 0 T t,
MIll jlln

NOTE XIX. p. 74.

H ERRERA and De Solis suppose, thatVelafquez
was encouraged to equip this armament against Cortes,
by the accounts which he received from Spain concern-
ing the reception of the agents sent by the colony of
Vera Cruz, and the warmth with which Fonseca bithop
of Burgos had espoused his interefi, and condemned the
proceedings of Cortes. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 18.
De Solis, lib. iv. c. 5. But the chronological order of
events refutes this supposition. Portocarrero and Mon-
tejo failed from Vera Cruz, July 26, 15g9. Herrera,
dec. ii. lib. v. c. A. They landed at St. Lucar in Oto-
ber, according to Herrera, ibid. But P. Martyr, wlho
attended the court at that time, and communicated every
occurrence of moment to his correspondents day by day,
mentions the arrival of these agents, for the first time
in December, and speaks of it as arecent event. Epifi.
6-;. All the historians agree, that the agents of Cortes
h;d their firlt audicnce of the emperor at Tordefillas,
when he went to that town to visit his mother in his way
to St. Jago de Compoftclla. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c.
4. Dc Solis, lib. iv. c. . But the emperor set out
fiom Valladolid for Tordefillas, on the I ith of March

5 zo ; and P. Martyr mentions his having seen at that
time the presents made to Charles, Epill. 665. The ar-
rlament under Narvaez failed fiom Cuba in April 1520.
It is inanifcil then, that Velasquez could not receiveany
nccount of what palled in this interview at Tordefillas,
previous to his holtilepreparations againfl Cortes. His
real motives fecin to he those which I have mentioned.
T'he patent appointing him .4lcltlatado of New Spain,
with such cxtcnlivc powers, bears date November 13,
1 19. lIerrera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 1 1. He might rc-
ccive it about thi beginning of Jannuary. Gomnara takcs
noti:e, that as loon ;st this patent was delivered to hiii,
he beLan to eqCuip a fleet and levy forces. Cron. c. 6.

N 0 T lr

NOTE XX. p. 76.

D E Solis contends, that as Narvaez had no interpre-
ters, he could hold no intercourse with the people of the
provinces, nor converse with them in any way but by
signs, and that it was equally impossible for him to car-
ry on any communication with Montezuma. Lib. iv.
c. 7, But it is upon the authority of Cortes himself that
I relate all the particulars of Narvaez's correspondence,
both with Montezuma and with his fuljeds in the ma-
ritime provinces. Relat. Ramus. iii. 244. A. C. Cor-
tes affirms, that there was a mode ofintercourie between
Narvaez and the Mexicans, but does not explain how it
was carried on. Bernal Diaz supplies this defedt, and
informs us, that the three deserters who joined Narvaez
acted as interpreters, having acquired a competent
knowledge of the language, c. io. With his usual
minuteness, he mentions their names and characters,
andrelates, in chapter 122, how they were punished for
their perfidy. The Spaniards had now relided above a
year among the Mexicans; and it is not surprising, that
fevcral among them ihould have made some proficiency
in speaking their language. This seems to have been
the cafe. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. x. c. i. Both B. Diaz,
whowas present, and Herrera, the moll accurate and belt
intoried of all the Spanith writers, agree with Cortes in
his account of the fCcret correspondence carried on with
Montezuma. -Dec. ii. lib. ix. c. I8, 19. De Solis
fecns to confider it as a discredit to Cortes, his hero,
that Montezuma ihould have been ready to engage in a
correspondence with Narvaez. Hc flippofes that mo-
narch to have con traded fuich a wonderful altc.ftion for
the Spaniards, that he was not solicitous to be delivered
from them. After the indignity with which he had been
treated, Lfchll an fl'ecion is incredible ; and even Dc
Solis is obliged to acknowledge, that it mull be looked
upon as one of the miracles which God wrought to fa-
'ilit;te the conqucie, lib. iv. c. 7. The truth is, Mon-
tczuma, however much overawed by his dread of the

M m m z Spaniards,

457

Spaniards, was extremely impatient to recover hit
liberty.

N O T E XXI. p. 89.

HESE words I have borrowed from the anony.

mous Account of the European Settlements in America,
published by Dodfley, in two volumes, 8vo. a work of
io much merit, that I Ihould think there is hardly any
writer in the age who ought to be ashamed of acknow-
ledging himself to be the author of it.

NOTE XXII. p. 95.

HE contemporary hillorians differ considerably

with refpe& to the loss of the Spaniards on this occasion.
Cortes, in his second dispatch to the emperor, makes
the number only 15o. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 249,
A. But it was manifestly his interest, at that juncure,
to conceal from the court of Spain the full extentofthe
loss which he had sustained. De Solis, always studious
to diminish every misfortune that besel his countrymen,
rates their loss at about two hundred men. Lib. iv. c.
19. B. Diaz afiirms, that they loft 870 men, and that
oll y !^c c Icapedfirom Mexico, c. 128, p. 108. b. Pala-
fox, biffhop of Los Angeles, who seems to have inquired
into the early tranfaclions of his countrymen in Ncvw
Spain, with great attention, confirms the account of B.
l)iaz \vith rlli c to the extent of their loss. Virtudes
dcl Indio, p. 22. G omara fates their loss at 450 men.
C1run . c. 10). Somni moulths afterwards, when Cortes
had reccived several reinforcemcnts, he mustered his
troops, and cound them to be only 590. Relat. ap. R;a-
muf. iii. p. z55, E. Now, as Narvaez brought 8So men
into New Szpain, and about .oo of Cortcs's foldicrs wc"e
then ;livc, it is evident, tlat his loss in the retreat firo"
Mexico mull have been much more considcrable tliIl'
what hl mentions. B. Diaz, solicitous to magnify tl'e

dangers

dangers and sufferings to which he and his fellow-con-
querors were exposed, may have exaggerated their loss;
but, in my opinion, it cannot well be estimated at less
than 600 men.

N O T E XXIII. p. I1.

SOME remains of this great work are itill visible,
and the spot where the brigantines were built and launch-
ed, is Itiil pointed out to itrangers. Torquemada view-
ed them. Monarq. Indiana, vol. i. p. 531.

N OTE XXIV. p. I2o.

T HE flation of Alvarado on the causeway of Tacu-
ba was the nearest to the city. Cortes observes, that
there they could diflin.tly observe what pawed when
their countrymen were sacrificed. Relat. ap. Ramus.
iii. p. 273. E. B. Diaz, who belonged to Alvarado's
division, relates what he beheld with his own eyes. C.
152. p. 148, b. 149, a. Like a man whose courage was
so clear as to be above suspicion, he describes with his
ufial fmplicity the impreflion which this fpetacle
made upon him. " Before, fays he, I saw the breasts
of my companions opened, their hearts yet fluttering, of-
ferrcd to an accurciid idol, and their fleli devoured by
thcil exul tiig enemies, I was accustomed to enter a bat-
t!e not only without fear, but with high spirit. B31t
fiom that tine I never advanced to fight the AMexicans
wiithout a fccret horror and anxiety, my heart trcm;led
,at the toulghts of the death which I had 1cen them luf-
fcr.'" lie takes care to add, that as soon as the copnbat
hegan this terror went off'; and, indeed, his adventur-

s bra;very on every occasion is full evidence of this.
. 3i;;z, c. 156. p. 157, a.

N0 T E

459

NOTE XXV. p. 125.

O NE circumlfance in this siege merits particular no-
tice. The account which the Spaniih writers give of the
numerous armies employed in the attack or defence of
Mexico, teems to be incredible. According to Cortes
himself, he had at one time 15o,ooo auxiliary Indians
in his service. Relat. Ramus. iii. 275, E. Gomaraaf-
ferts, that they were abeve 2o0,000. Cron. c. 136. Her-
rera, an author of higler authority, fays, they were a-
bout2oo,ooo. Dec. iii. lib. i. c. 19. None ofthe con-
temporary writers ascertain explicitly the number of
persons in Mexico during the liege. But Cortes on fe-
verai occasions, mentions the number of Mexicans who
were slain, cr who periihed for want of food; and, if
we may rely on those circumflances, it is probable, that
above two hundred thousand mutt have been Ihut up in
the town. But the quantity of provisions necessary for
the iubfiilence of fach vaR multitudes assembled in one
place during three months is so great, and it requires so
much foresight and arrangement to colled them, so as to
be certain of a regular supply, that one can hardly be-
lieve that this could be accomplished in a countrywhere
agriculture was so imperfect as in the Mexican empire,
where there were no tame animals, and by a people na-
turally so improvident, and so incapable of executing a
complicated plan as the moll improved Americans. The
Spaniards, with all their care and attention, fared very
poorly, and were often reduced to cxtreme diitrhef fi0om
want of provisions. 1. Diaz, p. 1lz. Cortes Rclat.
271, D. Cortes, on one occasion mentions slightly the
fubfiitence of his army; and after acknowledging, tlat
they were often in great want, adds, that they received
supplics from the people of the country, of lill, and of
some fruit, which he calls the cherries of the countrl,
ibid. B. Diaz fays, that they h)a(l cakes ofl maize, 1l1
ccrafas de la tierra; and when the fctfon of these was
over, another fiuit, which he calls T';las ; but teir
imot comfortable fubfialencc was a root which the In-
dians uli as food, to which he gives the name of o/ili/r,

1p. 1,2.
460

p. 142. The Indian auxiliaries had one means of sub-
fiilence more than the Spaniards. They fed upon the
bodies of the Mexicans whom they killed in battle.
Cort. Relat. '176, C. B. Diaz confirms his relation,
and adds, that when the Indians returned from Mexico
to their own country, they carried with them large
quantities of the flesh of the Mexicans salted or dried, as
a molt acceptable present to their friends, that they
might have the pleasure of feeding on the bodies of their
enemies in their festivals, p. 157. De Solis, who seems
to confider it as an imputation of discredit to his coun-
trynen, that they should a& in concert with auxiliaries
who fed upon human flelh, is solicitous to prove, that
they endeavoured to prevent their associates from eating
the bodies of the Mexicans, lib. v. c. 24. But he has
no authority for this from the original historians. Nei-
ther Cortes himself, nor B. Diaz, seem to have had any
such scruple; and, on many occasions, mention the In-
dian repasss, which were become familiar to them, with-
out any mark of abhorrence. Even with this additional
itock of food for the Indians, it was hardly possible to
procure fubfitence for armies amounting to such num-
bels as we find in the Spanilh writers. Perhaps, the belt
solution of the difficulty is, to adopt the opinion of B.
Diaz del Caflillo, the molt artless of all the Hi/loriadores
priliitivos. ' When Gomara, fays he, on Tome 'occafi-
ons relates, that there were so many thoufandIndians
our auxiliaries, and on others, that there were so many
thousand houses in this or that town, no regard is to be
paid to his enumeration, as he has no authority for it,
the numbers not being in reality the fifth of what he re-
lates. If we add together the diffcrcnt numbers which
he mentions, that country would contain more millions
thn there are in Calltile." C. z29. But though some
conliderable dcduction fliould certainly be made fiom
tlie Spanilh accounts of the Mexican forces, they mutt
have been very numerous ; for nothing but an immense
flncriority in number, could have enabled them to with-
lian :t boldy of nine hundred Spaniards, commanded by
a1 general of such abilities as Cortes.

NOTE

461

N O T E XXVI. p. 138.

IN relating the oppressive and cruel proceedings of
the conquerors of New Spain, I have not followed B. de
las Casas as my guide. His account of them, Relat. de
la Deftruyc. p. 18, &c. is manifestly exaggerated. Itis
from the testimony of Cortes himself and Gomara, who
wrote under his eye, that I have taken my account of
the punilhment of the Punucans; and they relate it
without any difapprobatio n. B. Diaz, contrary to his
usual cuftorm, mentions it only in general terms, c. 162.
Herrera, solicitous to extenuate this barbarous action of
his countrymen, though he mentions 60 caziques, and
400 men of note, as being condemned to the flames, as.
ferts, that thirty only were burned, and the reft pardoned.
Dec. iii. lib. v. c. 7. But this is contrary to the tef-
timony of the original hiflorians, particularly of Goma-
ra, whom it appears he had consulted, as he adopts fe-
veral of his expreifions in this passage The punishment
of Guatimozin is related by the most authentic of the
Spanish writers. Torquemada has extracted from a
hiflory of Tezeuco, composed in the Mexican tongue,
an account of this tranfaition, more favourable to Gua-
timozin than that of the Spanish authors. Mon. Indi-
diana, i. i7. According to that account, Cortes had
scarcely a Ihadow of evidence to justify such a wanton
act of cruelty. B. Diaz affirms, that Guatimozin and
his fellow-fuflerers asserted their innocence with their
]i!t breath, and that many of the Spanihl fildies co1-
dcmlned this action of Cortes as equally unneccfnhlyalad
a.njull, p. Zo0, b. 201, a.

N 0 T '1' XXVIr. p. 140.

j T'IFn motive tf;r ixIert;,l in lthis cxp(edition w(:s, to
pu itilL CuLrillv;.l d:; Olid, one of his ofliccrs who hid1

" '( i ,rvYltcO.
462

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

revolted againil him, and aimed at eftablifliing an inde-
pendent jurifdidion. Cortes regarded this infurlreaion
as offuch dangerous example, and dreaded so much the
abilities and popularity of its author, that in person he
led the body of troops deflined to suppress it. He mar-
ched, according to Gomara, three thousand miles, thro'
a country abounding with thick forests, rugged moun-
tains, deep rivers, thinly inhabited, and cultivated only
in a few places. What he suffered from famine, from
the hostility of the natives, from the climate, and from
hardihips of every species, has nothihg in history parallel
to it, but what occurs in the adventures of the other
discoverers and conquerors of the New World. Cortes
was employed in this dreadful service above two years;
and though it was not diflinguifhed by any splendid
event, he exhibited, during the course of it, greater
personal courage, more fortitude ofmind,more perfeve-
rance and patience, than in any other period or scene of
his life. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. vi, vii, viii, ix. Gomara
Cron. c. 163- 177. B. Diaz, 174-I9o.

N O T E XXVIII. p. 142.

A C C R D I N G to Herrera, the treasure which
Cortes brought with him, confilned offiftecn hulnndrej
marks of.wrought plate, two hundred thoftiind pelos of
fine gold, and ten thousand of inferior Itandard, many
rich jewels, one in particular worth forty) thouiiand pe-
sos, and several trinkets and ornaments ol vallue. Dec.
iv. lib. iii. c. 8. lib. iv. c. i. He afterwards engaged
togive a portion with his daughter ofa h undlred thou .nd
pesos. Gomara, Cron. c. 237. The fortune which he
left his sons was very confidcrablc. .But as we have be-
fore related, the fimn divided among the conquerors on
tlhe firt reldution of Mcxico wais very fiall. There ap-
pears then to be foile reason for fillting that the ac-
culations of (ortes's enlmice were not altogether delli-
tlte of foundation. ''licy charged him wit h having un-
jullly iaplied to his own uife a dillpLoportionate Ihalre of

VoL.. .1. N 11n Lic

Mexican spoils; with having concealed the royal trea-
fures of Montezuma and Guatimozin, with defrauding
the king of his lifth, and robbing his followers of what
was due to them. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. viii. c. 15. dec.
iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some of the conquerors themselves
entertained fulpicions of the fame kind. B. Diaz, c.
157.

N O T E XXIX. p. 1+7.

I N tracing the progress of the Spanilh armsin New
Spain, we have followed Cortes himself asourmoit
certain guide. His dispatches to the emperor contain
a minute account of his operations. But the unletter-
ed conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own
exploits. Our information with reitped to them is de-
rived however fiom contenmporary and refpeCtableau-
thors.

T H E molt early account of Pizarro's tranfaaions in

Peru, waspubli lled 1v Francisco de Xerez his secretary.
It is a simple unli.dirned n. rr:tive, carried down no far-
ther than the deathl o0 Attahualpa, in i533; for the au-
thor rciurned to Spain in 1 53, and soon after he land-
ed, p:inted at Seville his fhorlt Hiliory of the conquelt
1- 'cri., addiclli_'d to the enmperor.

Du ri Pcdro Sanchlo, an officer who served under Pi-

zaljro, drew up ill account of his expedition, which was
tranI!.:ted into til;iall bly Ramufio, and infertcdin his
vaill ti)le collcction, liut has never been publilhcd in
it', ,riiin;itl aiIan t :tg i. Sancio returned to Spain at
the flic li ine with X'c'iCi . Great credit is due towhat
both tLolle auitliors riir e concerning the progrels and
,-er l:tionls ,of Pi:,:rro, I'ut tile refidclce of the Spaniards
in cPeru hat(! bee n 10 I' llot,t the time

l vhen they left it,

and t!hir intecl':urie with the natives ob ilender, that
their knwl e of ie lcriuvian mannerl s land cultllo11
is very ille'Clrtect. ,

.
464

THE next contemporary historian is Pedro Cieza de

Leon, who publilhed his' Chronica del Peru, at Seville i'n
1553. If he had finished all that he propotes in the
general divilion of his work, it would have Ixben the
mont complete history which had been pnbli!ifed of any
region in the New World. He was well qualified to
execute it, having served during seventeen years in Ame-
rica, and visited in person molt of the provinces con-
cerning which he had occasion to write. Bit only the
sirs part of his Chronicle has been printed. It contains
a description of Peru, and several of the adjacent pro-
vinces, with an account of the intitutions and cufioms
of the natives, and i wvri.itn wVith so little art, and fiuch
an apparent regard for truth, that one mutl regret the
loss of the other parts of his work.

THIS loss is amply supplied by Don Augufline Za-

rate, who publilied, in 155 5, his Hiftoria del defcubri-
miento y Conquella de la provincia del Peru. Zarate
was a man of rank and education, and employed in Pe-
ru as comptroller general of the public revenue. His
hiflory, whether we attend to its matter or composition,
is a book ofconfiderable merit; as he had opportunity
to be well informed, and seems to have been inquisitive
with refped to the manncrs and tranfacions of the Pe-
ruviMns, great credit is due t,, his teltimony.

DON Diego Ferinndez publiflcd his Hilloria del Pe-

ru in 1571. His sole objet is to relate the dissentions
and civil wars of the Spaniaids in that enlpile. As lie
served in a public ilation in l'eru, and was \veil acquaint-
ed both with the country, and with the principal actors
in thofe.:lingular tcencs which he dcfcribes, as he pof-
fcfid found underllanding, and great impartiality, his
work may be ranked among tloife of the hillorians molt
dillinguilled for their indullry in rcfearch, or their ca-
pacity in judging with relpcd to the events which they
relate.

N n 11

Trr ,

THE lal- author who can be reckoned among the

contemporary hitlorians of the conquest of Peru, is Gar-
cilafo de la Vega, Inca. For though the first part of
his work, intitled, Cementa-ios Reales del Origen de los
Incas Reies del Peru, was not published sooner than the
year 1609, seventy fix years after the death ofAtahualpa
the lail emperor, yet as he was born in Peru, and was
the son of an officer of diflincion among the Spaniih con-
querors, by a Caga, or lady of the royal race, on ac-
count of which he always took the name ofInca, as he
was mailer of the language spoken by the Incas, and
acquainted with the traditions of his countrymen, his
authority is rated very high, and often placed above
that of all the other hiltorians. His work, however, is
little more than a commentary upon the Spanish writers
of the Peruvian story, and compoled ofquotations taken
from the authors whom I have mentioned. This is the
idea which he himfelfgives of it, lib. i. c. 1o. Noris
it in the account of fats only that he follows them ser-
vilely. Even in explaining the inltitutions and rites of
his ancestors, his information seems not to be more per-
sec than theirs. His explanation of the Quipos is al-
most the fame with that of Acofta. He produces no fpe-
cimen of Peruvian poetry, but that wretched one which
he borrows from Bias Valera, an early miflionary,
whose memoirs have never been published. Lib. ii.c.
15. As for compoeition, arrangement, or a capacity of
diilinguilhing between what is fiabulous, what is proba-
blc, ;ilnd what is true, one fearclcs for them in vainiin
the c' r.:icniLarlC.ls of Inca. His work, however, notwith-
tlanding its grceat dcfccts, is not altogether dellitte of
uife. Sonic traditions which he received from hiscoun-
trynlci ar e preservcd in it. Hiis knowledge of the Pc-
ruLvian languagc has enabled him to correct some errors
of thi Spt;iilh writers, and he ais inserted in it some
curi;uII fIILt,' taken ti'r:n :uthorl whofc works were never
p}ubliflicd, and arc now lolt.

:W, .....
: 3 ""' 1

,'. X
466

NOT E XXX. p. ISz.

ON E may form an idea both of the hardflips which
they endured, and of the sickliness of the regions which
they viiited, from the extraordinary mortality that pre-
vailed among them. Pizarro carried out 112 men, Al-
magro 7o. In lers than nine months 130 of these died.
Few fell by the sword; molt of them were cut off by
dileafes. Xerez, p. 180.

NOTE XXXI. p. 155.

T HIS illand, fays Herrera, is rendered so uncom-
sortable by the unwholfomenefs of its climate, its impe-
netrable woods, its rugged mountains, and the multi-
tude of infeas and reptiles, that it is seldom any softer
epitlct than that of inferinal is employed in, describing
it. The fun is almost never seen there, and throughout
the yea; it hardly ever ceases to rain. Dec. iii. lib. x.
c. 3. DIapier couched at this iland in the year 1685;
and his account of the climate is not more favourabie.
Vol. i. p. 17Z. He, duiing his cruize on that coafl, vi-
fited moll of the Si aces where Pizarro landed, and his
description o th!cmi throws light on the narrations of the
earl)y panilh hillorians.

N O T E XXXII. p. 169.

\ tj t ,lis time horses had multiplied greatly in the

Sp :ni;h fIcttlcl'ncnto o;i the cllntincnt. Wheln Cortes
1'1, t hii: iL. :p di tion inle yter cl Ij 8, though his an.a-
l"nt v,;lr; lr;re colidc(rable thain tha:t of Piz;arro, and
't>:} i'dl s(l crli. ns I lpcrior in r.lik to tIht: whs o inlv.ad-
c l -':.1, hc' cotld procure no more than lixtcn horIbcs.

N ' 1TE

467

N O T E XXXII. p. 171.

IN the year 1740, D. Ant. Ulloa, and D. George
Juan, travelled from Guayquil to Motupe, by the fame
route which Pizarro took. From the description of
their journey, one may form an idea of the dificulty of
his march. The sandy plains between St. Michael de
Piura and Motupe extend go miles, without water, with-
out a tree, a plant, or any green thing, on a dreary
stretch of burning sand. Voyage, tom. i. p. 399, &c.

N O T E XXXIV. p. 175'

T H I S extravagant and unseasonable discourse
of Valverde has been censured by all hiitorians, and
with jufiice. But though lie seems to have been an il-
literate and bigotted monk, nowise refenbling the good
Olmedo, who accompanied Cortes; the absurdity of his
addrcfs to Atahualpa mull not be charged wholly upon
him. His harangue is evidently a translation, or para-
phrase of that form, concerted by a junto of Spanifl di-
vines and lawyers in the year 1509, for explaining the
right of their king to the sovereignty of the New World,
and for directing the oflicers employed in America how
they fllould take pofleflion of any neiw coun try. See Vol.
i. Note xx;ii. The sentiments contained in Valvcrde's
harangue Inulf not then be imputed to the bigottedimn-
becillity of a particular man, but to that of the age.
Gomara and Bcnzoni relate one circutmliance concern-
ing Valverde, which, if authentic, renders him an ob-
jet not of contempt only, but of horror. 'I'hey aflirt,
th at during the whole aition, 'Valverde continued to ex-
cite the fold1ers to il;aughter, calling to them to firike
the enemy not with tihe edg:, but with the points0'
their swords. oin. Cron. c. 11. lIenz. Iiflto. NO''
()rlis, lib. iii. c. 3. Such blchaviour was very difcrcint
fron that of the Roman Catholic clergy in other p"ars
468

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
of America, where they uniformly exerted their influ-
encc to protect the Indians, and to moderate the ferocity
of their countrymen.

N 0 T E XXXV. p. 176.

T W O different fyflems have been formed concern-
ing the conduc of Atahualpa. The Spaniih writers,
in order to j ufify the violence of their countrymen, con-
teld, that all the Inca's professions of friendship were
feigned; and that his intention in agreeing to.an inter-
view with Pizarro at Caxamalca, was to cut off him and
his followers at one blow; that for this purpose he ad-
xanced with such a numerous body of attendants, who
had arms concealed under their garments to execute this
ichleme. This is the account given by Xerez and Za-
rate, and adopted by Herrcra. But if it had been the
plan of the Inca to deflroy the Spaniards, one can hardly
imagine that he would have permitted them to march
unniolelled through the desert of Motupe, or have ne-
gleded 'to defend the passes in the mountains, where
they might have been attacked with so much advantage.
If tle Peruvians marched to Caxanalca with an inten-
tiol to fall upon the Spaniards, it is inconceivable,
tihat of so great a body'of men, prepared for acion, not
one llhoild attempt to make refinance, but all tamely
tfuler themselves to be butchered by an enemy whom
tlhev were armed to attack. Atallualpa's mode of ad-
vancing to tihe interview, has tlhe alpect of a peaceable
pr(celi(on, not of a military enterprize. I-Ie himself,
aill( his followers we(rc, in their hlabits of ceremony, pte-
cil.edl, as on diays of Iblcemiiity, by utnarmed lharbingers.

li'.;,,h riude ii:ation:; ar fi'requently cunning and fillfe.
yct, il ;i felihcie f' deception aud treachery mull be im-
i)ti'tl cilil(r tO a nonaclic, that had no great eafion to be
:eined :tt a vilit Ifom jlralngcr.s lwho 1tlicitcd adinflion
ilili(i!ii j)rtcic s l fJieiud, or to an aldvrenturer so ldaring,
;i,{ l l;)itl ' (lliru)lilotii, aI s li ;arl , one cannllot hllit;itC
*'it dvticrlnjinig liCee lC fiX illth rtI'fiinptivn olf ui3ill.

E. I,

Even amidit the endeavours of the Spanilh writers to
palliate the proceedings of Pizarro, one plainly per-
ceives, that it was his intention, as well as his interelt,
to seize the Inca, and that he had taken measures for
that purpose, previous to any suspicion of that monarch's
designs.

GARCILASO DE LA VEGA, extremely solicitous to

vindicate his countrymen, the Peruvians, fiom the crime
of having concerted the deilruftion of Pizarro and his
followers, and no less afraid to charge the Spaniards
with improper conduct towards the Inca, has framed a-
nother fyfiem. He relates, that a man of majetic form,
with a long beard, and garments reaching to the ground,
having appeared in vision to Viracocha, the eighth Inca,
and declared, that he was a child of the Sun, that mo-
narch built a temple in honour of this person, and e-
reaed an image of him, resembling, as nearly as pofi-
ble, the singular form in which he had exhibited himself
to his view. In this temple, divine honours were paid to
Xnim, by the name of Viracocha. P. i. lib. iv. c. 21.
lib. v. c. 22z. When the Spaniards first appeared in Pe-
ru, the length of their beards, and the dress they wore,
flruck every person so much with their likeness to the
image of Viracocha, that they supposed them to be chil-
dren of the Sun, who llad descended from heaven to earth.
All concluded, that the fatal period of the l'eruvian em-
pire was now approaching, and that the throne would
be occupied by nevw )poicflbrs. Atahualpa himself, con-
fidering the Spanin'rds as nicfflingcrs firomr heaven, was
so far from entcrtai:ning any thoughts of rcfifting thel,
that he determined to yield implicit obedience to their
commands. From1 tlole eaiI.inl!lts ilowcd his profflli-
ons of love and rcfj c't. 'To thctl were owing the cor-
dial rception of Soto atdl e(lillen;nd Pizarro in is
camp, and the fiiulniliv r'everence with which head-
vanced to v;iit the painiill gucl'tral in his qluarters. But
fromn the grolf iGcr;l;'inc c f' Philipiilo, the interprctelr
the declaration of ti' S.iali;lli, land his anii;cr to it
were if ill explaincll, t,.at by their nmutual inability tO

C()ll-
470

comprehend each other's intentions, the fatal rencoun-
ter at Caxamalca, with all its dreadful consequences, was
occafiohed.

IT is remarkable, that no traces of this fuperilitious
veneration of the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are
to be found either in Xerez, or Sancho, or Zarate, pre-
vious to the interview at Caxamalca; and yet the
two former served under Pizarro at that time, and the
latter visited Peru soon after the conquel. If either the
Inca himself, or his meflengers, had addressed the Spa-
niards in the words which La Vega put in their mouths,
they mull have been itruck with Ihch fubmiflive declara-
tions; and they would certainly have availed them-
selves of them to accomplifl their own designs with
greater facility. La Vega himielf, though his narra-
tive of the interccurie between the Inca and Spaniards,
preceding the rencounter at Caxamalca, is founded
on the supposition of his believing them to be Viraco-
chas, or divine beings. P.'ii. lib. i. c. 17, &c. yet with
his ufial inattention and inaccuracy he admits, in ano-
ther place, that the Peruvians did not recoliect the re-
semblance between them and the god Viracocha, until
the fatal difaflers subsequent io the defeat at Caxa;nalc.a,
and then only began to call them Viracochas. P. i,
lib . v. c. 1. This is confirmed by Herrera, dec. v.
lib. ii. c. 12. In many diflfcrent parts of America, if
we may believe the S r;:nii'h writers, their countrylmen
wereconfidered as divine lceings who had idefcendei fiomin
leaven. But in this inllanL e, as in many which occur
in the ihterccurlc between nations, whofie 1progircf in
refinement is very unceurlil, the ideas of thole who u lc
the expreflion, were dil'lerent from the ide:.as ofthofre who
!cardlit. For, fichl is ti, idlioin of the fin li;nlm lan a-
ges, or fuclJ i, llte finmlil:ty of thofl w\ho peak; them,
thlttwhen they 1(e any tlhiln with which tllcy \vere for-
lielly unacquaiuted, a(nd of which they do not know
the origin, they fay, tllt it camel down ifom l-l'eaven.
*NugScz. Ramn. iii. 327, C.

l: accoun t whlich r hllve g!iv(,n of the feltilmet'nt.

n(l prI)ocetdings of the Pcrixl. i;ns, aIppeClr.s to I)e mile
v,01 1. .0 o o in.tu'Ml

47i

natural and confitent than either of the two preceding,
and is better supported by the faas related by the con-
temporary historians.

ACCORDING to Xerez, p. zoo, two thousand Peruvi-
ans were killed, Sancho makes the number of theflain
fix or seven thousand. Ram. iii. 274, D. By La Ve
ga's account, five tloufand were massacred. P. ii. lib,
i. c. 2z. The number which I have mentioned, being
the medium between the extremes, may probably be
nearel-f the truth.

N O T E XXXVI. p. 178.

IN O T H I N G can be a more ihriking proof of this,
titan that three Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca to
Cuzco. The distance between them is fix hundred
niiles. In every place throughout this vast extent of
country, they were treated with all the honours which
the Peruvians paid to their sovereigns, and even to their
divinities. Under pretext of anmaffing what was want-
ing' for the ran'om of the Inca, they demanded the
plates of gold viti which the walls of the Temple of
tlhe Sun in (Cuzco were adorned; and though the priests
x ere unwilling to alienate those sacred ornaments, and
the people rcutiled to violate the Ihrine of their God,
the thrcc Spani:rds x ith their own hands robbed the
'lenlpic of part of this valuable treasure; and such was
tlil relcrencc of the natives for their persons, that
though they beheld this aat of sacrilege with aflonifli-
inclit, tlic did not attelmpt to prevent or dilturb the
C'cinilliion of it. Z;arate, lib. ii. c. 6. Sancho ap.
Ranul. iii. 375, D.

N O T E XXXVII. p. 18S.

A CCORDING to Herrera, the spoil of Clzco, as-
tt.i letting apart the king's fiji/, was divided anongi
40 So pi )lns. Each received 4ooo pclbs. This amo0ult

.. ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~tO
4.72

to 1,920,000 pesos. Dec. v. lib. vi. c. 3. But as the
general, and other officers, were entitled to a part far
greater than that of the private men, the fum total nltl
have rilen much beyond what I have mentioned. Go-
mara, c. 123. and Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. fatisiy theifelves
with afierting in general, that the plunder of Cuzco
was of greater value than the ransom of Atahualpa.

N O T E XXXVIII. p. 19o.

lN O expedition in the New World was conducted
with more persevering courage than that of Alvarado,
and in none were greater hardships endured Many of
the persons engaged in it were, like their leader, vete-
rans who had served under Cortes, inured to all the ri-
gour of American war. Such ofmy readers as have not
an opportunity ofperufing the firiking description of
their sufferings by Zarate or Herrera, may form some
idea of the nature of their march from the sea coast to
Quito, by consulting the account which D. Ant. Ulloa
giSes of his own journey in 1736, nearly in the fame
route. Voy. tor. i. p. 178, &c. or that of M. Bou-
guer, who proceeded fiom Puerto Viejo to Quito, by
the fame road which Alvarado took. He compares his
own journey with that of the Spanish leader, and by
the comparison, gives a most firiking idea of the bold-
ness and patience of Alvarado, in forcing his way
through so many obltacJes. Voyage du Perou, p.
xXviii, &c.

N O T E XXXIX. p. 19.

ACCORDING to IHerrera, there was entered on
account of the king, in gold, 155,300, pesos, and
;too marks (each 8 ounces)' of silver, besides fevcral
rclcls and ornaments, some of gold, and others of fil-

0cr; on account of private persons, in gold g99,ooo
Fle1s, and ;i,ooo marks of silver. Dec. v. lib. vi.c. 13.

o o z

47.3
NOTrE

N O T E XL. p. 198.

J HE Peruvians had recourse to other military
arts than those cf the Spaniards. As the cavalry were
the chief c'bje& of their terror, they endeavoured to
render thenm incapable of ating, by throwing a long
thong with a lhone fattened to each end. This twifled
about the horse and its rider, entangled them so as to
render them incapable of acting. Herrera mentions
this as an invention of their own. Dec. v. lib. viii.
c. 4. But as I have observed, vol. i. p. 375, this wea-
pon is common among several barbarous tribes tow-
ards the extremity of South America; and it is more
probable, that the Peruvians had observed the dexterity
with which they used it in hunting, and on this occasion
adopted it theinfelves. The Spaniards were confidera-
bly annoyed by it. Herrera, ibid. Another instance
of the ingenuity of the Peruvians deserves mention.
By turning a river out of its channel, they overflowed a
valley, in which a body of Spaniards was polled, so
suddenly, that it was with the utmost difficulty they
made their escape. Hterrera, dec. v. lib. viii. c. 5.

N O T E XLI. p. 215.

~li
-

P; ,

l- A's account of Orcllana's voyage is tie

mnlt inuailtc, ad ;lpalrently the moil accurate, It
was prolbably taken from the journal of Orell:na1
hinllclf. But the dates are not dillindtly marked. Ili
navitation ldown the Coca, or Napo, begun early inle-
bruary 1541 ; and le arriveCd at the mouth of tlc ril'r
on ti(: z6thl of Augul!t, lhaving lpent near seven month'
in tlie voyaigc. M. de la Condamine, in the ycar 7lll"
s{:il.d foll (I nc Jllclc to P;ara, a fettlcnient of tle 1'ort-
p uclc at tile imoutli of the river, a lnavigaltioln rslh
l]ngc.r than that of ()rellana, in less than foIur 1on1llt
\"*oyag.le, pt:. 1,719.b Il, the two adventlrers were vcry
dil'rclreltly providld flr tihe voyage. This ha:izardoi

0itil ct·
474-

undertaking, to which ambition prompted Orellana,
and to which the love offcience led M. de la Condamine,
was undertaken in the year 1769, by Madame Godin
des Odonais, from conjugal affection. The narrative
of the hardships which The suffered, of the dangers to
which lhe was exposed, and of the disasters which besel
her, is one of the moll singular and affecting stories in
any language, exhibiting in her conduct a llriking pic-
ture of the fortitude which diftinguiih the one sex,
mingled with the sensibility and tenderness peculiar to
the other. Lettre de M. Godin, a M. de la Conda-
mine.

N O T E XLII. p. 21.

H ERRERA gives a fRriking piture of their indi-
gence. Twelve gentlemen, who had been officers of
diflination under Almagro, lodged in the fame house,
and having but one cloak among them, it was worn al-
ternately by him who had occasion to appear in public,
while the reli, from the want of a decent dress, were ob-
liged to keep within doors. Their former fiiends and
companions were so much afraid of giving offence to
Pizarro, that they durst not entertain, or even converse
with them. One may conceive what was the condition,
rnd what the indignation of men once accultomcd to
power and opulence, wn they felt themselves poolr
:'nd dcfpife(d, without a roof under which to flelter their
heads, while they hcecld others, whose mcrit and services
were not cqu:il to theirs, living with splendour in sump-
tucus edifices . ec. vi. lib. viii. c, 6.

N 0 T E XLI I. p. 229.

II' 1RRI, R:, l the moil accurate of the Spanili hiluo-
ri;ns, ;u'rts, l:lat G;onz alo P'za;rro poflbfu d domains
in the Ici]>l,)ourliocc! of Clluiqucl.tca de la Plata, which
\'yicl(1d l nl aimn ain u.nll rc' en i:e greater than that of the
;l'lh)iillolnicof '['olcdo, tlie bcil endowed fee in Eu-
rope. Dec. vii. lib, vi. c. 3.

NOTE

475

N 0 T' E XLIV. p. 24z.

A LIL the Spanish writers describe his march, and
the difirefes of both parties very minutely, Zarate ob-
serves, that hardly any parallel to it occurs in hillory,
either with refpet to the length of the retreat, or the
ardour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to his com-
putation, followed the viceroy upwards of three thou-
sand miles. 'Lib. v. c. 16. 26.

N 0 T E XLV. p. 254.

jT amount-d, according to Fernanaez, the belt inform-
ed historian of that period, to one million four hundred
thousand pesos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

N O T E XLVI. p. 255.

C ARVAJAL, from the beginning, had been an ad-
vocate for an accomodation with Gafca. Finding Pi-
zarro incapable of holding that bold course which he
originally fuggeiled, he recommended to him a timely
fubnmiflion to his sovereign as the fafetl meafurc. When
the president's offers were first communicated to l'iza-
ro, " By our Lady (ifiid he, in that llrain of buffoonry
which was lamiliar to him) the prielt iflucs gracious
bulls. IHe gives them both good and cheap, let us not
only accept of theml, hut wear them as rcliques about our
necks." Iernandez, lib. ii. c. 63.

N O T E XLVJJ. p. 260.

DI URING the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, fcvcn
hundred men were killed in battle, and three hlunldred
and ei)hty were hanged or beheaded. Hcrrera, dec

VllII
476

viii. lib. iv. c. 4. Above three hundred of these were
cut off by Caljaval. Fernandez, lib. ii. c. g9. Zara-
te makes the number of those put to a violent death five
hundred. Lib. vii. c. .'

N O T E XLVIII. p. 267.

JN my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of
the Mexicans, I have received much information from a
large manuscript of Don Alonfo de Corita, one of the
judges in the Court of Audience of Mexico. In the
)year 1553, Philip II. in order that he might discover the
mode of levying tribute from his Indian fubjets, that
would be molt beneficial to the crown, and leaPt oppref-
five to them, addressed a mandate to all the Courts of
Audience in America, enjoining them to answer certain
queries which he proposed to them, concerning the an-
cient form of government eftablihed anong the various
nations of Indians, and the mode in which they paid
taxes to their kings, or chiefs. In obedience to this
mandate, Corita, who had resided nineteen years in
America, fourteen of which he passed in New Spain,
compoted the work of which I have a copy. He ac-
quaints his sovereign, that he had made it an obje& du-
ring his residence in America, and in all its provinces
which he had visited, to inquire diligently into the man-
nets and cutloms of the natives, that he had converted
for this purpose, with many aged and intelligent Indi-
ans, and consulted several of the Spanilll ecclesiastics,
who underltood the Indian languages moll perfecly,
particularly some of those who landed in New Spain
soon after the conquept. Corita appears to be a man of
fonme learning, and to have carried on his inquiries with
the diligence and accuracy to which hepretends. Great-
er credit is due to his tettimony fiom one circunlmtance.
Ilis work was not composed with a view to publication,
r in flupport of any particular theory, bu t contains fim-
ple, lthough fill ansivcrs to queries proposed to him of-

licially.

477

ficially. Though Herrera does not mention him among
the authors whom he had followed as guides in his hifto-
ry, I should suppose, from several fans of which he takes
notice, as well as from several expressions which he uses,
that this memorial of Corita, was not unknown to him.

N O T E XLIX. p. 276.

T H E early Spanish writers were so haftyand inac-
curate in estimating the numbers of people in the provin-
ces and towns of America, that it is impoflible to afcer-
tain that of Mexico itself with any degree of precision.
Cortes describes the extent and populoufiiefs of Mexico
in general terms, which imply, that it was not inferior
to the greatest cities in Europe. Gomara is more expli-
cit, and affirms, that there were 6o,ooo houses, or fami-
lies in Mexico. Cron. c. 78. Herrera adopts his opinion.
Dec. ii. lib. vii. c. 13; and the generality of writers
follow them implicitly without inquiry or scruple.
According to this account, the inhabitants of Mexico
mull have been about 300,000. 'Forquemada, with his
usual propensity to the marvellous, aflerts, that there
were a hundred and twenty thousand houses or familiec
in Mexico, and consequently about fix hundred thousand
inhabitants. Ibi. iii. c. 23. But in a very judicious
account of the Mexican empire, by one of Cortes's
officers, the populatlion is fixed at 6o,ooo people.
Ramufio, iii. 309, A. Even by this account, which
probably is niUchi nearer the truth than any of the forc-
going, Mexico was a great city.

N 0 T E L. p. 279.

IT is to P. Tol i;l,io de ]'enavente, that I am indebted
for this curious olbflIrvT.ion. Palafox, billiol'of I.l
Angeles, conIfii i,, andl illufl.i;atcs it more fully. 'lI
Mexican (l.ays li) i:, th1 only l.lingu.tlc in which :I tc
mliination indic;' ting> rcI lc:t, .//L wv,. rrz/'cr:., dli/.'Ij v d' -

[',
478

iefa, may be affixed to every word. By adding the final
syllable zin, or azinI to any word, it becomes a proper
expression of veneration in the mouth of an inferior.
If, in speaking to an equal, the word Father is to be
used, it is Tatl, but an inferior fays Tatzin. One
priest speaking to another, calls him Teopixque ; a person
of inferior rank calls him I'eopixcatzin. The name of
the emperor who reigned when Cortes invaded Mexico,
was Mlontezuma, but his vassals, from reverence, pro-
nounced it Montezumazin. Torribio, MS. Palaf. Vir-
tudes del Indio, p. 65. The Mexicans had not only
reverential noun., but reverential verbs. The manner
in which these are formed from the verbs in common
use, is explained by D. Jos. Aug. Aldama y Guevara
in his Mexican Grammar, NO. 188.

NOTE LI. p. 283.°

FROM comparing several passages in Corita and
Herrera, we may colleEt with some degree of accuracy,
the various modes in which the Mexicans contributed
towards the support of government. Some persons of
the firfl order seem to have been exempted from the
payment of any tribute, and as their only duty to the
public, were bound to personal service in war, and to
follow the banner of the sovereign with their vafials. a.
The immediate vaflals of the crown were bound not
only to personal military service, but paid a certain
proportion of the produce of their lands in kind. 3.
Those who held offices of honour or trufl, paid a certain
flare of what they received in consequence of holding
these. 4. Each Capullee, or association, cultivated some
part of the common field allotted to it, for the behoof of
the crown, and depolited the produce in the royal gra-
narics. 5. Some part of whatever was brought to the
public markets, whether fruits of the earth, or the vari-
ous productions of their artills and manuftacCturers, was
demanded for the public use, and the merchants who
paid this were cxempted fiom every other tax. 6. 'The
VOL. Pn. J),p Alt'yyuts,

479

MlayLZqes, or adfjripti glebte, were bound to cultivate
certain diltrids in every province, which may be confi.
dered as i-oro- lands, and brought the increase into
public llorchoules. Thus the sovereign received some
part of whatever was useful or valuable in the country,
whether it was the natural producion 6f the foil, or
acquired by the industry of the people. What each
contributed towards the support of government, seems
to have been inconsiderable. Corita, in answer to one
ot the queries put to the Audience of Mexico by Philip
I1. endeavours to ellimate in money the value of what
each citizen mightlbe .supposed to pay, and does not
reckon it at more than three or four reals, about eighteen
pence or two flillings a head.

N 0 .T E LII. p. z84.

C OARTES,' who seems to have been as much afto-
nifled with this, as with any inisance of Mexican inge-
nuity, gives a particular description of it. Along one
of the causeways, faysi he, by which they enter the city,
are conducted two conduits, compored of clay tempered
with mortar, about two paces in breadth, and railed
about fix feet. 11 one of them is conveyed a freamof
excellent water, as large as the body of a man, into the
center of the city, and it supplies all the inhabitants plen.
tifully. The other, is empty, that when it is neceflary
to clean, or repair the former, the fiream of water may
be turned into it. Ab this conduit pases along two of the
bridges, xhere there are breaches in the caufieway,
through which the iiat water of the lake flows, it is co,-
vexed over them in pipes as large as the body of an ox,
then carried firom the conduit to the remote quarters of
the city in canoes, and iold to the inhabitants. Rclal.
ap. Raiuf. 241, A.

N O ' E LIII. p. 289.

IN the armoury of the roy:l pallace of Madrid, ire
Ilt!'wn !uitb of a.rmoulr, which are called Montezull;''

'They
Aso

They are composed of thin lacquered copper-plates. In
the opinion of very intelligent judges they are evidently
ealtern. The forms of the ilver ornaments upon them,
representing dragons, &c. may be confidered as a cunfir-
mation of this. They are infinitely superior in point
of workmianhip to any effort of American art. The
Spaniards probably received them from the Philippine
islands. The only unquestionable specimen of Mexican
art that I know of in Great Britain, is a cup of very
fine gold, which is said to have belonged to Montezuma;
It weighs 5 oz. Iz dwt. Three drawings of it were
exhibited to the Society of Antiquaries, June io, 1765.
A man's head is represented on this cup. On one fide
the full face, on the other the profile, on the third the
back parts of the head. The relievois said to have been
produced by punching the inside of the cup, so as to
make the representation of a face oni the outside. The
features are rude, but very tolerable, and certainly too
rude for Spanilf workmanlhip. This cup was purchaf-
ed by Edward earl of Orford, while he lay in the har-
bour of Cadiz with the fleet under his command, and
is now in the poffefflon of his grandson, Lord Archer.
I am indebted for this information to my refpeeable
and ingenious fiiend Mr, Barrington.

N O T E LIV. p. 290.

T HE learned reader will perceive how much I have
been indebted, in this part of my work, to the guidance
ofthe bilhop of Gloucetter, who has traced the fuccef-
five leps, by which the human mind advanced in this
line of its progress, with much erudition, and greater
ingenuity. He is the firlt, as far as I know, who for..
med a rational and conliltent theory concerning the
various modes of writing pradifed by nations, according
to the various degrees of their improvement. Div. ILe-
gation of Moses, iii. 69, &c. Sonic important obferva-
tions have been added by the learned and intelligent
author of the Traite de la formation Mochanique dos
Langues, torn. i, 295, &c.

P p p As

As the Mexican paintings are the most curious mo-

numents extant of the earliest mode of writing, it will
not be improper to give Come account of the means by
which they were preserved from the general wreck of
every work of art in America, and communicated to
the Public. For the most early and complete collecion
of these published by Purchas, we are indebted to the
attention of that curious inquirer, Hakluyt. Don An-
tonio Mendoza, viceroy of New Spain, having deemed
those paintings a proper present for Charles V. the Ihip
in which they were Cent to Spain, was taken by a French
cruizer, and they came into the pofleffion of Thevet, the
king's geographer, who having travelled himfelfinto
the New World, and described one of its provinces, was
a curious observer of whatever tended to illufirate the
manners of the Americans. On his death, they were
purchased by Hakluyt, at that time chaplain of the En-
glifh ambafiador to the French court ; and, being left
by him to Purchas, were published at the desire of the
learned antiquary Sir Henry Spelman. Purchas, iii.
o65.

THE second specimen of Mexican-piture writing was

publiihed by Dr. Francis Gemelli Carreri, in two cop-
per-plates. The first is a map, or representation of the
progress of the ancient Mexicans on. their first arrival in
the country, and of the various flations in which they
fettled, before they founded the capital of theirempire
in the lake of Mexico. The second, is a chronological
Wheel, or Circle, representing the manner in which
they computed and marked their cycle of fifty two yeara.
The former was given to him by Dr. Chriaoval de Gua-
dalajora, in the city of Los Angeles; the latter he re-
ceived fiom Don Carlos de Siguenza y Gongorra. But
as it seems now to be a received opinion (founded I know
not on what evidence) that Carreri was never out oflta-
ly, and that his famous Giro del Mundo, is an account
of a fiEtitious voyage, I have not mentioned there paint-
ings in the text. They have, however, manifefily the
appearance of being Mexican productions, and are allow-
ed to be so by Boturini, who was well qualified to deter-
nine whether they were genuine or suppositious. The

fiyl
48z

style of painting in the former is considerably more per-
feet, than any other fpecimren of Mexican design';. but as
the original is said to have been much defaced by time,
I fufpet that it has been improved by Tome touches
fiom the hand of an European artill. Carreri, Church-
hil, iv. p. 487. The chronological wheel is a juR deli-
neation of the Mexican mode of computing time, as def-
cribed by Acolla, lib. vi. c. 2. It seems to resemble
one which that learned jesuit had seen ; and if it be ad-
niitted as a genuine monument, it proves, that the
Mexicans had artificial, or arbitrary characters, which
represented several things besides numbers. Each month
is there represented by a symbol expreflive of some
work or rite peculiar to it.

THE third specimen of Mexican painting was disco-
vered by another Italian. In 1736, Lorenzo Boturini
Benaduci set out for New Spain, and was led by several
incidents to study the language of the Mexicans, and to
colled the remains of their historical monuments. He
persisted nine years in his researches, with the enthusiasm
of a projector, and the.patience of an antiquary. In
1746, he published at Madrid, Idea deuzna Nueva Hifloria
Generaldela Anmerica Septentrional, containing an account
of the result of his inquiries; and he added to it a cata-
logue ofhis American 1liftorical Museum, arranged un-
der thirty-fix different heads. His idea of a New His-
tory appears to me the work of a whimsical credulous
man. But his catalogue of Mexican maps, paintings,
tribute-rolls, calendars, &c. is amnazing. Unfortunately
a flip, in which he had sent a considerable part of them
to Europe, was taken by an Englifl privateer in the war
Ibefore last ; and it is probable that they perilled by
filling into the hands .of ignorant captors. Boturini
himself incurred the difpleaftire of the Spanifl court,
and died in an hospital at Madrid. The hiltory, of which
t)Ie JtIa, &c. was only a profpeatus, was never publilhcd.
'Ille remainder of his Mufcumn fecms to have been dil-
lerfcd(l. Some part of it calle into the poflicion of the
present :rchbifllop of Toledo, when he was primate of
New Spain, and he publifled front it that curious tri-
bhtcr-oll which I have mentioned.

Tr It

483

T E only other collection of Mexican paintings, as

far as I can learn, is in the Imperial Library at Vienna.
By order of their Imperial Majefies, I have obtained
such a specimen of these as I desired, in eight paintings,
made with such fidelity, that I am informed the copies
could hardly be diftinguiihed from the originals. Ac-
cording to a note in this Codex Mcxicanius, it appears to
have been a present from Emmanuel King of Portugal
to Pope Clement VII. wio died A. D. i533. After
pafling through the hands of several illu2rious proprie-
tors, it fell into those of the cardinal ofSaxe Eisenach,
who prefentedit to the emperor Leopold. These paint-
ings are manifestly Mexican, ,ait they are in a itylevery
different from any of the former. An engraving has
been made of one of them, in order to gratify such of my
readers, as may deem this an objeCt worthy of their at-
tention. Were it an object of sufficient importance, it
might be pofli'ble, with some attention, by recourse to
the plates of Purchas, and the archtifhop of Toledo, as
a key, to form plausible conjectures concerning the
meaning of this picture. Many of the figures are mani-
feftly similar. A. A. are targets and darts, almotl in
the fame form with those. publifled by Purchas, p. 1070,
1071, &c. B. B. are figuresof temples, nearly refem-
bling those which occur in Purchas, p. 1109 and 1 13,
and in Lorenzana, Plate II. C. is a bale of mantles, or
cotton cloths, the figure of which occurs in almost every
platcof Purchas and Lorenzana. E. E. E. seem to be
Mexican captains in their war dress, the fantastic orna-
ments of which resemble the figures in Purchas, p. 1110,
1 11 , 1113. I flhould suppose this picture to be a tri-
bute-roll, as their mode of noting numbers occurs fre-
quently. D. D. D. &c. According to Boturini, thle
mode of computation by the number of knots, IVw
known to the Mexicans as well as to the Peruvians, P'
8, and the manner in which the number of units is re-
presented in the Mexican paintings in my pofflflion,
teems to confirm this opinion. Thley plainly refcmble
a firing of knots on a cord or rope.

N 0 TE

NOTE LV. p. zg9.

T HE first was called, the Prince of the deathful
Lance; the second, the Divider of Men ; the third, the
Shedder of Blood; the fourth, the Lord of the Dark-
House. Acolta, Lib. vi. c. Z5,

N O T E LVI. p. 297.

T HE Temple of Cholula, which was deemed more
holy than any in New Spain, was likewise the rmof cor-
liderable. But it was nothing more than amount of so-
lid earth. According to Torquemada, it was above a
quarter of a league in circuit at the base, and rote to the
;eight of forty fathom. Mon. Ind. Lib, iii. c. 19.

FROM infpe&ing various figures of Temples, which
occur in the paintings engraved by Purchas, there seems
to be tome reason for -fufpeding that all their temples
were conltruided in the fame manner. See vol. iii. p..
1109, 1IIO, 1113.

N O T E LVII. p. 298.

N OT only in Tlafcala, and Tepeaca, but even in
Bl'xico itlclf the houses of the people were mere huts
uill with turf, o , md or the branches of trees. They
\t'(i extremely low, and flight, and without any firni-
i 'r but a few ealrthen vcflTls. Like the rudell Indians,
i f'cr.ll f.1-ilies resided under the fahie roof, without
, iug lliiy fcpar.ate apartments. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib.
i. c 3. lib. x.c. 22. Dec. iv. lib. iv. c. 17. Tor-

ui oint',a , ili. c. 23.

NOTE

N O T E LVIII. p. 298.

I AM informed by a person who resided long in New
Spain, and visited almost every province of it, that there
is not in all the extent of that ivaft empire, any monu-
ment, or vefige of any building more ancient than the
conquest, nor of any bridge, or highway, except some
remains of the causeway from Guadaloupe to the gate of
Mexico, by which Cortes entered the city. MS. penes
me. The author of another account in manuscript ob-
serves, " That at this day there does not remain even
the finalleft veflige of the exislence of any ancient In-
dian building, public or private, either in Mexico or in
any province of New Spain. I have travelled, fays he,
throughall the countries adjacent to them, viz. New
Galicia, New Biscay, New Mexico, Sonora, Cinaloa,
the New Kingdom of Leon, and New Santandero, with
out having observed any monument worth notice, ex-
cept the ruins near an ancient village in the valley de
Colas Grandes, in lat. N. 3o'". 46. longit. 258°. 24. from
the Island of Teneriire, or 460 leagues N. N. W. fiom
Mexico. He defcribcf this minutely; and it appearsto
have been a paltry building of turf and flone, plaifler-
ed over with white earlth or lime. A mifionary inform-
ed that gentleman, that he had discovered the ruins of
another settlement similar to the former, about a hun-
dred leagues towards N. W. on the hanks of the river
St. Pedro. MS. plcs imc.

THiosE testimonics derive great credit friom one cir-

cuimftance, that tlhey were not given in support ofany
particular system or theory, but as simple anfwcrs to
queries which I had lr'opcofed. It is probable, hoWeve',
that when these gentliinen afle:rt no ruins or Inonulnent)
of any ancient work \v'lL;livcr are now to be tlifcovL'rel
in the Mexican Emlpiit., thecv meant that there vwere 1
such ruins or mnont1 :i»ilt,, a!; con\mycyl any idea ofgrilY1
deur or magnificence, in the works of its a;cient ihl11i
tants. For it appe:tr,1. 11 the tlc ll imoiny of l(vral S1'p
nifh authors, that in Otiull)b, 'l'lafc.ll, Choluli a,'

Ionle
486

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

fomeveftiges of ancient buildings are still visible. Villa
Segnor Theatro Amer. p. 143. 38 0 353. D, Fran. Ant.
Lorenzana, formerly archbishop of Mexico, and now of
Toledo, in his introdution to that edition of the Cartas
de Relacion of Cortes, which he publilhed at Mexico,
mentions some ruins which are still visible in several of
the towns, through which Cortes passed inhis way to the
capital, p. 4, &c. But neither of these authors give any
description of them, and they seem to be so very incon-
fiderable, as to mew only that some buildings had once
been there. The large mount of earth at Cholula,
which the Spaniards dignified with the name of temple,
fill remains, but without any feps by which to ascend,
or any facing of stone. It appears now like a natural
mount, covered with grass and flirubs, and poflibly it
was never any thing more. Torqu em. lib iii. c. 19. I
have received a minute description of the remains of a
temple near Cuernavaca, on the road from Mexico to
Acapulco. It is composed of large flones, fitted to each
other as nicely as those in the buildings of the Peruvians,
which are hereafter mentioned. At the foundation it
forms a square of 25 yards; but as it rites in height, it
diminishes in extent, not gradually, but by being con-
traded suddenly at regular distances, so that it mull
have resembled the figure B in the Plate. It termiiated,
it is said, in a spire.

NOTE LIX. p. 303.

T HE exaggeration of the Spanili Hiforians, with
refpet to the number of human vidims sacrificed 'in
Mexico, appears to be very great. According to Gona-
rn, there was no year in which twenty thousand human
vicimns were not offered to the Mexican Divinities, and
In some Y'earl they amounted to fifty thousand. Cron.
c' 229. The nculls of those unhappy persons were rang-
ed ill order in a building crected for that purpose ; and
two of Cortes's oflicers who had counted them, informoed
(;lm tll;lra t that their number was ;a hIllldred arid thirlty
si thoutand. Ibid. c. 82. Iscrerlra's ,CCounll is 11ill
Vo'L. 1 ,

O.)..Iq <1 mo'e

more incredible, that the number of vi&ims was so
great, that five thousand have been sacrificed in one day,
nay on some occasions, no less than twenty thousand.
Dec. iii. lib. ii. c. 16. Torquemada goes beyond both
in extravagance, for he asserts that twenty thousand chil.
dren, exclusive of other vidims, were slaughtered annu-
ally. Mon. Ind. lib. vii. c. 21. The most refpeaable
authority in favour of such high numbers is that of Zu-
murraga, the firit bishop of Mexico, who, in a letter to
the chapter general of his order, A. D. 1631, asserts that
the Mexicans sacrificed annually twenty rhoufand vic-
tiins. Davila. Teatro Eccles. 126. In opposition to all
thcfe accounts, B. de las Casas observes, that if there
had been such an annual waite of the human species, the
country could never have arrived at that degree ofpo-
puloufnefs, for which it was remarkable when the Spa-
niards firit landed there ; and he positively asserts, that
the Mexicans never sacrificed more than fifty or a hun-
dred persons in a year. See his dispute with Sepulveda,
subjoined to his Brevillima Relacion, p. o15. Cortes
does not specify what number of viaims was sacrificed
annually; but B. Diaz del Castillo relates that aninqui-
rv having been made, with refpet to this, by the Fran-
cilcan M.I:ks who were sent into New Spain immediate-
1; after the conquelt, it was found that about two thou-
land live hundred were sacrificed every year in Mexico.
c. 07,.

NOTE LX. p. 3o4.

1I' is hardly necefl.ary to obfcrve, that the Peruvial
Chronology is ilt only obl)lure, but repugnant to co"'
clufions deduced from thle mon: accurate and extenfivc
oblervations, concerning the tiin tthat elapses during
:each reign, in any given fucccflion of princes. The nmc
diumn has been found not to cxceed twenty years. Ac-
cording to Acolia and Gaircilafo de la Vega, H"uan
Cap:ac, who died about the yearl 1I 27, was tle tweltth
Inca. T'Ie dtii;tion of tlhl Peruvian monarchy ought
not to have been reckoned above two hundred anid folt)

year.;

years; but they affirm, that it had fubfifled four hun-
dred years. Acofta, lib. vi.' c. g1. Vega, lib. i. c. 9.
By this account, each reign is extended at a medium to
thirty three years, inflead of twenty, the number afcer-
tained by Sir Isaac Newton's observations ; but so im-
perse& were the Peruvian traditions, that though the
total is boldly marked, the number of years in each
reign is unknown.

NOTE LXI. p. 31o.

M ANY of the early Spanilh writers assert, that the
Peruvians offered human sacrifices. Xerez. p. 190.
Zarate, lib. i. c. i I. Acolta, lib. v. c. 19. But Gar-
cilaffo de la Vega contends, that though this barbarous
pratice prevailed among their uncivilized ancestors, it
was totally abolished by the Incas, and that no human
victim was ever offered in any temple of the Sun. This
assertion, and the plausible reasons with which he con-
firms it, are sufficient to refutethe Spanifli writers, whose
accounts seem to be founded entirely upon report, not
upon what they themselves had observed. Vega, lib.
li. c. 4. In one of their festivals, the Peruvians ofFered
cakes of bread, moillened with blood drawn fi-om the
arms, the eye-brows, and notes of their children. Id.
lib. vii. c. 6. This rite seems to have been derived
from their ancient practice.

N O T E LXI1. p. 315.

T HE Spaniards have adopted both those cuftoies of
the ancient Peruvians. They have preserved some of
tle aqlueduts or canals, made in the days of the Incas,
adl have made new ones, by which they water every
field that they cultivate. Ulloa Voyage, tom .

i. 422,

477' They likewise continue to ute g'ano, or the dung
of i'a-fowls, as manure. Ulloa gives a defeription of
the alnoll incredible quantity of it in the finall islands
lnc "'the cotll. Ibidl. 4 1.

Ql q 2 NOTE

439

NOTE LXIII. p. 317.

Tf HE temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at
Callo in the plain of Lacatunga, and that dfAtun-Can-
nar, are described by Ulloa, tom. i. 286, &c. who in-
fpeted them with great care. M: de Condamine pub.
liihed a curious memoir concerning the ruins of Atun-
Cannar. Mem. de 1'Academie de Berlin, A. D. 1746,
p. 435. Acofta describes the ruins of Cuzco, which he
had examined. Lib. vi. c. 14. Garcilaffo in his usual
flile, gives pompous and confuted descriptions of several
temples, and other public edifices. Lib. iii. c. i. 21.
lib. vi. c. 4. Don - Zapata, in a large treatili
concerning Peru, which has not hitherto been publilh-
ed, communicates some information with refpe& tofeve-
ral monuments of the ancient Peruvians, which have
not been mentioned by other authors. MS. penes t,
Articulo xx. Ulloa describes some of the ancient Peru-
vian fortifications, which were likewise works of great
extent and solidity. Tcm. i. 391. Three circumtan-
ces struck all those observers : the vast size of the sones
which the Peruvians employed in some of their build-
ings. Acofta measured one, which was thirty feet long,
eighteen broad, and fix in thickness ; and yet, he adds,
that in the fortress at Cuzco, there were stones confider-
ably larger. It is difficult to conceive how the Peruvians
could move there, and raise them to the height even of
twelve feet. The fccond circumstance is, the imperfec-
tion of the Peruvian art, when applied to working ill
timber. By the patience and perfevcrance natural to
Americans, ftoncs may be formed into any Illape, mit'rel
by rubbing one againfl another, or by the use of lhatci
ets or other infiruments made of ifone ; but with (fich
rude tools, little progress can be made in carpenltry
The Peruvians could not mortize two beams togetlIcr
or give any degree of union, or Itability to any w0V
copntlofed of timber. As they could not form a centle,
they were totally unacquainted with the use of arches i"
buildilng, nor can the Splhiih authors conceive 1how

they
49o

they were able to frame a roof for those ample itruc-
tures which they raised.

THE third circumtfance is a striking proof, which all

the monuments of the Peruvians furnish, of their want
ofingenuity and invention, accompanied with patience
no less astonishing. None of the flones employed in
those works were formed into any particular or uniform
shape, that might render them fit for building. The
Indians took them as they fell from the mountains, or
were raised out of the quarries. Some were square, some
triangular, Come convex, some concave. Their art and
industry were employed in joining them together, by
forming such hollows in one, as perfecly corresponded
to the projecions or risings in the other. This tedious
operation which might have been so easily abridged, by
adapting the surface of the stones to each other, either by
rubbing, or by their hatchets of copper, would be deem-
ed incredible, if it were not put beyond doubt, byin-
specting the remains of those buildings. It gives them
a very singular appearance to an European eye. There
is no regular layer or itratum of building, and no one
stone resembles another in dimensions or form. At the
fame time, by the persevering, but ill-direded indus-
try of the Indians, all are joined with that minute nice-
ty which I have mentioned. Ulloa made this obferva-
tion concerning the form of the stones in the fortress of
Atun-Cannar. Voy. i. p. 387. Pincto gives a similar
description of the fortress of Cuzco, the moll perfect of
all the Peruvian works. Zapata MS. penes me. Ac-
cording to M. de Condamine there were regular strata
of building in some parts of Atun-Cannar, which he re-
nmarks as singular, and proof of tome progress in im-
provemen t.

N O T E LXIV. p. 320.

T Il. ;ppe;rance of those bridges, which bend witl
teir ow\n weight, wave with the w ind, and are confider-
1), ly;gitatld b) the motion of every person who passes

along

491

along them, is very frightful atfirft. But the Spaniards
have found them to be the easiest mode of passing the
torrents of Peru, over which it would be difficult to
throw more solid ftruetures either of stone or timber.
They form those hanging bridges so strong and broad
that loaded mules pass over them. All the trade of
Cuzco is carried on by means of such a bridge over the
river Apurimac. Ulloa, tom. i. 35S. A more simple
contrivance was employed in pafling fialler firears: a
basket, in which the traveller was placed, being fufDen-
ded from a strong rope firetched across the stream, it was
pushed or drawn from one fide to the other. Ibid.

N O T E LXV, p. 329.

M Y information, with refpet to those events, is tak-
en from Noticia .br-ve de la expedicion militarde Sonora
y Cinaloa, fu exito feliz, y vantojofo eflado, en que por
confecuencia de ello, fe han puello ambas provincias,
published at Mexico, June 17th, 177 1, in order to satis-
fy the curiosity of the merchants, who had furniflied the
viceroy with money for defraying the expence of the ar-
mament. The copies of this Noticia are very rare in
Madrid; but I have obtained one which has enabled me
to communicate these curious fads to the public. Ac-
cording to this account, there was found in the mine
Yecorato in Cinaloa, agrain of gold of twenty-two ca-
rats, which weighted sixteen marks four ounces four
ochavas; this was sent to Spain as a pretent fit for the
king, and is now deposited in the royal cabinet at Ma-
drid.

N O..T E LXVI. p. 329.

'7 lHE uncertainty of geographers with refpet to this
point is remarkable, for Cortes feeIns to have surveyCd
its coills with great accuracy. T'lhe arcllbifop of To-
lcdo has publillicd, fiom the original, in the pollcfiion

of
492

of the Marquis del Valle, the descendant of Cortes, a
map drawn in 1541, by the pilot Domingo Castillo, in
which California is laid down as a peninsula, stretching
out nearly in the fame direction which is now given to
it in the best maps, and the point where Rio Colorado
enters the gulf is marked with precision. Hit. de Nue-
va Efpagna, 327.

N O T E LXVII. p. 332.

J AM indebted for this fa& to M. L'Abbe Raynal,
tom. iii. 103, and upon consulting an intelligent per-
son, who having been long fettled on the Mosquito
shore, has been engaged in the logwood trade, I find
that ingenious author has been well informed. The
logwood cut near the town of St. Francis of Campeachy,
is of much better quality than that on the other fide of
Yucatan, and the English trade in the Bay of Honduras
is almost at an end.

N O T E LXVIII. p. 348.

P . Torribio de Benevente, or Motolinea, has enume-
rated ten causes of the rapid depopulation of Mexico, to
shich he gives the nameof the ten plagues. Manyof
there are not peculiar to that province. i. The intro-
duLcion of the small-pox. This disease was firlt brought
into New Spain in the year 1520, by a negroe slave, who
attendedl Narvaez. Torribio affirms, that one half of
tihe people, in the provinces visited with this diltemper,
(ile. 'ITo this inortality occasioncd by the finall-pox,
I'or( ucmniada adds the delfrutive eflt:&s of two conta-
iou.s (liltell.pers which raged in the years 1545 and
17I6. In the former oo,ooo ; in the latter, above two
nlillions l, piflied, according to an exad account taken
Ltyo'li of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i. 64.z. The finall-
pox wlre not introduced into Peru for several years after
tic invalion of the Spaniards, but proved very fatal to

the

491

the natives. Garcia Origen, p. 88. 2. The numbers
who were killed, or died of famine in their war with the
Spaniards, particularly during the siege of Mexico. 3.
The great famine that followed after the reducion of
Mexico, as all the people engaged, either on one fide or
other, had negleted the cultivation of their lands.
Something similar to this happened in all the other
countries conquered by the Spaniards. 4. The griev-
ous talks imposed by the Spaniards upon the people be-
longing to their Repartimientos. 5. The opprefflive
burden of taxes, which they were unable to pay, and
from which they could hope for no exemption. 6. The
numbers employed in collecing the gold, carried down
by the torrents from the mountains, who were forced
from their own habitations, without any provision made
for their subsistence, and fubjeaed to all the rigour of
cold in those elevated regions. 7. The immense labour
of rebuilding Mexico, which Cortes urged on with such
precipitate ardour, as destroyed an incredible number of
people. 8. The number of people condemned to fervi-
tude, under various pretexts, and employed in working
the silver mines. These, marked by each proprietor
with a hot iron, like his cattle, were driven in herds to
the mountains. 9. The nature of the labour to which
they were fubjeded there, the noxious vapours of the
mines, the coldness of the climate, and scarcity of food
were so fatal, that Torribio affirms, the country round
several of those mines. particularly near Guaxago, was
covered with dead bodies, the air corrupted with their
irench, and so many vultures, and other voracious birds,
hovered about for their prey, that the fun was darkencd
with their flight. o1. The Spaniards, in the diffeenlt
expeditions which they undertook, and by the civil wars
which they carried on, destroyed many of the natives,
whom they compelled to fierve them as rramrmes, or car-
riers of burdens. This last mode of opprellion was par-
ticularly ruinous to the Peruvians. From the number
of Indians who perified in G onzalo Pizarro's expedition
into the countries to the call of the Andes, one may
form some idea of wIhat they full'red, and how f.ila they
wllted. Torribio, MS. Corita in lhir rvLy Sumnri;v y

liclaciodnl
494

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.
Relacion, illuflrates and confirms several of Torribio's
observations, to which he refers. MS. penes me.

N O T E LXIX. p. 348.

ELVEN Montesquieu has adopted this idea, lib. viii.
c. 18. But the paflion of that great man for fyfiem,
sometimes rendered him inattentive to research ; and
from his capacity to refine,he was apt, in some instances,
to overlook obvious and just causes.

NOTE LXX. p. 349.

A Strong proof of this occurs in the teflament of Ifa-
bella, where She discovers the most tender concern for
the humane and mild usage of the Indians. Those.
laudable sentiments of the queen have been adopted in-
to the public law of Spain, and serve as the introducti-
on to the regulations contained under the title of the good
ltialmcnt of the Indians. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. x.

N O T E LXX. p. 351.

IN the seventh Tite, of the first book of the Recop'ia-
i6n, whichl contains the laws concerning the powers and
functions of archbishops and biihops, alnoft a third part
of them relates to what is incumbent upon them, as
guardians of the Indians, and points out the various me-
thods in which it is their duty to interpose, in order to
defend them fiom oppreflion, either with refpec& to their
perion or property. Not only do the laws commit to
them this honourable and humane office, but they ac-
tually exercise it.

INNUMERABnLE proofs of this might be produced
fiom Spanifl authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as hd
was not disposed to ascribe any merit to the popifl cler-
VOL. 1. R r r gy,

gy, to which they were not fully entitled. Survey, p.
142. 192, &c. Henry Hawks, an English merchant, who
resided five years in New Spain, previous to the year
1572, gives the fame favourable account of the popish
clergy. Hakluyt, iii. 466. By a law ofCharles V. not
only bilhops, but other ecclefiafiics, are empowered to
inform and admonish the civil magiltrates, if any Indian
is deprived of his juit liberty and rights. Recopilac,
lib. vi. tit. vi. ley. 14; and thus were conflituted legal
protecors of the Indians. Some of the Spanih eccle.
fiaftics refused to grant absolution to such of their coun.
trymen as possessed Encomiendas, and confidered the In-
dians as slaves, or employed them in working their
mines. Gonz. Davil. Fiatro. Eccles. i. 157.

NOTE LXXII. p. 35.

A CCORDING to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos contains
4000 families, and he mentions it only as one of the
largest Indian towns in America. P. 104.

N O T E LXXIII. p. 351.

IT is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of
the state of population in those kingdoms of Europe
where the police is moflt perse&, and where fciencehas
made the greatell progress. In Spanish America, where
knowledge is still in its infancy, and few men havelei-
sure to engage in researches merely fpeculativc, little at-
tention has been paid to this curious inquiry. But in
the year 1741, Philip V. enjoined the viceroys and go-
vernors of the several provinces in America, to make an
actual survey of the people under their jurifdiclion, and
to tranfinit a report concerning their number and occu-
pations. In conlfquence of this order, the Conde de
Fuen-Clara, viceroy of New Spain, appointed D. J0s
Antonio de Villa-Segnor y Sanchez, to execute tlat
conleniflon in New Spain. From the reports of the ma-

,1\~ ~ gilli.ats

giftrates in the several diftrias, as well as from his own
observations, and long acquaintance with most of the
provinces, Villa Segnor publilhed the result of his in-
quiries in his Theatro Americano. His report, however,
is imperfet. Of the nine dioceses, into which the
Mexican empire has been'divided, he has published an
account only of five, viz. the archbilhopric of Mexico,
the bishoprics of Los Angeles, Mechoacan, Oaxaca,
and Nova Galicia. The bishoprics of Yucatan, Verapaz,
Chiapa, and Guatimala, are entirely omitted, though
the two latter comprehend countries, in which the Indian
race is more numerous than in any part of New Spain.
In his survey of the extensive diocese of Nova Galicia,
the situation of the different Indian villages is defcrib-
ed, but he specifies the number of people only in a
small part of it. The Indians of that vast province, in
which the Spanish dominion is imperfectly eflablifhed,
are not regislered with the fame accuracy as in other
parts of New Spain. According to Villa Segnor, the
afual fiate of population in the five dioceses above
mentioned is of Spaniards, negroes, mulattoes, and
meffizos, in the dioceses of

Families£

Mexico - - -105,202
Los Angeles - - 30,600
Mechoacan 30,840
Oaxaca - 7,296
Nova Galicia - - 6,770

190,708
At the rate of five to a family, the total num-

ber is, - - - 953,540

Indian families in the diocese of Mexico 119,511
Los Angeles - - 88,240
Mechoacan - - - - 36,196
Oaxaca - - - 44,222
Nova Galicia - - - 6,222

294,391

Ar the rate of five to a family, the total number is
>t471,955. We may rely with greater certainty on this

R r r 2 computation

computation of the number of Indians, as it is taken
fiom the Matricida, or regitler, according to which the
tribute paid by them is collected. As four diocefesof
nine are totally omitted, and in that of Nova Galicia,
the numbers are imperfec&l recorded, we mayconclude,
that the number of Indians in the Mexican empire ex.
ceeds two millions.

TH E account of the number of Spaniards, &c. seems

not to be equaily complete. Of many places, Villa
Sgnorr observes in general terms, that several Spaniard;,
negroes, and people of a mixed race, rcfide there, with-
Oat fpecifving their number. If, therefore, we make
allowance for these, and all who reside in the four dio-
celes omitted, the number of Spaniards, and ofthole of
a mixed race, may probably amount to a million anda
half. In some places, Villa Segnor distinguishes be.
tLceni Smpniards and the three inferior races of negroes,
ML-latces, aind Metizos, and marks their numbers fepa-
rat;v'. But he generally blends them together. But
from the proportion obLervable in those places, where
the nunmber of each is marked, as well as from the ac-
coun!t of tte i.i

i of poi ulaLion in New Spain by other

aulhor'.. it is inanifeil that tLe number of negroes and
pLr:;,ns cf a mixed race far exceeds that of the Spaniards.
Pcriaps the latter ought not to be reckoned above
50o,0oo to a n.illion of the former.

DEF rCTlVE a!S this account may be, I have not been

able to procure such intelligence concerning the number
of people ;n Peru, a, might enable me to form anycon-
jceurc eil ui;ll sati: f ing withl reteet to the degree of
it. j., }:l:;tio'_. I have been informed, that in the year
1;t)l, tre ;;rotector of tie Iiidi;,ins in the vice-royalty of
Peru cc'illpl ted tliit 6J 2,7 to paiid tribute to the king.
As all fcr lc

r , and pci-rlibns under ;age, are exempted

sion' t!iiL a t ill J'crr!, the total n IIjber of Indians ought,
by that .acount, to be z2,4.;.9,12 z . .pencs 0mc'.

I Si HI. . melntion another inucde, by wlich one may

colmrpute, or. ;Lt i ;i tir a g u:s colicerlniilg the iate of
pop ulani;; s iln I cw Spain anld 'er u. Accortling t() ;

accoLut

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

account which I have reason to confider as accurate, the
number of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported to
Peru on each new publication, is 1,171,953 ; to New'
Spain 2,649,326. I am informed, that but few Indians
purchase bulls, and that they are fold chiefly to the
Spanilh inhabitants, and those of mixed race; so that
the number of Spaniards, and people of a mixed race,
will amount by this mode of computation at least to
three millions.

THE number of inhabitants in many of the towns in

Spanish America, may give us some idea of the extent
ofpopulation, and corre& the inaccurate, but popular
notion entertained in Great Britain, concerning the
weak and desolate state of their colonies. The city of
Mexico contains at least 15o,ooo people. Los Angeles
contains above 60,ooo Spaniards, and people of a mixed
race. Villa Segnor, p. 247, Guadalaxara contains
above 30,000, exclusive of Indians. Id. ii. 206. Lima
contains 54,000. D. Cofme Bueno Deicr. de Peru,
1764. Carthagena contains 25,oo0. Potofi contains
25,000. Bueno, 1767. Popayan contains above 20,000.
Ulloa, i. 287. Towns of a second class are still more
numerous. The cities in the most thriving settlements
of other European nations in America cannot be com-
pared with there.

T HES E arc such detached accounts of the number of

people in fevcral towns, as I found scattered in authors
whom I thought worthy of credit. But I have obtained
an enumeration of the inhabitants of the towns in the
province of Q.uito, on the accuracy of which I can rely ;
and 1 conimunicicite it to the Public, both to gratify cu-
riofity, and to rectify the miltaken notion which I have
mentioned. St. Francisco de Quito contains betwvccb
5o and (,o,oo people of all the diflercnt races. Besides
the city, tlerc atc in tlhe Corr9)imuicnio 29 curacies efa-
bIilljcd in the principal villages, each of which has final-
letI hIinlcts idpecndingi upon it. lThe inhabitants of
tlhfe i arc' mnlly Indians iand Mellizos. St. Juan de 'as-
10 ha';; lCiwcn 6 and , 'ooo inhalbitant;, beides 2.7 de..-
p'iidclti villa;gc~. St. Miguel dt Il.barr1 7,000 citizcns,

alud

and ten villages. The diltrid of Havala between 18
and 20,000 people. The diflrid of Tacunna between
io and 12,ooo. The diftrid of Ambato between 8 and
io,ooo, betides 16 depending villages. The city of
Riobamba between 16 and 2o,ooo inhabitants, andg
depending villages. The difiriA of Chimbo between 6
and 8000. The city of Guaquilfrom 16 to 2o,ooo in-
habitants, and I + depending villages. The diltrid of
Atuafi between 5 and 6000, and 4 depending villages.
The city of Cuenza between 75 and 30,000 inhabitants,
and9 populous depending villages. The town of Laxa
from 8 to io,ooo inhabitants, and 14 depending villa-
ges. This degree of population, though slender, if we
confider the vait extent of the country, is f.r beyond
what is commonly fiuppofed. I have omitted to men.
tion, in its proper place, that Quito is the only pro-
vince in Spaniih America that can be denominated a
manufa&uring country; hats, cotton fiuff:s, and coarse
woollen cloths, are made there in such quantities, as to
be sufficient not only for the consumption of the pro-
vince, but to furnimh a considerable article for exporta-
tion into other parts of Spanish America. I know not
whether the uncommon indufiry of this province should
be confidered as the cause or effect of its populousness.
But among the ostentatious inhabitants of the New
World, the pallion for every thing that comes from Eu-
rope is so violent, that I am told the manufautres of
Quito are Io much undervalued, as to be on the decline.

N O T E LXXIV. p. 356.

T HESE arc eflabliflied at the following places. St.
Domingo in the iliand of I-lilinaiola, Mexico in New
Spain, Lima in Peru, Panama in Ticrra Firme, Santia-
go in C u:itin:;ila, CGuad;lai..ra in New Galicia, Santa
J': in tlhe N\tw Kinlgdomln of G ranada, La Plata in the
counltry (of l.os Cl.lrc;s, St. lrainiftco dc Quito, St. Ja-
o dIc ( '.i:', B uclu; Ayres. To ;ach of thcie are hibjeal
ed fevca liar!c ;provilices, and onc so fotar reimoved
irom th: it.-, hlcic i.e :o I ilts are fixed, that they G;I"

derive
5oo

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

derive little benefit from their jurifdiation. The Spa-
nifh writers commonly reckon up twelve courts of Au-
dience; but they include that of Manila in the Philip-
pine Islands.

N O T E LXXV. p. 362.

ON account of the distance of Peru and Chili from
Spain, and the difficulty of carrying commodities of
such bulk as wine and oil across the isthmus of Panama,
the Spaniards in those provinces have been permitted to
plant vines and olives. But they are ftricly prohibited
from exporting wine or oil totrPanama, Guatimala, or
any province in such a situation as to receive it from
Spain. Recop. lib. vi. tit. xviii. 1. i5- 8.

N O T E LXXVI. p. 363.

T HIS computation was made by Benzoni, A. D,
155o, fifty-eight years after the difcoveryofAmerica.
Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 21. But as Benzoni wrote
with the spirit of a malcontent, disposed to detra& from
the Spaniards in every particular, it is possible that his
calculation may be too low.

N O T E LXXVIT. p. 365.

M Y information, with rcfpe& to the division and
tranlmiflion of property in the Spanish colonies is imper-
feBt. The Spanilh authors do not explain this fully,
and have not perhaps attended fufliciently to the effiets
of their own inflitutions and laws. Solorzano de jure
Ind. vol. ii. lib. ii. 1. 16. explains in some measure the
introdution of the tenure of Mllayorago, and mentions
some of its efleits. Villa Segnor takes notice of a fin-
gul;tr consequence of it. He observes, that in Ibme of
the bcet situations in the city of Mexico, a good deal of

ground

ground is unoccupied, or covered only with the ruinsof
the houses once erected upon it; and adds, that as this
ground is held by right of Mayorafgo, and cannot be
alienated, that desolation and those ruins become per-
petual. Theatr. Amer. vol. i. p. 3+4

N O T E LXXVIII. p. 366.

T HERE is no law that excludes Creoles from of.-
ces either civil or ecclesiastic. On the contrary, there
are many Cedulas which recommend the conferring
places of trufl indiscriminately on the natives of Spain
and America. Betancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &c. p.
5, 6. But notwithstanding such repeated recommenda-
tions, preferment in almost every different line is confer-
red on native Spaniards. A remarkable proof of this is
produced by the author last quoted. From the difcove-
ry of America to the year 1637, three hundred and sixty-
nine bishops, or archbishops, had been appointed to the
different dioceses in that country, and of all that num-
ber only twelve were Creoles, p. 4o.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 371.

M ODERATE as this tribute may appear, such i1
the extreme poverty of the Indians in many provinces
ofAmerica, that the exating of it is intolerably oppref-
five. Pegnaltiner. par Parochos de Indios, p. 192.

N O T E LXXX. p. 372.

IN New Spain, on account of the extraordinary merit
and services of tie firfl conquerors, as well as the fiall
revenue arising from the country previous to the disco-
very of the mines of Sacatecas, the encomiendas were
granted for three, and foimtiniies for four lives. Recopil.
lilb. vi. tit. ii. c. 14, &c.

NOTE
502

N O T E LXXX p. 373.

D o Ant. U!loa contends, that working in the mines
i, not noxious, and as a proof of tils inrforms us, that
many Meflizos and Indians, who do not belong to any
Repirtimiento, voluntarily hire themselves as mincrs;
and feveial of the Indians, when the legal term of their
service expires, continue to work in the mines of choice.
iirelNec. p. z65. But his opinion concerning the whole-
fomenefs of this occupation is contrary to the experience
of all ages; and wherever men are allured by high wa-
geS, they will engage in any species of labour, however
fitiguing or pernicious it may be. D. iern. Carillo
Altemirano relates a curious fa& incompatible with this
opinion. Wherever rmies are wrought, fays he, the
number of Indians decreases ; but in the provinces of
Campeachy, where there are no mines, the number of
Indians has increased more than a third since the con-
queil of America, though neither the foil nor climate be
so favourable as in Peru or Mexico. Colbert. Colle&.
In another memorial presented to Philip III. in the year
16c9, Captain Juan Gonzalez de Azcvedo afltrts, that
in every diflril of Peru, where the Indians are compel-
led to labour in the mines, their nunmbcis were reduced
to the half, ant in tome places to the third of what it

i das under the vice-royalty of Don Fran. Toledo in 15 1.
L'olb. Collet.

N O T E LXXXII. p. 373.

A 'S labour of thlis kind cannot be prcfcribed with lce-
i';l iiccuracy, the t:;fls f'eeC to he in a grc: it leasure ar-
bit';iry, and like the fcrvices cxactld by feudal fIleri-
"or, in vinea, prato ant r effe, firon their vaflhls, arc ex-
cllc, ly burldenfoine, nnd often wlanltonly opprellive.
I'ct;na [tincr, par PI'aoclhos de Indios,

S s

o03
VOL. 1I

N O 't1 ]

N O T E LXXXIII. p. 373.

T HE turn offervice known in Peru by the name of
Mita, is called Tanda in New Spain. There it conti.
nues no longer than a week at a time. No person is
called to serve at a greater distance from his habitation
than 24 miles. This arrangement is less oppressive to
the Indians than that eftablifled in Peru. Memorial of
Hern. Carillo Altamirano. Colbert Collet.

N O T E LXXXIV. p. 375.

T HE strongest proof of this may be deduced from
the laws themselves. By the multitude and variety of
regulations to prevent abuses, we may form an idea of
their number. Though the laws have, wifely, provided
that no Indian shall be obliged to serve in any mine at a
greater distance from his place of residence than thirty
miles, we are informed in a memorial of D. Hernan Ca-
rillo Altimirano presented tothe king, that the Indians
of Peru are often compelled to serve in mines at the dif-
tance of a hundred, a hundred and fifty, and even two
hundred leagues from their habitations. Colbert Col-
led. Many mines are situated in parts of the country,
so barren and so dirtant from the ordinary habitations of
the Indians, that the neceflity of procuring labourers to
work there, has obliged the Spanish monarchs todif-
penfe with their own regulations in several inltances, and
to permit the viceroys to compel the people of more re-
mote provinces to resort to thcfe mines. Efcalona Ga-
zophyl. Perub. lib. i. c. 16. But in juflice to them it
fiould be obfcrved, that they have been studious to al-
leviate this oppreflion as much as poflible, by enjoining
the viceroys to employ every method, in order to induce
the Indians to fettle in some part of the country adja-
cent to the mines. Id. ibid.

NOTE

N O T E LXXXV. p. 379.

TO R QU E M A D A, after a long enumeration,
which has the appearance of accuracy, concludes the
number of monafleries in New Spain to be four hun-
dred. Mon. Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. The number of mo-
nafleries in the city of Mexico alone was, in the year
1745, fifty-five. Villa-Segnor. Theat. Amer. i. 34.
Ulloa reckons up forty convents in Lima ; and mention-
ing those for nuns, he fays, that a small town might be
peopled out of them, the uumber ofperfons shut up there
is fogreat. Voy. i. 429. Philip III. in a letter to the
viceroy of Peru, A. D. 162o, observes that the number
of convents in Lima was so great, that they covered
more ground than all the reft of the city. Solonz. lib.
iii. c. 23. n. 57. Lib. iii. c. 16. Torquem. lib. xv.
c. 3. The first monaflery in New Spain was founded,
A. D. 1525, four years only after the conqueRt. Torq.
lib. xv. c. 16.

ACCORDING to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the complete
eflablifhment of the American church in all the Spanilh
settlements was, in the year 1649, i patriarch 6, arch-
bishops, 32 bilhops, 346 prebends, z abbots, 5 royal
chaplains, 840 convents, Teatro Ecclefiaftico de las
Ind. Occident. vol. i. Pref. When the order ofJefuits
was expelled from all the Spanifl dominions, the colle-
ges, proseed houses, and refidencies, which it poileffed in
the province of New Spain, were thirty, in Quito fix-
teen, in the New Kingdom of Granadathirteen, in Peru
seventeen, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay eighteen, in
all a hundred and twelve. Collcccion General de Pro-
videncias hafla acqui tomadas fobre elrjanamento, &c.
de la Compagnia, part i. p. 19. The number ofjefiits,
pritefs and novices in all these amounted to z22z . MS.
pales mIe.

IN the year 1644, the city of Mexico presentcd a peti-
tion to the king, priyinf that no new monastery mig;ht
be founded, and that tih( revlnules of those already ellab-

S s S z li2lctd

5a5

iifhed might be circumf'ribed, otherwile the religious
houics woulld f on acquire the property of the whole
country. They requel lilke.vife that the biflops might
le laid under re!itritions in .conferring holy orders, as
there were at that time in New Spain above fix thous;and
clery-,men without any living. Ib. p. 16. They mult
have been enormous abutes indeed, when the fuperflition
of American Spaniards was 'nocked, and induced to re-
nionil.rie againit them.

N O T E LXXXVI. p. 382.

I-TIS def-riptinn of the manners of the Spanifli

clergv, 1 l1louid not ha e ventured to give, upon thetef-
timonyn ofprote!iaant authors alone, as they may be sus-
peced of prejudice or exaggeration. Gage, in particu
lar, v, ho had a better cpiportunity than any protellant,
to view the interior iate cfSpanilh America; describes
the corruption of the church, which he had forsaken,
with ls much of the acrimony of a new convert, that I
i, d have dJfi'ruilld his evidence, though it communi-
catc ;io;iie veriy curious and iTriking facts. But Benzoni
nicntiqnn the proiligacy of ecclefiatlics in America ata
vciv c;iirv period after their ifttlcment there. Hill.
lib. ii. . 1i, 20. AM. Frezicr, an intelligent oblfrver,
and zealiis for his own religicn, paints the diflibute
mn.niner s olfthe Sp:nnlil ecc!elialtics in Peru, particularly
rlic eg ll .rs, in !iroil' ecr colours than I have emplo0y1c
\',' I . I. i. 5, &c. IV. Gcntil confirms this accouct,

\ )i. Ci. orrec:I concurs with both, and adds many

rcill.:ri .:ti'i cI:' CUllrill el;'lts. V oy. i. 61. 155. i161.

'i, c (g id rclalon to beli\ve, tlhat the nmanners of tihere
<,p l;ir 'lkr v, p r tieul:- l'v in Peru, are l ill extreli(ely l'V
cLiclil. .'c\(,l'i, h;l , .!i' :Ickl: wlcedges thiat grcatcor
I:;; .i:.n cnt anncL, had been the consequence of p'r
]iii.ii' monUIi, to foin'ike the retirement and difcipli"
ct tle (inilcr, tind to l iini rle ;i;i.cin with tieworhill'Y
tIIdI't:it. in l the chiarg' of'tlic Indianpariflis. DC pro)

(ti 1i. I ii ,

,ll .

,ii , l ib. i'. .c. 13, &c. 1-It menIltions pr
tic u l1ily tlulc vice:,, of which I lhave taken notice, a"n

con1idler.
506

ccnfiders tle temptations to them as so formidable, that
he leans to the opinion of those who hold that the re-
gular clergy ihould not be employed as parish priefls.
Lib. v. c. 20. Even the advocates for the regulars ad.
mit, that many and great enormities abounded among
the monks of different orders, when set free from the
rellraint of monastic discipline; and from the tone of
their defence, one may conclude that the charge brought
against them was not'deftitute of truth. In the French
colonies, the lrate of the regular clergy is nearly the
fame as in the Spanish settlements, and the fame confe-
quences have followed. M. Biet, superior of the fecu-
lar priells in Cayenne, inquires with no less piety than
candour, into the causes of this corruption, and imputes
it chiefly to the exemption of regulars from thejurifdic-
tion and censures of their diocesans ; to the temptations
to which they are exposed; and to their engaging in
commerce. Voy. p. 320. It is remarkable that all
the authors, who censure the licentiousness of the Spa-
nith regulars with greatell severity, concur in vindicat-
ing the conduct of the Jesuits. Formed under a difci-
pline more perfet than that of the other monafic or-
ders, or animated by that concern for the honour of the
society, which takes such full possession of every mem-
bert, the Jefiits, both in Mexico and Peru, it is allowed,
have maintained a moll irreproachable decency of man-
ners. Frezier, 2z3. Gentil, i. 3+. The fame prailfis
lilewif: due to the bilhops and moll of the dignified cler-
gy. Frez. ibid.

N O T E LXXXVII. p. 3z2.

"'OT.ORZANO, aftcr mentioning the corrupt morals
o(t lme of the regular clergy, with that caulLtious re-
t'erv\, w hich becc;me a SpaniillI l:yminan, in touching 1on a
Itauljcl lo dcliciatc ; gixes his opinion very explicitly,
;n;al with I mlucIh lirminclc ;i:againl coullimiing parochial
clr·gcs to IInln ks. iC prIdliucC the tcllimiony of felvc-
;'1l rcsiLcl:tbleI authlors of his country, b1)lt divines ;:iid
i:la,'.r;. in cotnrlnl;ion(l of hli opinion. De Jlure Ihd.

ii.

50o7

ii. lib. iii. c. 16. A striking proof of the alarm excited
by the attempt of the Prince d'Efquilache to exclude the
regulars from parochial cures, is contained in the Col-
bert collection of papers. Several memorials were pre-
sented to the king by the procurators for the monalfic
orders, and replies were made to there in name of the
secular clergy. An eager, and even rancorous, fpiritis
manifest on both fides, in the conduct of this dispute.

N 0 T E LXXXVIII. p. 386.

OT only the native Indians, but the MeJfizos, or

children of a Spaniard and Indian, were originally ex-
cluded from the priesthood, and refused admission into
any religious order. But by a law issued Sept. 28th,
1588, Philip II. required the prelates of America to or-
dain such meltizos born in lawful wedlock, as they
should find to be properly qualified, and to permit them
to take the vows in any monastery where they had gone
through a regular noviciate. Recopil. lib. i. tit. vii. 1.
7. Some regard seems to have been paid to this law in
New Spain ; but none in Peru. Upon a representation
of this to Charles II. in the year 1697, he issued a new
edict enforcing the observation of it, and profefling his
desire to have all his iilbjets, Indians, and mestizos as
well as Spaniards, admitted to the enjoyment of the
fame privilc(ges. Such, however, was the aversion of the
Spaniards in Amierica to the Indians, and their race, that
this seems to liave produced little efect ; for, in the
year 1725, Philip V". was obliged to renew the injundi-
on in a more 1)erclmpto'y tone. But so unsurmountable
are the hatred and cdontempt of the Indians among the
Peruvian Spaniards, that the precfnt king has been con-
fIrained to enftirce the former edicts anew by a law,
publifled Sc)telbcr 11, 1771.. Real Cedula, MS.
£eNEcs ms.

N O'TE

N O T E LXXXIX. p. 389.

UZTARIZ, an accurate and cautious calculator,
seems to admit, that the quantity of silver that 'does not
pay duty may be stated thus high. According toHer-
rera, there was not abovea third of what was extraated
from Potofi that paid the king's fifth. Dec. viii. lib. ii.
c. 15. Solorzano asserts likewise, that the quantity of
filvcr which is fraudulently circulated, is far greater than
that which is regularly stamped, after paying the fifth.
De Ind. jure, vol. ii. lib. v. p. 846.

N O T E XC. p. 392.

WV\HEN the mines of Potofi were discovered in the
year 1545, the veins were so near the surface, that the
ore was easily extraced, and so rich, that it was refined
with little trouble, and at small expence, merely by the
aCtion of fire. This simple mode of refining by fusion
alone continued until the year 1574, when the use of
mercury in refining silver, as well as gold, was discover-
ed. Those mines having been wrought without inter-
ruption for two centuries, the veins are now funk so
deep, that the expence of extracting the ore is greatly
incrcafed. Besides this, the richness of the ore, contrary
to what happens in mott other mines, has become le!s
as tlhevein continued todip, and has diminished to such
a degree, that one is amazed that the Spaniards flould
perfili in working it. Other rich mines have been fuc-
ceclively discovered, but in general the value of the ores
has decreased so much, while the expence ofextracting
them has augmented, that the court of Spain, in the
year 1736, reduced the duty payable to the king fiom a
ffih to a tcnth. All the quicklilver used in Peru, is ex-
tratted fiom the famous mine of Guanacabelica, dilco-
vercd in the year 1563. The crown has reserved the
Property of this mine to itself; and the persons who
pluIchafed tlc quickfilvcr, paid not only the price of it,

but

509

but likewise a fifth, as a duty to the king. But, in the
year 1761, this duty on quicksilver was aboliihed, on ac-
count of the increase of expence in working mines,
Ulloa, Entretenimientos, xii.-xv. Voyage, i. p. o5.
523. Any of my readers who are desirous of being ac-
quainted with the mode in which the Spaniards condut
the working of their mines, and the refinement of the
ore, will find an accurate description of it by Acola.
Lib. iv. c. 1--13.

N O T E XCI. p. 393.

IN consequence of this abolition of the ffth, and some
subsequent abatements cf price. which became necefi'ry
on account of the increaling e-pence of working rines,
quicksilver, which was formerly fold at ei.ilty pesos the
,uintal, is now delivered by the king at the rate ofi\Nty
pesos. Campomanes Educ. Popul. ii. 132. Note. The
duty on gold is reduced to a tvC7nticth, or five per cent,

NO T E XCII. p. 395.

VT ANY remarlkable proofs occur of the advanced
btae of i duilry in Spain, at the beginning cf the fix-
tcenth clentury. The num bcr of cities in Spain wascoln-
fidcrablc, and they wcrc pcopled far beyond thcplopo'o
tion that was colmmton in other part; of' Eulrope. 'Ile
c;au;li ol this I have cxp lained, liili. of Cha. V. i. 15I
WMherever cities ;ale popullous, that pe cics of indiliully

hicli is peculi; r to theim incrcai es, ;ar iL ccrs an:d lllnl-

f;acturers a;boundl. 'l ' ein'; c (! ii lXl- Anri'Lan trade in
givingl; aLivity to thclse is mnilci1e , fiom a; lilgul;l itt.
Inl tllh' y' r

:. 5 , wlile S paki cc rlin:ll cd to depeIll onl its

ownl inc.luflr, fllr the Ifluply of its colonies, Ufo rnlij
work was befpc(ke firoil the main;: t curcr;, that it ,'
filppflcdl they( it ld i:rdliy) finlifl it in ilets tlhan ixy1 rt'i
Ct 1l]on. i. ,io(). Such a c lkns ;i. l inutill have p)tt llliiCl
inculltly i,,n
l IlK.'i), and hasve eild cxc td tlxtraoitlOY, ct

fort.

forts. Accordingly, we are informed, that in the be-
ginning of Philip II's reign, the city of Seville alone,
where the trade with America centered, gave employ-
ment to no fewer than 60,ooo looms in silk or woollen
work, and that above 130,000 persons had occupation
in carrying on these manufa&tures. Campom. ii. 472.
But so rapid and pernicious was the operation of the
causes which I ihall enumerate, that before Philip III.
ended his reign, the looms in Seville were reduced to
400. Uztariz, c. 7,

N O T E XCIII. p. 40z.

N 0 bale of goods is ever opened, no chef of trea-
sure is examined. Both are received on the credit of the
persons to whom they belong; and only one instance of
fraud is recorded, during the long period in which trade
was carried on with this liberal confidence. All the
coined silver which was brought from Peru to Porto-bel-
lo in the year 165 4, was found to be adulterated, and to
be mingled with a fifth part of base metal The Spa-
nifl merchants with their usual integrity, fuflained the
whole loss, and indemnified the foreigners, by whom
they were employed. The fraud was detected, and the
treasurer of the revenue in Peru, the author of it, was
publicly burnt. B. Ulloa Retablif. de Manus. &c. b.
ii.p. 102.

N O T E CXIV. p. 406.

14ANY firiking proofs occur of the scarcity of mo-
ney in S;pain. Of all the immenlLe stuns which h:lvc heen
imlpitrt: L from America, the ;nmount of which I ffiall
afici; v:ir.s have occaiion to Inention, MIoncada aflnerts,
tiht th!cre did not rCmn;in in Spa in, in 161, above two
hu"\''; ' d illIoni; {'/cj's, one half in coined money, the
Oti.li in ilKnc and jvs''cls. ;Rcllur.i.de Efpa;inia, Di:c.
iii. . i. ' !.t.irz7, whli publi!cil(d his valuable work in
Vol i;. T t t 1724,

5,1

1724, contends, that in money, plate, and jewels, there
did not remain a hundred million. Theor. &c. c. 3,
Campomanes, on the authority of a remonitrance from
the university of Toledo to Philip III. relates, as a cer-
tain proof how scarce cash had become, that persons who
lent money, received a third part of the fum which they
advanced, as intcreft and premium. Educ. popul. i. 41

N O T E XCV. p. 409.

HE account of the mode in which the fa&ors of the

South Sea Company conducted the trade in the fair of
Porto-bello, which was opened to them by the Afliento,
I :have taken from Don Alcedo y Herrera, prefidentof
the court of Audience in Qlito, and governor ofthat
province. Great credit is due to his testimony, as he
was an eve-witnefs of the tranfadions which he relates,
and often employed in deteting and authenticating the
frauds which he describes. It is probable, however,
that his representation being composed at the commence-
Ient of the war which broke out between Great Britain
and Spain, in the year 1739, may, in some initances,be
ex:nggerated. His detail of fats is curious; and even
English authors confirm it in some degree, by admit
ting both that various frauds were pradifiedinthetranf-
ac&ions of the annual ship, and that the contraband trade
froml Jamaica, and other Britifl colonies, was become
enorinouilv grent. But lor the credit of the Englifl na
tion it may be oblerved, that those firaudulent operati
ous arc not to he confidered as deeds of the Conmpany,
but as the d iionoural he arts of their facors nd angents.
'I'hc Conpalny itc!f ifullaiin. d a conliderable loss by tlhe
A!{ H'nto trade. Man v of it:, lervants acquired immllenl
forL'ne. AndiCr. Anrl Chlronol. dedul. ii. 388.

N 0 T

' XCVI. p. 414.

i\ .V-ER,.\I. salts wvith rcfpelll to the inllitution, thle

pr,:re-sd, :li lh] ;f!e tets, of this Company, are curioul
anld btlittlCg

Anown lo inglii h
readers. Though the

province
512

province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends four hun-
dred miles along the coast, and is one of the most fertile
in America ; it was so much neglected by the Spaniards,
that during the twenty years prior to the etliailihment
of the Company, only five Ihips failed from Spain to
thlat province ; and during sixteen y>ears, from 1706 to
1722, not a single ship arrived from the Caraccas in
Sain. Noticias de Real Compania de Caraccas, p 28.
liuring this period Spain must have been supplied al-
nlo! entirely with the large quantity of cacao, which it
conlumes, by foreigners. Before the erecion of the
Company, neither tobacco nor hides were imported from
C.raccas into Spain. Id. p. 117. But since the co;Tm-
mrercial operations of the Company began in the year
1731, the importation of cacao into Spain, has increased
amazingly. During thirty years subsequent to 1701,
tne number of Funegas of cacao (each a hundred and ten
pounds) imported from Caraccas, was 643,215. Dur-
ing eighteen years subsequent to 1731, the number of
Fanagas imported was 869,247; and if we suppose the
impu.rtation to be continued in the fame proportion dur-
ing the remainder of thirty years, it will amount to
1,448,746 Faneas, which is an increase of 805,531 Fa-
negas. Id. p. 148. During eight years subsequent to
1756, there has been imported into Spain by the Conm-
pany 88,482 arrohas (each twenty-five pound) of toba.-
co;and hides to the number of 177,354. Id. 161. Since
the publication of the Noticias de Compania, in 1765,
its trade leems to be on the increase. During five years
fuibfequent to 1769, it has imported 179,156 Faiegna of
cacao into Spain, 36,o08 arrobas of tobacco, 75,496
hides, and 221,432 pcfos in specie, Campomanes, ii.
162. The lalt article is a proof of the growing wealth of
the colony. It receives cai( from Mexico in return for
thel cacao, with which it supplies that province, and this
it remits to Spain, or lays out in purehafing European
goods. But belides this, the moil explicit evidence is
produced, that the quantity of cacao raised in the pro-
vince is double to what it yielded in 1731 ; the number
of its live Itock is more than treble, and its inhabitants
unchi augmented, 'I'he revenue of the bifiop, which

513
' t t z

arises

arises wholly from tythes, has increased from eight to
twenty thoufandpefos. Notic. p. 69. In consequence
of the augmentation of the quantity of cacao imported
into Spain, its price has decreased from eighty pesos for
thefanega to forty. Id. 61.

N O T E XCVII. p. 419.

TH IIS first experiment made by Spain of opening a
free trade with any of her colonies, has produced effeEts
so remarkable, as to merit some farther illustration. The
towns to which this liberty has been granted, are Cadiz
and Seville, for the province of Andalusia; Alicant and
Carthagena, for Valencia and Murcia ; Barcelona, for
Catalonia and Arragon ; Santander, for Cailile; Corug-
na, for Galicia ; and Gijon, for Asturias. Append. ii.
a laEduc. popul. p. 41. These are either the ports of
chief trade in their respective dilirits, or those moll con-
veniently situated for the exportation of their refpeaive
productions. The following fats give a view of the in-
crease of trade in the settlements, to which the new re-
gulations extend. Prior to the allowance of free trade,
the duties collected in the custom-house at the Havanna
were computed to be 104,20 pelbs annually. During
the five years preceding 1774, they rose at a medium to
30S,oo0 pesos a year. In Yucatan, the duties have risen
from 8,coo to 15,ooo. In Hispaniola from 2.500 to
5,6oo. In Porto Rico from 1,zoo to 7,000. Theto-
tal value of goods imported from Cuba into Spain, was
reckoned, in 1774, to be 1,50o,ooo pesos. Educ. Po0
pul. i. 450, &c.

N O T E XCV1II. p. 424.

T HE two Treatifcs of Don Pedro Rodrigucz Ca`n-
pomanes, Fiscal del real cofJrjo y Supremo (an ofnicc i
rank and power nearlly finilar to that of Attornley Ge-
neral in England) and Director of the Royal Academy
of I-illory, the one inlitled, Difcurfo fobre cl FPo0mnt0

de
514

de la Induftria Popular; the other Difcurfo fobre la Edu-
cacion Popular de los Artefanos y fu Fomento; the for-
mer published in I774, and the latter in 1775, afford a
striking proof of this. Almost every point of importance
with refped to interior police, taxation, agriculture,
manufactures, and trade, domestic as well as foreign, is
examined in the course of these works; and there are
not many authors, even in the nations most eminent for
commercial knowledge, who have carried on their in-
quiries with more thorough knowledge of those various
fubjets, and a more perfect freedom from vulgar and
national prejudices, or who have united more happily the
calm researches of philosophy, with the ardent zeal of a
public spirited citizen. These books are in high efti-
mation among the Spaniards ; and it is a decisive evi-
dence of the progress of their own ideas, that they are
capable of relishing an author whose sentiments are so
liberal.

N O T E XCIX. p. 428.

I HE galeon employed in that trade, inflead of the
fix hundred tons, to which it is limited by law, Recop.
lib. xlv. 1. 15, is commonly from twelve hundred to two
thousand tons burden. The lhip from Acapulco, taken
by Lord Anson, inllead of the 500o,oo pesos permitted
by law, had on board 1,313,843 pesos, betides uncoin-
ed silver equal in value to 43,611 pesos more. Anson'+
Vo) a 3e, 384.

NOTE C. p. 430.

R. IE price paid for the bull varies according to the
rank of different persons. Those in the lowell order,
who are servants or slaves, pay two reals of plate, or one
flilling; other Spaniards pay eight reals ; and thofc in
public oflice, or who hold cncomiendas, sixteen reals.
Solorz. de jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. According

to

SIS

to Chilton, an Englifl merchant who resided longin
the Span`ih settlements, the bull of Cruzado, bore an
higher price in the year 1570, being then fold for four
reals at the lowelt. Hakluyt, iii. 461. The price
seems to have varied at different periods. That exacted
for the bulls issued in the last Predicad-on, will. appear
from the ensuing table, which wili give some idea of
the proportional numbers of the different classes of citi-
zens in \New Spain and Peru.

There were iii'ued for New Spain,
Bulls at lo pesos each - - 4

at 2 peios each 2-- 2,6o0

at I peso each - - - 164,220
at 2 reals each - - ,462.5:

2,649,3-j

For Peru,

at 16 pesos, 4h reals each
at 3 pesos, 3 reals each - - 4,202
at I peso, sh reals - - 78,822
at 4 reals - - 410,325
at 3 reals 668,601

1,171,953

N O T E CI. p. 431.

A S Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this
information, was accomptant-general in one of the molt
considerable departments of the royal revenue, and by
tliat means had access to proper information, his tcflimo-
ny with refpea to this point merits great credit. No
such accurate detail of the Spanifll revenues, in any part
of America, has hitherto been publiflied in ithe lnglifli
languagc, and the particulars of it may appear curious
and intcrelling to fomc of my readers.

FRoM

F'ROM thebull of Cruzada, publifled every two years,

there arises an annual revenue in pesos - 150,ooo
From the duty on silver - - 700,003
From ditto on gold - - 60,000
From tax on cards - - 70,000
From tax on Pulque, a drink used by the

Indians

From tax on stamped paper
From ditto on ice - -
From ditto on leather
From ditto on gunpowder
From tax on salt
From ditto on copper of Mechocan
From ditto on alum - -
From ditto on Juego de los Gallos
From the half of ecclesiastical annats
From royal ninth of bishoprics, &c.
From the tribute of Indians
From Alcavala, or duty on sale of goods
From the Almajorifafgo, custom-house
From the mint - -

161,ooo
41,000
15,522
2,500
71,550
32,000
1,000
- 6,500

21,100
49,000

- 68,800
- 650,000

721,875
- 373,333

357,500

3,552,680

THIS fum amounts to 819,1611. Sterling, and if we

add to it the profit accruing from the sale of ooo quin-
talS of quicklilver ,iimportcd fiom the mines of Almaden,
in ,Spain, on the king's account, and what accrues from
the Averia, and rome other taxes which Villa Segnor
does not efiinate, lmay well be reckoned above a million
pounds tlerling money. Theat. Mex. vol. i. p. 38, &c.
A/ccordin'; to Villa Segnor, the total produce of the
Mcuxic:ln mine , amounts at a medium to eight millions
of'tclbs in lilver annually, and to 5912 marks of gold.
i!. p. 4r .

4 Several branchcs of the revenue have been

xplaineId in the course of the hiflory ; some, which
tlire wa; no occasion of mentioning, require a particu-
l]:r ill:irh:tin. T'fhe right to the tythcs in the New
\ rild, is vceled in the crown of Spain, by a bull of
A.cx ;l(.er VI. Charles V. app(,inted tlhem to be ap-
I'iedC in the following nnh is

lloin

nr. n-frt is tted
to the bilip of the diocele, another fourth to the de;n

and

5x;

and chapter, and other officers of the cathedral. The
remaining half is divided into nine equal parts. Twoof
these, under the denomination of los dos Novenos reales,
are paid to the crown, and conllitute a branch of the
royal revenue. The other seven parts are applied to the
maintenance of the parochial clergy, the building and
support of churches, and other pious uses. Recopil. lib,
i. tit. xvi. Ley. 23, &c. Avendano Thefaur. Indic.
vol. i. p. I84+.

THE Alca-vala, is a duty levied by an excise on the

sale of goods. In Spain it amounts to ten per cent. In
America to four per cent. Solorzano Polit. Indiana,
lib.vi. c. 8. Avendano, vol. i. 186.

THE Al/ajor'fafio, or custom paid in America on

goods imported and exported, may amount on an ave-
rage to fifteen per cent. Recopil. lib. viii. tit. xiv.
Ley. I. Avendano, vol. i. ISS.

THE A-veria, or tax paid on account of convoys to

guard the ships failing to and from America, was firit
imposed when Sir Francis Drake filled the New World
with terror by his expedition into the South Sea. Ita-
mounts to 2 per cent. on the value of goods. Avenda-
no, vol. i. p. 189. Recopil. lib. 'ix. tit. ix. Ley. 43, 44'

I H^AVE not been able to procure any accurate detail

of the several branches of revenue in Pcru, later than the
year 1614. From a curious ilanufcript, containinga
slate of that vice-royalty in all its department:;, prclCn-
ted to the Marquis of Montcs-Claro;, by lran. Lopez
Caravantes, accomptant-1encral in the tribunal of li-
ma, it appears, that the public revenue, as nearly as
can compute the valute of ithe mconcy in which Car;a-
vantes flates his accounts, that tie revenue collchled,
amounted in diucsats, at.. I d. to - - 2,37,76
Expenccs ofgovernmenit - - ,Zi2,9

Net fice revenue I, 1 z977

l'ihe
518

NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

The total in sterling money £. 583,303
Expences of government 305,568

Net free revenue 277,735

BUT several articles appear to be omitted in this com-

putation, such as the duty on fiamped paper, leather,
ecclesiastical annats, &c. so that the revenue of Peru
may be well supposed equal to that of Mexico.

IN computing the expence of government in New
Spain, I may take that of Peru as a standard. There
the annual establishment for defraying the charge of ad-
ministration, exceeds one half of the revenue collected;
and there is no reason for supposing it to be less in
New Spain.
I HAVE obtained a calculation of the total amount of
the public revenue of Spain from America and the Phi-
lippines, which, as the reader will perceive from the two
lalt articles, is more recent than any of the former,
Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanaspefos fuertes

(Customs), &c. - - -2,500,000

Duties on gold and silver - 3,000,000
Duty on coinage of, at the rate of one real de

la Plata for each mark - - 300,000
Bull ofCruzada - ,000,000
:Tribute of the Indians 2,000,000
By faleofquickfilver - - 300,000
Paper exported on the king's account, and

fold in the royal warehouses - 300,000
Stamped paper, tobacco, and other finall

duties -- ,000,000

From the trade of Acapulco, and the coall-

ing trade from province to province 500oo,ooo
'Afiento of negroes - 200,000
l'rom the trade of Mathi, or herb of Paraguay,

formerly monopolized by the Jelifits 500,000
o: lin other revenues formerly belonging to
that order - 400,000

Total 1,ooo,ooo0
VuOL. II U u Lu Total

Total in sterling money 2,700,00o
Deduce half, as the expence of adminiifra-

tion, and there remains net free revenue 1,350o00

NOTE CII. p. 431.

A N author, long conversant in commercial fpecula.
tion, has computed that from the mines of New Spain
alone, the king receives annually, as his fifth, the fun
of two millions of our money. Harris Colledt. ofVoy,
ii. p. I64. According to this calculation, the total
produce of the mines mult be ten millions iterling; a
fum so exorbitant, and. so little corresponding with
all accounts of the annual importation from America,
that the information on which it is founded muf eri.
dently be erroneous. According to Campomanes,
the total produdt of the American mines may be com.
puted at thirty millions of pesos, which, at four Ihil.
lings and fix pence a peso, amounts to 7,425,0001. ler-
ling, the king's fifth of which (if that were regularly
paid) would be ,485,oool. But from this funithe
cxpence of administration is to be deducted, which
is very considerable, as appears fiom the preceding
note. Educ. Popular, vol. ii. p. 131. note.

N O T E CIII. p. 431.

A CCORDING to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign
goods exported from Spain to America pay duti"
of various kinds, amounting in all to more than 2i
per. cent. As moll of the goods with which Spain
supplics her colonies are foreign; such a tax tupoll
trade fb extensive muit yield a considerable rCevenul
Retablif. de Manus. & du Commerce d'Efp. P. 150
J-le computes the value of goods exported annually fl"'
Spain to Amnelica, to be about two millions andt a hlf
ilerling, p. 9 7 7.r .r T f
5zo

I, -

NOTE CIV. p. 433.

T HE Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage,
by a monopoly of salt, and by embarking deeply in
the Manilla trade as well as in that to Spain, gained
annually a million of ducats. In one year he re-
mitted a million of ducats to Spain, in order to pur-
chafe from the Conde Olivares, and his creatures, a
prolongation of his government, p. 6i. He was fuc-
cefsful in his suit, and continued in office from 1624 to
1635, double the usual time.

S H OR T

521
UU 2

# SHORT ACCOUNT OF What is contained in the LETTER sent to the EMPEROR, mentioned PREFACE, p. viii.

SHORT ACCOUNT

o F

What is contained in the LETTER sent to
the EMPEROR, mentioned PREFACE, p. viii.

T HIS letter is dated July 6th, 1519. Cortes in his
second dispatch, takes notice that it was sent off on the
i6th of July.

THE great obje& of the persons who wrote this letter,

is to justify their own conduc in establishing a colony
independent on the jurifdidion of Velasquez. With
this view they endeavour to detract from his merit, in
fitting out the two former armaments under Cordova
and Grijalva, representing these as equipped by the ad-
venturers who engaged in the expedition, not by the
governor. They labour likewise to depreciate the ser-
vices of Cordova and Grijalva, in order to exalt the
merit of their own exploits.

THEY contend, that the sole object of Velasquez

was to trade or barter with the natives, not to attempt
the conquest of New Spain, or the elfabliliment of a
colony there. This is frequently mentioned by B.
Diaz del Cafillo, c. 19. 41, 42, &c. But if Velasquez
had not conquest and fcttlement in view, there seems to
have been no reason for equipping such a considerable
armamen t.

TH iE afTert, that Cortes defrayed tle greatell part

of the expence of fitting out the armament. But this
does not agree with the account of his slender fortune
given by Golara, Cron. c. 7. and B. Diaz, c. 20, or
w1at I have mentioned Note iii. vol. ii.

TniE

THEY take notice, that though considerable numbers

were wounded in their different encounters with the peo-
ple of Tabasco, not one of them died, and all recovered
in a short time. This seems to confirm what I have ob-
served, vol. ii. p. 39, concerning the imperfetion of
the offensive weapons of the Americans.

THEY give some account of the manners and infli.

tutions of the Mexicans. It is very short, and as they
had resided but a fliort time in the country, and had
but little intercourse with the natives, it is both defec-
tive and inaccurate. They describe minutely, and with
great horror, the human sacrifices offered by the Mexi-.
cans to their deities, and affirm that rome of their num-
ber were eye-witnesses of those barbarous rites.

THEY subjoin to their letter a catalogue and defcrip-

tion of the presents sent to the emperor. That pub-
lithed by Gomara, Cron. c. 29. teems to have been co-
pied from it, and Pet. Martyr describes many of the ar-
ticles in his treatise De Infulis nuper inventis, p.
354, &c.

A C A T A L OGUE
524

# A CATALOGUE OF SPANISH BOOKS and MANUSCRIPTS.

A
CATALOGUE

O F
SPANISH BOOKS and MANUSCRIPTS.

A

CARETE de Biscay, Relation des Voyages dans
la Riviere de la Plata, & dela par Terre au Perou.
Exftat. Recueil de Thevenot, Part IV.

----- A Voyage up the River de la Plata, and
thence by Land to Peru, 8vo. London, 1698.

Acolla (Joseph de) Hiftoire Naturelle & Moral des In-
des tant Orientales qu' Occidentales, 8vo. Paris, 1600.

Novi Orbis Hiftoria Naturalis & Moralis.
Exft. in ColleCt. Theod. de Bry, Pars IX.

De Natura Novi Orbis, Libri duo, & de

procuranda Indorum Salute, Libri sex, Salmant. 8vo.
1589.

(Chriflov.) Tratado de las Drogas y Me-

decinas de las Indias Occidentales, con sus PlantasDi-
buxadasal vivo, 4to. Burgos, 1578.

Acugna (P. Chrilloph.) Relation de la Riviere des
Amazones, zmo. Tom. ii. Paris, 1682.

A Relation of the great River of the Ama-
zons in South America, Svo. Lond. 1698.

Alarchon (Fern.) Navigatione a Scoprere il Rcgno di
fettc (itti. Ramurio, III. 363.

Albuquerque Coello (Duartc de) Memorial de Artes
de la Guerra del Brasil, 4to. Mad. 1634.

Alcafarado (Franc.) An Hifiorical Relation of the
Difcoveryof the Isle of Madeira, 4to. Lond. 1675.

A!cedoyl-lHrrera (D. Dionyfio dc) Avifo Hillorico:

Politico-Gcogirailico, con las Noticias mas particulares,
del Peru, Ticrra Firme, Chili, y nuevo Reyno de Gra-
itl;i, 4to. Mad. 1740.

Compendio

----- Compendio Hiftorico de la Provincia y Puey-
to de G aayaquil, 4to. Mad. 1741.

Aldarr. ., Guevara (D. Jos. Auguftin de) Artede la
Lengua Me.,i;: n, izmc. Mexico, 1754.

Alvarado (Pedro de) Dos Relaciones a Hern. Cortes

Referiendole sus Expediciones y Conquiftas en varias
Provincias de N. Efpagna. Exit. Barcia Hiftoriad.
Primit. tom i.

-Lettere due, &c. Exft. Ramuf.III. 296.

Aranzeles Reales de los Miniliros de la Real Audien-
cia de N. Eip.agna, fol. Mexico, 1727.

Argenfola (Bartolome Leonardo de) Conquifta de las
IflI. Malucas, fol. Mad. 1609.

Alales de Aragon, fol. Saragofs, 1630.

Arriago (P. Pablo Jos. de) Extirpacion de la Idolatria
del Peru, 4to. Lima, 1621.

Avendagno (Didac.) Thesaurus Indicus ceu generalis

Inftruttor pro Regimine Confcientie, in iis qua ad In-
dias fpectant, fol. 2 vols. Antwerp, 166o.

Barcia (D. And. Gonzal.) Hiftoriadores Primitivos
de las Indias Occidentales, fol. 3 vols. Mad. 1749.

Barco-Centinera (D. Martin di) Argentina yCon-

quilta del Rio de la Plata Poema. Exit. Barcia Hifio-
riad. Primit. .II.

Barros (Joao de) Decades de Asia, fol. 4 vols. Lilboa,
I628.

Bellefteros (D. Thomas de) Ordenanzas del Peru, fol.
z vols. Lima, 1685.

Benzo (Hieron.) Novi Orbis Hiftoria;-DeBry Ame-
rica, Part IV, V, VI.

Betancurt y Figucroa (Don Luis) Derecho de las
Jglelias Metro Politanas de las Indias, 4to. Mad. 1637.

Blanco (F. Matias Ruiz) Conversion dc Piritu de In-
dios CumannLgotos y otros, 2zmo. Mad. 1690.

Boturini Benadtuci (Lorenzo) Idea de una nueva His-

toria general de la America Septentrional, fundada fobrc
material copiofa de Figuras, Symbolas, Carateres, Can-
tares y Mannfcritos dc Autores Indios, 4to. Mad. 1746.

Botello de Moracs y Vafconccllos (D. Francisco de)
El Nucvo Mundo Pocmna Hecroyco,+to. Barcelona, 1701.

Botcro
z26

Botero Benes (Juan) Description de todas las Pro-
vincias, Reynos, y Ciudades del Mundo, 4to. Girona,
1748.

Brietius (Phil.) Parallela Geographia Veteris & No-
ve, 4to. Paris, 1648.

C

Cabeza de Baca (Alvar Nugnez) Relacion de los
Naufragios. Exit. Barcia Hilt. Prim. Tom. i.

Examen Apologetico de la Hiftorica Nar-
ration de los Naufragios. Exit. ibid.

Commentarios de lo fuccedido durante fu
gubierno del Rio de la Plata. Exft. ibid.

Cabo de Vacca Relatione de. Exit. Ramufio, III. 310.
Cabota (Sebatt.)Navigazione de. Ext. Ramus. II.2i .
Calancha (F. Anton. de la) Cronica moralizada del
Orden de San Auguftin en el Peru,fol. Barcelona, 1638.

California-Diario Hiftorico de los Viages de Mar y
Tierra hechos en 1768, al Norte de California, di orden
del Marques de Croix Vi-rey deNueva Efpagna,&c. MS.

Calle (Juan Diaz de la) Memorial Informatorio de lo
que a fu Mageflad provien de la Nueva Efpagna y Pe-
ru, +to. 1645.

Caracas-Real Cedula de Fundacion de la real Com-
pagnia Guipulcoana de Caracas, izmo. Mad. 1765.

Caravantes (Fr. Lopez de) Relacion de las Provincias
que tiene el Govierno del Peru, los Officios que en el fe
provien, y la Hacienda que alli tiene fu Mageltad, lo
que fe gafat de ella y le queda Libre, &c. &c. Dedi-
cadoal Marques de Santos Claros, Agno. de 161i . MS.

Cardenas y Cano (Gabr.) EnfayoCronologico para la
I-illoria general de la Florida, fol. Mad. 1733.

Caro de Torres (Franc.) Hilloria de las Ordcnes Mi-

litarcs de Sant Jago, Calatravay Alcantara, fol. Mad.
1029.

Carranzana (D. Goncales) A Gcographical Defcrip-
tion of the Coalts, &c. of the Spaninfi Well-Indies, 8vo.
Lond. 1740.

Caas (Bart. de las) Brevifiima Relacion de la Del-
trLl'cic n die las inditas, 'Ito. 1552.

--- N llaratio lconibus Illulirata; per Theod. de

lBry. +to. Oppent. 161 +.
VOL 11. X xx C al(s

527

Casas (Bart. de las) An Account of the firfl Voyages

and Discoveries of the Spaniards in America; 8vo.
Lond. 1693.

Caflhni.(P. Joseph) Hiftoria de la Provincia de Com.

pagnia de Jesus del Nuevo Reyno de Granada. fol,
Mad. 1741.

Caftanheda (Fern. Lop. de) Hiftoria do Defcobrimen.

to & Conquifta de India pclos Portugueses, fol. 2 vols.
Lifboa, 1552.

Caftellanos (Juan de) Primera Parte de las Elegias de
Varones Illuftres de Indias, 4to. Mad. 1589.

Castillo (Bernal Diaz del) Hiltoria Verdadera de la
Conquifta de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 1632-

Cavallero (D. Jos. Garcia) Brieve Cotejo y Valance

de las pefas y medidas di varias Naciones, reducidasa
las que corren en Castilla, 4to. Mad. 1731.

Cieca de Leon (Pedro de) Cronica del Peru, fol. Se-
vill. 1553.

Cifineros (Diego) Sitio, Naturaleza y Propriedades de
la Ciudad de Mexico, 4to. Mexico, 1618.

Cogullado (P. Fr. Diego Lopez) Hiftoria de Yuca-
tan, fol. Mad. i688.

Collecao dos Brives Pontificos e Leyes Regiasque

forao Expedidos y Publicadas defde'o Anno 1741, fobre
a la Liberdada des Peflbas bene e Commerciodos Indos
de Brefil.

Coleccion General de las Providenciashaftaaquito'

madas per el Gobierno fobre el Elftagnimento, y Occu-
pacion de Temporalidades de los Regulares de la Com-
pagnia de Efpagna, Indias, &c. Partes IV 4to. Mad.
17b7.

Colon (D. Fernando) La Hiftoria del Almirantc, D.
Chriitoval Colon. Exit. Barcia Hilt. Prim. I. 1.

Columbus (C!:rilt.) Navigatio qua multas Regiolle

hatlenus incognitas invenit. Exit. Nov. Orb. Gryn1i,
p. 90.

. 9. (Fcrd.) Life and Aftions of.his Father Ad.

miral Chriitoph. Columbus. Exit. Churchill's Voyages,
11. 479.

Concilios Provinciales Primero y Segundo celebradol

en la muy Noble y nuy leal Ciudad de Mexico en loi
Agnos de 1555 & 1565. fol. Mexico, 1769. Conciliu
5.'

SPANISH BOOKS AND MANUSCRIPTS.
Concilium Mexicanum Provinciale tertium telebra-
tum Mexici, Anno 1585, fol. Mexici. 1770.

Corita (Dr. Alonzo) Breve y fumaria Relacion de los

Segnores, manera y Differencia de ellos, que havia en la
Nueva Efpagna, y otras Provincias sus Comarcanas, y
de sus Leyes, Ufos y Coftumbres, y de la Forma que te-
nian en Tributas sus Vafallos en Tiempo de fu Gentili-
dad, &c. MS. +to. pp. 307.

Coronada (Fr. Vafq. de) Sommario di due sue Lettere

del Viaggio fatto del Fra Marco da Nizza al fette Citta
deCevola. Exit. RamufioII. 354.

- - Relation del Viaggio alle fette Citta. Ra-
mufio III. 359.

Cortes (Hern.) Quattro Cartas dirigidas al Empera-

dor Carlos V. en que ha Relacion de sus Conquiltas en
la Nueva Efpagna. Exfl. Barcia Hilt. Prim. tom. i.

Cortefii (Ferd.) De infulis nuper inventis Narrationes
ad Carolum V. fol. 1532.

Cortefe (Fern.) Relationi, &c. Exit. Ramufio III.
225.

Cubero (D. Pedro) Peregrinacion del Mayor Parte
delMundo. Zaragoff. 4to. x688.

D

Davila Padilla (F. Aug.) Hiftoria de la Fundacion y
Difcurfode Provinciade St. Jago de Mexico, fol. Brufs.
i625.

(Gil. Gonzalez) Teatro Ecclefiafvico de

la Primitiva Iglefia de las Indias Occidentales, fol. 2
vols. 1649.

Decumentos tocantes a la Perfecucion, que los Regui-

lares de la Compagnia fuicitaron contra Don B. de Car-
denas Obifpode Paraguay, 4to. Mad. 1768.

E

Echavari (D. Bcrnardo Ibagnez de) El ReynoJcfil i-

tico del Paraguay. Exit. tom. iv. Colleccion de Do-
cumentos, 4to. Mad. 1770.

1chave y Affu (1). Francisco de) La Eftrella de Lima

cnnvertilda en Sol fobre sus tres Coronas, fol. Amberes,
i688.
Eguiara cl Egueren (D. Jo. Jos.) Bibliotheca Mexica-
"a, five Eruditortun :Iifloria Virorum in America Bo-

Xx x z reali

reali natorum, &c. tom. Prim. fol. Mex. 1755. N. B.
No more than one volume of this work has been pub.
limhed.

Ercilla y Zuniga (D. Alonzo de) La Araucana, P0.
ema Eroico, fol. Mad. 1733.

Efcalona (D. Gaspar de) Gazophylacium Regium
Peru-vicum, fol. Mad. 1775.

F

Faria y Sousa (Manuel de) Hiftoria del Reyno de
Portugal, fol. Amber. 1730.

.-- -History of Portugal from the firit ages to the
Revolution under John IV. 8vo. Lond. 1698.

Fernandez (Diego) Hiilloria del Peru, fol Sevill,
'571.

-(P. Juan Patr.) Relacion Iiitorial de las

Missiones de los Indios que claman Chiquitos, 4t0.
Mad. 1726.

Feyjoo (Benit. Geron) Espagnoles Americanos-Dif-
curfo VI. del tom. iv. del Teatro Critico. Mad. 1769.

Solucion del gran Problema Hiftorico, fobre

la Poblacion de la America-Difcurfo XV. del tom. v.
del Teatro Critico.

(D. Miguel) Relacion Defcriptiva de la

ciudad y Provincia de Truxillo del Peru, fol. Mad.

763. Freyre (Ant.) Piratas de la America, 4to.
Fraflo (D. Petro) De Regio Patronatu Indiarum, fol.
zvols. Matriti, 1775.

' G

Galvao (Antonio) Tratado dos Defcobrimientos anti-
gos y Modernos, fol. Lifboa, 173 1.

Galvano (Ant.) The. Discoveries of the Worldfrom

the firfl Original unto the Year 1555. Olborne's Col-
led. II. 354.

Garcia (Gregorio) Hifloria Ecclefiaflica y Seglar de

la India Oriental y Occidental, y Predicacion de la Santa
Evangeliaen ella, izmo. Baeca, i626.

- (Fr, Gregorio) Origen de los Indios del Nu-
cvo Mundo, fol. Mad. 1729.

Godoy (Diego de) Relacion al HI. Cortes, quc trata
del D'c'ubrimiento de diverfas Ciudades, y provincias

y Gucrras
530

O F

y Guerras que tuio con los Indios. Exft. Barcia HifR.
Prim. tom. i.

----- Lettera a Cortefe, &c. Exft. Ramufio
III. 300.

Gomara (Fr. Lopez de) La Hiftoria general de las In-
dias, Izmo. Any. 155i .

-_ - - ·Hiftoria general de las Indias. Exft. Bar-
cia Hist. Prim. tom. ii.

- Clhronica de la Nueva Efpagna o Con-
quifta de Mexico. Exft. Barcia Hilft. Prim..tom. ii.

Gumilla (P. Jos.) Hilloire Naturelle, Civile & Geo-

graphique de l'Orenoque. Traduite par M. Eidous,
izmo. tom. iii. Avign. 1758.

Gufman (Nugno de) Relacion fcritta in Omitlan

Provincia de Mechuacan della maggior Spagna nell
1530. Exft. Ramufio III. 331.

H

Henis (P. Thadeus) Ephemerides belli Guaranici, ab
Anno 1754. ExIt. Collecion general de Docum.
torn. iv.

Hernandes (Fran.) Plantarum, Animalium & Mine-

ralium Mexicanorum Hiftoria, fol. Rom. 165 1.

Herrera (Anton. de) Hiftoria general de los Hechos

de los Caftellanos en las Iflas y Tierra Firma del Mar
Oceano, fol. 4vols. Mad. 1601.

Hiftoria General, &c. 4 vols. 1730.
General Hiflory, &c. Translated by Stephens,
8vo. 6 vol. Lond. 1740.

--- Defcriptio India Occidentalis, fol. Amll.
1622.

L

Leon (Fr. Ruiz. de) Hernandia Poema Heroyco de
Conquifta de Mexico, 4to. Mad. 1755.

~---- (Ant. de) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Ori-
ental y Occidental, Nautica y Geografica, fol. Mad.
'737.

Lima, A true account of the Earthquake which hap-
pened there 28th October 1746. Translated fi-om the
Spanilh, 8vo. Lond. 1748.

Lima Gozofi, Description de las fellibas Demonftra-
clones, con q ue efa ciudad celebrlo la reatl Proclamacion

de

531

de el Nombre Augufto del Catolicp Monarcho D.
Carlos I. Lima, 4to. 1760.

Llano Zapata (D. Jos. Eufeb.) Preliminar al Tomo

1. de las Memorias Hiforico-Phyficas, Critico-Apologe-
ticas de la America Meridional, 8vo. Cadiz. 1759.

Lopez (Thom.) Atlas Geographico de la America
Septentrional y Meridional, zmo. Par. 1758.

Lorenzana(D. Fr. Ant.) Hiftoria de Nueva Efpagna,

efcrita por fu Efclarecido Conquistador Hernan Cortes.
Aumentada con otros Documentos y Notas, fol. Mex.
1770.

Lozano (P. Pedro) Description Chorographica, del

Terretorios, Arboles, Animales, del Gran Chaco, yde
los ritos y Coftumbres, de las innumerabiles Naciones
que la habitan, 4to. Cordov. 1733.

Itilloria de la Compagnia de Jesus en la
Provincia del Paraguay, fol. 2 vols. Mad. 1753.

M

Madriga (Pedro de) Description de la Gouvernment

du Perou. Exfl. Voyages qui ont fervi a l'etabliffement
de la comp. des Indes, tom. ix. Io;.

Mariana (P. Juan de) Difcurfo de las Enfermedades
de la Compagniade Jesus, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Martinez de Ia Puente (D. Jos.) Compendio de las

Hiflorias de los Defcubrimientos, Conquiftas y Guerras
de la India Oriental, y sus Iflas, defde los Tiempos del
Infante Don Enrique de Portugal fu inventor, 4t0.
Mad. 16SI.

Martyr ab Angleria (Pctr.) De Rebus Oceanicis &
Novo Orbe Decades tres, i 2mo. Colon. 1574.

- De Infulis nuper inventis, & de moribu
Incolarum, Ibid. p. 329.

Opus Epiftolarum, fol. Amft. 1670.
11 Solnmario cavato della fua Hilloria del
Nuevo Mundo. Ramufio III. i.

Mechuacan-Relacion de las Ceremonias, Ritos Y

Poblacion de los Indios de Mechuacan hecla al 1. S. I).
Ant. de Mendoza Virrey de Nueva Efpagna, fol. MS.

Melendez (Fr. Juan) Teforos Verdaderos de las tndi-

as Hiftoria dc la Provincia de S. Juan Baptiia dcl Pelr,
del Orden de Predicadorcs, fol. 3 vols. Rom. 1681.

lMcndoza

Mendoza (D. Ant. de) Lettera al Imperatore del

Difcoprimento della Terra Firmadella N. Spagna ver-
so Tramontano. Exft. Ramufio III. 355.

----- (Juan Gonz. de) Hiiloria del gran Reyno

de China con un Itinerario del Nuevo Mundo, 8vo.
Rom. 1585.

Monardes (El Dottor) Primera y Segunda y Tercera

Parte de la Hiitoria Medicinal, de las Cosas que fe traen
de nueftras Indias Occidentales,que firven en Medecina.
4to. Sevilla 1574.

Moncada (Sancho de) Reltauracion Politica de Es-
pagna y defeos publicos, 41to. Mad. 1746.

N

Nizza (F Marco) Relatione del Viaggio fattaper

''erra al Cevole, Regno di Sette Citta. ExIt. Ramus.
III. 356.

Nodal-Relacion del Viage que hicieron los Capi-

tanes Barth. y Gornz. de Nodal al-defcubrimicnto del
Efirecho que hoy es nombrado de Maire, y reconoci-
miento del de Magellanes, 4to. Mad.

Nueva Efpagna-Hifloria de los Indios de Nueva Es-

pagna dibidida en tres Partes. En la: primera trata de
los Ritos, Sacrificios y Idolatrias del Tiempo de fu Gen-
tilidad. En la fegunda de fu maravillcfa Conversion a
la Fe, y modo de celebrar las Fiestas de NTuelra Santa
Iglefia. En la terccra del Genio y Carai-ctr tic ue!a
Gente ; y, Figuras con que notaban hss Acontciirniintcs,
con otras particularidades ; y Noticias de las prinJii.;ilcs
Ciudades en aquel Reyno. Efcrita en c] \Ano ix.t
por uno de los doce Rcligiofos Franciscos qT.' primcro
paffaron a entender cn fu Conversion, MS. fol. pp. 6iS..

0

Ogna (Pedro de) Arauco Domado. Poema, I zmo..
Mad. 16o5.

Ordenanzas del Confejo real de las Indias, fol. Mad.
1681.

Ortcga (D. Cafimiro de) Rcfumcn -Iiflorico del pri-

mnie Viage hecho al rededor del Mundo, 4to. Mad.
1769.

Oflbrio (Jeromc) H1illory of the Portugucfe, during
tilt Rcign ofl'Emlin uel, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1752.

Oflbrius

Offorius (Hieron.) De rebus Emmanuelis Lufitanie
Regis, 8vo. Col. Agr. 1572.

Ovalle (Alonfo) Hiftorica Relacion del Reyno de
Chili, fol. Rom. 1 6+6.

,----- An Historical Relation of the Kingd om of
Chili. Exit. Churchill Collec. III. i.

Oviedo y Bagnos (D. Jos.) Hiftoria dela ConquiRta y
Publacion de Venezuela, fol. Mad. 1723.

Oviedo (Alonfo) Sommaria, &c. Exit. Ramufio
III. 44.

Oviedo (Gonz. Fern. de) Relacion Sommariadela

Hiltoria Natural de las Indias. Exit. Barcia Hilt. Prim,
tom. i.
Oviedo Hiftoria Generale & Naturaledell, Indie Oc-
cidentale. Exft. Ramufio. III. 74.

---- Relatione della Navigatione per la Gran-
diflima Fiume Maragnon. Exft. Ramus. III. 415.

P

Palafox y Mendoza (D. Juan) Virtudes del Indios o

Naturaliza y Coftumbres de los Indios de N. Efpagna,
4to.

Vie de Venerable Dom. Jean Palafox,Eve-
que de l'Angelopolis, Izmo. Cologe, 1772.

Pegna (Juan Nugnez de la) Conquilta y Antigueda-
des de lasflas de Gran Canaria, 4to. Mad. 1676.

Pcgna Montenegro (D. Alonfo de la) Itinerario para

Parochos de Indios, en que tratai las materias mas par-
ticulares, tocantes a cllos para fu buen adminiftracion,
4to. Ainberes, 1754.
Pcralta Barnuevo (D. Pedro de) Lima fundada o Con-
quilla del Per,, Pienma Eroyco, 4to. Lima, 1732.

Peralta Calderon (D. Mathias de) El Apoftol de las

lJidli;s ! n ucvci gentes San Francisco Xavicr de la Coni-
;agnia dc Jt!'ts Epitome de sus Apoltolicos hechos, 4to.
i'anp. 166;.

I'cl iria de Bcrrido (Bernard.) Annaes Hiiloricos do
e';ilt,, d i Marancliao, fol. Lilboa, 1749.

'Pci u--lRlatiolne d'un Capitano Spagnuolo del Def-
c0p.illlcnto v Conquilta del Peru. Exit. Ramus. 111. 371.

i'cl-r--c!.!;licne d'un Secrclt;.ijo te Franc. Pizzalro
dellia Con Urlliclta; dl Peru. Exit. R.t;iimfio ll. 302.

--i- Cliol d}el ]'eru, /IMS.

Pcfq lisa
534

Pefquifa de los Oydores de Panama contra D. Javme

' Mugnos &c. por haverlos commerciado illicitamente
- en tiempo de Guerra, fol. 1755.

Philipinas-Catta que escribe un Religiofo antiguo de
Philipinas, a un Amigo fuyo en Efpagna, que le preg-
i unta el Naturel y Genio de los Indios Naturales de es-
tas Iflas. MS. 4to.

Piedrahita (Luc. Fern.) Hiftoria general de las con-
quiitas del Nuevo Reyno de Granada, fol. Ambres.

Pinelo (Ant. de Leon) Epitome de la Bibliotheca Ori-

ental y Occidental en que fe contienen los Efcritores de
las Indias Orientales y Occidentales. fol. z vols. Mad.
1737-

Pinzonius focius Admirantis Columbi-Navigatio &
res per eum repertae. Exft. Nov. Orb. Grynei. p. 1 i.

| Pizarro y Orellana (D. Fern.) Varones illutlres del
iN. Mundo, fol. Mad, i639.

Puente (D. Jos. Martinez de la) Compendio delas
Hiltorias de los defcubrimientos de la India Oriental y
sus Iflas, 4to. Mad. 168i.

;:~~

. Q.

Quir (Ferd. de) Terra Aultralis Incognita, or a neyr
Southern Discovery, containing a fifth Part of the 'World
lately found out, 4to. Lond. 1617.

R

Real Compagnia Guipuzcoana de Caracas, Noticias
hiltoriales Pradicas, de los Succeflbs y Adclantamientos
de efa Compagnia defde fn Fundacion en 1728 halta
1764, 4to. 1765.

Recopilacion de Leycs dc los Reynos de las Indias,

fol. - vols. Mad. 1756.

Relatione d'un Gentilhuomo del Sig. Fern. Cortefe
della gr;n Citta Temiltatan, Mexico, & delle altre cofe
della NovaSpagna. Exit. Ramus. J1I. 304.

Reimal (Fr. Ant.) Hiltoria general dc las Indias
Occi(lentales y partictilar de la Govcrnacion de Chiapa
Y!y( u;timala, fol. Mad. 1620.

Riladceneyra. (D. Diego l'ortichuelo de) Relacion dcl
\ iagc dlefl quie filio de Lima, haila quc llego a Efpag-
", 41to. Mad. 1657.
Riibadencyra y Barrientos (1), Ant. Joach.) Manuel

lVl.. 1I, Y yy Compcndio

Compendio de el Regio Patronato Indiano, fol. Mad,
1755.

Ribas (Andr. Perez de) EHiforia de los Triumphos

de Nueftra Sta Fe, entre Gentes las mas Barbaras, ea
las mifiiones de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. I645.

Riol (D. Santiago) Reprefentacion a PhilipeV. so.

bre el eftado actual de los Papeles universales de la Mo.
narchia, MS.

Rocha Pitta (Sebaftiano de) Hiftoria da AmericaPor.

tougueza des de o Anno de 1500 de fui defcobrimento
ate o de 1724, fol. Lifboa 1730.

Rodriguez (Manuel,) Explicacion de la Bulladela
Santa Cruzada, 4to. Alcala, 1589.

(P. Man.) El Maragnon y Amazonas, His-

toria de los Defcubrimientos, Entradas yReducionde
Naciones, fol. Mad. 1684.

Roman (Hieron.) Republicas del Mundo, fol. 3 vols.
Mad. I595.

Rofende (P. Ant. Gonz. de) Vida del Juan de Pala-
fox Arcobifpode Mexico, fol. Mad. 1671.

Ruiz (P. Ant.) Conquifta Efpiritual hechapor losRe-

ligiofos de la. Compagnia de Jesus, ei las Provincias de
la Paraguay, Uraguay, Parana y Tape, 4to. Mad. 1639.

S

Salazar de Mendoza (D. Pedro) Monarquia de Es
pagna, toin. i,11, iii, fol. Mad. 1770.

Salazar y Olarte (D. Ignacio) Hiftoria de la Conquif'
ta de Mexico-Segunda parte-No place nor year.

Salazar y Zevallos (D. Alonz. Ed. de) Conftitucines

y Ordenanzas antiguas Agnadidas y Modernasde laReal
Univerfldad y cftudio general dte San Marcos de laCiu
dad de los Reyes del Peru, fol. En la Ciudad de lo1
Reyes, 1735.

Sanchez (Ant. Ribeiro) Diffcrtation fur 'Origine d

la haladie Vencrienne, dans laqucllc on prouvc qu'cll
n'a point ete portce de I'Anmerique, i mo. Paris, 176,.

Sarmicnto de Ga;n Lboa (Pcdilo de) Viage al Eftrecl
de Magellancs, 40to. Mad. 1768.

Santa Cruz (El Marquces) C-imcerio Suclto y n Com-
pllias Gcinera-l, i z2no. Mad. 1732.

Sclicinidel (Hullderico) H-ifFlorila y De;-ubrilient del

Rio de la Pllata y Paraguay. Il. x. Barcia Hiit. 1him'

toni. 111.
536

Sebara da Sylva (Jos. de) Recueil Chronologique &

Analytique de tout ce qu'a fait en Portugal la Societe
dite de Jesus, depuis son entree dansce Royaume en
1540 jufqu'a son Expulsion en 1759, I2mo. 3 vols. Lifb.
1769.

Sepulveda (Genefius) Dialogus de juftis belli caulis
prxfertim in Ipdos Novi Orbis. MS.

Seyxas y Lovero (D. Fr.) T1eatro Naval Hydrogra-
phico, 4to. 1648.

Defcripcion Geographica y PIerrotero de la
Region AuftralMagellanica, 4to. Mad. 169o.

Simon (Pedro) Noticias Hiftoriales de las Conquiftaa

de Tierra Firme en las Indias Occidentales, fol. Cuenca,
1627.

Solis (D. Ant. de) Hiftoria de las Conquiftas de Mex-
ico, fol. Mad. 1684.

History of the conquelt of Mexico-Tran-

flated by Townsend, fol. 1724.
Solorzano Pereira (Joan.) Politica Indiana.

-De Indiarum jure fiv,e de jufta !ndiarum
Occidentalium Gubernatione, fol. 2 vols. Lugd. 1672.

De Indiarum Jure, Matriti, 2 vols. fol.
1629.

Suarezde Figueroa (Chriftov.) Hechos de D. Garcia
Hurtado de Mendoza,4to. Mad. 1613.

T

Tarragones (Hieron. Gir.) Dos Libros de Cosmo-
graphia, 4.to. Milan, 1556.

Techo (F. Nichol. de) The Hiltory of the Provinces
Paraguay, Tucuman, Rio de la Plata, &c. Exft. Chur-
chill's Coll. VI. 3.

Torquemada (Juan de) Monarquia Indiana, fol. 3
vols. Mad, 1723.

Torres (Sim. Per. de) Viage del Mundo. Exil. Bar-
cia Hill. Prim. lil.

--- - (Franc. Caro de) I-Iitoria de las Ordenes

Miilitares de Santiago, Calatrava y Alcanitara, defde fu
lFundacion halla cl Rcy D. Fclipe II. Admninitador per-
petuo dellas, fol. Mad. 1629.

T'rnrribio (P. F. Jo,;.) Aparato para la Hifloria Natu-
. ' pagna laifol. Mad. 1754.1

Y yy z -- Differtacion

537

:;, Differtacion Hiftorico Politica y en muchz

parte Geografica de las Iflas Philipinas, 12mo. Mad.
1753.

Ulloa (D. Ant. de) Voyage Hiftorique de l'Ame.
rique Meridionale, 4to. 2 tom. Paris, 1752.

Noticias Americanas, Entretenimientos

Phyficos Hifforicos, fobre la America Meridional y lI
Septentrional Oriental, +to. Mad. 1772.

(Franc.) Navigatione per fcoprire l'Ifole

delle Specierie fino al Mare dettoVermejo nel 1539,
Exft. Ramus. III. 339.

-(D. Bernardo) Retabliffement des Manu-
factures & du Commerce d'Efpagne, izmo. Amit. 1753.

Uztariz (D. Geron.) Theoria y Prafica de Commer.
cio& de Marina, fol. Mad. 1757.

--- The Theory and Praaice of Commerce,
and Maritime Affairs, 8vo. 2 vols. Lond. 1751.

V

Venegas (Miguel) A Natural and Civil Hifloryof
California, 8vo. z vols. Lond. 1759.

Varages (D. Thom. Tamaio de) Reftauracion de la

Ciudad del Salvador y Baia de Todos Sandos en 1a
Provincia del Brafil,4to. Mad. 1628.

Vargas Machuca (D. Bern. de) Milicia y Defcripci-
on de las Indias, 4to. Mad. 1699.

Vega (L'Ynca Gatcilaffo de la) HiRfoire des Guerres

Civiles des Efpagnolcs dans les Indes, par Baudouin,
4to. 2 tom. Paris. 1648.

Vega (Garcilaffo de la) Hiftoire de la Conquete dela

Floride. Traduite par Richelct, I2mo. z tom. Leyd.
1731-

----- Royal Commentaries of Peru, by Rycaut,
fol. Lond. j688.

Veitia Linage (Jos.) The Spanifl Rule of Trade to
the Well Indies, 8 vo. Lond. 1702.

Norte de la Contratacion de las IndiasOc-
cidentales, fol. Sevill. 1672.

Verazzano (Ciov.) Relatione delle Terra per lui so0-
perta nel 152 z Exi. Exi. Ramufo 111. p. 4.20.

Viage de 1Elfagna, 2nlo. 6 tom. Mad. 1776.
Vidoria (Fran.) Relationes 'hcologicaz de Indis & de

jure belli contra eos, 4to. Mad. 1765. Vicra
538

Viera y Clavijo (D. Jos.) Noticias de la Hiftoria ge-
neral de las Iflas de Canaria, 4to. z tom. Mad. 1772.

Villagra (Gasp. de) Hiftoria de Nueva Mexico, Poe-

ma, I2mo. Alcala, 1610.

Villa Segnor y Sanchez (D. Jos. Ant.) Theatro Ame-
ricano. Description general de los Reynos y Provincias
de la Nueva Efpagna, fol. 2 tom. Mex. 1746.

X

Xerez (Franc. de) Verdadera Relacion de la Conquif-

tadel Peru y Provincia de Cuzco, embiada al Empera-
dor Carlos V. Exft. Barcia Hilt. Prim. tom. III.

Relatione, &c. &c. Exft. Ramus. III. 372.

Z

Zarate (Aug. de) Hitloria del Defcubrimiento y Con-

quifta de la Provincia del Peru. Exft. Barcia. Hist.
Prim. tom. III.

-- Hiloire de la Decouverte & de la Conquete

du Perou, I2mo. 2 tom. Paris, 1742.
- Zavala y Augnon (D. Miguel de) Reprefentacion al
Rey N. Segnor D, Philipe V. dirigida al mas feguro
Aumento del Real Erario. No place, 1732.

Zevallos (D. Pedro Ordognez de) Hiftoria y Viage
del Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1691.

WN DE X.

539

# INDEX.

I

N

D

E

X.
N. B. The Roman Numerals refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Page.

A.
4ABrSSINIA, an embassy Lent

to that country by John II.

King of Portugal, i. 55.
Acapulca, the nature of the trade

carried on from thence to Ma-
nila, ii. 427. Amount of the
treasure on board the ihip ta-
ken by Lord Anson, 515.
Acof/a, his method of accounting

for the different degrees ofheat,
in the old and new continents,
i. 450.
Adair, his account of the re-

vengeful temper of the native
Americans, i. 478.
Adanfon, his j unification of Han-

no's account of the African
seas, i. 423.
lAfriica, the weflern coast of, first

explored by order of John I.
King of Portugal, i. 42. Is
discovered from Cape Non, to
Bojador, ibid. Cape Bojador
doubled, 46. The countries
southward of the River Scne-
a;il discovered, 52. Cape of
Good Ilope fcen by Bartholo-
.mcw )i;tz, 55. Ca;['es of lhe
extreme heat of the climate
tlhere, 254. Ignorance of the
ancient altronolners concern-
ing, 423.

Agriculture, the tfate of, among

the native Americans, i. 328.
Two principal causes of the
defects of, j32-.
Aguada, is sent to Hispaniola, as

a commissioner to infpe& the
conduct of Columbus, i. 130.
Aguilar, Jerom de, is relieved

from a long captivity among
the Indians at Cozumel,. by
Fernando Cortes, ii. Io.
Albuquerque, Rodrigo, his barba-

rous treatment of the Indians
ofHifpaniola, i. 214.
Alcav.ala, in the Spanish customs,

the term explained, ii. 518.
Alexander the Great, his political

character, i. 14. His motive
in founding the city of Alexan-
dria, 15. His discoveries in
India, 16.
/lexander VI. Pope, grants to

Ferdinand and lIfabella of Caf-
tile the right of all their wef-
tern difcovcries, i. 113. Sends
missionaries with Columbus oli ,'-
his second voyage, I 4.
Alhagro, Diego de, his birth and

character, ii. 149. Aflbciates
with Pizarro and de Luque, in
a voyage of discovery, 15o.
I-s unsuccessful attempts, 15 1.
Is neglcetcd by Pizarro in his
Spanilh ncgociation, 159. Is

reconciled

reconciled to him, 160. Brings
reinforcements to Pizarro at
Peru, 1-78. Beginning of dif-
fenfions between him and Pi-
zarro, 192. Invades Chili,
195. Is created governor of
Chili, and marches to Cusco,
199. Seizes Cus-co out of the
h;an's ofPizarro, 201. Defeats
Aivara.lo, and takes him pri-
soner, ,id. Is deceived by the
artful negociations of Francis
pizarro, 203. Is defeated by
the Pizarros, 206. Is taken
prisoner, 207. Is tried and
condemned, 208. Is put to
death, 209.
.nlmagro the son, affords refuge to

his father's followers at Lima,
ii. 217. His characer, ibid.
Heads a conspiracy againIt
Francis Pizarro, zi8. Pizarro
afaflinated, 219. Is acknow-
ledged as his fulcceffor, 220.
His precarious situation, 221.
Is defeated by Vaca de Castro,
223. Is betrayed and executed,
224.
Almnajorifafgo, in the Spanilh A-

merican customs, the amount
of, ii. 518.
Alvarado, Alonzo, is Cent from

Lima, by Francis Pizarro, with
a body of Spaniards to relieve
his brothers at Cusco, ii. 201.
Is taken prisoner by Almagro,
202. His cfcape, 203.
Alvarado, Pedro de, is left by

Cortes to command at Mexi-
co, while he marched againll
Narvaez, ii. 78. He is belieg-
ed by the Mexicans, 84. His
imprudent condult, 85. -is
expedition to (Quito in Peru,
1S9.
.mnzol:s, a community of, iaid to

exilt in South Arnerica, by
Francis Orellaila, ii. 215.

America, the continent of, disco-

vered by Chriffopher Colum.
bus, i. 138. How it obtained
this name, 149. Ferdinand of
Caflile nominates two govern-
ments in, 192. The propofi-
tions offered to the natives,
ibid. I11 reception of Ojeda
and Nicuenfa among them,193.
The South Sea discovered by
Balboa, 204. Rio de Plata
discovered, 213. The natives
of, injuriouily treated by the,
Spaniards, 233. The va ex-
tent of, 2z.8. The grand ob-
jeE.s it preSented to view, 249.
The circumllances of, favour-
able for commerce and civili-
zation, 250. The climates of,
252. Various causes of the
peculiarity of its ciimates,253.
Its rude and uncultivated Iate
when firftdifcovered, 257. Its
animals, 259. Its infedtsand
reptiles, 26i. Birds, 262. Ge-
neral account of its foil, 263.
Inquiry into the firfl populati-
on of, 264. Could not be peo-
pled by civilized nations, 270.
The northern extremity of,
contiguous to Asia, 273. Pro-
bably peopled by Afiatics,28o.
Condition and character of the
native in habitants inquilred in-
to, 281. Were more rude than
the natives of any other known
parts of the earth, 282. The
Peruvians and Mexicans cx-
ccpted, 283. The firfl disco-
vcrers incapable of a judicious
speculative examination, 28i.
T'he various fylellls of philo-
fophers refpicctig the nlativcs,
286. Method observed in the
preeitnt review of tlheil bodii/
co(nllitution and circumll:lfllnc';,
2R8. Tlhe venereal dife;st dc-
rived fioo tllis p.art of tJhe

Vworld,
X.

world, 307. Why so thinly in-
habited, 337. The country de-
populated by continual wars,
366. Cause of the extreme
coldness toward the southern
extremity of, 453. The natu-
ral uncultivated state of the
country described, 455. Bones
of large extinct species of ani-
mals discovered underground
near the banks of the Ohio,
456. Why European animals
degenerate there, 457. Sup-
posed to have undergone a con-
vulfive separation from Asia,
461. Causes of the depopula-
tior of, traced, ii. 346. This
depopulation not the result of
any intentional fyllem of poli-
cy, 348. Nor the result ofreli-
gion, 350. Number of Indian
natives fill remaining in Mexi-
coand Peru, 35i. All the Spa-
nifh dominions there, fubjefted
to two viceroys, 354. Its third
viceroyalty lately established,
355. See liexico, Peru, Cortes,
Pizarro, &c.
Americans, native, in Spanish A-

merica, their bodily conltituti-
on and complexion, i. 289.
'Their strength and abilities,
290. Their intfnfibility with
regard to their women, 292.
No deformities in their frame,
296. This circumitance ac-
counted for, 297. Uniformity
oftheir colour, 298. A pecu-
liar race of; deicribed, 301.
'hle Ifqu(imaux, 302. IPata-
gonians, 303. The exillence
of l':ttagonian giants yet re-
nmniilag to be decided, 305.
'h'lcir dire;fces, 306. T'he ve-
nereal dileafe, peculiarly theirs,
307. 'The powers and quialities
"t their minds, 308. Are only
lolicitous to flipply immeldiate

VoL. 11. Z z z

wants, 310. The art of cor
putation, scarcely known to
them, ibid. Have no abftraa
ideas, 312. The North Ame-
ricans much more intelligent
than those of the South, 313.
Their averlion to labour, 3 15.
Their social liate, 317. Do-
meltic union, ibid. The wo-
men, 318. Their women not
prolific, 321. Their parental
affection and filial duty, 322.
Their modes offubfiftence, 324.
Fifling, 325. Hunting, 326.
Agriculture, 328. The various
objects of their culture, 329.
Two principal causes of the
defects of their agriculture,
33z. Their want of tame ani-
mals, ibid. Their want of use-
ful metals, 334. Their politi-
cal inititutions, 336. Were di-
vided into small independent
communities, ibid. Unac-
quainted with the idea of pro-
perty, 337. Their high sense
of equality and independence,
338. Their ideas of fubordi-
nation inmperfeEt, 340. To
what tribes there descriptions
apply, 341. Some exception,
343. Florida, ibid. The Nat-
cliez, 344. The islands, 345.
In Bogota, ibid. Inquiry into
the causes of these irregulari-
ties, 346. Their art of war,
349. T'heir motives to holtili-
ty, 350. Cautfis of their fero-
city, 351. Perpetuity of their
animofities, 352. Their modes
of conll uding war, 353. A re
not dellitute of courage and
fortitude, 355. Incapable of
military dilcipline, 356. Their
treatment of prisoners, 357.
Their fortitude under torture,
359. Never eat human flelh
but to gratify revenge, 361.

H-ow

How the South Americans
treated their prisoners, 362.
Their military education, 303.
Strange method of chuuing a
captain among the Indians on
the banks of the Orinoco, ibid.

he'ir numbers waited by con-
tinual wars, 366. Their tribes
now recruit their numbers by
adopting prisoners, 367. Are
nc.'er formidable in war, to
more polihed nations, 368.
''heir arts, dress, and orna-
ments, 369. Their habitati-
ons, 372. Their arms, 374.
Their domestic utenlils, 375.
Coniiiru.oion of their canoes,
376. The lilUefflielf with which
they apply to labour, 377.
Their religion, 378. Some
tribes altogether deititute of
any, 381. Remarklc:ble diverfi-
ty in their religious notions,
384. Their ideas of the im-
mortality of the loul, 3i'7.
Their modes of burial, 388.
Why their phylicians pretend
to be conj uro:, 390. '1 heir
lov c of .ilncingl 3(93. ' leir
imrnodcr:ate p;ialioin r.r ga in g,
395. Art c\trftlltcy taddid:l-'
to drul:llennset, 31)6. lPut
tilri agld and in u,,iblc to
death, 400. GenCeral cliimate
t,i'their character, 4oi. Iheir
in telletu:,l powers,4cz. T'heir
political talents, 403. Powers
of alletion, 404. l-I.:rdncls of
heart, 405. 'lheir in cfnlibiii-
ty, 400. lTaciturnity, -107.
Their cunning, 1.o08. Their
virtue,, 4.09. TheCir (irict C
illdplced.'nce, q. lo. I'oriiti de,
)itid. Attachnmlnt to their
com!Imunity, 4.1 . ''ihlir fiti'-
f.,,wtion wilh their ow n conditi-
on, i'iti. General c;altion
with rcdlitt to thli inqutiry,

414. Tvwo diflinguilhableclaf.
les of, 415. Exceptions as to
their chararter, 417. Their
charatcriltic features declrib.
ed, 461. Inilances of theirper.
fevering spced, 462. An anti.
pathy indulrioufly encouraged
between them and the negroes
in America, by the Spaniards,
ii. 369. Their prefentcondi.
tion, 370. How taxed, 571.
Stated lervices demanded from.
them, 372. Modeofexafiing
tilee lervices, 373. How go.
vcrncd, ibid. Protectorofthe
Indians, his function, 34,
Reufons why so fmnall a pro-
*:reis is made in their conver-
nun, 384.
A 'merigo, Vespucci, publiflies

the first written account of the
New World, and hence gave
name to America, i. 149. His
claim as a discoverer examined,
442. Auiaccvana, a female cazique of

Hifi;,aniol:l, her base and cruel
ul;Ic b-,' the Spaniards, i. 1So.

'.!a,'.;,, truipendous height and ex-

tent of that range of miun-
tains, i. 249. Their height
coln pare; d wvith other moun-
ta.in, 44,. Gonzalo Pizarro's
renarilabelc ;xpedition over,
ii. 213.

il.,iml.r iargc, very few found in

A rmerica at it: s'.rst difcovcry, i.
259.
.a-:i,:nts, cause of the imllpclfeIi-

on of tlhe art of navlig:tion a-
meon; tlhem, i. 4. Their geo-
gr.-.p'lici lccnowvledge cxtrcnll-
ly c.hll'niedi 2, 22, 3, 42.1,
426.
lr, t!bi, ;'s, peculiarly attached to

tile ully of geography,

o'
r) ;UoaIs, tile expedition of, why

so

lo famous among the Greeks,

i. 12.

Arithmetic, or computation, the

art of, hardly known to the na-
tive Americans, i. 3 10.
Ajcolino, father, his extraordinary

miflion to the prince of the
Tartars, i. 32.
Asiatic discoveries made by the

Ruffians, i 273.
.J/iento trade, the nature of, ex-

plained, ii. 408. The frauds
in, arid how put an end to,
409, 512.
Atahaulpa, is left by his father

Huafcar his successor in the
kingdom of Quito, ii. 167.
Defeats his brother Huafcar,
and usurps the empire of Pe-
ru, ibid. Sends pres'ents to Pi-
zarro, 170. Visits Pizarro, 173.
Is perfidiously seized by him,
176. Agrees with Pizarro on
a ransom, I77. Is refuted his
liberty, 180. His behaviour
during his confinement, 183.
A form of trial bellowed on
him, 184. Is put to death, 185,
Comparison of authorities re-
lating to his tran fations with,
and treatment by Pizarro,
4a69.

Audience of New Spain, board of,

established by the Emperor
Charles V. ii. 143. Courts of,
their jurifdicion, 356.
AvLria, a Spanifil tax for convoy

to and from America, when
firfl imposed, ii. 5 18. Its rate,
Azorrs, those islands difcovcred

by the Portuguese, i. 50.

B
Bil,/ona, Vafco'Nugnnez de, set-

tles a colony at Santa Maria
on the gulph of Duaricn, i. 1 4.

iz z

Receives intelligence of the
rich country of Peru, zoo. His
characer, 202. Marches a-
cross the Ithmus, 203. Dif-
covers the Southern Ocean,
204. Returns, 205. Is super-
feded in his command by the
appointment of Pedrarias Da-
vila, 207. Is fined by Pedra-
rias for former tranfations,
208. Is appointed lieutenant
governor of the countries on
the South Sea, and marries Pe-
drarias's daughter, 210. Is
arrelted and put to death by
Pedrarias, 211.
Bark, Jesuits, a produstion pe-

culiar to Peru, ii. 393.
Barrere, his description of the

conltrution of Indian houses,
i. 485.
Behring and Tfchirikow, Ruffian

navigators, thought to have
discovered the north-well ex-
tremity of America from the
eastward, i. 275. Uncertainty
of their accounts, 460.
Bizfncazar, governor of St.

Michael, reduces the kingdom
of Quito, ii. 1SS. Is deprived
of his command by Pizarro,
213.
Bezjamin the Jew of Tudela, his

extraordinary travels, i. 31.
Bcrnal/es, instance of the bravery

of the Caribbees, mentioned by,
him, i.'49o.
Blethe'ncourt, John de, a Norman

baron, conquers and pollUilns
the Canary Illands, i. 38.
Birds, an account of those natural

to America, i. 262. The 11 ight
of, often Jhretch to an inlenfe
dii alnce from land, 4.31.
Begcta in America, some account

of the inhabitants of, i. 34t5.
Cau fes of their tame fubmiflion
to tile Spaniards, 3,48. ITheir
2 religious

religious docrines and rites,
386.
Bo.ador, cape, the firif discovery

of, i. 42. Is doubled by the
Portuguese discoverers, +6.
Bo/ie, his account of the Ameri-

can war song, i. 480.
Bovadilla, Francis de, is sent to

Hispaniola to inquire into the
conduct of Columbus, i. 154.
Sends Columbus home in ir-
ons, i55. Is degraded, 158.
161.
Bouigainville, his defence of the

Periplus of Hanno, i. 422.
Bourger, M. his character of the

native Peruvians, i. 467.
Brajil, the coast of, discovered by

Alvarez Cabral, i. 151. Re-
marks on the climate of, 452.
Bridges, Peruvian, delcribed, ii.

491.
B£,oios Ayres, in South America,

some account of that province,
ii. 336.
Bulls papal, of no force inSpanifh

Amleri'a, htefore exainiied and
tlppro\ved bv the royal council
of the Indies, ii. 377. See
Crutzido.
Burial of the dead, American

mode of, i. 388.

C
Cnal/Il, Alvarez., a Portuguese

comnmlnndcr, dilcovcrs the coast
of Brasil, i. I .
Caroa, the hell in qualitv, pro-

duced in the Spanilli American
colonies, ii. 393, The perpa-
ration of chocolate from, de-
rived fi'om the Mexicains, 41 2.
C(,/li., the galcons and flota, re-

moved thither fiomn Scvillc,
ii. .1.01.
Cal/,/riia, tlhe pcninfula of, dif-

covered by Fernando Cortes
ii. 144. The true state of this
country long unknown, 329.
Why depreciated by the Je-
suits, 330. Favourable ac-
count of, given by Don Jo-
feph Galvez, ibid.
Californians, the characEer of, by

P. Venegas, i. 469.
Campeachy, discovered by Cordo.

va, who is repulsed by the na.
tives, i. 239.
Campomanes, Don Pedro Rodri.

guez, character of his political
and commercial writings, ii.
514. His account of the pro-
duce of the Spanilh American
mines, 5zo.
Canary iilands ereced into a

kingdom by pope ClementVI.
i. 38. Are conquered byJohn
de Bethencourt, ibid.
Cannibals, no people ever found

to eat human flelh forfubfill-
ence, though often for revenge,
i. 361. 480.
Canoes, American, the conflruc-

tion of, described, i. 376.
Caraccas, eftabliflment of the

company trading to that coall,
ii. 413. Growth of the trade,
5'13.
Canriec islands, difcovcred b

Columbus in his second voy-
age, i. 114.
Caribhces, their spirit peculiarly

fierce, i. 417. Their cha-
racter by M. de Chanvalon,
468. Probable conjecture as
to the diinjlntion in clharactr
between them and tlhe native
of the larger islands, 491.-
Carini, his extraordinary mifliol

to the prince of the T'aitar,
i. 32.
Cartiha.Fna, tlhe harbour of, tlh

fatif'i and belt fortified of an!'

Ill

in all the Spanilh American
dominions, ii. 339.
Carthaginians, state of commerce

and navigation among, i. 8.
The famous voyages of Hanno
and Himilco, 9.
Cur.vajal, Francisco de, contri-

butes to Vaca de Callro's vic-
tory over young Almagro, ii.
224. Encourages Gonzalo Pi-
zarro to aflume the govern-
ment of Peru, 238. Advises
Pizarro to assume the fover-
eignty of the country, 243. Is
seized by Gafca and executed,
257.
Ca/fillo, Bernal Diaz del, charac-

ter of his Hiitotia Verdadero
de la Conquilla de la Nueva
Efpagna, ii. 444.
Centeno, Diego, revolts from

Gonzalo Pizarro to the vice-
roy of Peru, ii. 240. Is de-
feated by Carvajal, and fecre-
tes himself in a cave, z+2.
Sallies out and seizes Cuzco,
253. Is reduced by Pizarro,
214. Is employed by Gafca
to make discoveries in the re-
gions about the river Plata,
262.
Ch'ntr-alon, M. de, his characer

of the native Caribbees, i. 468.
C(,h.petones, in the Spanil Ame-

rican colonies, who thus dillin-
guifhed, ii. 366.
C(nar.ts 111. king of Spain, clla-

bli hes packet boats between
Spain and the colonies, ii. 1,5
Allows firee trade to the wind-
ward illands, 416. Grants the
colonies a free trade with each
other, 41 .
('1r,/s V. emperor, lfnds Ro-

dlerigo de F1igueroa to Hilipa-
niola, as chief j ludge, to regu-
late the treatment of the In-

dians, i. 225, Causes this sub-
je& to be debated before him,
230. Equips a squadron at
the solicitation of Ferdinand
Magellan, ii. 129. IRcfigi s
his claim on the Moltuccas ;o
the Portuguese, 133. Appoints
Cortes governor of New Spain
135. Rewards him on coming
home, 142. Establishes a board
called the Audience of New
Spain, 143. His confultatins
on American affairs, 225.
Eflablilhes new regulations,
229.
Chili, is invaded by Almagro, ii.

195. How fubjecled by the
Spaniards, 332. Excellence
of its climate and foil, 333.
Cause of its being neglece:i,
334. Profped of its improve-
ment, 335.

Chiquitos, political rfate of that
people, from Fernandez, i. 477.
Chocolate, the use of, derived

from the Mexicans, ii. 412.
Chollda, in Mexico, arrival of

Cortes there, with fomei ac-
count of the to\vn, ii. 46. A
conspiracy againlt Cortes dif-
covered, and the inhabitants
deleroyed, 48.
Cicero, in!tance of his ignorance

in gcogrnphy, i. 426.
Cinloan, political Itate of the

people there, i. 477. Their
mode of living, 484. Are
delitute of all religion, 487.
Extraordinary large grain of
gold found there, ii. 490.
Cintgilla, in the province of So-

nora, late discoveries of rich
mines made there by the Spa-
niards, ii 328. 2 Probable es-
feds of thelei discoveries, 329.
Clement \V. pope, ereds the Ca-

nary Ilands into a king-

dom,

dom, i. 38.
Climates, influenced by a variety

of causes, i. 252. Their ope-
ration on mankind, 414. In-
quiry into the cause of the dif-
ferent degrees of heat in, 450.
Cochineal, an important produc-

tion, almoit peculiar to New
Spain, ii. 393.
Cold, extraordinary predominance

of, in the climates of America,
i. 252. Causes of this pecu-
liarity, 253.
Colonies, Spanish American, view

of the policy and trade of, ii.
345. Depopulation the firtl
effect of them, ibid. Causes
of this depopulation, 346.
The frall-pox very fatal to,
348. General idea of the Spa-
nifh policy in, 352. Early in-
terpofition of the regal autho-
rity in, 353. An exclusive
trade the firfi object in, 360.
Compared with those of anci-
ent Greece and Rome, 361.
The great reftridtions they are
subjet to, 362. Slow progress
of their population from Eu-
rope, 363. Are discouragcd
by the Itate of property there,
ibid. And by the nature of
their ecclefialical policy, 365.
The various clafles of people
in, 366. Ecclelialltical conlti-
tution of, 376. Form and
endowments of the church
there, 377. Pernicious ef'rets
of monatfic institutions there,
378. Character of the ccle-
iaftics there, 379. Produfti-
ons of; 387. lhe mines, ibid.
Those of Potofi and Saco-
tecas, 388. The (pirit with
which they are vworkcd, 390.
Fatal eflects 'of this ardour,
391. Other commodities that

compose the commerce of, 393
Amazing increase of horned
cattle there, 394. Advanta-
ges which Spain formerly de-
rived from them, ibid. Why
the fame advantages are not
till received, 396. Guarda
cofdas employed to check the
contraband trade in, 409.
The use of register ships intro-
duced, 410. And galeons laid
aside, 411. Company of the
Caraccas infituted, 413. Es-
tabliflument of regular packet
boats to, 415. Free trade
permitted between them, 418.
New regulations in the go-
vernment of, 420. Reforma-
tion of the courts of justice,
ibid. New difiribution of go-
vernments,' ibid. A fourth
viceroyalty eftablilhed, 421.
Attempts to reform domestic
policy, 423. Their tradewith
the Philippine islands, 426.
Revenue derived fiom, by
Spain, 429. Expence of ad-
niniftration there, 432. State
of population in, 496. The
number of monafleries there,
505. See Mexico, Peru, &c.
ColumbLzs, Bartholomew, is tent

by his brother Christopher to
negociate with Henry VII.
king of England, i. 70. The
misfbrtunes of his voyage, 73.
Follows his brother to I-lfpa-
niola, 123. Is velced with
the adminiiration of affairs
there by his brother on his
return to Spain, 131. Founds
the town of St. Domingo, 139.
Colub11,/.us, CIttiiloptlier, birth and

education of, i. 59. His early
voyages, 60. Mariies and tlt-
tles at Liflon, '61. His gco-
graphical rIcleclio;, 63. Con-

ceivcs

ceives the idea of making dif-
coveries to the westward, 65.
Offers his services to the Ge-
noefe senate, 67. Cause of his
overtures being rejeEted in
Portugal, 69. Applies to the
courts of Castile and England,
ibid. His proposal, how treated
by the Spanish geographers,
71. Is patronised by Juan Pe-
rez, 74. His proposals again
rejected, 75. Is invited by If-
abella, and engaged in the
Spanish service, 79. Prepa-
rations for his voyage, 80.
The amount of his equipment
81. Sails from Spain, 82.
His vigilant attention to all
circumitances during his voy-
age, 84. Apprehensions of
his crew, 85. His addrels in
quieting their cabals, 87. In-
dications of their approaching
land, 89. An island discover-
ed, g9. He lands, 91. His
interview with the natives, 92.
Names the island San Salva-
dore, 93. Prosecutes his dif-
coveries southward, 94. Dif-
covers and lands on the island
of Cuba, 95. Dilcovers Hlif-
paniola, 96. Suffers flipwreck
but is saved by the Indians,
99. Builds a fort, 102. Re-
turns to Europe, 104. His ex-
pedient to preserve the memo-
ry of his dilcovcries during a
lil)rn, Io6. Arrives at the A-
zores, ibid. Arrives at Lilbon,
107. Hi-s reception in Spain,
loS. His audience with Fcr-
clinand and lfabella, 109. His
cquipment for a fecondl voy-

I,'c, x 12. Discovers the Ca-

ril,,icc islands, 114. Fiids his
colony on Hifspaniolat dellroy-
cd, 115. Builds a city, which

he calls Isabella, 117. Visits
the interior parts of the coun-
try, 19. His men difcon-
tented and fatious, 120. Dif-
covers the island of Jamaica,
122. Meets his brother Bar-
tholomew at Isabella, 123.
The natives ill used by his
men, and begin to be alarmed,
24. He defeats the Indians,
127. ExaCts tribute from
them, I28. Returns to Spain
to juRfify his conduc, 131. Is
furnithed with a more regular
plan for colonization, 133.
His third voyage, 136. Dif-
covers the island of Trinidad,
137. Discovers the continent
of America, 138. State of
Hispaniola on his arrival, 139.
Composes the mutiny of Rol-
dan and his adherents, 142.
Is distressed by the fafious be-
haviouir of his men, 152.
Complaints carried to Spain
againll him, 153. Is sent
home in irons, I55. Clears
his conduct, but is not reftor-
ed to his authority, 157. His
solicitations neglected, I61.
Forms new schemes of disco-
very, 162. Engages in a fourth
voyage, 164. His treatment
at Iifpaniola, ibid. Searches
after a paaflge to the Indian
ocean, 166. Is shipwrecked on
the coast of Jamaica, 167. His
artifice to secure the fricindlhip
of the Indians, 170. Is deli-
vered, and arrives at Hifpani-
ola, 173. Returns to Spain,
17+. His death, 175. His
right to the original discovery
of Amcrica defended, 435.
Colmbus, Don Diego, fies out

his claims to his father's pri-
vilcges, i. 188. Marries and

goes

goes over to Hispaniola, 189.
Eftablifies a pearl fimhery at
Cubagua, 190. Projets the
concueit of Cuba, 196. His
meaiures thwarted by Ferdi-
nand, 213. Returns ro Spain,

2I4.
C:.ntmcrc, the ara from which its

coni.nmcacemnent is to be dated,
i. 2. Motives to an intercourse
among diltant nations, 4. Still
flourihcd in the eastern empire
after the subversion of the wef-
tern, z6. Revival of, in Eu-
rope, zS.
Comnajs mariner's, navigation

extended r:ore by the inventi-
on of, than by all the efforts
of preceding ages, i. 36. By
whom invented, ibid.
Condamine, M. his account of the

country at the s.:ot of the An-
des, in South America, i. 454
His remarks on the characer
of the native Americans, 467.
Congo, the kingdom of, discover-

ed by the Portugueze, i. 52.
Co.:iantinople, the consequence of

removing the feat of the Ro-
man empire to, i. 25. Conti-
nued a commercial city after
the extinction of the wellern
empire, 26. Became the chief
mart ofltaly, 29.
CorAlva, IF ralcifco Hernandez,

discovers Yucatan, i. 238. Is
repulsed at Campeachy, and
returns to Cuba, 239.
Corita, Alonzo, his obfervatioln:

on the contraband trade of the
Spanilh colonies, ii. 425. Cha-
rader of his American nle-
moirs, 477.
Cortes, Fernlando, his birth, edu-

cation, and clhrader, ii. 3. Is
by Vclafquez appointed coIn-
nmander of the armament lit-
ted out by him againlt New

Spain, 4. Velasquez becomes
jealous of him, 6. Velasquez
lends orders to deprive him of
his commiflion, and lay him
under arrest, 7. Is proteced
by his troops, 8. The amount
of his forces, 9. Reduces the
Indians at Tabasco, I . Ar-
rives at St. Juande Ulua, ibid.
His interview with two Mexi-
can commanders, 13. Sends
presents to Montezuma, i5.
Receives others in return, 16.
His schemes, 21. Eftablifies
a form of civil government,24.
Resigns his commiflion under
Velasquez, and afinumes the
command in the king's name,
27. His fiiendfllip courted by
the Zempoallans, 28. Buildsa
fort, 30. Concludes a formal
alliance with several caziques,
ibid. Discovers a conspiracy
among his men, and deltroys
his Ihips, 33. Advances into
the country, 35. ,Is opposed
by the Tlafcalans, 37. Con-
cludes a peace with them, 42.
His rafli zeal, 44. Proceeds to
Cholula, 46.- Difcoversacon-
fpiracy aga:iint him here, and
dclhroys the inhabitants, 48.
Approaches in light of the ca-
pital city of Mexico, 5o. His
lirlt interview with Montezu-
m1a, 51. His anxiety at his li-
tuation in the city of Mexico,
6. Seizes Mlonlezumlia, 60.
Orders him to be fetterced, 62.
Rec;laiOns of his coil(utd, 63.
'revails on Montezulma to owl
himnfelf a vaflAtl to the Spanilh
crown, 66. Amloult land di-
vision of his trcafure, 7. En-
rages the Mexicans by his i1a'
)prIudcnt zeal, 70. An arnli-
inent Icilt by Velafquel z to fil-
i)crledc li im, 71.. His lielil'-;

tions
X.

tions on this event, 76. Ad-
vances to meet Narvaez, 79.
Defeats Narvaez, and takes
him prisoner, 82. Gains over
the Spanish soldiers to his in-
terest, 83. Returns to Mexico,
85. His improper condut on
his arrival, 86. Is resolutely
attacked by the Mexicans, 87.
Attacks them in turn without
success, 88. Death of Monte-
zuma, 9g. His extraordinary
escape from death, 91. Aban-
dons the city of Mexico, 92. Is
attacked by the Mexicans, 93.
His great losses in the encoun-
ter, 94. Difficulties of his re-
treat, 95. Battle of Otumba,
97. Defeats the Mexicans, 98.
Mutinous ipirit of his troops
1o0. Reduces the Tepeacans,
102. Is strengthened by feve-
ral reinforcements, 104. Re-
turns to Mexico, lo5. Eflab-
liihes his head-quarters at Te-
zeuco, 107. Reduces, or con-
ciliates the surrounding coun-
try, 108. Cabals among his
troops, log. His prudence in
fupprefling them, 11o, Builds
and launches a fleet of brigan-
tines on the lake, 113. Bcfieges
Mexico, 115. Makes a grand
afflult to take the city. by
storm, but is repulsed, 118.
Evades the Mexican prophe-
cy, 121 .Ta\kes Guatimozin
priloner, 124. Gains poflcf-
lion of the city, ibid. And of
the whole empire, 1z7. l)efeats
another attempt to, ifperlede
him in his conmand, 134. Is
appointed governor of New
Spain, 13g, His lchemes and
arrangeiments, 136. Cruel
treatment of the natives, 137.
lIis conlduId Lfbjcted to in-

o l.,1. A a

quiry, 140. Returns to Spain
tojultify himself, i41. Is re-
warded 1by the emperor Charles
V. 142. Goes back to Mexico
with limited powers, 143. Dif-
covers California, 144. Re-
turns to Spain, and dies, ibid.
Inquiry into the nature of his
letters to the Emperor Charles
V. 443. Authors who wrote of
his conqleft of New Spain,
144 '
Council of the Indies, its power,

ii. 358.
Creols, in the Spanini American

colonies, characcr of, ii. 367.
Croglan, colonel George, his ac-

count of the discovery of the
bones of large extinct ipecies of
animals in North America, i.
456.
Crifades to the Holy Land, the

great political advantages de-
rived from, by the European
nations, i. 30.
Crijado, bulls of, published re-

gularly every two years in the
Spanish colonies, ii. 430. Prices
of, and amount of the sale at
the latd publication, 515.
Cuba, the island of, discovered

by Chrillopher Columbus, i.
95. Is failed round by Ocam-
po, 188. The conquest of, un-
dertaken by Diego Velasquez,
196. Cruel treatment ofthe
cazique Hatuey, and his re-
partee to a fi'iar, 197. Colum-
bus's enthufialtic delfiription of
a harbour in, 43 . The tobac-
co produced there, the fineR ill
all America, ii. 393.
Clthagua, a pearl filhery ellablifl-

ed there, i. 190.
Cumlana, the natives of, revenge

their ill-treatment by the Spa-
niards, i. 3. Thle country
a a a

dIclol.itcd

desolated by Diego Ocampo,
235. Cuf/o,the capital of the Peruvian

enmpire, founded by Manco
Capac, ii. 164. Is seized by
Pizarro, i88. Is besieged by
the Peruvians, 198. Isfurpriz-
ed by Almagro, o01. Is reco-
vered and pillaged by the Pi-
z:!.rros, 207 Was the only city
in all Peru, 322.

D.
Danicing, the love of, a favourite

pa7ion among the Americans,
1. 393.
Darien, the iifhmus of, described,

i. 201. The iincreafe of fettle-
ment there, obhirudted by the
no.xioufilefs of the climate, ii.
3)8.
Dc Solis, his unfortunate expedi-

tion up the river Plata, i. 212.
De Sclis, An tonio, character of

hi; Hiloria de iA Conquilta de
Mexico, ii. 445.
LD'l'juilc.'he, prince, viceroy of

iPeru, his vigorous maciflres for
reltraiiinin the excclties of the
regui:ir clergy therc, ii. 3,z.
Rendered ineli'ictcial, 383.
Di'z,, BI; tiloioomcv, diico er:, the

C'ape c:i(God Hope, i. i5.
D) o*j.o,'rir's, the difl'.rcncc between

thoi l nmade by land, and tlioft
by ica, Htated, i. 425.
D/.z-u:'/l, liih (;.hjietion to the Pe-

riplus of H-anno exploded, i.
4Z 1 ·
Domitgo, St. on the island of

Hilpaniola, fotinded by Bar-
tlo'olnevw Colulnbus, i. 139.
Dou/ii-cl/s, tli(le in His paniola

publicl!i rcInonllra-te a.gaint thc
crut l trIc.ati tlltn c(f tihe .ndiai ns,
i. ' 1 5. See La (,itsrs .
Drunkenriar, ,lrong propensity of

the Americans to indulge in,
i. 396.

E.
Earth, the globe of, how divi.

ded into zones by the ancients,
i. 23.
Egjptians, ancient, gtate of com-

merce and navigation among
them, i. 5.
El Dorado, wonderful reports of

a country so called, made by
Francis Orellana, ii. zi5.
Elephant, that animal peculiar to

the torrid zone, i. 456.
EJiuimalx Indians, resemblances

between them and their neigh-
bours the Greenlanders, i.
27 3. Some account of, 362.
485.
Eugene IV. pope, grants to the

Portuguese an exclusive right
to all the countries.they should
discover, fiom Cape Non to
the conrinent of India, i. 49.
Eur I:p/, how afficted by the dif-

memberment of the Roman
ei-pi r by the barbarous nati-
tins, 1. 2 . Revival of com-
merce a.id navigation in, 28.
I'olitical advantages derived
fiom the crusades, 30.

F.
.Frdi,iand kking of Castile. See

Coiul:In s and Jfa/'rlin. Turns
his attention at l]cgth to the
rcgulation of A merican afi'lils,
i. 1 I,. Don Dielo dc C-
luiibiua ftles out his filther's
claims aga;inll him, 188. IErr'
two governilentts on the contl-
)lntt of IAn .eic;, 1y2. Sends
a flcct to )Daribnl, and fIl'lcr-
fcdc!s 11nlboa;, 207. Ap]('int
B;3l b,a l ieutenan t-governi(l of
the c(luntriecs on the South Sea,

210

zio. Sends Dias de Solis to
discover a western paifage to
the Moluccas, 212. Thwarts
the measures of Diego Colum-
bus, 213. His decree con-
cerning the treatment of the
Indians, 216.
Fernandez, Don Diego, chara&er

of his Hiftoria del Peru, ii. 465.
Fernandez, P. his description of

the political Hate of the Chi-
quitos, i. 475.
Figueroa, Roderigo de, is ap-

pointed chief judge of Hifpa-
niola, with a commifflon to
examine into the treatment of
the Indian natives, i. 225.
Makes an experiment to deter-
mine the capacity of the In-
dians, 234.
Florida,difcovered by Juan Ponce

de Leon, i. 197. The chiefs
there hereditary, 34 1. Ac-
count of, from Alvar Nu gnez
Cabeca de Vaca, i. 472.
Flota, Spanifi, tome account of,

1i. 401.
Fonsrca, bishop ofBadajos, minis-

ter for Indian affairs, obllruts
the plans of colonization and
diicover.y formed by Colum-
bus, i. 128. 136. Patronizes
the expedition of Alonzo de
Ojeda, 148.

G.

Galeons, Spanifl, the nature and

purpoe of thefc vessels, ii. 4o .
Arrangemcnt of their voyage,
40Z,

Galvcz, Don Jofcph, sent to dif-

cover the true ltate of Califor-
nia, ii. 330.
Gama, Valco cle, his voyage for

ifcovory, i 144. l)oul)les
the Cape of Good Hope, 145.

A aa a z

Anchors before the city of Mc-
linda, ibid. Arrives at Cale-
cut in Malabar, 146.
Gaming, tlrange propensity of the

Americans to, i. 395.
Ganges, erroneous ideas of the

ancients as to the position of

/ that river, i. 425.
Garca, Pedro de la, sent to Peru

as president of the court of
Audience in Lima, ii. 246.
His charaAer and moderation,
247. The powers he was
veiled with, 248. Arrives at
Panama, 249. Acquires pof-
felion of Panama with the fleet
and forces there, 251. Ad-
vances towards Cuzco, 255.
Pizarro's troops desert to him,
2-6. His moderate use of the
victory, 257. Devises empoyv-
ment for his soldiers, z61. His
division of the country anlong
his followers, 262. Refores
order and government, 263.
His reception at his return to
Spain, 264.
G,'nimns, in'tance of his ignor-

ance in geography, i. 427.
Geogsrapby, the knowleJge of, ex-

tremnely confined among the
ancients, i. 22. Became a fa-
vourite 1tudy among the Ara-
bians, 27.
Giants, the accounts of, in our

early travellers, unconfirmed
by recent discoveries, i. 35.
464.
Gioia, Flavio, the inventor of the

mariner's compass, i. 36.
Globe, its division into zones by

the ancients, i. 23.
Go]l, why the firil metal with

which man was acquainted, i.
3341. Extraordinary large grain
of, found in the mines at Ci-
naloa, ii. 49),.

Gonlnrar,

Gconara, chara&er of his Cronica

de la Nueva Efpagna, ii. 444.
Good Hope, cape of, discovered by

Bartholomew Diaz, i. 55.
Governiimet no visible form of,

among the native Americans,
i. 340. Exceptions, 343.
GIn CiaSco, account of the me-

thod of making war among the
natives of, from Lozano, i.
478.
Granada, new kingdom of, in A-

merica, by whom reduced to
the Spanilh dominion, ii. 341.
Its climate and produce, 342.
A viceroy lately eltablilhed
there, 355.
Grceks, ancient, progress of navi-

gation and discovery among
them, i. ii. Their commer-
cial intercourse with other na-
tions very limited, 13.
Greenland, its vicinity to North

An-erica, i. 278.
Grijal.va, Juan de, sets out from

Cuba on a voyage of discovery,
i. 240. Di)iovers and gives
name to New Spain, 241. His
reasons for not planting a co-
lonv in his new\ly (diicovercd
lands, 243.
Guarda Collas, employed by

Spain to check illicit trade in
the Ame;ican colonies, ii. 409.
C(intiNma/a, the indigo there til-

perior to any in America, ii.
393. (;Ciatifiozsin, nephew and fon-in-

law of Montezulma, fucceds
Quetlalvca in the kingdom of
Mexico, ii. . e. Rpulics thle
attacks of the Spaniards in
itorming the city of Mexico,
118. Is ta.ken prifoier by
Cortes, 124. 1i; tortured to
di lcover his trcafure, 126. Is
h.iiigd, 13S.

Guiana, Dutch, cause of the ex.

ceffive fertility of the foil there,
i. 459.

H
Hanno, his Periplus defended,

with an account of his voyage,
i. 421.
Hatuey, a cazique of Cuba, his

cruel treatment, and memo-
rable rapartee to a Franciscan
friar, i. 197.
Hawkejwvorth's voyages, account

of New Holland, and the in-
habitants from, i. 474.
Heat, the different degrees of,

in the old and new continents
accounted for, i. 450. Eitimat.
ed, 458.
Henry, prince of Portugal, his

characer and studies, i. 43.
Expeditions formed by his
order, 44. Applies for a pa-
pal grant of his new difcove-
ries, 48. His death, 50.
Herrada, Juan de, affaflinates

Francis Pizarro, ii. 219. Dies,
223.
Hcrrera, the best hiltorian of the

conqueit of New Spain, ii.
446. His account of Orrel-
lana's voyage, 474.
HiJp/aniola, the island of, disco-

vered by Chriltopher Colum-
b1us, i. 96. His tranfations
with the natives,97. A colo-
ny left there by Columbus,
103. The colony detlroye(d,
iS5. Columbus builds a city
called liabella, 117. Then;l-
tives ill-used, and begin to be
alarmed, 124. Are defeated
by tlle Spaniards, 127. Tri-
bute exaecd from them, 1i.
''lhey scheme to flarve die
Spaniards, 129. St. Domilgo
founded by Bartholomew (Co

1 umbus

lIambus, 139. Columbusfent
home in irons by Bovadilla,
i 5. Nicholas de Ovanda ap-
pointed governor, 158. Sum-
mary view of the condut of
the Spaniards towards the na-
tives of, 179. Unhappy fate
of Anacoana, 8o. Great
produce from the mines there,
182.- The inhabitants dimi-
nilh, 185. The Spaniards re-
cruit them by trepanning the
natives of the Lucayos, 186.
Arrival of Don Diego de Co-
lumbus, 189. The natives of,
almolt extirpated by slavery,
195. 214. Controversy con-
cerning the treatment of them,
215. Columbus's account of
the humane treatm'ent he re-
ceive dfrom the natives of, 43 2.
Curious instance of fuperiti-
tion in the Spanish planters
there, 458.
Ho]l uirn, Pedro Alvarez, erets

tie royal llandard in Peru, in
opposition to the younger Al-
magro, ii. 23. Vaca de Caf-
tro arrives and affuines the
comlmand, ibid.
Homer, his account of the naviga-

tiln of the ancient Greeks,
i. 12.
Honduras, the value of that coun-

try, owing to its production
of the logwood-tree, ii. 331.
Hlorc:d cattle, amazing increase

of them in Spanilh America,
i. 394.
tllo,;s, aflonifinnent and miltakes

of the Mexicans at the first
light of them ii. 5 1. Expe-
dient of C;, Peruvians to ren-
der them incapable of adion,
1 74
IlIilh,,I Capac Iinca of Peru, lhis

hllarI'lcr andl fmnlily, ii. 166.

Huafcar Capac, Inca of Peru,

disputes his brother Atahual-
pa's succession to Quito, ii.
167. Is defeated and taken
prisoner by Atahualpa, ibid.
Solicits the assistance of Pizar-
ro againfI his brother, 169. Is
put to death by order of Ata-
-hualpa, I78.

I.
Jamaica, discovered by Chrifto-

pher Columbus, i. 122.
7erone, St. three monks of that

order sent by Cardinal Xime-
nes to Hispaniola, to regulate
the treatment of the Indians, i.
220. Their conduc under this
comrnmiion, 222. Are recalled,
225.
Jesuits, acquire an absolute do-

minion over California, ii.
329. Their motives for depre-
ciating the country, 330.
7Je.ws, ancient, irate of commerce

and navigation among them,
i.7.
Incas of Peru, received origin of

their empire, ii. 165. 306.
Their empire founded both in
religion and policy, 307. See
Peru.
India, the motives of Alexander

the Great in his expcdition.t ,
i. 15. The commerce with,
how carried on in ancient
times, 19. And when arts be-
gan to revive in Europe, 28.
The fir(l voyage made round
the Cape of Good Hope, 145.
Indians in Spanifi America. See

.jimericans.
Indies, Welt, why Columbtis's

di coveries were co named, i.
lreInccnt IV. pope, hiscxtraordi-

na;ry

nary mission to the prince of
the Tartars, i. 32.
Inqufi/tion, court of, when and by

whom firtl introduced into Por-
tugal, i. 429.
Infeis and reptiles, why so nu-

merous and noxious in Ame-
rica, i. 26i.
John I. king of Portugal, the

first who sent mhips to explore
the western coasts of Africa, i.
41. His fonprince Henry en-
gages in these attempts, 43.
John II. king of Portugal, pa-

tronifes all attempts towards
discoveries, i. 52. Sends an
embassy to Abyssinia, 55. His
ungenerous treatment of Co-
lumbus, 69.
Iron, the reason why savage na-

tions were unacquainted with
this metal, i 334.
Isabella, queen of Castile, is ap-

plied to by Juan Perez in be-
half of Christopher Columbus,
i. 74. Is again applied to by
Quintanilla and Santangel,
77. Is prevailed on to equip
him, 78. Dies, 174. Her real
motives for encouraging dif-
coveries in America, ii. 349.
I/abella, the city of, in Hilpani-

ola, built by Chriflopher Co-
lumbus, i. 117.
Italy, the first country in Europe,

where civilization and arts re-
vived after the overthrow of the
Roman empire, i. 28. The
commercial spirit of, acivc and
onterprifing, 29.

L.
Ladrone islands, discovered by

Ferdinand Magellan, ii. 131.
Lakes, amazing size of those in

North America, i. 250.

Las Casas, Bartholomew, returns

from Hispaniola. to solicit the
cause of the enslaved Indians at
the court of Spain, i. zi9. Is
sent back with powers by car-
dinal Ximenes, 220. Returns
dissatisfied, 223. Procures a
new commission to be sent over
on this subjed, 225. Recom-
mends the scheme of supplying
the colonies with negroes, 226.
Undertakes a new colony, 228.
His conference with the bilhop
of Darien before the Emperor
Charles V. 230. Goes to A-
merica to carry his schemes in-
to execution, 232. Circum-
fiances unfavourable to him,
234. His final miicarriage,
235. Revives his reprefentati-
ons in favour of the Indians,
at the deiire of the emperor,ii.
227. Composes a treatise on
the deftruftion of America,
228.
Leon, Pedro Cieza de, character

of his Chronica del Peru, ii.
465.
Levy, his description of the cou-

rage and ferocity of the Tou-
pinambos, i. 479.
Lima, the city of, in Peru, foun-

ded by Pizarro, ii. 194.
Logwood, the commodity that

gives importance to the pro-
vinces of Honduras and Yuca-
tan, ii. 331. Policy of the Spa-
niards to defeat the Englill
trade in, 332.
Louis, St. king of France, his em-

bafly to the chan of the'Tar-
tars, i. 33.
Lozano, his account of the me-

thod of making war among
the natives of Gran Chaco, i.
478.
Luiue, Hernando de, a priell, as

fociatce

fociates with Pizarro in his Pe-
ruvian expedition, ii. 150.

M
Madeira, the island of, firt dif-

covered, i. 45.
Madoc, prince of North Wales,

story of his voyage and disco-
very of North America exam-
ined, i. 437.
Mlagellan, Ferdinand, his account

of the gigantic size of the Pa-
tagonians, i. 303. Theexift-
ence of this gigantic race yet
to be decided, 305. 464. His
introduction to the court of
Castile, ii. I28. Is equipped
with a squadron for a voyage
of discovery, 1z9. Sails
through the famous strait that
bears his name, 130. Disco-
vers the Ladrone and Philip-
pine islands, 131. Is killed,
ibid.
lMaglnet, its property of attracting
iron known to the ancients,
but not its polar inclination,
i. 4. Extraordinary advan-
tages resulting from this dif-
covery, 36.
Malo St. account of its commerce

with Spanifl America, ii. 407.
Malnco Capac, fownder of the

Peruvian empire, account of,
ii. 164. 3o6.
!,ii,devzili,, Sir John, his caftern
tr;vels, with a character of his
wvritings, i. 3_.
Manila, the colony of, ellablifli-

cd by Philip 1I. of Spain, ii.
426. Tlrade between, and
Soitli Ameriica;, 427.
KRh,,;,/,', their disposition and
I1imnnler formed by their situ-
:tilln, i. 267. HIence Icfnil-
lal:incc tobe traced in very
dlitia t tlatLes without coninmu-

nication, 268. Have uniform-
ly attained the greatef per-
fecion of their nature in tem-
perate regions, 415.
Marco Polo, the Venetian, his

extraordinary travels in the
East, i. 34.
Mareft Gabriel, his account of

the country between the Illi-
nois and Machillimakinac, i.
474.
Marina, Donna, a Mexican

slave, her history, ii. 12.
Marinuts Tyrius, his erroneus po-

fition of China, i. 43o.
Marrtyr, Peter, his sentiments on

the firfl discovery of America,
i. 440.
Mef/izos, in the Spanifl American

colonies, dillin&ion between
them and Mulattoes, ii. 368.
Metals, useful, the original na-

tives of America totally unac-
quainted with, i. 334,
Mexicans, their account of their

own origin, compared with
laterdifcoveries, i. 280. Def-
criptions of their hiltorical
pictures, ii. 482. Various ex-
aggerated accounts of the
numbers of human victims fa-
crificed by them, 487. Their
language furnilhed with ref-
peAful terminations for all its
words, 478. How they contri-
buted to the support ofgovern-
ment, 479.
Mexico, arrival of Fernando Cor-

tes on the coall of; ii. I. His
interview with two Mexican
oficers, '13. Information sent
to Molollezulinla, with some
Spa.nili presents, 15. Monte-
zllma fends presents to Cortes,
\ith orders not to ;,pproacl
his capital, 16. State of the
em pireat that time, 17. The
Zlmpoallons court the fiiend-

lhip

ship of Cortes, z8. Several ca-
ziques enter into alliance with
Cortes, 30. Charadcer of the
natives o Tlafcala, 36. T'he
TIafcalans reduced to sue for
peace, 42. Arrival of Cortes
at the capital city, 51. The
city described, 5 2. Montezu-
ma acknowledges hinfelf a
vassal to the Spanith crown, 66.
Amount of the treasure col-
lected by Cortes, 68. Reasons
of gold being found in such
finall quantities, 68. The
Mexicans enraged by the im-
prudent zeal cf Cortes, 70.
Attack Alvarado during the
absence of Cortes, 84. Their
resolute attack on Cortes when
he returned, 87. Death of
Montezuma, go. The city
abandoned by Cortes, 93.
Battle of Otumba, 97. The
Tepeacans reduced, 12o. Pre-
parations of the Mexicans
againit the return of Cortes,
lo0. Cortes besieges the city
with a fleet on the lake, 115.
The Spaniards repulled in
florming the city, I18. Gua-
timozin taken priloner, 124.
Cortes aipointed governor,
135. IHis schemes and arrange-
nlents, 136. Inhuman treat-
inent of the natives, 137. Re-
ception of the new regulations
there, 231. A retrolpec into
the form of government, po-
licy, and arts in, 267. Our
information concerning, very
imperfedt, 270. Origin of the
monarchy, 271. Number and
grcatnefs of the cities, 275.
Mechanical profcllions there
diflinguiflcd from each other,
276. DillinAion ofrank;i, 2 7.
Political inltitutions, z79.

Power and splendour of their
monarchs, z82. Orderofgo-
vernment, ibid. Provision fcr
the support of it, 283. Police
of, ibid. Their arts, z84.
Their paintings, 286. Their
method of computing time,
290. Their wars continual
and ferocious, i&id. Their fu
neral rites, 292. Imperfetion
of their agriculture, ibid.
Doubts concerning the extent
of the empire, 293. Little in-
tercourfe among its several
provinces, 294. Ignorance of
money, 295. State of their
cities, 296. Temples and o-
ther public buildings, 297.
Religion of, 302. Causes of
the depopulation of this coun-
try, 346. The small pox very
fatal there, 348. Number of
Indian natives remaining there
351. Lilt and charaEter of
those authors who wrote ac-
counts of the conquell of, 444.
Defcrivtion of the aquedut
for the supply' of the capital
city, 480. See Colonies.
Michael, St. the gulph of, in the

South Sea, dicovered and
named by Balboa, i. 204.
The colony of, cltablilhed by
Pizarro, ii. 1 3.
Migrations of mankind, why firl

made by land, i. I.
Mind, human, theellorts of, pro.

portioned to the wants of the
body, i. 314.
Mines of South Amnerica, the

great inducement to populati-
onl, ii. 327. Some account of,
387. 'heir produce, 389.
The spirit with which they air
worked, 39o. latal c1lettsof
this ;ardor, 391'. vidience of
tle pcrnicious lct'ics us l;bou-

-i"£

ing in them, 500. Of Mexico,
total produce of,to the Spanish
revenue, 517. 519.
Molucca Islands, the Spanish

claims on, fold by the Em-
peror Charles V. to the Por-
tuguefe, ii. 133.
Mcnatjic institutions, the pernici-

ous effects of, in the Spanish
American colonies, ii. 378.
Number of convents there, 505.
Monjoons, the periodical courfc of,

when discovered by navigators,
i. 19.
Montlf/io, a Dominican preacher

at St. Domingo publicly re-
monftrates againfl the cruel
treatment of the Indians, i.
215. Montezuma, the first intelligence

received by the Spaniards of
this prince i. 242. Receives
intelligence of the arrival of
Fernando Cortes in his domi-
nions, ii. 15. His presents to
Cortes, 16. Forbids him to
approach his capital, 17. State
of his empire at this time, ibid.
His charader, 18. His per-
plexity at the arrival of the
Spaniards, 19. His timid ne-
gociations with Cortes, 20.
His scheme for defr-oving Cor-
tes at Cholula discovered, 47.
His irrefol Lte conduc, 50. His
firtl interview with Cor.es, 51.
Is seized by Cortes and con-
fined to the Spanilh quarters,
6o. Is fettered, 62. Ac-
knowledges himself a vaflia to
tle Spanitli crown, 66. Re-
mains inflexible with regard
to religion, 7o. Circumltances
of his death, go. Account of
o gold cup of his, in England,
ilhIn,/o,,, in the Spanifli Ameri-

VOL. 11. C

can colonies explanation of this
diftintion, ii. 368.

N.
Nazrvaez, Pamphilo, is sent by

Velasquez with an armament
to Mexico, to supersede Cortes,
ii. 74. Takes possession of
Zempoalla, 79. Is defeated
and taken prisoner by Cortes,
82. How he carried rn his
correspondence with Montezu-
ma, 457.
Natcbez, an American nation,

their political inifitutions, i.
344. Causes of their tame
fubmiilion to the Spaniards,
348. Their religious dotrines,
385.
Navigation, the arts of, very

slowly improved by mankind,
i. 2. The knowledge of, prior
to commercial intercourse, ibid.
Imperfeaions of among the
ancients, 4. More improved
by the invention of the mari-
ner's conipafs, than by all the
efforts of preceding ages, 36.
The firll naval discoveries un-
dertaken by Portugal, 40.
Negroes, their peculiar situation

under the Spanifil dominion in
America, ii. 369.
Nezufoundland, its situation def-

cribed, i. 449.
Ne,.wlolland, tbme account of the

country and inhabitants, i. 474.
.Nenw Spain, discovered and na:m-

ed by Juan de Grijalva, i. 241.
See Mexico.
Nigno, Alonfo, his voyage to A-

mcrica, i. 150.
Nor-twgliansi , might in ancient

times have migrated to, and
colonized America, i. 279.
439.
b 1)b i IIgne

Ntg!ez. Vela, Blasco, appointed

viceroy of Peru, to enforce the
new regulations, ii. 231. His
character, 234. Commits Va-
ca de Caltro to prison, 235.
Diflenfions between him and
the court of Audience, 237. Is
confined, 238. Recovers his
liberty, 239. Resumes his
command, z24. Is pursued by
Gonzalo Pizarro, 241. Is
defeated and killed by Pizarro,
242.

0.
Ocampo, Diego, sent with a fqua-

dron from Hispaniola to defo-
late the country of Cumana, i.
233. 235.
Ocamjo, Sebaltian de, first fails

round Cuba, and discovers it
to be an island, i. 188.
Ocean, though adapted to facili-

ta te the intercourse between
di Itant countries continued
l]r.. a formi(dable barrier, i. i.
S., Conzpri;' and A;aL'igation.
Oy/ea', Alonzo de, his private

expedition to the Welt Indies,
i. 148. Iis licond voyage,
I'c). Obtnins a government
on thle con tinenl t, 192.
Ohindt', 'Father Blthatolomew de,

check' the ra;h zeal of Cortes
at ''lal>f;li in Mexico, ii. 4.'
Is ifcnt by Cortes to ncgociate
with Narva.i, ,,77.
Or,'i/ltHI,, Fr;ancis, is appoinlted to

the command of a bl)rk built
1b' (;onzailo Iiz.arro, and dc-
fer'r, im, ii. 214. Sail down
tlhe Mi; gnllon. 215. keturns
t. Spuain vith a report ot woln-
derfl'l difcove ie:., i/Hil. Her-
Icr.i's accouIIt of hiis vo age,
474'

Orgognez, commands Almagro's

party against the Pizarros, and
is defeated and killed by them,
ii. 206.
Orinoco, the great river of, disco.

vered by Christopher Colum.
bus, i. 138. The amazing
plenty of fish in, 471. Strange
method ofchufing a captain,
among the Indian tribes on the
banks of, i. 363.
Otahcite, the inhabitants of, ig.

norant of the art of boiling
5water, i. 486.
Otumba, battle of, between Cor-

tes and the Mexicans, ii. 97.
Ovarndo, Nicholas de, is sent go-

vernor to Hispaniola, i. 159.
His prudent regulations, 161.
Refuies admifflon to Colum-
bus, on his fourth voyage, 164.
His ungenerous behaviour to
Columbus on his shipwreck,
169. 171. Receives him at
length and fends him home,
173. Engages in a war with
the Indians, 178. His cruel
treatment of them, 179. En-
courages cultivation and ma-
nufaLtures, 183. His method
of trepanning the natives ofthe
Lucayos, 186. Is recalled,
189.

P.
Pacific Ocean, why, and by whom

o inamed, ii. 131.
Packet boats, firl eftablifimcnntof,

between Spain and her Anicri-
can colonies, ii. 415.
Panamna, is fettled by I'cdrari;l,

I)avila, i. 212.
PlrmNriilrs, the firfl who divided

the earth 1b zones, i. 4.28.
Platgoiars, folll accon(t of, i'

303. 'I'he reality of their i-
gantic size yet to be deciddcl,
305. 40 jl

Pedrarias Davila, is sent with a

fleet to supersede Balboa in his
government of Santa Maria on
the isthmus of Darien, i. 207.
Treats Balboa ill, 208. Rapa-
cious conduct of his men, zo9.
Is reconciled to Balboa, and
gives him his daughter, 210.
Puts Balboa to death, l2.
Removes his settlement from
Santa Maria to Panama, 212.
Penguin, the name of that bird

not derived from the Welsh
language, i. 438.
Perez, Juan, patronises Colum-

bus at the court of Castile, i.
74. Hisfolemn invocation for
the success of Columbus's voy-
age, 82.
Periplus of Hanno, the authenti-

city of that work jultified, i.
421.
Peru, the first intelligence con-

cerning this country received
by Valco Nugnez de Balboa, i.
200. 205. The coatt of, firit
discovered by Pizarro, ii. 156.
Pizarro's second arrival, 161.
His hollile proceedings againlt
the natives, 162. The colony
of St. Michael cllablifled, 163.
State of the empire at the time
of this invasion, ibid. The
kingdom divided between Hu-
afcar and Atahualpa, 167.
Atahualpa usurps the govern-
ment, 168. Hluafcar solicits
afliflance fi-om Pizarro, 169.
Atahualpa visits Pizarro, 173.
Is fcized by' Pizarro, 175.
Agreement for his ransom, 177.
Is refuifed his liberty, 18o. Is
cruelly put to death, 185.
Confusion of the empire on this
event, 186. Quito reduced by
Benalcaz:al, 188. The city of
Lilma founded by Pizarro, 194..

I b

Chili invaded by Almagro,
195. Insurrection of the Pe-
ruvians, 196. Almagroput to
death by Pizarro, 209. Piz-
arro divides the country among
his followers, 21 . Progress cf
the Spanish arms there, 212.
Francis Pizarro affaflinated,
219. Reception of the new
regulations there, 232. The
vice-roy confined by the court
of Audience, 238. The vice-
roy defeated and killed by
Gonzalo Pizarro, 242. Arri-
val of Pedro de la Gafca, 249.
Reduction and death of Gon-
zalo Pizarro, 257. The civil
wars there not carried on with
mercenary soldiers, 258. But
nevertheless gratified with im-
mense rewards, 259. Their
profusion and luxury, ibid.
Ferocity of their contells, 260.
Their want of faith, ibid. In-
stances, 261. Division of by
Gafca among his followers,
262. A retrofpeEt into the
original government, arts, and
manners of the natives, 267.
The high antiquity they pre-
tend to, 303. Their records,
304. Origin of their civil po-
licy. 306. This founded in
religion, 307. The auihority
of the Incas absolute and un-
limited, ibid. All crimes there
punished capitally, 308. Mild
genius of their religion, 309.
Its influence on their civil po-
licy, 310. And on their mili-
tary fyllem, 311. Peculiar ltate
of property there, 312. Difl
tinction of ranks, 313. State
of arts, 31+. Improved slate
of agriculture, ibid. Their
buildings, 316. Their public
roads, 317. Their bridges,
b b 2 319.

319. Their mode of refining
ilverore, 32o. Works of ele-
gance, 321. Their ci.ilizati-
on, nevertheless, but imper-
feit, 32z. Cnzco the only
place that had tle appearance
of a city, ibid. No pertfec
separation of profelions, 323.
L;ttle commercial intircourle,
ibidt. Their unw ar'ike spirit,
324. Eat their helh and liih
rav, 325. Brief account of
other provinces under the vice-
roy of New Spain, 326.
Cauifes of the depopulation of
this country, 34. The' tall
pox very fatal there, 348.
Writers xwho gave accounts ot
the conqueil of, 464 . 'hcir
method of building, 90o.
State of the revenue derived
from, by the crown of Spain,
5 17. See Cslcnits.
PtUer 1. czar of Rullia, his exten-

five views in prosecuting Alia-
tic discoveries, i. z73.
Pc.licians, ancient, iRate ofcom-

n'erce and navication among
th:in, i. 6. Their trade how
cond ucted, 42z 1.
PIilip II. of Spain, his turbulent

diipofition aided by his Ame-
rican treasuries, ii. 396, Llla-
blilhcs the colony ot Malnila,
426..
Philip III. exhailts his country

by inconsiderate bigotry, ii,
Phi,//,;,/,: islands, discovered by

i:l''din:n;d Magellan , ii 131.
A col'ny :y e!labliflied there lby
P'iilip 11. oli-;lh in,4. t. 'l'r;: e
l k't\ e;, n ,

;nd /\incica, 4Z7.
P.'.,', I! .'l )t, in America,

\a},' ct-nrc.citd v, ilh diclinati-

jn , i. , '.
s';.'.., tiicv.ali r, his dl'fcrip'jti.,

of the charaaceriftic features of
'the native Americans, i. 462.
Ph;-r:cn, Vincent Yanez, com-

mands a veilel under Colum-
bus in his firlt voyage of dif-
cu erly', i. 8, Sails to Ameri
ca ;n a private adventurewith
soi/r fllips, I8o. DifcoversYu.
catan, i 88.
]'Ai ; rc, Ferdinand, is besieged

in Cusco by the Peruvians, ii.
198. Is surprised there by Al-
magro, 20zo. Escapes with Al-
varado, 203. Defends his bro-
ther at the court of Spain, zli.
Is committed to prison, 211.
Pizarro, Francisco, attends Bal-

boa, in his settlement on the
isthmus of Darien, i. 194.
Marches under him acrofsthe
ilthmus, where they discover
the South Sea,zo4. His birth,
education, and characer, ii.
148. Associates with Almagro
and De Luque, in a voyage of
diicovery, 150. His ill luccels,
151. is recalled, and deserted
by lmoll of his followers, 154.
Remains on the island ofGor-
gona fo(r fIlp lies, ibid. Difo-
ve-s the coall of Peru, 156.
$cturns to Panama, 157. Goes
to Spain to lolicit reinforce-
ments, 158. Procures the sil-
preine comm and ior himflelf,
159. Is aflilted with money by
Cortes, ibid. Lands again in
Peru, 161. His hollile pro-
(ccdinngs againlt tlile atiVCe,
162. I llal)bliles the colony of
St. Mi(lciel, 163. Stalte ftl:e
'Peruvi;ln empire at this tinl',
i/id. Ciaufe of his c1fy pcnc-
tlr-tioni inlto tlhe countr)y 10
1,' applied to hy Huic;lar, for
:i;,(ill/., c pi:;:iintll si. visitoriit1S
bitithlrr 'At;a'lihnalpa, 169. State

of

of his forces, ibid. Arrives at
Caxamaica, 171. Is visited by
thelnca, 173. His perfidious
seizure of him, 175. Agrees to
Atahualpa's offer for his ran-
fom, 177. Division of their
plunder, 179. Refuses Atahu-
alpahis liberty, 180. His ig-
norance exposed to Atahual-
pa, 183. Bestows a form of
trial on the Inca, 184. Puts
him to death, 185. Advances
toCufco, 187. Honours con-
ferred on him by the Spanish
court, g19. Beginning of dif-
fenfions between him and Al-
magro, 192. His civil regula-
tions, 193. Founds the city
of Lima, 194. Infurretion of
the Peruvians, 196. Cusco
seized by Almagro, zo1. De-
ludes Almagro by negociati-
ons, 203. Defeats Almagro,
and takes him prisoner, 206.
Puts Almagro to death, 209.
Divides the country among his
followers, 211. The impolitic
partiality of his allotments, ib.
Makes his brother Gonzalo
governor of Quito, 213. Is as-
fhflinated by Juan de Herrada,
219.
Pizarro, Gonzalo, is made go-

vernor of Quito, by his bro-
ther Francis, ii. 213. Hiis ex-
pedition over the Andes, i/i,'.
Is defcrted by Orellina, 21.1.
Ilis dillrefs on this cvcrt, 216.
His difatllous return to (Qtjito,
217. Is encollr.nred lby tic
people tooppol)f N tI;L/ \V' la,
the new viceroy, z; 6. A ii ilT-s
the government (i 1Pt'I t, 238.
M;arclchs ag.il-il the vict'rc',
2.,0. I)ce',its and kills hi:im,
:'' 2. ls ;dl\;'fidl by C:-va l

jl to
alli le tl e lfivcrcligNllt) o the

country, 243. Chufes to ne-
gociate with the court of Spain
244. Consultations of the court
on his conduCt, 245. His vio-
lent relblutions on the arrival
of Pedro de la Gafca, 250.
Resolves to oppose him by vio-
lence, 25 x. Marches to reduce
Centeno at Cusco, 253. De-
feats him, 254. Is deserted by
his troops on the approach of
Gaica, 256. Surrenders and is
executed, 257. His adherents
men of no principle, 26 1.
Plata, Rio de, discovered by Di-

as de Solis, i. 213. Its amaz-
ing width, 448.
Pliny, the naturalist, intlance of

his ignorance in geography, i.
427.
Pcnce, de Leon, Juan, discovers

Florida, i. 197. Romantic
motive of his voyage, 198.
Population of the earth, flow pro-

grefs of i. 1.
Porto Bello, dilcovered and nam-

ed by Chrilfopher Columbus,
i. 166.
Pcrrio Rico, is fettled and ftb-

jeded by Juan Ponce de Leon,
i. 187.
Pcrlo Santo, the firit difcovcry of,

i.44.
Pr-/;ga/l, when and by whom the

court ofinlAuiifition us a fir.ltin-
trodutced ilto, i. 429.
Pcrlngu/'l, a view ot the circum-

it;lans tlhat induced them to
ulid rt:ike the discovery of un-
known countries, i. 0o, 41.
Si i l. Africaln ldilcoveries of,4z.
M1 ieilra dii(covered, 45. 'lhey
double Cape pJojadol, 46. Ob-
:linl a p:tpall grant of all the
cotunllt-i they Ihould dilfover,
49. Cpe \Verd Islands, and the
Azoic-, dlifcoverld,5o. Voyage

to

to the East Indies by Vasco de
Gama, 14.5.
Potoji, the rich silver mines there,

how discovered, ii. 388. The
mines of, greatly exhausted,
and scarcely worth working,
509.
Priners of war, how treated by

the native Americans, i. 357.
Property, the idea of, unknown to

the native Americans, i. 337.
Notions of the Brafilians con-
cerning, 475-
ProteóJor of the Indians, in Spa-

nilh America, his function, ii.
374-
Ptoleny the philofnpher, his geo-

graphical descriptions more
ample and exa& than those of
his predeceTfors, i. 25. His
Geography translated by the
Arabians, 28. His erroneous
position of the Ganges, 425.

Q:
Zuetlavaca, brother of Monte-

zuma, succeeds him as king of
Mexico, ii. o15. ConduAs in
person the fierce attacks which
obliged Cortes to abandon his
capital, o15. Dies ofthe final
pox, o16.

teevcdo, biffop of Darien, his
'conference with Las Calis on
the treatment of the Indians,
in the presence of the emperor
Charles, V. i. 230.
Q6)kjiilv'ur, the property of the

tamous mines of, at (Guaa;-
cabelica, reserved by the crown
of Spain, ii. 509. The price
of, why reduced, 510.
titinquliat, or Jcfuit's bark, a

produEtion peculiar to P'eru,
". 393.
Qleips, or hiltoric cords of the

Peruvians, some account of
ii. 304.
sidfo, the kingdom of, conquer.

ed by Hluana Capac, Inca of
Peru, ii. 166. Is left to his
son Atahualpa, 167. Atahual-
pa's general revolts after his
death, 187. Is reduced by the
Spaniards under Benalcazar,

S1.8 Benalcazar deprived,
and Gonzalo Pizarro made
governor, 213.

R
Ranzzfio, his defence of Hanno's

account of the coast of Africa,
i. 422.
Regifr'er ships, for what purpose

introduced in the trade be-
tween Spain and her colonies,
ii. 410. Supersede the use of
the galeons, 411.
Religion of the native Americans,

an inquiry into, i. 378.
Ribas, his account of the political

slate of the people of Cinaloa,
i. 477. Of their want of re-
ligion, 487.
Rio de la Pl,ata, and Tucuman,

account of those provinces, ii.
335.
Rivers, the amazing size of those

in America, i. 249.
Roblion, profeflbr, his rclarlk

on the temperature of various
climates, i. 4.50.
Ro/rtia, Franci:;, is left chiefij(-

rice in l-lifpaniola, by Chrillo-
plhr Columbus, i. 131. 1e-
comes ringleader of a miutillny
140o. Submllits, 143.
Romans, their progrels in navi-

gation and difcovcry, i. rS
1'hi eir military spirit avcrle to
mnechanical arts and comnitmel'',
iibi. Navigation and trale

tlvoiu ire
X.

favoured in the provinces un-
der their government, 19.
Their extensive dilioveries'by
land, z . Their empire, and
the sciences, destroyed toge-
ther, 25.
RIzuriruqis, father, his embassy

from France to the chan of the
Tartars, i. 33.
Ruflmas, Asiatic discoveries made

by them, i, 273. Uncertainty
of, 460.

S
Sacotecas, the rich silver mines

there, when discovered, ii. 388.
San Salvador, discovered and

named byChrillopher Colum-
bus, i. 93.
Sancho, Don Pedro, account of

his HiRtory of the conquefi of
Peru, ii. 464.
Sandoval, the {hocking barbari-

ties executed by, in Mexico,
ii. 137.
Scandoval, Francisco Tello de, is

sent by the emperor Charles
V. to Mexico, as vifitador of
America, ii. 231. Hi s mde-
ration and prudence, ibid.
Savage life, a general aelimate

of, i. 4oz02.
Scalps, motive of the native A-

mericans for taking them from
their enemies, i. 48o.
Scrral/vo, marquis de, his extra-

ordinary gains during his vice-
royalty in America, ii. 521.
SCville, extraordinary incrcafli of

its manufactures by the Aine-
rican trade, ii. 5 1 . Its trade
greatly reduced, ibid. The A-
mncrican tradle removed to Ca-
(liz, 401.
i/v,:r, ore, method of refining it

pr)aised by the native I'eru-
viaIs, ii. 320.

Sonora, late discoveries of rich

mines made there by the Spa-
niards, ii. 328.
Sorl, American ideas of the im-

mortality of, i. 387.
Sozth Sea, first discovered by Vas-

co Nugnez de Balboa, i. 204.-
Spain, general idea of the policy

of, with regard to the Ameri-
can colonies, ii. 352. Early
interposition of the regal au-
thority in the colonies, 353.
All the American dominions
of, fubjeated to two viceroys,
354. A third vice-royalty
lately established, 355. The
colonies of, compared with
those of Greece and Rome,
361. Advantages she derived
from her colonies, 3914. Why
fle does not fill derive the
fame, 395. Rapid decline of
trade, 397. This decline in-
creased by the mode of regu-
lating the intercourse with A-
merica, 400. Employs guar-
da collas to check illicit trade,
409. The use of regilter flips
introduced, 410. Ellablifh-
ment of the company of Ca-
raccas, 413. Enlargement of
commercial ideas there, 4.14.
Free trade permitted to several
provinces, 416. Revenue de-
rived from America, 429.
Specification, 5 15.
Spaniards, their curious form of

taking pofliflion of new disco-
vered countries, i. 4 14.
Straio, a citation from, proving

the great geographical igno-
rance of the ancients, i. 424.
His own want of geographical
knowledge, 428.
Super/flition, always connced with

a desire of penetrating into the
fccrcts of futurity, i. 389.

ftsiia,
X.

T.
Tapia, Chriftoval de, is sent from

Spain to Mexico, to supersede
Cortes in his command, but
fails in the attempt, ii. I 34.
Tartars, the poflibility of their

migrating to America, i. 277.
Tlafcala, in Mexico, character of

the natives of, ii. 36. Oppose
the paflage of the Spaniards,
37. Are reduced to sue for
peace, 42.
Tobacco, that'of Cuba the belt

flavoured of any in all Ameri-
ca, ii. 393.
Toupinambos, account of their fe-

rocious courage from Lery, i.
481.
Tr'ade, free, opened between

Spain and her colonies, ii. 416.
Increase of the Spanish cuf-
toms from this measure, 514.
erade winds, the periodical course

of, when discovered by navi-
gators, i. 19.
Travellers, ancient, character of

their writings, i. 35.
Trinidad, the island of, discovered

by Christopher Columbus on
his third voyage, i 137.
Tuczman, and Rio de la Plata,

account of those provinces, ii.
335.
Tyr-e, the commerce of that city,

how condueted, i. 421.
7Tythes of Spanish Amcrica, how

applied by the court of Spain,
i. 517.

V.
Vaca de Cajiro, Chriftoval, is

sent from Spain to rcgul;lte
the government of Peru, ii.
2io. Arrives at Qjito, 221.
Allutnes the fiulpcme autholi-

ty, 222. Defeats young Al-
magro, 223. The fevefityof
his proceedings, 224. Prevents
an insurreCtion concerted to op.
pose the new regulations, 234,
Is imprifoled by the new vice-
roy, 235.
Yalvc-rde, father Vincent, his cu-

rious harangue to Atahualpa,
Inca of Peru, ii. 174. Gives
his fan&ion to the trial and
condemnation of Atahualpa,
184.
tega, Garcilafo de la, charater

of his commentary on the Spa-
nifh writers concerning Peru,
ii. 466.
fegetaebles, their natural tendency

to fertilize the foil where they
grow, i. 264.
1Jelafquez, Diego de, conquers

the island ofCuba, i. 196.237.
His preparations for invading
New Spain, ii. i. His difficul-
ty in chufing a commander for
the expedition, 2. Appoints
Fernando Cortes, 3. His mo-
tives to this choice, 4. Be-
comes lufpicious of Cortes, 6.
Orders Cortes to be deprived
of his commiflion and arrefled,
7. Sends an armament to Mex-
ico after Cortes, 72.
rcncgas, P. his charaster of the
native Californians, i. 469.
tIci'urealdifeafe, originally brought
from America, i. 307. Appears
to be wearing out, 308. Its
firlt rapid progrles, 465.
I/C)'ic:zcla, history of that fcttle-

ment, ii. 340.
Ifflhc', its origin as a maritime

Iltttc, i. 30. Travelsof Marco
Polo, 34'
f1.(/, illainds discovered by the

I'm tugnedl:, i. 50o.
/,v'r, all: tihe Spanifli dominil

oilS
X.

ens in America fubjeded to
two, ii. 354. A third lately
established, 355. Their pow-
ers, ibid. A fourth eftabliihed,
421.
Villa, Segnor, his account of the

Rtate of population in New
Spain, ii. 496. His detail of
the SFanifh American reve-
nue, 516.
Villefagno, Antonio, one of Cor-

tes's soldiers, foments a muti-
ny among his troops, ii. IIo.
Is discovered by Cortes, and
hanged, ii.
Ulloa, Don Antonio, de, his de-

scription of the chara&eriftic
features of the native Ameri-
cans, i. 461. 463. His reason
for the Americans not being so
sensible of pain as the rellof
mankind, i. 482. His account
of the goods exported from
Spain to America, with the
duty on them,ii. 520.
dolcaos, remarkable number of,
in the northern parts of the
globe discovered by the Ruf-
sians, i.461.

W.
Wafer, Lionel, his account of a

peculiar race of diminutive A-.
mericans, i. 301. Compared
with iimilarproductions in A-
frica, 302.
I'Fr song of the native Ameri-

cans, the fcntiments and terms
of, i. 480.
I uomcn, the condition of; among

the native Americans, i. 31 .

Are not prolific, 321. Are not
permitted to join in their
drunken feasts, 399. Nor to
wear ornaments, 483.

X
Xeres, Francisco de, secretary to

Pizarro, the earliest writer on
his Peruvian expedition, ii.
464.
Ximenes, cardinal, his regulations

for the treatment of the In-
dians in the Spanish colonies,
i. 220. Patronises the attempt
of Ferdinand Magellan, ii.
128.

Y.
2Tucatan, the province of, disco-

vered by Pinzon and Diaz de
Solis, i. 188. Described,447.
From whence that province
derives its value, ii. 331. Po-
licy of the court of Spain with
iefped to, 332.

Z.
Zarate, Don Augutline, charac-

ter of his I-Iiiory of the con-
quelt of Peru, ii. 4.65.
Zones, the earth how divided in-

to, by the geography of the an-
cients, i. 23. By whom firnt so
divided, 427.
Zuiimmaraga, Juan de, firil bilhop

of Mexico, the dectroycr of all
the ancient records of the Mex-
ican cnlpire, ii. 271.
L N D OF THE SECOND V L U M E.
