HISTORY

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

VOL. II.

7~ ·--

7,~~~~
1: ::; ·liI/lL:

Iii'~~~~2
N> gI~CI d "0~~rblPl~V

\~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.~N~/.·

THE
HISTORY

R E I G. N

OF THE
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HISTO.

RIOGRAPHER. to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

A NEW EDITION.

VO L.. I.

LONDON:
Printed for W. S T R A H A N; T. C A DE L L, ill thQ

Strand ; ;ald J. B A L F
o R, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXX11.

# BOOK I.

THE
HIS TORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OP THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK I;
C HARLES V. was born at Ghent on the B o o r

the twenty-fourth day of February, in the ,
year one thousand five hundred. His fa- B'arti of

ther, Philip the Handsome, archduke of Aultria,
was the son of the emperor I1laximilian, and of
Mary, the only child of Charles the Bold, the last
prince of the house of Burgundy. His mother,
Joanna, was the second daughter of Ferdinand
and Isabella, king and queen of Castile and Ara-
gon.

A LO0G train of fortunate events had opened His dmi.

nion, l and

the way for this young prince to the inherinance h nevento
of more extcnfive dominions, than any European h ,*,hu'
monarch, since Charlemagne, had possesed. Each thwm

VoL. II. B of

B 0 0 K of his ancestors had acquired kingdoms or pro-
* y,_ evinces, towards which their prospect of fuccefflon

was extremely remote. The rich poffemons of
Mary of Burgundy were deltirnd for another fa-
mily, she having been contrasted by her father to
the only son of Louis XI. of France; but that
capricious monarch, indulging his hatred to her
family, chose rather to strip her of part of her ter-
ritories by force, than to secure the whole by
marriage; and by this miftcondut, fatal to his
poferity, threw all the Netherlands and Franche
Comte into the hands of a rival. Isabella, the
daughter of John II. of Castile, far from having
any profpet of that noble inheritance which the
transmitted to her grandson, passed the early part
ofher life in obscurity and indigence. But the Ca-
flilians, exasperated against her brother Henry IV.
an ill-advifed and vicious prince, publickly charged
him with impotence, and his queen with adultery.
Upon his demise, rejeting Joanna, whom the
king had uniformly, and even on his death-bed,
owned to be his lawful daughter, and whom an
assembly of the states had acknowledged to be the
heir of his kingdom, they obliged her to retire
into Portugal, and placed Isabella on the throne
of Castile. Ferdinand owed the crown of Aragon
to the unexpeced death of his elder brother, and
acquired the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily by
violating the faith of treaties, and disregarding
the ties of blood. To all there kingdoms, Chrifto-
, pher Columbus, by an effort of genius and of in-

trepidity, the boldest and mont successful that is

7 recorded

recorded in the annals of mankind, added a new B o 0°
world, the wealth of which was one considerable '-
source of the power and grandeur of the Spanifl
monarchs.

DoN JOHN, the only son of Ferdinand and Ifa- hl pn^ .

bella, and their eldest daughter, the queen of fr..hann
Portugal, being cut.off in the flower of youth, all srpia.
their hopes centered in Joanna and her polterity.
But as her husband, the archduke, was a stranger
to the Spaniards, it was thought expedient to in-
vite him into Spain, that by residing among them,
he might accuilom himself to their laws and
manners; and it was expe&ed that the Cortes, or
assembly of states, whole authority was then so
great in Spain, that no title to the crown was
reckoned valid unless it received their fanetion,
would acknowledge his right of succession, to-
gether with that of the infanta, his wife. Philip
and Joanna, passing through France in their way
to Spain, were entertained in that kingdom with 'So''
the utmost magnificence. The archduke did ho-
mage to Louis XII. for the earldom of Slanders,
and took his feat as a peer of the realm in the
parliament of Paris. They were received in
Spain with every mark of honour that the paren-
tal affection of Ferdinand and Isabella, or the
refpe& of their fubjeCs, could devise; and their
title to the crown was soon after acknowledged
by the Cortes of both kingdoms.

B 2 BUT

-a o0 KX BUT amidst these outward appearances of fa-

_ tisfation and joy, some ficret uneasiness preyed

Ferdinaod
j--louorf upon the mind of each of there princes. The
pOwc. flately and reserved ceremonial of the Spanifl

court was so burdensome to Philip, a prince young,
gay, affable, fond of lociety and of pleaftre, that
he loon began to express a desire of returning to
his native country, the manners of which were
more suited to his temper. Ferdinand, observing
the declining health of his queen, with whose life
his right to the government of Castile muff cease,
easily foresaw, that a prince of Philip's disposition,
and who already dilcovered an extreme impatience
to reign, would never content to his retaining any
degree of authority in that kingdom; and the
profpe& of this diminution of his power, awaken-
ed the jealousy of that ambitious monarch.

Ifahe',i . ISABELLA beheld, with the Sentiments natural
flicitude,
with trrpe to a mother, the indifference and neglect with
to him and
her dgh. which the archduke treated her daughter, who was
t'e destitute of those beauties of perion, as well as

those accomplishments of mind, which fix the
affe&ions of an husband. Her understanding,
always weak, was often disordered. She doated
on Philip with ltch an excess of childiih and in-
discreet fondners, as excited disgust rather than
affe&tion. Her jealoury, for which her huiband's
behaviour gave her too much cause, was propor-
tioned to her love, and often broke out in the
most extravagant actions. Ifabel!a, though fen-
lible of her defects, could not help pitying her

condition,

condition, which was soon rendered altogether B o01 K
deplorable, by the archduke's abrupt resolution of -
setting out in the middle of winter for Slanders,
and of leaving her in Spain. Isabella intreated
him not to abandon his wife to grief and melan-
choly, which might prove fatal to her, as the was
near the time of her delivery. Joanna conjured
him to put off his journey for three days only,
that fie might have the pleasure of celebrating
the festival of Christmas in his company. Ferdi-
nand, after representing the imprudence of his
leaving Spain, before he had time to become ac-
quainted with the genius, or to gain the affections
of the people, who were one day to be his sub-
jects, besought him, at least, not to pass through
France, with which kingdom he was then at open
war. Philip, without regarding either the dic-
tates of humanity, or the maxims of prudence,
perrifted in his purpose; and on the twenty-fecond
of December set out for the Low Countries, by
the way of France '.

FROM the moment of his departure, Joanna Dirorderof

funk into a deep and fullen melancholy', and Ji'nina'
while she was in that situation bore Ferdinand her F,'rtof
second son, for whom the power of his brother ftewt
Charles afterwards procured the kingdoms of
Hungary and Bohemia, and to whom he at last
transmitted the imperial sceptre. Joanna was the

a Petri Martyris Anglerij Epifole, 250. z53.
b Id. Epilf. a55.

B 3 only

B o o K only person in Spain who discovered no joy at the
u--v.-' birth of this prince. Insensible to that, as well as

to every other pleasure, the was wholly occupied
with die thoughts of returning to her hulband;
nor did ihe, in any degree, recover tranquillity of
1540. mind, until The arrived at Brussels next year'.

PHILIP, in passing through France, had an in-

terview with Louis XII. and figred a treaty with
him, by which he hoped that all the differences
between France and Spain would have been finally
terminated. But Ferdinand, whose affairs, at
that time, were extremely prosperous in Italy,
where the superior genius of Gonfalvo de Cordova,
the great captain, triumphed on every occasion
over the arms of France, did not pay the least re-
gard to what his fon-in-law had concluded, and
carried on hostilities with greater ardour than ever.

Berth of FROM this time Philip seems not to have taken
Ifabcll. any part in the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet

till the death either of Ferdinand or of Isabella
should open the way to one of their thrones. The
latter of there events was not far distant. The
untimely death of her children had made a deep
impression on the mind of Isabella, and as the
could derive but little consolation for the losses
which the had sustained either from her daughter
Joanna, whose infirmities daily increased, or from
her fon-in-law, who no longer preserved even the

c Mariana, lib. 27. c. I. 14. Flechier Vie de Ximen. I.

~191.appearance

appearance

appearance of a decent refpe& towards that un- B 0 O K
happy princess, her spirits and health began gra- '- --
dually to decline, and after languishing some
months, ihe died at Medina: del Campo on the
twenty-fixth of November, one thonfand five hun-
dred and four. She was no less eminent for vir-
tue, than for wifdomn ;and whether we confider her
behaviour as a queen, as a wife, or as a mother, Ihe
is juitly entitled to tie high encomiums bestowed
on her by the Spanifs historiansd.

A FEW weeks before her death, (he made her Her wll

appointing

last will, and being convinced of Joanna's incapa. Ferdinand
city to assume the reins of government into her caI ls.
own hands, and having no inclination to commit
them to Philip, with whose conduA she was ex-
tremely difTat.;ied, (he appointed Ferdinand re-
gent or administrator of the affairs of Castile un-
til her grandson Charles should attain the age of
twenty. She bequeathed to Ferdinand likewise
one half of the revenues which should arise from
the Indies, together with the grand masterships
of the three military orders; dignities, which ren-
dered the person who possessed them almost inde-
pendent, and which Isabella had, for that reason,
annexed to the crown . But before she signed a
deed so favourable to Ferdinand, flie obliged him
to swear that he would not, by a second marriage,
or by any other means, endeavour to deprive

d P. Mart. Ep. 279.
e P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar. Hifi. lib. z8. c. li. Ferne.
ras Hit. Gener. d'Erpagne, tom. viii. z63.

B 4 Joanna

30 0 K Joanna or her posterity of their right of fucceflion

Lu.;w-m to any of his kingdoms '.

IMMEDIATELY upon the queen's death, Ferdi-

nand resigned the title of king of Caitile, and
commanded Joanna and Philip to be publickly
proclaimed the sovereigns of that kingdom. But,
at the fame time, he afiumred the char-acer of re-

aainaid gent, in consequence of Isabella's telia;menti and
acknow. not long after he prevailed on the Cortes of
ledsed as re-
pgt bythe Castile to acknowledge his right to that ofice.
C105. This, however, he did nor j:r.; ure withlout dim-
The C
li ns ei- culty, nor without difc)vcring such lymptoms of
fatified. alienation and dis'ilt among tlhe Caftilia;a as filled

him with great uneafin:r'. Thie union ,f Ci ;ile
and Aragor, for almost thirty years, had not so
.entirely extirpated the a;cient and hcredk.l!r,: =n-
mity which subsisted between the natives of these
kingdoms, that the Caltilian pnlde could sub,
mit, without murmuring, to the government of
a king of Aragon. Fer,'inand's own chara&ter,
with which the Castilians were well acqL, inted,
was far from rendering his authority desirable,
Suspicious, discerning, revere, and parsimonious,
he was accustomed to observe the most minute
actions of his fubje6ts with a jealous attention,
and to reward their highest services with little
liberality; and they were now deprived of Ifa-
bella,whofe gentle qualities, and partiality to her
Castilian fubjeas, often tempered his austerity, or

M Mar. Hid. lib. . . c. 14.

rendered

rendered it tolerable. The maxims of his go- aB oO K
vernment were especially odious to the grandees; v-
for that artful prince, sensible of the dangerous
privileges conferred upon them by the feudal in-
ftitutions, had endeavoured to curb their exorbi-
tant power , by extending the royal jurisdiction,
by protecting their injured vaflals, by increasing
the immunities of cities, and by other measures
equally prudent. From all these causes, a formid-
able party among the Castilians united against
Ferdinand, and though the persons who composed
it, had not hitherto taken any publick ftep in
opposition to him, he plainly saw, that upon the
rlaft encouragement from their new king, they
would proceed to the most violent extremities.

THERE was no less agitation in the Netherlands Ph3ltp-

deavoun to
upon receiving the accounts of Ilabella's death, btain the

govern~

and of Ferdinand's having assumed the govern- ofCaile.
ment of Castile. Philip was not of a temper
tamely to susser himself to be supplanted by the
unnatural ambitionof his father-in-law. IfJoanna's
infirmities, and the non-age of Charles, rendered
them incapable of government, he, as a hulband,
was the proper guardian of his wife, and as a father,
the natural tutor of hi, son. Nor was it sufficient
to oppose to thee jufl rights, and to the inclina-
tion of the people of C.iftile, the authority of a
testament, the genuineness of which was perhaps
doubtful, and its contents certainly iniquitous.

* Marian. lib. 28. c. z.

A keener

B o 0 K A keener edge was added to Philip's resentment,
ty- and new vigour infused into his councils by the

arrival of Don John Manuel. IHe was Ferdi-
nand's ambairfdor'at the imperial court, but upon
the first notice of Isabella's death repaired to
Bruffls, flattering himself, that under a young
and liberal prince, he might attain to power and
honours, which he could never hope for in the
service of an old and frugal mailer. He had
early paid court to Philip during his residence in
Spain, with such afliduity as entirely gained his
confidence; and having been trained to bufincfs
under Ferdinand, could oppose his schemes with
equal abilities, and with arts not inferior to thole
for which that monarch was dilfinguiflied .

.e requires BY his advice, ambafladors were dispatched to
Ferdinand refignBhe require Ferdinand to retire into Aragon, and to
»*reney. resign the government of Castile to those persons

whom Philip should entrust with it until his ar-
rival in that kingdom. Such of the CaRfilian
nobles as had discovered any diffatisfa&tion with
Ferdinand's administration, were encouraged by
every method to oppose it. At the fame time a
treaty was concluded with Louis XII. by which
Philip flattered himself, that he had secured the
friendihip and aliftance of that monarch.

MEANWHILE, Ferdinand employed all the arts
of address and policy, in order to retain the power

b Zurita Annales de Aragon, tom. vi. p. 12.

of

of which he had got poffeflion. By means of B 0O0 K
Conchillos, an Aragonian gentleman, he entered <_
i'nto a private negociation with Joanna, and pre-
vailed on that weak princess to confirm, by her
authority, his right to the regency. But this in-
trigue did not escape the penetrating eye of Don
John Manuel; Joanna's letter of content was in-
tercepted; Conchillos was thrown into a dun-
geon; she herself confined to an apartment in the
palace, and all her Spanish domefticks Itcluded
from her presence'.

THE mortification which the discovery of this Fcrdinand

scheme occasioned to Ferdinand, was much in- 'bthecafi.
creased by his observing the progress that Philip's 'aa no"bc
emiflaries made in Castile. Some of the nobles re-
tired to their castles; others to the towns in which
they had influence: they formed themselves into
confederacies, and began to assemble their vassals.
Ferdinand's court was almost totally deserted;
not a person ofdiftintion but Ximenes, archbishop
of Toledo, the duke of Alva, and the marquis of
Denia, remaining there; while the houses of
Philip's ambassadors were daily crowded with
those of the highest rank.

EXASPERATED at this universal defection, and Ferdinand

mortified perhaps with feeing all his schemes de- 'mai.
feated by a younger politician, Ferdinand resolved, o°rd t'oe.
in defiance of the law of nature, and of decency, sdu*.htr

from the
tialrne.
P. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Annalcs, vi. p. 14.

tO

X o0o K to deprive his daughter and her posterity of the

; _ crown of Castile, rather than renounce the re-

gency of that kingdom. His plan for accom-
plilhing this was no leTs bold, than the intention
itself was wicked. He demanded in marriage
Joanna, the supposed daughter of Henry IV. on
the belief of whose illegitimacy, Isabella's right
to the crown of Castile was founded; and by re-
viving the claim of this princess, in opposition; to
which he himself had formerly led armies and
fought battles, he hoped once more to get pof-
session of the throne of that kingdom. But
Emanuel, king of Portugal, in whole dominions
Joanna resided, being married to one of Ferdi-
nand's daughters by Isabella, refused his consent
to that unnatural match; and the unhappy prin-
cess herself, having loft all reliih for the objets
of ambition, by being long immured in a con-
vent, discovered no less aversion to it k.

Marrics THE resources, however, of Ferdinand's am-
niece of the
Frenchh bition, were not exhausted. Upon meeting with
ki"n. a repulse in Portugal, he turned towards France,

and fought in marriage Germain de Foix, a
daughter of the viscount of Narbonne, and of
Mary, the sifter of Louis XII. The war which
that monarch had carried on against Ferdinand in
Naples, had been so unfortunate, that he listened
with joy to a proposal, which furnished him with
an honourable pretence of concluding peace: And

k Sandov. Hill. of Civil Wars in Castile. Lon. 165g. p. 5.
Zurita Annales de Aragon, tom. vi . p. 1t3.

though.

though no prince was ever more remarkable than 3 0 o K
Ferdinand for making all his passions bend to the '--'
maxims of interest, or become subservient to the
purposes of ambition, yet so vehement was his
resentment against his fon-in-law, that the desire
of gratifying it rendered him regardless of every
other consideration. In order to be revenged of
Philip, by detaching Louis from his interest, and
in order to gain a chance of excluding him from
his hereditary throne of Aragon, and the domi-
nions annexed to it, he was ready once more to
divide Spain into separate kingdoms, though the
union of these was the great glory of his reign,
and had been the chief object of his ambition; he
consented to restore the Neapolitan nobles of the
French facion to their pofleflions and honours;
and submitted to the ridicule of marrying, in an
advanced age, a princess of eighteen'.

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived

Philip of his only ally, and threatened him with
the loss of so many kingdoms, gave a dreadful
alarm to him, and convinced Don John Manuel
that there was now a necessity of taking other
measures with regard to the affairs of Spain m.
He accordingly inftru&ed the Flelnifh ambaffa-
dors in the court of Spain, to testify the strong
desire which their maftcr had of terminating all
differences between him and Ferdinand in an
amicable manner, and his willingness to consent

P. Mart. Ep. 9go. 29,2 Mariana, lib. 28. c. 16, 17.
' P. Mart. Ep. z93.

to

B 01 K to any conditions that would re-establish the

friendlfhip which ought to subsist between a father
and a fon-in-law. Ferdinand, though he had

A trystv be-
twfen i r- made and broken more treaties than any prince
dinand and
P: ", d of any age, was apt to confide so far in the since-

rity of other men, or to depend so much upon his
own address and their weakness, as to be always
extremely fond of a negociation. He listened
with eagerness to there declarations, and soon
Nov. 24. concluded a treaty at Salamanca; in which it was

itipulated, that the government of Caaile ihould
be carried on in the joint names of Joanna, of
Ferdinand, and of Philip; and that the revenues
of the crown, as well as the right of conferring
offices, should be shared between Ferdinand and
Philip by an equal division.

;So6. NOTHING, however, was farther from Philip's

Philip and
joan,.a lt thoughts than to observe this treaty. His sole in-

s tention in proposing it was to amuse Ferdinand,

and to prevent him from taking any measures for
obftruAing his voyage into Spain. It had that
effect. Ferdinand, sagacious as he was, did not
for some time fufpet his design; and though when
he perceived it, he prevailed on the king of France
not only to remonfrate against the archduke's
journey, but to threaten hostilities if he should
undertake it; though he solicited the duke of
Gueldres to attack his fon-in-law's dominions in
the Low-Countries, Philip and his consort never-
* Zurita Annales de Aragon, vi. 19. P. Mart. Ep. 293, 294.

thelefs

thelefs set fail with a numerous fleet, and a good B °0 K
body of land forces. They were obliged by a vio- t-.-
lent tempest to take Ihelter in England, where
Henry VII. in compliance with Ferdinand's Iblici-
tations, detained them upwards of three months o;
at last they were permitted to depart, and after a
more prosperous voyage, they arrived in safety at April 2.
Corunna in Galicia, nor durst Ferdinand attempt,
as he had once intended, to oppose their landing
by force of arms.

THE Castilian nobles, who had been obliged Thyeoob;
hitherto to conceal or to diffcmble their senti- tile dre

for Philip.

ments, now declared openly in favour of Philip.
From every corner of the kingdom, persons of
the highest rank, with numerous retinues of their
vassals, repaired to their new king. The treaty
of Salamanca was universally condemned, and all
agreed to exclude from the government ofCaftile
a prince, who, by consenting to disjoin Aragon
and Naples from that crown, discovered so little
concern for its true interests. Ferdinand, mean-
while, abandoned by almost all the Castilians,
disconcerted by their revolt, and uncertain whe-
ther he should peaceably relinquilh his power, or
take arms in order to maintain it, earnestly soli-
cited an interview with his fon-in-law, who, by
advice of Manuel, studiously avoided it. Con-
vinced at last, by feeing the number and zeal of
Philip's adherents daily increase, that it was vain

e Ferrer. Hil. viii. 28;.

to

B* o 0 to think of resitting such a torrent, Ferdinand
_ _,.* v consented, by treaty, to resign the regency of
d',;Tz7.n' Castile into the hands of Philip, to retire into his

,efigns tp hereditary dominions of Aragon, and to reft fa-
Cafllr, and tisfied with the mafterihips of the military orders,
Au2oa. and that Ihare of the revenue of the Indies, which

Isabella had bequeathed to him. Though an in-
terview between the princes was no longer necef-
fary, it was agreed to on both fides from motives
ofdecency. Philip repaired to the place appointed,
with a splendid retinue of Caftilan nobles, and a
considerable body of armed men. Ferdinand ap-
peared without any pomp, attended by a few fol-
lowers mounted on mules, and unarmed. On
that occasion Don John Manuel had the pleasure
of displaying before the monarch, whom he had
deserted, the extensive influence which he had
acquired over his new mailer: While Ferdinand,
suffered in presence of his former subje&s, the two
mod cruel mortifications which an artful and am-
bitious prince can feel; being at once over-
reached in condu&, and stripped of power P.
July. NOT long after, he retired into Aragon; and

hoping that some favourable accident would soon
open the way for his return into Castile, he took
care to protest, though with great secrecy, that
the treaty concluded with his fon-in-law, being
extorted by force, ought to be deemed void of
all obligation q.

Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. 64. Mar. lib. -8. c. 19, 20.

P. Mart. ep. 304, 305, &c. * Zurita Annales
de Ara. vi.
v . (O P^---- Hilt viii. 2o.

PHILIP

PHILIP took pofleflion of his new authority B 00 K
with a youthful joy. The unhappy Joanna, from ----

Philip and

whom he derived it, remained, during all there joanna ac
contests, under the dominion of a deep melan- k,,,ngd
choly; she was seldom allowed to appear in pub- q-ht by
lick; her father, though he had often desired it,
was refused access to her; and Philip's chief ob-
jet was to prevail on the Cortes to declare her
incapable of government, that an undivided power
might be lodged in his hands, until his son ihould
attain to full age. But such was the partial at-
tachment of the Castilians to their native princess,
that though Manuel had the address to gain some
members of the Cortes assembled at Valladolid,
and others were willing to gratify their new so-
vereign in his first request, the great body of the
repretentatives refused their consent to a declara-
tion which they thought so injurious to the blood
of their monarchs . They were unanimous, how-
ever, in acknowledging Joanna and Philip, queen
and king of Castile, and their son Charles prince
of Asturias.

THIS was almost the only memorable event Death .

during Philip's administration. A fever put an Philip
end to his life in the twenty-eighth year of his sept. 5,
age, when he had not enjoyed the regal dignity,
which he had been to eager to obtain, full three
months '.

r Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 7 .
' Marian. lib. 28. c. z3.
VOL1. II C THr

B0 0 K THE whole royal authority in Castile ought of
L-v--.a course to have devolved upon Joanna. But the
The .,forder
of J,,Jn^,' shock occasioned by a disaster so unexpected as
mind ci- the death of her husband, completed the disorder

of her understanding, and her incapacity for
government. During all the time of Philip's
sickness, no intreaty could prevail on her, though
in the sixth month of her pregnancy, to leave
him for a moment. When he expired, however,
She did not shed one tear, or utter a single groan.
Her grief was silent and fettled. She continued
to watch the dead body with the fame tenderness
and attention as if it had been alive', and though
at iift she permitted it to be buried, ihe soon
removed it from the tomb to her own apartment.
There it was laid upon a bed of state, in a fplen-
did dress: and having heard from some monk a
legendary tale of a king who revived after he had
been dead fourteen years, she kept her eyes almost
conRtantly fixed on the body, waiting for the
happy moment of its return to life. Nor was this
capricious affetaion for her dead husband less tinc-
tured withjealoufy, than that which she had born
to him while alive. She did not permit any of
her female attendants to approach the bed on
which his corpse was laid; she would not ifffer
.any woman who did not belong to her family to
enter the apartment; and rather than grant that
privilege to a midwife, though a very aged one
had been chosen of purpose, lhe bore the

' P. Mart. Ep. 316.

princess

princess Catherine without any other assistance B oo K
than that of her own domestics".

A WOMAN in such a fRate of mind was little She ; inca.

capable of governing a great kingdom; and pblrn.
Joanna, who made it her sole employment to be-
wail the loss, and to pray for the foul of her
husband, would have thought her attention to
publick affairs an impious neglect of those duties
which lhe owed to him. But though file declined
assuming the administration herself, yet, by a
strange caprice ofjealoufy, she refuted to commit
it to any other person; and no intreaty of her lub-
je&ts could persuade her to name a regent, or even
to sign such papers as were necesary for tne ex-
ecution ofjuftice, and the security of the kingdom.

THE death of Philip threw the Castilians into ;iJx;i;,an

the greatest perplexity. It was necessary to ap- ,l, Vo,
point a regent, both on account of Joanna's fren- p4.,^,
zy, and the infancy of her son; and as there was ti: "a"'- y
not among the nobles, any person so eminently
distinguished as to be called by the publick voice
to that high office, all naturally turned their eyes
either towards Ferdinand, or towards the emperor
Maximilian. The former claimed that dignity
as administrator for his daughter, and by virtue
of the testament of lfabellh; the latter thlouglht
himself the legal guardian of his grandson, vhom,
on account of his mother's infirmity, he already

Mar. His. lib.29g .

c. 3& . P. Mart. Ep. 31. 324. 323.
33t?

C 2 cons Jcr d

B o0o K confidered as king of Castile. Such of the nobility

v--' as had lately been most ative in compelling Ser-

dinand to resign the government of the kingdom,
trembled.at the thoughts of his being restored so
fuon to his former dignity. They dreaded the
return of a monarch, not apt to forgive, and who,
to those defects with which they were already
acquainted, added that resentment which the re-
membrance of their behaviour, and reflection
upon his own disgrace, must naturally have ex-
cited. Though none of these objections held
against Maximilian, he was a stranger to the laws
and manners of Caltile; he had not either troops
or money to support his pretensions; nor could
his claim be admitted without a public declara-
tion of Joanna's incapacity for government, an
indignity to which, notwithstanding the notoriety
of her distemper, the delicacy of the Castilians
could not bear the thoughts of fubje&ing her.

DoN JOHN MANUEL, however, and a few of

the nobles, who confidered themselves as most
obnoxious to Ferdinand's displeasure, declared
for Maximilian, and offered to support his claim
with all their interest. Maximilian, always enter-
prizing and decisive in council, though feeble and
dilatory in execution, eagerly embraced the offer.
But a series of ineffetual negociations was the
only con'equence of this tranfation. The em-
peror, as usual, afierted his rights in a high strain,
promised a great deal, and performed nothing".

Mariana, lib. 29. c. 7. Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. 93.

A FEW

A FEW days before the death of Philip, Ferdi- B °0 K

nand had set out for Naples, that, by his own L--
presence, he might put an end, with the greater Fb,.dnand.
decency, to the viceroyalty of the great captain, vfit o hi
whose important services, and cautious condu&, N;plcs.
did not screen him from the suspicions of his jea-
lous master. Though an account of his bfn-in-
law's death reached him at Porto-fino, in the ter-
ritories of Genoa, he was so solicitous to discover
the secret intrigues which he supposed the great
captain to have been carrying on, and to establish
his own authority on a firm foundation in the
Neapolitan dominions, by removing him from
the lupreme command there, that rather than
discontinue his voyage, he chore to leave Caflile
in a state of anarchy, and even to rifque, by this
delay, his obtaining poffeltion of the government
of that kingdom r

NOTHING but the great abilities and prudent Acqi;re,

condu&t of his adherents, could have prevented `f',,fle
the bad effects of this abefnce. At the head of 'fY th

through the

there was Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, who, iff",,rennC O
though he had been raised to that dignity by Ifa- xi.,ncS.
bella, contrary to the inclination of Ferdinand,
and though he could have no expetation of en-
joying much power under his jealous adminiftra-
tion, was nevertheless .so disinterested, as to prefer
the welfare of his country before his own gran-
deur, and to declare, that Cailile could never be

Y Zuritas Annales de Arag. vi. p. 85.

C3 3o

B o0o K so happily governed as by a prince, whom long

j experience had rendered thoroughly acquainted

with its true interefl. His zeal to bring over his
countrymen to this opinion, induced him to lay
aside somewhat of his usual austerity and haughti-
s:5:. ness. H-e condescended, on this occasion, to

court the diifanected nobles, and employed ad-
dreis, as well as arguments, to persuade them.
Ferdinand leconded his endeavours with great
art; and by conceflions to some of the grandees,
by promifics to others, and by letters full of com-
plai,'nce to all, he gained many of his most vio-

A::.,.-. I olt opponentsz. Though many cabals were
FerdDnan1i

,rcir.; o formied, and fonme commotions were excited, yet
Spi""' wchen Ferdinand, after having fettled the affairs

of Naples, arrived in Castile, he entered upon the
adlminifration without opposition. The prudence
with which he exercised his authority in that king-
dom, equalled the good fortune by which he had

i`is PruL't: recovered it. By a nioderate, but fleady admini-
^,o. ftration, free from partiality and from resent-

ment, he entirely reconciled the Castilians to his
person, and secured to them, during the remain-
telr of his life, as much doneftick tranquillity,
as was consistent with the genius of the feudal
government, which still subsisted among them in
full vigoir '.

NoI. was the preservation of tranquillity in his
hereditary kingdoms, the only obligation which

Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p. 87. 94. 1o9.
M V..riani, lib. 29. c. 1o.

the

the archduke Charles owed to the wilc :; . ':.-c of B 0 0 K
his grandfather; he had the fatisfadion, dtui;g _-
that period, of feeing very important acquisitions
added to the dominions over which he was to
reign. On the coalt of Barbary, Oran, and other Conqe,
conquests of no small value, were annexed to the
crown of Castile by cardinal Ximenes, who, with
a spirit very uncommon in a monk, led in person ,509.
a numerous army against the Moors of that coun-
try; and, with a generosity and magnificence still
more singular, defrayed the whole expence of the
expedition out of his own revenues'. In Europe,
Ferdinand, under pretences no lets perilous than
unjult, as well as by artifices the mot flhameful
and treacherous, expelled John d'Albert, the law- Acqtri;ion
ful sovereign, from the throne of Navarre; and of Navare.
seizing on that kingdom, extended the limits
of the Spanish monarchy from the Pyrenees on
the one hand, to the frontiers of Portugal on the
other'.

IT was not, however, the desire of aggrandiz- Ferdinand

ing the archduke, which influenced Ferdinand ltgnSfon
in this, or in any other of his actions. He was cl''l8.
more apt to confider that young prince as a rival,
who might one day wref out of his hands the
government of Caltile, than as a grandson, for
whose behoof he was entruled with the admini-
firation. This jealousy flon begot aversion, ani
even hatred, the 1yinptorns of which he was at

b Mariana, lib. 29. c. iR.
e Mar. lib. 30. c. Ii, 12. In. 2.I.

C no

B oo K no pains to conceal. Hence proceeded his im-
L. --- moderate joy when his young queen was delivered

1509. of a (on, whose life would have deprived Charles

of the crowns of Aragon, Naples, Sicily, and
Sardinia; and upon the untimely death of that
prince, he discovered, for the fame reason, an
excessive solicitude to have other children. This
impatience hastened, in all probability, the ac-
cefion of Charles to the crown of Spain. Ferdi-
nand, in order to procure a blefling, of which,
from his advanced age, and the intemperance of
his youth, he could have little profpet, had re-
I5s3. course to his physicians, and by their prescription

took one of those potions, which are supposed to
add vigour to the conflitution, though they more
frequently prove fatal to it. This was its effect
on a frame so feeble and exhausted as that of Ser-
dinand; for though he survived a violent disorder
which it at first occasioned, it brought on such
an habitual !anguor and dejetion of mind, as
rendered him averse from any serious attention to
publick affairs, and fond of frivolous amufeinents,
on which he had not hitherto bestowed much
time '. Though he now derpaired of having any
son of his own, his jealousy of the archduke did
not abate, nor could he help viewing him with
that aversion which princes often bear to their

r.st'.; flcceffors. In order to gratify this unnatural
to diminish passion, he made a will, appointing prince Ser-
his pwer,
by a will in dinand, who having been born and educated in
tivinor ot

d Zurita Annales de Arag. vi. p.347. P. Mart. Ep. 531.
Argcnfola Annales de Aragon, lib. i. p. 4.

Spain,

Spain, was much beloved by the Spaniards, to B O 0 KI
be regent of all his kingdoms, until the arrival *
of the archduke his brother; and by the fame
deed he fettled upon him the grand-mafterfbip of
the three military orders. The former of these
grants might have put it in his power to have
disputed the throne with his brother; the latter
would, in any event, have rendered him almolt
independent.

FERDINAND retained to the last that jealous

love of power, which was to remark.ble thiough
his whole life. Unwilling to resign it, even at
the approach of death, he removed continually
from place to place, in order to fly from his dif-
temper, or to forget it. Though his strength
declined every day, none of his attendants durst
mention his condition; nor would he admit his
father confessor, who thought such silence crimi-
nal and unchristian, into his pretence. At last
the danger became so imminent, that it could be
no longer concealed. Ferdinand received the
intimation with a decent fortitude; and touched,
perhaps, with compunaion at the injustice which
he had done his grandson, or influenced by the
honest remonstrances of Carvajal, Zapara, and
Vargas, his most ancient and faithful coun-
iellors, who represented to him, that by invest-
ing prince Ferdinand with the regency, he would
infallibly entail a civil war on the two brothers?
and by bestowing on him the grand-mafterlhip
of the military orders, would strip the crown of

B 01o K its noblcft ornament and chief strength, he con-
*-. v- sented to alter his will in both there particulars.

15v6.

Is pertu.aed By a new deed he left Charles the sole heir of all
to alter that
.,IVt nhis dominions, and allotted to prince Ferdinand,

initead of that throne of which he thou.lht him-
self almost iecure, an inconsiderable eltablifllment
and ules. of fifty thousand ducats a year c. He died a few

hours after flgning this will, on the twenty-third
day of January, one thousand five hundred and
sixteen.
'ucatonnfr CHARLES, to whom such a noble inheritance

descended by his death, was near the full age of
sixteen. He had hitherto resided in the Low-
Countries, his paternal dominions. Margaret of
Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of York, the
sifter of Edward IV. of England, and widow of
Charles the Bold, two princcffes of great virtue
and abilities, had the care of forming his early
youth. Upon the death of his father, the Fle-
mings committed the government of the Low-
Countries to his grandfather, the emperor Maxi.
mnilian, with the name rather than the authority
of regent'. Maximilian made choice of William
de Croy lord of Chievres to superintend the edu-

* Mlar. hill. lib. 30. c. ult. Zurita Annales de Arag. vi.

401. P. Mart. Ep. 565, 566. Argenfola Annales de Arag.
lib. i. p. i.

f Pontius Heuterus Rerum Auriacarum, lib. xv. Lov.
1649. lib.7. c. 2. p. 155.

cation

cation of the young prince his grandfonL. That B O ° K
nobleman poflefeild, in an eminent degree, the ---
talents which fitted him for such an important
office, and discharged the duties of it with great
fidelity. Under Chievrcs, Adrian of Utrecht
afted as preceptor. This preferment, which
opened his way to the highef dignities an eccle-
fiaftic can attain, he owed not to his birth, for
that was extremely mean; nor to his interest, for
he was a firanger to the arts of a court; but to
the opinion which his countrymen entertained of
his learning. IHe was indeed no inconsiderable
proficient in thole frivolous sciences, which, dur-

ing

: The French hifiorians, upon the authority ofM. de Bel-

lay, Mem. p. x i. have unanimously aflerted, that Philip, by
his lai will, having appointed the king of France to have the
direction of his son's education, Louis XII. with a difinterelt-
ednefs suitable to the confidence reposed in him, named
Chievres for that office. Even the president Henaut has
adopted this opinion. Abrege Chron. A. D. 1507. Va-
rillas, in his usual manner, pretends to have fecn Philip's
tefiament. Prat. de l'Education des Princes, p. 16. But the
Spanilh, German, and Flemish historians concur in contra-
dicting this assertion of the French authors. It appears from
-icuterus, a cotemporary Flemish historian of great authority,
that Louis X[.Y by contenting to the marriage of Germainede
Foix with Ferdinand, had loft much of that confidence which
Philip once placed in him; that this difguRi was increased by
the French king's giving in marriage to the count of An-
goiiC.mc his eldell daughter, whom he had formerly betrothed
to Charles, Hentcr. Rcr. Auitr. lib. v. I I: That the French,
a (hort time before Philip's death, had violated the peace,
which fubfifed between thlini and the Flemings, and Philip
had complained of this injury, and was ready to resent it.
Hlcutcr. ibid. All thefc circunll;lnccs render it improbable

that

B o00 K ing several centuries, assumed the name of phi-
L.--.. lofophy, and had published a commentary,

3516. which was highly esteemed, upon The Book of

Sentences, a famous treatise of Petrus Lombardus,
confidered at that time as the standard fyfiem of
metaphysical theology. But whatever admiration
these procured him in an illiterate age, it was
soon found that a man accuflomned to the retire-
ment of a college, unacquainted with the world,
and without any tinture of taste or elegance,
was by no means qualified for rendering science
agreeable to a young prince. Charles,.accordingly,

that Philip, who made his will a few days before he died,
Heuter. p. J:z, Ihould commit the education of his son to
Louis XII. In confirmation of there plausible conjectures,
positive teltimony can be produced. It appears from Heu-
tcrus, that Philip, when he set out for Spain, had entrufhed
Chievres both with the care of his son's education, and with
the government of his dominions 'in the Low-Countries.
Heuter. lib. vii. p. 153. That an attempt was made, soon
after Philip's death, to have the emperor Maximilian ap-
pointed regent, during the minority of his grandson; but
this being opposed, Chievres seems to have continued to dil-
charge both the offices which Philip had committed to him.
Heut. ibid. 153. 155. That in the beginning of the year
15o3, the Flemings invited Maximilian to accept of the
regency; to which he consented, and appointed his daughter
Margaret, together with a council of Flemings, to exercise
the supreme authority, when he himself flould, at any time,
be abfcnt. He likewise named Chievres as governor, and
Adrian of Utrecht as preceptor to his son. Heut. ibid. 155.
157. What Hcuterus relates with rcfpe& to this matter is
confirmed by Moringus in Vita Adriani apud Analct;l Cafp.
Burmanni de Adriano, cap. to; by Barlandus Chronic. Bra.
bant. ibid. p. z5; and by Harxus Annal. Brab. vol. ii.
520, &c.

discovered

discovered an early aversion to learning, and an B o° K
excessive fondness for those violent and martial -
exercises, to excel in which was the chief pride, s5x6.;
and almost the only study of persons of rank in
that age. Chievres encouraged this taste, either
from a desire of gaining his pupil by indulgence,
or from too flight an opinion of the advantages of
literary accomplifhmentsh. He infiruded him,
however, with great care in the arts of govern-
ment; he made him study the history not only of
his own kingdoms, but of those with which they
were conneted; he accustomed him, from the
time of his assuming the government of Slanders The first

openings of'

in the year one thousand five hundred and fifteen, his cha,,ac
to attend to business; he persuaded him to peruse ter.
all papers relating to public affairs; to be present
at the deliberations of his privy-counfellors, and
to propose to them himself those matters, con-
cerning which he required their opinion'. From
such an education, Charles contracted habits of
gravity and recolletion which scarcely suited his
time of life. The first openings of his genius did
not indicate that superiority which its maturer
age difplayedk. He did not discover in his youth
that impetuosity of spirit which commonly ushers
in an ative and enterprizing manhood. Nor.did
his early obsequiousness to Chievres, and his

h Jovii Vita Adriani, p. 91. Struvii Corpus Hill. Germ.
ii. 967. P. Heuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. vii. c.3. p. 157.

i Memoires de Bellay, 8vo. Par. 1;73 P. 1I. P. Hcutcr.
lib. viii. c. i. p. 184.

k P. Martyr, Ep. 569. 65 .

other

A o0 K other favourites, promise that capacious and de-

l.
:51ó. cifive judgment, which afterwards direced the
5:6. affairs of one half of Europe. But his fubjets,

dazzled with the external accomplifliments of a
graceful figure and manly address, and viewing
his character with that partiality which is always
Ihown to princes during their yuuth, entertained
sanguine hopes of his adding luitre to those crowns
which defccnded to him by the death of Ferdi-
nand.

Stape of THE kingdoms of Spain, as is evident from
Spai, re-
quire vi- the view which I have given of their political
oTrous adi-
minifra- constitution, were at that time in a situation,

which required an administration no less vigor-
ous than prudent. The feudal intfitutions, which
had been introduced into all its different pro-
vinces by the Goths, the Suevi, and the Vandals,
subsisted in great force. The nobles, who were
powerful and warlike, had long possessed all the
exorbiran: privileges, which these institutions
vested ., their order. The cities in Spain were
more numerous and more considerable, than the
genius of feudal government, naturally an enemy
to com:.erce and to regular police, seemed to
admit. The perfunal rights, and political in-
fluence, which the inhabitants of theie cities had
acquired, were extensive. The royal prerogative,
circumliribed by the privileges of the nobility,
and by the pretensions of the people, was confined
within very narrow limits. Under such a form
of government, the principles of discord were

many ;

many; the bond of union was exremely feeble; B o o K
and Spain felt not only all the inconveniencies --v
occasioned by the defeats in the feudal fyflem, '5
but was exposed to disorders arising from the
peculiarities in its own constitution.

DURING the long adminiltration of Ferdinand,

no internal commotion, it is true, had arisen in
Spain. His superior abilities enabled him to
restrain the turbulence of the nobles, and to mode-
rate the jealoufv of the commons. By the wisdom
of his domeflic government, by the sagacity with
which he conducted his foreign operations, and
by the high opinion that his subje&s entertained
of both, he preserved among them a degree of
tranquillity, greater than was natural to a confti-
tution, in which the feeds of discord and disorder
were so copiously mingled. But, by the death of
Ferdinand, there restraints were at once with-
drawn; and faation and difeontent, from being
long repressed, were ready to break out with
fiercer animnoity.

IN order to prevent there evils, Ferdinand had Ferdinand

in his last will taken a most prudent precaution, ell^ pr:n'
by appointing cardinal Ximenes, archbishop of Xim'"en
Toledo, to be sole regent of Callile, until the
arrival of his grandson in Spain. The singular
charaAer of this man, and the extraordinary qua-
lities which marked him out for that office at
liuch a junLure, merit a particular description.
He was defccndtd of an honourable, not of i Hisl;rt .d

e, clurth) tcl .
O *v eaklh,

B o KC wealthy family; and the circumstances of his
- -.--- parents, as well as his own inclinations, having

só6. dete:mined him to enter into the church, he early

ob!:..ned benefices of great value, and which
placed him in the way of the highest preferment.
All there, however, he renounced at once; and
after undergoing a very severe noviciate, aflumed
the habit of St. Francis in a monastery of Obfer-
vantine friars, one of the most rigid orders in the
Romifli church. There he soon became eminent
for his uncommon austerity of manners, and for
thole excefles of fuperflitious devotion, which are
the proper chara&eriftics of the monaftick life.
But notwithstanding these extravagances, to which
weak and enthusiastic minds alone are usually
prone, his underRfanding, naturally penetrating
and decisive, retained its full vigour, and ac-
quired him such great authority in his own order,
as raited him to be their provincial. His repu-
tation for fantity soon procured him the office
of father-confeffor to queen Isabella, which he
accepted with tle utmost relucance. He pre-
served in a court, the fame austerity of manners
which had distinguished him in the cloister. He
continued to make all his journies on foot; he
fubilfted only upon alms; his ats of mortifica-
tion were as severe as ever, and his penances as
rigorous. Isabella, pleased with her choice, con-
ferred on him, not long after, the archbifhoprick
of Toledo, which, next to the papacy, is the
richest dignity in the church of Rome. This
honour he declined with a firmness, which no-

4 thing

thing but the authoritative injuncion of the pope B 0 o K
was able to overcome. Nor did this height of L---r
promotion change his manners. Though obliged 15i6'
to display in public that magnificence which be-
came his itation, he himself retained his monadic
severity. Under his pontifical robes he con-
itantly wore the coarse frock of St. Francis, the
rents in which he used to patch with his own
hands. He at no time used linen; but was com-
monly clad in hair-cloth. He slept always in his
habit, most frequently on the ground, or on
boards, rarely in a bed. He did not taste any of
the delicacies which appeared at his table, but
satisfied himself with that simple diet which the
rule of his order prescribed'. Notwithstanding
there peculiarities, so opposite to the manners of
the world, he pofleffed a thorough knowledge of
its affairs; and no sooner was he called by his
(tation, and by the high opinion which Ferdi-
nand and Isabella entertained of him, to take a
principal Ihare in the administration, than he
displayed talents for business, which rendered the
fame of his wisdom equal to that of his fancdity.
Bold and original in all his plans, his political
conduc flowed from his real character, and par-
took both of its virtues and its defects. His
extensive genius suggested to him schemes, vast
and magnificent. Conscious of the integrity of
his intentions, he pursued there with unremitting

I Hilfoire de I'adminiltraticn du Card. Ximcn, par Mich,
Baudier, 4to. 1i3j. p. 13.

VOL. II. I) and

B 0 O K and undaunted firmness. Accustomed from his

I.
i._-.,- early youth to mortify his own paflions, he shewed

516C. little indulgence towards those of other men.

Taught by his system of religion to check even
his most innocent desires, he was the enemy of
every thing to which he could affix the name of
elegance or pleasure. Though free from any
suspicion of cruelty, he discovered in all his com-
merce with the world a revere inflexibility of
mind, and austerity of character, peculiar to the
monaftick profefion, and which can hardly be
conceived in a country where that is unknown.

Cardinal SUCH was the man to whom Ferdinand com-
pAnt.d r mitted the regency of Castile, and though
harlc. Ximenes was then near fourscore, and perfetly

acquainted with the labour and difficulty of the
office, his natural intrepidity of mind, and zeal
for the public good, prompted him to accept of
it without helitation. Adrian of Utrecht, who
had been sent into Spain a few months before
the death of Ferdinand, produced full powers
from the archduke to assume the name and autho-
rity of regent upon the demise of his grand-
father; but such was the aversion of the Spaniards
to the government of a stranger, and so un-
equal the abilities of the two competitors, that
Adrian's claim would at once have been re-
jeted, if Ximenes himfelfj from complaisance to
his new matter, had not consented to acknow-
ledge him as regent, and to carry on the govern-
ment in conjuncion with him. By this, how-

ever,

ever, Adrian acquired a dignity merely nominal. B 0O K
Ximenes, though he treated him with great de- A-

5156.
cency, and even refpe&, retained the whole power Ximnens

obtains the
in his own hands". role direc-

tion of at.
fairs.
THE cardinal's first care was to observe the mo- Hi precau-

ionq agains:
tions of the infant Don Ferdinand, who having the intsnt

Don Ser.

been flattered with to near a profpet of supreme dinnd.
power, bore the disappointment of his hopes with
greater impatience than could have been expe&ed
of a prince so young. Ximenes, under pretence of
providing more effetually for his safety, removed
him from Guadalupe, the place in which he had
been educated, to Madrid, where he fixed the
residence of the court. There he was under the
cardinal's own eye, and his conduct, with that of
his domefticsj was watched with the utmost atten-
tion".

THE first intelligence he received from the

Low-Countries, gave greater disquiet to the car-
dinal, and convinced him how difficult a talk it
would be to conduct the affairs of a young prince,
under the influence of counsellors unacquainted
with the laws and manner of Spain. No sooner
did the account of Ferdinand's death reach Bruf- Charles f.

rumes the

fels, than Charles, by the advice of his Flemish title of
ministers, resolved to affumne the title of king. in.

m Gometius de reb. gest. Ximenii, p. 15o. fol. Compl.
1569.

Miniana Contin. Marianx, lib. I. c. 2. Baudier, IIlt.
de Ximenes, p. 1i 8.

D By

B 01. K By the laws of Spain, the sole right to the
.---v-. crowns both of Cattile and of Aragon, belonged

15t6. to Joanna; and though her infirmities diiquali-

sicd her fiom governing, this incapacity had not
been declared by any publick at of the Cortes
in either kingdom; so that the Spaniards con-
fidered this resolution, not only as a dire&t
violation of their privileges, but as an unnatural
ul'urpation in a son on the prerogatives of a mo-
ther, towards whom, in her present unhappy
situation, he manifefled a less delicate regard than
her fubjets had always expressed°. The Flemish
court, however, having prevailed both on the pope
and on the emperor to address letters to Charles
as king of Castile; the former of whom, it was
pretended, had a right as head of the church; and
the latter, as head of the empire, to confer this
title; inftru&ions were sent to Ximenes, to prevail
on the Spaniards to acknowledge it. Ximenes,
though he had earnestly remonstrated againit the

ealfure, as no less unpopular than unnecessary,

resolved to exert all his authority and credit in
carrying it into execution, and immediately as-
fenbled fich of the nobles as were then at court.
What Charles required was laid before them; and
when, inltead of complying with his demands,
they began to murmur against such an unpre-
cedented encroachment on their privileges, and
to talk high of the rights of Joanna, and their
oath of allegiance to her, Ximenes haltily inter-

° P. Mart. Ep. SCS.

posed,

poled, and with that firm and decisive tone which B Oo K
was natural to him, told them, that they were -
not called now to deliberate, but to obey; that R..co~nd
their sovereign did not apply to them for advice, thlnu"g ,h^
but expected fubmiflion; and " this day, added ximne"cy

* *'' April 13.

he, Charles shall be proclaimed king of Castile
in Madrid, and the reft of the cities will follow
its example." On the spot he gave orders for
that purpose P; and notwithltanding the novelty
of the pratice, and the secret discontents of many
persons of dittlintion, Charles's title was univer-
sally recognized. In Aragon, where the privi-
leges of the subjee were more extensive, and the
abilities as well as authority of the archbishop
of Saragossa, whom Ferdinand had appointed
regent, were far inferior to thol'e of Ximenes,
the fame obsequiousness to the will of Charles did
not appear, nor was he acknowledged there under
any other chara&er but that of prince, until his
arrival in Spain .

XIMENES, though pofleffed only of delegated rl:: rt.,ire

sO£ C9 I'lldj.

power, which, from his advanced age, he could iRl - .r ,
not expect to enjoy long, airumed, together with r""aive
the character of regent, all the ideas natural to a
monarch, and adopted schemes for extending the
regal authority, which he puriflec with as much
intrepidity and ardour, as if he himself had been

P Gometius, p. 152, &c. Baudier Hi.l. dc Ximcn. p. 1z2.
q P. Mart. Ep. 572.

D 3 to

B 0° o to reap the advantages resulting from their fuc-

_-^"- cess. The exorbitant privileges of the Castilian
J5'6. nobles circunifcribed the prerogative of the prince

within very narrow limits. These the cardinal
confidered as so many unjust extortions from the
crown, and determined to reduce them. Dan-
gerous as the attempt was, there were circum-
Ifances in his situation, which promised him greater
success than any king of Castile could have ex-
peced. His ftrit and prudent cconomy of his
arch;epifcopal revenues, furnilhed him with more
ready money than the crown could at any time
command; the san&ity of his manners, his cha-
rity and munificence, rendered him the idol of
the people; and the nobles themselves, not
fufpe&ting any danger from him, did not observe
his motions with the fame jealous attention; as
they would have watched those of one of their
monarchs.
By derrel. IMMEDIATELY upon his acceffilon to the re-

hc'l0. gency, several of the nobles, fancying that the

reins of government would of consequence be
somewhat relaed, began to aflemble their vassals,
and to prosecute, by force of arms, private quar-
rels and pretensions, which the authority of Ser.
dinand had obliged them to dissemble, or to reT
linquifh. But Ximenes, who had taken into pay
a good body of troops, opposed and defeated all
their designs with unexpected vigour and facilityi
and though he did not treat the authors of these
dilfrders with any cruelty, he forced them to

ads

a&s of submission, extremely mortifying to the B 0 o K
haughty fpiric of Catilian grandees.

,S 6.
BUT while the cardinal's attacks were confined By forming

a body of

to individuals, and every ad of rigour was jufti- troops de
fled by the appearance of necessity, founded on the cown
the forms of justice, and tempered with a mix-
ture of lenity, there was scarcely room for jea-
lousy or complaint. It was not so with his next
measure, which, by striking at a privilege effen-
tial to the nobility, gave a general alarm to the
whole order. By the feudal constitution, the
military power was lodged in the hands of the
nobles, and men of an inferior condition were
called into the field only as their vassals, and to
follow their banners. A king with scanty re-
venues, and a limited prerogative, depended on
these potent barons in all his operations. It was
with their forces he attacked his enemies, and
with them he defended his own kingdom. While
at the head of troops attached warmly to their
own lords, and accustomed to obey no other
commands, his authority was precarious, and
his efforts feeble. From this state Ximenes re-
solved to deliver the crown; and as mercenary
standing armies were unknown under the feudal
government, and would have been odious to a
martial and generous people, he irfued a pro-
clamation, commanding every city in Castile to
enroll a certain number of its burgeies, in order
that they might be trained to the use of arms on
Sundays and holidays; he engaged to provide

D 4 officers

B o0 K officers to command them at the public expence;
A^-v and as an encouragement to the private men,

j6. promied them an exemption from all taxes and

impositions. The frequent incursions of the
Moors from Africa, and the necessity of having
some force ready to oppose them, furnished a
plausible pretence for this innovation. The
object really in view was to secure the king a
body of troops independent of his barons, and
which might ser.ve to counterbalance their power,.
The nobles were not ignorant of his intention,
and saw how effectually the scheme which he had
adopted would accomplilh his end; but as a
meafure.which had the pious ,appearance of re-
sifting the progress of the infiiels was extremely
popular, and as any opppiition.'to it arising from
their order alone, would have been imputed wholly
to interested: motives, they endeavoured to excite
the cities themselves to refute obedience, and to
remonstrate against the proclamation, as incon-
fiftent with ..their charters and privileges. In
consequence of their instigations,. Burgos, Valla-
dolid, and several other cities,.. rose in open mu-
tiny. Some of the grandees declared themselves
their protecors. Violent remonstrances were
presented to the king. His Flemish counsellors
wvere alarmed. Ximenes alone continued firm
and undaunted; and partly by terror, partly by
intreaty; by force in .ome instances, and by for-
bearance, in others, he prevailed on all the re-

r Miniana Continuatio Mariana, fol. Hag. 1733. p. 3.

fra&ory

fra&ory cities to comply.. During his admini- B o0 K

1.

ftration, he continued to execute his plan with _.._
vigour; but soon after his death it was entirely *5''
dropt.

His success in this scheme for reducing the Byc re!ln

the grants
exorbitant power of the nobility, encouraged him of former

monarchs to

to attempt a diminution of their poffeflions, which thenobiiity,
were no less exorbitant. During the contests and
disorders inseparable from the feudal government,
the nobles, ever attentive to their own interest,
and taking advantage of the weakness or distress
of their monarchs, had seized some parts of the
royal demesnes, obtained grants of others, and
having gradually wrested almost the whole out
of the hands of the prince, had annexed them to
their own estates. The rights, by which most of
the grandees held there lands, were extremely
defective; it was from some successful usurpation,
which the crown had been too feeble to dispute,
that many derived their only title to pofTeffion.
An enquiry carried back to the origin of these
encroachments, which were almost co;ival with
the feudal system, was impra&icable; and as it
would have stripped every nobleman in Spain of
great part of his lands, it must have excited a
general revolt. Such a ftep was too bold, even
for the enterprizing genius of Ximenes. He
confined himself to the reign of Ferdinand; and
beginning with the pensions granted during that

P. Mart. Ep. 556, &c. Gometius, r. 160, &c.

time,.

B O 0 K time, refused to make any farther payment, be-
-. -v cause all right to them expired with his life. He
356' .then called to account such as had acquired

crown lands under the adminifiration of that
monarch, and at once resumed whatever he had
alienated. The effets of there revocations ex-
tended to many persons of high rank; for though
Ferdinand was a prince of little generosity, yet
he and Isabella having been raiied to the throne
of Castile by a powerful fa&ion of the nobles,
they were obliged to reward the zeal of their
adherents with great liberality, and the royal
demesnes were their only fund for that purpose.
The addition made to the revenue of the crown
by these revocations, together with his own frugal
cconomy, enabled Xirpenes not only to discharge
all the debts which Ferdinand had left, and to
remit considerable fums to Slanders, but to pay
the officers of his new militia, and to eflablilh
magazines more pumerous, and better furnished
with artillery, arm.s, and warlike tores, than
Spain had ever poflffed in any former age'. The
prudent and disinterested application of these
fums, was a full apology to the people for the
rigour with which they were exacted.

'rie nnb!es THE nobles, alarmed at these repeated attacks,
.iZiuits; began to think of precautions for the safety of

their order. Many cabals were formed, loud
complaints were uttered, and defperace refolu.

t Flechier Vie de Ximen. ii. 600.

tions

tions taken; but before they proceeded to extre. B o o0
mities, they appointed some of their numbers to --
examine the powers in consequence of which the '51'
cardinal exercised aas of such high authority.
The admiral of Castile, the duke de Infantado,
and the Conde de Benevento, grandees of the
first rank, were entrusted with this commission.
Ximenes received them with cold civility, and in
answer to their demand, produced the testament
of Ferdinand by which he was appointed regent,
together with the ratification of that deed by
Charles. To both there they obje&ted; and he
endeavoured to establish their validity. As the
conversation grew warm, he led them insensibly
towards a balcony, from which they had a view of hit ,itho.lt

f¢cctds.

a large body of troops under arms, and of a for-
midable train of artillery. " Behold," fays he,
pointing to there and raising his voice, c" the
powers which I have received from his Catholick
majesty. With there I govern Castile; and with
there I will govern it, until the king your matier
and mine takes pofleflion of his kingdom"." A
declaration so bold and haughty silenced them, and
astonished their associates. To take arms against
a man aware of his danger, and prepared for his
defence, was what despair alone would dicate.
All thoughts of a general confederacy against the
cardinal's adminiltration were laid afidc; and
except from some flight commotions, excited by
the private resentment of particular noblemen,

e Flcch. ii. 551, Ferrcras, Hilt. viii. 433.

the

B o 0 I the tranquillity of Caflile suffered no interrup-

' tion.

I516.

Thwarted IT was not only from the opposition of the
by ,les Spanish nobility that obstacles arose to the exe-
miniafs. cution of the cardinal's schemes; he had a con-

slant struggle to maintain with the Flemiflh mini-
fters, who, presuming upon their favour with
the young king, aimed at direting the affairs of
Spain, as well as those of their own country.
Jealous of his great abilities and. independent
spirit, they confidered Ximenes rather as a rival
who might circumscribe their power, than as a
minister, who by his prudence and vigour was
adding to the grandeur and authority of their
master. Every complaint against his adminiftra-
tion was listened to with pleasure by the courtiers
in the Low Countries. Unnecessary obftruc-
tions were thrown by their means in the way of
all his measures; and though they could not,
either with decency or safety, deprive him of the
office of regent, they endeavoured to lessen his
authority by dividing it. They soon discovered
that Adrian of Utrecht,, already joined with him
in office, had neither genius nor spirit sufficient
to give the leaR check to his proceedings; and

An 2a0i. therefore Charles, by their advice, added to the
bor f ,m commifion of regency La Chau, a Flemish gen-
p^iatcd. tieman, and afterwards Ameritorf, a nobleman

of Holland; the former diftinguihed for his
address, the latter for his firmness. Ximenes,
though no stranger to the malevolent intention

rI~~ ~of

of the Flemihf courtiers, received these new BO K
associates with all the external marks of difiinc- --
tion due to the office with which they were in- '516.
vested; but when they came to enter upon bufi-
ness, he abated nothing of that air of superiority
with which he had treated Adrian, and still re-
tained the sole direction of affairs. The Spaniards, Ximenrre

t tain. the di.

more averse, perhaps, than any other people, to trh atlof
the government of itrangers, approved of all his awirs"
efforts to preserve his authority. Even the
nobles, influenced by this national palflon, and
forgetting their jealousies and discontents, chore
rather to fee the supreme power in the hands of
one of their countrymen, whom they feared,
than in those of foreigners, whom they hated.

XIMENES, though engaged in such great H, r.,er

schemes ofdomeRick policy, and cmbarraffed by fu var in
the artifices and intrigues of the Flenmif mi-
nifters, had the burden of two foreign wars to
support. The one was in Navarre, invaded by
its unfortunate monarch, John d'Albrec. The
death of Ferdinand, the absence of Charles, the
discord and difaffeaion which reigned among the
Spanish nobles, seemed to present him with a
favourable opportunity of recovering his domi-
nions. The cardinal's vigilance, however, de-
feated a measure so well concerted. As he forc-
saw the danger to which that kingdom might be
exposed, one of his first a&s of adminifiration
was to order thither a confiderablc body of troops.
While the king was employed with one part of

his

BOO K his army in the siege of St. Jean Pied en Port,
* -v-:' Villalva, an officerof great experience and courage,

attacked the other by furprize, and cut it to pieces.
The king instantly retreated with precipitation,
and an end was put to the war . But as Navarre
was filled at that time with towns and castles
slightly fortified, and weakly garrisoned, which
being unable to resist an enemy, served only to
furnilh him with places of retreat; Ximenes, al-
ways bold and decisive in his measures, ordered
every one of there to be dismantled, except Pam-
peluna, the fortifications of which he proposed to
render very strong. To this uncommon precau-
tion Spain owes the pofleflion of Navarre. The
French, since that period, have often entered,
and have as often over-run the open country;
while they were exposed to all the inconvenien-
cies attending an invading army, the Spaniards
have easily drawn troops from the neighbouring
provinces to oppose them; and the French, being
delfitute of strong towns to which they could
retire, have been obliged to abandon their con-
quest with as much rapidity as they gained it.

His ope2. THE war which he carried on in Africa, against
tions in
Aftricale the famous adventurer Horuc Barbarossa, who,
fortunate from a private corsair, raised himself, by his

singular valour and address, to be king of Algiers
and Tunis, was far from being equally ficcefsful.
The ill conduct of the Spanilh general, and the

· P. Mart. Ep. 570.

rash

ra(h valour of his troops, presented Barbarolra B 0o K
with an easy victory. Many perifled in the -
battle, more in the retreat, and the remainder ls
returned into Spain covered with infamy. The
magnanimity, however, with which the cardinal
bore this disgrace, the only one he experienced
during his administration, added new luitre to
his characerY. Great composure of temper un-
der a disappointment, was not expe6ted from a
man to remarkable for the eagerness and impa-
tience with which he urged on the execution of
all his schemes.

THIS disaster was soon forgotten; while the Corup'on

conduct of the Flemiih court proved the cause of mil mi;i-
constant uneasiness, not only to the cardinal, but tiU!a, .D
to the whole Spanili nation. All the great cic'",.
qualities of Chievres, the prime miniser and
favourite of the young king, were sullied with an
ignoble and fordid avarice. The accefion of his
matier to the crown of Spain, opened a new and
copious source for the gratification of this pafion.
During the time of Charles's residence in
Slanders, the whole tribe of pretenders to offices
or to favour resorted thither. They soon dif-
covered that, without the patronage of Chievres,
it was vain to hope for preferment; nor did
they want sagacity to find out the proper method
of securing his protection. Vast rums of money
were drawn out of Spain. Every thing was venal,

r Gomctius, lib. vi. p. 1;9.
4 annd

B o K and disposed of to the highest bidder. After the

-~ example of Chievres, the inferior Flemish mini-
'5'6' fters engaged in this traffick, which became as

general and avowed, as it was infamousz. The
Spaniards were filled with rage when they beheld
offices of great importance to the welfare of their
country, set to sale by Rfrangers, unconcerned for
its honour or its happiness. Ximenes, disinterested
in his whole administration, and a stranger, from
his native grandeur of mind, to the paflion of
avarice, inveighed with the utmost boldness
against the venality of the Flemings. He repre-
sented to the king, in strong terms, the murmurs
and indignation which their behaviour excited
among a free and high-fpirited people, and be-
fought him to set out without loss of time for
Spain, that, by his pretence, he might dissipate
the clouds which were gathering all over the
kingdom'.

Cbalteper- CHARLES was fully sensible that he had de-
ximeneto layed too long to take pofleflion of his dominions

ait Splin. in Spain. Powerful obstacles, however, flood

in his way, and detained him in the Low-Coun-
tries. The war which the league of Cambray
had kindled in Italy, still fubfitted; though,
during its course, the armies of all the parties
engaged in it had changed their deltination and
their objets. France was now in alliance with
Venice, which it had at lirif combined to destroy.

X Miniana, Contin. I. i. c. z. 1 P. Mart. Ep. {76.

Maximilian

Maximilian' and Ferdinand had for some years B o o K
carried on hostilities against France, their origi- --
nal ally, to the valour of whose troops the con- '
federacy had been indebted for all its success,
Together with his kingdoms, Ferdinand tranS-
mitted this war to his grandson; and there was
reason. to expet that Maximilian, always fond of
new enterprizes, would persuade the young mo-
narch to enter into it with ardour. But the Fle-
mings, who had long poffefred an extensive com-
merce, which, during the league of Cambray,
had grown to a great height upon the ruins of
the Venetian trade, dreaded a rupture with
France; and Chievres, sagacious to discern the
true interest of his country, and not warped on
this occasion by his love of wealth, warmly de-
clared for maintaining peace with the French
nation. Francis I. destitute of allies, and soli-
citous to tecure his late conquefs in Italy by a
treaty, listened with joy to the firsl overtures of
accommodation. Chievres himself conducted the
negociation in name of Charles. Gouffier ap-
peared as plenipotentiary for Francis. Each of
them had presided over the education of the prince
whom he represented. They had both adopted
the fame pacific system; and were equally per-
fuaded that the union of the two monarchs was
the happiest event for themselves, as well as for
their kingdoms. In such hands the negociation
did not languish. A few days after opening their Ap-,a;.tn.
conferences at Noyon, they concluded a treaty of i, ',,,,
confederacy and mutual defence between the two ^,'6'i

VOL. II. E monarchs,

B 0 0 K monarchs; the chief articles in which were, that
L--. Francis should give in marriage to Charles his

'56.( eldest daughter, the princess Louise, an infant of

a year old, and as her dowry, Ihould make over
to him all his claims and pretensions upon the
kingdom of Naples; that, in consideration of
Charles's being already in possession of Naples,
he should, until the accomplishment of the mar-
riage, pay an hundred thousand crowns a year to
theFrench king; and the half of that fum annually,
as long as the princess had no children; that
when Charles shall arrive in Spain, the heirs of
the king of Navarre may represent to him their
right to that kingdom; and if it do not give
them fatisfation, Francis ihould be at liberty
to afift them with all his forcesb. This alli-
ance not only united Charles and Francis, but
obliged Maximilian, who was unable alone to
cope with the French and Venetians, to enter into
a treaty with those powers, which put a final
period to the bloody and tedious war that the
league of Cambray had occasioned. Europe en-
joyed a few years of universal tranquillity, and
was indebted for that blessing to two princes,
whose rivalfhip and ambition kept it in perpetual
diicord and agitation during the remainder of
their reigns.

The Fle. By the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a safe
to Charle' pairage into Spain. It was not, however, the
visit to
SpiJn.

b Lconiard Recucil des Traitez, tom. ii. 69.

interest

interest of his Flemish ministers, that he should B 00 K
visit that kingdom soon. While he resided in --
Slanders, the revenues of the Spanish crown were 56
spent there, and they engrossed, without any
competitors, all the effects of their monarch's
generosity; their country became the feat of
government, and all favours were dispensed by
them. Of all these advantages they run the
rifque of feeing themselves deprived, from the
moment that their sovereign entered Spain. The
Spaniards would naturally assume the direction
of their own affairs; the Low Countries would
be confidered only as a province of that mighty
monarchy; and they who now difributed the
favours of the prince to others, must then be
content to receive them from the hands of
strangers. But what Chievres chiefly wished to Afaid of
avoid was, an interview between the king and Xi"ant.
Ximenes. On the one hand, the wildom, the
integrity, and the magnanimity of that prelate,
gave him a wonderful ascendant over the minds
of men; and it was extremely probable, that
these great qualities, added to the reverence due
to his age and office, would command the refpe&
of a young prince, who, capable of noble and.
generous sentiments himftlf, would, in propor-
tion to his admiration of the cardinal's virtues,
lel'en his deference towards persons of another
character. Or, on the other hand, if Charles
ihould allow his Ffemilh favourites to retain all
the influence over his councils which they at

E 2 present

B o o K present possessed, it was easy to foresee that the
' -v;-. cardinal would remonstrate loudly against such an

S516. indignity to the Spanifl nation, and vindicate

the rights of his country with the fame intrepi-
dity and success, that he had asserted the prero-
gatives of the crown. For these realbns, all his
Flemifhl counsellors combined to retard his de-
parture; and Charles, iuntilfpicous, fiom want
of experience, and fond of his native country,
suffered himself to be unnecessarily detained in
the Netherlands a whole year after signing the
treaty of Noyon.

517. THE repeated entreaties of Ximcnle3, the ad-

Charles em-
harks for vice of his grandfather Maximilian, and the im-

patient murmurs of his Spanifl fubjets, prevail-
ed on him at last to embark. lie was attended
not only by Chievres, his prime minister, but by
a numerous and splendid train of the Flemish
nobles, fond of beholding the grandeur, or of
:.;p(.3. iharing in the bounty of their prince. After a

dangerous voyage, he landed at Villa Viciofa, in
the province of Aflurias, and was received with
such loud acclamations of joy, as a new monarch,
whose arrival was so ardently desired, had reason
to expect. The Spanifl nobility reforred to their
sovereign from all parts of the kingdom, and
displayed a magnificence which the Flemings
were unable to emulatec.

c P. Mart. Ep. 599. 6oz.

XlMENES,

XIMENES, who confidered the presence of the B o0 K

king as the greatest blefling to his dominions,
was advancing towards the coast, as fast as the Hi'F.ni
infirn state of his health would permit, in order minift

c ndeavour
to receive him. During his regency, and not- to prevent

an inter-

withstanding his extreme old age, he had abated, e;,wwith
in no degree, the rigour or frequency of his ximeu"".
mortifications; and to these he added such la-
borious assiduity in buirfiers, as would have worn
out tile mutt youthful and vigorous conlitution.
Every day he employed several hours in devo-
tion; he celebrated mars in person; he even
allotted some space for fltndy. NotwithfRanding
these occupations, he regularly attended the coun-
cil; he received and read all papers precfntcd to
him; he di&ated letters and inftrutions; and
took under his infpedcion all business, civil, ec-
cleliaftical, or military. Every moment of his
time was tilled up with lbme serious employment.
The only amusement in which he indulged him-
lelf, by way of relaxation after business, was to
canvass, with a few friars and divines, bome in-
tricate artricle in fcholaftick theology. Wafted
by such a course of life, the infirmities of age
daily grew upon him. On his journey, a violent
disorder seized him at Bos Equillos, attended
with uncommon fymptons; which his followers
confidered as the effe& of poison"', but could not
agree whether the crime ought to be imputed to
the hatred of the Spanish nobles, or to the malice

d Miuiana, Contin. lib. i. c. ;,

E 3 of

B o0o K of the Flemilh courtiers. This accident obliging
$-- ' him to flop Ihort, he wrote to Charles, and with
cha,,el' his usual boldness advised him to dismiss all the
gXimenera.te rangers in his train, whose numbers and credit

gave offence already to the Spaniards, and would
ere long alienate the affetions of the whole
people. At the fame time he earnestly desired to
have an interview with the king, that he might
inform him of the state of the nation, and the
temper of his subje&s. To prevent this, not
only the Flemings, but the Spanish grandees,
employed all their address, and industriously kept
Charles at a distance from Aranda, the place to
which the cardinal had removed. Through their
fuggefions, every measure that he recommended
was rejeted; the utmost care was taken to make
him feel, and to point out to the whole nation,
that his power was on the decline; even in things
purely trivial, such a choice was always made, as
was deemed most difagrecable to him. Ximenes
did not bear this treatment with his usual forti-
tude of spirit. Conscious of his own integrity
and merit, he expe&ed a more grateful return
from a prince to whom he delivered a kingdom
more flourishing than it had been in any former
age, together with authority more extensive and
better established, than the most illustrious of his
ancestors had ever possessed. He could not,
therefore, on many occasions, refrain from giving
vent to his indignation and complaints. He la-
mented the fate of his country, and foretold the
calamities which it would susser from the in-

folence,

folence, the rapaciousness, and ignorance of B 0 0 K
strangers. While his mind was agitated by there --
palions, he received a letter from the king, in
which, after a few cold and formal expressions of
regard, he was allowed to retire to his diocese;
that after a life of such continued labour, he
might end his days in tranquillity. This meflage His death,
proved fatal to Ximenes. His haughty mind, it
is probable, would not survive disgrace perhaps
his generous heart would not bear the profpet
of the misfortunes ready to fall on his country.
Whichsoever of these opinions we embrace, cer-
tain it is that he expired a few hours after read- NOv. s.
ing the letter . The variety, the grandeur, and
the success of his schemes, during a regency of
only twenty months, leave it doubtful, whether
his sagacity in council, his prudence in conduct,
or his boldness in execution, deserve the greatest
praise. His reputation is still high in Spain,
not only for wisdom, but for san&ity; and he is
the only prime minister mentioned in history,
whom his contemporaries reverenced as a faint',
and to whom the people under his government
ascribed the power of working miracles.

SOON after the death of Ximenes, Charles made is5t.

Cor ec held

his publick entry, with great pomp, into Valla- at vll.d
dolid, whither he had flummoned the Cortes of lid.
Catlile. Though he assumed on all occalions

* Marfollier, Vie de Ximenes, p. 447. Gomerius, lib.vii.
p. 206, &c. Baudier His. de Ximen. p. zo8.

r Flechier, Vie de Ximen. ii. p. 746.

E 4 the

B 0 0
o the name of king, that title had never been

v- ' acknowledged in the Cortes. The Spaniards
I5ZL confidering Joanna as possessed of the sole right

to the crown, and no example of a son's having
enjoyed the title of king during the life of his
parents occurring in their history, the Cortes
discovered all that scrupulous refpe& for ancient
forms, and that aversion to innovation, which
are conspicuous in popular alfemblies. The pre-
fence, however, of their prince, the address, the
artifices, and the threats of his ministers, pre-

Declare vailed on them at last to proclaim him king, in
Charles
king. conjuncion with his mother, whose name they

appointed to be placed before that of her tbn in
all publick acs. But, when they made this con-
cefflon, they declared, that if, at any future
period, Joanna should recover the exercise of rea-
son, the whole royal authority should return into
her hands. At the fame time, they voted a free
gift of fix hundred thousand ducats to be paid in
three years, a fum more considerable than had
ever been granted to any former monarch g.

Direontent NOTWITHSTANDINO this obsequiousness of the
ofthe Carl|-
lia. andt Cortes to the will of the king, the most violent
the causra
'~"si'" symptoms of diffatisfaaion with his government

began to break out in the kingdom. Chievres
had acquired over the mind of the young mo-
narch the ascendant not only of a tutor, but of a

J Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. P. Mart. Ep. 608,
Sandov. p. 12.

parent,

parent Charles eiremed to have no sentiments B O0 K
but those which his minister inspired, and scarcely '-
uttered a word but what he put into his mouth. ,s.
He was constantly surrounded by Flemings; no
person got access to hitn without their permiflion;
nor was any admitted to audience but in their
presence. As he spoke the Spanifl language
very imperfetly, his answers were always ex-
tremely (hort, and often delivered with hefita-
tion. From all there circumstances, many of the
Sp niards were led to believe that he was a prince
of a flow and narrow genius. Some pretended to
discover a strong resemblance between him and
his mother, and began to whisper that his capa-
city for government would never be far superior
to hers; and though they who had the best op-
portunity of judging concerning his chara&er,
maintained, that notwithstanding such unpro.
mifing appearances, he possessed a large fund of
knowledge, as well as of sagacity h yet all agreed
in condemning his partiality towards his country-
men, and his attachment to his favourites as un-
reasonable and immoderate. Unfortunately for
Charles, these favourites were unworthy of his
confidence. To amass wealth seems to have been
their only aim; and as they had reason to fear,
that either their malter's good sense, or the in-
dignation of the Spaniards, might soon abridge
their power, they hattened to improve the present
opportunity, and their avarice was the more ra-

Sandoval, p. 31. P.Mart. Ep.6;5.

7 pacious,

B o o K pacious, because they expe&ed their authority to

v N« be of no long duration. All honours, offices,
5lst. and benefices, were either engrossed by the Fle-

mings, or publickly fold by thepn. Chievres,
his wife, and Sauvage, whom Charles, on the
death of Ximenes, had imprudently raised to be
chancellor of Castile, vied with each other in all
the refinements of extortion and venality. Not
only the Spanilh historians, who, from resent-
ment, may be fufpeAed of exaggeration, but
Peter Martyr Angleria, an Italian, who resided
at that time in the court of Spain, and who was
under no temptation to deceive the persons to
whom his letters are addressed, give a description
which is almost incredible, of the infariable and
lhamelefs covetousness of the Flemings. Ac-
cording to Angleria's calculation, which he asserts
to be extremely moderate, they remitted into the
Low Countries, in the space of ten months, no
less a fum than a million and one hundred thou-
sand ducats. The nomination of William de
Croy, Chievres' nephew, a young man not of
canonical age, to the archbilhoprick of Toledo,
exasperated the Spaniards more than all there
exations. They confidered the elevation of a
stranger to the head of their church, and to the
richest benefice in the kingdom, not only as an in-
jury, but as an insult to the whole nation; both
clergy and laity, the former from interest, the latter
from indignation, joined in exclaiming against it'.

i Sandoval, 28-31. P. Mart. Bp. 608. 611. 613, 614.
6zz, 623. 639. Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. p. 8.

CHARLES

CHARLES leaving CaRile thus disgusted with B o1o OK

his adminifiration, set out for Saragossa, the capital A- _
ofAragon, that he might be present in the Cortes chxi
of that kingdom. On his way thither, he took hot,,tho
leave of his brother Ferdinand, whom he sent Asag"
into Germany on the pretence of visiting their
grandfather, Maximilian, in his old age. To
this prudent precaution, Charles owed the pre-
servation of his Spanish dominions. During the
violent commotions which arose there loon after
this period, the Spaniards would infallibly have
offered the crown to a prince, who was the darling
of the whole nation; nor did Ferdinand want
ambition, or counsellors, that might have prompt-
ed him to accept of the offerk.

THE Aragonefe had not hitherto acknowledged The Atago

.ere mor

Charles as king, nor would they allow the Cortes ,.nt,.be
to be assembled in his name, but in that of the ca.lthL
Juftiza, to whom, during an inter-regnum, this
privilege belonged . The oppoiition Charles
had to struggle with in the Cortes of Aragon,
was more violent and obfinate than that which
he had overcome in Castile; after long delays,
however, and with much difficulty, he perfuad-
ed the members to confer on him the title of
king, in conjun&ion with his mother. At the
fame time he bound himself by that solemn oath,
which the Aragonefe exacted of their king, never

k P. Martyr, Ep. 619. Ferrerat, viii. 460.
P. Martyr, Ep. 605.

to

B 0o K to violate any of their rights or liberties. When

I.
X-- _ a donative was demanded, the members were still

'5'' more intratable; many months elapsed before

they would agree to grant Charles two hundred
thousand ducats, and that fum they appropriated
ib firitly for paying debts of the crown, which
had long been forgotten, that a very small part
of it came into the king's hands. What had hap-
pened in Castile taught them caution, and deter-
mined them rather to satisfy the claims of their
fellow-citizens, how obsolete bfever, than to
furnish strangers the means of enriching them-
ielves with the spoils of their country"'

DURING these proceedings of the Cortes, am-

bafladors arrived at Saragolfa from Francis I.
and the young king of Navarre, demanding the
restitution of that kingdom in terms of the treaty
of Noyon. But neither Charles, nor the Cafti-
lian nobles whom he consulted on this occasion,
discovered any inclination to part with.this acqui-
fition. A conference held toon after at Mont-
pelier, in order to bring this matter to an ami-
cable iflue, was altogether fruitless; while the
French urged the injustice of the usurpation, the
Spaniards were attentive only to its importance".
,S,9. FROM Aragon, Charles proceeded to Catalonia,

where he wafted as much time, encountered more

m P. Mart'r, Ep. 61i-634.

P. Martyr, Ep. 605. 633. 640.

difficulties,

difficulties, and gained less money. The Fle- B 0 0 K
mings were now become so odious in every pro- I
vince of Spain by their exaftions, that the desire 'S9.
of mortifying them, and of disappointing their
avarice, augmented the jealousy with which a
free people usually condu& their deliberations.

THE Castilians, who had felt most sensibly the Comiin·-

weight and rigour of the oppressive fcheines Cafiolia.o
carried on by the Flemings, resolved no longer Flemill;.
to submit with a tameness fatal to themselves, "'i,',
and which rendered them the objets of scorn
among the reft of the Spaniards. Segovia, To-
ledo, Seville, and fcveral other cities of the first
rank, entered into a confederacy for the defence
of their rights and privileges; and notwithfland-
ing the silence of the nobility, who, on this
occasion, discovered neither the public fpirir,
nor the resolution which became their order, the
confederates laid before the king a full view of
the state of the kingdom, and of the mal-admi-
firation of his favourites. The preferment of
strangers, the exportation of the current coin,
the increase of taxes, were the grievances of
which they chiefly complained ; and of these
they demanded redress with that boldness which
is natural to a free people. Thefl remonflrances,
presented at fir4t at Saragossa, and rcnewed after-
wards at Barcelona, Charles treated with great
neglet. The confederacy, however, of tieie
cities, at this juncture, was the beginning of that
famous union among the commons of Catlilc,

which

0 0 K which not long after threw the kingdom into

I.
.-v such violent convulsions as shook the throne, and
'519' almofl overturned the constitution °.

SooN after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he

received the account of an event which interested
him much more than the murmurs of the Cafti-
lians, or the scruples of the Cortes of Catalonia.

Deathofthe This was the death of the emperor Maximilian;
emperor Maximi- an occurrence of finall importance in itielf, for
Jaury la. he was a prince conspicuous neither for his vir-

tues, nor his power, nor his abilities; but ren-
dered by its consequences more memorable than
any that had happened during several ages. It
broke that profound and universal peace which
then reigned in the Christian world; it excited
a rivalfhip between two princes, which threw all
Europe into agitation, and kindled wars more
general, and of longer duration, than had hitherto
been known in modern times.

THE revolutions occasioned by the expedition

of the French king, Charles VIII. into Italy, had
inspired the European princes with new ideas
concerning the importance of the Imperial dig-
nity. The claims of the empire upon some of
the Italian fiates were numerous; its jurifdition
over others was extensive; and though the for-
mer had been almost abandoned, and the latter
reldor exerciscd, under princes of Render abi-

P. Martyr, Ep. 630. Frreras, viii. 464.

lities

lities and of little influence, it was obvious, that B 0 O I
in the hands of an emperor possessed of power or --
genius, they would be employed as engines for 15,9'
itretching his dominion over the greater part
of that country. Even Maximilian, feeble and
unsteady as his condu&t always was, had availed
himself of the infinite pretensions of the empire,
and had reaped advantage from every war and
every negociation in Italy during his reign.
These considerations, added to the dignity of the
station, confefledly the first among Chritian
princes, and to the rights inherent in the office,
which, if exerted with vigour, were far from
being inconsiderable, rendered the Imperial crown
more than ever an objeEt of ambition.

NOT long before his death, Maximilian had Maxim;iiun

had endea-

discovered great solicitude to preserve this dig- voure. ,
nity in the Austrian family, and to procure the ,"c e'
king of Spain to be chosen his successor. But crowntooh"
he himself having never been crowned by the
pope, a ceremony deemed essential in that age,
was confidered only as emperor elel. Though
historians did not attend to that diftin&ion, nei-
ther the Italian nor German chancery bellowed
any other title upon him than that of king of
the Romans; and no example occurring in his-
tory of any perlbn's being chosen a successor to
a king of the Romans, the Germans, always
tenacious of their forms, and unwilling to confer
upon Charles an office for which their conftitu-

~~~~~~~2 ~~tion

3 0 0 K tion knew no name, obstinately refused to gratify

, Maximilian in that point .

2519.

Charles and By his death, this difficulty was at once re-
Francis i.
competitor, moved, and Charles openly aspired to that dig-
pirL em- nity which his grandfather had attempted, with-

out success, to secure for him. At the fame
time, Francis I. a powerful rival, entered the
lilts against him; and the attention of all Europe
was fixed upon this competition, no leTs illuftri-
ous from the high rank of the candidates, than
from the importance of the prize for which they
contended. Each of them urged his pretensions
with sanguine expectations, and with no unpro-
Prer.nfons mifing profpea of success. Charles confidered

c l'te, tile Imperial crown as belonging to him of right,

from its long continuance in the Aulfrian line;
he knew that none of the German princes pof-
sessed power or influence enough to appear as his
antagonist; he flattered himself, that no confi-
deration would induce the natives of Germany to
exalt any foreign prince to a dignity, which
during so many ages had been deemed peculiar
to their own nation; and least of all, that they
would confer this honour upon Francis I. the
bovereign of a people whose genius, and laws,
and manners, differed lb widely from those of

P Cuicciardini, lib. 13. p. 15. I-Ifl. Gener. d'Allemagnc,

par P. Barre, tom. viii. part i. p. 1c87. P. Heutcr. Rcr.
Auitr. lib. vii. c. 17. 179. lib. viii. c. ,. p. 183.

the

the Germans, that it was hardly possible to efla- B 0 0 K
blith any cordial union between them; he trusted
not a little to the effet of Maximilian's negocia- ''9
tions, which, though they did not attain their
end, had prepared the minds of the Germans for
his elevation to the Imperial throne; but what
he relied on as a chief recommendation, was the
fortunate situation of his hereditary dominions in
Germany, which served as a natural barrier
to the empire against the encroachments of the
Turkish power. The conquests, the abilities,
and the-ambition of Sultan Selim II. had spread
over Europe, at that time, a general and well-
founded alarm. By his victories over the Ma-
malukes, and the extirpation of.that gallant body
of men, he had not only added Egypt and Syria
to his empire, but had secured to it such a degree
of internal tranquillity, that he was ready to turn
against Chriflendom the whole force of his arms,
which nothing hitherto had been able to refitl.
The most eff'e&ual expedient for flopping the
progress of this torrent, seemed to be the ele&ion
of an emperor, pofeffed of extensive territories
in that country, where its first impreiflon would
be felt, and who, besides, could combat this
formidable enemy with all the forces of a power-
fil monarchy, and with all the wealth furnished
by the mines of the new world, or the commerce
of the Low Countries. These were the argu-
ments by which Charles publickly supported his
claim; and to men of integrity and reflclion,
they appeared to be not only plausible but con-

YOL. II. F vincing.

B 0o K vincing. He did not, however, truRl the fuc-
. ,1 cess of his cause to these alone. Great fums of

5'9' money were remitted from Spain; all the refine-

ments and artifice of negociation were employed;
and a considerable body of troops, kept on foot
by the states of the Circle of Suabia, was secretly
taken into his pay. The venal were gained by
prefcnts; the objecions of the more scrupulous
were answered or eluded; some feeble princes
were threatened and over-awed%.
Of France. ON the other hand, Francis supported his

claim with equal eagerness, and no less confidence
of its being well founded. His emissaries con-
tended that it was now high time to convince the
princes of the houlie of AutLria that the Imperial
crown was elceive, and not hereditary; that
other persons might aspire to an honour which
their arrogance had come to regard as the pro-
perty of their family; that it required a sovereign
of mature judgment, and of approved abilities,
to hold the reins of government in a country
where such unknown opinions concerning reli-
gion had been publilhed, as had thrown the minds.
of men into an uncommon agitation, which
threatened the most violent effects that a young
prince, without experience, and who had hither-
to given no specimens of his genius for command,
was no equal match for Selim, a monarch grown

q Guic.lib. 3. r19. Sleidan, Hil. of theReformat. 4.
.Suuvii Corp il. Cil. erman. ii. 971. Not. 2s.

old

old in the art of war, and in the course of vicory; B °° K
whereas a king, who in his early youth had
triumphed over the valour and discipline of the
Swiss, till then reckoned invincible, would be an
antagonist not unworthy the Conqueror of the
East; that the fire and impetuosity of the French
cavalry, added to the discipline and ilability of
the German infantry, would form an army so
irrefiflible, that, instead of waiting the approach
of the Ottoman forces, it might carry hostilities
into the heart of their dominions; that the elec-
tion of Charles would be inconfiflent with a fun-
damental constitution, by which the person who
holds the crown of Naples, is excluded front
aspiring to the Imperial dignity that his eleva-
tion to that honour would soon kindle a war in
Italy, on account of his pretensions to the dutchy
of Milan, the effeAs of which could not fail
of reaching the empire, and might prove fatal to
it'. But while his ambassadors enlarged upon
these and other topicks of the fame kind, in all
the courts of Germany, Francis, sensible of the
prejudices entertained against him as a foreigner,
unacquainted with the German language or man-
ners, endeavoured to overcome there, and to
gain the favour of the princes by immense gifts,
and by infinite promiles. As the expeditious
method of transmitting money, and the decent
mode of conveying a bribe, by bills of exchange,

r Guicc. lib. 13. 160. Sleil. p. :6. Gcor. Sabini de elct.
Car. V. Hiftoria apud Scardii Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. p. 4.

I,' ~ was

B 0 0 was then little known, the French ambafladors

^ -. travelled with a train of horses loaded with trea-
'59'l sure, an equipage not very honourable for that

prince, by whom they were employed, and in-
famous for those to whom they were sent'.

Vew and THE other European princes could not remain
intcreft of
other ftatcs. indifferent fpe&tators of a contest, the decision of

which so nearly affected them. Their common
interest ought naturally to have formed a general
combination, in order to disappoint both com-
petitors, and to prevent either of them from
obtaining such a pre-eminence in power and
dignity, as might prove dangerous to the liberties
of Europe. But the ideas with respect to a proper
difiribution and balance of power were so lately
introduced into the system of European policy,
that they were not hitherto objects of sufficient
attention. The pafllons of some princes, the
want of foresight in others, and the fear of giving
offence to the candidates, hindered such a falu-
tary union of the powers of Europe, and ren-
dered them either totally negligent of the publick
safety, or kept them from exerting themnfelves
with vigour in its behalf.

of the THE Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded the
S6WfAS elevation of either of the contending monarchs,

and though they wished to have seen some prince
whose dominions were less extensive, and whose

' Memoires de Marech. de Fleuranges, p. 296.

power

power was more moderate, feated on the Im- B 010 C
perial throne, were prompted, however, by their - -r
hatred of the French nation, to give an open
preference to the pretensions of Charles, while
they used their utmost influence to frustrate those
of Francis'.

THE Venetians easily discerned, that it was the of the Ve.

interest of their republick to have both the rivals
set aside; but their jealousy of the house of Au-
stria, whose ambition and neighbourhood had
been fatal to their grandeur, would not permit
them to at up to their own ideas, and led them
hastily to give the fan&ion of their approbation
to the claim of the French king.

IT was equally the interest, and more in the of Hery

power of Henry VIII. of England, to prevent
either Francis or Charles from acquiring a dig-
nity which would raise them so far above other
monarchs. But though Henry often boasted,
that he held the balance of Europe in his hand,
he had neither the steady attention, the accurate
dilcernment, nor the difpaflionate temper which
that delicate function required. On this occasion
it mortified his vanity so much, to fee himself
excluded from that noble competition which
reflected such honour upon the two antagonists,
that he took a resolution of fending an ambafra,
dor'into Germany, and of declaring himself a

Sahlnus, p. 6.

F 3 candidate

X 0o0 K candidate for the Imperial throne. The am-
L I.- baffador, though loaded with caresses by the Ger-

1519g man princes and the pope's nuncio, informed his

malter, that he could hope for no success in
a claim which he had been so late in preferring.
Henry, imputing his disappointment to that cir-
cumftance alone, and toothed with this oftenta-
tious display of his own importance, seems to have
taken no farther part in the matter, either by
contributing to thwart both his rivals, or to pro-
mote one of them".
f Leo x. LEO X. a pontiff no less renowned for his po-

litical abilities, than for his love of the arts, was
the only prince of the age who observed the mo-
tions of the two contending monarchs with a
prudent attention, or who discovered a proper
solicitude for the publick safety. The Imperial
and papal jurisdiction interfered in so many in-
stances, the complaints of usurpation were fT
numerous on both fides, and the territories of the
church owed their lecurity so little to their own
force, and so much to the weakness of the powers
around them, that nothing was so formidable to
the court of Rome as an emperor with exten-
five dominions, or of enterprizing genius. Leo
trembled at the profpeA of beholding the Im-
perial crown placed on the head of the king of
Spain and of Naples, and the malter of the new

Memoircs de Fleuranges, 3r4.. Herbet , Hill. of Henry

world

world; nor was he less afraid of feeing a king of o o K

1.

France, who was duke of Milan and lord of --~
Genoa, exalted to that dignity. He foretold *5'9'
that the eletion of either of them would be fatal
to the independence of the holy fee, to the peace
of Italy, and perhaps to the liberties of Europe.
But to oppose them with any profpet of success,
required address and caution in proportion to the
greatness of their power, and their opportunities
of taking revenge. Leo was defective in neither.
He secretly exhorted the German princes to place
one of their own number on the Imperial throne,
which many of them were capable of filling with
honour. He put them in mind of the conflitu-
tion by which the kings of Naples were for ever
excluded from that dignity . He warmly ex-
horted the French king to persist in his claim,
not from any desire that he should gain his end,
but as he foresaw that the Germans would be
more disposed to favour the king of Spain, he
hoped that Francis himself, when he discovered
his own chance of success to be desperate, would
be Rimulated by resentment and the spirit of
rivalfhip, to concur with all his interest in raising
some third person to the head of the empire; or,
on the other hand, if Francis should make un-
expeEted progress, he did not doubt but that
Charles would be induced by similar motives to
a& the fame part; and thus, by a prudent atten-

X Goldafti Conflitutiones Imperiales. Francof. 1673. vol. i.

F39.
LS 4 tion_

B 010 K tion, the mutual jealousy of the two rivals might
-._.-' be so dexterously managed, as to disappoint
to 9' both. But this scheme, the only one which a

prince in Leo's fituarion could adopt, though
concerted with great wisdom, was executed with
little difcrction. The French ambassadors in
Germany fed their master with vain hopes; the
pope's nuncio, being gained by them, altogether
forgot the infiruc'ions which he had received;
and Francis perievered so long and with such
obi'liacy in urging his own pretensions, as ren-
dered all Leo's measures abortive ".

TrL.e't SUCH were the hopes of the candidates, and
j,.j7ch. the views of the different princes, when the diet

was opened according to form at Frankfort. The
right of chufing an emperor had long been veiled
in lfven great princes, diftinguilhed by the name
of Eledors, the origin of whose office, as well as
the nature and extent of their powers, have al-
ready been explained. These were, at that time,
Albert of Brandenburgh, archbilhop of Mentz;
Herman count de Wied, archbishop of Cologne;
Richard de Greiifenklau, archbishop of Treves;
Lewis, king of Bohemia; Lewis, count Palatine
of the Rhine; Frederick, duke of Saxony; .nd

v'i.iortle Joachim I. marquis Qs Brandenburgh, Not-
E..tu. xwithftanding the artful arguments produced by

the ambafladors of the two kings in favour of their
refpeaive masters, and in fpitr of all their folici-
tlcions, intrigues, and prrfcnts, the elecors did

> l:ccir. .ib. li. 3. 161,

ZlOt

not forget that maxim on which the liberty of B 0 0 K
the German constitution was thought to be found- t---.
ed. Among the members of the Germanick 's9'
body, which is a great republick composed of
states almost independent, the first principle of
patriotism is to depress and limit the power of the
Emperor; and of this idea, to natural under
such a form of government, a German politician
seldom loses fight. No prince of considerable
power, or extensive dominions, had for some
ages been raised to the Imperial throne. To
this prudent precaution many of the great fami-
lies in Germany owed the splendour and inde-
pendence which they had acquired during that
period. To eleft either of the contending mo-
narchs, would have been a gross violation of
that salutary maxim; would have given to the
Empire a master, instead of an head; and would
have reduced themselves from the rank of equals,
to the condition of subje&s.

FULL of there ideas, all the elecors turned their offer the

Imperial

eyes towards Frederic, duke of Saxony, a prince crown to
of such eminent virtue and abi!ities, as to be ouSaIoiy,
diftinguilhed by the name of the Sage, and with
one voice they offered him the Imperial crown.
He was not dazzled with that object, which
monarchs, so far superior to him in power, courted
with such eagerness; and after deliberating upon
the matter a short time, he rejeted it with a
magnanimity and disinterestedness, no less singular who rejedt
than admirable, Nothing, heobferved, could

6 be

B 0 ° K be more impolitick, than an obstinate adherence
^mm- *to a maxim which, though found and just in many

cafes, was not applicable to all. In times of
tranquillity, said he, we wish for an Emperor
who has not power to invade our liberties; times
of danger demand one who is able to secure
our safety. The Turkish armies, led by a gal-
lant and vicorious monarch, are now aflembling.
They are ready to pour in upon Germany with a
violence unknown in former ages. New con-
juncures call for new expedients. The Imperial
iceptre must be committed to some hand more
powerful than mine, or that of any other German
prince. We possess neither dominions, nor re-
venues, nor authority which enable us to en-
counter such a formidable enemy. Recourse must
be had in this exigency to one of the rival mo-
narchs. Each of them can bring into the field
forces sufficient for our defence. But as the king
of Spain is of German extracion; as he is a
member and prince of the empire by the ter-
ritories which descend to him from his grand-
father; as his dominions stretch along that fron-
tier which lies molt exposed to the enemy; his
claim is preferable, in my opinion, to that of a
stranger to our language, to our blood, and to our
country; and therefore I give my vote to confer
on him the Imperial crown.

THIS opinion, dictated by such uncommon

generosity, and uipported by arguments so plau-
fible, made a deep impreflion on the Electors.

The

The king of Spain's ambassadors, sensible of the B 0O K
important service which Frederick had done their '- v-
master, tent him a considerable fum of money, andrb.;,s
as the first token of that prince's gratitude. But n ,,tecn
he who had greatness of mind to refule a crown, ,C^,rios
disdained to receive a bribe; and upon their
entreating that at least he would permit them to
distribute part of that fum among his courtiers,
he replied, That he could not prevent them from
accepting what Ihould be ofered, but whoever
took a single florin should be difmifled next
morning from his service z.

No prince in Germany could now aspire to a Furiher de-

dignity, which Frederick had declined for rea- I'tbertin.c
sons applicable to them all. It remained to to,.

2 P. Daniel, an historian of considerable name, seems to

call in queflion the truth of this account of Frederick's be-
haviour in refusing the Imperial crown, because it is not
mentioned by Georgius Sabinus in his Hiltory of the Elec-
tion and Coronation of Charles V. tom. iii. p. 63. But no
great stress ought to be laid on an omiflion in a superficial
author, whose treatise, though dignified with the name of
History, contains only such an account of the ceremonial of
Charles's eletion, as is usually published in Germany on like
occasions. Scard. Rer. Germ. Script. v. a. p. i. The teRli-
mony of Erafinus, lib. 13. epilt. 4. and that of Sleidan, p. 18.
are express. Seckendorf, in his Commentarius Hiltoricus
J& Apologeticus de Lutheranifmo, p. 12z. has examined this
faR with his usual induflry, and has efRablilhed its truth by
the mol undoubted evidence. To there testimonies which he
has collected, I may add the decisive one of cardinal Caje-
tan, the pope's legate at Frankfort, in his letter July Sth,
1519. ISpiflres au Princes, &c. recucilles par Rufcelli traduiis
par Rclforclf. Par. 1572. p. 60.

make

B 00 K make a choice between the two great compel

J.

--~ titors. But betides the prejudice in Charles's
''9' favour arising from his birth, as well as the

fituacion of his German dominions, he owed not
a little to the abilities of the cardinal de Gurk,
and the zeal of Erard de la Mark, bilhop of Liege,
two of his ambassadors, who had conducted their
negociations with more prudence and address
than those entrusted by the French king. The
former, who had long been the minister and
favourite of Maximilian, was well acquainted with
the art of managing the Germans; and the latter
having been disappointed of a cardinal's hat by
Francis, employed all the malicious ingenuity
with which the desire of revenge inspires an
ambitious mind, in thwarting the measures of
that monarch. The Spanifli party among the
Elecors daily gained ground; and even the
Pope's nuncio, being convinced that it was vain
to make any farther opposition, endeavoured to
acquire tome merit with the future Emperor,
by offering voluntarily, in the name of his master,
a dispensation to hold the Imperial crown in con-
junction with dthe. of Naples'.

ON the twenty-eighth of June, five months

and ten days after the death of Maximilian, this
iinportant contest, which ha' held all Europe
in fufpence, was decided. Six of the Electors

a Freheri Rqr. German. Scriptorcs, vol. iii. 172 cur.
Struvii Argent. 1717. Gianonc lill. of Naples, 2. 498.

haci

had already declared for the king of Spain; and B 0O0 K
the archbishop of Treves, the only firm adherent -v-

]539.
to the French interest, having at last joined his Tlie chufe

Charles ent-

brethren, Charles was, by the unanimous voice rCro,.
of the Ele&oral college, raised to the Imperial
tlrone b.

BUT though the Eletors contented, from va-

rious motives, to promote Charles to that high
station, they discovered at the fame time great
ealoufy of his extraordinary power, and endea-
voured, with the utmost solicitude, to provide apprehen-

rive of hiS

against his encroaching on the privileges of the power,and
0 rmanicktake pre.
Germanick body. It had long been the custom rautions
to demand of every new Emperor a confirma- ag.ftl
tion of these privileges, and to require a promise
that he would never violate them in any instance.
While princes, who were formidable neither from
extent of territory, nor of genius, possessed the
Imperial throne, a general and verbal engage-
ment to this purpose was deemed sufficient fe-
curity. But under an Emperor so powerful as
Charles, other precautions seemed necessary. A
Capitulation or claim of right was formed, in
which the privileges and immunities of the Elec-
tors, of the princes of the empire, of the cities, and
of every other member of the Germanick body are
enumerated. This capitulation was immediately
ligned by Charles's ambaTiadors in the name of

b Jac. Aug. Thuan. Hil. fui Teniporis. Edit. Bulklcy
lib. i. c, 9.

their

B 0° K their mafter,and he himself, at his coronation, con.

!.
_-v- firmed it in the most solemn manner. Since that

period, the Electors have continued .to prescribe
the fame conditions to all his successors; and the
Capitulation, or mutual contrat between the
Emperor and his subje&s, is confidered in Ger-
many as a tfrong barrier against the progress of
the Imperial power, and as the great charter of
their liberties, to which they often appeal .

The dec- THE important intelligence of his eletion was
tion null-
sied o conveyed in nine days from Frankfort to Bar-
Lh451cs.

celona, where Charles was still detained by the
obstinacy of the Catalonian Cortes, which had
not hitherto brought to an iflue any of the affairs
which came before it. He received the account
with the joy natural to a young and aspiring
mind, on an accellion of power and dignity which
raised him so far above the other princes of
Europe. Then it was that thole vail profpecs
which allured him during his whole adminiftra.
tion began to open, and from this xra we may
date the formation, and are able to trace the
gradual progress, of a grand fyltemn of enterprizing
ambition, which renders the history of his reign
so worthy of attention.

'It' effC A TRIVIAL circumstance firfl discovered the
Upon bin.

effcts of this great elevation upon the mind of

c Pfeffel AbregO dc 'Hist. de Droit Publique d'Allemagne,

59o. Limnei Capitulat. Imper. Epiltres des Princes par Ruf-
cclli, p. 6o.

4 Charles.

Charles. In all the publick writs which he iftued Ba o K
as king of Spain, he assumed the title of Majesty, - -
and required it from his fubjec's as a mark of 'lx9'
their refpet. Before that time, all the monarchs
of Europe were satisfied with the appellation of
Higinefs, or Grace; but the vanity of other courts
soon led them to imitate the example of the
Spanish. The epithet of Majesty is no longer a
mark of pre-eminence. The most inconsiderable
monarchs in Europe enjoy it, and the arrogance
of the greater potentates has invented no higher
denomination .

THE Spaniards were far from viewing the Th eSpa

niards dido

promotion of their king to the Imperial throne aatified
with the fame fatisfadion which he himself felt. , l"t.'
To be deprived of the pretence of their fove-
reign, and to be fubjeaed to the government
of a viceroy and his council, a species of admi-
niftration often oppressive, and always disagree-
able, were the immediate and necessary confe-
quences of this new dignity. To fee the blood
of their countrymen shed in quarrels wherein the
nation had no concern; to behold its treasures
wafted in l'upporting the splendour of a foreign
title; to be plunged in the chaos of Italian and
German politics, were effe&s of this event almost
as unavoidable. From all there considerations,
they concluded, that nothing could have hap-

d Minian: Contin. Mar. p. 13. Ferrcras, viii. 475.
Mcmoircs Hist. dc la I-toutTai, tom. ip. 5. 3, &c.

pened

B Oo K pened more pernicious to the Spanilh nation
A_
- and the fortitude and publick spirit of their an-
'SI9' ceftors, who, in the Cortes of CaRile, prohibited

Alphonzo the Wife from leaving the kingdom,
in order to receive the Imperial crown, were
often mentioned with the highest praise, and pro-
nounced to be extremely worthy of imitation ac
this junture '.

BUT Charles, without regarding the sentiments

or murmurs of his Spaniih subjects, accepted
of the Imperial dignity which the count Pa-
latine, at the head of a solemn embassy, offered
Novewr. him in the name of the Eleclors; and declared

his intention of setting out soon for Germany,
in order to take polfeffon of it. This was the
more neceflary, because, according to the forms
of the German constitution, he could not, be-
fore the ceremony of a publick coronation, exer-
cife any aft ofjurifdicaion or authority f.

Thirdi.- THEIR certain knowledge of this resolution
ontent i.n- augmented so much the disgust of the Spaniards,

that a fullen and refractory spirit prevailed among
persons of all ranks. The Pope having granted
the king the tenths of all ecclesiastical benefices
in Castile to aflift him in carrying on war with
greater vigour against the Turks, a convocation
of the clergy unanimously refuted to levy that

e Sandoval, i. p. 32. Miniana, Contin. p. 14.
f Sabinus, P. Barre, viii. ioS;.

fuim,

fum, upon pretence that it ought never to be B o0 K
exa&ed but at those times when Christendom --
was actually invaded by the Infidels; and though tS'9
Leo, in order to support his authority, laid the
kingdom under an interdict, so little regard was
paid to a censure which was universally deemed
unjust, that Charles himself applied to have it
taken off. Thus the Spanish clergy, besides their
merit in opposing the usurpations of the Pope,
and disregarding the influence of the crown,
gained the exemption which they had claimed '.

THE commotions which arose in the kingdom An inrur-

of Valencia, annexed to the crown of Aragon, vcn^ian
were more formidable, and produced more dan-
gerous and lasting effeeRs. A seditious monk
having by his sermons excited the citizens of
Valencia, the capital city, to take arms, and to
punish certain criminals in a tumultuary manner,
the people, pleated with this exercise of power,
and with such a discovery of their own im-
portance, not only refused to lay down their
arms, but formed themselves into troops and
companies, that they might be regularly trained
to martial exercires. To obtain some security
against the opprefflon of the grandees was the
motives of this aflociation, and proved a power-
ful bond of union for as the ariftocratical privi.
leges and independence were more complete in
Valencia than in any other of the Spanilh king.

* P. Martyr. Ep. +6a. Ferreras, viii. 473.
VOL. II. G doms,

B o 0 K doms, the nobles, being scarcely accountable for
*_ -' their conduct to any superior, treated the people

not only as vassals but as saves. They were
alarmed, however, at the progress of this unex-
pected infurre&ion, as it might encourage the
people to attempt lhaking off the yoke alto-
gether; but as they could not repress them with-
out taking arms, it became necessary to have
recourse to the Emperor, and to desire his per-
Its ptrrcrs. million to attack them. At the fame time the

people made choice of deputies to represent their
grievances, and to implore the protection of their
sovereign. Happily for the latter, they arrived at
court when Charles was exasperated to an high.
degree against the nobility. As he was eager to
visit Germany, where his pretence became every
day more ncceffary, and as his Flemish courtiers
were still more impatient to return into their
native country, that they might carry thither the
spoils which they had amassed in Catile, it was
impolfible for him to hold the Cortes of Valencia
in person. He had for that reason empowered the
cardinal Adrian to represent him in that Aflem-
bly, and in his name to receive their oath of al-
legiance, to confirm their privileges with the usual
folemnities, and to demand of them a free gift.
But the Valencian nobles, who confidered this
measure as an indignity to their country, which
was no less entitled, than his other kingdoms,
to the honour of their sovereign's pretence, de-
clared, that by the fundamental laws of the con-
ftitution they could neither acknowledge as king

a prlbon

a person who was absent, nor grant him any sub- B o°° K
fidy; and to this declaration they adhered with- -.
an haughty and inflexible obstinacy. Charles, 9'
piqued by their behaviour, decided in favour of
the people, and rashly authorised them to continue
in arms. Their deputies returned in triumph,
and were received by their fellow-citizens as the
deliverers of their country. The insolence of the
multitude increasing with their success, they ex-
pelled all the nobles out of the city, committed
the government to magistrates of their own elec-
tion, and entered into an aflociation diftinguiffhed
by the name of Germanada or Brotherhood, which
proved the source not only of the wildef difor-
ders, but of the molt fatal calamities in that king-
dom b.

MEANWHILE, the kingdom of CaRile was The Crtes

of Cafile

agitated with no less violence. No sooner was fumoned,
the Emperor's intention to leave Spain made tometi
known, than several cities of the first rank re-
solved to remonstrate against it, and to crave
redress once more of those grievances which they
had formerly laid before him. Charles artfully
avoided admitting their deputies to audience;
and as he saw from this circumtfance how diffi-
cult it would be, at this junture, to restrain the
mutinous spirit of the greater cities, he fum-
moned the Cortes of Castile to meet at Com-

P. Martyr. Ep. 651. Ferreras, viii. 476. 485.

G a poftella,

a oo K poftella, a town in Galicia. His only rcafon for
'_---' calling that assembly, was the hope of obtaining

1S*' another donative; for as his treasury had been

exhausted in the fame proportion that the riches
of his miniflers increased, he could not, without
some additional aid, appear in Germany with
splendour suited to the Imperial dignity. To
appoint a meeting of the Cortes in so remote a
province, and to demand a new subsidy before
the time for paying the former was expired,
were innovations of a most dangerous tendency;
and among people not only jealous of their li-
berties, but accufloined to supply the wants of
their sovereigns with a very frugal hand, excited
an universal alarm. The magistrates of Toledo
remonstrated against both these measures in a
very high tone; the inhabitants of Valladolid,
who expeaed that the Cortes should have been
held in thar city, were so enraged, that they took
arms in a tumultuary manner; and if Charles,
with his foreign counsellors, had not fortunately
made their escape during a violent tempeir, they
would have massacred all the Flemings, and
have prevented him from continuing his journey
towards Conpoftella.

The pro- EVERY city through which they paflfd, peti-
,hth,,,ltn. tioned against holding a Cortes in Galicia, a
bly. * point with regard to which Charles was inflex-

ible. But though the utmost influence had been
cxerted by the ministers, in order to procure a

choice

choice of representatives favourable to their de- B 0 o i
signs, such was the temper of the nation, that, I
at the opening of the assembly, there appeared Apr1 i.
among many of the members unusual symptoms
of ill-humour, which threatened a fierce oppo-
fition to all the measures of the court. No re-
prelentatives were sent by Toledo; for the lot,
according to which, by antient cutiom, the
eleetion was determined in that city, having
f'llen upon two persons devoted to the Flemilh
ministers, their fellow-citizens refused to grant
them a commiflion in the usual form, and in
their head made choice of two deputies, whom
they empowered to repair to Compofteila, and
to protest against the lawfulness of the Cortes
assembled there. The representatives of Sala- The i;ts,
manca refuted to take the ulual oath of fidelity, tCieCaii.
unless Charles consented to change the place of i,,,re
meeting. Those of Toro, Madrid, Cordova,
and several other places, declared the demand of
another donative to be unprecedented, unconfti-
tutional, and unnecessary. All the arts, however,
which influence popular assemblies, bribes, pro.
mises, threats, and even force, were employed
in order to gain members. The nobles, soothed
by the refpeAful afilduity with which Chievres
and the other Flemings payed court to them,
or instigated by a mean jealousy of that spirit of
independence which they saw riring among the
commons, openly favoured the pretensions of
the court, or at the utmost did nut oppose tL'.e

G 3 ai4,

B 01 K and at last, in contempt not only of the senti-

1.
*I_- * ments of the nation, but of the antient forms of

'S"' the conitirution, a majority voted to grant the

donative for which the Emperor had applied'.
Together with this -rant, the Cortes laid before
Charles a representation of thofl grievances where-
of his people craved redress; but he, having ob-
tained from them all that he could expe&, paid
no attention to this ill-timed petition, which it was
no longer dangerous to disregard k.

crl"es ap- As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he
pr.ts d.uring disclosed his intention with regard to the regency

of Caltile during his absence, which he had
hitherto kept iccret, and nominated cardinal
Adrian to that office. The viceroyalty of Ara-
gon he conferred on Don John de Lanuza;
that of Valencia on Don Diego de Mendoza
Condc de Melito. The choice of the two latter
'das universally acceptable; but the advance-
Inent of Adrian, tiough the only Fleming who
had prefervel any reputation among the Spa-
niards, animated the Castilians with new hatred
:!-ainl: foreigners; and even the nobles, who
lIld si tamely fuffcred other inroads upon the
.:ontfitution, felt the indignity offered to their
own order by his promotion, and remon[trated
iagainl it at illegal. But Charles's desire of
'iliring Germany, as well as the impatience of

I . MTartvr. Ep. 663. Sandoval, p. 33, &c.
$ Sandoval, 8.t.

his

his ministers to leave Spain, were now so much B 0 0 K

1.

increased, that without regarding the murmurs -
of the Castilians, or even taking time to pro- '5'
vide any remedy against an infurreftion in To-
ledo, which at that time threatened, and after-
wards produced most formidable effecs, he
failed from Corogna on the twenty-fecond of f'nd etbLrks

-- for the Low

May; and by setting out so abruptly in quest Countries.
of a new crown, he endangered a more important
one of which he was already in poleflion'.

i P. Martyr. Ep. 670. Sandov. 86.

G. '

# BOOK II.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
RE IGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK II.
M ANY concurring circumstances not only B oo K

called Charles's thoughts towards the as- "'

fairs of Germany, but rendered his pretence in Cs10.
that country necefrary. The electors grew im- presence in

Germany

patient of so long an interregnum; his heredi- neccaiy
tary dominions were disturbed by intestine com-
motions; and the new opinions concerning reli-
gion made such rapid progress as required the
most serious consideration. But above all, the
motions of the French king drew his attention,
and convinced him that it was neceflary to take
measures for his own defence, with no less speed
than vigour.

WHEN Charles and Francis entered the lifts as Rite and

progrfe oF
candidates for the Imperial dignity, they con- tp^e.rair.ip

between
duted Charles and

Fraucil I

B o0 K dusted their rivalfhip with many profefiions of

c-u-- regard for each other, and with repeated declara-
lS9'o tions that they would not susser any tincture of

enmity to mingle itself with this honourable emu-
lation. ", We both court the fame mistress,"
iaid Francis, with his usual vivacity; " each
ought to urge his suit with all the address of
which he is mailer; the molt fortunate will pre-
vail, and the other must reft contented'." But
though two young and high-fpirited princes, and
each of them animated with the hope of success,
might be capable of forming such a generous
resolution, it was soon found that they promised
tluon a moderation too refined and disinterested
for human nature. The preference given to
Charles in the fight of all Europe mortified
Francis to the highest degree, and inspired him
with all the paflions natural to disappointed am-
bition. To this was owing the personal jealousy
and rival(hip which subsisted between the two
monarchs during their whole reign; and the ran-
cour of there, augmented by a real opposition of
interest, which gave rife to many unavoidable
cauifes of discord, involved them in almost per-
petual hostilities. Charles had paid no regard to
the principal article in the treaty of Noyon, by
refusing oftener than once to dojuftice to John
d'Albret, the excluded monarch of Navarre,
whom Francis was bound in honour, and prompt-
ed by interest, to restore to his throne. The

Guic. lib. 3. P.
P i9.

French

French king had pretensions to the crown of B o 0 K
Naples, of which Ferdinand had deprived his .--
predecessor by a most unjustifiable breach of faith. 25°'
The emperor might reclaim the dutchy of Milan
as a fief of the empire, which Francis had seized,
and still kept in poffeflion, without having re-
ceived investiture. Charles confidered the dutchy
of Burgundy as the patrimonial domain of his
ancestors, wrefled from them by the unjust policy
of Louis XI. and observed with the greatest jea-
lousy the ftrift connections which Francis had
formed with the duke of Gueldres, the hereditary
enemy of his family.

WHEiN the sources of discord were so many and Their dli-

' berations
various, peace could be of no long continuance, previous to

the corn-

even between princes the mot exempt from menemen
ambition or emulation. But as the {hock be- d~st0
tween two such mighty antagoniRts could not
fail of being extremely violent, they both dif-
covered no finall solicitude about its confe-
quences, and took time not only to collec
and to ponder their own strength, and to com-
pare it with that of their adversary, but to
secure the friendship or affiRtance of the other
European powers.

THE pope had equal reason to dread the two TOiy nen.

rivals, and saw that he who prevailed, would be- tihe p'pe
come absolute master in Italy. If it had been in
his power to engage them in hostilities, without
rendering Lombardy the theatre of war, nothing

would

B 0 0 K would have been more agreeable to him than to

a.
--.--' fee them waite each other's strength in endless

is0. quarrels. But this was impoflible. Leo fore,

saw, that, on the first rupture between the two
monarchs, the armies of France and Spain would
take the field in the Milanese; and while the
scene of their operations was so near, and the
subje&t for which they contended so interesting to
him, he could not remain long neuter. He was
obliged, therefore, to adapt his plan of condu&
to his political situation. He courted and sooth-
ed the emperor and king of France with equal
industry and address. Though warmly solicited
by each of them to espouse his cause, he assumed
all the appearances of entire impartiality, and
attempted to conceal his real sentiments under
that profound dissimulation which seems to have
been affeced by mo(t of the Italian politicians in
that age.

Wib the THE views and interest of the Venetians were
Vcnctian. not different from those of the pope; nor were

they less solicitous to prevent Italy from becom-
ing the feat of war, and their own republick from
being involved in the quarrel. But through all
Leo's artifices, and notwithstanding his high pre-
tensions to a perfect neutrality, it was visible that
he leaned towards the emperor, from whom he
had both more to fear and more to hope than
from Francis; and it was equally manifef, that
if it became neceffarv to tace a fide, the Vene-
tians would, from motives of the fame nature,

declare

declare for the king of France. No considerable B 0o0 K
afliftance, however, was to be expe&ed from the a-.-
Italian states, who were jealous to an extreme ,520.
degree of the Transalpine powers, and careful to
preserve the balance between them, unless when
they were {educed to violate this favourite maxim
of their policy, by the certain prolifeEt of tome
great advantage to themfeives.

BUT the chief attention both of Charles and of With Hen-

Francis, was employed in order to gain the king r') v.
of England, from whom each of them expected
afliftance more effectual, and afforded with less
political caution. Henry VIII. had ascended the
throne of that kingdom in the year one thousand
five hundred and nine, with such circumstances
of advantage, as promised a reign ofdiftinguithed
felicity and splendour. The union in his person The grt
of the two contending titles of York and Lan- ,Phtmo
cafler; the alacrity and emulation with which n"rtc.
both facions obeyed his commands, not only
enabled him to exert a degree of vigour and
authority in his domeftick government which none
of his predecessors could have safely assumed;
.but permitted him to take a share in the affairs
of the continent, from which the attention of the
English had long been diverted by their unhappy
divisions. The immense treasures which his fa-
ther had amassed, rendered him the most wealthy
prince in Europe. The peace which had sub-
silted under the cautious administration of that
monarch, was of sufficient length to recruit the

a nation

B 0 0 K nation after the desolation of the civil wars, but

II.
.- not so long as to enervate its spirit; and the
510 Englifl, ashamed of having rendered their own

country so long a scene of discord and blood(hed,
were eager to difp!ay their valour in some foreign
war, and to revive the memory of the vicories
;H cbuae. gained by their ancestors. Henry's own temper

t perfectly fuiced the state of his kingdom, and the

difpolition of his subje&s. Ambitious, a&ive#
enterprizing, and accomplished in all the martial
exercises which in that age formed a chief part in
the education of persons of noble birth, and in-
spired them with an early love of war, he longed
to engage in ation, and to signalize the beginning
of his reign by some remarkable exploit. An
opportunity foonrprefented itself; and the vicory
at Guinegate, together with the successful sieges of
Teroienne and Tournay, though of little utility
to England, reflected great lustre on its monarch,
and confirmed the idea which foreign princes
entertained of his power and importance. So
many concurring causes, added to the happy
situation of his own dominions, which secured
them from foreign invasion; and to the fortunate
circumstance of his being in possession of Calais,
which served not only as a key to France, but
opened an easy passage into the Netherlands, ren-
dered the king of England the natural guardian
of the liberties of Europe, and the arbiter between
the emperor and French monarch. Henry him-
self was sensible of this singular advantage, and
convinced, that, in order to preserve the balance

4 even,

even, it was his office to prevent either of the B 0°° K
rivals from acquiring such fuperioriry of power i-a
as might be fatal to the other, or formidable to '5'
the reft of Christendom. But he was deftiture of
the penetration, and fill more of the temper,
which such a delicate function required. In-
fluenced by caprice, by vanity, by refentmenr,
by affection, he was incapable of forming any
regular and extensive fvftem of policy, or of ad-
hering to it with fteadiners. His measures seldom
resulted from attention to the general welfare, or
from a deliberate regard to his own interest, but
were ditated by pardons which rendered him
blind to both, and prevented his gaining that
ascendant in the affairs of Europe, or from reap-
ing such advantages to himself, as a prince of
greater art, though with inferior talents, might
have easily secured.

ALL the impolitick steps in Henry's admini- And of hi-

ftration must not, however, be imputed to de- Ci,,"
secs in his own character; many of them were wCilr'.
owing to the violent passions and insatiable ambi-
tion of his prime miniletr and favourite cardinal
Wolfey. This man, from one of the lowest
ranks in life, had risen to an height of power and
dignity, to which no Englifl fubje& ever arrived;
and governed the haughty, prefumptluous, and
untraatable spirit of Henry with absolute autho-
rity. Great talents, and of very different kinds,
fitted him for the two opposite stations of mini-
fter, and of favourite. His profound judgment,

his

B 0 0 K his unwearied industry, his thorough acquaintance

II..
, :- with the state of the kingdom, his extensive

' knowledge of the views and intcrefts of foreign

courts, qualified him for that uncontrouled di-
recion of affairs with which he was intrufed.
The elegance of his manners, the gaiety of his
conversation, his insinuating address, his love of
magnificence, and his proficiency in those parts
of literature of which Henry was fond, gained
him the affection and confidence of the young
monarch. Wolfeywas far from employing this vast
and almost royal power, to promote either the true
interest of the nation, or the real grandeur of his
malter. Rapacious at the fame time, and pro-
fuse, he was insatiable in desiring wealth. Of
boundless ambition, he aipired after new honours
with an eagerness unabated by his former success;
and being rendered presumptuous by his uncom-
mon elevation, as well as by the ascendant which
he had gained over a prince, who scarcely brook-
ed advice from any other person, he discovered
in his whole demeanour the most overbearing
haughtiness and pride. To these passions he him-
1elf sacrificed every consideration; and whoever
endeavoured to obtain his favour, or that of his
master, found it necessary to sooth and to gratify
them.

rhe cour As all the fates of Europe fought Henry's
wolfrey by friendship at that time, all courted his minister
Vrancis with incredible attention and obsequiousness, and

strove by presents, by promises, or by flattery, to

work

work upon his avarice, his ambition, or his B 0O K
pride b Francis had, in the year one thousand
five hundred and eighteen, employed Bonnivet,
admiral of France, one of his most accomplished
and artful courtiers, to gain the haughty prelate.
He himself bellowed on him every mark of re.
fpea and confidence. He consulted him with
regard to his mofd important affairs, and received
his responses with implicit deference. By there
arts, together with the grant of a large pension,
Francis secured the cardinal, who persuaded his
master to surrender Tournay to France, to con-
clude a treaty of marriage between his daughter
the princess Mary and the dauphin, and to con-
sent to a perional interview with the French
king . From that time, the molt familiar inter-
course subsistcd between the two courts; Francis,
sensible of the great value of Wolsey's friendship,
laboured to fecurc the continuance of it by every
possible expression of regard, bellowing on him,
in all his letters, the honourable appellations of
Father, Tutor, and Governor.

CHARLES observed the progress of this union And by

, , , TT Charles.

with the utmost jealousy and concern. His near
affinity to the king of England gave him rome
title to his friendship; and soon after his accef-
sion to the throne of Ca!cilc, he had attempted to

b Fiddes's Life ofWolfcy, 166. Rymcr's Fwadera, xiii.
718.

c Herbert's IiL1a. of HenryVIII. 30. Rymcr, xiii. (z4.
VOL. . 1. ingratiate

s °0 o ingratiate himself with Wolfey, by fettling on
*- *-' him a pension of three thousand livres. His

chief solicitude at present was to prevent the in-
tended interview with Francis, the effeAs of which
upon two young princes, whose hearts were no
Jess susceptible of friendlhip than their manners
were capable of inspiring it, he extremely dread-
ed. But after many delays, occasioned by diffi-
culties about the ceremonial, and by the anxious
precautions of both courts for the safety of their
refpecive sovereigns, the time and place of meet-
ing were at last fixed. Messengers had been sent
to different courts, inviting all comers, who
were gentlemen, to enter the lifts at tilt and
tournament, against the two monarchs and their
knights. Both Francis and Henry loved the
splendour of there fpe&acles too well, and were
too much delighted with the graceful figure
which they made on such occasions, to forego
the pleasure or glory which they expe&ed from
such a singular and brilliant afTembly. Nor was
the cardinal less fond of displaying his magni-
ficence in the presence of two courts, and of
discovering to the two nations the extent of his
influence over both their monarchs. Charles,
finding it impomfble to prevent the interview,
endeavoured to disappoint its effects, and to pre-
occupy the favour of the Engliflh monarch, and
his minister, by an aft of complaisance still morec

chJar' flattering and more uncommon. Having failed
va end, from Corunna, as has already been related, he
M3y,6th. ileered his course diretly towards England, and

relying

relying wholly on Henry's generosity for his own o °,° :
safety, landed at Dover. This unexpeced visit -
surprised the nation. Wolfey, however, was
well acquainted with the emperor's intention. A
negociation, unknown to the historians of that
age, had been carried on between him and the
court of Spain; this visit had been concerted;
ard Charles granted the cardinal, whom he calls
his mofi dear friehd, an additional pension of ieven
thousand ducatsd. Henry, who was then at Can-
terbury, in his way to France, immediately dif-
patched Wolfey to Dover, in order to welcome
the emperor; and being highly pleased with an
event so soothing to his vanity, haflened to re-
ceive, with suitable refpe&t, a guest who had
placed in him such unbounded confidence.
Charles, to whom time was precious, staid only inrniieq,
four days in England: But during that short fhvol bufia
ipace, he had the address not only to give Henry "

it ''

favourable impressions of his charaSer and inten- w.;sy.
tions, but to detach Wolfcy entirely from the in-
tcrelt of the French king. All the grandeur,
wealth, and power which the cardinal polfeffed,
did not fatisfv his ambitious mind, while there
was one ftep higher to which an ecclefiaftick
could ascend. The papal dignity had for some
time been the object of his withes, and Francis,
as the most effectual method of securing his
friendlhip, had promired to favour his preten-
sions, on the first vacancy, with all his interest.

J R:mer, xiii. 714.

-H 2 But

B o0 K But as the emperor's influence in the college of

cardinals was greatly superior to the French
*510' king's, Wolfcy grasped eagerly at the offer which

that artful prince had made him of exerting it
vigoroufy in his behalf; and allured by this pro-
fpet, which, under the pontificate of Leo, frill in
the prime of his life, was a very distant one, he
entered with warmth into all the emperor's
schemes. No treaty, however, was concluded at
that time between the two monarchs; but Henry
in return for the honour which Charles had done
him, promised to visit him in some place of the
Low Countries, immediately after taking leave
of the French king.

,ne ,7th. His interview with that prince was in an open
Intcrv ew
.etween plain between Guifnes and Ardres, where the two
^:'',,Y'nd kings and their attendants displayed their mag-

nilicence with such emulation, and profuse ex-
pence, as procured it the name of the Field of the
Cloth of Gold. Feats of chivalry, parties of gal-
lantry, together with such exercises and pastimes
as were in that age reckoned manly or elegant,
rather than serious business, occupied both courts
during eighteen days that they continued toge-
ther'. Whatever imprefIion the engaging man-

ncrs

The French and English hiltorians describe the pomp of

this interview, and the various fpctaclcs, with great mi-
nutencfs. One circumRflaice mentioned by the marechal dc
Flcuranges, who was prefcnt, and which appears singular in
the preflnt age, is commonly omitted. " After the tour.

namcnt,"

ners.of Francis, or the liberal and unfupicious 8 o l K
confidence with which he treated Henry, made a
on the mind of that monarch, was soon effaced '5.~
by Wolfcy's artifices, or by an interview he had
with the emperor at Gravelines; which was con- JulY ic.
ducted by Charles with less pomp than that near
Guitnes, but with greater attention to his politi-
cal interest.

THxis afiduity with which the two greatest I-Tenry'

ijJ, of

hed

monarchs in Europe paid court to Henry, ap- own im-
peared to him a plain acknowledgment that he olat'"c
held the balance in his hands, and convinced him
of the .uftnefs of the motto which he had chosen,

T( That whoever he favoured would prevail."

In this opinion he was confirmed by an offer
which Charles made, of submitting any difference
that might ariie between him and Francis to his
sole arbitration. Nothing could have the ap-

nament," f;iys he, "' the French and English wrestlers made
their appearance, and wrestled in presence of the kings, and
the l.dics; and as there were many flout wreltlers there, it
afforded excellent pastime; but as the king of France had
negleted to bring any wrestlers out of Bretagne, the Englilh
gained the prize. -- After this, the kings of Prance and
England retired to a tent, where they drank together, and
the king of England seizing the king of France by the col
lar, said, " Mly brother, I ml tzvrell, with.youl," and endca-
voured once or twice to trip up his heels; but the king of
France, who is a dextrous wreftlcr, twisted him round, and
threw him on the earth with prodigious violence. The king
of England wanted to renew the combat, but was prevented."
Memoires do Fleuranges, z0°. Paris, 1753. p. 329.

H 3 pcarance

B ° o K pearance of greater candour and moderation, than
A,, the choice of a judge who was reckoned the com-
5210. mon friend of both. But as the emperor had now

attached Wolfey entirely to his interest, no pro-
pofal could be more insidious, nor, as appeared
by the sequel, more fatal to the French king'.

nc.t~,E;n CHARLES, notwithstanding his partial fondness

oi b.e Em.
pcror. for the Netherlands, the place of his nativity,

made no long flay there; and after receiving the
homage and congratulations of his countrymen,
hastened to Aix-la-Chapelle, the place appointed
C:ih;er,3. by the golden bull for the coronation of the

emperor. There, in pretence of an assembly
more numerous and splendid than had appeared
on any former occasion, the crown of Charle-
magne was placed on his head, with all the
pompous solemnity which the Germans affect in
their publick ceremonies, and which they deem
essential to the dignity of their empire g.

crImarnthe ALMOST at the fame time Solyman the Mag-
,'end'the nificent, one of the molt accomplished, enter-
o,,o.an prizing, and vidtorious of the Turkih princes, a

constant and formidable rival to the emperor,
ascended the Ottoman throne. It was the pecu-
liar glory of that period to produce the mod
illustrious monarchs, who have at any one time

F Herbert, 37.
s Hartman. Mauri Relatio Coronat. Car. V. ap. Golda4.
Polit. Imperial. Franc. 1614. fol. p. 264.

appeared

appeared in Europe. Leo, Charles, Francis, B o°° K
Henry and Solyman were each of them possessed h-v--
of talents which would have rendered any age
wherein they happened to flourish, cnlfpicuous.
But such a constellation of great princes shed
uncommon lustre on the sixteenth century. In
every contest, great power as well as great abili-
ties were set in oppofstion; the efforts of valour
and conduct on one fide, counterbalanced by an
equal exertion of the fame qualities on the other,
not only occasioned fiuch a variety of events as
renders the history of that period interesting, but
served to check the exorbitant progress of any of
those princes, and to prevent their attaining such
pre-eminence in power as would hl;ve been fatal
to the liberty and happiness of mankind.

THE firl ac of the Emperor's adminifIration Ditct.cled

'

* /- i * > > . < to meet at

was to appoint a diet of the empire to be held at Worms.
Worms on the sixth of January, one thousand
five hundred and twenty-one. In his circular
letters to the different princes, he informed them,
that he had called this assembly in order to con-
cert with them the most proper ineafures for
checking the progress of those new and dangerous
opinions, which threatened to disturb the peace
of Germany, and to overturn the religion of their
ancestors.

CHARLES had in view the opinions which had Riaeof the

been propagated by Luther and his disciples since n.:m
the yearone thousand five hundred and seventeen.

H 4 As

B °0 K As these led to that happy reformation in religion
i>c- .which rescued one part of Europe from the papal

'J5' yoke, mitigated its rigour in the other, and pro-

duced a revolution in the sentiments of mankind,
the greatefl, as well as the most beneficial, that has
happened since the publication of Christianity,
not only the events which at first gave birth to
such opinions, but the causes which rendered
their progress so rapid and successful, deserve to
be confidered with minute attention.

To overturn a system of religious belief found-

ed on ancient and deep-rooted prejudices, sup-
ported by power, and defended with no less art
than industry; to efablifil in its room docrines
of the most contrary genius and tendency; and
to accomplish all this, not by external violence
or the force of arms, are operations which hilto-
rians, the leafl prone to credulity and fuperflition,
must ascribe to that Divine Providence which,
with infinite cafe, can bring about events which
to human sagacity appear impofible. The in-
terpofition of Heaven in favour of the Christian
religion at its firlt publication, was manifested by
miracles and prophecies vwrought and uttered in
confirmation of it. And though none of the re-
formers poffelTed, or pretended to pofrefs, these
fupernatuiral gifts, yet that wonderful preparation
of circumiftances which disposed the minds of
men for receiving their doctrines, that singular
combination of causes which secured their fuc-
cess, and enabled men, destitute of power and

of

of policy to triumph over those who employed B o I K
both against them, may be confidered as no flight *--_
proof, that the fame hand which planted the '5.0'
Christian religion, protected the reformed faith,
and reared it, from beginnings extremely feeble,
to an amazing degree of strength and maturity.

IT was from causes, seemingly fortuitous, and From in

confide,'ab!C

from a source very inconsiderable, that all the begi°ien.
mighty effects of the Reformation flowed. LeoX.
when raised to the papal throne, found the re-
venues of the church exhaufled by the vast pro-
je&s of his two ambitious predecessors, Alex-
ander VI. and Julius II. His own temper, na-
turally liberal and enterprizing, rendered him
incapable of that severe and patient economy
which the situation of his finances required. On
the contrary, his schemes for aggraniizing the
family of Medici, his love of fpieindour, his tatte
for pleasure, and his magnificence in rewarding
men of genius, involved him daily in new ex-
pences; in order to provide a fund for which, he
tried every device, that the fertile invention of
prielts had fallen upon, to drain the credulous
multitude. Among others, he had reccourfe to a
sale of Indulgences. According to the doctrine of A tale cf
the Romish church, all the good works of the publileciby
Saints, over and above those which were nccef-
fary towards their ownjutification, are deposited,
together with the infinite merits of Jctl.s Chrifl',
in one inexhaustible treasury. The keys of this
were committed to St. Peter, and to his fucceirors

Xi3~~ ~~the

B 00O K the popes, who may open it at pleasure, and by
L _
. transferring a portion of this fuperabundantmerit

15*0 to any particular person, for a Ibm of money,

may coavey to him either the pardon of his own
fins, or a release for any one in whom he is in-
tereffed, from the pains of purgatory. Such in-
dulgences were first invented in the eleventh cen-
tury by Urban II. as a recompence for those who
went in person upon the meritorious encerprize
of conquering the Holy Land. They were after-
wards granted to those who hired a soldier for
that purpose; and in process of time were be-
stowed on such as gave money for accomplilhing
any pious work enjoined by the popeb. Julius II.
had bellowed indulgences on all who contributed
towards building the church of St. Peter at Rome;
and as Leo was carrying on that magnificent and
expensive fabrick, his grant was founded on the
fame pretence'.

So condua THE right of promulgating of these indulgences
general of in Germany, together with a lhare in the profits
fence, arising from the sale of them, was granted to

Albert, elector of Metz and archbilhop of Mag-
deburg, who, as his chief agent for retailing
them in Saxony, employed Tetzel, a Dominican
friar, of licentious morals, but of an a&ive spirit,
and remarkable for his noisy and popular elo-
quence. He, aflifted by the monks of his order,

h History of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4.
Palavic. HiR. Cone. Trident. p. 4.

a2 executed

executed the commiflion with great zeal and fuc- B 01 0
cess, but with little discretion or decency; and .
though, by magnifying excelively the benefit of 's2'
their indulgencesk, and by disposing of them at
a very low price, they carried on for some time an
cxtenfive and lucrative traffick among the cre-
dulous multitude; the extravagance of their asser-
tions, as well as the irregularities in their con-
duc, came at last to give general offence. The

princes

k As the form of these Indulgences, and the benefits which

they were supposed to convey, are unknown in protestant
countries, and little underltood, at present, in several places
where the Roman catholick religion is eltablithed, I have,
for the information of my readers, translated the form of
absolution used by Tetzel. " May our Lord Jrfus Chritt
have mercy upon thee, and absolve thee by the merits of his
molt holy paflion. And I by his authority, that of his blesTed
apostles Peter and Paul, and of the molt holy Pope, granted
and committed to me in these parts, do absolve tlich, first
from all ecclefiafical censures in whatever manner they have
been incurred, and then from all thy fins, tranfg.rcl:ions, ar.d
excesses, how enormous soever they ma.y be, even; f;om such
as are reserved for the cognizance of the holy f.'c, and as fir
as the keys of the holy church extend, I remit to you all
punishment which you deserve in Purgatory on ilair account,
and I restore you to the holy facramcnts of the church, to the
unity of the faithful, and to that innocence and purity which
you poltffeed at baptifi, so that when you die t:he g.tcs of
punishment shall be fliut, and the gates of the par;dife o'
delight Ihall be opened, and if you shall not die at present,
this grace shall remain in full force when you are at the point
of death. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Gholt." Scckend. Comment. lib. i. p. 14.

The terms in which Tctzel and his associates described the
benefits of Indulgences, and dte necceflity of purchaling them,

are

B °o° princes and nobles were irritated at fceing their
--''-- vassals drained of so much wealth, in order to

Z5*' replenish the treasury of a prufufe pontiff. Men of

piety regretted the delusion of the people, who
being taught to rely for the pardon of their fins
on the Indulgences which they purchased, did
not think it incumbent on them either to
abound in faith, or to pratife holiness. Even
the most unthinking were fIocked at the scan-
dalous behaviour of Tetzel and his afrociates,
who often squandered in drunkenness, gaming,

are so extravagant, that they appear to be almost incredible.
If any man (said they) purchases letters of Indulgence, his
foul may reft secure with refpe& to its salvation. The fouls
confined in purgatory, for whose redemption Indulgences
are purchased, as soon as the money tinkles in the chelt, in-
fantly escape from that place of torment, and ascend into
heavcu. That the efficacy of Indulgences was so great, that
the moll heinous fins, even if one fliould violate (which was
impoiible) the Mother of God, would be remitted and ex-
piated by them, and the person be freed both from puniliment
and guilt. That this was the unspeakable gift of God, in
order to reconcile men to himself. That the cross erected by
the preachers of Indulgences, was as efficacious as the cross of
Christ itself. Lo! the heavens arc open; if you enter not
now, when will you enter? For twelve-pence you may re-
deem the foul of your father out of purgatory; and are you
so ungrateful, that you will not rescue your parent from tor-
ment? If you had but one coat, you ought to flrip yourfclf
inllantly, and fell it, in order to purchase such benefits, &c.
Thcfic, and many such extravagant e.:prefllons, are feleted
out of Luther's *works by Chemnitius in his Examen Concilii
Tr'idciitii apud Herm. Vonder. Hardt. His. Liter. Reform.
pars iv. p. 6. The fime author has publifled several of
Tetzel's discourses, which prove that there expreflions were
neither singular nor exaggerated. Ibid. p. 14.

qna

and low debauchery, those furns which were B 0 0 1
piously bestowed in hopes of obtaining eternal --
happiness; and all began to with that some check 'S.-'
were given to this commerce, no less detrimental
to society than deftru&ive to religion.

Suc[H was the favourable juncure, antd so dif- Firfl1rpr-

posed were the minds of his countrymen to lifen tr, '..i."
to his discourses, when Martin Luther first began hei.cIIarc-
to call in question the efficacy of Indulgences,
and to declaim against the vicious lives and flife
doctrines of the persons employed in promul-
gating them. Hte was a native of EiPleben
in Saxony, and though born of poor parents,
had received a learned education, during the
progress of which he gave many' indications of
uncommon vigour and acuteness of genius. As
his mind was naturally liffceptible of serious
impreiflons, and tintured with fbmewhat of that
religious nelancholy which delights in the lli-
tude and devotion of a monaflick life, he retired
into a convent of Augulfinian friars, and without
suffering the intreaties of his parents to divert
him from what he thought his duty to God, he
assumed the habit of that order. There he ac-
quired great reputation, not only for piety, but
for his love of knowledge, and unwearied appli-
cation to fludy. He had been taught the fclho-
lasiic philosophy and theology which were tlhe
in vogue by very able matcers, and wanted noc
penetration to comprehend all the niceties and
difinlions with which they abound l but his

undlerflanding,

D 0 0 K underflanding, naturally found, and superior to
---J every thing frivolous, soon became disgusted with
Isz"' the subtile and uninftrutive sciences, and fought

for omne more solid foundation of knowledge and
of piety in the holy scriptures. Having found a
copy of the Bible, which lay neglected in the
library of his monastery, he abandoned all other
purflits, and devoted himself to the study of it,
with such eagerness and assiduity, as aflonished
the monks, who were little accustomed to derive
their theological notions from that source. The
great progrcfs which he made in this uncommon
course of itudy, augmented so much the fame
both of his sanctity and of his learning, that
Frederick, eleator of Saxony, having founded
an university at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the
place of his residence, Luther was chosen first to
teach philosophy, and afterwards theology there;
and diicharged both offices in such a manner, that
he was deemed the chiet ornament of that society.

Be oppoeiT WHILE Luther was at the height of his repu-
I "dul. tation and authority, Tetzel began to publish
enLcs, Indulgences in the neighbourhood of Wittem-

berg, and to ascribe to them the fame imaginary
virtues, which had, in other places, imposed on the
credulity of the people. As Saxony was not
more enlightened than the other provinces of
Germany, Tetzel met with prodigious success
there. It was with the utmost concern, that
Luther beheld the artifices of those who fold,
aid the fimpllcity of those who bought Ii-

dulgenccs

dulgences. The opinions of Thomas Aquinas B o0 K
and the other fchoolmen, on which the docrine -i_
of Indulgences was founded, had already loft
much of their authority with him; and the Scrip-
tures, which he began to confider as the great
Itandard of theological truth, afforded no coun-
tenance to a practice, equally subversive of faith
and of morals. IHis warm and impetuous temper
did nor susser him long to conceal such import-
ant discoveries, or to continue a silent fpeaator
of the delusion of his countrymen. From the
pulpit in the great church at Wittemberg, he
inveighed bitterly against the irregularities and
vices of the monks who published Indulgences;
he ventured to examine the doctrines which they
taught, and pointed out to the people the danger
of relying for salvation upon any other means
than those appointed by God in his word. The.
boldness and novelty of these opinions drew great
attention, and being recommended by the autho-
rity of Luther's personal chara&er, and delivered
with a popular and persuasive eloquence, they
made a deep impreflon on his hearers. Encou-
raged by the favourable reception of his doc-
trines among the people, he wrote to Albert,
elecfor of Mentz and archbishop of Magdeburgh,
to whofejurifdi&ion that part of Saxony was sub-
jet, and remonstrated warmly against the faife
opinions, as well as wicked lives, of the preachers
of Indulgences; but he fotund that prelate too
deeply interested in their success to correct their
abufcs. llis next attempt w:s to gain the sus-

fr;lge

B ° ° frage of men of learning. For this purpose he

---» publilhed ninety-five theles, containing his fenri-

Hepublfi ments with regard to Indulgences. These he
his theres
ahih" proposed, not as points fully established, or of
them' undoubted certainty, but as fubjets of inquiry

and disputation; he appointed a day, on which
the learned were invited to impugn them, either
in person, or by writing; to the whole he sub-
joined iblemn protestations of his high refpe& for
the apoftolick fee, and of his implicit fubmifllon
to its authority. No opponent appeared at the
time prefixed; the theses fpreaa over Germany
with aftonilhing rapidity; they were read with
the greatest eagerness; and all admired the bold-
ness of the man, who had ventured not only to
call in question the plenitude of papal power, but
to attack the Dominicans, armed with all the
terrors of inquisitorial authority'.

Suppotthd THE friars of St. Augustine, Luther's own
do. o order, though addiCted with no less obsequious-

ness than the other monafick fraternities to the
papal fee, gave no check to the publication of
there uncommon opinions. Luther had, by his
piety and learning, acquired extraordinary autho-
rity among his brethr!en; he proreltcd the highest
regard for the authority of the pope; his pro-
feslions were at that time sincere and as a secret

Lutheri Orera J n:, , 6i2, vol. i. pr.: fat. 3. p. 2. 66.

HI.. of o,

o ....... . ..

L. '. .

. . I. .:'ckenl. Coin.
Aptol p. l6.

enmity,

enmity, excited by interest or emulation, fubrfis B 0o0 K
among all the monaftick orders in the Romish <-
church, the Augultinians were highly pleated '5'Z
with his invectives against the Dominicans, and
hoped to fee them exposed :o the hatred and scorn
of the people. Nor was his sovereign, the
elector of Saxony, the wifelt prince at that time
in Germany, ditl;tisficd with this obstruction
which Luther threw in the way of the publica-
tion of Indulgences. Ie fccretly encouraged the
attempt, and flattered himself that this dispute
among the Ecclefiallicks themselves, might give
omne check to the exaaions of the court of Rome,
which the secular princes had long, though with-
out success, been endeavouring to oppof.

MANY zealous champions immediately arose to M-.v ,,-

de;v,.ir to

defend opinions on which the wealth and power couiLC
of the church were founded, againll Luther's at- him.
tacks. In opposition to there theses, Tctzcl
published counter-thefes at Francfort on the
Oder; Eccius, a celebrated Divine of Augsburg,
endeavoured to refute his notions; and Prierias,
a Dominican friar, mafler of the sacrcd palace
and Inquifitor-general, wrote againit hi'n with
all the virulence of a fcholatick difiutanr. Buit
the manner in which they corldll. tl the contio-
verfy, did little service to their caliue. Luther
attempted to combat Indulir'nces by arguments
founded in realon, or derived from scripture;
they produced nothing in support of them but
the lfntilents of fchooimen, the conclusions of

VOL. II. I the

B 0 0 K the canon law, and the decrees of popes". The
X ii:i.. decision of judges so partial and interested, did not

si' satisfy the people, who began to call in queflion

the authority even of these venerable guides, when
they found them sanding in diret opposition to
the ditates of reason, and the determinations of
the divine law". *

MEAN-

m F. Paul, p. 6. Seckcnd. p. 40. Palavic. p. 8.
n Seckend. p. 30.
* Guicciardini has alierted two things with regard to the

fir-1 promulgation of Indulgences: I. That Leo bellowed a
gift of the profits arising from the sale of Indulgences in
Saxony, ard the adjacent provinces of Germany, upon his
lifler Magdalen, the wife of Francelcetto Cibo, Guic. lib.
13. 168. 2. That Arcemboldo, a Genoese eccldiaftick,
who had been bred a merchant, and Rill retained all the arts
of that profefion, was appointed by her to colle& the money
which should be railed. F. Paul has followed him in both
these particulars, and adds, that the Augustinians in Saxony
had been immembrially employed in preaching Indulgences g
but that Arcemboldo and his deputies, hoping to gain more
by committing this :rull to the Dominicans, had made their
bargain with Tetzel, and that Luther was prompted at first
to oppose Tetzel and his afrociates, by a desire of taking re-
v'enge for this injury offered to his order. F. Paul, p. 5.
A nmoR all the historians since their tithe, popiih as well as pro.
seliant, have, without examination, admitted these afertions
to be true upon their authority. But notwithstanding the con-
curring testimony of two authors, so eminent both for exa&t-
aefs and veracity, we may obfcrve,

I. That Felix Contolori, who searched the pontifical

archives of purpose, could not find this pretended grant in
any of those regiters where it mudt necesSarily have been re-
corded. Palav. p. 5.-2. That the profits arising from In-
dulgences in Saxony and the adjacent countries, had been
granted not to Magdaln, but to Albert archbiihop of Mentz,

who

MZANWHILE, thdfe novelties in Luther's doc- B 3° 0 K

trines which incerefted all Germany, excited little _.V- -
attention and no alarm in the court of Rome. theSen
Leo, fond of elegant and refined pleasures, intent ram^.t
upon great schemes of policy, a stranger to theo- v'^*1 L'
logical controversies, and apt to despise them,

who had the right of nominating those who published them.
Seck. p. tz. Luth. Oper. i. pr.f. p. i. Palav. p. 6.-3. That
Arcemboldo never had concern in the publication of Indul-
dences in Saxony; his diftrie was Slanders and the Upper
and Lower Rhine; Seek. p. 14. Palav. p. 6.-4. That La-
ther and his adherents never mention this grant of Leo's to
his sifter, though a circumstance of which they could hardly
have been ignorant, and which they would have been careful
not to suppress. -- . The publication of Indulgences in Ger-
many was not usually committed to the Auguffinians. The
promulgation of them, at three different periods underJuliusII
was granted to the Fraicifcans; the Dominicans had been
employed in the fame office a ihort time before the present
period. Palav. p, 4'.-6. The promulgation of thotf Indul-
gences, which firs excited Luther's indignation, was entrust.
ed to the archbishop of Mentzj in conjunRion with the guar-
dian of the Franciscans; but the latter having declined ac-
cepting of that trust the sole right became vested in the
archbishop. Palav. 6. Seck. z6, 1)'-7. Luther was not in-
ftigated by his superiors among the Augustinians to attack
the Dominicans their rivals, or to depreciate Iiddlgcnccs be.
cause they were promulgated by them; his opposition to their
opinions and vices proceeded from more laudable motives.
Seck, p. i5. 32. Lutheri Operan, , p. 64. 6. 8. A diploma
of Indulgences is publified by Herm. Vonder HArdt, from
which it appears, that the name of the guardian of the Fran-
cifcans is retained, together with that of the archbihop, al-
though the former did not a&. The limits of the country to
which their commiflions extended, viz. the diocese of Mentz,
Magdeburg, Halberfadt, and the territories of the marquis
of Brandenburg, are mentioned in that diploma. Hist. Lite-
raria Reformat. par iv. p. 14.

I 2 regarded

B 0oO K regarded with the utmost indifference the opera-

- tions of an obscure friar, who, in the heart of
'S'° Germany, carried on a fcholaftick disputation in

a barbarous fyle. Little did he apprehend, or
Luther himself dream, that the effets of this
quarrel would be so fatal to the papal fee. Leo
imputed the whole to monaftick enmity and
emulation, and seemed inclined not to interpose
in the contest, but to allow the Augustinians and
Dominicans to wrangle about the matter with their
ulual animosity.

Tih rrn- THE solicitations, however, of Luther's ad-
,,cr'soi verfaries, exasperated to an high degree by the
"'°"O' boldness and fcverity with which he animadverted

on their writings, together with the furprizing
progress which his opinions made in different
parts of Germany, roused at last the attention of
the court of Rome, and obliged Leo to take
measures for the security of the church againit an
attack that now appeared too serious to be de-

He s, um- spifed. For this end, he summoned Luther to
ppta at appear at Rome, within sixty days, before the
R"o'". auditor of the chamber, and the fame Prierias

who had written against him, whom he empower-
ed to examine his dotrines, and to decide con-
cerning them. He wrote, at the fame time, to
the ele&or of Saxony, beseeching him not to pro-
tet a man w.hose heretical and prophane tenets
were so lhocking to pious ears; and enjoined the
provincial of the Augultinians to check, by his
authority, the raflnefs of an arrogant monk, which

brough:

brought dirgrace upon the order of St. Augutfine, B 0° K-
and gave offence and disturbance to the whole --
church. Islo.

FROM the dtrain of these letters, as well as from The Pope

empowers

the nomination of a judge so prejudiced and par- hi rgare
tial as Prierias, Luther easily saw what sentence inormny.
he might expe& at Rome. He discovered, for
that reason, the utmost iblicitude to have his
cause tried in Germany, and before a less fufpecc-
ed tribunal. The professors in the university of
Wittemberg, anxious for the safety of a man
who did so much honour to their focicty, wrote
to the pope, and after employing several pretexts
to excuse Luther from appearing at Rome, in-
treated Leo to commit the examination of his
doctrines to some persons of learning and autho-
rity in Germany. The eledtor requested the
fame thing of the pope's legate at the diet of
Augsburg; and as Luther himself, who, at that
time, was so far from having any intention to
disclaim the papal authority, that he did not
even entertain the smallest suspicion concern-
ing its divine original, had written to Leo a most
fubmillive letter, promising an unreicrved com-
pliance with his will, the pope gratified them so
far as to empower his legate in Germany, cardi-
nal Cajetan, a Dominican, eminent for fcholafick
learning, and paflionately devoted to the Roman
feet to hear and determine the cause.

! 3 LUTHER,

* o0o K LUTHER, though he had good reason to decline
----' a judge chosen among his avowed adversaries,
Lzt°;rap. did not hesitate about appearing before Cajetan;
, ; ,ePt and having obtained the emperor's fafe-condu&t,

immediately repaired to Augsburg. The cardi-
nal received him with decent refpeC, and endea-
voured atfirft togain him upon by gentletreatment:
But thinking it beneath the dignity of his Ration
to enter into any formal dispute with a person of
such inferior rank, he required him, by virtue of
the apoftolick powers with which he was clothed,
to retra& the errors which he had uttered with
regard to Indulgences, and the nature of faith i
and to abstain, for the future, from the publica-
tion of new and dangerous opinions. Luther,
fully persuaded of the truth of his own tenets,
and confirmed in the belief of them by the ap-
probation which they had met with among per-
sons conspicuous both for learning and piety,
was surprised at this abrupt mention of a recanta-
tion, before any endeavours were used to con-
vince him that he was mistaken. He had flat-
tered himself, that in a conference concerning
the points in dispute with a prelate of such
Cdifinguifhed abilities, he would be able to re.
move many of those imputations with which the
ignorance or malice of his antagonits had loaded
him; but the high tone of authority that the
cardinal assumed, extinguished at once all hopes
ps this kind, and cut off every profpeft of ad-
vantage from the interview. His native in-

4 trepidity

trepidity of mind, however, did not desert him. B O0 K
He declared, with the utmost firmness, that he :Z
could not, with a safe conscience, renounce opi- Hi intrp;a

bcbhafior.

nions which he believed to be true; nor ihould
any consideration ever induce him to do what
would be so bale in itself, and so offensive to God.
At the fame time, he continued to express no
less reverence than formerly for the authority of
the apoftolick fee o; he signified his willingness
to submit the whole controversy to certain uni-
verfities which he named, and promised neither
to write nor to preach concerning Indulgences for
the future, provided his adversaries were likewise
enjoined to be silent with refpedt to them'. All
there offers Cajetan disregarded or rejeced, and
till insisted peremptorily on a simple recantation,
threatening him with ecclefiatical censures, and
forbidding him to appear again in his presence,
unless he resolved instantly to comply with what
he had required. This haughty and violent
manner of proceeding, as well as other circum-
Rances, gave Luther's friends such frong reasons
to fufpe&t, that even the Imperial fafe-condu&
would not be able to prote&t him from the
legate's power and resentment, that they pre-
vailed on him to withdraw secretly from Augf-
burg, and to return to his own country. But
before his departure, according to a form of
which there had been some examples, he pre- Hi;,.ppel.
pared a solemn appeal from the pope, ill-inform. oaoler ate

* Luth. Oper. vol. i. p. 164. r Ibid. p. z19.

I 4 ed

B o0 K ed at that time concerning his cause, to the pope,

II.
---- when he Ihould receive more full information

,5s'. with refte;t to it'.

IHr , r p. CAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat,
p~r, ' hy
!.2 EI:l?,r and at the publication of his appeal, wrote to the
s""y. eiector of Saxony, complaining of both; and

requiring him, as he regarded the peace of the
church, or the authority of its head, either to
fend that seditious monk a prisoner to Rome, or
to banish him out of his territories. It was not
fiom theological considerations that Frederick
had hitherto countenanced Luther; he seems to
have been much a firanger to controversies of that
kind, and to have been little interested in them.
His protection flowed alnoft entirely, as hath
been already obifrved, from political motives,
and was afforded with great secrecy and caution.
1le had neither heard any of Luther's discourses,
nor read any of his books; and though all Get-
pmany resounded with his fame, he had never
once admitted him into his presence'. But upon
this delmrnd :which the cardinal made, it became
nccc1'ruy to throw off bomewhat of his former
relcrve. He had been at griat expence, and had
beliowcd mtuch) attention on .founding a new uni-
ver:'iy, a;n olbjea of considerable importance to
every Germ1an prince; and foreseeing how fatal a

1 Sleid. -lil. of Reform. p. 7. Scckend. p. 45. Lutl.
Oper. i. 163.

; Scckcnd. p.27. Sleid. Hill. p. 1z.

blow

blow the removal of Luther would be to its re- B 00 K
putation', he, under various pretexts, and with .I
many profcfflons of esteem for the cardinal, as '50'
well as of reverence for the pope, not only declined
complying with either of his requeefs, but openly
discovered great concern for Luther's safety'.

THE inflexible rigour with which Cajetan in- Motive of

the legate'tj

sifted on a limple recantation, gave great ofFence conduat.
to Luther's followers in that age, and hath since
been censured as imprudent, by several Popish
writers. But it was impossible for the legate to
at another part. The judges before whom Lu-
ther had been required to appear at Rome, were
so eager to display their zeal against his errors,
that, without waiting for the expiration of the
sixty days allowed him in the citation, they had
already condemned him as an heretick". Leo
had, in several of his brieves and letters, fligma-
tized him as a child of iniquity, and a man given
up to a reprobate sense. Nothing less, therefore,
than a recantation could save the honour of the
church, whose maxim it is, never to abandon the
smallest point that it has eftabliihed, and which
is even precluded, by its pretensions to infallibi-
lity, from having it in its power to do so.

LUTHER'S situation, meanwhile, was such as Luther's
would have filled any other person with the most litua.

' Seckend. p. 59. t SliJd. liilt. p. zo. Luth. Oper. i. 172.

tutlH, Oper. i. 16 .

3 disquieting

3 0ouo disquieting apprehensions. He could not expet

d-I- that a prince so prudent and cautious as Frederick,
'SM' would, on his account, set at defiance the thunders

of the church, and brave the papal power, which
had cruihed some of the moif powerful of the
German emperors. He knew what veneration
was paid, at that time, to ecclefiafRical decisions;
what terrors ecclesiastical censures carried along
with them, and how easily these might intimidate
and shake a prince, who was rather his protetor
from policy, than his disciple from convition. If he
ihould be obliged to quit Saxony, he had no pro-
fpet of any other asylum, and must Rand exposed
to whatever punishment the rage or bigotry of
his enemies could inflic. Though sensible of his
danger, he discovered no fynptroms of timidity
or remissness, but continued to vindicate his own
condut and opinions, and to inveigh against
those of his adversaries with more vehemence thai
ever".

,p pprl, BUT as every Rep taken by the court of Rome,
t, .c,"' particularly the irregular fencence by which he

had been so precipitately declared a heretick, con-
vinced Luther that Leo would loon proceed to the
mot violent measures agaift him, she had recourse
to the only expedient in his power, in order to
prevent the effect of the papal censures. He
appealed to a general council, which he affirmed
to be the representative of the catholick church,

Seckend. p. 59.

and

and superior in power to the pope, who being a B 0O K
fallible man, might err, as St. Peter, the moRt -
perses of his predecessors, had erredr. *5so

IT soon appeared, that Luther had not formed A new ull

rash conjectures concerning the intentions of the indil-
Romifl church. A bull, of a date prior to. his ec
appeal, was issued by the pope, in which he mag-
nifies the virtue and efficacy of Indulgences, in
terms as extravagant as any of his predecessors
had ventured to use in the darkest ages; and
without applying such palliatives, or mentioning
such conceflions, as the juncture seemed to call
for, he required all Christians to assent to what
he delivered as the doctrine of the Catholick
church, and fubje&ed those who Ihould hold or
teach any contrary opinion, to the heaviest eccl..
iaftical censures.

AMONo Luther's followers, this bull, which Uaimbli.

they confidered as an unjustifiable effort of the ofadva:Me
pope in order to preserve that rich branch of his toLutha.
revenue which arose from Indulgences, produced
little cffect. But, among the ref of his country-
men, such a clear decision of the sovereign pon-
tiff against him, and enforced by such dreadful
penalties, must have been attended with confe-
quences very fatal to his cause; if these had not
been prevented in a great measure by the death
of the emperor Maximilian, whom both his prin- JI."n 7

1

H. uth. e. . .
y Sleid. Hist. a12. Luth. Oper, i. 179.

ciples

B t

° r ciples and his interest prompted to support the
---.. apthority of the holy lee. In consequence of

'5"' this event, the vicariat of that part of Germany

which is governed by the Saxon laws, devolved to
the eletor of Saxony; and under the lhelter of
his friendly administration, Luther not only en-
joyed tranquillity, but his opinions were fuffrred,
during the inter-regnum which preceded Charles's
election, to take root in different places, and to
grow up to Tome degree of strength and firmness.
At the fame time, as the election of an emperor
was a point more interesting to Leo than a theo-
logical controversy, which he did not understand,
and of which he could not foresee the confe-
qulences, he was so extremely solicitous not to
irritate a prince of such considerable influence in
the elecoral college as Frederick, that he dif-
covered a great unwillingners to pronounce the
fcertence of excommunication against Luther,
which his adversaries continually demanded with
the molt clamorous importunity.

suspension To these political views of the pope, as well
of proceed- as to his natural aversion from revere measures,
ingd igr.inR

L was owing the suspension of any further proceed-

ings against Luther for eighteen months. Per.
petual negociations, however, in order to bring
the matter to rome amicable issue, were carried
on during thatfpace. The manner in which these
were conduced having given Luther many op.
portunities of observing the corruption of the
pourt of Rome; its obstinacy in adhering to efta-

-Il....

blilhed errors; and its indifference about truth, B 00 K
however clearly propored, or strongly proved, he -.-
began to utter rome doubts with regard to the 'S'B
divine original of the papal authority. A publick He ben*
disputation was held upon this important question ouenio the
at Leipfick, between Luther and Eccius, one of thPity.
his molt learned and formidable antagonils; but
it was as fruitless and indecisive as such fcholaftick
combats usually prove. Both parties boaleed of
having obtained the victory; both were con-
firmed in their own opinions; and no progress
was made towards deciding the point in contro-
verfy '.

NOR did this spirit of mutiny against the doe- Retfor,-

trines and usurpations of the Romish. church swz.
break out in Saxony alone; an attack no less li',
fierce, and occasioned by the fame causes, was
made upon them about this time in Switzerland.
The Franciscans being entrusted with the pro-
mulgation of Indulgences in that country, exe-
cuted their commillion with the fame indiscretion
and rapacioulihefs, which had rendered the Domi-
nicans so odious in Germany. They proceeded,
nevertheless, with uninterrupted success till they
arrived at Zurich. There Zuinglius, a man not
inferior to Luther himlElf in zeal and intrepidity,
ventured to oppose them; and being animated
with a republican boldnels, and free from those
relraints which fubjetlion to the will of a prince

z Lttlh. Oper. i. 19'.

inipofed

B °0 K imposed on the German reformer, he advanced
_ :'_ with more daring and rapid steps to overturn
35t'' the whole fabrick of the eitabliffed religion *

The appearance of such a vigorous auxiliary, and
the progress which he made, was, at first, matter
of great joy to Luther. On the other hand, the
decrees of the universities of Cologne and Lou.
vain, which pronounced his opinions to be erro-
neous, afforded great cause of triumph to his
adversaries.

iuthels BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther acquired
fn pro frfh vigour from every instance of opposition,

' and pushing on his inquiries and attacks from one

doctrine to another, he began to shake the firmest
foundations on which the wealth or power of the
church were established. Leo came at las to be
convinced, that all hopes of reclaiming him by
forbearance were vain; several prelates of great
wisdom exclaimed no less, than Luther's personal
adversaries, against the pope's unprecedented lenity
in permitting an incorrigible heretick, who during
three years had been endeavouring to fubvcrt every
thing sacred and venerable, still to remain within
the bosom of the church; the dignity of the
papal fee rendered the most vigorous proceedings
necessary; the new emperor, it was hoped, would
support its authority; nor did it feemn probable
that the elector of Saxony would so far forget his
usual caution, as to set himself in opposition to

Sklid. IHit.. 2. seckend. 59.,

their

their united power. The college of cardinals B ° oIK
was often assembled, in order to prepare the r
fcntence with due deliberation, and the ablest s5'0
canonists were consulted how it might be expressed
with unexceptionable formality. At last, on the Bll, of a.
fifteenth of June, one thousand five hundred and cio" b.
twenty, the bull, so fatal to the church of Rome, lifhim .
was issued. Forty-one propositions, extracted
out of Luther's works, are therein condemned
as heretical, scandalous, and offensive to pious
ears; all persons are forbidden to read his writ-
ings, upon pain ofrexcommunication; such as
had any of them in their custody, are command-
ed to commit them to the flames; he himself, if
he did not, within sixty days, publickly recant
his errors, and burn his books, is pronounced
an obstinate heretick; is excommunicated, and de-
livered unto Satan for the defirudion of his fleflh
and all secular princes are required, under pain
of incurring the fame censure, to seize his per-
son, that he might be punished as his crimes de-
served .

THE publication of this bull in Germany ex- The eAr,,t

cited various paflions in different places. Lu- ^
ther's adversaries exulted, as if his party and
opinions had been crulhed at once by such a de-
cifive blow. His followers, whose reverence for
the papal authority daily diminithed, read Leo's
anathemas with more indignation than terror.

b Palavic. 27. Luth. Oper. i. 413.

In.

B o o K In some cities, the people violently obfruted the

--.,-' romnulgation of the bull; in others, the persons
s5'± * ,!," ,rtempted to publish it were insulted, and

tr,- oull itself torn in pieces, and trodden under
foot c.

and upon T-irs sentence, which he had for some time
Luthrr.
NoU. 17. expected, did not disconcert or intimidate Luther.

After renewing his appeal to the general coun-
cil, he publilhed remarks upon the bull of ex-
communication; and being now persuaded that
Leo had been guilty both of impiety and injuf-
tice in his proceedings against him, he boldly de-
clared the pope to be that man of fin, or Anti-
chritl, whose appearance is foretold in the New
Testament; he declaimed against his tyranny and
usurpations with greater violence than ever; he
exhorted all Christian princes to shake off such
an ignominious yoke; and boalled of his own
happiness in being marked out as the object of
ecclesiastical indignation, because he had ventured
to aflert the liberty of mankind. Nor did he
confine his expressions of contempt for the papal
power to words alone; Leo having, in execution
of the bull, appointed Luther's books to be
burnt at Rome, he, by way of retaliation, as-
fembled all the professors and fludents in the uni-
verfity of Wittemberg, and with great pomp, in
pretence of a vast multitude of fpe&ators, cast the
volumes of the canon law, together with the

c Scckend. p. 116.

bull

bull of excommunication, into the flames; and B ° ° Ki
his example was imitated in several cities of Ger- a
many. The manner in which he juitified this '5ag.
ation was still more offensive than the a&ion it-
self. Having colle&ed from the canon law
some of the most extravagant propoftions with
regard to the plenitude and omnipotence of the
pope's power, as well as the Subordination of all
secular jurifdidion to his authority, he publifled
these with a commentary, pointing out the im-
piety of such tenets, and their evident tendency
to subvert all civil government'.

SUCH was the progress which Luther had made, State of the
and such the state of his party, when Charles ion when

Charles ar-

arrived in Germany. No secular prince had hi- rivedin
therto embraced Luther's opinions; no change Germay.
in the eftablified forms of worship had been in-
troduced; and no encroachments had been made
upon the poffeflions or jurifdi&ion of the clergy;
neither party had yet proceeded to ation; and
the controversy, though conducted with great
heat and pafion on both fides, was fill carried on
with its proper weapons, with theses, disputations,
and replies. A deep impreflion, however, was
made upon the minds of the people; their reve-
rence for ancient institutions and do&rines was
ihaken; and the materials were already scattered,
which kindled into the combustion that soon
spread over all Germany. Students crowded from

Luth. Oper. ii. 316,
VOL. II. K every

B °oo K every province of the empire to Wittemberg;
_»-__ and under Luther himself, Melandhon, Car-

520' loftadius, and other masters, then reckoned emi-

nent, imbibed opinions, which, on their return,
they propagated among their countrymen, who
listened to them with that fond attention, which
truth, when accompanied with novelty, naturally
commands '.

Reuonihe D tRING the course of there tranfa&ions, the
coidu& of court of Rome, though under the diretion of one
the court of
Rome, of its ablest pontiffs, neither formed its schemes

with that profound sagacity, nor executed them
with that Ready perseverance, which had long
rendered it the most perse& model of political
wisdom to the reft of Europe. When Luther
began to declaim against Indulgences, two dif.
ferent methods of treating him lay before the
pope; by adopting one of which the attempt,
it is probable, might have been crushed, and by
the other it might have been rendered innocent.
If Luther's first departure from the doctrines of
the church had instantly drawn upon him the
weight of its censures, the dread of there might
have refrained the elector of Saxony from pro-
tecing him, might have deterred the people from
listening to his discourses, or even might have
overawed Luther himself; and his name, like
that of many good men before his time, would
now have been known to the world only for his

* Seckend. 59.

honest
*t,

honest but ill-timed effort to correct the corrup. B 0o K
tions of the Romilh church. On the other hand, ~-~
if the pope had early testified some displeasure 'S5°'
with the vices and excesses of the friars who had
been employed in publishing Indulgences; if he
had forbidden the mentioning of controverted
points in discourses addressed to the people; if
he had enjoined the disputants on both fides to
be silent; if he had been careful not to rifque the
credit of the church by defining articles which
had hitherto been left undetermined, Luther
would, probably, have flopt ihort at his first
discoveries: He would not have been forced, in
felf-defence, to venture upon new ground, and
the whole controversy might poflibly have died
away insensibly; or being confined entirely to the
schools, might have been carried on with as little
detriment to the peace and unity of the Romith
church, as that which the Franciscans maintain
with the Dominicans, concerning the immacu-
late conception, or that between the JanfeniRs
and Jesuits concerning the operations of grace.
But Leo, by fluctuating between there oppoflte sys.
tems, and by embracing them alternately, de-
feated the effects of both. By an improper exer-
tion of authority, Luther was exasperated, but
not restrained. By a mistaken exercise of lenity,
time was given for his opinions to spread, but ,
no progress made towards reconciling him to the
church; and even the sentence of excommunica.
tion, which at another juncture might have been

K a decisive,

S o0o K decisive, was delayed so long, that it became at

--.~_i last scarcely an objec of terror,

r50o.

and upon SUCH a series of errors in the measures of a
the condu&
ot Lulhcr. court, seldom chargeable with mistaking its own

true interest, is not more aftonilhing than the
wisdom which appeared in Luther's condu&t.
Though a perfect stranger to the maxims of hu-
man prudence, and incapable, from the impe-
tuofity of his temper, of observing them, he was
led naturally by the method in which he made
his discoveries, to carry on his operations in a
manner which contributedmore to their success,
than if every ftep he took had been prescribed by
the most artful policy. At the time when he set
himfeif to oppose Tetzel, he was far fromintend-
ing that reformation which he afterwards effe&t-
ed; and would have trembled with horror at the
thoughts of what at last he gloried in accomplish-
ing. The knowledge of truth was not poured
into his mind all at once, by any special reve-
lation ; he acquired it by industry and meditation,
and his progress, of consequence, was gradual.
The do&rines of popery are so closely conne&ted,
that the exposing of one. error conduced him na-
turally to the detection of others; and all the
parts of that artificial fabrick were so linked to-
gether, that the pulling down of one loosened the
foundation of the reft, and rendered it more easy
to overturn them. In confuting the extravagant
tenets concerning Indulgences, he was obliged to

inquire

inquire into the true cause of ourjuftification and B 0o K
acceptance with God. The knowledge of that -v
discovered to him by degrees the inutility of pil- 5
grimages and penances; the vanity of relying on
the intercession of faints; the impiety of worship-
ping them; the abuses of auricular confeflon;
and the imaginary existence of purgatory. The
detecion of so many errors, led him of course to
confider the character of the clergy who taught
them; and their exorbitant wealth, the severe in-
junCion of celibacy, together with the intolerable
rigour of monaftick vows, appeared to him the
great sources of their corruption. From thence,
it was but one ftep to call in question the divine
original of the papal power, which authorized
and supported such a system of errors. As the
unavoidable result of the whole, he disclaimed
the infallibility of the pope, the decisions of school-
men, or any other human authority, and appeal-
ed to the word of God as the only standard of
theological truth. To this gradual progress Lu-
ther owed his success. His hearers were not
lhocked at first by any proposition too repugnant
to their ancient prejudices, or too remote from
eftablilhed opinions. They were condu&ted in-
sensibly from one do&rine to another. Their
faith and convition were able to keep pace with
his discoveries. To the fame cause was owing
the inattention, and even indifferences with which
Leo viewed Luther's first proceedings. A dire&
or violent attack upon the authority of the church
would at once have drawn upon Luther the whole

K 3 weight

B °0 K weight of its vengeance; but as this was far from

sI.
- his thoughts, as he continued long to profess

great refpedt for the pope, and made repeated
offers of fubmillion to his decisions, there seemed
to be no reason for apprehending that he would
prove the author of any desperate revolt; and he
was suffered to proceed ftep by ftep, in under-
mining the constitution of the church, until the
remedy applied at las came too late to produce
any ecfest.

^ Iqiry BUT whatever advantages Luther's cause de.
·aufis rived either from the mifakes of his adversaries,
which cen-
tributed to or from his own good condut, the sudden pro-
the prop~i
of theRe. grefs and firm efablifhment of his docrines,

Vtiuo. must not be ascribed to these alone. The fame

corruptions in the church of Rome which he con-
demned, had been attacked long before his ap.
pearance. The fame opinions which he now
propagated, had been published in different
places, and were supported by the fame argu-
ments. Waldus in the twelfth century, Wick-
liss in the fourteenth, and Huss in the fifteenth,
had inveighed against the errors of popery with
great boldness, and confuted them with more in-
genuity and learning than could have been ex-
:eted in those illiterate ages in which they flou-
rilhed. But all there premature attempts towards
a reformation proved abortive. Such feeble
lights, incapable of dispelling the darkness which
then covered the church, were Coon extinguished;
and though the doftrines of there pious men pro-

duce4

duced some effees, and left some traces in the B O 0
countries where they taught, they were neither L..
extensive nor considerable. Many powerful caures 520.
contributed to facilitate Luther's progress, which
either did not exist, or did not operate with full
force in their days; apd at that critical and ma-
ture jun&ture when he appeared, circumstances
of every kind concurred in rendering each ftep
that he took successful.

THE long and scandalous schism which divided The long

the church, during the latter part of the four- the four-
teenth, and the beginning of the fifteenth cen- tecJh cen
turies, had a great effect in diminishing the vene-
ration with which the world had been accustomed
to view the papal dignity. Two or three con-
tending pontiffs roaming about Europe at a time;
fawning on the princes whom they wanted to
gain; squeezing the countries which acknow-
ledged their authority; excommunicating their
rivals, and cursing those who adhered to them,
discredited their pretensions to infallibility, and
exposed both their persons and their office to
contempt. The laity, to whom all parties ap-
pealed, came to learn that fume right of private
judgment belonged to them, and acquired the
exercise of it so far as to chufe, among these in-
fallible guides, whom they would please to fol-
low. The proceedings of the councils of Con-
stance and Basil, spread this difrefpet for the
Romish fee still wider, and by their bold exertion
of authority in deporing and electing popes,

K 4 taugh;

B 0o K taught the world that there was in the church a
a_--,.. jurifdition superior even to the papal power,

X5i' which they had long believed to be supreme.

NThe ponl- THE wound given on that occafon to the papal

ficatcs of
Afiunder authority was scarcely healed up, when the pon-
VI and of

,u: ii. tificates of Alexander VI. and Julius II. both able

princes, but deteRfable ecclefiaflicks, raised new
:candal in Chriatendom. The profligate morals
of the former in private life; the fraud, the in-
justice and cruelty of his publick administration,
place him on a level with thofc tyrants, whose deeds
are the greatest reproach to human nature. The
latter, though a stranger to the odious paflions
which prompted his predecessor to commit so
many unnatural crimes, was under the dominion
of a refllefs and ungovernable ambition, which
scorned all considerations of gratitude, of decen-
cy, or of justice, when they obftrutted the exe-
cution of his schemes. It was hardly pofllble, to
be firmly persuaded that the infallible knowledge
of a religion, whose chief precepts are purity and
humility, was deposited in the breafs of the
impious Alexander, or the overbearing Julius.
The opinion of those who exalted the authority
of a council above that of the pope, spread won-
derfully under their pontificates; And as the
emperor and French kings, who were alternately
engaged in hostilities with those active pontiffs,
permitted and even encouraged their fubjets to
expose their vices with all the violence of invec-
tive, and all the petulance of ridicule, men's ears

being

being accustomed to there, were not shocked B 0 0 K
with the bold or ludicrous discourses of Luther -
and his followers concerning the papal dignity. So.

NOR were such excesses confined to the head of ie, immo.

the church alone. Many of the dignified clergy, th, lve,'ofg
secular as well as regular, being the younger sons
of noble families, who had aflumed the eccle-
fiaftical charater for no other reafbn but that
they found in the church stations of great dignity
and affluence, were accustomed totally to neglect
the duties of their office, and indulged them-
selves without reserve in all the vices to which
great wealth and idleness naturally give birth.
Though the inferior clergy were prevented by
their poverty from imitating the expensive luxury
of their superiors, yet gross ignorance and lowv
debauchery rendered them as contemptible as the
other were odiouss. The revere and unnatural
law of celibacy, to which both were equally sub-
je&, occasioned such irregularities, that in feve-

f The corrupt state of the church prior to the Reforma-

tion, is acknowledged by an author, who was both abun-
dantly able to judge concerning this matter, and who was
not overforward to confers it.' " For some years (fays Bel..
larmine) before the Lutheran and Calviniftick hcrcfies were
published, there was not (as contemporary authors testify) any
severity in ecclefiafical judicatories, any discipline with re-
gard to morals, any knowledge of sacred literature, any
reverence for divine things, there was not almoR any reli-
gion remaining." Bellarminus Concio. xxviii. Oper. tom.
vi. col. 296. edit. Colon. 1617. apud Gerdefii Hilt. Evan,
Renovati, vol. i. p. 25:

ras

B °O1 K ral parts of Europe the concubinage of prieits

i-s-- was not only permitted, but enjoined. The
Sse. employing of a remedy so contrary to the genius

of the Christian religion, is the frongeft proof
that the crimes it was intended to prevent were
both numerous and flagrant. Long before the
sixteenth century, many authors of great name and
authority give such descriptions of the dissolute
morals of the clergy, as seem almost incredible
in the present age'. The voluptuous lives of
eclefiafticks occasioned great scandal, not only
because their manners were inconsistent with their
sacred character; but the laity being accustomed
to fee several of them raised from the lowest
stations to the greatest affluence, did not shew
the fime indulgence to their excefres, as to those
of persons pofleffcd of hereditary wealth or gran-
deur; and viewing their condition with more
envy, they censured their crimes with greater

severity,

* Centum Gravamina Nationif. German. in Fa(ciculo Rer.

expetend. & fugiendarum, per Ortuinum Gratium, vol. i.
361. See innumerable paflages to the fame purpose in the
appendix, or second volume, published by Edw. Brown. See
alib Herm. Vonder Hardt. Hist. Lit. Reform. pars iii. and the
vati collections of Walchius in his four volumes of Monumenta
medii avi. Gotting. 1757.

The authors I have quoted enumerate the vices of the

clergy. When they ventured upon atlions manife/ily criminal,
we may conclude that they would be less scrupulous with
rcfpef to the decorum of behaviour. Accordingly their
neglec of the decent conduct suitable to their profellion,
freas :o have given great offence. In order to illultrate thit,

I shall

severity. Nothing, therefore, could be more B °
acceptable to Luther's hearers, than the violence -..-
with which he exclaimed against the immoralities 'ls'
of churchmen, and every person in his audience
could, from his own observation, confirm the
truth of his invetives.

THE scandal of there crimes was greatly in- The fc;litv

creased by the facility with which such as commit- tih eimm'o
ted them obtained pardon. In all the European Ip^lrdned
kingdoms, the impotence of the civil magistrate,
under forms of government extremely irregular
and turbulent, made it necessary to relax the
rigour of justice, and upon payment of a certain
fine or composition prescribed by law, judges
were accustomed to remit farther punishment,
even of the most atrocious crimes. ThM court of
Rome, always attentive to the means of aug-
menting its revenues, imitated this pracice, and,

I Iball transcribe one palage, because it is taken not from
any author whose profefled purpose it was to describe the im-
proper condua of the clergy; and who, from prejudice or
artifice, may be supposed to aggravate the charge against them.
The emperor Charles IV. in a letter to the archbishop of
Mentz, A. D. 13;9, exhorting him to reform the disorders of
the clergy, thus exprefres himself: " De Chrifti patrimonio,
ludos, haftiludia & torneamenta exercent; habitum militarem
cuam pretextis aureis & argentcis gefant, &l caceos militares;
comam & barbam nutriunt, & nilill quod ad vitam & ordincm
ecclefiafticum £pe&at, oftendunt. Militaribus re duntaxat &
fecularibus afibus, vita & moribus, in fu:: falutis difpen.
diun, & generale populi fcandaluin, immifcenc." Codci.
Diplomaticus Anccdotorum, per Val. Ferd. Gudcnum, 4to.
vol. iii. p. 43S.

by

B oo K by a preposterous accommodation of it to reli-
...,-.. gious concerns, granted its pardons to such tranf-

25Z0 greffors as gave a fum of money in order to pur-

chafe them. As the idea of a composition for
crimes was then familiar, this strange traffick
was so far from shocking mankind, that it soon
became general; and in order to prevent any
imposition in carrying it on, the officers of the
Roman chancery publilhed a book, containing
the precise fum to be exaced for the pardon of
every particular fin. A deacon, guilty of mur-
der, was absolved for twenty crowns. A bilhop
or abbot might aflrafinate for three hundred
livres. Any ecclefialtick might violate his vows
of chastity, even with the most aggravating cir-
cumftances, for the third part of that fum. Even
such shocking crimes, as occur seldom in human
life, and perhaps exiit only in the impure imagi-
nation of a cafuifi, were taxed at a very moderate
rate. When a more regular and perfect mode of
dispensing justice came to be introduced into
civil courts, the pra&ice of paying a composition
for crimes went gradually into disuse; and man-
kind having acquired more accurate notions con-
cerning religion and morality, the conditions on
which the court of Rome bestowed its pardons
appeared impious, and were confidered as one
great source of ecclesiastical corruptionh.

h Fafcicul. Rcr. expet. & fug. I. 3;5. J. G. Scliellhornii

Amtnit. Literar. Francof. 1725. vol. ii. 369. Dition. de
Bayle, Artic. Banck & Tuppius. Taxa Cancellar. Romanic,
Edit. Francof. 1651. pafi m.

THIS

THIS degeneracy of manners among the clergy B 0l 0

might have been tolerated, perhaps, with greater .
indulgence, if their exorbitant riches and power TcS2tori.
had not enabled them, at the fame time, to op- tntweath
press all other orders of men. It is the genius church;
of superstition, fond of whatever is pompous or
grand, to set no bounds to its liberality towards
persons whom it esteems sacred, and to think its
expressions of regard defective, unless it hath
raised them to the height of wealth and autho-
rity. Hence flowed the extensive revenues and
jurisdiction possessed by the church in every
country of Europe, and which were become in-
tolerable to the laity from whose undifcerning
bounty they were at first derived.

THE burden, however, of ecclesiastical op- prt;uiaulr

preflion had fallen with such peculiar weight on ia Ge.
the Germans, as rendered them, though natu-
rally exempt from lenity, and tenacious of their
ancient customs, more inclinable than any people
in Europe to liften to those who called on them
to assert their liberty. During the long contests
between the popes and emperors concerning the
right of investiture, and the wars which these
occasioned, most of the considerable German
ecclefafticks joined the papal faction; and while
engaged in rebellion against the head of the
empire, they seized the Imperial revenues, and
usurped the Imperial jurifdilEion within their
own dioceses. Upon the re-eftablilhment of tran-
quillity, they fill retained these usurpations, as

if

0o0o K if by the length of an unjust poreffion they had
- v- - acquired a legal right to them. The emperors,

320. too feeble to wrest them out of their hands, were

obliged to grant the clergy fiefs of those vast ter-
ritories, and they enjoyed all the immunities as
well as honours which belonged to feudal barons.
By means of these, many bishops and abbots in
Germany were not only ecclefiafticks, but princes,
and their character and manners partook more
of the licence too frequent among the latter, than
of the fan&city which became the former'.

whieu he THE unsettled Rate of government in Ger-
glergy u-
furpeda many, and the frequent wars to which that
grat part of
he proper. country was exposed, contributed in another

.f manner towards aggrandizing ecclefiaficks. The

only property, during those times of anarchy,
which enjoyed security from the oppression of
the great, or the ravages of war, was that which
belonged to the church. This was owing, not
only to the great reverence for the sacred cha-
racer prevalent in those ages, but to a fuperfti-
tious dread of the sentence of excommunication,
which the clergy were ready to pronounce against
all who invaded their pofleflions. Many ob-
serving this, made a surrender of their lands to
ecclefiaflicks, and consenting to hold them in
fee of the church, obtained as its vaflals a degree
of safety, which without this device they were
unable to procure. By such an increase of the

i F. Paul. History of Eccleiat. Benefices, p. so7.

7 number

number of their vassals, the power of eccle- BO 0 0
fiafticks received a real and permanent augmen- I'
tation; and as lands, held in fee by the limited 's"'
tenures common in those ages, often returned to
the persons on whom the fief depended, confider-
able additions were made in this way to the pro-
perty of the clergyk.

THE solicitude of the clergy in providing for T'he va

perfunal iam-
the safety of their own persons, was fill greater pmun"ieof

eccilesal=

than that which they displayed in securing their tk^,.
pofelllons; and their efforts to attain it were
fill more successful. As they were consecrated
to the priestly office with much outward folem-
nity; were diftinguilhed from the reft of man-
kind by a peculiar garb and manner of life;
and arrogated to their order many privileges
which do not belong to other Christians, they
naturally became the obje&s of excessive vene-
ration. As a superstitious spirit spread, they
were regarded as beings of a superior species to
the profane laity, whom it would be impious to
try by the fame laws, or to subje&t to the fame
punishments. This exemption from civil jurif-
di&ion, granted at first to ecclefiaticks as a
mark of respect, they soon claimed as a point of
right. This valuable immunity of the priest-
hood is aflerted, not only in the decrees of popes
and councils, but was confirmed in the molt

k F. Paul, Hist. of Rccler. Benef. p. 66. Boulainvillers,
Etat, deFrance, tom.i. 169. Lond. 1737.

ample

B o1O K ample form by many of the greatest emperors .

v -.- As long as the clerical characer remained, the
520-. person of an ecclefiaftick was' sacred; and unless

he were degraded from his office, the unhallowed
hand of the civil judge durst not touch him. But
as the power of degradation was lodged in the
spiritual courts, the difficulty and expence of ob-
taining such a sentence, too often secured abfo-
lute impunity, to offenders. Many assumed the
clerical characer for no other reason, than that
it might screen them from the punishment which
their ations defervedm. The German nobles
complained loudly, that these anointed malefac-
tors, as they called them", seldom suffered capi-
tally, even for the most atrocious crimes; and
their independence on the civil magistrate is
often mentioned in the remonstrances of the
diets, as a privilege equally pernicious to bociety,
and to the morals of the clergy.

Thei en. . WHILE the clergy afterted the privileges of
gEat, on their own order with so much zeal, they made
tJ of ,h continual encroachments upon those of the laity.
I'Y, All causes relative to matrimony, to testaments,

to usury, to legitimacy of birth, as well as those
which concerned ecclesiastical revenues, were
thought to be so conneced with religion, that

I Goldafti Conitut. Imperial Francof. 1673. vol. ii. 92.
1o7.

m Rymcr's Fadera, vol. xiii. 532.
A Centum Gravam. §31.

5 they

they could be tried only in the spiritual courts. B o o K
Not satisfied with this ample jurisdiction, which _ _
extended to one half of the fubjets which give s3'5.
rife to litigation among men, the clergy, with
wonderful industry, and by a thousand inventions,
endeavoured to draw all other causes into their
own courts". As they had engrossed the whole
learning known in the dark ages, the spiritual
judges were commonly so far superior in know-
ledge and abilities to those employed in the fecu-
lar courts, that the people at first favoured any
stretch that was made to bring their affairs under
the cognizance of a judicature, on the decisions
of which they could rely with more perfect con-
fidence. Thus the intereft'of the church, and
the inclination of the people, concurring to elude
the jurisdiction of the lay-magiftrate, soon re-
duced it almost to nothingP. By means of this,
vast power accrued to ecclefiafticks, and no in-
considerable addition was made to their revenue
by the fums paid in those ages to such as admi-
niftered justice.

THE penalty by which the spiritual courts Th drada.

enforced their sentences, added great weight and or spiritus
terror to their jurifdicion. The censure of ex- *n""""
communication was instituted originally for pre-
serving the purity of the church; that obitinate
offenders, whose impious tenets or profane lives

* Giannoni Hist. of Naples, book xix. 3.
P Centum Gravam. § 9. 56. 64.
VOL. II. L were

B ° ° K were a reproach to Christianity, might be cut off
L-~- from the society of the faithful: This, ecclcfiaf.

5a0* ticks did not scruple to convert into an engine

for promoting their own power, and inflited it
on the most frivolous occasions. Whoever de-
spifed any of their decisions, even concerning
civil matters, immediately incurred this dreadful
censure, which not only excluded them from all
the privileges of a Christian, but deprived them
of their rights as men and citizensq; and the
dread of this rendered even the most fierce and
turbulent spirits obsequious to the authority of
the church.

The devices NOR did the clergy neglet the proper methods
es ecclefla£.
ticks to fe. of preserving the wealth and power which they
ufufpation. had acquired with such industry and address.

The polfefflons of the church, being consecrated
to God, were declared to be unalienable; so that
the funds of a society which was daily gaining,
and could never lose, grew to be immense. In
Germany, it was computed that the ecclefiafticks
had got into their hands more than one half of
the national property'. In other countries, the
proportion varied; but the lhare belonging to
the church was every where prodigious. These
vast poffefions were not subject to the burdens
imposcd on the lands of the laity. The Ger-
man clergy were exempted by law from all

' Centun Gravam. § 34.
* Centum Gravam. s8.

taxes;

taxes'; and if, on any extraordinary emergence, B o0O R
ecclefiafticks were pleased to grant some aid to- -v-
wards supplying the publick exigencies, this was '
confidered as a free gift flowing from their own
generosity, which the civil magistrate had no
title to demand, far less to exa&, In consequence
of this strange solecism in government, the laity in
Germany had the mortification to find themfclves
loaded with excefive impositions, because fich
as polefled the greatest property were freed from
any obligation to support, or to defend the fate.

GRIEVOUS, however, as the exorbitant wealth TheCer-

man eccleu
and numerous privileges of the clerical order flia'ek

. -m=ly Io-

were to the other members of the Germanick reuna.
body, they would have reckoned it some miti-
gation of the evil, if there had been poffefled only
by ecclefiafticks residing among themselves, who
would have been less apt to make an improper
ife of their riches, or to excrcife their rights
with unbecoming rigour. But the bishops of
Rome having early put in a claim, the boldest
that ever human ambition liggefted, of being
filprere and infallible heads of the Christian
church; they, by their profound policy and un-
wearied perseverance, by their address in avail-
ing thenmflves of every circumflance which oc-
curred, by taking advantage of the fuperflition
of some princes, of the necessities of others,
and of the credulity of the people, at length efta-

' Centum Gravam. § 28. Goldati Conft. Imper. ii. 79.
loS. Pftclel. Hilt. du Droit Publ. 35o. 374.

L z blilhcd

3 0 0 K blifhed their pretensions, in opposition both to
* V-.1 the interest and common fenfeof mankind. Ger-

*5O0' many was the country which there ecclesiastical

sovereigns governed with most abfol'ite autho-
rity. They excommunicated and c:pofed some
of its mort illustrious emperors, and excited their
fubjeas, their ministers, and even their chil-
dren, to take arms against them. Amidst there
contests, the popes continually extended their
own immunities, spoiling the secular princes gra-
dually of their most valuable prerogatives, and
the German church felt all the rigour of that
oppression which flows from flbjection to foreign
dominion, and foreign exaaions.

fomninated THE right of conferring benefices, which the
, iahepp popes ulurped during that period of confusion,

was an acquisition of great importance, and
exalted the ecclesiastical powver upon the ruins
of the temporal. The emperors and other
princes of Germany had long been in poffeflion
of this right, which served to increase both their
authority and their revenue. But by wresting
it out of their hands, the popes were enabled
to fill the empire with their own creatures; they
accustomed a great body of every prince's sub-
je&s to depend, not upon him but upon the Ro-
man fee ; they bestowed upon strangers the richest
benefices in every country, and drained their
wealth to supply the luxury of a foreign court.
Even the patience of the most superstitious ages
mutinied under such oppreflion; and so loud and

frequent

frequent were the complaints and murmurs of B ° ° K
the Germans, that the popes, afraid of irritating -r.
them too far, consented, contrary to their usual 5:0'
praEtice, to abate somewhat of their pretensions,
and to reft satisfied with the right of nomi-
nation to such benefices as happened to fall vacant
during fix months in the year, leaving the dif-
fpofal of the remainder to the princes and other
legal patrons i.

BUT the court of Rome easily found expedients The. ee-

d'ents for
for eluding an agreement which put such re- rfiraiining

" '.~~~~~~~~~

* (-.-.I (-this power

ftraints on its power. The pratice of reserving ofthe popes
certain benefices in every country to the pope's ineafsual.
immediate nomination, which had been long
known, and often complained of, was extended
far beyond its ancient bounds. All the benefices
poffefled by cardinals, or any of the numerous
officers in the Roman court; those held by per-
sons who happened to die at Rome, or within
forty miles of that city on their journey to or
from it; those which became vacant by tranfla-
tion, with many others, were included in the
number of reserved benefices; Julius II. and Leo,
firerching the matter to the utmost, often col-
lated to benefices where the right of reservation had
not been declared, on pretence of having men-
tally reserved this privilege to themselves. The
right of reservation, however, even with this
extension, had certain limits, as it could be exer-

F. Paul, Hilt. of Eccles. Benef. 204. Gold. Conflit.
Imper. i. 408.

L 3 cited

°0 0 K cifed only where the benefice was atually va-

cant; and therefore, in order to render the exer-
,5so. tion of papal power unbounded, expeiaativegraces,

or mandates nominating a person to succeed to a
benefice upon the first vacancy that should hap-
pen, were brought into use. By means of there,
Germany was filled with persons depending on
the court of Rome, from which they received
such reversionary grants; princes were defrauded,
in a great degree, of their prerogatives; the
rigths of lay-patrons were preoccupied, and ren-
dered almost entirely vain .

Venality of THE manner in which these extraordinary
the court of
lom, powers were exerciled, rendered them fill more

odious and intolerable. The avarice and extor-
tion of the court of Rome, were become excef-
five almost to a proverb. The sale of benefices
was so notorious, that no pains were taken to
conceal, or to disguise it. Companies of mer-
chants openly purchased the benefices of dif-
ferent dirtrias in Germany from the pope's mini-
iters, and retailed them at an advanced price".
Pious men beheld with deep regret these fimo-
niacal tranfaaions, to unworthy the minilters of
a christian church; while politicians complained
of the lot's uftained by tlhe exportation of so
much wealth in that irreligious traffick.

u Centum Grav.ar. § 1i. Fafcic. Rer. Expet. &c. 134.

Gold. Conit. Irper. i. 391. 404, do;. F. Paul, Hilt. of
Eccl. Bencf. z67. 199.
x ,ifcic. Rer. Expet, i. j59.

THE

THE fums, indeed, which the court of Rome a o00 K

drew by its ifated and legal impositions from all .-'
the countries acknowledging its authority, were Jd,.
so considerable, that it is not Rfrange that princes, ",o"
as well as their subje&s, murmured at the fiallet wrelth..
addition made to them by unnecessary or illicit
means. Every ecclesiastical person, upon his
admiflion to his benefice, paid annats, or one
year's rent of his living, to the pope; and
as that tax was exacted with great rigour, its
amount was prodigious. To this must be added,
the frequent demands made by the popes of free
gifts from the clergy, together with the extraordi-
nary levies of tenths upon ecclesiastical benefices,
on pretence of expeditions against the Turks,
seldom intended, or carried into execution; and
from the whole, the vast proportion of the reve-
nues of the church, which flowed continually to
Rome, may be estimated.

SuCH were the dissolute manners, the exorbi- The undte

tant wealth, the vast power and privileges of thefcar"
the clergy before the Reformation; such the
pppreflive rigour of that dominion which the
popes had efablifhed over the christian world;
and such the sentiments concerning them that
prevailed in Germany at the beginning of the fix-
teenth century. Nor has this Sketch been copied
from the controversial writers of that age, who,
in the heat of disputation, may be fufpeEed of
having exaggerated the errors, or of having mif-
represented the conduct of that church which they

L 4 laboured

00 oX laboured to overturn; it is formed upon more
X- -.i authentic evidence, upon the memorials and re-

530.' mongrances of the Imperial diets, coolly enu-

merating the grievances under which the empire
groaned, in order to obtain the redress of them.
Diffatisfa&ion muff have risen to a great height
among the people, when these grave assemblies
expressed themselves with such acrimony; and if
they demanded the abolition of chose enormities
with so much vehemence, the people, we may
be assured, uttered their sentiments and desires in
bolder and more virulent language.

)Men pre- To men thus prepared for ihaking off the
pared to
mbrace Lu. yoke, Luther addressed himself with certainty of
ther's epi.-
pins-, success. As they had long felt its weight, and

had born it with impatience, they listened with
joy to the first proposal for procuring deliver-
ance. Hence proceeded the fond and eager
reception that his doctrines met with, and the
rapidity with which they spread over all the pro-

*dt tole. vinces of Germany. Even the impetuosity and
rate hie oco
fmt. fierceness of Luther's fpirir, his confidence in

afterting his own opinions, and the arrogance as
well as contempt wherewith he treated all who
differed from him, which, in ages of greater
moderation and retinement, have been reckoned
defects in the charater of that reformer, did not
appear excessive to his contemporaries, whose
minds were strongly agitated by thole interesting
¢ontrovcrfies which he carried on, and who had

themselves

themselves endured the rigour of papal tyranny, 1 00 R
and seen the corruptions in the church against -.-.a
which he exclaimed. rs0,

NOR were they offended at that gross scurrility

with which his polemical writings are filled, or
at the low buffoonery which he Sometimes in-
troduces into his gravest discourses. No dispute
was managed in those rude times without a large
portion of the former; and the latter was com-
mon, even on the most solemn occasions, and in
treating the most sacred subje&s. So far were
either of these from doing hurt to his cause, that
invetive and ridicule had some effect, as well
as more laudable arguments, in exposing the
errors of popery, and in determining mankind to
abandon them.

BESIDES all there causes of Luther's rapid pro- The effea

grefs, arising from the nature of his enterprize, of.
and the juncture at which he undertook it, he Printingon

the prngrel
reaped advantage from some foreign and adven- ofthe Re.

formration

titious circumstances, the beneficial influence of
which none of his forerunners in the fame course
had enjoyed. Among these may be reckoned the
invention of the art of printing, about half a
century before his time. By this fortunate dif.
covery, the facility of acquiring and of propa-
gating knowledge was wonderfully increased, and
Luther's books, which must otherwise have made
their way slowly and with uncertainty into distant
countries, spread at once all over Europe. Nor

were

B3 0 K were they read only by the rich and the learned,
-u-- who alone had access to books before that inven-
'5s°' tion; they got into the hands of the people, who,

upon this appeal to them as judges, ventured to
examine and to reje& many dotrines, which thev
had formerly been required to believe, without
being taught to undertand them.

And es the THE revival of learning at the fame period was
revival of
urning. a circumstance extremely friendly to the Reform-

ation. The fudy of the ancient Greek and
Roman authors, and the discovery of that liberal
and found knowledge which they contain, rouzed
the human' mind from the profound lethargy in
which it had been funk during several centuries.
Mankind seem, at that period, to have recovered
the powers of enquiring and of thinking, facul-
ties of which they had long loft the use; and
fond of the acquisition, they exercised them with
great boldness upon all ftbjets. They were not
now afraid of entering an uncommon path, or of
embracing a new opinion. Novelty appears
rather to have been a recommendation of a doc-
trine; and instead of being startled when the
daring hand of Luther drew alide, or tore the
veil which covered eltablifhed errors, the genius
of the age applauded and aided the attempt.
ILuther, though a iRranger to elegance in taste or
composition, zealously promoted the cultivation
of ancient literature; and sensible of its being
necessary in studying the scriptures, he himself
had acquired confiderab!e knowledge both in the

Hebrew

Hebrew and Greek tongues. Melan&hon, and B o o K
some other of his disciples, were eminent profi- i
cients in the polite arts; and as the fame bar- 5'.
barous monks who opposed the introdution of
learning into Germany, set themselves with equal
fierceness against Luther's opinions, and de-
clared the good reception of the latter to be the
effect of the progress which the former had made,
the cause of learning and of the Reformation
came to be confidered as closely conneced, and,
in every country, had the fame friends and the
fame enemies. This enabled the reformers to
carry on the contest at first with great superiority.
Erudition, induitry, accuracy of sentiment, pu-
rity of composition, even wit and raillery, were
wholly on their fide, and triumphed with ease
over illiterate monks, whose rude arguments,
exprefled in a perplexed and barbarous style, were
found insufficient for the defence of a system, the
errors of which, all the art and ingenuity of its
later and more learned advocates have not been
able to palliate.

'IHAT bold spirit of inquiry, which the revival Luther ai.

eel by per.
of learning excited in Europe, was so favourable fns wPho

did not wi&

to the Reformation, that Luther was aided in his hid^ccs?
progress, and mankind were prepared to embrace
his doEtrines, by erfons who did not with fuc-
ccls to his undertaking. The greater part of
the ingenious men who applied to the study of
ancient literature, towards the close of the fifteenth

7 century,

B o0 K century, and the beginning of the sixteenth,

though they had no intention, and perhaps no
1s2@ with, to overturn the eftablilhed system of reli-

gion, had discovered the absurdity of many tenets
and practices authorized by the church, and per-
ceived the futility of those arguments, by which
illiterate monks endeavoured to defend them.
Their contempt of there advocates for the re-
ceived errors, led them frequently to expose the
opinions which they supported, and to ridicule
their ignorance with great freedom and severity.
By this, men were prepared for the more serious
attacks made upon them by Luther, and their
reverence both for the dctrines and persons
against whom he inveighed, was considerably
abated. This was particularly the cafe in Ger-
many. When the first attempts were made to
revive a tate for ancient learning in that coun-
try, the Ecclefiafticks there, who were fill more
ignorant than their brethren on the other fide of
the Alps, set themselves to oppose its progress
with more a&ive zeal; and the patrons of the
new studies, in return, attacked them with greater
violence. In the writings of Reuchlin, Hutten,
and the other revivers of learning in Germany, the
corruptions of the church of Rome are censured
with an acrimony of style, little inferior to that
of Luther himfclfy.

Y Gerdefius His,. Evang. Renov. vol. i. p. 141. 157.

Seckcnd. lib. i. p103. Vender I-ardt. -lii.t Literar. Re-
bOir. pars i.

FRONM

FROM the fame cause proceeded the frequent B O O K

ftri&ures of Erafinus upon the errors of the .-
church, as well as upon the ignorance and vices P.tSuill,
of the clergy. His reputation and authority E",s,'',
were so high in Europe at the beginning of the
sixteenth century, and his works were read with
such univerlal admiration, that the effete of there
deserves to be mentioned as one of the circum-
stances which contributed most considerably to-
wards Luther's success. Erasmus, having been
destined for the church, and trained up in the
knowledge of Ecclesiastical literature, applied
himself more to theological inquiries than any
of the revivers of learning in that age. His
acute judgment and vast erudition enabled him
to discover many errors, both in the dotrine and
worship of the Romish church. Some of these he
confuted with great solidity of reasoning, and
force of eloquence. Others he treated as objects
of ridicule, and turned against them that irre-
fiftible torrent of popular and satirical wit, of
which he had the command. There was scarcely
any opinion or practice of the Romish church
which Luther endeavoured to reform, but what
had been previously animadverted upon by Eras-
mus, and had afforded him fubje& either of cen-
sure or of raillery. When Luther first began
his attack upon the church, Erasmus seemed to
applaud his condu&t; he courted the friendship
of several of his disciples and patrons, and con.
demned the behaviour and spirit of his adver-

saries.

B0 0 K saries'. He concurred openly with him in in-

_-'
1

veighing againt the school divines, as the teach-
'52. ers of a system equally unedifying and obscure.

He joined him in endeavouring to turn the atten,
tion of men to the study of the holy scriptures,
as the only standard of religious truth'.

VARIOVS circumRtances, however, prevented

Erasmus from holding the fame course with
Luther. The natural timidity of his temper;
his want of that force of mind which alone can
prompt a man to assume the chara&er of a re-
formerb; his exceflive deference for persons in
high station; his dread of losing the pensions
and other emoluments, which their liberality had
conferred upon him; his extreme love of peace,
and hopes of reforming abuses gradually, and by
gentle methods; all concurred in determining
him not only to repress and to moderate the
zeal with which he had once been animated

* Seckend. lib. i. p. 40. 94.
a Vonder Hardt. Hiftor. Literar. Reform. pars i. Gerdef.
Hist. Evang. Renov. i. 147.

b Erafinus himself is candid enough to acknowledge this:

' Luther," fays he, " has given us many a wholesome doc-
trine, and many a good counsel. I wish he had not defeated
the efe& of them by intolerable faults. But if he had written
every thing in the molf unexceptionable manner, I had no
inclination to die for the fake of truth. Every man hath not
the courage requisite to make a martyr; and I am afraid, that
if I were put to the trial, I ihould imitate St. Peter." Epift.
Erafri in Jortin's Life ofErafim. vol. i, p. 273.

against

against the errors of the church', but to assume B 00 K
the character of a mediator between Luther and A
his opponents. But though Erasmus soon began JssO'
to censure Luther as too daring and impetuous,
and was at last prevailed upon to write againit
him, he must, nevertheless, be confidered as his
forerunner and auxiliary in this war upon the
church. He first scattered the feeds, which Lu-
ther cherished and brought to maturity. His
raillery and oblique censures prepared the way
for Luther's invectives and more dire& attacks.
In this light Erasmus appeared to the zealous de-
fenders of the Romilh church in his own times .
In this light he must be confidered by every per-
son conversant in the history of that period.

IN this long enumeration of the circumstances

which combined in favouring the progress of
Luther's opinions, or in weakening the resistance
of his adversaries, I have avoided entering into
any discussion of the theological dotrines of
popery, and have not attempted to ihew how
repugnant they are to the Ipirit of Christianity,
and how destitute of any foundation in reason,
in the word of God, or in the practice of the
primitive church, lcaving thofle topicks entirely
to ecclesiastical hiflorians, to whose province
they peculiarly belong. But when we add the
effect of these religious considerations to the in-

c Jortin's Life of Erasmus, vol. i. p. 258.
d Vonder Hardc. Hist. Literar. Reform. pars i. p. 2.

fluence

B 0° 0 fluence of political causes, it is obvious that the
_-~-' united operation of both on the human mind

510.' must have been sudden and irresistible. Thought

to Luther's contemporaries, who were too near
perhaps to the scene, or too deeply interested in
it, to trace causes with accuracy, or to examine
them with coolness, the rapidity with which his
opinions fpead, appeared to be .f unaccountable,
that ofme of them imputed it to a certain un-
common and malignant position of the stars,
which scattered the spirit of giddiness and inno-
vation over the world"; it is evident, that the
success of the Reformation was the natural effec
of many powerful causes prepared by peculiar
Providence, and happily conspiring to that end.
This attempt to investigate these causes, and to
throw light on an event so singular and im-
portant, will not, perhaps, be deemed an unne-
ceffary digreflion.-I return from it to the course
of the history.

Prmeedings THE Diet at Worms conducted its delibera-
of the Dit
atWorm,. tions with that flow formality peculiar to such

25'. assemblies. Much time was spent in establishing

some regulations with regard to the internal po-
lice of the empire. The jurifdiition of the Im-
perial chamber was confirmed, and the forms of
its proceeding rendered more fixed and regular.
A council of regency was appointed to afift Ser-
dinand in the government of the empire during

' Jovii Hifloria, Lut. 1553. fol. p. 134.
4 his

his brother's absence; which, from the extent of B 00 K
the emperor's dominions, as well as the multi- .v
plicity of his affairs, was an event that might be
frequently expe&edf. The state of religion was
then taken into consideration. There were not The mpe.

for's views

wanting some plausible reasons which might have with repar
induced Charles to have declared himself the
protector of Luther's cause, or at least to have
connived at its progress. If he had pofflefled no
other dominions but those which belonged to
him in Germany, and no other crown besides the
the Imperial, he might have been disposed, per-
haps, to favour a man, who asserted so boldly
the privileges and immunities for which the em-
pire had struggled so long with the popes. But
the vast and dangerous schemes which Francis I.
was forming againfl Charles, made it necelfary
for him to regulate his condu&t by views more
extensive than those which would have suited a
German prince; and it being of the utmost im-
portance to secure the pope's friendffip, this
determined him to treat Luther with great feve-
rity, as the most effectual method of soothing
Leo into a concurrence with his measures. His
eagerness to accomplish this, rendered him not
unwilling to gratify the papal legates in Ger-
many, who insisted that, without any delay or
formal deliberation, the diet ought to condemn
a man whom the pope had already excommuni-

f Pont. Heuter. Rer. Auft. lib. viii. c. il. p. 195. Pflfel
Abreg6 Chronol. p. 598.

VoL. II. M cated

B 0 0 K cated as an incorrigible hererick. Such an abrupt
.-.-. manner of proceeding, however, being deemed

15'. unprecedented and unjust by the members of the

4e i, fum. diet, they made a point of Luther's appearing in
,Ioned to
,ajpr. person, and declaring whether he adhered or not

to those opinions, which had drawn upon him
the censures of the churchg. Not only the em-
peror, but all the princes through whose terri-
tories he had to pass, granted him a fafe-con'
,',c! 6. ducl; and Charles wrote to him at the fame time,

requiring his immediate attendance on the diet,
and renewing his promises of protecion from
any injury or violence h. Luther did not hesitate
one moment about yielding obedience, and set
out for Worms, attended by the herald who had
brought the emperor's letter and fafe-condut.
While on his journey, many of his friends, whom
the fate of Huss, under similar circumltances,
and notwithstanding the fame security of an Im-
perial fafe-condu&, filled with solicitude, ad-
vised and intreated him not to rulh wantonly

.is un. into the midfl of danger. But Luther, fupe-
Sirit," rior to such terrors, silenced them with this

reply, " I am lawfully called," said he, " to
appear in that city, and thither will I go iq the
name of the Lord, though as many devils, as
there are tiles on the houses, were there com-
bined againit me'."

* P.Mart. Ep. 7;z. h Luth. Oper. ii. 41.
A Luth. Opcr. ii. .41.

THE

THE reception which he met with at Worms, B °O o

was such as he might have reckoned a full re- ' --'
ward of all his labours, if vanity and the loveof H' rcep-

tion at

applause had been the principles by which he was wms.
influenced. Greater crowds assembled to behold
him, than had appeared at the emperor's publick
entry; his apartments were daily filled with
princes and personages of the highest rank', and
he was treated with all the refpedt paid to those who
poflefs the power of directing the understanding
and sentiments of other men; an homage, more
sincere, as well as more flattering, than any
which pre-eminence in birth or condition can
command. At his appearance before the diet, Tbe ms-
he behaved with great decency, and with equal appearance.
firmness. He readily acknowledged an excess
of vehemence and acrimony in his controversial
writings, but refused to retract his opinions unless
he were convinced of their falsehood; or to con- -
sent to their being tried by any other rule than
the 'word of God. When neither threats nor
entreaties could prevail on him to depart from
this rebolution, some of the ecclefiafticks pro-
posed to imitate the example of the council of
Constance, and by punishing the author of this
pestilent heresy, who was now in their power, to
deliver the church at once from such an evil.
But the members of the diet refusing to expofc
the German integrity to frelh reproach by a second
violation of publick faith; and Charles being no

* Seckend. 156. Luth. Oper.ii. 414.

M a less

B 00 K less unwilling to bring a fain upon the begin-
'..-v-- ning of his administration by such an ignomini-
'51' . ous aAion, Luther was permitted to depart in

April 6. safety'. A few days after he left the city, a
Edia severe edi& was published in the emperor's name,
again im, and by authority of the diet, depriving him, as

an obstinate and excommunicated criminal, of
all the privileges which he enjoyed as a fubje&
of the empire, forbidding any prince to harbour
or protec him, and requiring all to concur in
seizing his person as soon as the term specified in
his fafe-condua was expiredm.

He is sized BUT this rigorous decree had no considerable
and conceal-
ed a Wart- effect, the execution of it being prevented, partly
bc'g. by the multiplicity of occupations which the

commotions in Spain, together with the wars in
Italy and the Low Countries, created to the
emperor; and partly by a prudent precaution
employed by the ele&or of Saxony, Luther's
faithful patron. As Luther, on his return from
Worms, was pafling near Altenftein in Thu-
ringia, a number of horsemen in masks ruflied
suddenly out of a wood, where the elector had
appointed them to lie in wait for him, and
surrounding his company, carried him, aftcr
difiniiing all his attendants, to Wartburg, a
ltrong cafrle not far diltant. There the eleator
orlered him to be fuppliedl with every thing nc-

t F. Paul, Ilill. of Counc. p. 13. Sc;kcndl. J6o.
'm Gild. Conll, Imiperial. ii. o48.

ceTffry

ceffary or agreeable, but the place of his retreat B o0 K
was carefully concealed, until the fury of the v
present storm againit him began to abate, upon "'
a change in the political situation of Europe.
In this solitude, where he remained nine months,
and which he frequently called his Patmos, after
the name of that island to which the apostle John
was banished, he exerted his usual vigour and
industry in defence of his doctrines, or in con-
futation of his adversaries, publilhing several
treatises, which revived the spirit of his followers,
aftonilhed to a great degree, and disheartened at
the sudden disappearance of their leader.

DURING his confinement, his opinions con- Prngrers of

tinued to gain ground, acquiring the ascendant nion.
in almost every city in Saxony. At this time,
the Augustinians of Wittemberg, with the ap-
probation of the university, and the connivance
of the elecor, ventured upon the first ftep to-
wards an alteration in the eftablijhed forms of
publick worship, by abolishing the celebration
of private mafes, and by giving the cup as well
as the bread to the laity in administering the fa-
crament of the Lord's supper.

WHATEVER consolation the courage and fuc- Decree of

the uniler-

cess of his disciples, or the progress of his doc- ity of N
trines in his own country, afforded Luther in his tondem"ni"
retreat, he there received information of two
events which considerably damped his joy, as
they seemed to lay inouperable obstacles in the

M 3 way

B ° 1 K way of propagating his principles, in the two

.'-,- molt powerful kingdoms of Europe. One was,
'5"' a solemn decree, condemning his opinions, pub-

lilhed by the university of Paris, the molt
ancient, and at that time the moit refpeAable of

HenryVIm. the learned societies in Europe. The other was,
I^sit the answer written to his book concerning the

" Babylonifh captivity by Henry VIII. of England.

That young monarch, having been educated un-
der the eye of a suspicious father, who, in order
to prevent his attending to business, kept him
occupied in the Rfudy of literature, still retained
a greater love of learning, and stronger habits of
application to it, than are common among princes
of so acive a disposition, and such violent pas-
sions. Being ambitious of acquiring glory of
every kind, as well as zealously attached to the
Ronifh church, and highly exasperated against
Luther, who had treated Thomas Aquinas, his
favourite author, with great contempt, Henry
did not think it enough to exert his royal autho-
rity in opposing the opinions of the reformer,
but resolved likewise to combat them with fcho-
latlick weapons. With this view he published
his treatise on the Seven Sacraments, which,
though forgotten at present, as books of con-
troverfy always are, when the occasion that pro-
duced them is past, is not destitute of polemical
ingenuity and acuteness, and was reprelented by
the flattery of his courtiers to be a work of such
wonderful science and learning, as exalted him
no lets above other authors in merit, than he

was

was distinguished among them by his rank. The B 0, K
pope, to whom it was presented with the greatest c'
formality in full consistory, spoke of it in such
terms, as if it had been ditated by immediate
inspiration; and as a testimony of the gratitude of
the church for his extraordinary zeal, conferred on
him the title of Defender of the Faith, an appella-
tion which Henry soon forfeited in the opinion
of thole from whom he derived it, and which is
still retained by his fuccel'ors, though the avowed
enemies of those opinions, by contending for
which he merited that honourable diftintion.
Luther, who was not overawed either by the

Luthe,'q

authority of the University, or the dignity of reply to
the Monarch, soon published his animadversions b'th.
on both in a flyle no less vehement and revere,
than he would have used in confuting his meanest
antagonist. This indecent boldness, instead of
ihocking his contemporaries, was confidered by
them as a new proof of his undaunted spirit. A
controversy managed by disputants so illultrious,
drew more general attention; and such was the
contagion of the spirit of innovation, diffused
through Europe in that age, and so powerful the
evidence which accompanied the doEtrines of the
reformers on their first publication, that, in spite
both of the civil and ecclesiastical powers com-
bined against them, they daily gained converts
both in France and in England.

How desirous soever the emperor might be ,steofat.
to put a flop to Luther's progress, he was often twen

Chade, acud
M 4 obliged, ,,,,nci,.

B °e K obliged, during the diet at Worms, to turn his

.ird thoughts to matters ifill more interesting, and
352i which demanded more immediate attention. A

war was ready to break out between him and
Francis in Navarre, in the Low Countries, and
in Italy; and it required either great address to
avert the danger, or timely and wife precautions
to refitl it. Every circumstance, at that junc-
ture, inclined Charles to prefer the former mea-
sure. Spain was torn with intestine commotions.
In Italy, he had not hitherto secured the assist-
ance of any one ally. In the Low Countries,
his fubjets trembled at the thoughts of a rupture
with France, the fatal effecs of which on their
commerce they had often experienced. From
these considerations, as well as from the folici-
tude of Chievres, during his whole adminiftra-
tion, to maintain peace between the two mo-
narchs, proceeded the emperor's backwardness
to commence holilities. But Francis and his
minilters did not breathe the fame pacific spirit.
He easily foresaw that concord could not long
fubfilt, where interest, emulation, and ambition
conipired to dissolve it; and he possessed several
advantages which flattered him with the hopes
of furprizing his rival, and of overpowering him
before lie could put himself in a posture of de-
tence. The French king's dominions, from
their compa& situation, from their fubje&ion to
the royal authority, from the genius of the people,
fund of war, and attached to their sovereign by
pyery tie of duty and affe&tion, were more ca-

pable

pable of a great or sudden effort, than the larger B O o :
but disunited territories of the emperor, in one -
part of which the people were in arms against his '5'
ministers, and in all his prerogative was more
limited than that of his rival.

THE only princes, in whose power it was to HenryVInI.

have kept down, or to have extinguished this emperor.
flame on its first appearance, either negleted to
exert themselves, or were a&ive in kindling and
spreading it. Henry VIII. though he asseted
to assume the name of mediator, and both par-
ties made frequent appeals to him, had laid aside
the impartiality which suited that chara&er.
Wolfey, by his artifices, had estranged him so
entirely from the French king, that he secretly
fomented the discord which he ought to have
composed, and waited only for some decent pre-
text to join his arms to the emperor's".

LEo'S endeavours to excite discord between teohefi.

latcs be-

the emperor and Francis were more avowed, tweenthe
and had greater influence. Not only his duty, ival,.
as the common father of Christendom, but his
interest as an Italian potentate, called upon the
pope to act as the guardian of the publick tran-
quillity, and to avoid any measure that might
overturn the system, which after much blood-
Ihed, and many negociations, was now establish-
ed in Italy. Accordingly Leo, who instantly

n Herbert, Fiddec's Life ofWolfey, 28.

difccrned

B oo K discerned the propriety of this condut, had
- ..-O formed a scheme, upon Charles's promotion to
352. the Imperial dignity, of rendering himself the

umpire between the rivals, by soothing them al-
ternately, while he entered into no close con-
federacy with either; and a pontiff less ambi-
tious and enterprizing, might have saved Eu
rope from many calamities by adhering to this
plan. But this high-fpirited prelate, who was
fill in the prime of life, longed passionately to
distinguish his pontificate by some splendid ation.
He was impatient to wash away the infamy of
having loft Parma and Placentia, the acquifi-
tion of which refleted so much lustre on the
administration of his predeceflor Julius. He
beheld, with the indignation natural to Italians
in that age, the domihion which the Tranfal-
pine, or as they, in imitation of the Roman arro-
gance, dehominated them, the barbarous nations,
had attained in Italy. He flattered himself, that
after assisting the one monarch to strip the other
of his pofleffions in that country, he might find
means of driving out the victor in his turn, and
acquire the glory of restoring Italy to the liberty
and happiness which it enjoyed before the in-
vafion of Charles VIII. when every state was
governed by its native princes, or its own laws,
and unacquainted with a foreign yoke. Extra-
vagant and chimerical as this project may seem,
it was the favourite objet of almost every Italian
eminent for genius or enterprize during great
part of the sixteenth century. They vainly hoped,

6 that

that by superior kill in the artifices and refine- B o 0 K
ments of negociation, they should be able to -v-
baffle the efforts of nations, ruder indeed than
themselves, but much more powerful and war-
like. So alluring was the prospeCt of this to
Leo, that notwithstanding the gentleness of his
disposition, and his fondness for the pleasures of
a refined and luxurious ease, he hastened to dif-
turb the peace of Europe, and to plunge himself
in a dangerous war, with an impetuosity scarcely
inferior to that of the turbulent and martial Ju-
lius'.

IT was in Leo's power, however, to chufe

which of the monarchs he would take for his
confederate against the other. Both of them
courted his friendship; he wavered for rome time
between them, and at firif concluded an alliance
with Francis. The object of this treaty was the
conquest of Naples, which the confederates agreed
to divide between them. The pope, it is pro-
bable, flattered himself, that the brifl and aftive
spirit of Francis, seconded by the fame qualities
in his fubje&ts, would get the tPart of the flow
and wary councils of the emperor, and that they
might over-run with ease this detached portion
of his dominions, ill provided for defence, and
always the prey of every invader. But whether
the French Icing, by discovering too openly his
suspicions of Leo's Sincerity, disappointed there

G Gulc. lib. xiv .
p. 173.

hopes;

B 0o K hopes; whether the treaty was only an artifice
L-.-- of the pope's to cover the more serious negocia-

'521" tions which he was carrying on with Charles;

whether he was enticed by the profpe& of reap-
ing greater advantages from an union with that
prince; or whether he was toothed by the zeal
which Charles had manifested for the honour of

Conclui'e i the church in condemning Lurher; certain it is,
treaty with
Churls. that he soon deserted his new ally, and made

overtures of friendlhip, though with great fecre-
cy, to the emperor . Don John Manuel, the
fame man who had been the favourite of Philip,
and whose address had disconcerted all Ferdi-
nand's schemes, having been delivered, upon the
death of that monarch, from the prison to which
he had been confined, was now the Imperial am-
baffador at Rome, and fully capable of improv-
ing this favourable disposition in the pope to his
master's advantage 1. To him the conduct of this
negociation was entirely committed; and being
carefully concealed from Chievres, whose aver-
sion from a war with France would have prompt-
ed him to retard or defeat it, an alliance between
Mays. the pope and emperor was quickly concluded'.

The chief articles in this treaty, which proved
the foundation of Charles's grandeur in Italy,
were, that the pope and emperor should join

P Guic. lib. xiv. p. 175. Mem. de Bellay, par. 1573. P. 4.
s Jovii Vita Leonis, lib. iv. p. 89.
' Guic. 1. xiv. 181. Mum. de Bellay, p. z4. Du Mont,
Corps Diplom. tom. iv. fuppi. p. 96.

their

their forces to expel the French out of the Mi- B o o K
lanefe, the poffeflion of which should be granted _
to Francis Sforza, a son of Ludovico the Moor, 's"
who had resided at Trent since the time his bro-
ther Maximilian had been difpoffeffed of his do-
minions by the French king; that Parma and
Placentia should be restored to the church; that
the emperor should aflift the pope in conquer-
ing Ferrara; that the annual tribute paid by
the kingdom of Naples to the Holy See Ihould
be increased; that the emperor should take the
family of Medici under his protetion; that he
should grant to the cardinal of that name a pen-
sion of ten thousand ducats upon the archbilhop-
rick of Toledo; and fettle lands in the kingdom
of Naples to the fame value upon Alexander the
natural son of Lorenzo de Medici.

THE tranfating an affair of such moment with- Death of

ChlicwVc.s,

out his participation, appeared to Chievres so ue emp.-
decisive a proof of his having loft the ascendant ,ie rnd
which he had hitherto maintained over the mind mi"intr
of his pupil, that his chagrin on this account,
added to the melancholy with which he was
overwhelmed on taking a view of the many and
unavoidable calamities attending a war against
France, is said to have ihortened his days'. But
though this, perhaps, may be only the conjec-
ture of historians, fond of attributing every thing
that befals illustrious perlbnages to extraordinary

Belcarii Comment. de reb. Gallic. 483.
7 causes,

s 0 0 r causes, and of ascribing even their diseases and
- .- death to the effe& of political palfions, which
'5'10 are more apt to disturb the enjoyment than to

abridge the period of life, it is certain that his
death, at this critical juncture, cxtinguifhed all
hopes of avoiding a rupture with France'. This
event, too, delivered Charles from a minister, to
whole authority he had been accultomed from
his infancy to submit with such implicit deference,
as checked and depressed his genius, and retained
him in a state of pupillage, unbecoming his
years as well as his rank; but this restraint
being removed, the native powers of his mind
were permitted to unfold themselves, and he be-
gan to display such great talents, both in council
and execution, as exceeded the hopes of his con-
temporaries", and command the admiration of
posterity.

Cm,,mn- WHILE the pope and emperor were preparing,
henosli° in consequence of their secret alliance, to attack
Nwarrt. Milan, holtilities commenced in another quarter.

The children of John d'Albret, king of Navarre,
having often demanded the restitution of their
hereditary dominions, in terms of the treaty of
Noyon, and Charles having as often eluded their
requests upon very frivolous pretexts, Francis
thought himself authorized by that treaty to aftliR
the exiled family. The juncture appeared ex-

P. Heuter. Rer. Aultriac. lib. viii. c. 1 X. p. 197.
u P. Mart. Ep. 735.

tremely

tremely favourable for such an enterprize. Charles B O O
was at a distance from that part of his dominions; A-
the troops usually Pationed there, had been called I'.
away to quell the commotions in Spain; the
Spanish malecontents warmly solicited him to
invade Navarre', in which a considerable fa&ion
was ready to declare for the descendants of their
ancient monarchs. But in order to avoid, as
much as potfible, giving offence to the emperor,
or king of England, Francis dire&ed forces to be
levied, and the war to be carried on, not in his
own name, but in that of Henry d'Albret. The
condu& of these troops was committed to An-
drew de Foix, de l'Efparre, a young nobleman,
whom his near alliance to the unfortunate king
whose battles he was to fight, and what was still
more powerful, the interest of his sifter, madame
de Chateaubriand, Francis's favourite mistress,-
recommended to that important trust, for which
he had neither talents nor experience. But as Prorrefs t

- the French.

there was no army in the field to oppose him,
he became matter, in a few days, of the whole
kingdom of Navarre, without meeting with any
obftru&ion but from the citadel of Pampeluna.
The additional works to this fortress, begun by
Ximenes, were still unfinished; nor would its
flight refitance have deserved notice, if Ignatio
Loyola, a Bifcayan gentleman, had not been
dangerously wounded in its defence. During the
progress of a lingering cure, Loyola happened
to have no other amusement than what he found

P. Mart. Ep. -21.

B 0o0 K in reading the lives of the faints: The efflet of
A-_>- this on his mind, naturally enthufiatcick but am-

5 bitious and daring, was.to inspire him with such

a desire of emulating the glory of these fabulous
worthies of the Romish church, as led him into
the wildest and moos extravagant adventures,
which terminated at last in inflituting the society
-"-;: of Jesuits, the most political and best regulated of

all the monaftick orders, and from which man-
«:< >:2 kind have derived more advantages, and received

greater hurt, than from any other of 'these reli-
gious fraternities.

The,, ente IF, upon the redusion of Pampeluna, L'Es-
Castile.

parre had been satisfied with taking proper pre-
cautions for securing his conquest, the kingdom
of Navarre might still have remained annexed
to the crown of France, in reality, as well as in
title. But, pulhed on by youthful ardour, and
encouraged by Francis, who was too apt to be
dazzled with success, he ventured to pass the
confines of Navar=e, and to lay siege to Lo-
grogno, a small town in Castile. This rouzed
the Castilians, who had hitherto beheld the rapid
progress of his arms with great unconcern, and
the dissentions in that kingdom being almost
composed, both parties exerted themselves with
emulation in defence of their country; the one,
that it might efface the memory of past mifcon-
du& by its present zeal; the other, that it might
add to the merit of having subdued the empe-
ror's rebellious fubjeAs, that of repulsing his

foreign

foreign enemies. The sudden advance of their B °a ° K
troops, together with the gallant defence made A..-v
by the inhabitants of Logrogno, obliged the 'u'
French general to abandon his rash enterprize.
The Spanish army, which increased every day, Theyq a
harafling him during his retreat, he, instead of and driven
taking Ihelter under the cannon of Pampeluna, , Na
or waiting the arrival of rome troops which were
marching to join him, attacked the Spaniards,
though far superior to him in number, with great
impetuosity, but with so little conduct, that his
forces were totally routed, he himself, together
with his principal officers, was taken prisoner,
and Spain recovered ppffeflon of Navarre in still
shorter time than the French had spent in the
the conquest of it .

WHILE Francis endeavoured to justify his in- Hoinitie.

vafion of Navarre, by carrying it on in the name ,b",oi,
of Henry D'Albret, he had recourse to an artifice Countrie.
much of the fame kind, in attacking another
part of the emperor's territories. Robert de la
Mark, lord of the small but independent territory
of Bouillon, situated on the frontiers of Lux-
embourg and Champagne, having abandoned
Charles's service on account of an encroachment
which the Aulick council had made on his jutif-
dition, and having thrown himself upon France
for protection, was easily persuaded, in the heat
of his resentment, to fend a herald to Worms,

Y Mem. d Bellay, p. 21. P. Mart. p.. 7z6.
Y,. II. N and

B o0 K and to declare war againpt the emperor in form.
* . Such extravagant insolence in a petty prince fur-

15"' prized Charles, and appeared to him a certain

proof of his having received promises of power-
ful support from the French king. The juptnefs
of this conclusion soon became evident. Ro-
bert entered Luxembourg with troops levied in
France, by the king's connivance, though seem-
ingly in contradition to his orders, and after
ravaging the open country, laid siege to Vireton.
Of this Charles complained loudly, as a direct
violation of the peace subsisting between the two
crowns, and summoned Henry VIII. in terms or
the treaty concluded at London in the year one
thousand five hundred and eighteen, to turn his
,rms against Francis as the firit aggressor. Francis
pretended that he was not answerable for Robert's
conduEt, whose army fought under his own
flandards, and in his own quarrel; and affirmed,
that, contrary to an express prohibition, he had
ftduced some fubjets of France into his service;
but Henry paid so little regard to this evasion,
that the French king, rather than irritate a prince
whom he still hoped to gain, commanded De Ia
Mark to disband his troopsZ.

THE emperor, mean while, was assembling an

army to chaflife Robert's insolence. Twenty
thousand men, under the count of Nassau, in-

2 Mem. de Bellay, p. zz, &c. Mem. do Fleurangc, p.
335, &c.

~~;,~~~~ ~vaded

vaded his little territories, and in a few days be- C o0 K
came masters of every place in them but Stdan. .-.
After making him feel so sensibly the weight of 'I;,'
his matter's indignation, Nassau advanced to-
wards the frontiers of France; and Charles
knowing that he might prefulme so far on Henry's
partiality in his favour, as not to be overawed
by the fame fears which had restrained Francis,
ordered his general to besiege Moulon. The
cowardice of the garrifbn having obliged the go-
vernor to surrender almost without refiflnce,
Nassau invelted Mezieres, a place at that time of .r;,"s.
no considerable strength, but tb advantageol.:ly til'e:"'-
situated, that by getting pofifeRion of it, the Im-
perial army might have penetrated into the he:rt
of Champagne, in which there was hardly any
other town capable of obstructing its progrcfs.
Happily for France, its monarch, cnfible of the
importance of this fortress, and of the danger to
which it was exposed, committed the defence
of it to the chevalier Bayard, diflingutiflied among
his contemporaries by the appellation of T.e
Knight without fear, and without reproaTcb. This
man, whose prowess in combar, whole pul.nili-
ous honour and fornal gallantry, bl.ar a nearer
refenblance, than any rthig leco(rc.d il hiotory,
to the characer ascribed to the heroes of chival-
ry, possessed all the talents which formn a great.
general. These he had many occafiuns of ex-
erting in the defence of Meziercs; partly by his

a Oeuvrcs de Brantome, tor. vi. 114.

N a vatour,

B o0 K valour, partly by his condu&, he protrated the

It.

,-v-. siege to a great length, and in the end obliged
.aitdr.' the Imperialists to raise it, with infamy and lofsb.

Francis, at the head of a numerous army, soon
retook Moufon, and entering the Low Countries,
made several conquests of small importance. In
the neighbourhood of Valenciennes, through an
excess of caution, an error with which he cannot
be often charged, he loft an opportunity of
cutting off the whole Imperial army ; and what
was fill of more consequence, he disgusted the
constable Bourbon, by giving the command of
the van to the duke D'Alencon, though this poll
of honour belonged to Bourbon, as a prerogative
of his office.

Actuft. DURING there operations in the field, a con-

Conprc. at
Calai, un- grefs was held at Calais under the mediation of
do the me.
diation of Henry VIII. in order to bring all differences to
ngland, an amicable issue; and if the intentions of the

mediator had correlponded in any degree to his
professions, it could hardly have failed of pro-
ducing some good effect. Henry committed the
sole management of the negociation, with unli-
mited powers, to Wolfey; and this choice alone
was sufficient to have rendered it abortive. That
prelate, bent on attaining the papal crown, the
great objeEt of his ambition, and ready to facri-
fice every thing in order to gain the emperor's

b Mem. de Bellay, p. z2, &c.
P. Mart. Ep.747. Mem. de Bellay, 35.

interest,

interest, was so little able to conceal his partia- B 0 o K
lity, that, if Francis had not been well acquaint- a__-
ed with his haughty and vindiaive temper, he 'sa.
would have declined his mediation. Much time
was spent in inquiring who had begun hostilities,
which Wolfey affe&ed to represent as the princi-
pal point; and by throwing the blame of that on
Francis, he hoped to justify, by the treaty of
London, any alliance into which his matier should
enter with Charles. The conditions on which wsih"'tny
hostilities might be terminated, came next to be
confidered; but with regard to there, the empe-
ror's proposals were such, as discovered either
that he was utterly averse to peace, or that he
knew Wolfey would approve of whatever terms
Ihould be offered in his name. He demanded
the restitution of the dutchy of Burgundy, a
province, the poffeflion of which would have
given him access into the heart of the kingdom;
and required a discharge of the homage due to
the crown of France for the counties of Slanders
and Artois, which none of his ancestors had ever
refused, and which he had bound himself by the
the treaty of Noyon to renew. These terms, to
which an high-fpirited prince would scarcely have
listened, after the disasters of the most unfortu-
nate war, Francis rejeted with great disdain;
and Charles shewing no inclination to comply
with the more equal and moderate propositions
of the French monarch, that he Ihould restore
Navarre to its lawful prince, and withdraw his
troops from the siege of Tournay, the congress

N 3 broke

B 00 K broke up without any other effet than that which

11.
k.^ - attends unsuccessful negociations, the exafperatinig

15"1 of the parties, whom it was intended to recon-

cile '.

JwUFcu DuRING the continuance of the congress, Wol-
;, b,.-i feyy,on ,retence that the emperor hilmlelf would
·' .,'"h; be more willing to make reasonable concessions
:.r::y ll. than his ministers, made an cxcurfion to Bruges,

to meet that monarch. He was received by
Charles, who knew his vanity, with as much
retpet and magnificence as if he had been king
of England. But inflead of advancing the trea-
ty of peace by this interview, Wolfey, in his
matter's name, concluded a league with the em-
peror againfl Francis; in which it was stipulated,
that Charles lhould invade France.on the fide of
Spain, and I lenry in Picardy, each with an army
of forty thousand men; and that, in order to
strengthen their union, Charles should espouse
the princess Mary, IHenry's only child, and the
apparent heir of his dominions". Henry produced
no better reai;ns for this measure, equally unjust
and impolitick, than the article in the treaty of
London, by which he pretended that he vt.-3
bound to take arms agrainft the French ki;,!-.r T I;,:
first aggressor; and the injury which hre -!':r1 I
Francis had durne him, in perilittin,; tl.e - .!: c' <
Albany, the head of a faction in Scoclt. :!,! . 1

d P. Mart. Ep. 739. HErbert.
* Rylcr, FeCdcr. xiii. l-lcrbrt.

"
4 '" 1

opposed his interest, to return into that kingdom. B o O K
He was infliuenced, however, by other confidera- -v^
tions. The advantages which accrued to his sub- s'
je&s from maintaining an exat neutrality, or the
honour that resulted to himfeif from acing as the
arbiter between the contending princes, appeared
to his youthful imagination so inconsiderable,
when compared with the glory which Charles and
Francis reaped from leading armies or conquer-
ing provinces, that he determined to remain no
longer in a state of inactivity. Having once
taken this resolution, his inducements to prefer
an alliance with Charles were obvious. He
had no claim upon any- part of that prince's
dominions, most of which were so fittiated, that
he could not attack them without great difficulty
and dildvahtage; whereas ieveral mari tiime prob
vinces of Fraice had beedn long in the hands of
the English monarchs, whose pretensions, even
to the crown of that kingdom, were not as yet
altogether forgotten; and the poffefion of Ca-
lais not only gave him easy access into some of
these provinces, but in cafe of any disaster, as-
forded hin a secure retreat. While Charles at.
tacked. France on one frontier, Henry flattered
himself thait he would find little resistance on the
other, and that the glory of re-annexing to the
crown of England the ancient inheritance of its
monarchs on the continent, was reserved for his
reign. Wolfey artfully encouraged there vain
hopes, which led his master into such measures as

N 4 were

B 0o K were mofi subservient to his own secret schemes;

11.

«..
~ and the English, whose hereditary animosity against
'5"' the French was apt to rekindle on every occasion,

did not disapprove of the martial spirit of their
sovereign.

RHoAt';J.; MEANWHILE the league between the pope and
in Italy.

emperor produced great effects in Italy, and ren-
dered Lombardy the chief theatre of war. There
was, at that time, such contrariety between the
character of the French and Italians, that the
latter submitted to the government of the former
with greater impatience, than they expressed un-
der the dominion of other foreigners. The
phlegm of the Germans and gravity of the Spa-
niards, suited their jealous temper and ceremoni-
ous manners better than the French gaiety, too
prone to gallantry, and too little attentive to
decorum. Lewis XII. however, by the equity
and gentleness of his administration, and by grant-
ing the Milanese more extensive privileges than
thote they had enjoyed under their native princes,
had overcome, in a great measure, their preju-
judices, and reconciled them to the French go-
vernment. Francis, on recovering that dutchy,
did not imitate the example of his predecessor.
Though too generous himself to oppress his
people, his boundless confidence in his favourites,
and his negligence in examining into the conduc
of those whom he entrusted with power, embold-
ened them to venture upon many aas ofoppreflion.

The

The government of Milan was committed by him B 0°1 x
to Odet de Foix, Marechal de Lautrec, another - .
brother of Madame de Chateau-Briand, an officer TheMi',
of great experience and reputation, but haughty, `re dir
imperious, rapacious, and incapable eitherof liten- t, 'Fe.
ing to advice, or of bearing contradicion. His mlut
insolence and exacions totally alienated the assec-
tions of the Milanese from France, drove many
of the considerable citizens into banishment,
and forced others to retire for their own safety.
Among the last was Jerome Moron:, vice-chan-
cellor of Milan, a man whose genius for intrigue
and enterprize diftinguilhed him in an age and
country, where violent factions, as well as fre.
quent revolutions, affording great scope for such
talents, produced or called them forth in great
abundance. He repaired to Francis Sforza,
whose brother Maximilian he had betrayed; and
fiifpedting the pope's intention of attacking the
Milanese, although his treaty with the emperor
was not yet made publick, he proposed to Leo,
in name of Sforza, a scheme for furprizing
several places in that dutchy by means of the
exiles, who, from hatred to the French, and from
attachment to their former maifers, were ready for
any derperate enterprize. Leo not only encou-
raged the attempt, but advanced a considerable
fum towards the execution of it; and when,
through unforeseen accidents, it failed of success
in every part, he allowed the exiles, who had
aflembled in a body, to retire to Reggio, which
belonged at that time to the church. The Mare-

cha)

1o0 0 K ehal de Foix, who commanded at Milan in ab-

- fence of his 'brother Lautrec, who was then in
jaunes.' France, tempted with the hopes of catching at

once, as in'a snare, all the'avowed enemies of his
master's government in that country, ventured
to march into the ecclesiastical territories, and to
invest Reggio. But the vigilance and good con-
dut otf Guicciardini the historian, governor of
that place, obliged the French general to aban-

ThP¢pe don the eriterprize with dilfrace'. Leo, on re-
Fap;nit ceiving this intelligence, with which he was

highly pl;eaed, as it furnished him a decent pre-
text for a rupture with France, immediately as-
fembled the consistory of cardinals. After com-
plaining bitterly of the hostile intentions of the
French king, and magnifying the emperor's zeal
for the church, of which he had given a recent
proof by his proceedings against Luther, he de-
clared that he was constrained in feif-defence, and
a's the only expedient for the security of the eccle-
fiaftical state, to join his arms to those of that
prince. For this purpose, he now pretended to
conclude a treaty with Don John Manuel, al-
though it had really been signed rome months
before this time; and he publickly excommuni-
cated De Foix, as an impious invader of St.
Peter's patrimony.
Wir in the LEO had already begun preparations for war by

taking into pay a considerable body of Swiss; but

Guic. lib.xiv. 183. Mci. deBellay, p. 38, &c.

the

the Imperial troops advanced so slowly from B 0-0 K
Naples and Germany, that it was the middle of _-
autumn before the army took the field under the Is
command of Prosper Colonna, the most eminent of
the Italian generals, whose extreme caution, the
cffec& of long experience in the art of war, were
opposed with great propriety to the impetuosity
of the French. In the mean time, De Foix dif-
patched courier after courier to inform the king
of the danger which was approaching. Francis,
whole forces were either employed in the Low
Countries, or assembling on the frontiers of
Spain, and who did not expe& so sudden an at-
tack in that quarter, sent ambaffidors to his allies
the Swiss, to procure from them the immediate
levy of an additional body of troops; and com-
manded Lautrec to repair forthwith to his govern-
ment. That general, who was well acquainted
with the great neglea of cconomy in the admi-
niftration of the king's finances, and who knew
how much the troops in the Milanese had already
suffered from the want of their pay, refused to
set out, unless the fum of three hundred thousand
crowns was immediately put into his hands. But
the king, Louise of Savoy, his mother, and
Semblancy, the superintendent of finances, hav-
ing promiscd, even with an oath, that on his
arrival at Milan he should find remittances for
the fum which he demanded; upon the faith of
this, he departed. Unhappily for France, Louise,
a woman deceitful, vindictive, rapacious, and
capable of sacrificing any thing to the gratifica-

tio:'2

· 0 0 . tion of her paltions, but who had acquired an
..-. absolute ascendant over her son by her maternal

5T'' tenderness, her care of his education, and her

great abilities, was resolved not to perform this
promise. Lautrec having incurred her difplea-
sure by his haughtiness in neglecing to pay court
to her, and by the freedom with which he had
talked concerning some of her adventures in gal-
lantry, the, in order to deprive him of the ho-
nour which he might have gained by a successful
defence of the Milanese, seized the three hundred
thousand crowns destined for that service, and
detained them for her own use.

fr~Of LAUTREC, notwithfanding this cruel difap-
~a.fr. pointment, found means to assemble a confi-

derable army, though far inferior in number to
that of the confederates. He adopted the plan
of defence most fiitable to his situation, avoid-
ing a pitched battle with the greatest care, while
he harassed the enemy continually with his light
troops, beat up their quarters, intercepted their
convoys, and covered or relieved every place
which they attempted to attack. By this pru-
dent conduct, he not only retarded their progress,
but would have soon wearied out the pope, who
had hitherto defrayed almofl the whole expence
of the war, as the emperor, whose revenues in
Spain were diflipated during the commotions in
that country, and who was obliged to support a
numerous army in the Netherlands, could not
make any considerable remittances into Italy.

But

But an unforeseen accident disconcerted all his a ° ° s
measures, and occasioned a fatal reverse in the
French affairs. A body of twelve thousand Swiss 'p*'
served in Lautrec's army under the banners of the
republick, with which France was in alliance.
By a law, no less political than humane, eta-
blilhed among the cantons, their troops were not
hired out by publick authority to both the con-
tending parties in any war. This law, the love
of gain had sometimes eluded, and private per-
sons had been allowed to enliR in what service
they pleated, though not under the publick
banners, but under those of their officers. The
Cardinal of Sion, who fill preserved his interest
among his countrymen, and his enmity to France,
having prevailed on them to permit a levy of this
kind, twelve thousand Swiss joined the army of
the confederates. The cantons, when they saw
so many of their countrymen marching under
hostile standards, and ready to destroy each other,
became so sensible of the infamy to which they
would be exposed, as well as the loss they might
susser, that they dispatched couriers, command-.
ing their people to leave both armies, and to
return forthwith into their own country. The
Cardinal of Sion, however, had the address, by
corrupting the mesrengers appointed to carry
this order, to prevent it from being delivered to
the Swiss in the service of the confederates but
being intimated in due form to those in the
French army, they, fatigued with the length of
the campaign, and murmuring for want of pay,

instantly

. 0 0 K instantly yielded obedience, in spire of Lautrec's

11.
X - - remonstrances and intreaties.

AFTER the desertion of a body which formed

the strength of his army, Lautrec durst no longer
face the confederates. He retired towards Mi-
lan, encamped on the banks of the Adda, and
placed his chief hopes of safety in preventing the
enemy from palling the river; an expedient for
defending a country so precarious, that there are
few examples of its being employed with success
against any general of experience or abilities.

Become Accordingly Colonna, notwithitanding Lautrec's
chasters of
Milan, vigilance and activity, passed the Adda with little

loTs, and obliged him to shut himself up within
the walls of Milan, which the confederates were
preparing to besiege, when an unknown person,
who never afterwards appeared either to boast ot
this service, or to claim a reward for it, came
from the city and acquainted Moron<, that if
the army would advance that night, the Ghibel-
line or Imperial fation would put them in pof-
feflion of one of the gates. Colonna, though no
friend to rash enterprizes, allowed the marquis
de Pescara to advance with the Spanifl infantry,
and he himself followed with the reft of his
troops. About the beginning of night, Pescara
arriving at the Roman gate in the suburbs, Ii'r-
prized the soldiers whom he found there; thol'
ported in the fortifications adjoining to it imme-
diately fled; the marquis seizing the works which
they abandoned, and pushing forward incessantly,

thloug!

though with no less caution than vigour, became B 0 0o
matters of the city with little bloodshed, and ---
almost without refiRtance; the viaors being as '
much astonished as the vanquified at the facility
and success of the attempt. Lautrec retired pre-
cipitately towards the Venetian territories with
the remains of his ihattered army; the cities of
the Milanese, following the fate of the capital,
surrendered to the confederates; Parma and Pla-
centia were united to the ecclesiastical slate, and
of all their conquetts in Lombardy, only the town
of Cremona, the castle of Milan, and a few in-
considerable forts remained in the hands of the
French .

LEO received the accounts of this rapid fuc- Dea-a'f

ceflion of prosperous events with such tranfpor,:s
of joy, as brought on (if we may believe the
French historians) a flight fever, which being ne-
gle&ed, occasioned his death on the second of
December, while he was still of'a vigorous age, :;nd
at the height of his glory. By this unexpc'ted
accident, the spirit of the confederacy was bro-
ken, and its operations fufpcnded. The cardi-
nals of Sion and Medici left the army that they
might be present in the conclave; the Swilf were
recalled by their uiperiors; tome other merce-
naries disbanded for want of pay; and only the
Spaniards, and a few Germans in the emperor's

ijuic. 1. xiv. 190, &c. lMei. de Bcllay, , 4, C. Gs-

leacii Capclla de reb. geit. pro itllttur. Fran. Sforti: Com-
ment. ap. Scardium, vol. ii. i8o, &c.

fcrvice,

3 0 0 K service, remained to defend the Milanese. But
_Lv Lautrec, destitute both of men and of money,
ospt was unable to improve this favourable opportu-

nity in the manner which he would have wished.
as*. The vigilance of Morone, and the good con-

duc of Colonna, disappointed his feeble attempts
on the Milanese. Guicciardini, by his address
and valour, repulsed a bolder and more danger-
ous attack which he made on Parmab.

Adrha GGREAT discord prevailed in the conclave,
P. which followed upon Leo's death, and all the

arts natural to men grown old in intrigue, when
contending for a prize so valuable, were prac-
tifed. Wolsey's name, notwithstanding all the
emperor's magnificent promises to favour his
pretensions, of which that prelate did not fail to
remind him, was hardly mentioned in the con-
clave. Julio cardinal de Medici, Leo's nephew,
who was more eminent than any other member
of the sacred college for his abilities, his wealth,
and his experience in tranfating great affairs, had
already secured fifteen voices, a number fuflicient,
according to the forms of the conclave, to ex-
clude any other candidate, though not to carry
his own election. All the old cardinals com-
bined against him, without being united in favour
of any other person. While there facions were
endeavouring to gain, to corrupt, or to weary
out each other, Medici and his adherents voted

1 Guic. I. xlv. 214.
s .one

one morning at the scrutiny, which according to B °o K
form was made every day, for cardinal Adrian of --
Utrecht, who at that time governed Spain in the '5
emperor's name. This they did merely to pro-
tract time. But the adverse party inftant'y
closing with them, to their own amazement and
that of all Europe, a itranger to Italy, unknown
to the persons who gave their suffrages in his
fivour, and unacquainted with the manners of
the people, or the interest of the slate, the go-
vernment of which they conferred upon him, was
unanimously raised to the papal throne, at ajunc- lanu: y9.
ture so delicate and critical, as would have de-
manded all the sagacity and experience of one of
the molt able prelates in the sacred college.
The cardinals themselves, unable to give a reason
for this strange choice, on account of which, as
they marched in proceflion from the conclave,
they were loaded with insults and curses by the
Roman people, ascribed it to an immediate im-
pulse of the Holy Ghost. It may be imputed
with greater certainty to the influence of Don
John Manuel, the Imperial ambassador, who by
his address and intrigues facilitated the eleAtion
of a person devoted to his mafttr's service, from
gratitude, from intcreft, and from inclination'.

BESIDE the influence which Charles acquired wirrenew.

co in the
by Adrian's promotion, it threw great lustre on 'Mziia,'I.

i Herm. Moringi Vita Hadriani ap. Cafp. Burman. in A-
naleI. de Hadr. p. 52, Conclave Hadr. Ibid. p. 144, &c.

VOL. II. Q his

8 °0 K his administration. To berlow on his preceptor
*.-.v- such a noble recompence, and to place on the

'5"' papal throne a creature whom he had raised, were

acts of uncommon magnificence and power.
Francis observed, with the sensibility of a rival,
the pre-eminence which he was gaining, and re-
solved to exert himself with frefl vigour, in order
to wrest from him his late conquests in Italy.
The Swiss, that they might make some repara-
tion to the, French king, for having withdrawn
their troops from his army so unseasonably, as to
occasion the loss of the bMilanefe, permitted him
to levy ten thousand men in the republick. To-
gether with this reinforcement, Lautrec received
from the king a fnall fur of money, which
enabled him once more to take the field, and
after seizing by furprize, or force, several places
in the Milancfe, to advance within a few miles
of the capital. The confederate army was in no
condition to obftrut his progress; for though
the inhabitants of Milan, by the artifices of
Morone, and by the popular declamations of a
monk whom he employed, were inflamed with
such enthufiaftick zeal against the French govern-
menr, that they consented to raise extraordinary
contributions, Colona murt soon have abandoned
the advantageous camp which he had chosen
at Bicocca, and have dismissed his troops for
want of pay, if the Swiss in the French service
had not once more extricated him out of his diffi-
culties.

w~~~~~~~~l

THE insolence or caprice of that people were B o 0 K

often no lets fatal to their friends, than their ' ---
valour and dilcipline were formidable to their T'e French
enemies. Having now served some months withl- "tadnf
out pay, of which they complained loudly, a boc.
fum destined for their use was sent from France
under a convoy of horse; but Morone, whose
vigilant eye nothing escaped, posted a body of
troops in their way, so that the party which
escorted the money durst not advance. On re-
ceiving intelligence of this, the Swiss loft all pa-
tience, and officers as well as soldiers crowding
around Lautrec, threatened with one voice in-
lantly to retire, if he did not either advance
the pay which was due, or promise to lead them
next morning to battle. In vain did Lautrec
remonstrate against there demands, representing
to them the impollibility of the former, and the
rashness of the latter, which must be attended
with certain deftru&ion, as the enemy occupied
a camp naturally of great strength, and which by
art they had rendered almost inacceflible. The
Swiss, deaf to reason, and perluaded that their
valour was capable of surmounting every ob-
flacle, renewed their demand with greater fierce-
ners, offering themselves to form the vanguard,
and to begin the attack. Lautrec, unable to
overcome their obstinacy, complied with their
request, hoping, perhaps, that some of those un-
foreseen accidents which so often determine the
fate of battles, might crown this rash enterprize
with undeserved success; and convinced that the

0 a efect$

B 0 0 K effets of a defeat could not be more fatal than

II.
---,-, those which would certainly follow upon the re-
;U'y. treat of a body which composed one half of his

army. Next morning the Swiss were early in the
field, and marched with the greatest intrepidity
against an enemy deeply intrenched on every
fide, surrounded with artillery, and prepared to
receive them. As they advanced, they sustained a
furious cannonade with great firmness, and with-
out waiting for their own artillery, rulhed impe-
tuouly upon the intrenchments. But after in-
credible efforts of valour, which were seconded
with great spirit by the French, having loft their
bravest officers and belt ioldiers, and finding that
they could make no impreflon on the enemy's
works, they founded a retreat; leaving the field
of battle, however, like men repulsed, but not
vanquished, in close array, and without receiving
any moleti.tion from the enemy.

Doi.cn ..t: NEXr day, such as fitrvived fct out for their
of :he Mil-
lane,-. own country; and Lautrec, despairing of being

able to make any farther resistance, retired into
France, after throwing garrisons into Cremon;i,
and a few other places; all which, except the
citadel of Cremona, Colonna soon obliged to
surrender.
lofeCenoa. GENOA, however, and its territories, remain-

ing subject to YFrance, ltill gave Francis confi-
derable footing in Italy, and made it easy f)r
him to execute any scheme for the recovery of the

Milancic.

Milanese. But Colonna, rendered enterprizing B OO K
by continual success, and excited by the folicita-
tions of the faction of the Adorni, the hereditary '5s2'
enemies of the Fregoli, who under the protec-
tion of France pofrffed the chief authority in
Genoa, determined to attempt the reduAtion of
that state; and accomplished it with amazing fa-
cility. He became matier of Genoa by an acci-
dent as unexpected as that which had given him
pofieflion of Milan; and almoit without oppofi-
tion or bloodshed; tihe power of the Adorni, and
the authority of tlh emperor, were establishcd in
Genoa .

SUCH a cruel fuccemocn of misfortunes affeEted Henry VlT.

Francis with deep concern, which was not a little i' war
augmented by the unexpected arrival of an Eng- Fr".'.
lilh herald, who, in the name of his sovereign,
declared war in form against France. This ftep
was taken in conlequence of the treaty which
Wolfey had concludedl with the emperor at
Bruges, and which had hitherto been kept secret.
Francis, though he had reason to be furprized
with this denunciation, after having been at such
pains to sooth Henry and to gain his minister,
received the herald with great composure and
dignity'; and without abandoning any of the
schemes which he was forming against the empe-
ror, began vigorous preparations for resisting this

k Jovii Vita FerIin. Davali, p. 344.. Guic. I. xiv. 233.
Journal de Luuile de Savoic, p. 1.99.

0 3 new

B 00 K new enemy. His treasury, however, being ex-

Cz ._ _hauflted by the efforts which he had already made,

nS as well as by the fums he expended on his plea-
fures, he had recourse to extraordinary expe-
dients for supplying it. Several new offices were
created, and exposed to sale; the royal demesnes
were alienated; unusual taxes were impofedl;
and the tomb of St. Martin was stripped of a rail
of massive silver, with which Louis XI. in one of
his fits of devotion, had encircled it. By means
of these expedients he was enabled to levy a con-
fiderable army, and to put the frontier towns in
a good potlure of defence.
Charles THE emperor, meanwhile, was no less soli-

dE. '"- citous to draw as much advantage as possible

from the acceflion of such a powerful ally; and
the prosperous situation of his affairs, at this
time, permitting him to set out for Spain, where
his pretence was extremely neceflary, he visited
the court of England in his way to that coun-
try. He proposed by this interview not only to
flrengthen the bonds of friendship which united
him with Henry, and to excite him to pulh the
war againit France with vigour, but hoped to
remove any difguit or resentment that Wolfey
might have conceived on account of the cruel
disappointment which he had met with in the
late conclave. His fuccels exceeded his most
ianguine expectations; and by his artful address,
during a residence of fix weeks in England, he
gained not only the king and the minister, but

the

the nation itself. Henry, whose vanity was fen- B o 0 K
sibly flattered by such a visit, as well as by the - -.
iludied refpet with which the emperor treated s'.
him on every occasion, entered warmly into all
his schemes. The cardinal foreseeing, from
Adrian's age and infirmities, a sudden vacancy in
the papal fee, difiembled or forgot his resent-
ment; and as Charles, betides augmenting the
pensions which he had already fettled on him, re-
newed his promire of favouring his pretensions
to the papacy, with all his interest, he endea-
voured to merit the former, and to secure the
accomplishment of the latter by frcfli services.
'The nation, liaring in the glory of irs monarch,
and pleased with the confidence which the empe-
ror placed in the English, by creating the earl of
Surrey his high-admiral, discovered no less in-
clination to commence hostilities than Henry

imfin f.

IN order to give Charles, before he left Eng- Tr,,hEnglh

land, a proof of this general ardour, Surrey failed iivande
with such forces as were ready, and ravaged the
coasts of Normandy. lie then made a dercent
on Bretagne, where he plundered and burnt
.Mjrlaix, and fomc other places of lets confe-
quence. After there flight excursions, attended
with greater dishonour than damage to France,
he repaired to Calais, and took the command of
the principal army, confiting of sixteen thou-
sand men; with which, having joined the Flemish
troops under the count de Buren, he advanced

O 4 into

B 0 0 K into Picardy. The army which Francis had as-
ps fembled, was far inferior in number to thelc
'5,' united bodies. But during the long wars be-

with little tween the two nations, the French had discovered
fucce!s.

the proper method of defending their country
against the English. They had been taught by
their misfortunes to avoid a pitched battle with
the utmost care, and to endeavour, by throwing
garrisons into every place capable of resistance,
by watching all the enemy's motions, by inter-
cepting their convoys, attacking their advanced
posts, and harassing them continually with their
numerous cavalry, to ruin them with the length
of the war, or to beat thecn by piece-meal. This
plan the duke of Vendome, the French general
in Picardy, pursued with no less prudence than
success; and not only prevented Surrey from
taking any town of importance, but obliged him
to retire with his army greatly reduced by fa-
tigue, by want of provisions, and by the loss
which it had fultained in flevral uniucccliful flir-
nilfhes.

THlus ended the fccond campaign, in a war the

moll general that hitherto had becn kindlcd in
Europe; and though Francis, by his mother's
ill-timed refcntment, by the diguliling inlolence
of his gencral, and the caprice of the mercenary
troops which he empluyed, had loll his conquclls
in Italy, yet all the powers combined againlt him
had not been able to make any imprefnion on his
hereditary domlinions and wherever they either

ilten:led

intended or attempted an attack, he was well B o K
prepared to receive them. n,

1512.
WHILE the Christian princes werc thus waft- solyman's

e,.nI,,el of

ing each other's firength, Solyman the Magni- Rhodes.
licent entered Hungary with a numerous army,
and investing Belgrade, which was deemed the
chief barrier of that kingdom againit the Turkilh
arms, soon forced it to surrender. Encouraged
by this fuccels, he turned his victorious arms
againfl the i/land of Rhodes, the feat at that
time, of the knights of St. John of Jerusalem.
This finall Rate he attacked with such a numerous
army, as the lords of ACia have been accuRomed
in every age to bring into the field. Two hun-
dred thousand men, and a fleet of four hundred
fail appeared against a town defended by a garri-
son confifing of five thousand soldiers, and fix
hundred knights, under the command of Villiers
de L'lfe Adam, the grand matter, whose wisdom
and valour rendered him worthy of that station
at such a dangerous juncure. No sooner did
he begin to suspect the deltination of Solyman's
valt armaments, than he dispatched mefengers
to all the Chrillian courts, imploring their aid
againit the common enemy. But though every
prince in that age acknowledged Rhodes to be
the great bulwark of Chrillcndom in the east,
and trufled to the gallantry of its knights as the
best security againit the progress of the Ottoman
arms; though Adrian, with a zeal which became
the head and father of the church, exhorted the

contending

B o K contending powers to forget their private quarrels,

. *--»-' and, by uniting their arms, to prevent the infidels
532' from defiroying a society which did honour to

the Christian name; yet so violent and im-
placable was the animosity of both parties, that,
regardless of the danger to which they exposed all
Europe, and unmoved by the intreaties of the
grand master, or the admonitions of the pope,
they suffered Solyman to carry on his operations
against Rhodes without disturbance. The grand
master, after incredible efforts of courage, of
patience, and of military condut during a siege
of fix months; after sustaining many assaults,
and disputing every polf with amazing obstinacy,
was obliged at last to yield to numbers; and hav-
ing obtained an honourable capitulation from the
sultan, who admired and refpe&ed his virtue, he
surrendered the town, which was reduced to a
heap of rubbish, and destitute of every resource'.
Charles and Francis, alhamed of having occa-
sioned such a loss to Christendom by their ambi-
tious contests, endeavoured to throw the blame
of it on each other, while all Europe, with greater
justice, imputed it equally to both. The empe-
ror, by way of reparation, granted the knights of
St. John the finall island of Malta, in which they
fixed their residence, retaining, though with less
power and splendour, their ancient spirit, and
implacable enmity to the Infidels.

m Fontanus de Bcllo Rhodio ap. Scard. Script. Rer. Ger-
man. Vol. ii. p. 88. P. Barre. Hist. d'Allem. tom. viii. 57.

THE

# BOOK III.

THE
HIS TORY

OF THE
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK III.

H ARLES, having had the fatisfa&ion of B 0o0 o
feeing hostilities begun between France and -

England, took leave of Henry, and arrived in cit, in
Spain on the seventeenth of June. He found that Cifilc,
country just beginning to recover order and
strength after the miseries of a civil war, to which
it had been exposed during his absence; an ac-
count of the rife and progress of which, as it was
but little connected with the other events which
happened in Europe, hath been reserved to this
place.

No sooner was it known that the Cortes afemrn- r:furreaon

bled in Galicia had voted the emperor a free gift, of Tled.
without retaining the redress of any one grievance,

,than

Bo o i0 than it excited universal indignation. The citi-

-...-* zens of Toledo, who confidered themselves, on
u^Y,5o. account of the great privileges which they en-

joyed, as guardians of the liberties of the Cafti-
lian commons, finding that no regard was paid
to the remonfrances of their deputies against
that unconstitutional grant, took arms with tu-
multuary violence, and seizing the gates of the
city which were fortified, attacked the al-cazar,
or castle, which they soon obliged the governor
to lurrender. Emboldened by this success, they
deprived of all authority every perfbn whom they
fufpefted of any attachment to the court, efta-
blifled a popular form of government, composed
of deputies from the several parishes in the city,
and levied troops in their own defence. The
chief leader of the people in there infurre&ions
was Don John de Padilla, the eldelt son of the
commenda:or of Castile, a young nobleman of a
generous temper, of undaunted courage, and
possesscd of the talents as well as of the ambition
which, in times of civil dilcord, raise men to
power and eminence'.
Of PSgyv;' THE resentment of the citizens of Segovia pro-

duced eiffets irill more fatal. Tordefillas, one
of their representatives in the late Cortes, had
voted for the donative; and being a bold and
haughty man, ventured, upon his return, to call

a Sandov. p. 77.
.. together

together his fellow-citizens in the great church, B O0 O
that he might give them, according to custom, n --,
an account of his conduct in that assembly. But ','*
the multitude, unable to bear his insolence, in
attempting to justify what they thought in-
cxcufable, burat open the gates of the church
with the utmost fury, and seizing the unhappy
Tordefillas, dragged him through the streets,
with a thousand curses and insults, towards the
place of publick execution. In vain did the
dean and canons come forth in procelion with
the holy sacrament, in order to appease their
rage. In vain did the monks of those monaiteries
by which they pafied, conjure them on their
knees to spare his life, or at lealf to allow him
time to confess, and to receive absolution of his
fins. Without liltening to the dictates either of
humanity or religion, they cried out, " That
the hangman alone could absolve such a traitor
to his country; " they then hurried him along with
greater violence; and perceiving that he had ex-
piredl unler their hands, they hung him up withl
his head downwalrds on the common gibbet b.
The fr e f irit fcized the inhabitants of Burgos,
Zaiora, and fevcral other cities; and though
their reprefet't!.v:es, t.king warning fiom the
fate of Tordltiilas, had been lo wile as to save
themli Ives by a tinciy flight, they were burnt in
etHigy, their houfcs razed to the ground, and
their ctfeds confurmed with fire; and such was

P. Martyr. Ep. 67 .

the

B I0 K the horror which the people had conceived againfi
A_. them, as betrayers of the publick liberty, that not

. one in those licentious multitudes would touch

any thing, however valuable, which had belonged
to them'.

Mea(furof ADRIAN, at that time regent of Spain, had
Ad'ian, in
order to Pu. scarcely fixed the feat of his government at Val.
nifh ihem.
June s, ladolid, when he was alarmed with an account of
a'yr there infurretions. He immediately assemblcd

the council to deliberate concerning the proper
method of fupprefling them. The counfcllors
differed in opinion; some insisting that it was
necessary to check this audacious spirit in its in-
fancy by a severe execution of justice; others
advising to treat with lenity a people who had
some reason to be incensed, and not to drive
them beyond all the bounds of duty by an ill-
timed rigour. The sentiments of the former
being warmly supported by the archbishop of
Granada, president of the council, a person of
great authority, but cholerick and impetuous,
were approved by Adrian, whose zeal to support
his master's authority hurried him into a measure,
to which, from his natural caution and timidity,
he would otherwise have been averse. He com-
manded Ronquillo, one of the king's judges, to
repair instantly to Segovia, which had set the firfl:
example of mutiny, and to proceed against the
delinquents according to law; and left the people

c Sandov. o03. P. Mart Ep. 674.

7 houild

ihould be so outrageous as to refill his authority, B o o K
a considerable body of troops was appointed to
attend him. The Segovians, foreseeing what .s.op,
they might expect from a judge lb well known Spui4da^
for his austere and unforgiving temper, took
arms with one consent, and having mustered
twelve thousand men, shut their gates against
him. Ronquillo, enraged at this insult, de-
nounced them rebels and outlaws; and his troops
seizing all the avenues to the town, hoped that it
would soon be obliged to Surrender for want of
provisions. The inhabitants, however, defended
themselves with vigour, and having received a
considerable reinforcement from Toledo, under
the command of Padilla, attacked Ronquillo,
and forced him to retire, with the loss of his
baggage and military cheftd.

UPON this Adrian ordered Antonio de Fonseca, an. at the

dina dcl

whom the emperor had appointed commander in Camp,.
chief of the forces in Castile, to assemble an
army, and to besiege Segovia in form. But the
inhabitants of Medina del Campo, where cardi-
nal Ximenes had established a vail magazine of
military stores, wuild not susser himl to draw
from it a train of battering cannon, or to destroy
their countrymen with tholf arms which had
been prepared against the enemies of the king-
dom. Fonseca, who could not execute his orders
without artillery, determined to seize the maga-

d Sandov. 112. P. Mart. Ep. 679. Miniana, Contin. p. i;.

zinc

°0 0 K zine by force, and the citizens standing on their
II.
v- ' defence, he assaulted the town with great brifl-
'5s's nets: But his troops were so warmly received,
Aug. t. that despairing of carrying the place, he set fire

to fume of the houses, in hopes that the citizens
would abandon the walls, in order to save their
families and effects. Inttead of that, the expe-
dient to which he had recourse served only to in-
crease their fury, and he was repulsed with great
infamy, while the flames spreading from street to
fireet, reduced to ashes almoit the whole town,
one of the moll considerable at that time in Spain,
and the great mart for the manufaaures of Sego-
via, and several other cities. As the warehouses
were then filled with goods for the approaching
fair, the loss was immense, and was felt universally.
This, added to the impreiflon which such a cruel
acion made on a people long unaccustomed to the
horrors of civil war, enraged the Castilians almost
to madness. Fonseca became the object of gene-
ral indignation, and was branded with the name
of incendiary, and enemy to his country. Even
the citizens of Valladolid, whom the pretence of
the cardinal had hitherto restrained, declared that
they could no longer remain inative fpecators
of the sufferings of their countrymen. Taking
arms with no less fury than the other cities, they
burnt Fonseca's house to the ground, eleted new
magistrates, raised soldiers, appointed officers to
command them, and guarded their walls with as
much diligence as if an enemy had been ready to
attack them.

Tai

THE cardinal, though virtuous and difinte- B 0o K

relied, and capable of governing the kingdom .--,
with honour in times of tranquillity, possessed Adrian dif.
neither the courage nor sagacity necessary at such I,,ps
a dangerous juncture. Finding himself unable
to check these outrages committed under his own
eye, he attempted to appease the people, by pro-
testing that Fonseca had exceeded his orders, and
had by his rash conduct offended him, as much
as he had injured them. This condescension, the
effec of irrelolution and timidity, rendered the
malecontents bolder and more insolent; and the
cardinal having soon after recalled Fonseca, and
difinifled his troops, which he could no longer
afford to pay, as the treasury, drained by the ra-
pacioufnefs of the Flemifhl ministers, had received
no supply from the great cities, which were all
in arms, the people were left at full liberty to
at without controul, and scarcely any shadow of
power remained in his hands.

NOR were the proceedings of the commons the The vsews

and p e'r eno

effects merely of popular and tumultuary rage; lionsosthe
they aimed at obtaining redress of their political c^,"n0
grievances, and an eftablilhment of publick li-
berty on a secure basis, objets worthy of all the
zeal which they discovered in contending for
them. The feudal government in Spain was at
that time in a state more favourable to liberty
than in any other of the great European king-
doms. This was owing chiefly to the number
of great cities in that country, a circumstance I

VOL. II. P have

B 0 KI have already taken notice of, and which contri-

Ill.
,----- butes more than any other to mitigate the rigour

of the feudal institutions, and to introduce a
more liberal and equal form of government.
The inhabitants of every city formed a great cor-
poration, with valuable immunities and privi-
leges; they were delivered from a state of lub-
jecion and vassalage; they were admitted to a
considerable ihare in the legislature; they ac-
quired the arts of industry, 'without which cities
cannot subsist; they accumulated wealth, by
engaging in commerce; and being free and in-
dependent themselves, were the guardians of the
publick freedom and independence. The genius of
the internal governmenteltablilhed in cities, which,
even in countries where defpotick power prevails
most, is democratical and republican, rendered the
idea of liberty familiar and dear to them. Their
representatives in the Cortes were accustomed,
with equal spirit, to check the encroachments of
the king, and the opprefion of the nobles.
They endeavoured to extend the privileges of
their own order; they laboured to 1hake off the
remaining incumbrances with which the feudal
tyranny had burdened them; and, conscious of
being one of the most considerable orders in the
itate, were ambitious of becoming the most power-
fill.

ri,.;r co. TIHE present jun&ure appeared favourable for
ftc)c.¥ by
t*ir^eof puiifing any new claim. Their sovereign was
.^nt.. abient from his dominions; by the ill-condu& of

4 his

his ministers he had loft the esteem and affe&ion B O O r
of his subje&s; the people cxafperated by many A
injuries had taken arms, though without concert, IS'-
almost by general consent; they were animated
with rage capable of carrying them to the most
violent extremes the royal treasury was ex-
haufted; the kingdom deflitute of troops; and
the government committed to a itranger, of
great virtue indeed, but of abilities unequal to
such a trust. The first care of Padilla, and the
other popular leaders who observed and deter-
mined to improve these circumfiances, was to
establish some form of union or association among
the malecontents, that they might aa with greater
regularity, and pursue one common end; and as
the different cities had been prompted to take
arms by the fame motives, and were accuitomed
to confider themselves as a diftinE body from the
reft of the subje&s, they did not find this diffi-
cult. A general convention was appointed to be
held at Avila. Deputies appeared there in name
of almost all the cities entitled to have represent-
atives in the C6rtes. They all bound them-
selves, by solemn oath, to live and die in the fcr-
vice of the king, and in defence of the privileges
of their order; and assuming the name of the
holy Junta or alfociation, proceeded to deliberate
concerning the state of the nation, and the proper
method of redressing its grievances. The first rhey di.
that naturally presented itlelf, was the nomina- 'di,^ .
tion of a foreigner to be regent; this they de- tlhcit.
cared with one voice to be a violation of the

P 2 fundamental

B o0 t fundamental laws of the kingdom, and resolved
L-.-i to fend a deputation of their members to Adrian,

'*' 3 requiring him in their name to lay aside all the

ensigns of his office, and to abstain for the future
from the exercise of a jurifdi&ion which they had
pronounced illegal'.

;t rs WHILE they were preparing to execute this

fcliic' of
...., bold refolurion, Padilla accomplished an enter-

prize of the greatelt advantage to the cause.
At. .9. After relieving Segovia, he marched suddenly to

Tordefillas, the place where the unhappy queen
Joanna had resided since the death of her hus.
band, and being favoured by the inhabitants, was
admitted into the town, and became master of
her person, for the security of which Adrian had
neglected to take proper precautions'. Padilla
waited immediately upon the queen, and accolt-
ing her with that profound refpec, which she
exa&ed from the few persons whom the deigned
to admit into her pretence, acquainted her at
large with the miserable condition of her Castilian
tlbjets under the government of her fonj who
being deflitute of experience himself, permitted
his foreign ministers to treat them with fucl
rigour, as had obliged them to take arms in de-
fence of the liberties of their country. The
queen, as if ihe had been awakened out of a
lethargy, exprceled grear aftonifllment at what

P. Mart. Ep.691. f \ita dcll' Tmper. Carl. V.
sell' Alt. Ulloa. Ven, 1509, p. 67. Miniana, Contin. p. 17.

he

he said, and told him, that as she had never n 00 K
heard, till that moment, of the death of her fa- '-,-
ther, or known the sufferings of her people, no s,1'
blame could be imputed to her, but that now flhe
would take care to provide a sufficient remedy
and in the mean time, added she, let it be your
concern to do what is necessary for the publick
welfare. Padilla, too eager in forming a con-
clufion agreeable to his wishes, mistook this lucid
interval of reason for a perse& return of that
faculty; and acquainting the Junta with what
had happened, advised them to remove to Tor-
defillas, and to hold their meetings in that place.
This was instantly done; but though Joanna re-
ceived very graciously an address of the Junta,
beseeching her to take upon her the government
of the kingdom, and in token of her compliance,
admitted all the deputies to kifs her hand;
though she was present at a tournament held on
that occasion, and seemed highly satisfied with
both these ceremonies, which were conducted
with great magnificence in order to please her,
ibe soon relapsed into her former melancholy and
sullenness, and could never be brought, by any
arguments or intreaties, to sign any one paper
necessary towards the dispatch of businesss.

THE Junta, concealing as much as pollible this Carryon o.

last circumstance, carried on all their delibera- h'r"""
tions in her name; and as the Castilians, who

8 Sanlov. 164. P. Mart. Ep. 685, 686.

P 3 idolized

B 0 0 K idolized the memory of Isabella, retained a won.

derful attachment to her daughter, no sooner
'sl' was it known that she had consented to assume

the reins of government, than the people ex-
pressed the motl universal and immoderate joy;
and believing her recovery to be complete,
ascribed it to a miraculous interposition of Hea-
ven, in order to rescue their country from the

and depriv oppreflion of foreigners. The Junta, conscious
Adrian of
ltIpofr. of the reputation and power which they had ac-

quired by seeming to a& under the royal autho-
rity, were no longer satisfied with requiring
Adrian to resign the office of regent; they de-
tached Padilla to Valladolid with a confderable
body of troops, ordering him to seize such mem-
bers of the council as were fill in that city, to
condu& them to Tordefillas, and to bring away
the feals of the kingdom, the publick archives,
and treasury booksl Padilla, who was received
by the citizens as the deliverer of his country,
executed his commission with -great exa&nefs;
permitting Adrian, however, Rill to reside in Val-
ladolid, though only as a private person, and
without any shadow of powerb.

The emte THE emperor, to whom frequent accounts of
toralarmed. there tranfations were tranfiitted while he was

still in Slanders, was sensible of his own impru-
dence and that of his ministers, in having derpifed
too long the murmurs and remonstrances of the

h Sandov. 174. P. Mart. Ep. 791.

Caslilians.

Castilians. He beheld, with deep concern, a B °° l
kingdom, the most valuable of any he poffeifed, -v-
and in which lay the strength and sinews of his 't'
power, just ready to disown his authority, and on
the point of being plunged in all the miseries of
civil war. But though his pretence might have
averted this calamity, he could not, at that
time, visit Spain without endangering the Impe-
rial crown, and allowing the French king full
leisure to execute his ambitious schemes. The

Hss mea.

only point now to be deliberated upon, was, furw,,lth
whether he should attempt to gain the malecon- .'i?,,'.
tents by indulgence and concefions, or prepare con"ents.
directly to suppress them by force; and he re-
solved to make trial of the former, while, at the
fame time, if that thould fail of success, he pre-
pared for the latter. For this purpose, he issued
circular letters to all the cities of Castile, exhort-
ing them in most gentle terms, and with affur-
ances of full pardon, to lay down their arms;
he promised such cities as had continued faithful,
not to exa& from them the subsidy granted in the
late Cortes, and offered the fame favour to such
as returned to their duty; he engaged that no
office ihould be conferred for the future upon
any but native Castilians. On the other hand,
he wrote to the nobles, exciting them to appear
with vigour in defence of their own rights, and
those of the crown, against the exorbitant claims
of the commons; he appointed the high admiral,
Don Fadrique Enriquez, and the high constable
of Castile, Don Inigo de Velafco, two noblemen

P 4 of

B °0 K of great abilities as well as influence, regents of
.- .-.. the kingdom in conjunction with Adrian; and

he gave them full power and inftrutions, if tlhe
obfiinacy of the malecontents ihould render it
necessary, to vindicate the royal authority by
force of arms'.

Thelarge THESE conceflions, which, at the time of his
remsn-
itRnce of leaving Spain, would have fully satisfied the
the J..J.t,
ent;rning people, came now too late to produce any effe&.
,'ces.1';' The Junta, relying on the unanimity with which

the nation submitted to their authority, elated
with the lticcefs which hitherto had accompanied
all their undertakings, and feeing no military
force collected to defeat or obstruct their designs,
aimed at a more thorough reformation ofpolitical
abuses. They had been employed for Tome time
in preparing a remonfrrance, containing a large
enumeration, not only of the grievances of which
they craved red refs, but of such new regulations
as they thought necessary for the security of their
liberties. This remonstrance, which is divid-
ed into many articles relating to all the dif-
ferent members of which the constitution was
compolcd, as well as the various departments in
the adminillration of government, furnishes us
with more authentick evidence concerning the
intentions of the Junta, than can be drawn from the
testimony of the later Spanilh historians, who lived
in times when it became faflionable and even

P. IIcuter. Rer. Aufir. lib. viii. c. 6. p. i88.

necessary

necessary to represent the condu& of the male- B 0 0 rK
contents in the worst light, and as flowing from ---
the worst motives. After a long preamble con-
cerning the various calamities under which the
nation groaned, and the errors and corruption in
government to which these were to be imputed,
they take notice of the exemplary patience where-
with the people had endured them, until self-
preservation, and the duty which they owed to
their country, had obliged them to assemble, in
order to provide in a legal manner for their own
safety, and that of the constitution: For this
purpose, they demanded that the king would be
pleased to return to his Spanifl dominions and
reside there, as all their former monarchs had
done; that he would not marry but with content
of the Cortes; that if he should be obliged at
any time to leave the kingdom, it ihall not be
lawful to appoint any foreigner to be regent;
that the present nomination of cardinal Adrian to
that office shall instantly be declared void; that
he would not, at his return, bring along with
him any Flemings or other firangers; that no
foreign troops shall, on any pretence whatever,
be introduced into the kingdom; that none but
natives lhall be capable of holding any office or
benefice either in church or state; that no so-
reigner Shall be naturalized; that free quarters
flall not be granted to soldiers, nor to the mem-
bers of the king's houlfehold, for any longer time
than fix days, and that only when the court is in
a progress; that all the taxes lhall be reduced

10

° °

0 to the fame state they were in at the death of
In.
_-, queen Isabella; that all alienations of the royal

'sIm demesnes or revenues since that queen's death

shall be resumed; that all new offices created
since that period Ihall be abolilhed; that the sub-
fidy granted by the late Cortes in Galicia shall
not be exacted; that in all future Cortes each city
lhall fend one representative of the clergy, one of
the gentry, and one of the commons, each to be
ele&ed by his own order; that the crown (hall
not influence or dire& any city with regard to
the choice of its representatives; that no member
of the Cortes shall receive an office or pension
from the king, either for himself or for any of
his family, under pain of death, and confiscation
of his goods; that each city or community ihall
pay a competent salary to its representatives for
his maintenance during his attendance on the
Cortes; that the Cortes shall assemble once in
three years at least, whether summoned by the
king or not, and Ihall then enquire into the ob-
servation of the articles now agreed upon, and
deliberate concerning publick affairs; that the re-
wards which have been given or promised to any
of the members of the Cortes in Galicia, shall
be revoked; that no gold, silver, or jewels, fhull,
upon pain of death, be sent out of the kingdom;
that judges shall have fixed salaries assigned them,
and ihall not receive any (hare of the fines and
forfeitures of persons condemned by them; that
nD grant of the goods of persons accuscd shall be
valid, if given before sentence was pronounced

againit

against them; that all privileges which the nobles Bm XO o
have at any time obtained, to the prejudice of .
the commons, shall be revoked; that the govern- 's'
ment of cities or towns lhall not be put into the
hands of noblemen; that the possessions of the
nobility shall be subjec to all publick taxes in the
fame manner as those of the commons; that an
enquiry be made into the conduct of fueh as have
been entrusted with the management of the royal
patrimony since the tccefion of Ferdinand; and
if the king do not within thirty days appoint
persons properly qualified for that service, it hall
be lawful for the Cortes to nominate them; that
Indulgences fhal not be preached or dispersed
in the kingdom until the cause of publiihing them
be examined and approved of by the Cortes;
that all the money arising from the sale of Indul-
gences shall be faithfully employed in carrying
on war against the Infidels that such prelates as
do not reside in their dioceses fix months in the
year, lhall forfeit their revenues during the time
they are absent; that the ecclesiastical judges
and their officers ihall not exact greater fees than
those which are paid in the secular courts; that
the present archbishop of Toledo, being a so-
reigner, be compelled to resign that dignity,
which shall be conferred upon a Catilian; that
the king (hall ratify and hold, as good service
done to him and to the kingdom, all the pro-
ceedings of the Junta, and pardon any irregula-
rities which the cities may have committed from
an excess of zeal in a good cause: That he /hall

promire

3 0 0 K promise and swear in the most solemn manner to
^'v~ observe all there articles, and on no occasion ar-

tempt either to elude, or to repeal them; and
that he lhall never solicit the pope or any other
prelate to grant him a dispensation or absolution
from this oath and promifek.

The (p;vt SUCH were the chief articles presented by the
es liberty
w«hi.h: it Junta to their sovereign. As the feudal infitu-
brcathcd.

tions in the several kingdoms of Europe were
originally the fame, the genius of those govern-
ments which arose from them bore a frong re-
semblance to each other, and the regulations
which the Castilians attempted to eRablifh on
this occasion, differ little from those which other
nations have laboured to procure in their struggles
with their monarchs for liberty. The grievances
complained of, and the remedies proposed by the
English commons in their conteits with the
princes of the house of Stuart, particularly re-
femble those upon wh.ch the Junta now insisted.
But the principles of liberty seem to have been
better undertood, at this period, by the Castilians,
than by any other people in Europe they had
acquired more liberal ideas with refpe& to their
own rights and privileges; they had formed more
bold and generous sentiments concerning go-
vernment; and discovered an extent of politi-
cal knowledge to which the English themselves

k Sandov. 206. P. Mart. Ep. 686.

did

did not attain until more than a century after- B 0 0 K
wards.

IT is not improbable, however, that the spirit

of reformation among the Castilians, hitherto
unrestrained by authority, and emboldened by
luccefs, became too impetuous, and prompted
the Junta to propoft innovations which, by alarm-
ing the other members of the constitution, proved
fatal to their cause. The nobles, who, instead
of obftru&ting, had favoured or connived at their
proceedings, while they confined their demands
of redress to such grievances as had been occa-
sioned by the king's want of experience, and
by the imprudence and rapaciouihefs of his so-
reign ministers, were filled with indignation when rri 'tes the
they began to touch the privileges of their order,
and plainly saw that the measures of the com-
mons tended no less to break the power of the
aristocracy, than to limit the prerogatives of the
crown. The resentment which they had con-
ceived on account of Adrian's promotion to the
regency, abated considerably upon the emperor's
railing the conaable and admiral to joint power
with him in that office; and as their pride and
dignity were less hurt by suffering the prince to
poflefs an extensive prerogative, than by ad-
mitting the high pretenlions of the people, they
determined to give their fovcreign the assistance
which he had demanded of them, and began to
assemble their vassals for that purpose.

THE

B 0 0 K THE Junta, meanwhile, expected with impa-

* I_ tience the emperor's answer to their remon-

The 5'e. itrance, which they had appointed some of their
ties of she
Junta dare number to present. The members entrufled
not ,preret with this commiflion set out immediately for
*ranee. Germany, but having received at different places
Oaober 20'

certain intelligence from court, that they could
not venture to appear there without endangering
their lives, they ftopt ihort in their journey, and
acquainted the Junta of the information which
had been given them'. This excited such vio-
lent pallions as transported the whole party be-
yond all bounds of prudence, or of moderation.
That a Castilian king should deny his fubjets
access into his presence, or refuse to liten to
their humble petitions, was represented as an as
of tyranny ib unprecedented and intolerable,
that nothing now remained but with arms in
their hands to drive away that ravenous band of
foreigners which encompassed the throne, who,
after having devoured the wealth of the kingdom,
found it necessary to prevent the cries of an in-
jured people from reaching the ears of their
sovereign. Many insisted warmly on approving a
motion which had formerly been made, for de-
priving Charles, during the life of his mother,

Violent pro of the regal titles and authority which had been
pofitiollm of
thcbunt. too ralhly conferred upon him, from a falle sup-

poGition of her total inability for government.

I Sandov. 143.

Som?~

Some proposed to provide a proper person to assist B o!c K
her in the administration of publick affairs, by ----
marrying the queen to the prince of Calabria, '"'.
the heir of the Aragonefe kings of Naples, who
had been detained in prison since the time that
Ferdinand had difpoffeffed his ancestors of their
crown. All agreed that, as the hopes of obtain.
ing redress and security merely by presenting
their requests to their sovereign, had kept them
too long in a state of ination, and prevented
them from taking advantage of the unanimity
with which the nation declared in their favour,
it was now necessary to collet their whole
force, and to exert themselves with vigour, in
opposing this fatal combination of the king and
nobles against their liberties ".

THEY soon took the field with twenty thou- Tke the

sand men. Violent disputes arose concerning the "'-
command of this army. Padilla, the darling of
the people and soldiers, was the only person
whom they thought worthy of this honour. But
Don Pedro de Giron, the eldest son of the Condc
de Uruena, a young nobleman of the first order,
having lately joined the commons out of private
resentment against the emperor, the refpe& due
to his birth, together with a secret desire of dif-
appointing Padilla, of whose popularity many
members of the Junta had become jealous, pro- No,^,bn
cured him the office of general; though he soon :3

m P. Mart. Ep. 688.

gave

B o o K gave them a fatal proof that he pofeflfed neither
--v»-' the experience, the abilities, nor the steadiness

s'. which that important flation required.

The tfent THE regents, meanwhile, appointed Riofeco
and noJles
am. as the place of rendezvous for their troops,

which, though far inferior to those of the com-
mons in number, excelled them greatly in dif-
cipline and in valour. They had drawn a con-
liderable body of regular and veteran infantry out
cf Navarre. Their cavalry, which formed the
chief strength of their army, consisted mostly of
gentlemen accustomed to the military life, and
animated with the martial spirit peculiar to their
order in that age. The infantry of the Junta
was formed entirely of citizens and mechanicks,
little acquainted with the use of arms. The
Iniall body of cavalry which they had been able
to raise, was composed of persons of ignoble birth,
and perfet firangers to the service into which
they entered. The chara&er of the generals dif-
sered no less than that of their troops. The
royalifis were commanded by the Conde de Haro,
the confrable's eldest son, an officer of great
experience, and of diiinguifled abilities.

Impr-lence GIRON marched with his army directly to Rio-
an i 'i. feco, and feizing-the villages and paices around
Cfrs of te
rent,,of it, hoped that the royalists would be obliged

either to furrcnder for want of provisions, or co
fight with difatdvairage before all their troops
were assembled, But he had not the abilities,

nor

nor his troops the patience and discipline necef- B o o K
fary for the execution of such a scheme. The - -
Conde de Haro found little difficulty in condut- 15'2-
ing a considerable reinforcement through all his
posts into the town; and Giron, despairing of
being able to reduce it, advanced suddenly to
Villa-panda, a place belonging to the conltable,
in which the enemy had their chief magazine of
provisions. By this ill-judged motion, he left
Tordefillas open to the royalists, whom the
Conde de Haro led thither in the night, with the Decemberc.
utmost secrecy and dispatch; and attacking the
town, in which Giron had left no other garrison
than a regiment of priests raised by the bishop of
Zamora, he, by break of day, forced his way
into it after a desperate resistance, became matier
of the queen's person, took prisoners many mem-
bers of the Junta, and recovered the great feal,
with the other ensigns of government.

BY this fatal blow, the Junta loft all the repu-

tation and authority which they derived from
seeming to as by the queen's commands; such
of the nobles as had hitherto been wavering or un-
determined in their choice, now joined the re-
gents with all their forces; and an universal con-
fternation seized the partizans of the commons.
This was much increased by the suspicions they
began to entertain of Giron, whom they loudly
accused of having betrayed Tordefillas to the
enemy; and though that charge seems to have
been destitute of foundation, the success of the

VOL. II. Q royalists

B 0 o K royalists being owing to Giron's ill-condu& ra-

im.

_ . ther than to his treachery, he so entirely loft credit
's1'. with his party, that he resigned his commission,

and retired to one of his castles".

The junta Such members of the Junta as had escaped the
aheliev tno
tlicirlyfnm. enemy's hands at Tordefillas, fled to Valladolid;

and as it would have required long time to supply
the places of those who were prisoners by a new
eletion, they made choice among themselves of
a small number of persons, to whom they com-
mitted the supreme direcion of affairs. Their
army, which grew itronger every day by the
arrival of troops from different parts of the king-
dom, marched likewise to Valladolid; and Padilla
being appointed commander in chief, the spirits of
the soldiery revived, and the whole party, forget-
ting the late misfortune, continued to express the
fame ardent zeal for the liberties of their coun-
try, and the fame implacable animosity againit
their oppressors.

Their cx- WHAT they stood most in need of, was money
pedients tor
;inns to pay their troops. A great part of the current
money* coin had been carried out of the kingdom by

the Flemings; the stated taxes levied in times of
peace were inconsiderable; commerce of every kind
being interrupted by the war, the fum which they
yielded decreased daily; and the Junta were
afraid of difgulling tlhe people by burdening them

Milfccllancous Trafts by Dr. Mih. Geddes, vol. i. 278.

with

with new imporitions, to which, in that age, they B O o K
were little accut:iomte. But-from this difficulty -V
they were extricated by Donna Maria Pacheco, '5s'
Padilla's wife, a woman of noble birth, of great
abilities, of boundless ambition, and animated
with the molt ardent zeal in support of the cause
of the Junta. She, with a boldness superior to
those superstitious fears which often influence her
sex, proposed to seize all the rich and magnifi-
cent ornaments in the cathedral of Toledo; but
left that ation, by its appearance of impiety,
might offend the people, Ihe and her retinue
marched to the church in solemn procefflon, in
mourning habits, with tears in their eyes, beat-
ing their breasts, and falling on their knees, im-
plored the pardon of the faints whose shrines she
was about to violate. By this artifice, which
screened her from the imputation of sacrilege,
and persuaded the people that necessity and zeal
for a good cause had constrained her, though
with reluctance, to venture upon this aCtion, flhe
procured a considerable supply of money for
the Junta,. The regents, no less at a lots how
to maintain their troops, the revenues of the
crown having either been disipated by the Fle-
mings, or seized by the commons, were obliged
to take the queen's jewels, together with the
plate belonging to the nobility, and apply them
to that purpose; and when those failed, tLey

v Sandov, 308. Dit. de Bayle, Art. Padillt.

Q.2 Xobtained

B o0 K obtained a finall fum by way of loan from the

ill. *-* king of PortugalP.

Lofoe time i THE nobility discovered great unwillingness to
with the proceed to extremities with the Junta. They
nobi!i.y.

were animated with no less hatred than the com-
mons against the Flemings; they approved much
of fcveral articles in the remonttrance; they
thought the junature favourable, not only for
redressing palt grievances, but for rendering the
conltitution more perfet and secure by new re-
gulations; they were afraid, that while the two
orders, of which the legislature was composed,
wafted each other's strength by mutual hostilities,
the crown would rife to power on the ruin or
weakness of both, and encroach no less on the
independence of the nobles, than on the privi-
leges of the commons. To this disposition were
owing the frequent overtures of peace which the
regents made to the Junta, and the continual
negociations they carried on during the progrets
of their military operations. Nor were the terms
which they offered unreasonable; for on condi-
tion that the Junta would pass from a few articles
most subversive of the royal authority, or incon-
iiftent with the rights of the nobility, they en-
gaged to procure the emperor's content to their
other demands, which if he, through the in-
fluence of evil counsellors, flould refuse, several

' P. Mart. Ep. 7 i .

of

of the nobles promised to join with them, in B ot K
order to extort itq. Such divisions, however, -
prevailed among the members of the Junta, as '*'
prevented their deliberating calmly, or judging
with prudence. Several of the cities which had
entered into the confederacy, were filled with
that mean jealousy and diltruft of each other,
which rivallhip in commerce or in grandeur is
apt to inspire; the constable, by his influence and
promises, had prevailed on the inhabitants of
Burgos to abandon the Junta, and other noble-
men had shaken the fidelity of rome of the lesser
cities; no person had arisen among the commons
of such superior abilities or elevation of mind as
to require the direction of their affairs; Padilla,
their general, was a man of popular quali-
ties, but distrusted for that reason by those of
highest rank who adhered to the Junta; the con-
du& of Giron led the people to view, with fufpi-
cion, every perlbn of noble birth whojoined their
party; so that the strongest marks of irrefolu-
tion, mutual diftrufl, and mediocrity of genius,
appeared in all their proceedings at this time.
After many consultations held concerning the
terms proposed by the regents, they suffered
themselves to be so carried away by resentment
against the nobility, that, rejecting all thoughts
of accommodation, they threatened to strip them
of the crown lands, which they or their ance'tors
had usurped, and to rerannex there to the royal

9 P. Mart. Ep.695. 71 . Geddea' Trafts, i. a6,.

Q_3 domain.

B OOK: domain. Upon this preposterous scheme, which

' would at once have annihilated all the liberties
J'S* for which they had been struggling, by rendering

the kings of Castile absolute and independent
on their subje&s, they were so intent, that they
now exclaimed with less vehemence against the
exactions of the foreign minirters, than against
the immense power and wealth of the nobles, and
seemed to hope that they might make peace with
Charles, by offering to enrich him with their spoils.

Elated with THE fucces which Padilla had met with in
tiler ftccefs
in ,f.le several finall encounters, and in reducing fbme
fir.all ren.
,..ntclis. inconldlerable towns, helped to precipitate the

members of the Junta into this measure, filling
them with such conlidence in the valour of
their troops, that they hoped for an easy victory
over the royalisis. Padilla, that his army might
not remain inacive, while flufied with good
fortune, laid siege to Torrelobaton, a place of
greater firength and importance than any that
he had hitherto attacked, and which was de-
fended by a sufficient garrison; and though the
belieged made a desperate refitance, and the ad-

areh ,. miral attempted to relieve them, he took the
I53' town by form, and gave it up to be plundered

by his soldiers. If he had marched instantly with
his victorious army to Tordefillas, the head-quar-
ters of the royalists, he could hardly have failed
of making an efFectual impression on their troops,
furprized at the briskness of his operations, and
far from being of sufficient strength to give him

battle.

battle. But the fickleness and imprudence of B 0O0 K
the Junta prevented his taking this ftep. In- v-.
capable, like all popular associations, either of Imp,,nce
carrying on war, or of making peace, they liften- 0of tiC.
ed again to overtures of accommodation, and
even agreed to a short suspension of arms. This
negociation terminated in nothing; but while it
was carrying on, many of Padilla's soldiers, un-
acquainted with the refiraints of discipline, went
off with the booty which they had got at Torre-
lobaton; and others, wearied out by the unusual
length of the campaign, deferred'. The con-
stable too had leisure to assemble his forces at
Burgos, and to prepare every thing for march-
ing; and as soon as the truce expired, he effected
a jun&ion with the Conde de Haro, in spite of
all Padilla's efforts to prevent it. They advanced
immediately towards Torrelobaton, and Padilla,
finding the number of his troops so diminished
that he durst not risk a battle, attempted to re-
treat to Toro, which if he could have accom-
pliflhed, the invasion of Navarre at that jun&ure
by the French, and the necelity which the re-
gents must have been under of detaching men to
that kingdom, might have saved him from dan-
ger. But Haro, sensible how fatal would be The nobles
the consequences of suffering him to escape, :kothe
marched with such rapidity at the head of his Junta
cavalry, that he came up with him near Villalalr, p 23.
and without waiting for his infantry, advanced to

' Sandov.336.

Q.+ the

B °0 K the attack. Padilla's army, fatigued and dif-
A-v--' heartened by their precipitant retreat, which
s5:.' they could not distinguish from a flight, happen-

ed at that time to be passing over a ploughed
field, on which such a violent rain had fallen,
that the soldiers funk almost to the knees at every
ftep, and remained exposed to the fire of some
field-pieces which the royalists had brought along
with them. All there circumstances so difcon-
certed and intimidated raw soldiers, that without

and dereat facing the enemy, or making any refitance, they
it.

fled in the utmost confusion. Padilla exerted
himself with extraordinary courage and adivity in
order to rally them, though in vain; fear render-
ing them deaf both to his threats and intreaties:
Upon which, finding matters irretrievable, and
resolving not to survive the disgrace of that day,
and the ruin of his party, he rulhed into the
thickest of the enemy; but being wounded and
difinounted, he was taken prisoner. His princi-
pal officers shared the fame fate; the common
soldiers were allowed to depart unhurt, the nobles
being too generous to kill men who threw down
their arms'.

THE resentment of his enemies did not susser
P'adilla to linger long in expe&ation of what

' Sandov. 35, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 720. Miniana. Contin.

p. 26. Epitome de la vide y Hechos del Emper. Carlos V.
ur 1), Juan Anton. de Vera y Zuniga. +to. Madr. 1627.

i~." i!~.,~Shoud

thou)d

should befal him. Next day he was condemned B 00 o
to lose his head, though without any regular trial, -t-.
the notoriety of the crime being supposed fuffi- 's2'
cient to supersede the formality of a legal pro-
cess. He was led instantly to execution, toge- Padill,
ther with Don John Bravo, and Don Francis ,^l, put'I
Maldonada, the former commander of the Sego- dath
vians, and the latter of the troops of Salamanca.
Padilla viewed the approach of death with calm
but undaunted fortitude; and when Bravo, his
fellow-fufferer, expressed rome indignation at
hearing himself proclaimed a traitor, he checked
him, by observing, " That yesterday was the
time to have displayed the spirit of gentlemen,
this day to die with the meekness of Chriflians."
Being permitted to write to his wife and to the
community of Toledo, the place of his nativity,
he addressed the former with a manly and vir-
tuous tenderness, and the latter with the exulta-
tion natural to one who confidered himself as a
martyr for the liberties of his country'. After

this,

' The firain of these letters is so eloquent and high-fpirit-

ad, that I have translated them for the entertainment of my
readers.

Tsre Letter of Dcn Jo.n, Padilla to his Wipe.

S EN 0 RA,

" I your grief did not affli me more than my own

death, I ihould deem myself perfcUtly happy. For the end
of life being certain to all men, the Almighty confers a mark
ps dillinguiihing favour upon that person, for whom he ap-
points a death such as mine, which, though lamented by

many,

I 0 ° K this, he submitted quietly to his fate. Most of

AIl.
.t-. ,i the Spanish historians, accultomed to ideas of

s government and of regal power, very different

from thole upon which he ated, have been so
eager to testify their disapprobation of the caule
in which he was engaged, that they have ne-
gle&ed, or have been afraid to do juRice to his
virtues; and by blackening his memory, have
endeavoured to deprive him of that pity, which
is seldom denied to illultrious sufferers.

R..n o fthe THE vicory at Villalr proved as decisive as it
ry- was complete. Valladolid, the moll zealous of

all

many, is neverthelers acceptable unto him. It would require
more time than I now have, to write any thing that could afford
you consolation. That my enemies will not grant me, nor
do I with to delay the reception of that crown which I hope
to enjoy. You may bewail your own loss, but not my death,
which, being so honourable, ought not to be lamented by
any. My foul, for nothing else is left to me, I bequeath to
you. You will receive it, as the thing in this world which
you valued moll. I do not write to my father Pero Lopez,
hecaufe I dare not; for though I have flewn mvfelf to be his
fop in daring to lose my life, I have not been the heir of his
good fortune. I will not attempt to fay any thing more, that I
may not tire the executioner, who waits for me, and that I
may not excite a suspicion, that, in order to prolong my lite,
1 lengthen out my letter. My servant Sofia, an eye-witnel;,
and to whom I have communicated my mot secret thought.,
will inform you of what I cannot now write; and thus I retl,
expecting the inltrument of your grief, and of my deliver-
ance.",

His Letter to t.,e City of Toledo.

' To thee, the crown of Spain, and the light of the
whole world, free from the time of the mighty Goths: to

thee,

11 the associated cities, opened its gates imme- B o , K
diately to the conquerors, and being treated with ,
great clemency by the regents, Medina del ZS'.
Campo, Segovia, and many other towns followed
its example. This sudden dissolution of a con-
federacy, formed not upon flight dilgufts, or
upon trifling motives, into which the whole body
of the people had entered, and which had been
allowed time to acquire rome degree of order
and consistence by establishing a regular plan of
government, is the strongest proof of the ina-
bility of its leaders, or of Tome secret discord
reigning among its members. Though part of

thee, who, by shedding the blood of firangers, as well as thy
own blood, hall recovered liberty for thyself, and thy neigh-
bouring cities; Thy legitimate son, Juan de Padilla, gives
information, how by the blood of his body, thy ancient vic-
tories are to be refreihed. If fate hath not permitted my
aiions to be placed among your successful and celebrated ex-
ploits, the fault hath been in. my ill fortune, not in my good
will. This I request of thee as of a mother, to accept, since
God hath given me nothing more to lose for thy fake, than
that which I am now to relinquilh. I am more solicitous
about thy good opinion than about my own life. The Ihift-
ings of fortune, which never fiands Rill, are many. But
this 1 fee with infinite consolation, that I, the lead of thy
children, luster death for thee; and that thou had nursed at
thy breasts such as may take vengeance for my wrongs.
Many tongues will relate the manner of my death, of which
I am dill ignorant, though I know it to be near. My end
will tetify what was my desire. My foul I recommend to thee
as to the patroness of Christianity. Of my body I fay nothing,
for it is not mine. I can write nothing more, for at this very
moment 1 feel the knife at my throat, with greater dread of
thy difpleafurc, than apprehension of my own pain." San-
dov. Hilt. vol. i. p. 47 .

thr

B o0 K the army, by which they had been subdued, was
'% obliged, a few days after the battle, to march
'5'. towards Navarre, in order to check the pro-

grefs of the French in that kingdom, nothing
could prevail on the deje&ed commons of Castile
to take arms again, and to embrace such a fa-
vourable opportunity of acquiring those rights
and privileges for which they had appeared so

Pdila's zealous. The city of Toledo alone, animated by
WilcTdeiends Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's widow, who,
cp-t Ipirit. instead of bewailing her husband with a womanish

sorrow, prepared to revenge his death, and to
prosecute that cause in defence of which he had
suffered, must be excepted. Relpect for her sex,
or admiration of her courage and abilities, as
well as sympathy with her misfortunes, and ve-
neration for the memory of her husband, secured
her the fame ascendant over the people which he
had possessed. The prudence and vigour with
which ihe aaed, justified that confidence they
placed in her. She wrote to the French general
in Navarre, encouraging him to invade Caltile
by the offer of powerful assistance. She endea-
voured by her letters and emissaries to revive the
spirit and hopes of other cities. She raised soldiers,
and exacted a great fum from the clergy belong-
ing to the cathedral, to defray the expence of
keeping them on foot". She employed every
artifice that could interest or inflame the popu-
lace. For this purpose she ordered crucifixes to

P. Mart. Ep. 727.

be

be used by her troops initead of colours, as if B 0 K
they had been at war with infidels, and enemies --
of religion; ihe marched through the streets of 5*2-
Toledo with her son, a young child, clad in deep
mourning feated on a mule, having a standard
carried before him, repreienting the manner of
his father's execution%. By all these means she
kept the minds of the people in such perpetual
agitation as prevented their passions from sub-
liding, and rendered them insensible of the dan-
gers to which they were exposed, by standing
alone in opposition to the royal authority. While
the army was employed in Navarre, the regents
were unable to attempt the reduEion of Toledo
by force; and all their endeavours, either to di.
minifh Donna Maria's credit with the people, or
to gain her by large promises and the folicita-
tions of her brother the marquis de Mondeiar,
proved inffetual. Upon the expulsion of the
French out of Navarre, part of the army return-
ed into Castile, and invested Toledo. Even this
made no impression on the intrepid and obstinate
courage of Donna Maria. She defended the
town with vigour, her troops beat the royalists
in several sallies, and no progress was made to-
wards reducing the place, until the clergy, whom
she had highly offended by invading their pro-
perty, cealed to support her. As soon as they
received information of the death of William de
Croy archbishop of Toledo, whose poIfcflion of

X Sandov. 375.

that

B 0 0 K that fee was their chief grievance, and that the
A_-» emperor had named a Castilian to succeed him,
'5-' they openly turned against her, and persuaded

the people that she had acquired such influence
over them by the force of enchantments, that
Ihe was aflifted by a familiar demon which at-
tended her in the form of a Negro-maid, and
that by its suggestions she regulated every part of
her conduct . The credulous multitude, whom
their impatience of a long blockade, and despair
of obtaining succours either from the cities for-
merly in confederacy with them, or from the
French, rendered desirous of peace, took arms
against her, and driving her out of the city, fur-
Oaober 6. rendered it to the royalists. She retired to the

citadel, which Ihe defended with amazing forti-
tude four months longer; and when reduced to
the last extremities, she made her escape in dif-

Feb. ro. guile, and fled to Portugal, where Ihe had many
5S'. relations '

stall effra UPON her flight, the citadel surrendered. Tran-

of silis civil
f,,.ii quillity was re-eltablifhed in Caltile; and this

bold attempt of the commons, like all unsuccess-
ful insurrections, contributed to confirm and ex-
tend the power of the crown, which it was in-
tended to moderate and abridge. The Cortes
still continued to make a part of the Caltilian
constitution, and were i'ummoned to meet when-

Y P. Mart. Ep. 727.
= Saudov. 375. P. Mart. Ep 7;4. Ferrer. viii. 563.

* ~~~~~~~~~~~I: vC::

ever the king flood in need of money; but in- B o I K
tlead of adhering to their ancient and cautious --_
form of examining and redrefling publick griev- sX'
ances, before they proceeded to grant any supply,
the more courtly custom of voting a donative in
the first place was introduced, and the sovereign
having obtained all that he wanted, never al-
lowed them to enter into any inquiry, or to
attempt any reformation injurious to his autho-
rity. The privileges which the cities had en-
joyed were gradually circumscribed or abolished;
their commerce began from this period to de-
cline; and becoming less wealthy and less po-
pulous, they lot that power and influence which
they had acquired in the Cortes.

WHILE Caltile was exposed to the calamities The pr.

of civil war, the kingdom of Valencia was torn is,,,'"n
by intestine commotions Rill more violent. The in v
afiociation which had been formed in the city of
Valencia in the year one thousand five hundred
and twenty, and which was diftinguilhed by the
name of the Germanada, continued to subsist
after the emperor's departure from Spain. The
members of it, upon pretext of defending the
coasts against the descents of the Corsairs of Bar-
bary, and under fanstion of that permission,
which Charles had rashly granted them, refused
to lay down their arms. But as the grievances,
which the Valencians aimed at redreCling, pro.
ceeded from the arrogance and exactions of the

4 nobility,

B 0 0 K nobility, rather than from any unwarrantable ex-
v__--- ercife of the royal prerogative, their resentment

5 turned chiefly againfl the former. As soon as

they were allowed the use of arms, and became
conscious of their own strength, they grew impa-
tient to take vengeance of their oppressors. They
drove the nobles out of most of the cities, plun-
dered their houses, wafted their lands, and aiTault.
ed their castles. They then proceeded to elect
thirteen persons, one from each company of
tradesmen eftabliihed inValencia, and committed
the administration of government to them, under
pretext that they would reform the laws, eftablith
one uniform mode of dispensing justice without
partiality, or regard to the dilltin&ion of ranks,
and thus restore men to some degree of their ori-
ginal equality.

THE nobles were obliged to take arms in self-

defence. Hostilities began, and were carried oi:
with all the rancour with which resentment at
oppreflion inspired the one party, and the idea of
insulted dignity animated the other. As no pcl-
son of honourable birth, or of liberal education,
joined the Germanada, the councils as well as
troops of the confederacy were condu&ed by low
mechanicks, who acquired the confidence of an
enraged multitude chiefly by the fiercenefi of
their zeal, and the extravagance of their pro-
ceedings. Among such men, the laws intro-
duced in civilized nations, in order to reifrain or

6 moderate

ti.oderate the violence of war, were unknown or B 0I K

Il.

despised; and they committed the wildest ats of --
cruelty and outrage. 152.

THE emperor, occupied with fupprefling the

infurreLtion in Castile, which more immediately
threatened the subversion of his power and pre-
rogative, was unable to give much attention to
the tumults in Valencia, and left the nobility of
that kingdom to fight their own battles. His
viceroy, the Conde de Mclito, had the supreme
command of the forces which the nobles railed
among the vassals. The Germanada carried on
the war during the years one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty and twenty-one, with a more
persevering courage, than could have been ex-
peced from a body so tumultuary, under the
conduc of such leaders. They defeated the no-
bility in several ations, which, though not con-
fiderable) were extremely sharp. They repulsed
them in their attempts to reduce different towns.
But the nobles, by their superior skill in war, and
at the head of troops more accustomed to service,
gained the advantage in mos of the rencounters.
At length, they were joined by a body of Cafti-
lian cavalry, which the regents dispatched to-
wards Valencia, soon after their victory over
Padilla at Villalar, and by their aflillance they
acquired such superiority, that they entirely broke
and ruined the Germanada. The leaders of the
party were put to death, almolt without any for-

VOL. II. R mality

B 0 1 K mality of legal trial, and suffered such cruel pu.

Ill.
-_--' nifhments, as the sense of recent injuries prompt-
152' ed the nobles to inflit. The government of Va-

lencia was re-eftabliihed in its ancient form;.

AppearJn- IN Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame
ces of dig
aitetionin spirit of difaffe&ion and mutiny, which reigned
Arazon. in the other kingdoms of Spain, began to appear;

but by the prudent condut of the viceroy, Don
John de Lanufa, they were so far composed, as
to prevent their breaking out into any open in-

formidahle furreEtion. But in the island of Majorca, an-
infurre!ioln
.a i1.ijorca. nexed to the crown of Aragon, the fame causes

which had excited the commotions in Valencia,
produced effets no less violent. The people,
impatient of the hardfiips which they endured
M"arh i. under the rigid jurifdition of the nobility, took

arms in a tumultuary manner; deposed their
viceroy; drove him out of the ifand; and maf-
sacred every gentleman who was so unfortunate
as to fall into their hands. The obstinacy with
which the people of Majorca persisted in their
Febellion, was equal to the rage with which they
began it. Many and vigorous efforts were re-
quifite in order to reduce them to obedience; and
tranquillity was re-eftablilhed in every part of

a Argenfola Annales de Aragon, cap. 75. 90. 99. 1r8.

Sayas Annales de Aragon, cap. 5. iz, &c. P. Mart. Ep. lib.
.xxiii. & xxxiv. pafim. Ferrer. Hit. d'Efpagne, viii. 542.
564, &c.

Spain,

Spain, before they could be brought to submit to B °°O K
their sovereign. b

WHILE the spirit of difaffeeion was so general caufts

whicn pre-
among the Spaniards, and so many causes con- vented the

union cfth

curred in precipitating them into such violent mlaecon.i
measures, in order to obtain the redrcfs of their tar
grievances, it may appear strange, that the male-
contents in the different kingdoms flould have
carried on their operations without any mutual
concert, or even any intercourse with each other.
By uniting their councils and arms, they might
have ated both with greater force, and with
more effet. The appearance of a national con-
federacy would have rendered it no less refpe6t-
able among the people than formidable to the
crown and the emperor, unable to resist such a
combination, muff have complied with any terms
which the members of it thought fit to prescribe.
Many things, however, prevented the Spaniards
from forming themselves into one body, and
pursuing common measures. The people of the
different kingdoms in Spain, though they were
become the subje6s of the fame sovereign, re-
tained, in full force, their national antipathy to
each other. The remembrance of their ancient
rivalfhip and hostilities was still recent, and the
sense of reciprocal injuries so intire, as to be

b Argenfola Annalesde Aragon, c. 113. Ferrer. Hift.viii.
542. Sayas Annalesde Aragon, cap. 7. 11. 14. 76. 81. Ser-
reras Hilt. d'Efpagne, viii. 579, &c. 6o9.

R 2 incon-

B 0 0 K incompatible with their acting in confidence and

C'-z--' concert. Each nation chore rather to depend on

'5 its own efforts, and to maintain the struggle

alone, than to implore the aid of neighbours,
whom they distrusted and hated. At the fame
time, the forms of government in the several
kingdoms of Spain were so different, and the
grievances of which they complained, as well as
the alterations and amendments which they at-
tempted to introduce, so various, that it was not
easy to bring them to unite in any common plan.
To this disunion Charles was indebted for the
preservation of his Spanish crowns; and while
each of the kingdoms followed separate measures,
all of them were obliged at last to conform to the
will of their sovereign.

'rleempe. THE arrival of the emperor in Spain filled his
ror' Ptu- fubjee&s who had been in arms against him with
dent and ge-
nerous be- deep apprehensions; from which he soon deliver-
haviour to-
warJs I.e ed them by an a; of clemency, no less prudent

,n't. than generous. After a rebellion so general,

scarcely twenty persons, among so many crimi-
nals obnoxious to the law, had been punished
capitally in Castile. Though firongly solicited
by his council, Charles refused to shed any more
blood by the hands of the executioner; and pub-
oa 1.2 lihed a general pardon, extending to all crimes

committed since the commencement of the in-
lurretions, from which only fourscore were ex-
ccpted. Even there he seems to have named,
rather with an intention to intimidate others,

than

than from any inclination to seize them; for 8a I K
when an officious courtier offered to inform him - -
where one of the most considerable among them '1s:
was concealed, he avoided it by a good-natured
pleasantry; I" Go," lays he, " I have now no
reason to be afraid of that man, but he has some
cause to keep at a distance from me, and you
would be better employed in telling him that I
am here, than in acquainting me with the place
of his retreat ." By this appearance of magna-
nimity, as well as by his care to avoid every
thing which had disgusted the Castilians during
his former residence among them by his address
in assuming their manners, in speaking their
language, and in complying with all their hu-
mours and customs, he acquired an afcendanr
over them which hardly any of their native mo-
narchs had ever attained, and brought them to
support him in all his enterprizes with a zeal and
valour to which he owed much of his success and
grandeur'.

ABOUT the time that Charles landed in Spain, AJrian fe

out for

Adrian set out for Italy to take pofrefion of his tom, mind
new dignity. But though the Roman people Chpio'
longed extremely for his arrival, they could not, there'
on his firit appearance, conceal their fiurprize and
disappointment. After being accuflomed to the

c Sandov. 377, &c. Vida del. Emper. Carlos por Don
Juan. Anton. de Vera y Zuniga, p. 30.
d Ulloa Vita de Carlo V. p. 85.

R 3 princely

B OOI K princely magnificence of Julius, and the elegant

v
-- -' 1lendour of Leo, they beheld with contempt an

old man of an humble deportment, of austere
manners, an enemy to pomp, destitute of taste in
the arts, and unadorned with any of the external
accomplilhments which the vulgar expe& in those
railed to eminent stations . Nor did his poli-
tical views and maxims seem less strange and
astonishing to the pontifical ministers. He ac-
knowledged and bewailed the corruptions which
abounded in the church, as well as in the court
of Rome, and prepared to reform both; he dif-
covered no intention of aggrandizing his family;
he even scrupled at retaining such territories as
ibme of his predecessors had acquired by violence
or fraud, rather than by any legal title, and for
that reason he inverted Francesco Maria de Ro-
vare anew in the dutchy of Urbino, of which
Leo had Dripped him, and surrendered to the
duke of Ferrara several places wrested from him
by the church'. To men little habituated to fee
princes regulate their condut by the maxims
of morality and the principles of justice, these
actions of the new pope appeared inconteftible
proofs of his weakness or inexperience. Adrian,
who was a perse& stranger to the complex and
intricate system of Italian politicks, and who
could place no confidence in persons whose subtle
refinements in business suited so ill with his na-

Guic. 1. xv. 233. Jovii Vita Adriani, 117. Bellefor,
i'pitr. dcs Princ. 8. f Guic. lib, xv. 240.

tural

tural simplicity and candour, being often embar- B o°° K
raffed and irresolute in his deliberations, the opi- -
nion of his incapacity daily increased, until both 'sz'
his person and government became objects of ri-
dicule among his fubjets%.

ADRIAN, though devoted to the emperor, en- Te e,,nde.

You V

oi0 is

deavoured to assume the impartiality which be- no.e peace
came the common father of Christendom, and
laboured to reconcile the contending princes, that
they might unite in a league against Solyman,
whose conquest of Rhodes rendered him more
formidable than ever to Europeh. But this was
an undertaking far beyond his abilities. To
examine such a variety of pretensions, to ad-
just such a number of interfering interests, to
extinguish the pafions which ambition, emula-
tion, and mutual injuries had kindled, to bring
so many hostile powers to pursue the fame scheme
with unanimity and vigour, required not only
uprightness of intention, but a great superiority
both of understanding and address.

THE Italian Rates were no less desirous of peace

than the pope. The Imperial army under Co-
lonna was fill kept on foot, but as the emperor's
revenues in Spain, in Naples, and in the Low
Countries, were either exhausted, or applied to

* Jov. Vita Adr. 1 8. P. Mart. Ep. 774. Rufcelli Let-
tres.de Princ. vol. i. 87. 96. sol.

b Bellefor. Epitr. p. 86.

R 4 some

8 1oi K rome other purpose, it depended entirely for pay
A--,-' and subsistence on the Italians. A great part of

it was quartered in the ecclefiatical Rfate, and
monthly contributions were levied upon the Flo-
rentines, the Milanese, the Genoese, and Luc-.
chefe, by the viceroy of Naples; and though all
exclaimed againfi such opprefflon, and were im-
patient to be delivered from it, the dread of
worse consequences from the rage of the army, or
the relentment of the emperor, obliged them to
submit'.

5'3. So much regard, however, was paid to the

A new a
l.eaue pope's exhortations, and to a bull which he
a.ainat the
Fench issued, requiring all Chritfian princes to content
Zking to a truce for three years, that the Imperial, the

French, and English ambassadors at Rome were
empowered to treat of that matter; but while
they wafted their time in fruitless negociations,
their maiters continued their preparations for
war. The Venetians, who had hitherto adhered
with great firmness to their alliance with Francis,
being now convinced that his affairs in Italy were
in a desperate situation, entered into a league
june s. against him witlh the emperor; to which Adrian,

at the instigation of his countryman and friend
Charles de Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, who per-
fladed him that the only obitacles to peace arofi
from the ambition of the French king, soon after
acceded. The other Italian states followed their
example; and Francis was left without a fingl;

Guic. 1. xv. 238.

ally

ally to resist the efforts of so many enemies, B o

, Kr

whose armies threatened, and whose territories s-.
encompassed, his dominions on every fidel. '1s,*

THE dread of this powerful confederacy, it Francz,

vigorous
was thought, would have obliged Francis to keep mefares in

opporatiou

wholly on the defensive, or at least have prevent- to it.
ed his entertaining any thoughts of marching
into Italy. But it was the charater of that
prince, too apt to become remiss, and even ne-
gligent on ordinary occasions, to rouze at the ap-
proach of danger, and not only to encounter it
with spirit and intrepidity, qualities which never
forsook him, but to provide against it with dili-
gence and industry. Before his enemies were
ready to execute any of their schemes, Francis
had assembled a numerous army. His authority
over his own fubjeas was far greater than that
which Charles or Henry poffefled over theirs.
They depended on their diets, their cortes, and
their parliaments for money, which was usually
granted them in fiall fums, very slowly, and
with much relu&ance. The taxes he could im-
pose were more considerable, and levied with
greater dispatch; so that on this, as well as on
other occasions, his army was in the field while
they were devising ways and means for raising
theirs. Sensible of this advantage, Francis hoped
tp disconcert all the emperor's schemes by march-
ipg in person into the Milanese; and this bold

k Guic. 1. xv. 241. 248. e

mcature,

° ° K measure, the more formidable because unexpe&.
iii. ed, could scarcely have failed of producing that
31513 effec'. The vanguard of his army had already

soin'hde reached Lyons, and he himnfelf was hastening
difnov.y of after it with the second division of his troops,
the eonsla.
ie Bo,,r- when the discovery of a domeflick conspiracy,
itacy. which threatened the ruin of the kingdom, obliged

him to stop short, and to alter his measures,
;, chI"c. THE author of this dangerous plot was Charles

duke of Bourbon, lord high constable, whose noble
birth, valt fortune, and high office, raised him to
be the most powerful subjec& in France, as his great
talents, equally suited to the field or the council,
and his signal services to the crown, rendered
him the ioft illustrious and deserving. The
near resemblance between the king and him in
many of their qualities, both being fond of war,
and ambitious to excel in manly' exercises, as
well as their equality in age, and their proximity
of blood, ought naturally to have secured him a

oTf¢hil'c.' considerable share in that monarch's favour. But
Afiaifon. unhappily Louise, the king's mother, had con-

tracted a violent aversion to the house of Bour-
bon, for no better reason than because Anne of
Bretagne, the queen of Louis the Twelfth, with
whom fle lived in perpetual enmity, discovered a
peculiar attachment to that branch of the royal
family; and she had taught her son, who was
too lufceptible of any imprecfon which ihe gave
him, to view all the conftablc's ations with a
mean and unbecoming jealousy. His diftin-

guinled

gui/hed merit at the battle of Marignano had not B 0 0 K;
been sufficiently rewarded; he had been recalled ,
from the government of Milan upon very frivo- 's53
lous pretences, and had met with a cold recep-
tion, which his prudent conduct in that difficult
Ration did not deserve; the payment of his pen-
sions had been suspended without any good cause;
and, during the campaign of one thousand five
hundred and twenty-one, the king, as has al-
ready been related, had affronted him in presence
of the whole army, by giving the command of
the van to the duke of Alencon. The conflable,
at first, bore these indignities with greater mo-
deration than could have been expe&ed from an
high-fpirited prince, conscious of what was due
to his rank, and to his services. Such a mul..
tiplicity of injuries, however, exhausted his pa-
tience; and inspiring him with thoughts of re-
venge, he retired from court, and began to hold
a secret correspondence with some of the empe.
ror's ministers.

ABOUT that time the duchess of Bourbon

happened to die without leaving any children.
Louise, of a disposition no less amorous than
vindicive, and still susceptible of the tender
pallions at the age of forty-fix, began to view
the constable, a prince as amiable as he was
accomplished, with other eyes; and notwith-
itanding the great disparity of their years, she
formed the scheme of marrying him. Bourbon,
who might have expe&ed every thing to which

an

B °0 K an ambitious mind can arpire, from the doting

%,-j^ fondness of a woman who governed her son and
z53' the kingdom, being incapable either of imitating

the queen in her sudden transition from hatred
to love, or of diflembling so meanly as to pre-
tend affecion for one who had persecuted him so
long with unprovoked malice, not only rejeted
the match, but embittered his refusal by some
severe raillery on Louise's person and charater.
She finding herself not only contemned, but in-
fulted, her disappointed love turned into hatred,
and since she could not marry, (he resolved tQ
ruin Bourbon.

FoR this purpose (he consulted with the chan.

cellor Du Prat, a man, who, by a base proftitu-
tion of great talents and of superior (kill in his
profeflion, had risen to that high office. By his
advice a law-suit was commenced against the
constable, for the whole estate belonging to the
house of Bourbon. Part of it was claimed in the
king's name, as having fallen to the crown; part
in that of Louise, as the nearest heir in blood of
the deceased duchess. Both these claims were
equally destitute of any foundation in jultice;
but Louise, by her solicitations and authority,
and Du Prat, by employing all the artifices and
chicanery of law, prevailed on the judges to
order the estate to be sequestered. This unjult
dccifion drove the constable to despair, and to

,o, r',,t measures which despair alone could have dictated.
with the He renewed his intrigues in the Imperial court,
CIT1"-o'" antd

and flattering himself that the injuries which he a °0 K
had suffered would justify his having recourse to --
any means in order to obtain revenge, he offered *1'3.
to transfer his allegiance from his natural so-
vereign to the emperor, and to assist him in the
conquest of France. Charles, as well as the king
of England, to whom the secret was communi-
cated', expecting prodigious advantages from
his revolt, were ready to receive him with
open arms, and spared neither promises nor
allurements which might help to confirm him in
his resolution. The emperor offered him in
marriage his filser Eleanor, the widow of the king
of Portugal, with a vast portion. He was in-
cluded as a principal in the treaty between Charles
and Henry. The counties of Provence and Dau-
phine were to be fettled on him, with the title
of king. The emperor engaged to enter France
by the Pyrenees, and Henry, supported by the
Flemings, to invade Picardy; while twelve thou-
sand Germans, levied at their common charge,
were to penetrate into Burgundy, and to aa in
concert with Bourbon, who undertook to raise
fix thousand men among his friends and vassals
in the heart of the kingdom. The execution of
this deep-laid and dangerous plot was suspend-
ed, until the king should cross the Alps with the
only army capable of defending his dominions;
and as he was far advanced in his march for that

Rymer's Feeder. xiii. 794.

purpose,

B 0 n K purpose, France flood on the brink of deftruc-

- tionm.

15123
dilcovered. HAPPILY for that kingdom, a negociation

which had now been carrying on for several
months, though conduced with the most pro-
found secrecy, and communicated only to a few
chosen confidents, could not altogether escape
the observation of the reft of the conrable's nu-
memous retainers, rendered more inquisitive by
finding that they were disturbed. Two of there
gave the king some intimation of a myterious
correspondence between their maser and the
count de Roeux, a Flemish nobleman of great
confidence with the emperor. Francis, who could
not bring himfeif to fufpet that the first prince
of the blood would be so base as to betray the
kingdom to its enemies, immediately repaired to
Moulins, where the constable was in bed, feign-
ing indisposition, that he might not be obliged
to accompany the king into Italy, and acquainted
him of the intelligence which he had received.
Bourbon, with great solemnity, and the most
imposing affectation of ingenuity and candour,
airerted his own innocence; and as his health, he
said, was now more confirmed, he promised to join
the army within a few days. Francis, open and
candid himself, and too apt to be deceived by

m Thuani His. lib. i. c. lo. Hcuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. viii.
C. 18. p. 207.

5 the

the appearance of those virtues in others, gave B 0 ° K
such credit to what he said, that he refused to a
arrest him, although advised to take that pre- 51'3.
caution by his wisest counsellors, and as if the
danger had been over, he continued his march
towards Lyons. The constable set out loon after, Septemter.
seemingly with an intention to follow him; but
turning suddenly to the left he crossed the Rhone, Fiey.t
and after infinite fatigues and perils, escaped all
the parties which the king, sensible too late of
his credulity, sent out to intercept him, and
reached Italy in fafetyn.

FRANCIS took every pofrible precaution to pre-

vent the bad effecs of the irreparable error which
he had committed. He put garrisons in all the
places of strength in the constable's territories.
He seized all the gentlemen whom he could
fufpet of being his associates; and as he had not
hitherto discovered the whole extent of the con-
fpirator's schemes, nor knew how far the insec-
tion had spread among his fubjefs, he was afraid
that his absence might encourage them to make
some desperate attempt, and for that reason re-
linquilhed his intention of leading his army in
person into Italy.

HE did not, however, abandon his design on Fiethlin-
the Milanese; but appointed admiral Bonnivet Milar.ef

"Mem. de Bellay, p. 64, &c. Pa(luier Recherches de la
France, p. 481.

to

°0 0 K to take the supreme command in his Read, ahd
Lvlc to march into that country with an army thirty

)s$:' thousand itrong. Bonnivet did not owe this pre-

ferment to his abilities as a general; for of all the
talents requisite to form a great commader, he
pofflffed only personal courage, the lowest and
the most common. But he was the molt accom-
plithed gentleman in the French court, of agree-
able manners, an insinuating address, and a
sprightly converfationi and Francis, who lived
in great familiarity with his courtiers, was so
charmed with these qualities, that he honoured
him, on all occasions, with the most partial and
diftinguilhing marks of his favour. He was, be-
fides, the implacable enemy of Bourbon; and as
the king hardly knew whom to trust at that junc-
ture, he thought the chief command could be
lodged no where so safely as in his hands.
Theirill COLONNA, who was entrusted with the defence

of the Milanese, his own conquest, was in no
condition to resist such a formidable army. He
was destitute of money sufficient to pay his troops,
which were reduced to a finall number by sick-
ness or desertion, and had, for that reason, been
obliged to negle& every precaution necessary for
the security of the country. The only plan which
he formed was to defend the passage of the river
Teflino against the French; and as if he had for-
gotten how easily he himself had disconcerted a
similar scheme formed by Lautrec, he promised
with great confidence on its being effet&ual. But

in

in spite of all his caution, it succeeded no better B o o0 r
with him than with Lautrtc. Bonnivet passed .--
the river without loss, at a ford which had been 151Z3
negleced, and the Imperialists retired to Milan,
preparing to abandon the town as soon as the
French should appear before it. By an unac-
countable negligence, which Guicciardini im-
putes to infatuationo, Bonnivet did not advance
for three or four days, and loft the opportunity
with which his good fortune presented him. The
citizens recovered from their consternation; Co-
lonna, fill ative at the age of fourscore, and
Morone, whose enmity to France was indefa-
tigable, were employed night and day in repairing
the fortifications, in amassing provisions, in col-
lecting troops from every quarter; and by the
time the French approached, had put the city in a
condition to sand the siege. Bonnivet, after some
fruitless attempts on the town, which harassed his
own troops more than the enemy, was obliged, by
the inclemency of the season, to retire into winter-
quarters.

DURING these tranfations, pope Adrian died; noath of

an event so much to the fatisfation of the Ro-
man people, whose hatred or contempt of him
augmented every day, that the night after his
decease, they adorned the door of his chief phy.
fician's house with garlands, adding this infcrip-

o Guic, lib. xv. 154r
VOL. 11. S tion,

B 00 K tion, TO THE DELIVERER OF HIS
_---- COUNTRY P. The cardinal de Medici in-

s513. ftantly renewed his pretensions to the papal dig.

nity, and entered the conclave with high expe&a-
tions on his own part, and a general opinion of
the people that they would be successful. But
though supported by the Imperial faction, pol-
sessed of great personal interest, and capable of
all the artifices, refinements, and corruption,
which reign in thole assemblies, the obstinacy
and intrigues of his rivals protrated the conclave

Eleion of to the unusual length of fifty days. The address
C;n:cnt and perseverance of the cardinal at last fur-
Nov. i». mounted every obstacle. He was raised to the

head of the church, and assumed the government
of it by the name of Clement VII. The choice
was univerlally approved of. High expecations
were conceived of a pope, whose great talents,
and long experience in business, seemed to qua-
lify him no less for defending the spiritual in-
terests of the church, exposed to imminent dan-
ger by the progress of Luther's opinions, than
for conducting its political operations with the
prudence requisite at such a difficult juncture;
and who, besides these advantages, rendered
the ecclesiastical state more refpe&able, by hav-
ing in his hands the government of Florence,
together with the wealth of the family of Me-
dici'.

Jovii Vit. Adr. 127. q Guic. 1. xv. 263.

CARDINAL

CARDINAL WOLSEY, not disheartened by the B o o K

disappointment of his ambitious views at the L-v-
former election, had entertained more sanguine Woley dif.

appointed
hopes of success on this occasion. Henry wrote and cih.d

w:tló recrCit.

to the emperor, reminding him of his engage- nent.
ments to second the pretensions of his miniter.
Wolfey beftirred himself with activity suitable to
the importance of the prize for which he con-
tended, and inftru&ed his agents at Rome to
spare neither promises nor bribes in order to gain
his end. But Charles had either amused him
with vain hopes which he never intended to
gratify, or he judged it impolitick to oppose a
candidate who had such a prospect of succeeding
as Medici; or perhaps the cardinals durst not
venture to provoke the people of Rome, while
their indignation against Adrian's memory was
still fresh, by placing another Ultra-montane on
the papal throne. Wolfey, after all his expe&a-
tions and endeavours, had the mortification to
fee a pope eleced, of such an age, and of so
vigorous a constitution, that he could not comfort
himself much with the chance of surviving him.
This second proof fully convinced Wolfey of the
emperor's insincerity, and it excited in him all
the rcfentment which an haughty mind feels on
being at once disappointed and deceived; and
thouglh Clement endeavoured to soothe his vin-
dirive nature by granting him a commillion
to be legate in England during life, with such
ample powers as vested in him almost the whole
papal jurifdition in that kingdom, the injury

S 2 he

B °0 K he had received entirely dissolved the tie which
.-__-' had united him to Charles, and from that mo-

'3 rnent he meditated revenge. It was necessary,

however, to conceal his intention from his matrer,
and to suspend the execution of it, until, by a
dexterous improvement of the incidents which
might occur, he mfould be able gradually to
alienate the king's affeftions from the emperor.
For this reason, he was so far from expressing any
uneasiness on account of the repulse which he
had met with, that he abounded on every occa-
sion, private as well as publick, in declarations
of his high latisfation with Clement's promo-
tion '.

enrt'n, HENRY had, during the campaign, fulfilled,
i. France. with great sincerity, whatever he was bound to

perform by the league against France, though
more slowly than he could have wilhed. His
thoughtless profusion, and total negle&t of ceco-
norny, reduced him often to great firaits for
money. The operations of war were now car-
tied on in Europe in a manner very different from
that which had long prevailed. Instead of armies
suddenly assembled, which under diftint chief-
tains followed their ptince into the field for a
short space, and served at their own cost, troops
were now levied at great charge, and received
regularly considerable pay. Instead of impa-
tience on both fides to bring every quarrel to the

r Fiddes's LifeofWolfey, 294, &c. Herbert.

ifue

ifmue of a battle, which commonly decided the B 0 0 K
fate of open and defenceless countries, and al-
lowed the barons, together with their vassals, to
return to their ordinary occupations; towns were
fortified with great art, and defended with much
obstinacy; war, from a very simple, became a
very intricate tciences and campaigns grew of
course to be more tedious, and less decisive. The
expence which these alterations in the military
fyllem neceflarily created, appeared intolerable
to nations hitherto unaccustomed to the burden
of heavy taxes. Hence proceeded the frugal,
and even parsimonious spirit of the Englilh par-
liaments in that age, which Henry, with all his
authority, was seldom able to overcome. The
commons, having refused at this time to grant
him the supplies which he demanded, he had
recourse to the ample and almofR unlimited pre-
rogative which the kings of England then pof-
ilefed, and by a violent and unusual exertion of
it, raised the money he wanted. This, however, sept. io.
wafted so much time, that it was late in the sea-
son before his army, under the duke of Suffolk,
could take the field. Being joined by a coni-
derable body of Flemings, Suffolk marched into
Picardy, and Francis, from his extravant eager-
ness to recover the Milanete, having left that
frontier almost unguarded, he penetrated as far
as the banks of the river Oyfe, within eleven
leagues of Paris, filling that capital with confter-
nation. But the arrival of some troops detached
by the king, who was Ifill at Lyons; the adive

S 3 gallantry

BOOK

nm. gallantry of the French officers, who allowed the
^-' allies no respite night or day; the rigour of a

most unnatural season, together with scarcity of
provisions, compelled Suffolk to retire; and La
Ioverbe. Tramoiiille, who commanded in those parts, had

the glory of having, with an handful of men,
checked the progress of a formidable army, and
of driving them with ignominy out of the French
territories'.

And thor' THE emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and
of the Ger.
man and Guienne were not more fortunate, though in
$paiazds.

both these provinces Francis was equally ill pre-
pared to resist them. The conduct and valour of
his generals supplied his want of foresight; the
Germans who made an irruption into one of these
provinces, and the Spaniards, who attacked the
other, were repulsed with great disgrace.
EDd of the THUS ended the year 1523, during which

Francis's good fortune and success had been lfich
as gave all Europe an high idea of his power and
resources. He had discovered and difconcerced
adangerous conspiracy, the author of which he
had driven into exile, almost without an at-
tendant i he had rendered abortive all the fchenes
of the powerful confederacy formed against him;
he had prote&ed his dominions when attacked
on three different fides; and though his army in
the Milanese had not made such progress as might

Hlerbert. Mem. de Bellay, 73,' &c.

have

have been expected from its superiority to the B o°, K
enemy in number, he had recovered, and fill kept
possession, of one half of that dutchy. 1S23.

THE ensuing year opened with events more s, 4.
disastrous to France. Fontarabia was loft by tie lot ,o -ic

pope.

cowardice or treachery of its governor. In Italy, VD,. ,7.
the allies refulved on an early and vigorous effort
in order to dispossess Bonnivet of that part of the
Milanese which lies beyond the Tefino. Cle-
ment, who, under the pontificates of Leo and
Adrian, had dificovercd an implacable enmity to
France, began now to view the power which the
emperor was daily acquiring in Italy, with so
much jealousy, that he refulled to accede, as his
predecessors had done, to the league against
Francis, and forgetting private pafiions and ani-
mofities, laboured with the zeal which became
his character, to bring about a reconciliation
among the contending parties. But all his en-
deavours were ineffcdual; a numerous army, to
which each of the allies furnished their contin-
gent of troops, was afimbled at Milan by the be-
ginning of March. Lannoy, viceroy of Naples, in,'r;,l
took the command of it upon Colonna's death, '"".,'d.
though the chief diretion of military operations ficlt 'l".
was committed to Bourbon, and the marquis de
Pescara; the latter, the ablest and most enter-
prifing of the Imperial generals; the former in-
spired by his resentment with new ativity and
invention, and acquainted so thoroughly with
the characers of the French commanders, the

S 4 genius

oB 0 1 K genius of their troops, and the ftrcngth as well as
-.--- weakness of their armies, as to be of infinite
'24. service to the party which he had joined. But

all thtfe advantages were nearly loll through the
emperor's inability to raise money sufficient for
executing the various and extensive plans which

Rt,,dabob he had formed. When his troops were com-
tilet cn;'. manded to march, they mutinied against their

leaders, demanding the pay which was due to
them for some months; and disregarding both
the menaces and intreaties of their officers,
threatened to pillage the city of Milan, if they
did not inlantly receive faristarion. Out of this
difficulry the generals of the allies were extri-
cated by Moron;, who prevailing on his country-
men, over whom his influence was'prodigious,
to advance the fum that was requisite, the arBmy
took the field'.

:* - rnch BONNJIVET was deftiute of troops to oppose
, 'r..nirhe this army, and il11l more of the talents which
M.J".eit. could render him an equal match for its leaders.

After various movements and encounters, de-
liribed with great accuracy by the contemporary
hidforians, a detail of which, at this distance of
tine, would be equally uninterelling and un-
inftruaive, he was forced to abandon the itrong
camrp in which he had entrenched himfdlf at
BiagrasTa. Soon after, partly by his own mif-
Lonejdut, partly by the activity of the enemy,

Guic. I . xr. z67. C-pella, 19.o

w }!'

who harassed and ruined his army by continual B o0 K
fkirmilhes, while they carefully declined a battle --
which he often offered them; and partly by the 5
caprice of 6ooo Swi's, who refused to join his
army, though within a day's march of it; he was
reduced to the necessity of attempting a retreat
into France through the valley of Aolt. Just as
he arrived on the banks of the Seffia, and began
to pass that river, Bourbon and Pescara appeared
with the vanguard of the allies, and attacked his
rear with great fury. At the beginning of the
charge, Bonniver, while exerting himself with
much valour, was wounded so dangcrotuly as
obliged him to quit the field; and the cond'uit
of the rear was committed to the chevalier Bay-
ard, who, though so much a firanger to the arts
of a court that he never rose to the chief com-
mand, was always called, in times of real dan-
ger, to the potls of greatest difficulty and im-
portance. He put himself at the head of the
men at arms, and animating them by his pre-
fence and example to sustain the whole shock of
the enemy's troops, he gained time for the reft
of his countrymen to make good their retreat.
But in this service he received a wound which he Dehthofthe

ch v-lier
Immediately perceived to be mortal, and being vay.r', and

rIin of the

unable to continue any longer on horseback, he French
ordered one of his attendants to place him under army'
a tree, with his face towards the enemy; then
fixing his eyes on the guard of his tword, which
he held up instead of a cross, he addreffled his
prayers to God, and in this posture, which be-

4 came

B o

O K came his chara&er both as a soldier and as a

.-- Christian, he calmly waited the approach of
'54' death. Bourbon, who led the foremost of the

enemy's troops, found him in this situation, and
expressed regret and pity at the fight. " Pity
I' not me," cried the high-fpirited chevalier,
¢' I die as a man of honour ought, in the dif-
c charge of my duty: They indeed are obje-ts
I of pity, who fight against their king, their
c country, and their oath." The marquis de
Pescara, passing obon after, manifested his admi-
ration of Bayard's virtues, as well as his sorrow
for his fate, with the generosity of a gallant ene-
my; and finding that he could not be removed
with safety from that spot, ordered a tent to be
pitched there, and appointed proper persons to
attend him. He died, notwithstanding their
care, as his ancelors for several generations had
done, in the field of battle. Pescara ordered his
body to be embalmed, and sent to his relations;
and such was the refpet paid to military merit in
that age, that the duke of Savoy commanded it
to be received with royal honours in all the cities
of his dominions; in Dauphine, Bayard's native
country, the people of all ranks came out in a
solemn procession to meet it".

BoNNIvET led b:ck the flattered remains of
his army into Fr;nc(; and in one Ihort cam-

: trllc .ir, Epitr. p.

ic . p, clM.

. e Bcllln, 75. Oeuv.
e Briuit. tomn. vi, iRe, ;:.*. I'a:quicr Rccherches, p. 526.

paigrl,

paign, Francis was firipped of all he had pof-B ° o K
fefied in Italy, and left without one ally in that ,-'-~
country. .s54.

WHILE the war, kindled by the emulation of Progre.of

thle refor-

Charles and Francis, spread over so many count- ation in
tries of Europe, Germany enjoyed a profound Germany.
tranquillity, extremely favourable to the refor-
mation, which continued to make progress daily.
During Luther's confinement in his retreat at
Wartburg, Carloftadius, one of his disciples,
animated with the fime zeal, but pofleffed of less
prudence and moderation than his matter, began
to propagate wild and dangerous opinions, chiefly
among the lower people. Encouraged by his ex-
hortations, they rose in several villages of Saxony,
broke into the churches with tumultuary vio-
lence, and threw down and destroyed the images
with which they were adorned. These irregular
and outrageous proceedings were so repugnant
to all the eleaor's cautious maxims, that, if
they had not received a timely check, they could
hardly have failed of alienating from the re-
formers a prince, no less jealous of his own au-
thoriry, than afraid of giving offence to the
emperor, and other patrons of the ancient opi-
nions. Luther, sensible of the danger, immedi-
ately quitted his retreat, without waiting for
Frederick's permiflion, and returned to Wittem-
berg. Happily for the reformation, the venera- Ma rh 6,
tion for his peribn and authority were still so
great, that his appearance alone lfppreffed that

f,)irir

B 0o K spirit of extravagance which began to seize his

IlL.
'-- --'party. Carloftadius and his fanatical followers,

P4-' struck dumb by his rebukes, declared that they

heard the voice of an angel, not of a manx.

Luthesr BEFORE Luther left his retreat, he had begun
the Bib:e. to translate the Bible into the German tongue,

an undertaking of no less difficulty than iln-
portance, of which he was extremely fond, and
for which he was well qualified: He had a cor-
petent knowledge in the original languages; a
thorough acquaintance with the fvyle and senti-
ments of the inspired writers; and though his
compositions in Latin were rude and barbarous,
he was reckoned a great masker of the purity of
his mother tongue, and could express himriii'
with all the elegance of which it is capable. By
his own airduous application, together with the
afliftance of Melancthon and several other of his
dilciples, he finished part of the New Tellament
in the year 1522; and the publicationof it proved
more fatal to the church of Rome, than that of
all his own works. It was read with wonderful
avidity and attention by persons of every rank.
They were astonished at discovering how con-
trary the precepts of the Author of our religion
are, to the inventions of thole priests who pre-
tended to be his vicegerents; and having now
in their hand the rule of faith, they thought
tlhe!ici ves qualified, by applying it, to judge of

' ;.: d. 'Ii, 5z. Sex. cklcildl. 1th5.

the

the eftablilhed opinions, and to pronounce when B O oK
they were conformable to the flandard, or when _--
they departed from it. The great advantages 4'
arising from Luther's tranfiation of the Bible,
encouraged the advocates for reformation, in the
other countries of Europe, to imitate his example)
and to publish versions of the Scriptures in their
rcfpective languages.

ABOUT this time, Nuremberg, Francfort, Sv.erei
I-Tamburgh, and several other cities in Germany lih the.

rites nt the

of the tirft rank, openly embraced the reformed popifl
religion, and by the authority of their magi- churh-
ftrates abolished the mals, and the other fuperiti-
tious rites of popery Y. The elector of Branden-
burgh, the dukes of Brunswick and Lunenburgh,
and prince of Anhalt, became avowed patrons of
Luther's opinions, and countenanced the preach-
ing of them among their subjects.

THE court of Rome beheld this growing de- MerfurM

fetion with great concern; and Adrian's first care by .Adr^in
after his arrival in Italy, had been to deliberate 'o de to
with the cardinals, concerning the proper means Ph" Ra'f,
of putting a flop to it. This poie was profound- matlun.
ly skilled in scholastic theology, and having been
early taken notice of on that account, he fill
retained such an exceflive admiration of the science
to which he owed his reputation and success in
life, that he confidered Luther's invettives against

7 Seckend. 241. Chytrxi Cuntinr. Kr;:zii, :03.

the

B o O K the fchoolmen, particularly Thomas Aquinas, as
A- _- little less than blalphemy. All the tenets of that
1524I do&or appeared to him so clear and irrefragable,

that he supposed every person who called in quef.
tion or contradited them, to be either blinded
by ignorance, or to be asing in opposition to
the conviction of his own mind: Of course, no
pope was ever more bigoted or inflexible with
regard to points of do&trine than Adrian; he not
only maintained them as Leo had done, because
they were ancient, or because it was dangerous
for the church to allow of innovations, but he
adhered to them with the zeal of a theologian,
and with the tenaciousness of a disputant. At
the fame time his own manners being extremely
simple, and uninfected with any of the vices
which reigned in the court of Rome, he was as
sensible of its corruptions as the reformers them-
selves, and viewed them with no less indignation.
The brief which he addressed to the diet of the
November, empire assembled at Nuremberg, and the in-

:s5- iftru&ions he gave Cheregato, the nuncio whonm

he sent hither, were framed agreeably to theie
views. On the one hand, he condemned Lu-
ther's opinions with more asperity and rancour of
expreflion than Leo had ever tfed; he severely
censured the princes of Germany for fiffleririg
him to spread his pernicious tenets, by their
neglecting to execute the edi& of the diet at
Worms, and required them, if Luther did not
instantly retrat his errors, to deL'toy him with
fire as a gangrened and incurable member, in

7 like

like manner as Dathan and Abiram had been cut B o 0 K
off by Moses, Ananias and Sapphira by the
apostles, and John Huss and Jerome of Prague 's"'
by their anceftorsz. On the other hand, he,
with great candour, and in the most explicit
terms, acknowledged the corruptions of the Ro-
man court to be the source from which had flowed
most of the evils the church now felt or dreaded;
he promised to exert all his authority towards
reforming these abuses, with as much dispatch
as the nature and inveteracy of the disorders
would admit; and he requested of them to give
him their advice with regard to the most effec-
tual means of suppressing that new heresy which
had sprung up among them'.

THE members of the diet, after praising the Dt-.fNU.

pope's pious and laudable intentions, excused pooa6,
tlemfelves for not executing the edi&of Worms, cKunl,
by alleging that the prodigious increase of Lu- h Wyeper
ther's followers, as well as the averGion to the
court of Rome among their other subjects on
account of its innumerable exa&ions, rendered
such an attempt not only dangerous, but im-
pofible. They affirmed that the grievances of
Germany, which did not arile fiom imaginary
injuries, but from impnfitions no less real than
intolerable, as his Holiness would learn from a
catalogue of them which they intended to lay

Z Faic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. 34z.
* Ibid. p. 345.

before

B 0 0 K before him, called now for some new and effica-
_-_ cious remedy; and, in their opinion, the only

'5'4. remedy adequate to the disease, or which afford-

ed them any hopes of feeing the church restored
to soundness and vigour, was a General Council.
Such a council, therefore, they advised him,
after obtaining the emperor's content, to assemble
without delay, in one of the great cities of
Germany, that all who had right to be present
might deliberate with freedom, and propose their
opinions with such boldness, as the dangerous
situation of religion at this juncture required'.

Artifies of THE nuncio, more artful than his mailer, and
the nuncio
toeludeit. better acquainted with the political views and

interests of the Roman court, was flartled at
the proposition of a council; and easily foresaw
how dangerous such an assembly might prove, at
a time when many openly denied the papal au-
thority, and the reverence and fubmiflion yielded
to it visibly declined among all. For that reason
he employed his utmott address, in order to
prevail on the members of the diet to proceed
themselves with greater severity against the Lu-
theran heresy, and to relinquilh their proposal
concerning a general council to be held in Ger-
many. They, perceiving the nuncio to be more
solicitous about the interefs of the Roman court,
than the tranquillity of the empire, or purity of
the church, remained inflexible, and continued

b Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. p. 346.

to

to prepare the catalogue of their grievances to B 0.0 K
be presented to the pope'. The nuncio, that he - -'
might not be the bearer of a remonstrance so dif- '5'
agreeable to his court, left Nuremberg abruptly,
without taking leave of the diet4.

THE secular princes accordingly, for the eccle- The dlct

fiafticks, although they gave no opposition, did of an lull-
not think it decent to join with them, drew tp aned tothe
the lift (so famous in the German annals) of an P"e'
hundred grievances, which the empire imputed
to the iniquitous dominion of the papal fee.
This lift contained grievances much of the fame
nature with that prepared under the reign of
Maximilian. It would be tedious to enumerate
each of them they complained of the umns ex-
afled for dispensations, absolutions, and indul-
gences; of the expence arising from the law-suits
carried to Rome of the innumerable abuses
occasioned by reservations, commendams, and
annates; of the exemption from civil jurifdic-
tion which the clergy had obtained; of the arts
by which they brought all ficular causes under
the cognizance of the ecclefiafticaljudges; of the
indecent and profligate lives which not a few of
the clergy led; and of various other particulars,
many of which have already been mentioned
among the circumstances which contributed to
the favourable reception, or to the quick pro-
grefs of Luther's dotrines. In the end they con-

Fafcic. Rer. Exper. & Fugiend. 349. t Ibid. 376.
VOL., 1. 'I cluded,

B 0 0 K eluded, that if the holy fee did not speedily de-
<- -.- liver them from thoie intolerable burdens, they

s''* had determined to endure them no longer, and

would employ the power and authority with
which God had entrusted them, in order to pro-
cure relief".

'The reterf INSTEAD of such severities against Luther and
~ Qthe aie(C,
Msrch 6, his followers as the nuncio had recommended,

J52 3 the recess or edi& of the diet contained only a

general. injunction to all ranks of men to wait
with patience for the determinations of the coun-
cil which was to be assembled, and in the mean
time not to publish any new opinions contrary
to the eRablilhed dotrines of the church; to-
gether with an admonition to all preachers to
abstain from matters of controversy in their dif-
courses to the people, and to confine themselves
to the plain and inftruaive truths of religion f.

Thli diet o TRE reformers derived great advantage from
great benefit
totheaR. the tranfations of this diet, as they afforded
formation. them the fullet and most authentick evidence

that gross corruptions prevailed in the court of
Rome, and that the empire was loaded by the
clergy with insupportable burdens. With regard
to the former, they had now the testimony of
the pope himself, that their invetives and aceu-
fations were not malicious or ill-founded. As
to the latter, the representatives of the Ger-
e Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. 354. Ibid. 348.

manick

manick body, in an assembly where the patrons B °° K
of the new opinions were far from being the most _
numerous or powerful, had pointed out as the 5*4.
chief grievances of the empire, those very prac-
tices of the Romish church against which Luther
and-his disciples were accustomed to declaim.
Accordingly, in all their controverfal writings
after this period, they often appealed to Adrian's
declaration, and to the hundred grievances, in
confirmation of whatever they advanced concern-
ing the dissolute manners, or insatiable ambition
and rapaciousness of the papal court.

AT Rome, Adrian's conduct was confidered as Adriil'3

a proof of the molt childish simplicity and im- ctnl,,re at
prudence. Men trained up amidst the artifices
and corruptions of the papal coujt, and ac-
customed to judge of actions not by what was
just, but by what was useful, were aftonilhed at
a pontiff, who, departing from the wife maxims
of his predeceflors, acknowledged disorders which
he ought to have concealed; and forgetting his
own dignity, asked advice of those, to whom he
was entitled to prescribe. By such an excess of
impolitick sincerity, they were afraid that, in-
stead of reclaiming, he would render the enemies
of the church more presumptuous, and instead of
extinguishing heresy, would weaken the founda-
tions of the papal power, or itop the chief sources
from which wealth flowed into the churchs. For

s F. Paul. Hiit. of Counc. p. z8. Pallavic. HiR. 58.

T 2 this

B 1 0 K this reason they industriously oppoled all his

-,-i 'Ic:hemes of reformation, and by throwing objec-
5:4. tions and difficulties in his way, endeavoured to

retard or to defeat the execution of them. Adrian,
amazed on the one hand, at the obstinacy of the
Lutherans, difgulled on the other, with the
manners and maxims of the Italians, and finding
himself unable to correct either the one or the
other, often lamented his own situation, and
often looked back with pleasure on that period
of his life when he was only dean of Louvain,
a more humble but happier flation, in which
little was expeced from him, and there was no-
thing to frustrate his good intentions'.

CnUl;ee CLEMENT VII. his successor, excelled Adrian
geiunf L.i- as much in the arts of government, as he was
threr, and
1,i, die.d of inferior to him in purity of life, or uprightness
a zenerat
tI.LII. of intention. He was animated not only with

the aversion which all popes naturally bear to a
council, but having gained his own elecion by
means very uncanonical, he was afraid of an
aflembly that might fubie' it to a scrutiny which
it could not stand, IHe determined, therefore,
by every possible means to elude the demands of
the Germans, both with refpe& to the calling of
a council, and reforming abuses in the papal
court, which the ralhnefs and incapacity of his
predeccffir had brought upon him. For this
puFpofe, he made choice of cardinal Campeggio,

h Jcvii Vit. Adr. p. 11.

an

an artful man, often entrusted by the popes with B o l K
negociations of importance, as his nuncio to the -.
diet of the empire aflembled again at Nurem- s'5.
berg.

CAMPEGGIO, without taking any notice of 'Febhry.

The r. eoci-

what had palred in the las meeting, exhorted the ation (if ;i
diet in a long difcourti, to execute the cdict of "e,,. diet

at Niiremo

Worms with vigour, as the only effecn;il means b"I.,
of fupprefmng Luther's doctrines. The diet, in
return, desired to know the pope's intentions
concerning the council, and the redrrls of the
hundred grievances. The formner, the nuncio
endeavoured to elude by general and unmeaning
declarations of the pope's resolution to purliue
'such measures as would be for the greatest good
of the church. With regard to the latter, as the
catalogue of grievances did not reach Rome till
after Adrian's death, and of conlfquence had not
been regularly laid before the present pope,
Campeggio took advantage of this circumstance
to decline making any definitive answer to them
in Clement's nane; though, at the fame time,
he observed that their catalogue of g:ievances
contained many particulars extremely indecent
and undutiful, and that the publiflhing it by their
own authority was highly difrefpetful to the
Roman fee. In the end, he renewed his demand
of their proceeding with vigour against Luther
and his adherents. But though an ambaftrdor
from the emperor, who was at that time very :,"i41ll
£o)!icious to gain the pope, warmly ifeconded the effca,

T 3 nuncio,

B o0 K nuncio, with many professions of his maitcr's zeal

for the honour and dignity of the papal fee, the
Apri ,8. recess of the diet was conceived in terms of almost

the fame import with the former, without enjoin-
ing any additional severity against Luther and
his partyi.

BEFORE he left Germany, Campeggio, in order

to amuse and soothe the people, published cer-
tain articles for the amendment of some disorders
and abuses which prevailed among the inferior
clergy; but this partial reformation, which fell
so far short of the expecations of the Lutherans,
and of the demands of the diet, gave no fatisfac-
tion, and produced little effet. The nuncio,
with a cautious hand, tenderly lopped a few
branches; the Germans aimed a deeper blow,
and by striking at the root wished to exterminate
the evilk.

i Scckend. 286. Sleid. Hist. 66. k Scckend. 292,

.t

/
t

# BOOK IV.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IV.
T HE expulsion of the French, both out of D °°

the Milanese, and the republick of Genoa, --

was confidered by the Italians as the conclusion vics0of
of the war between Charles and Francis; and as ,ttes with
they began immediately to be apprehensive of the c'fl.,l'
emperor, when they saw no power remaining in Fr'fci,,
Italy capable either to controul or oppose him,
they longed ardently for the re-establishment of
peace. Having procured the restoration of Sforza
to his paternal dominions, which had been their
chief motive for entering into confederacy with
Charles, they plainly discovered their intention
to contribute no longer towards increasing the
emperor's superiority over his rival, which was
already the object of their jealousy. The pope
especially, whose natural timidity increased his

T 4 fifpicions

i 0 I K suspicions of Charles's designs, endeavoured bv

IV.

.---' his rernonftrances to inspire him with modera-

ji24' tion, and incline him to peace.

Cli rli rc- BUT the emperor, intoxicated with fucceli,
·::iTralle. and urged on by his own ambition, no leis than

by Bourbon's desire of revenge, contemned Cle-
ment's admonitions, and declared his resolution
of ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to
invade Provence, a part of his rival's dominions,
w here, as he least dreaded an attack, he was Icaft
prepared to resist it. His most experienced mi-
nifters dissuaded him from undertaking such an
enterprize with a feeble army, and an exhausted
treasury: But he relied so much on having ob-
tained the concurrence of the king of England,
and on the hopes which Bourbon, with the con-
fidence and credulity natural to exiles, enter-
tained of being joined by a numerous body of
his partisans as soon as the Imperial troops
should enter France, that he persisted obflinately
in the mealure. Henry undertook to furnish an
hundred thousand ducats towards defraying the
expence of the expedition during the first month,
and had it in his choice either to continue the
payment of that umr monthly, or to invade Pi-
cardy before the end of July with a powerful
army. The emperor engaged to attack Guienne
at the fame time with a considerable body of
men; and if these enterprizes proved successful,
they agreed, that Bourbon, besides the territories
which he had loft, ihould be put in poffeflion of

Provence,

Provence, with the title of king, and fliould do D 0 0 K
homage to Henry as the lawful king of France, -
for his new dominions. Of all the parts of this 524.
extensive but extravagant projec, the invasion of
Provence was the only one which was executed.
For although Bourbon, with a scrupulous deli-
cacy, altogether unexpected after the part whicl
lie had aftcd, positively refuteld to acknowledge
Henry's title to the crown of F'rance, and there-
by absolved him from any obligation to promote
the enterprize, Charles's ecagernefs to carry his
own plan into execution did not in any degree
abate. The army he employed for that purpole
amounted only to eighteen thousand men; the
supreme command of which was given to the
marquis de Pescara, with inltrueions to pay the
greatest deference to Bourbon's advice in all his
pperations. Pescara passed the Alps without rhe lme-

r alif'f enlt

opposition, and entering Provence, laid iege to povel,.,
Marseilles. Bourbon had advised him rather to Aul't .
march towards Lyons, in the neighbourhood of
which city his territories were situated, and where
of course his influence was molt extensive: Buc
the emperor was so desirous to get poffefiion of a
port, which would, at all times, secure hiln eafv
access into France, that by his authority he over-
ruled the ConRfable's opinion, and direeted Pelc
cara to make the reduction of Maricilles his chief
obje&t %

Guic, 1. xv. z3, &c. Mem. de Bellay, p. So.

FHRANCIS

B °0 KC FRANCIS, who foresaw, but was unable to pre-

AV.

t'- .-' vent this attempt, took the most proper precau-
pudent tions to defeat it. He laid waste the adjacent
^ai-Tci country, in order to render it more difficult for

the enemy to subsist their army; he razed the
suburbs of the city, strengthened its fortifications,
and threw into it a numerous garrison under the
command of brave and experienced officers.
To these, nine thousand of the citizens, whom
their dread of the Spanish yoke inspired with
contempt of danger, joined themselves; by their
united courage and industry, all the efforts of Pes-
cara's military skill, and of Bourbon's a&ivity and
revenge, were rendered abortive. Francis, mean-
while, had leisure to assemble a powerful army
under the walls of Avignon, and no sooner be-
gan to advance towards Marseilles, than the Im-
perial troops, exhausted by the fatigues of a siege
which had lasted forty days, weakened by dif-

imperialti eases, and almost destitute of provisions, retired
forced to
retret. with precipitation towards Italyb.
eypt. 19.

IF, during these operations of the army in Pro-

vence, either Charles or Henry had attacked
France in the manner which they had projeted,
that kingdom must have been exposed to the
most imminent danger. But on this, as well as
on many other occasions, the emperor found that
the extent of his revenues was not adequate to

b Guic. 1.x. 277. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 93.

the

the greatness of his power, or the ardour of his B o V K
ambition, and the want of money obliged him, -
though with much reluctance, to circumscribe ,524.
his plan, and to leave part of it unexecuted.
Henry, difgulfed at Bourbon's refusing to recog-
nize his right to the crown of France; alarmed
at the motions of the Scots, whom the folicita-
tions of the French king had persuaded to march
towards the borders of England; and no longer
incited by his minil2er, who was become ex-
tremely cool with regard to all the emperor's in-
terelts, took no measures to support an enter-
prize, of which, as of all new undertakings, he
had been at firIt cxceffivcly fond'.

IF the king of Fr,'nce had been satisfied with Francis .

!ame! with

having delivered his fubjeits from this formidable his uc,,s.
invasion, if he had thought it enough to fliew
all Europe the facility with which the internal
strength of his dominions enabled him to resist
the imprefflon of a foreign enemy, even when
seconded by the abilities and powerful efforts of
a rebellious subject, the campaign, notwithftand-
ing the loss of the Milanese, would have been fat
from ending ingloriously. But Francis, animated
with courage more becoming a soldier than a
general; pushed on by ambition, enterprizing
rather than considerate; and too apt to be elated
with success; was fond of every undertaking that
seemed bold and adventurous. Such an under-

s Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, Append. N°. 70, 71, 72.

taking,

B °0 K taking, the situation of his affairs, at that june.
*..L_ ture, naturally presented to his view. He had
Rerl,, to under his command one of the most powerful and

vadhe best appointed armies France had ever brought

into the field, which he could not think of dif-
banding without having employed it in any ser-
vice. The Imperial troops had been obliged to
retire almost ruined by hard duty, and dilhearten-
ed with ill success; the Milanese had been left
altogether without defence; it was not impossible
to reach that country before Pescara, with his
lhattered forces, could arrive there; or if fear
ihould add speed to their retreat, they were in no
condition to make head against his freth and nu-
merous troops; and Milan would now, as in
former instances, submit without resistance to a
bold invader. These considerations, which were
not destitute of plausibility, appeared to his fan-
guine temper to be of the utmost weight. In
vain did his wisest ministers and generals reprerent
to him the danger of taking the field at a season
so far advanced, with an army compored chiefly
of Swiss and Germans, to whose caprices he
would be subjea in all his operations, and on
whose fidelity his safety must absolutely depend.
In vain did Louise of Savoy advance by hally
journies towards Provence, that she might exert
all her authority in dissuading her son from such
a ra(h enterprize. Francis disregarded the remon-
firances of his fubjets; and that he might fiavC
himself the pain of an interview with his mother,
whose counsels he had determined to rejet, he

began

began his march before her arrival; appointing B o o K
her, however, by way of atonement for that ne- __
gle&, to be regent of the kingdom during his A^poit24
absence. Bonnivet, by his persuasions, contri- higen'dc
buted not a little to confirm Francis in this refo- i6 ,"s *il'

lince.

lution. That favourite, who strongly relembled
his matter in all the defecive parts of his charac-
ter, was led, by his natural imnpetuofity, warmly
to approve of such an enterprize; and being
prompted betides by his impatience to revisit a
Milanese lady, of whom he had been deeply ena-
moured during his late expedition, he is said, by
his flattering descriptions of her beauty and ac-
complifhments, to have inspired Francis, who
was extremely susceptible of such passions, with
an equal desire of feeing her'.

THE French passed the Alps at Mount Cenis; Opcrationi

and as their success depended on dispatch, they ad- lnsa.
vanced with the greatest diligence. Pescara, who
had been obliged to take a longer and more diffi-
cult route by Monaco and Final, was soon in-
formed of their intention; and being fcnfible that
nothing but the presence of his troops could
save the Milanese, marched with such rapidity,
that he reached Alva on the fame day that the
French army arrived at Varcelli. Francis, in-
ltru&ed by Bonnivet's error in the former cam-
paign, advanced direaly towards Milan, where
the unexpected approach of an enemy Ib power-

d Ocuv. de Brant. tom. vi. 253.

z ful

B o° K ful, occasioned such consternation and disorder,

c-t-^ .that although Pescara entered the ity with Tome
*5 4 of his best troops, he found that the defence of

it could not be undertaken with any probability
of success; and having thrown a garrison into
the citadel, retired through one gate, while the
French were admitted at another'.

Embrr,-r THESE brisk motions of the French monarch
sing tate of
thie mpe disconcerted all the schemes of defence which

the Imperialists had formed. Never, indeed, did
generals attempt to oppole a formidable inva-
sion under such circumstances of disadvantage.
Though Charles possessed dominions more exten-
five than any other prince in Europe, and had,
at this time, no other army but that which was
employed in Lombardy, which did not amount
to sixteen thousand men, his prerogative in all
his different states was so limited, and his sub-
je&s, without whose consent he could raise no
taxes, discovered such unwillingness to burden
themselves with new or extraordinary impositions,
that even this finall body of troops was in want
of pay, of ammunition, of provisions, and of
clothing. In such a situation, it required all the
wisdom of Lannoy, the intrepidity of Pescara,
and the implacable resentment of Bourbon, to
preserve them from finking under despair, and
to inspire them with resolution to attempt, or
sagacity to discover, what was essential to their

Mem. de Bellay, p. 81. Guic. I. xv. 278.

safety.

safety. To the efforts of their genius, and the B 0° K
activity of their zeal, the emperor was more in- ,--..-
debted for the preservation of his Italian domi- '5s4.
nions than to his own power. Lannoy, by mort-
gaging the revenues of Naples, procured some
money, which was immediately applied towards
providing the army with whatever was most ne-
ceffary'. Pescara, beloved and almost adored
by the Spaniff troops, exhorted them to shew the
world, by their engaging to serve the emperor,
in that dangerous exigency, without making any
immediate demand of pay, that they were ani-
mated with sentiments of honour very different
from those of mercenary soldiers; to which pro-
position, that gallant body of men, with an un-
exampled generosity, gave their consent . Bour-
bon having railed a considerable fum, by pawn-
ing his jewels, set out for Germany, where his in-
fluence was great, that by his pretence he might
haften the levying of troops for the Imperial
service".

FRANCIS, by a fatal error, allowed the empe- Francic be.

ror's generals time to derive advantage from all ,' 'P",.
there operations. Instead of pursuing the enemy,
who retired to Lodi on the Adda, an untenable
post, which Pescara had resolved to abandon on

r Guic. 1. xv. 280.
s jovii Vit. Davali, lib. v. p,.386. Sandov. vol. i. 621.

Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 94, &c, Vida dell Emper.
Carlos V. per Vera y Zuniga, p. ;6.

h Mom. de Bellay, p. 83.

5 his

B O )o K' his approach, he, in compliance with the opi

A-_-v .nion of Bonnivet, though contrary to that of his
otsber . other generals, laid siege to Pavia on the Tefino;

a town, indeed, of great importancei the poffeltl
lion of which would have opened to him all the
fertile country lying on the banks of that river.
But the fortifications of the place were strong;
it was dangerous to undertake a drficult siege
at so late a season; and the Imperial generals,
lenfible of its consequence, had thrown into the
town a garrison compored of fix thousand vete-
rans, under the command of Antonio de Leyva,
an officer of high rank; of great experience; of
a patient, but enterprizing courage; fertile in
refourccs ambitious of diftinguithing himself;
and capable, for that reason, as well as from his
having been long accultomed both to obey and
to command, of suffering or performing any thing
in order to procure success,
atvi;n- FRANCIS prosecuted the siege with obstinacy

equal to the rathnefs with which he had under-
taken it, During three months, every thing
known to the engineers of that age, or that could
be effected by the valour of his troops, was at-
tempted, in order to reduce the place; while
Lannoy and Pescara, unable to obftruE his ope-
rations, were obliged to remain in such an igno-
minious state of ination, that a Pasquinade was
published at Rome, offering a reward to any per-
son who could find the Imperial army, loft in the
month of Oaober in the mountains between

France

France and Lombardy, and which had not been B °° K
heard of since that time'. IY

. Sl4.

LEYVA, well acquainted with the difficulties The towa

under which his countrymen laboured, and the detfedcd.
impollibility of their facing, in the field, such
a powerful army as formed the siege of Pavia,
placed his only hopes of safety in his own vigi-
lance and valour. The efforts of both were ex-
traordinary, and in proportion to the importance
of the place, with the defence of which he was
entrusted. He interrupted the approaches of the
French by frequent and furious sallies. Behind
the breaches made by their artillery, he ereAed
new works, which appeared to be scarcely inferior
in flrength to the original fortifications. He
repulsed the besiegers in all their assaults; and
by his own example, brought not only the garri-
son, but the inhabitants, to bear the mods in-
tolerable fatigues, and to encounter the greatest
dangers without murmuring. The rigour of the
season conspired with his endeavours in retarding
the progress of the French. Francis attempting
to become matter of the town, by diverting the
course of the Tefino, which is its defence on one
fide, a sudden inundation of the river destroyed,
in one day, the labour of many weeks, and
swept away all the mounds which his army had
raised with infinite toil, as well as at great ex.
pence '.

i Sandov. i. 608.
k Guic. 1. xv. zSo. Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. 95.
VOL. II. U NOT.

B 0 0 K NOTWITHSTANDING the flow progress of the

IV.

L

.-'I besiegers, and the glory which Leyva acquired
Th, ppe by his gallant defence, it was not doubted but
conelud-s a
traty of that tile town would at laR be obliged to fur-
·euuaiy. render. The pope, who already confidered the

French arms as superior in Italy, became impa-
tient to disengage himself from his connecions
with the emperor, of whose designs he was ex-
tremely jealous, and to enter into terms of friend-
:hip with Francis. As Clement's timid and cau-
tious temper rendered him incapable of following
the bold plan which Leo had formed, of deliver-
ing Italy from the yoke of both the rivals, he
returned to the more obvious and pracicable
scheme of employing the power of the one to
balance and to restrain that of the other. For
this reason, he did not diffemnble his fatisfaaion
at feeing the French king recover Milan, as he
hoped that the dread of such a neighbour would
be some check upon the emperor's ambition,
which no power in Italy was now able to con-
troul. He laboured hard to bring about a peace
that would secure Francis in poffellon of his new
conqueris; and as Charles, who was always in-
flexible in the prosecution of his schemes, rejet-
ed the propoition with disdain, and with bitter
exclamations against the pope, by whose perfua-
sions, while cardinal de Medici, he had been
induced to invade the Milanese, Clement im-
mediately concluded a treaty of neutrality with

6' tlh

the king of France, in which the republick of B °0o K
Florence was included'.

FRANCIS having, by this tranfa&ion, deprived S","i,

the emperor of his two most powerful allies, and Nailes.
at the fame time having secured a passage for his
own troops through their territories, formed a
scheme of attacking the kingdom of Naples,
hoping either to over-run that country, which
was left altogether without defence, or that at
least such an unexpected invasion would oblige
the viceroy to recal part of the Imperial army
out of the Milanese. For this purpose he order-
ed fix thousand men to march under the com-
mand of John Stuart duke of Albany. But Pes-
cara foreseeing that the effeEt of this diversion
would depend entirely upon the operations of the
armies in the Milanese, persuaded Lannoy to
disregard Albany's motions ', and to bend his
whole force against the king himself; so that
Francis not only weakened his army very unfea-
fonably by this great detachment, but incurred
the reproach of engaging too rashly in chimerical
and extravagant projects.

BY this time the garrison of Pavia was reduced Eiror, of

to extremity; their ammunition and provisions Bbon.
began to fail; the Germans, of whom it was
chiefly composed, having received no pay for

C Guic, I. xv z8z. z85.
8 Guic. I. xv. z85.

U 2 seven

B V0 K teven months", threatened to deliver the town

,_< into the enemy's hands, and could hardly be re-
'52' firained from mutiny by all Leyva's address and

authority. The Imperial generals, who were no
firangers to his situation, saw the necessity of
marching without loss of time to his relief. This
they had now in their power: Twelve thou-
sand Germans, whom the zeal and activity of
Bourbon taught to move with unusual rapidity,
had entered Lombardy under his command, and
rendered the Imperial army nearly equal to that
of the French, greatly diminished by the ab-
fence of the body under Albany, as well as by
the fatigues of the siege, and the rigour of the
season. But the more their troops increased in
riumber, the more sensibly did they feel the dif-
trefs arising from want of money. Far from
having funds for paying a powerful army, they
had scarcely what was sufficient for defraying the
charges of conducting their artillery, and of car-
rying their ammunition and provisions. The
abilities of the generals, however, fupplied'every
defect. .By their own example, as well as by
magnificent promises in name of the emperor,
they prevailed on the troops of all the different
nations which composed their army, to take the
field without pay; they engaged to lead them
directly towards the enemy; and flattered them
with the certain profpet of vicory, which would

C Gold. Polit, Imperial, 875.

at once enrich them with such royal spoils as B 0 0 K
would be an ample reward for all their ser- _
vices. The ioldiers, sensible that, by quitting 's5s'
the army, they would forfeit the vast arrears due
to them, and eager to get poifflion of the pro-
mifed treasures, demanded a battle with all the
impatience of adventurers who fight only for
plunder .

THE I;npei:l. generals, without fuffcring the Thcymarh

i -- i * i < i . touattackthe

ardour of their troops to cool, advanced iname- r.-,ch,.
diately towards the French camp. On the firlt F:e''U'3
intelligence of their approach, Francis called a
council of war, to deliberate what course he
ought to take. All his otficers of greatest expe-
rience were unanimous in advising him to retire,
and to decline a battle with an enemy who courted
it from despair. The leaders of the Imperialists,
they observed, would either be obliged in a few
weeks to disband an army, which they were un-
able to pay, and which they kept together only
by the hope of pillage, or the soldiers enraged
at the non-performance of the promifrs to which
they had trufled, would rife in Iome furious mu-
tiny, which would allow them to think of no-
thing but their own safety: That, meanwhile,
he might encamp in obne tirong pofR, and wait-
ing in safety the arrival of frelh troops from
France and Switzerland, might, before the end
of fFring, take pollfiion of all the Milanele,
without danger, or bloodflied. But in oppofi-

Eryci Pcutcani Hifl. Cifalpina ap. GraLvii Thlc. A ntiquit
Ital. iii. . 1170. 1179.

U 3 tion

B 10 K tion to them, Bonnivet, whose destiny it was to

iV.
v- J give counsels fatal to France during the whole
515.' campaign, represented the ignominy that it would

refle&t on their sovereign, if he should abandon
a siege which he had prosecuted so long, or turn
his back before an enemy to whom he was still
superior in number; and insisted on the necef-
fity of fighting the Imperialists rather than re.
linquifh an undertaking, on the success of which
the king's future fame depended. Unfortunately,
Francis's notions of honour were delicate to an
excess that bordered on what was romantick.
Having often said that he would take Pavia, or
perish in the attempt, he thought himself bound
not to depart from that resolution; and rather
than expose himself to the slightest imputation,
he chose to forego all the advantages which were
the certain consequences of a retreat, and deter-
mined to wait for the Imperialists before the walls
of PaviaP.
Battle of THE Imperial generals found the French so

strongly entrenched, that notwithlfanding the
powerful motives which urged them on, they
hesitated lung before they ventured to attack
them; but at last the neceflities of the belfeged,
and the murmurs of their own soldiers, obliged
Feb. «4. theml to put every thing to hazard. Never did

armies engage with greater ardour, or with an
higher opinion of the importance of the battle

P Guic. 1. xv. 291.

which

which they were going to f lht; never were troops B O

°

more strongly animated witii emulation, national
antipathy, mutual refentmenr, and all the paflions '5s'
which inlpire obltirate bravery. On the one
hand, a gallant young monarch, f-conded by a
generous nobility, and followed by fubjefts to
whose natural iinpetuofity, indignation at the op-
poftion which they had encountcred, added new
force, contended for vitory ant honour. On
the other fide, troops more completely disciplined,
and conducted by generals of greater abilities,
fought from necefitty, with courage heightened
by despair. The Imperialilts, however, were
unable to resist the firil efforts of the French va-
lour, and their firmest battalions began to give
way. But the fortune of the day was quickly
changed. The Swiss in the service of France,
unmindful of the reputation of their country for
fidelity and martial glory, abandoned their post
in a cowardly manner. Leyva, with his garri-
son, sallied out and attacked the rear of the
French, during the heat of the a&tion, with such
fury as threw it into confusion; and .Pescara fall-
ing on their cavalry, with the Imperial horse,
among whom he had prudently intermingled a
considerable number of Spanilh foot, armed with
the heavy muflrets then in use, broke this for-
midable body by an unusual method of attack,
against which they were wholly unprovided. The The French
rout became universal; and refirance ceased in Lrmyuudt.
almof: every part, but where the king was in

U 4 pcrfon,

B ° K person, who fought now, not for fame or vicory,

_ but for safety. Though wounded in several
ss.* places, and thrown from his horse, which was

killed under him, Francis defended himself on
foot with an heroick courage. Many of his bravest
officers gathering round him, and endeavouring
to save his life at the expence of their own, fell
at his feet. Among these was Bonnivet, the
author of this great calamity, who alone died
unlamented. The king exhausted with fatigue,
and scarcely capable of farther refifance, was left
almost alone, exposed to the fury of some Spanifil
soldiers, strangers to his rank, and enraged at
his obstinacy. At that moment came up Ponm-
perant, a French gentleman, who had entered to-
gether with Bourbon into the emperor's service,
and placing himself by the fide of the monarch
against whom he had rebelled, aflifted in pro-
teEting him from the violence of the soldiers; at
the fame time beseeching him to surrender to
Bourbon, who was not far distant. Imminent as
the danger was which now surrounded Francis,
he rejected with indignation the thoughts of an
tacion which would have afforded filch matter
of triumph to his traitorous fubjets; and calling
for Lannoy, who happened likewise to be near
at hand, gave up his sword to him; which he,

taken ri. kneeling to kifs the king's hand, received with
S"on'. profound refpe&; and tacing his own sword

from his fide, presented it to him, faying, That
it did not become so great a monarch to remain

disarmed

disarmed in the presence of one of the emperor's B ° VO I
fubjeas q. i--

TEN thousand men fell on this day, one of

the most fatal France had ever seen. Among
these were many noblemen of the highest diftinc-
tion, who chose rather to perish than to turn their
backs with dishonour. Not a few were taken
prisoners, of whom the most illustrious was Henry
D'Albret, the unfortunate king of Navarre. A
small body of the rear-guard made its escape
under the command of the duke AlenSon; the
feeble garrison of Milan, on the first news of the
defeat, retired without being pursued, by another
road; and in two weeks after the battle, not a
Frenchman remained in Italy.

LANNOY, though he treated Francis with all

the outward marks of honour due to his rank and
character, guarded him with the utmost atten-
tion. He was solicitous, not only to prevent
any possibility of his escaping, but afraid that his
own troops might seize his person, and detain it
as the best security for the payment of their ar-
rears. In order to provide against both these
dangers, he conducted Francis, the day after the
battle, to the strong castle of Pizzichitone near

q Guic. I. xv. 29z. Oeuv.de Brant. vi. 355. Mem.de

Bellay, p.90. Sandov. Hist. i. 638, &c. P. Mart. Ep.80o,
81 . Rufcelli Lcttere de Principi, ii. p. 7o. Ulloa Vit,L
dcll Carlo V. p. 98.

CrCel1onai,

°°0 Cremona, committing him to the cuflody of

IV.
. .---- Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general of the Spaniil

S infantry, an officer of great bravery and of ftrief

honour, but remarkable for that severe and fcru-
pulous vigilance which such a trust required.

FRAuNIS, who formed a judgment of the em-

peror's dispositions by his own, was extremely
desirous that Charles should be informed of his
situation, fondly hoping that, from his generosity
or fynmpathy, he should obtain speedy relief. The
Imneria generals were no lets impatient to give
their fovcreign an early account of the decisive
vitory which they had gained, and to receive
his inlruLtions with regard to their future con-
dust. As the mors certain and expeditious me-
thod of conveying intelligence to Spain, at that
fcafon of the ycar, was by land, Francis gave
the comnmendador Pennalofa, who was charged
with Lannoy's dispatches, a pafport to travel
through France.

BA.4?of CHARLES received the account of this rignal
,,vitoy and unexpected success that had crowned his arms,
Mah ,,. with a moderation, which, if it had been real,

would have done him more honour than the
greatesl victory. Without uttering one word ex-
prelfive of exultation, or of intemperate joy, he
retired immediately into his chapel, and laving
spent an hour in offering up his thanksgivings to
heaven, returned to the pre!fnce-chamber, which
by that time was sild with grandees and foreign

almbaffadors,

ambassadors, aflembled in order to congratulate B 00
him. He accepted of their compliments with a -_-
modest deportment; he lamented the misfortune Iss'
of the captive king, as a striking example of the
fad reverse of fortune, to which the most power-
ful monarchs are fubje&; he sorbad any publick
rejoicings, as indecent in a war carried on among
Christians, reserving them until he mhould obtain
a victory equally illutfrious over the Infidels; and
seemed to take pleasure in the advantage which
he had gained, only as it would prove the occasion
of restoring peace to Christendom,.

CHARLES, however, had already begun to form The

rchemn he

schemes in his own mind, which little fuiced such began to
external appearances. Ambition, not generosity,
was the ruling pafion in his mind; and the
vi&ory at Pavia opened such new and unbounded
profpets of gratifying it, as allured him with
irresistible force: But it being no easy matter to
execute the vast designs which he meditated, he
thought it peceffary, while proper measures were
taking for that purpose, to asseE the greatet
moderation, hoping under that veil to conceal his
real intentions from the other princes of Europe.

MEANWHILE France was filled with confterna- Thegenenl

tion. The king himself had early transmitted ton'na
an account of the rout at Pavia, in a letter to his Ft"'ce.
mother, delivered by Pennalofa, which contain-

$andov. Hit. i. 641. Ulloa Vita deli Carlo V. p. i o.

cd

B °0 K ed only these words, " Madam, all is lolf, ex-

IV. jty'_t cept our honour." The officers who made their

's'ls escape, when they arrived from Italy, brought

such a melancholy detail of particulars as made
all ranks of men sensibly feel the greatness and
extent of the calamity. France, without its so-
vereign, without money in her treasury, without
an army, without generals to command it, and
encompassed on all lides by a victorious and aSive
enemy, seemed to be on the very brink of de-

The Por itrution. But on that occasion the great abilities
dent con.
dtti, ol' he of Louise the regent saved the kingdom, which

the violence of her palions had more than once
exposed to the greatecl danger. Instead of giving
herself up to such lamentations as were natural to
a woman so remarkable for her maternal tender.
ness, she discovered all the foresight, and exerted
all the ativity of a consummate politician. She
afmembled the nobles at Lions, and animated them
by her example no less than by her words, with
such zeal in defence of their country, as its pre-
sent situation required. She collected the remains
of the army which had served in Italy, ransomed
the prisoners, paid the arrears, and put them in a
condition to take the field. She levied new troops,
provided for the security of the frontiers, and
raiscd fums sufficient for defraying there extra-
ordinary expences. Her chief care, however, was
to appease the resentment, or to gain the friendlihip
of the king of England; and from that quarter,
the first ray of comfort broke in upon the French
afFair's.

THOUGH

THouGH Henry, in entering into alliances with B 0o O

IV.

Charles or Francis, seldom followed any regular --
or concerted plan of policy, but was influenced Effs5of
chiefly by the caprice of temporary palions, such thpvacy
occurrences often happened as recalled his atten- H-nryVII.
tion towards that equal balance of power which
it was necessary to keep between the two con-
tending potentates, the preservation of which he
always boasted to be his peculiar office. He had
expected that his union with the emperor might
afford him an opportunity of recovering some
part of those territories in France which had
belonged to his ancestors, and for the fake of
such an acquisition he did not scruple to give
his affitance towards railing Charles to a con-
fiderable pre-eminence above Francis. He had
never dreamt, however, of any event so decisive
and so fatal as the vicory at Pavia, which seem-
ed not only to have broken, but to have anni-
hilated the power of one of the rivals; so that
the prelpe& of the sudden and entire revolution
which this would occasion in the political system,
filled him with the most disquieting apprehen-
sions. He saw all Europe in danger of being
over-run by an ambitious prince, to whose power
there now remained no counterpoise; and though
he himself might at first be admitted, in quality
of an ally, to lome share in the spoils of the
captive monarch, it was easy to difccrn, that with
regard to the manner of making the partition,
as well as his security for keeping pofflelion of

what

B o K what should be allotted him, he must absolutely

V--. depend upon the will of a confederate, to whose
s25s' forces his own bore no proportion. He was fen-

fible, that if Charles were permitted to add any
considerable part of France to the vast dominions
of which he was already malter, his neighbour-
hood would be much more formidable to Eng-
land than that of the ancient French kingsl
while, at the fame time, the proper balance on
the continent, to which England owed both its
safety and importance, would be entirely loft.
Concern for the situation of the unhappy mo-
narch co-operated with there political confidera-
tions; his gallant behaviour in the battle of Pavia
had excited an high degree of admiration, which
never fails of augmenting sympathy; and Henry,
naturally susceptible of generous sentiments, was
fond of appearing as the deliverer of a van-
quilhed enemy from a state of captivity. The
passions of the English minister seconded the in-
clinations of the monarch. Wolfey, who had
not forgotten the disappointment of his hopes in
two successive conclaves, which he imputed chiefly
to the emperor, thought this a proper opportu-
nity of taking revenge; and Louise, courting
the friendship of England with such flattering
fubmillions as were no less agreeable to the king
than to the cardinal, Hcnry gave her secret
alfurances that he would not lend his aid towards
oppressing France, in its present helpless state,
and obliged her to promile that (he would not

content

content to dismember the kingdom even in order B o K
to procure her son's liberty.

BUT as Henry's conncfeions with the emperor

made it necelfary to a't in such a manner as to
five appearances, he ordered publick rejoicings
to be made in his dominions for the success of
the Imperial arms; and as if he had been eager to
seize the present opportunity of ruining the French
monarchy, he lent ambassadors to Madrid, to
congratulate with Charles upon his vitory; to
put him in mind, that he, as his ally, engaged
in one common cause, was entitled to partake in
the fruits of it; and to require that, in com-
pliance with the terms of their confederacy, he
would invade Guienne with a powerful army, in
order to give him poffeflion of that province.
At the fame time, he offered to fend the princess
Mary into Spain or the Low Countries, that Ihe
might be educated under the emperor's diretion,
until the conclusion of the marriage agreed on
between them; and in return for that mark of
his confidence he infifled that Francis lhould be
delivered to him, in consequence of that article
in the treaty of Bruges, whereby each of the
contracting parties was bound to surrender all
usurpers to him whose rights they had invaded.
It was impoflible that Henry could expe& that
the emperor would lifen to theLf extravagant de-
mands, which it was neither his interelt, nor in

, emn. de Bellay, 94. Guic. I. xvi. 318. Herbert.

his

B O K his power to grant. They appear evidently to

_-.--. have been made with no other intention than to
52SS' furnish him with a decent pretext for entering

into such engagements with France as the junc-
ture required'.

On the Tta. IT was among the Italian tates, however, that
i FowCs. the vi&ory at Pavia occasioned the greatef alarm

and terror. That balance of power on which
they relied for their security, and which it had
been the conifant obje& of all their negociations
and refinements to maintain, was destroyed in a
moment. They were exposed by their situation
to feel the first effects of the uncontrouled autho-
rity which Charles had acquired. They observed
many symptoms of a boundless ambition in that
young prince, and were sensible that, as emperor,
or king of Naples, he could either form dan-
gerous pretenflons upon each of their territories,
or invade them with great advantage. They
deliberated, therefore, with much solicitude con-
cerning the means of raising such a force as
might obftru& his progress". But their con-
fultations, conduCted with little union, and exe-
cuted with less vigour, had no effet. Clement,
instead of pursuing the measures which he had
concerted with the Venetians for securing the
liberty of Italy, was so intimidated by Lannoy's

Herbert, p. 64.
Guic. 1. xvi. 300. Rufcelli Lettere de Princ. ii. 74. 76'
&c. Thuani Hilt. lib.i. c. 1 .

7 threates

threats, or overcome by his promires, that he 0 0 K

Iv.

entered into a separate treaty, binding himself to -
advance a considerable fum in return for certain Ai'ir5
emoluments which he was to receive. The money
was instantly paid; Charles afterwards refused to
ratify the treaty; and the pope remained exposed
at once to infamy and to ridicule; to the former,
because he had deserted the publick cause for his
private interest; to the latter, because he had
been a loser by that unworthy aaion".

How dilhonourable soever the artifice might M1cTtny in

the Impe-

be which was employed in order to defraud the rnal ,rry.
pope of this fum, it came very seasonably into
the viceroy's hands, and put it in his power to
extricate himself out of an imminent 'danger.
Soon after the defeat of the French army, the
German troops, which had defended Pavia with
such meritorious courage and perseverance, grow-
ing insolent upon the fame that they had acquired,
and impatient of relying any longer on fruitless
promires with which they had been so often
amuied, rendered themselves masters of the town,
with a resolution to keep poirefllon of it as a fe-
curity for the payment of their arrears; and the
reft of the army discovered a much fironger in-
clination to alfil(, than to puninl the mutineers.
By dividing among them the money exated from
the pope, Lannoy quieted the tumultuous Ger-

x Guic. lib. xvi. 305. Mauroceni Hiftor.Venet. ap. Isc-
tichi dell cofc Vcncz. V. 131. 136.

VOL. II. X mans;

B 0 0 K mans; but though this satisfied their present

Vr.
~- demands, he had so little profpet of being able

' to pay them or his other forces regularly for the

future, and was under such continual apprehen-
sions of their seizing the person of the captive
king, that, not long after, he was obliged to
dismiss all the Germans and Italians in the Impe-
rial service . Thus, from a circumstance that
now appears very singular, but arising naturally
from the constitution of most European govern-
ments in the sixteenth century, while Charles was
fufpeced by all his neighbours of aiming at uni-
versal monarchy, and while he was really form-
ing vast projeas of this kind, his revenues were
so limited, that he could not keep on foot his
victorious army, though it did not exceed twenty-
four thousand men.

The Rmpe- DURINo there transactions, Charles, whose
roes delibe.
rationcon. pretensions to moderation and difintereftecnefs
erning the '
manner of were soon forgotten, deliberated, with the utmost
improving
hi viay. solicitude, how he might derive the greatest ad-

vantages from the misfortune of his adversary.
Some of his .ounfellors advised him to treat
Francis with the magnanimity that became a
victorious prince, and, instead of taking advan-
tage of his situation to impose rigorous condi-
tions, to dismiss him on such equal terms, as
would bind him for ever to his interest by the
ties of gratitude and affection, more forcible as

Y Guic. 1. xvi. p. 302.

well

well as more permanent than any which could B °o K
be formed by extorted oaths and involuntary fti- A-_
pulations. Such an exertion of generosity is not, 's-5S
perhaps, to be expected in the conduc of politi-
cal affairs, and it was far too refined for that prince
to whom ir was proposed. The more obvious,
but less splendid, scheme of endeavouring to
make the utmost of Francis's calamity, had a
greater number in the council to recommend it,
and suited better with the emperor's genius. But
though Charles adopted this plan, he did not
execute it in a proper manner. Instead of mak-
ing one great effort to penetrate into France with
all the forces of Spain and the Low Countries;
instead of crufiing the Italian fates before they
recovered from the consternation which the fuc-
cess of his arms had occasioned, he had recourse
to the artifices of intrigue and negociation. This
proceeded partly from necessity, partly from the
natural disposition of his mind. The situation of
his finances, at that time, rendered it extremely
difficult to carry on any extraordinary armament;
and he himself having never appeared at the
head of his armies, the command of which he
had hitherto committed to his generals, was averse
to bold and martial counsels, and trusted more
to the arts with which he was acquainted. He
laid, besides, too much trefs upon the victory of
Pavia, as if by that event the strength of France
had been annihilated, its resources exhausted, and
the kingdom itself, no less than the person of its
monarch, had been fubjc&ted to his power.

X 2 FULL

B °0 K FULL of this opinion, he determined to set tlt

IV.

- .-A highet price upon Francis's freedom, and having
Ths5^S ordered the count de Roeux to vifir the captive
he propos king in his name, he intruded him to propose
to Frncis. the following articles, as the conditions on which

he would grant him his liberty: That he should
restore Burgundy to the emperor, from whole
ancestors it had been unjutly wrested; that he
ihould surrender Provence and Dauphine, that
they might be erected into an independent king-
dom for the conltable Bourbon; that he ihould
make full fatisfa&ion to the king of England for
all his claims, and finally renounce the preten-
sions of France to Naples, Milan, or any other
territory in Italy. When Francis, who had hi-
therto flattered himself that he should be treated
by the emperor with the generosity becoming
one great prince towards another, heard these
rigorous conditions,, he was so transported with
indignation, that, drawing his dagger hastily, he
cried out, " 'Twere better that a king thould
die thus." Alarcon, alarmed at his vehemence,
laid hold on his hand; but though he loon re-
covered greater composure, he still declared, in
the most solemn manner, that he would rather
remain a prisoner during life, than purchalf li-
berty by such ignominious concefrions'.

Franc;s rT. THIS mortifying discovery of the emperor's
ripd prionr intentions, greatly augmented Francis's chagrin
*, Spain.

z MCcm. de BCll.av, r/.i. Fcrreras Hlil. ix.' '.

anid

and impatience under his confinement, and must B 0 K
have driven him to absolute despair, if he had - J
not laid hold of the only thing which could still 52S*
administer any comfort to him. He persuaded
himself that the conditions which Roeux had pro-
posed, did not flow originally from Charles him-
self, but were ditated by the rigorous policy of
his Spanish council; and that therefore he might
hope, in one personal interview with him, to do
more towards hastening his own deliverance, than
could be effeeed by long negociations passing
through the subordinate hands of his minliters.
Relying on this lippofition, which proceeded
from too favourable an opinion of the emperor's
character, he offered to visit him in Spain, and
was willing to be carried thither as a fpeaacle to
that haughty nation. Lannoy employed all his
address to confirm him in these sentiments; and
concerted with him in secret the manner of exe-
cuting this resolution. Francis was so eager on
a scheme which seemed to open Tome profi)eC of
liberty, that he furnifficd the gallies necessary for
the voyage, Charles being at that time unable
to set any fleet to sea. The viceroy, without
communicating his intentions either to Bourbon
or Pescara, conduEed his prisoner towards Genoa,
under pretence of transporting him by sea to
Naples; though soon after they set fail, he order-
ed the pilots to fleer directly for Spain; but the
wind happening to carry them near the French
coast, the unfortunate monarch had a full pro-
Ipedt of his own dominions, towards which he

X 3 cast

B v0 K cat many a sorrowful and desiring look. They
L -** landed, however, in a few days at Barcelona, and

Is$s' soon after Francis was lodged, by the emperor's
August 4 command, in the Alcazar of Madrid, under the

care of the vigilant Alarcon, who guarded him
with as much circumfpetion as ever'.

ceoncdVI' A FEW days after Francis's arrival at Madrid,
trctE wth and when he began to be sensible of his having
ort.ert.pro- relied without foundation on the emperor's gene-
cure bhia .
-ie. rofity, Henry VIII. concluded a treaty with the

regent of France, which afforded him some hope
of liberty from another quarter. Henry's extra-
vagant demands had been received at Madrid
with that neglect which they deserved, and which
he probably expected. Charles, intoxicated with
prosperity, no longer courted him in that re-
fpeaful and fubmiflive manner which pleased his
haughty temper. Wolfey, no less haughty than
his master, was highly irritated at the emperor's
discontinuing his wonted caresses and profelfions
of friendlhip to himself. These flight offences,
added to the weighty considerations formerly men-
tioned, induced Henry to enter into a defensive
alliance with Louise, in which all the differences
between him and her son were adjusted; at the
fame time he engaged that he would employ his
best offices in order to procure the deliverance of
his new ally from a slate of captivity b.

*Mem. deBellay, 95. P. Mart. Ep. ult. Guic. lib.xvi.
323. b Herbert. Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 337.

WHILE

WHILE the open defection of such a powerful B %v °

confederate asseted Charles with deep concern, '-v
a secret conspiracy was carrying on in Italy, which Moton's.

intrigues in
threatened him with consequences fill more fatal. order to

overturn the

The reRlefs and intriguing genius of Morone, emperor's
chancellor of Milan, gave rife to this. His re- 1rW.:
venge had been amply gratified by the expulsion
of the French out of Italy, and his vanity no less
soothed by the re-eltablifhment of Sforza, to
whose interest he had attached himself in the
dutchy of Milan. The delays, however, and
evasions of the Imperial court in granting Sforza
the invefiture of his new acquired territories,
had long alarmed Morone; there were repeated
so often, and with such apparent artifice, as be-
came a full proof to his suspicious mind, that the
emperor intended to strip his master of that rich
country which he had conquered in his name.
Though Charles, in order to quiet the pope and
Venetians, no less zealous of his designs than
Morone, gave Sforza, at last, the invefRiture
which had been so long desired; the charter was
clogged with so many reservations, and fubje&ted
him to such grievous burdens, as rendered the
duke of Milan a dependent on the emperor, ra-
ther than a vairal of the empire, and afforded
him hardly any other security for his poffieflons
than the good pleasure of an ambitious superior.
Suci. an accession of power as would have ac-
crued trom the addition of the Milanese to the
kingdom of Naples, was confidered by Morona
as fatal to the liberties of Italy, no lYfs than to

x 4 his

B u 0 K his own power and imporitance. Full of this

IV.
L-~» idea, he began to revolve in his mind the poffi-

3s5 bility of rescuing Italy from the yoke of so-

reigners; the darling scheme,. as has been already
observed, of the Italian politicians in that age,
and which it was the great obje& of their ambi-
tion to accomplish. If to the glory of having
been the chief instrument of driving the French
out of Milan, he could add that of delivering
Naples from the dominion of the Spaniards, he
thought that nothing would be wanting to com-
plete his fame. His fertile genius soon suggested
to him a projeEt for that purpose, a difficult, in-
deed, and daring one, but for that very reason
more agreeable to his bold and enterprising
tpneper.

Hisnegeci:. BOUROQN and Pescara were equally enraged at
tions w;th , .
efcara. Lannoy's carrying the French king into Spain

without their knowledge. The former, being
afraid that the two monarchs might, in his ab-
ience. conclude fomertreaty in which his interests
would be entirely sacrificed, hastened to Madrid,
in order to guard against that danger. The
latter, on whom the command of the army now
devolved, was obliged to remain in ltaly; but,
in every company, he gave vent to his indigna-
tion against the viceroy, in expreflions full of
rancour and contempt; he accused him, in a let.
ter to the emperor, of cowardice in the time of
danger, and of insolence after a vicory, towards
the obtaining of which he had contributed no.

thing

thing either by his valour or his condut; nor B 0°° KR
did he abstain from bitter complaints againit the ---
emperor himself, who had not discovered, as he 's5s5
imagined, a sufficient sense of his merit, nor be-
stowed any adequate reward on his services. It
was on this disgust of Pescara, that Morone found-
ed his whole system. He knew the boundlels
ambition of his nature, the vast extent of his
abilities in peace as well as war, and the intrepi-
dity of his mind, capable alike of undertaking and
of executing the most desperate designs, The
cantonment of the Spanish troops on the frontier
of the Milanese, gave occasion to many inter-
views between him and Morone, in which the
latter took care frequently to turn the converfa-
tion to the; transactions subsequent to the battle
of Pavia, a fubje& upon which the marquis al-
ways entered willingly, and with paflion; and
Morone observing his resentment to be uniformly
violent, artfully pointed out and aggravated
every circumftahce that could increase its fury.
He painted, in the strongest colours, the empe-
ror's want of discernment, as well as of grati-
tude, in preferring Lannoy to him, and in allow-
ing that presumptuous Fleming to dispose of the
captive king, without consulting the man to
whose bravery and wisdom Charles was indebted
for the glory of having him in his power. Hav-
ing warmed him by such discourses, he then
began to insinuate, that now was the time to
Ie avenged for there insults, and to acquire im-

mortal

0 0 r mortal renown as the deliverer of his country
Iv.
-v_ » from the opprefilon of strangers; that the Rates
'5S' of Italy, weary of the ignominious and intolerable

dominion of barbarians, were at lat ready to
combine in order to vindicate their own inde-
pendence; that their eyes were fixed on him as
the only leader whose genius and good fortune
could ensure the happy success of that noble en-
terprize; that the attempt was no less practicable
than glorious, it being in his power so to disperse
the Spanilh infantry, the only body of the empe-
ror's troops in Italy, through the villages of the
Milanese, that, in one night, they might be
destroyed by the people, who, having suffered
much from their exactions and insolence, would
gladly undertake this service; that he might then,
without opposition, take possession of the throne
of Naples, the Ration destined for him, and a
reward not unworthy the retoret of liberty td
Italy; that the pope, of whom that kingdom
held, and whose predecessors had disposed of it
on many former occasions, would willingly grant
him the right of inveRiture; that the Venetians,
the Florentines, the duke of Milan, to whom he
had communicated the scheme, together with the
French, would be the guarantees of his right;
that the Neapolitans would naturally prefer the
government of one of their countrymen, whom
they loved and admired, to that odious domi-
nion of strangers, to which they had been so long
fubj.eded; and that the emperor, astonished at

a blow

a blow so unexpected, would find that he had B 0o0 K
neither troops nor money to resist such a power- c -
ful confederacy'. 3s's

PESCARA, amazed at the boldners and extent sBayed

of the scheme, listened attentively to Moronc, p.soner bys
but with the countenance of a man loft in pro-
found and anxious thought. On the one hand,
the infamy of betraying his sovereign under whom
he bore such high command, deterred him from
the attempt; on the other, the profpet of ob-
taining a crown allured him to venture upon it.
After continuing a Ihort space in suspense, the
least commendable motives, as is usual after such
deliberations, prevailed, and ambition triumphed
over honour. In order, however, to throw a
colour of decency on his condu&, he infiift
that some learned casuists should give their opi-
nion, "' Whether it was lawful for a subjea to
take arms against his immediate sovereign, in
obedience to the lord paramount of whom the
kingdom itself was held ?" Such a resolution of
the cafe, as he expeted, was soon obtained from
the divines and civilians both of Rome and Milan;
bhe negociation went forward; and measures
seemed to be taking with great spirit for the speedy
execution of the design.

* Guic. 1. xvi. 325. Jovii Vita Davali, p. 417. Oeuv.

de Brantome, iv. 171. Rufcelli Lettre de Princ. ii. 91.
Thuani Hist. lib. i. c. I . P. Heuter. Rer. Autr. lib. ix.
e. 3. P. 207.

DURINO

B 0 0 K DURiNG this interval, Pescara, either shocked
^" ^ at the treachery of the ation that he was going

t to commit, or despairing of its success, began to

entertain thoughts of abandoning the engage-
ments which he had come under. The indifpo-
fition of Sforza, who happened at that time to
be taken ill of a distemper which was thought
mortal, confirmed this resolution, and determined
him to make known the whole conspiracy to the
emperor, deeming it more prudent to expeFt the
dutchy of Milan from him as the reward of this
discovery, than to aim at a kingdom to ue pur-
chased by a series of crimes. This resolution,
however, proved the source of afions hardly less
criminal and ignominious. The emperor, who
had already received full information concerning
the conspiracy from other hands, seemed to be
highly pleased with Pescara's fidelity, and com-
manded him to continue his intrigues for tome
time'with the pope and Sforza, both that he
might discover their intentions more fully, and
be ablte to convict them of the crime with greater
certainty. Pescara, conscious of guilt, ai well as
sensible how futpicious his long silence must have
appeared at Madrid, durst not decline that dif-
honourable office; and, to his eternal disgrace,
was obliged to aRt the meanest of all parts, that
of seducing with a purpose to betray. Confider-
ing thc abilities of the persons with whom h'hlad
to deal, the part was scarcely leTs difficult, than
base; but he abted it with such address, as to de-
c:ive even the penetrating eye of Morone, who

relying

relying with full confidence on his sincerity, B °° K
visited him at Novara, in order to put the last ---
hand to their machinations. Pescara received '5'5
him in an apartment where Antonio de Leyva was
placed behind the tapestry, that he might over-
hear and bear witness to their conversation: as
Morone was about to take leave, that officer fud-
denly appeared, and to his aftoniihment arrested
him prisoner in the emperor's name. He was
condu&ed to the castle of Pavia; and Pescara,
who had so lately been his accomplice, had now
the assurance to interrogate him as his judge.
At the fame time, the emperor declared Sforza
to have forfeited all right to the dutchy of Milan,
by his engaging in a conspiracy againit the so-
vereign of whom he held; Pescara, by his com-
mand, seized on every place in the Milanese,
except the castles of Cremona and Milan, which,
the unfortunate duke attempting to defend, were
closely blockaded by the Imperial troopsd.

BUT though this unsuccessful conspiracy, in- The igc.

I OUg treat.

stead of itripping the emperor of what he already ment of
pofleffed in Italy, contributed to extend his domi- F^,a
nions in that country, it shewed him the necelfity
of coming to some agreement with the French
king, unless he would draw on himself a confede-
racy of all Europe, which the progress of his arms,
and his ambition, now as undilfuilied as it was

d Guic. I, xvi. 329. Jovli Hist. 319. Capella, lib. v.
p. zoo.

Z boundlefi,

3 °0v K boundless, filled with general alarm. He had not

v-I- hitherto treated Francis with the generosity which
'5*s. that monarch expeced, and hardly with the de-

cency due to his station. Instead of displaying
the sentiments becoming a great prince, he seems
to have ated with the mercenary art of a corsair,
who, by the rigorous usage of his prisoners, en-
deavours to draw from them an high price for
their ransom. The captive king was confined in
an old castle, under a keeper whose formal aufte-
rity of manners rendered his vigilance still more
disgustful. He was allowed no exercise but that
of riding on a mule, surrounded with armed
guards on horseback. Charles, on pretence of
its being necefiary to attend the Cortes assembled
in Toledo, had gone to reside in that city, and
suffered several weeks to elapse without visiting
Francis, though he solicited an interview with
rndangm the most prefling and fubmillive importunity. So

many indignities made a deep impression on an
high-fpirited prince: he began to lose all relish
for his usual amusements; his natural gaiety of
temper forsook him; and after languishing for
some time, he was seized with a dangerous fever,
during the violence of which he complained con-
ftantly of the unexpected and unprincely rigour
with which he, had been treated, often exclaim-
ing, that now the emperor would have the satis-
faftion of his dying a prisoner in his hands,
without having once deigned to fee his face.
The physicians, at last, despaired of his life, and
informed the emperor that they saw no hope of

3 his

his recovery, unless he were gratified with regard 3 ° ° K
to that point on which he seemed to be so strong- A
ly bent. Charles, solicitous to preserve a life ;2s'
with which all his prospects of farther advantage
from the victory of Pavia must have terminated,
immediately consulted his ministers concerning
the course to be taken. In vain did the chancel-
lor Gattinara, the most able among them, repre-
sent to him the indecency of his visiting Francis,
if he did not intend to fat him at liberty immedi-
ately upon equal terms; in vain did he point out the
infamy to which he would be exposed, if motives
of avarice or ambition ihould prevail on him to
give the captive monarch this mark of attention
and sympathy, for which humanity and generosity
had pleaded so long without effeE. The empe-
ror, less delicate, or less solicitous about reputa-
tion than his minister, set out for Madrid to visit Sept. 2.

The Empt-

his prisoner. The interview was short; Francis rotisiu
being too weak to bear a long conversation, h"'
Charles accosted him in terms full of affection
and refpec, and gave him such promises of speedy
deliverance and princely treatment, as would
have refle&ed the gseatelt honour upon him, if
they had flowed from another source. Francis
grasped at them with the eagerness natural in his
situation; and, cheered with this gleam of hope,
began to revive from that moment, recovering
rapidly his wonted health".

= Guic. I. xvi. 339. Sandov. HIi.ft. 66;.

H£i

-B o°° K .HE had soon the mortification to find, that hit

IV.

t-- . confidence in the emperor was not better founded
Sh c'.Sa- than formerly. Charles returned instantly to To-
leisu"aL ledo; all negociations were carried on by his
Madrid. ministers; and Francis was kept in as strict cufto-

dy as ever. A new indignity, and that very gall-
ing, was added to all those he had already suffered.
Bourbon arriving in Spain about this time,
Charles, who had so long refused to visit the king,
received his rebellious subject with the most
No.e . fludied relpe&. He met him without the gates of

Toledo, embraced him with the greatest affection,
and, placing him on his left hand, conduted him
to his apartment. These marks of honour to
him, were so many insults to the unfortunate mo-
narch; which he felt in a very sensible manner.
It afforded him some consolation, however, to
observe, that the sentiments of the Spaniards dif-
sered widely from those of their sovereign. That
generous people detested Bourbon's crime. Not-
withstanding his great talents and important
services, they shunned all intercourse with him,
to such a degree, that Charles having desired the
marquis de Villena to permit Bourbon to reside
in his palace while the court remained in To-
ledo, he politely replied, " That he could not
refute gratifying the emperor in that request;"
but added with a Castilian dignity of mind, that
he must not be furprized if, the moment the
constable departed, he Ihould burn to the
ground a house, which, having been polluted

by

by the presence of a traitor, became an unfit ha- 3 °o g
bitation for a man of honour ." '--c

CHARLES himself, nevertheless, seemed to have App:nt:

ger ~; ,)1

it much at heart to reward Bourbon's services in the' 1.'r-
a signal manner. But as he insisted, in the firlt in iiy.
place, on the accomplihrment of the Emperor's
promise of giving him in marriage his filter
Eleanora, Queen dowager of Portugal, the ho-
nour of which alliance had been one of his chief
inducements to rebel against his lawful fbvereign;
as Francis, in order to prevent such a dangerous
union, had offered, before he left Italy, to marry
that Princess; and as Eleanora herself discovered
an inclination rather to match with a powerful
Monarch, than with his exiled fubieLt; all theie
interfering circumstances created great embar-
raffment to Charles, and left him hardly any
hope of extricating himself with decency. But EDcember,
the death of Pescara, who, at the age of thirty-
fix, left behind him the reputation of being one
of the greatest generals and ablelt politicians of
that century, happened opportunely at this junc-
ture for his relief. By that event, the command
of the army in Italy became vacant, and Charles,
always fertile in resources, persuaded Bourbon,
who was in no condition to dilpute his will, to
accept the office of general in chief there, to-
gether with a grant of the dutchy of Milan
forfeited by Sforza; and in return for these to

f Guic. I. xvi. 335.
VOL, II. Y relinquish,

B °0 K relinquish all hopes of marrying the Queen of

IV.
-v-_^ Portugal".
15X5.

Nec;a- THE chief obstacle that flood in the way of

ti ns fr Francis's liberty was the Emperor's continuing
p-ocrin, g
F ancis's to insist so peremptorily on the restitution of Bur-

gundy, as a preliminary to that event. Francis
often declared, that he would never consent to
dismember his tlate; and that, even if he should
lb far forget the duties of a Monarch as to come
to such a resolution, the fundamental laws of
the kingdom would prevent its taking effe&t.
On his part, he was willing to make an absolute
ceflion to the Emperor of all his pretensions in
Italy and the Low-Countries; he promired to
restore Bourbon all his lands which had been
confiscated; he renewed his proposal of mar-
rying the Emperor's sifter, the ,Qeen dowager
of Portugal; and engaged to pay a great urm
by way of ranibm for his own person. But all
mutual eftecmi and confidence between the two
Monarchs were now entirely loft; there appeared,
on the one hand, a rapacious ambition labour-
ing to avail itfcif of every favourable circum-
stance; on the other, fulficion and resentment,
standing perpetually on their guard ; so that the
profpeE of bringing their negociations to an illue
seemed to be far diflant. The dutchels of Alen-
son, the French King's filler, whom Charles
permitted to visit her brother in his confinement,

' Sandov. Hit. i. 6-6. Ociv. de Brant. iv. z49.

employed

employed all her address, in order to procure B OO K
his liberty on more reasonable terms. Henry of -_l
England interposed his good offices to the fame ',55'

Fraslcls in

purpose; but both with so little success, that defpa .
Francis in despair took suddenly the resolution er, ',i
of resigning his crown, with all its rights and "°""
prerogatives, to his son the Dauphin, determin-
ing rather to end his days in prison, than to
purchase his freedom by concessions unworthy of
a King. The deed for this purpose he signed
with legal formality at Madrid, empowering his
sifter to carry it into France, that it might be
regifRered in all the parliaments of the king-
dom; and at the fame time intimating his in-
tention to the Emperor, he desired him to name
the place of his confinement, and to allign him
a proper number of attendants during the re-
mainder of his daysh.

THIS resolution of the French King had great Charli

efett; Charles began to be sensible, that by al"'e'
puihing rigour to excess, he might defeat hts
own measures, and instead of the vast advantages
which he hoped to draw from ransoming a
powerful Monarch, he might at last find in his
hands a Prince without dominions or revenues.
About the fame time, one of the King of Na-
varre's domestics happened, by an extraordinary
exertion of fidelity, courage, and address, to

h This paper is published in Memoires Hifloriques, &c.
par M. I'Abbe Raynal, tom. ii. p. ait.

Y i procure

B °i K procure his master an opportunity of escaping
__- from the prison in which he had been confined

5s5S' ever since the battle of Pavia. This convinced

the Emperor, that the molf vigilant attention
of his officers might be eluded by the ingenuity
or boldness of Francis, or his attendants, and
one unlucky hour might deprive him of all the
advantages which he had been so solicitous to
obtain. By thelc considerations, he was induced
to abate somewhat of his former demands. On
the other hand, Francis's impatience under con-
finement daily increased; and having received
certain intelligence of a powerful league forming
againit his rival in Italy, he grew more com-
pliant with regard to conceflions, trusting that,
if he could once obtain his liberty, he would
soon be in a condition to resume whatever he had
yielded.

rS36. As these were the views and sentiments of the

Treaty of
3,..rid. two Monarchs, the treaty which procured Francis

his liberty was signed at Madrid, on the four-
teenth of January, one thousand five hundred
and twenty-fix. The article with regard to
Burgundy, which had hitherto created the great-
cit dilnfculty, was compromised, Francis enga-
ging to retcore that dutchy with all its dependen-
cies in full sovereignty to the Emperor; and
Charles, consenting, that this restitution should
not be made until the King was set at liberty:
in order to secure the performance of this, as
well as the other conditions in the treaty, Francis

agrecd,

agreed, that at that fame instant he himself was B 0o ik
released, he would deliver as hostages to the a-----
Emperor, his eldest son the Dauphin, his second
son the duke of Orleans, or in lieu of the latter,
twelve of his principal nobility, to be named by
Charles. The other articles swelled to a great
number, and, though not of filch importance,
were extremely rigorous. Among there the most
remarkable were, that Francis ihould renounce
all his pretensions in Italy; that he fhould'dif-
claim any title which he had to the sovereignty of
Slanders and Artois; that, within fix weeks after
his release, he fiould restore to Bourbon and his
adherents, all their goods, moveable and im-
moveable, and make them full reparation for
the damages which they had fuitained by the con-
fifcation of them ; that he (hould use his interest
with Henry D'Aibret to relinquish his preten-
sions to the crown of Navarre, and should not
for the future assist him in any attempt to re-
cover it; that there should be eftablilhed be-
tween the Emperor and Francis a league of per-
petual friendship and confederacy, with a pro-
mise of mutual affftance in every cafe of necef-
fity. That, in corroboration of this union, Fran-
cis Ihould marry the Emperor's sifter, the Queen
Dowager of Portugal; that Francis should cause
all the articles of this treaty to be ratified by the
States, and regidered in the parliaments of his
kingdom; that, upon the Emperor's receiving
this ratification, the holtages should be set at

Y 3 liberty;

B oo K liberty; but in their place, the duke of Angou-
X w" leme, the King's third son, should be delivered

J5 to Charles, that in order to manifest, as well as

to strengthen the amity between the two Mo-
narchs, he might be educated at the imperial
court; and that if Francis did not, within the
time limited, fulfil the stipulations in the treaty,
he should promise, upon his honour and oath,
to return into Spain, and to surrender himself
again a prisoner to the Emperor'.

,.,ntitnent BY this treaty, Charles flattered himfelfthat
of that age
^ :'h .ra he had not only effeStually humbled his rival,

but that he had taken such precautions as would
for ever prevent his re-attaining any formidable
degree of power. The opinion, which the wisest
politicians formed concerning it, was very dif-
ferent i they could not persuade themselves that
Francis, after obtaining his liberty, would exe-
cute articles against which he had struggled so
long, and to which even amidst the horrors of
captivity he had consented with such relutance.
Ambition and resentment, they knew, would
conspire in prompting him to violate the hard
conditions to which he had been constrained to
fibmit; nor would arguments and casuistry be
wanting to represent that which was so manifestly
advantageous, to be necessary and just. If one
part of Francis's conduc had been known at

i Recueil des Trait. torn. ii. 1 12. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo. V.
i,. 102, &C.

that

that time, this opinion might have been founded, B °o° o
not in conjc&ure, but in certainty. A few -v-
hours before he signed the treaty, he afTembled Franci
such of his counsellors as were then in Madrid, teas ,'in
and having exaced from them a solemn oath of the va"idit
lecrecy, he made a long enumeration in their
presence of the dilhonourable arts, as well as
unprincely rigour, which the Emperor had em-
ployed in order to ensnare or intimidate him.
lFor that reason, he took a formal protest in the
hands of notaries, that his content to the treaty
ihould be confidered as an involuntary deed, and
be deemed null and void k. By this disingenuous
artifice, for which even the treatment that he had
met with was no apology, Francis endeavoured to
satisfy his honour and conscience in signing the
treaty, and to provide at the fame time a pre-
text on which to break it.

GREAT, mean while, were the outward demon-

frations of love and confidence between the two
Monarchs; they appeared often together in pub-
lic; they frequently had long conferences in
private; they travelled in the famelitter, and
joined in the fame amusements. But, amidst these
signs of peace and friendship, the Emperor still
harboured suspicion in his mind. Though the
ceremonies of the marriage between Francis and
the Queen of Portugal were performed toon after
the conclusion of the treaty, Charles would not

k Recueil de Trait. torn. ii. p. 107.

Y 4 permit

B o o K permit him to consummate it until the return of

- the ratification from France. Even then Francis
' was not allowed to be at full liberty i his guards

were till continued i though carefled as a bro-
ther-in-law, he was still watched like a prisoner;
and it was obvious to attentive observers, that
an union, in the very beginning of which there
might be dilcerned such Iymptoms ofjealoufy and
dirtrufl, could not be cordial, or of long conti-
nuance'.
Ratifid in ABOUT a month after the signing of the treaty,

c the Regent's ratification of it was brought from

France; and that wife Princess, preferring, on
this occasion, the publick good to domeftick as-
fetion, informed her son, that, inltead of the
twelve noblemen named in the treaty, she had
sent the duke of Orleans along with his brother
the Dauphin to the frontier, as the kingdom
could susser nothing by the absence of a child,
but murf be left almolt incapable of defence, if
deprived of its ablest statesmen, and most expe-
rienced generals, whom Charles had artfully in-

':ids lret cl'yded in his nomination. At last Francis took
I libcrty. leave of the Emperor, whose suspicion of the

king's sincerity increaling, as the time of putting
it to the proof approached, he endeavoured to
bind him fill fatter by exacting new promises,
which, after those he had already made, the
french monarch was not flow to grant. He set

J Guic. I. xvi. 3j3

oul

out from Madrid, a place which the remem- B o K
brance of many affliiEing circumstances rendered L.-.-
peculiarly odious to him, with the joy natural '56'
On such an occasion, and began the long-wifhed-
for journey towards his own dominions. He was
escorted by a body of horse under the command
of Alarcon, who, as the king drew near the fron-
tiers of France, guarded him with more fcrupu-
lous exatnefs than ever. When he arrived at
the river Andaye, which separates the two king-
doms, Lautrec appeared on the opposite bank
with a guard of horse equal in number to Alar-
con's. An empty bark was moored in the mid-
dle of the stream; the attendants drew up in
order on the opposite banks; at the fame in-
ftant, Lannoy with eight gentlemen put off from
the Spanifl, and Lautrec with the fame number
from the French fide of the river; the former
had the King in his boat; the latter, the Dauphin
and duke of Orleans; they met in the empty
vetfel; the exchange was made in a moment:
Francis, after a ihort embrace to his children,
leaped into Lautrec's boat, and reached the
French Ihore. He mounted that instant a
Turkiffi horse, waved his hand over his head,
and with a joyful voice crying aloud several
times, " I ami yet a king," galloped full speed
to St. John de Luz, and from thence to Bayonne.
This event, no less impatiently desired by the
French nation than by their monarch, happened

on

B 0 0 K on the eighteenth of March, a year and twenty-

IV.

_w.v.- two days after the fatal battle of Pavia ".

The Emp. SooN after the Emperor had taken leave of
ige i 'hFrancis, and permitted him to begin his journey

,fU, towards his own dominions, he set out for Se-

ville, in order to solemnize his marriage with
Isabella, the daughter of Emanuel, the late King
of Portugal, and the filter of John III. who had
succeeded him in the throne of that kingdom.
Isabella was a princess of uncommon beauty and
accomplifllments; and as the Cortes, both in
Caflile and Aragon, had warmly solicited their
sovereign to marry, the choice of a wife, so nearly
allied to the royal blood of both kingdoms, was
extremely acceptable to his subje&s. The Por-
tuguefe, fond of this new connetion with the
first monarch in Christendom, granted him an
extraordinary dowry with Isabella, amounting to
nine hundred thousand crowns, a fum, which,
from the situation of his affairs at that juncture,
was of no small consequence to the Emperor.
:.'^ is. T7he marriage was celebrated with that splendour

and gaiety, which became a great and youthful
Prince. Charles lived with Isabella in perse&
harmony, and treated her on all occasions with
much diftination and regard .

"' Sandov. Hid. i. 735. Guic. 1. xvi. 355.
"Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. Io6. Belcarius Corn. Rel.
aallic. p. 56;. Spalatinun ap. Struv. Corp, Hid. Germ, ii.
icSr.

DUprI^<

DvUING these tranfaftions, Charles could hard- B oo° K

ly give any attention to the affairs of Germany, '-
though it was torn in pieces by commotions, AffriSof
which threatened the most dangerous confe- ctBDqir
quences. By the feudal institutions, which still
fubfiRfed almost unimpaired in the Empire, the
property of lands was veiled in the Princes and
free-barons. Their vassals held of them by the ofhre,,
ftriSeft and most limited tenures; while the 'ant
great body of the people was kept in a slate but
little removed from absolute servitude. In some
places of Germany, people of the lowest class
were to entirely in the power of their matters, as
to be subjeE to personal and domeftick flavcry,
the molt rigorous form of that wretched Rcate.
In other provinces, particularly in Bohemia and
Vufatia, the peasants were bound to remain on
the lands to which they belonged, and making
part of the estate, were transferred like any other
property from one hand to another. Even in
Suabia, and the countries on the banks of the
Rhine, where their condition was molt tolerable,
the peasants not only paid the full rent of their
farms to the landlord; but if they chore either to
change the place of their abode, or to follow a
new profefflon, they were obliged to purchase
this privilege at a certain price. Besides this, all
grants of lands to peasants expired at their death,
without descending to their posterity. Upon that
event, the landlord had a right to the best of
their cattle, as well as of their furniture; and

their

B o0 KC their heirs, in order to obtain a renewal of the
i-- grant, were obliged to pay large funs by Way

'51t of fine. These exaaions, though grievous, were

horn with patience, becaure they were customary
and ancient: But when the progress of elegance
and luxury, as well as the changes introduced
into the art of war, came to increase the expence
of government, and made it necessary for Princes
to levy occasional or stated taxes on their sub-
je&s, such impositions being new, appeared in-
tolerable; and in Germany, there duties being
laid chiefly upon beer, wine, and other necef-
saries of life, affe&ed the common people in the
nofl sensible manner. The addition of such a
load to their former burdens, drove them to de-
fpair. It was to the valour inspired by. resent-
ment against impositions of this kind, that the
Swiss owed the acquisition of their liberty in the
fourteenth century. The fame cause had excited
the peasants in several other provinces of Ger-
many to rebel against their superiors towards the
end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth
centuries; and though these infurre&tions were
not attended with like ficcefs, they could not,
however, be quelled without much difficulty and
bloodshed 0.

Theiri atr. By these checks, the spirit of the peasants was
ye'.lian overawed rather than flbduled ; and their griev-

ances multiplying continually, they ran to arms,
this year, with the most frantick rage. Their

0 Seckend. lib. ii. p. z. 6.

:r sn

first appearance was near Ulm in Suabia. The B oV° K
peasants in the adjacent country focked to their --.
standard with the ardour and impatience natural s 6
to men, who having groaned long under oppref-
lion, beheld at last Come profpet of deliverance;
and the contagion spreading from province to
province, reached almost every part of Germany.
Wherever they came, they plundered the mo-
nafteries; wafted the lands of their superiors;
razed their castles, and massacred without mercy
all persons of noble birth, who were Ib unhappy
as to fall into their hands P. Having intimidated
their oppressors, as they imagined, by the vio-
lence of these proceedings, they began to con-
fider what would be the most proper and effetual
method of securing themselves for the future
from their tyrannical exaetions. With this view,
they drew up and published a memorial, con-
taining all their demands, and declared, that
while arms were in their hands, they would either
persuade or oblige the nobles to give them full
fatisfation with regard to these. The chief ar-
ticles were, that they might have liberty to chufe
their own pallors; that they might be freed from
the payment of all tythes except those of corn; that
they might no longer be considered as the flavcs or
bondmen of their superiors; that the liberty of
hunting and filhing might be common ; than the
great forests might not be regarded as private pro-

P Petr. Crinitus de Bello Ruflicano, ap. Freher. Script.
Rer. Germ. Argent, 1717, vol. iii. p. 243.

perty,

B o.o K perty, but be open for the use of all; that they
'-w_-- might be delivered from the unusual burden of

2526. taxes under which they laboured; that the ad-

ministration of jutlice might be rendered less
rigorous and more impartial; that the encroach-
ments of the nobles upon meadows and commons
might be reftrainedi.

MANY of there demands were extremely tea-

fonable; and being urged by such formidable
numbers, might have met with some redress.
But those vast unwieldy bodies, aflembled in
different places, had neither union, nor condut,
nor vigour. Being led by persons of the lowest
rank, without skill in war, or knowledge of
what was necessary for accomplishing their de-
signs; all their exploits were distinguished only
by a brutal and unmeaning fury. To oppose
this, the princes and nobles of Suabia and the
Lower Rhine raised their vassals, and attacking
some of the mutineers with open force, and
others by furprize, cut to pieces or dispersed
all who infested those provinces; so that the
peasants, after ruining the open country, andt
losing upwards of twenty thousand of their afio-
ciates in the field, were obliged to return to
their habitations with less hope than ever of
relief from their grievances'.

i Sleid. Hist. p. 90.
* r Seckend. lib. ii. p. io. Petr. Gnodalius de Ruflicano-
rum Tumultu in Germania, ap. Scard. Script. vol. ii. p. 13 1,
&c.

THESE

THESE commotions happened at first in pro- B OC

vinces of Germany where Luther's opinions had _
made little progress; and being excited wholly Theiin.
by political causes, had no connection with the iThiur,
disputed points in religion. But the frenzy reach- &i'.
ing at last thote countries in which the Reform-
ation was established, derived new strength from
circumstances peculiar to them, and rose to a
till greater pitch of extravagance. The Reform-
ation, wherever it was received, increased that
bold and innovating spirit to which it owed its
birth. Men who had the courage to overturn a
system supported by every thing which can com-
mand refpeEt or reverence, were not to be over-
awed by any authority, how great or venerable
soever. After having been accustomed to con-
fider themselves as judges of the most important
dotrines in religion, to examine these freely,
and to reject, without scruple, what appeared to
them erroneous, it was natural for them to turn
the fame daring and inquisitive eye towards go.
vernment, and to think of rectifying whatever
disorders or imperfetions were discovered there.
As religious abuses had been reformed in several
places without the permission of the magistrate,
it was an easy transition to attempt the redress of
political grievances in the fame manner.

No sooner, then, did the spirit of revolt break More for.

out in Thuringia, a province subjet to the mida:".
Eletor of Saxony, the inhabitants of which were

$ mostly

B o K mostly converts to Lutheranifm, than it afrumed

LV.
«- . -a new and more dangerous form. Thomas Mun-

cer, one of Luther's disciples, having established
himself in that country, had acquired a wonder-
ful ascendant over the minds of the people. He
propagated among them the wildest and most
enthufiatick notions, but such as tended mani-
fefly to inspire them with boldness, and lead
them to sedition. " Luther, he told them, had

Their fan. done more hurt than service to religion. He
iclfpiri'. had, indeed, rescued the church from the yoke

of popery, but his do&tines encouraged, and
his life set an example of, the utmost licentiousness
of manners. In order to avoid vice (fays he),
men mufl pratife perpetual mortification. They
must put on a grave countenance, speak little,
wear a plain garb, and be serious in their whole
deportment. Such as prepare their hearts in
this manner, may expeEt that the Supreme Be-
ing will direc all their fleps, and by some visible
sign discover his will to them; if that illumina-
tion be at any time withheld, we may expoftu-
late with the Almighty, who deals with us so
harlhly, and remind him of his promises, This
expostulation and anger will be highly acceptable
to God, and will at last prevail on him to guide
us with the fame unerring hand which conducted
the patriarchs of old. Let us beware, however,
of offending him by our arrogance; but as all
men are equal in his eye, let them return to
that condition of equality in which he formed

4 them,

them, and having all things in common, let o ° K
them live together like brethren, without any - --J
marks of subordination or pre-eminence ." 5

EXTRAVAGANT as there tenets were, they flat-

tered so many passions in the human heart, as to
make a deep impression. To aim at nothing
more than abridging the power of the nobility,
was now confidered as a trifling and partial re-
formation, not worth the contending for; it was
proposed to level every diflindcion among man-
kind, and by abolishing property, to reduce them
to their natural state of equality, in which all
lhould receive their fubfifrence from one com-
mon stock. Muncer assured them, that the de-
sign was approved of by heaven, and that the
Almighty had in a dream ascertained him of its
success. The peasants fee about the execution
of it, not only with the rage which animated
those of their order in other parts of Germany,
but with the ardour which enthufiafin inspires.
They deposed the magistrates in all the cities of
which they were masters; seized the lands of the
nobles, and obliged such of them as they got
into their hands, to put on the dress commonly
worn by pealants, and instead of their former
titles, to be satisfied with the appellation given
to people in the lowest class of life. Vast num-
bers engaged in this wild undertaking; but

' Seckend, lib, ii, p. 13. Sklid. ift. p. 83.
VOL. II Z Muncer,

B °0 K Muncer, their leader and their prophet, was

IV.
. --V- destitute of the abilities necessary for conduting

516 it. He had all the extravagance, but not the

courage, which enthufiafis usually possess. It
was with difficulty he could be persuaded to take
the field; and though he soon drew together
eight thousand men, he suffered himself to be
surrounded by a body of cavalry under the com-
mand of the Eledor of Saxony, the Landgrave of
Hefle, and Duke Qs Brunswick. These Princes,
unwilling to shed the blood of their deluded sub-
jeas, sent a young nobleman to their camp, with
the offer of a general pardon, if they would im-
mediately lay down their arms, and deliver up
the authors of the sedition. Muncer, alarmed at
this, began to harangue his followers with his
usual vehemence, exhorting them not to trust
these deceitful promises of their oppressors, nor
to desert the cause of God, and of Chriifan
liberty.

Perants BUT the sense of present danger making a
defcated, deeper imprefflon on the ptafants than his elo-

quence, confusion and terror were visible in every
face, when a rainbow, which was the emblem
that the mutineers had painted on their colours,
happening to appear in the clouds, Muncer, with
admirable pretence of mind, laid hold of that
incident, and suddenly raiing his eyes and hands
towards heaven, " Behold," cries he, with an
elevated voice, " the sign which God has given.

3 " There

" There is the pledge of your safety, and a token B o KC
"C that the wicked ihall be destroyed." The fa- * -
natical multitude set up instantly a great flour, '5'6.
as if victory had been certain; and pafling in a
moment from one extreme to another, massa-
cred the unfortunate nobleman who had come
with the offer of pardon, and demanded to be
led towards the enemy. The Princes enraged at
this shocking violation of the laws of war, ad-
vanced with no less impetuosity, and began the
attack; but the behaviour of the peasants in the Mly s.
combat was not such as might have been ex-
peted either from their ferocity or confidence of
success; an undisciplined rabble was no equal
match for well-trained troops; above five thou-
sand were slain in the field, almost without mak-
ing refitance; the reft fled, and among the fore-
molt Muncer their general. HIe was taken next
day, and being condemned to such punishments
as his crimes had deserved, he fuffcred them with
a poor and dastardly fpirir. His death put an
end to the infurreEtions of the peasants, which
had filled Germany with such terror'; but the
enthufiaftick notions which he had scattered were
not extirpated, and produced, not long after,
effecs more memorable, as well as more ex-
travagant.

Sleid. Hill. p. 8+. Seckend. lib. ii. p. zz. Gnodalius
Tumult. Ruftican. 155.

Z 2 DURING

B o0 K DURING there commotions, Luther acted with

IV.

--. . exemplary prudence and moderation; like a
Lleter's common parent, solicitous about the welfare of
mand prdet both parties, without,fparing the faults or errors
'cndua. of either. On the one hand, he addressed a mo-

nitory discourse to the nobles, exhorting them to
treat their dependents with greater humanity and
indulgence. On the other, he severely censured
the seditious spirit of the peasants, advising them
not to murmur at hardships inseparable from their
condition, nor to leek for redress by any but
legal means".
T;ic mar. LUTHER'S famous marriage with Catharine a

' Boria, a nun of a noble family, who, having

thrown off the veil, had fled from the cloister,
happened this year, and was far from meeting
with the fame approbation. Even his most de-
voted followers thought this ftep indecent, at a
time when his country was involved in so many
calamities; while his enemies never mentioned
it with any softer appellation than that of in-
ceftuous or profane. Luther himself was fen-
fible of the imprefflon which it had made to his
disadvantage; but being satisfied with his own
conduet, he bore the censure of his friends, and
the reproaches of his adversaries, with his usual
fortitude x.

" Sleid. Hill. . b7. Seckend. lib. ii. p. rs.

7 THIS

THIS year the Reformation loft its first pro- Bn ov0 K

tector, Frederick, Elector of Saxony; but the -- -
blow was the less sensibly felt, as he was fuc- 5s26.
ceeded by his brother John, a more avowed and May s.
zealous, though less able patron of Luther and
his dotrines.

ANOTHER event happened about the fame time, ,,,,
which, as it occasioned a considerable change in .;rn',,

0J1 trro( the
the state of Germany, mutlt be traced back to l',t,,rics;

· o -rdr.

its source. While the frenzy of the Crusades
poireffed all Europe during the twelfth and thir-
teenth centuries, several orders of religious
knighthood were founded in defence of the
Christian faith against Heathens and Infidels.
Among these, the Teutonick order in Germany
was one of the most illustrious, the knights of
which diftinguiflied themselves greatly in all the
wild enterprizes carried on in the Holy Land.
Being driven at lafi from their settlements in the
calt, they were obliged to return to their native
country. Their zeal and valour were too impe-
tuous to remain long inacEive. They invaded,
on very flight pretences, the province of Prussia,
the inhabitants of which were frill idolaters; and
having completed the conquest of it about the
middle of the thirteenth century, held it many
years as a fief depending on the crown of Poland.
Fierce contests arose during this period, between
the grand masters of the order, and the Kings of
Poland; the former Ltruggling for independence,

Z 3 while

B ° v K while the latter aflerted their right of sovereignty

v- -A with great firmness. Albert, a Prince of the

6 house of Brandenburgh, who was elected grand

master in the year one thousand five hundred and
eleven, engaging keenly in this quarrel, main-
tained a long war with Sigifinmnd, king of Po-
land; but having become an early convert to
Luther's doctrines, this gradually lessened his
zeal for the interests of his fraternity, so that he
took the opportunity of the confusions in the
Empire, and the absence of the Emperor, to
conclude a treaty with Sigifinund, greatly to his
private emolument. By it, that part of Prussia,
which belonged to the Teutonick order, was
ereted into a secular and hereditary dutchy, and
the investiture of it granted to Albert, who, in
return, bound himself to do homage for it to the
Kings of Poland as their vassal. Immediately
after this, he made publick profession of the re-
formed religion, and married a Princess of Den-
mark. The Teutonick knights exclaimed bo
loudly against the treachery of their grand master,
that he was put under the ban of the Empire;
but he still kept possession of the province which
he had usurped, and tranfimitted it to his pofec-
rity. In process of time, this rich inheritance
fell to the electoral branch of the family, all de-
pendence on the crown of Poland was thaken off,
and the Margraves of Brandenburgh, having as-
fumed the title of Kings of Prussia, have not
only risen to an equality with the first Princes in

Germany,

Germany, but take their rank among the great B o o K
monarchs of Europey. *.

1516.

UPON the return of the French King to his Finmea-

dominions, the eyes of all the powers in Europe Frenh
were fixed upon him, that, by observing his first "i reuprn
motions, they might form a judgment concern- to"F"ac.
ing his subsequent conduct. They were not held
long in fufpence. Francis, as soon as he arrived
at Bayonne, wrote to the king of England,
thanking him for his zealous and affe&tionate in-
terpolition in his favour, to which he acknow-
ledged that he owed the recovery of his liberty.
Next day, the Emperor's ambassadors demanded
audience, and, in their master's name, required
him to issue such orders as were necessary for
carrying the treaty of Madrid into immediate
and full execution; he coldly answered, that
though, for his own part, he determined religi-
oufly to perform all that he had promised, the
treaty contained so many articles relative not to
himself alone, but affeCting the interefis of the
French monarchy, that he could not take any
farther ftep without consulting the States of his
kingdom, and that some time would be necessary,
in order to reconcile their minds to the hard con-
ditions which he had consented to ratify . This
reply was confidered as no obscure discovery of
his being resolved to elude the treaty; and the

v Sleid. Hill. p. 98. Pfeffel Abrege de I'hit. de Droit
Publ. p. 605, &c. z Mem. de Dellay, p. 97.

Z 4 comr

B V° K compliment paid to Henry, appeared a very

proper ftep towards securing the afiiftance of that
monarch in the war with the Emperor, to which
such a resolution would certainly give rife. Theei
circumstances, added to the explicit declarations
which Francis made in secret to the ambafiadors
from ieveral of the Italian powers, fully satisficd
them, that their conjetures with regard to his
condu&t had been just, and that, instead of in-
tending to execute an unreasonable treaty, he
was eager to seize the first opportunity of re-
venging those injuries which had compelled himi
to feign an approbation of it. Even the doubts,
and fears, and scruples, which used, on other
occasions, to hold Clement in a fate of uncer-
tainty, were dissipated by Francis's seeming im-
patience to break through all his engagements
with the Emperor. The situation, indeed, of
affairs in Italy at that time, did not allow the
Pope to hesitate long. Sforza was still besieged
by the Imperialifis in the caitle of Milan. That
feeble Prince, deprived now of Moron~'s advice,
and unprovided with every thing necessary for
defence, found means to inform Clement and
the Venetians, that he must soon surrender, if
they did not come to his relief. The Imperial
troops, as they had received no pay since the
battle of Pavia, lived at discretion in the Milan-
ei', levying such exorbitant contributions in
that dutchy, as amounted, if we may rely on
Guicciardini's calculation, to no leis a fum than

five

five thousand ducats a day 2; nor was it to be 1B O K
doubted, but that the soldiers, as soon as the
cafRle ihould submit, would chufe to leave a s5a6.
ruined country which hardly afforded them fib-
fiftence, that they might take poffciflon of more
comfortable quarters in the f-rtile and untouched
territories of the Pope and Venetians. The as-
fiftance of the French King was the only thing
which could either iave Sforza, or enable them to
protct their own dominions fromn the insults of the
Imperial troops.

FoR these reasons, the Pope, the Venetians, A AelF-

and duke of Milan, were equally impatient to ac5--itlrn
come to an agreement with Francis, who, on his
part, was no less desirous of acquiring Ifuch a
considerable accefion both of strength and repu-
tation as such a confederacy would bring along
with it. The chiefobje&s of this alliance, which
was concluded at Cognac on the twenCy-ficond
of May, though kept secret for tome time, were
to oblige the Emperor to set at liberty the French
King's sons, upon payment of a reasonable ran-
fom; and to re-eltablifl Sforza in the quiet
,po:)cflion of the Milanese. If Charles should re-
fuse either of these, the contrating parties bound
themlelves to bring into the field an army of
thirty-five thousand men, with which, after driv-
ing the Spaniards out of the Milanese, they
would attack the kingdom of Naples. The King

0,'Guic. 1. xvii. 3ó0.

B o o K of England was declared Prote&or of this league,
&..- > which they dignified with the name of Holy, be-

&'5a. cause the Pope was at the head of it; and in or-

der to allure Henry more effe&ually, a principa-
lity in the kingdom of Naples, of thirty thousand
ducats yearly revenue, was to be fettled on him;
and lands to the value of ten thousand ducats on
Wolfey his favourite b.

The Pope No sooner was this league concluded, than
wbil Clement, by the plenitude of his papal power,
^OM bi absolved Francis from the oath which he had

oath to oh.
fr, the taken to observe the treaty of Madrid . This
Madidd right, how pernicious soever in its effets, and

deftru&ive of that integrity which is the basis of
all tranfations among men, was the natural con-
sequences of the powers which the Popes arro-
gated as the infallible vicegerents of Christ upon
earth. But as, in virtue of this pretended pre-
rogative, they had often dispensed with obliga-
tions which were held sacred, the interest of some
men, and the credulity of others, led them to
imagine, that the decisions of a sovereign pontiff
authorized orjuftified a&tions which would, other-
wife, have been criminal and impious.
The Empe. MEANWHILE the discovery of Francis's in-

iunmd. tention to elude the treaty of Madrid, filled the

Emperor with a variety of disquieting thoughts.

b P. Heuter. Rer. Auflr. lib. ix. c. 3. p. z17. Recueil
des Trait. ii. 124.

· Goldatl. Polit. Imperial. p. zooz. Pallav. Hlt. p. 70.

He

He had treated an unfortunate prince with the B ° ° K
most ungenerous rigour; he had displayed an I--
insatiable ambition in all his negociations with '5I6'
his prisoner: He knew what censures the former
had drawn upon him, and what apprehensions
the latter had excited in every court of Europe;
nor had he reaped from the measures which he
pursued, any of thole advantages which poli-
ticians are apt to confider as an excuse for the
most criminal condut, and a compenlation for the
severest reproaches. Francis was now out of his
hands, and not one of all the mighty confe-
quences, which he had expeted froln the treaty
that set him at liberty, was likely to take place.
His rashness in relying so far on his own judg-
ment as to trust to the sincerity of the French King,
in opposition to the sentiments of his wisest mi-
nifters, was now apparent; and he easily con-
jecured, that the fame confederacy, the dread of
which had induced him to set Francis at liberty,
would now be formed against him with that gal-
lant and incensed monarch at its head. Self-
condemnation and lhame, on account of what
was past, with anxious apprehensions concerning
what might happen, were the necciefry result of
these refletions on his own conduct and situ-
ation. Charles, however, was naturally firm and
inflexible in all his measures. To have receded
suddenly from any article in the treaty of Madrid,
would have been a plain confeflion of imprudence,
and a palpable symptom of fear; he determined,

therefore,

B ov K therefore, that it was most suitable to his dignity,

IV.
Lv--- to insist, whatever might be the consequences,

' on the ftrit execution of the treaty, and parti-

cularly not to accept of any thing which might
be offered as an equivalent for the reltitution of
Burrundyd,

Requifs IN conftqiience of this refilution, he appointed
Francis to
prftorm Lannoy and Alarcun to repair, as his ambaffa-
what he had
nipuljtej. dors, to the court of France, and formally to

summon the King, either to execute the treaty
with the sincerity that became him, or to return,
according to his oath, a pritoner to Madrid.
Intlead of giving them an immediate answer,
Francis admitted the deputies of the flates
of Burgundy to an audience in their presence.
They humbly represented to him, that he had
exceeded the powers vested in a King of France,
when he consented to alienate their country
from the crown, the domains of which he was
bound by his coronation oath to preserve entire
and unimpaired. Francis, in return, thanked
them for their attachment to his crown, and in-
treated them, though very faintly, to remember
the obligations which he lay under to fulfil his
engagements with the Emperor. The deputies,
afTuming an higher tone, declared, that they
would not obey commands which they confidered
as illegal; and, if he flould abandon them to
the enemies of France, they had relblved to de-

Guic, 1. xvii. 366.

fend

fend themselves to the best of their power, with B o v K.
a firm purpose rather to perish than submit to a v--
foreign dominion. Upon which Francis turning '5'6.
towards the Imperial ambassadors, represented Hls a"ser*
to them the impossibility of performing what he
had undertaken, and offered, in lieu of Bur-
gundy, to pay the Emperor two millions of
crowns. The Viceroy and Alarcon, who eaily
perceived, that the fccne to which they had been
witnesses, was concerted between the King and
his fubjets in order to impose upon them, fig-
nified to him their master's fixed resolution not
to depart in the smallest point from the terms of
the treaty, and withdrew*. Before they left the
kingdom, they had the mortification to hear the
holy league against the Emperor published with June r;
great solemnity.

CHARLES no sooner received an account of this The f'pe.

ror's pre-
confederacy than he exclaimed in the most pub- parations

for war.

lick manner, and in the harshel terms, against
Francis, as a Prince void of faith, and of honour.
He complained no less of Clement, whom he
solicited in vain to abandon his new allies; he
accused him of ingratitude; he taxed him with
an ambition unbecoming his charater; he
threatened him not only with all the vengeance
which the power of an Emperor can infliit, but,
by appealing to a general council, called up be..

* Belcar. Comment. de Reb, Gal. 573. Mcm. de Belt
lay, 97.

fore

B ° gK fore him all the terrors arising from the authority

AV.
bm.-~- of those aifemblies so formidable to the papal fee.

Ss6.' It was necessary, however, to oppose something

else than reproaches and threats to the powerful
combination formed against him; and the Em-
peror, prompted by so many paflions, did not
fail to exert himself with unusual vigour, in or-
der to fend supplies, not only of men, but of mo-
ney, which was still more needed, into Italy.

Feeble ope- ON the other hand. the efforts of the confede-
thi°onc°f rates bore no proportion to that animosity againit
dCatct. the Emperor, with which they seemed to enter

into the holy league. Francis, it was thought,
would have infused spirit and vigour into the
whole body. He had his loft honour to repair,
many injuries to revenge, and the Itation among
the Princes of Europe, from which he had fallen,
to recover. From all there powerful incitements,
added to the natural impetuolity of his temper, a
war more fierce and bloody than any that he had
hitherto made upon his rival, was expected. But
Francis had gone through such a scene of distress,
and the imprefflon it had made was frill so frelh
in his memory, that he was become diffident of
himself, distrustful of fortune, and desirous of
tranquillity. To procure the release of his sons,
and to avoid the restitution of Burgundy by pay-
ing some reasonable equivalent, were his chief
objects; and for the fake of there, he would wil-
lingly have sacrificed Sforza, and the liberties
of Italy, to the Emperor. He flattered him-

self,

self, that the dread of the confederacy which he B 00 K
had formed would of itself induce Charles to -
liften to what was equitable; and was afraid of ,56'
employing any considerable force for the re-
lief of the Milanese, left his allies, whom he
had often found to be more attentive to their
own interest, than punctual in fulfilling their en-
gagements, ihould abandon him as soon as the
Imperialists were driven out of that country, and
deprive his negociations with the Emperor of
that weight which they derived from his being
at the head of a powerful league. In the mean
time the castle of Milan was pressed more closely
than ever, and Sforza was now reduced to the
last extremity. The Pope and Venetians, trust-
ing to Francis's concurrence, commanded their
troops to take the field, in order to relieve him i
and an army more than sufficient for that ser-
vice was soon formed. The Milanese, paflion-
ately attached to their unfortunate duke, and no
less exasperated against the Imperialists, who had
opprefled them so cruelly, were ready to aid the
confederates in all their enterprizes. But the
duke d'Urbino, their general, naturally flow and
indecisive, and restrained, betides, by his an-
cient enmity to the family of Medici, from tak-
ing any ftep that might aggrandize or add repu-
tation to the Pope , loft some opportunities, and
refuted to improve others, of attacking the Im-
perialifts, and rairing the siege. These delays

f Guic. 1. xvii. 382.

gave

B °V° K gave Bourbon time to bring up a reinforcement

_v-' of fresh troops, and a supply of money. He im-
T'S;. mediately took the command of the army, and

pufled on the siege with such vigour, as quickly
obliged Sforza to surrender, who retiring to Lo-
di, which the confederates had furprized, left
Bourbon in full poffeflion of the reft of the dutchy,
the investiture of which the Emperor had pro-
mifed to grant him A.

Di.quictude THE Italians began now to perceive the game
of the Ita.
lianpowers. which Francis had played, and to be sensible

that, notwithstanding all their address, and re-
finements in negociation, which they boasted
of as talents peculiarly their own, they had for
once been over-reached in those very arts by a
tramontane Prince. He had hitherto thrown al.
most the whole burden of the war upon them,
taking advantage of their efforts, in order to en-
force the proposals which he often renewed at the
court of Madrid for obtaining the liberty of his
sons. The Pope and Venetians expoftulated and
complainedh; but as they were not able to rouze
Francis from his inactivity, their own zeal and
vigour gradually abated, and Clement, having
already gone farther than his timidity usually per-
mitted him, began to accuse himself of raflnefs,
and to relapse into his natural state of doubt and
uncertainty.

c Guic. 1. xvii. 376, &c. h Rufcelli Lettere de
Principi, ii. i57, &c. 159, i6o-166.

ALL

ALL the Emperor's motions depending on B °, K
himself alone, were more brifl and better con- '-- J

i ci6.
certed. The narrowness of his revenues, in- M-ai'r.,of

ih'- Impt.

deed, did not allow him to mnake any sudden or riitts.
great effort in the field, but he abundantly sup-
plied that defect by his intrigues and negocia-
tions. The family of Colonna, the most power-
ful of all the Roman barons, had adhered uni-
formly to the Ghibeline or Imperial faction, dur-
ing thole fierce contentions between the Popes
and Emperors, which, f:r ieveral ages, filled
Italy and Germany with discord and bloodihed.
Though the causes which at first gave birth to
these deftruAive factions existed no longer, and
the rage with which they had been animated was
in a great measure spent, the Colonnas fill re-
tained their attachment to the Imperial interft,
and by placing themselves under the protec.ion
of the Emperors, secured the quiet poffeflion of
their own territories and privileges. The Car-
dinal Pompeo Colonna, a man of a turbulent
and ambitious temper, at that time the head of
the family, had long been Clement's rival, to
whose inluence in the last conclave he imputed
the disappointment of all his schemes for attain-
ing the papal dignity, of which, from his known
conne&ion with the Emperor, he thought him-
'elf secure. This was too great an injury to an
aspiring mind ever to be forgiven; and though
he had dissembled his refcntment to far as to
vote for Clement at his election, and to accept

VOL. II. A a of

* o ° K of great offices in his court, he waited with the

- utmost impatience for an opportunity of being

revenged. Don Hugo di Moncada, the Impe-
rial ambaffldor at Rome, who was no stranger
to there sentiments, easily persuaded him, that
tow was the time, while all the papal troops
were employed in Lombardy, to attempt some-
thing, which would at once avenge his own
wrongs, and be of essential service to the Empe-
ror his patron. The Pope, however, whose ti-
midity rendered him quick-lighted, was so at-
tentive to their operations, and began to be
alarmed so early, that he might have drawn to-
gether troops iufficient to have disconcerted all
Colonna's measures. But Moncada amused him
so artfully with negociations, promises, and false
intelligence, that he lulled asleep all his fufpi-
cions, and prevented his taking any of the pre-
cautions necessary for his safety; and to the
eternal disgrace of a prince poffefled of great
power, as well as renowned for political wisdom,
Colonna, at the head of three thousand men,

Ti^ Ci,9'- seized one of the gates of his capital, while he,
,ftboCr imagining himself to be in perfect security, was
.omC. altogether unprepared for refifing such a feeble

enemy. The inhabitants of Rome permitted
Colonna's troops, from whom they apprehended
no injury, to advance without opposition; the
Pope's guards were dispersed in a moment; and
Clement himself, terrified at the danger, ashamed
of his own credulity, and deserted by almost
.every person, fled with precipitation into the

4At(s~~ ~castle

castle of St. Angelo, which was immediately in- B o° K
vested. The palace of the Vatican, the church -v-
of St. Peter, and the houses of the Pope's mini-
fters and servants, were plundered in the mioft
licentious manner the reft of the city was left
unmoletted. Clement, destitute of every thing
necessary either for subsistence or defence, was
soon obliged to demand a capitulation; and
Moncada, being admitted into the castle, pre- Accommo.

dation be.

fcribed to him, with all the haughtiness of a tween the
conqueror, conditions which it was not in his ope P,.
power to reje&. The chief of there was, That
Clement should not only grant a full pardon to
the Colonnas, but receive them into favour, and
immediately withdraw all the troops in his pay
from the army of the confederates in Lom-
bardy'.

THE Colonnas, who talked of nothing less

than of deposing Clement, and of placing Pom-
peo, their kinfinan, in the vacant chair of St.
Peter, exclaimed loudly against a treaty which
left them at the mercy of a Pontiff uftly incenf-
ed against them. But Moncada, attentive only
to his master's interest, paid little regard to their
complaints, and, by this fortunate measure, broke
entirely the power of the confederates.

WHILE the army of the confederates suffered The Impe.

rial urmy
such a considerable diminution, the Imperialists reinfocs,.

t Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. p. Guic. 1. xvii. 40o.
Rufcclli Lettere de PYincipi, i. p. 1iw.

A a 2 received

B o°0 K received two great reinforcements; one firor

IV.
v-- ' Spain, under the command of Lannoy and Alar-

6. con, which amounted to iix thousand men; the

other was raised in the empire by George
Fronfperg, a German nobleman, who having
served in Italy with great reputation, had ac-
quired such influence and popularity, that mul-
titudes of his countrymen, fond on every occa-
sion of engaging in military enterprizes, and im-
patient at that juncture to escape from the op-
preflion of their superiors in religious as well as
civil matters, crowded to his standard; so that,
without any other gratuity than the payment
of a crown to each man, fourteen thousand en-
lifted in his service. To there the Archduke
Ferdinand added two thousand horse, levied in
the Austrian dominions. But although the Em-
peror had raited troops, he could not remic
the fums necessary for their support. His or-
dinary revenues were exhausted; the credit of
princes, during the infancy of commerce, was
not extensive; and the Cortes of Castile, though
every art had been tried to gain them, and some
innovations had been made in the contitution,
in order to fccure their concurrence, peremp-
torily refused to grant Charles any extraordi-
nary fupplyk; so that the more his army in-
creased in number, the more were his generals
cmbarraffed and distressed. Bourbon, in par-
ticular, was involved in such difficulties, that

: Sandov. i. 814.

he

he flood in need of all his address and courage B o V K
in order to extricate himself. Vast fums were .-~
due to the Spanish troops already in the Milan- 's'6
efe, when Fronfperg arrived wi:h sixteen thou-
sand hungry Germans, defitute of every thing.
Both made their demands with equal fierceness;

Tlhe Empeo

the former claiming their arrears, and the lat- ror's sin.n-
tcr, the pay which had been promised them on ,l i'
their entering Lombardy. Bourbon was alto-
gether incapable of giving fatisfaaion to either.
In this situation, he was confLrained to commit
acts of violence extremely flocking to his own
nature, which was generous and humane. He
seized the principal citizens of Milan, and by
threats, and even by torture, forced from them
a considerable ruin; he rifled the churches of
all their plate and ornaments; the inadequate
supply which these afforded, he diaLribuied aniong
the soldiers, with lo many soothing exprei.lns
of his sympathy and afftetion, that, t ho!gh it
fell far short of the fums due to them, it ap-
peared their prelient murmurs'.

AMONG other expedients for rairing rionney, n,,

Bourbon granted his life and liberty to Molon: , ....
who having been kept in prison since hii in-
trigue with Pescara, hlad been coind.neliicd tu die
Ly tlhe Spanish judges eni.powered to try him.

oL,' .'.s remiflion he paid twenty tliou!'lnd dcu-
cats aild such were his singular talents, and the

Ripamond. Hiil. Mediol. lib. ix. p. 717.

A a 3 wondlrful

B ° 0 K wonderful ascendant which he always acquired
a.-,- over the minds of those to whom he had access,

'se' 'that in a few days, from being Bourbon's pri-

soner, he became his prime confident, with whom
he consulted in all affairs of importance. To his
insinuations must be imputed the suspicions which
Bourbon began to entertain, that the Emperor
had never intended to grant him the inveititure
of Milan, but had appointed Leyva, and the
other Spanish generals, rather to be spies on his
condu&, than to co-operate heartily towards the
execution of his fcheimes. To him likewise, as
be still retained, at the age of fourscore, all the
enterprizing spirit of youth, may be attributed
the bold and unexpeced measure on which Bour-
bon soon after ventured.

Hi' delibe- SUCe, indeed, were the exigences of the Im-
rations with
rapcet to penal troops in the Milanese, that it became in-
his motion. dilpenpably neceflary to take rome immediate

Rep for their relief. The arrears of the soldiers
increased daily; the Emperor made no remit-
tances to his generals; and the utmost rigour
of military extortion could draw nothing more
from a country entirely drained and ruined. In
this situation there was no choice left, but either
to disband the army, or to march for fubfiftance
into the enemy's country. The territories of the
Venetians lay nearest at hand ; but they, with
their usual foresight and prudence, had taken

ri Gtuic. L xvii. 419.

such1

such precautions as secured them from any in- Ba OO 6
fult. Nothing, therefore, remained but to in- --
vade the dominions of the church, or of the '5*
Florentines; and Clement had of late aated such
a part, as merited the severest vengeance from
the Emperor. No sooner did his troops return
to Rome after the infurre&ion of the Colonnas,
than, without paying any regard to the treaty
with Moncada, he degraded the Cardinal Co-
lonna, excommunicated the reft of the family,
seized their places of strength, and waited their
lands with all the cruelty which the finart of a
recent injury naturally excites. After this, he
turned his arms against Naples, and as his ppep
rations were seconded by the French fleet, he
made some progress towards the conquest of
that kingdom; the Viceroy being no less defti-
tute than the other Imperial generals of the money
requisite for a vigorous defence".

THESE proceedings of the Pope justified, in I,,.

appearance, the measures which Bourbon's situ- sahsh.o
ation rendered necessary; and he set about exe- Pop'ster.
cuting them under such disadvantages, as furnish
the strongest proof both of the despair to which
he was reduced, and of the greatness of his abi-
lities which were able to surmount so many ob-
ftacles. Having committed the government of
Milan to Leyva, whom he was not unwilling
to leave behind, he began his march in the depth J1.nary 3.

Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. Guic. 1. xviii. T4.

A a4 of

B °0 K of winter, at the head of twenty-five thousand

IV.

-- men, comofied of nations differing from each
'517 other in language and manners; without money,

without magazines, without artillery, without
carriages; in short, without any of those things
which are necefTary to the final!et part,, and
which seem elTential to the existence and mo-
tions of a great army. His route lay through
a country cut by rivers and mountains, in which
the roads were almost impracticable; as an ad-
dition to his diituculties, the enemy's army, si;-
perior to his own in number, was at hand to
watch all his motions, and to improve every
advantage. But his troops, impatient of their
present hardfllips, and allured by the hopes of
immenif booty, without confidcring how ill
provided they were for a march, followed him
with great chearfulnefs. His first scheme was to
have made himself master of Placcntia, and to
have gratified his soldiers with the plunder of
that city; but the vigilance of the confederate
generals rendered the design abortive; nor had
he better success in his projec for the reducion
of Bologna, which was featonably supplied with
as many troops as secured it from the insults of
an army which had neither artillery nor anmnu-
nition. Having failed in both there attempts to
become master of foine great city, he was under
a necessity of advancing. But he had now been
t.vo months in the field his troops had suffered
every calamity that a long march, together with
the uncommon rigour of the ficaon, could bring

upon

upon men defitute of all neceflary accommo- B ° K
dations in an enemy's country; the magnificent - _
promiles to which they trusted, had proved alto- *57"
gether vain; they saw no profpet of relief;
their patience, tried to the utmolt, failed at latt,
and they broke out into open mutiny. Some T,..;,ny of
officers, who rafhily attempted to reflrain them, his troor.
fell vidims to their fury; Bourbon hiiimnlf, not
daring to appear during the firil transports of
their rage, was obliged to fly i:crctly from his
quarters". But this ifddten ebillition of wrath
began at 1ilk to ti;bfide; when Bourbon, who
poltifrcd in a wonderful degree the art of govern-
ing the minds of soldiers, renewed his promriles
with more confidence than formerly, and assured
thlem that they would be loon accomplihlhed.
IIe endeavoured to render their hardlhfips more
tolerable, by partakingof them hifelf; he fared
no better than the meanest centinel ; he marched
along with them on foot; he joined them in
linging their camp-ballads, in which, with high
praifcs of his valour, thlcy mingled many Itrokes
of military raillery on hi-s p::'crty; and wherever
they came, he allowed thlc;n, as a foretafit of
wlat he had promitd, to plunder the adjacent
villages at discretion. Encouraged by all thefl
soothing arts, they entirely forgot their fifFelrings
and complaints, and followed him with the fame
implicit confidence as formerly P,

" Guic. 1. xviii. 434. Jovii V olon. 163.
1 Oeuvrcsde Brandt, vol.i. iv 1 46, &c.

BOURBON,

a 0 0 K BoURBoN, meanwhile, carefully concealed his

intentions. Rome and Florence, not knowing

Tsiopes on which the blow would fall, were held in the
,iop, . most disquieting Rate of fufpence. Clement,
""s equally solicitous for the safety of both, flutuated

in more than his usual uncertainty; and while
the rapid approach of danger called for prompt
and decisive measures, he spent the time in de-
liberations which came to no issue, or in taking
resolutions, which, next day, his restless mind,
more sagacious in discerning than in obviating
difficulties, overturned, without being able to
fix on what should be substituted in their place.
At one time he determined to unite himself
more closely than ever with his allies, and to
pulh on the war with vigour; at another, he
inclined to bring all differences to a final accom-
modation by treaty with Lannoy, who knowing
his paRion for negociation, solicited him incef-

h fantly with proposals for that purpose. His

Concludo * timidity at length prevailed, and led him to con-
treaty with

Viceroy elude an agreement with Lannoy, of which the
ofNlplei following were the chief articles: That a sus-

pension of arms should take place between the
Pontifical and Imperial troops for eight months;
That Clement should advance sixty thousand
crowns towards satisfying the demands of the Im-
perial army; That the Colonnas ihould be ab-
bflved from censure, and their former dignities
and pofeffions be restored to them; That the
viceroy should come to Rome, and prevent Bour-

bor

bon from approaching nearer to that city, or B °o°
to Florenceq. On this hasty treaty, which de- I
prived him of all hopes of afiiftance from his al- 2s5?.
lies, without affording him any solid foundation'
offecurity, Clement relied so firmly, that, like a
man extricated at once out of all difficulties, he
was at perse& ease, and in the fulness of his con-
fidence disbanded all his troops, except as many
as were sufficient to guard his own person. This
amazing confidence of Clement's, who on every
other occasion was fearful and suspicious to ex-
cess, appeared so unaccountable to Guicciardini,
who being at that time the pontifical commifrary-
general and resident in the confederate army,
bad great opportunities, as well as great abilities,
for observing how chimerical all his hopes were,
that he imputes the Pope's conduct, at this junc-
ture, wholly to infatuation, which those who are
doomed to ruin cannot avoid'.

LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have ex- wh;ch

ecuted the treaty with great sincerity i and hav- Bou.bon
ing detached Clement from the confederacy,
wilhed to turn Bourbon's arms against the Vene-
tians, who, of all the powers at war with the
Emperor, had exerted the greatest vigour. With
this view he dispatched a courier to Bourbon,
informing him of the suspension of arms, which,
in the name of their common mailer, he had
concluded with the Pope. Bourbon had other

g Guic. 1. viii. 436. ' Guic. 1, xviii. 44..

fchcmncs;

IB 0 K schemes; and he had prosecuted them now too
IV.

far to think of retreating. To have mentioned
7 a retreat to his soldiers, would have been dan.

gerous; his command was independent on Lan-
noy: he was fond of mortifying a man whom he
had many reasons to hate: for these reasons,
without paying the ieaft regard to the meffige,
he continued to ravage the eccleliaftical territo-
ries, and to advance towards Florence. Upon
this, all Clement's terror and anxiety returning
with new force, he had recourse to Lannoy, and
intreated and conjured him to p-:t a stop ro
Bourbon's progress. Lannoy accordingly set out
for his camp, but durst not approach it; Bour-
bon's soldiers having got notice of the truce,
raged and threatened, demanding the accoin-
plifhment of the prolnifes to which they had
trusted; their general himself could hardly rc-
strain them; every person in Rome perceived
that nothing remained but to prcpare for relifling
a ftorn which it was now impolible to difll.
Clement alone, relying on some ambiguouss and
deceitful profeisions which Bourbn m1ade of lis
inclination towards peace, funk baL.ck into lii
former security .

Advances BouP.noN, on lis part, was far firom; becing free
towards from solicitude. All his attempts on any place

of importance had hitherto mifcanriced and Flo-
rence, towards whicli he had been app.roaching

Guic. 1. xviii. 437, 5c. Mem, dc Bcllay, p. Io.

for

for some time, was, by the arrival of the duke B 1

o K

d'Urbino's army, put in a condition to set his -
power at defiance. As it now became necessary
to change his route, and to take ir.fantly fore
new ridolution, he fixed without hesitation on
one no leCs daring in itself, than it was impious,
according to the opinion of that age. This was
to a1au1lt and ?plnnder Rome. Many reasons,
however, prompted him to it. He was fond of
thwartinpg Lrn.ny, who had undertaken for the
safety of that city; he imagtined that the Em-
pcoir woulde be highly pleated to fee Clement,
thJ chief auttor of the league againtl him,
hulrbled ; he flattered himself, that by gratify-
ing the rapacity of his soldiers with such im-
imnfe booty, he would attach them for ever to
his interefit; or (which is still more probable
than any ofthefe) he hoped that by means of the
power and fame, which he would acquire from
the ccnqueft of the sirs city in Chriffendom, that
he might lay the foundation of an independent
power; and that, afrer shaking off all connec-
tion \i:h the Emperor, he might take poffefrion
of N o:nlc, or of ibTln of the Ictaian fl.res in his
own n.lmi'

WHArTEV rx hi mo1t.'ei .vere, he executed his The Pope'*

reiblution with a raidiry cq:.ai to the boldness p'de't°nfn0
with which he had for'ed it. H-is soldiers, now

t Brant. iv, z7 .
7. 3.9. B::Iii. Comment. 594+

that

B 0 0 K that they had their prey in full view, complained
'-»-s neither of fatigue, nor famine, nor want of pay.
'5t7 No sooner did they begin to move from Tuscany

towards Rome, than the Pope, sensible at latt
how fallacious the hopes had been on which
he reposed, larted from his security. But no
time now remained, even for a bold and decisive
Pontiff, to have taken proper measures, or to
have formed any effectual plan of defence. Un.
der Clement's feeble condu&, all was confterna-
tion, disorder, and irresolution. He colleted,
however, such of his disbanded soldiers as fill re-
mained in the city; he armed the artificers of
Rome, and the footmen and train-bearers of the
Cardinals; he repaired the breaches in the walls;
he begun to erec new works; he excommuni-
cated Bourbon and all his troops, branding the
Germans with the name of Lutherans, and the
Spaniards with that of Moors". Trusting to
these ineffetual military preparations, or to his
spiritual arms, which were fill more despised by
rapacious soldiers, he seems to have laid aside
his natural timidity, and contrary to the advice
of all his counsellors, determined to wait the
approach of an enemy whom he might easily have
avoided by a timely retreat.

AIflt of BOURBON, who saw the necessity of dispatch,
Root. now that his intentions were known, advanced

with such speed, that he gained several marches

" Seckend. lib. ii. 68.

On

on the duke d'Urbino's army, and encamped B o o
in the plains of Rome on the evening of the -
fifth of May. From thence he Ihewed his fol- 's57
diers the palaces and churches of that city, into
which, as the capital of the Christian common-
wealth, the riches of all Europe had flowed dur-
ing many centuries, without having been once
violated by any hoflile hand; and commanding
them to refresh themselves that night, as a pre-
paration for the afTault next day, promised them,
in reward of their toils and valour, the poffeflion
of all the treasures accumulated there.

EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had

determined to distinguish that day either by his
death or the success of his enterprze, appeared
at the head of his troops, clad in complete
armour, above which he wore a vest of white
tissue, that he might be more conspicuous both
to his friends and to his enemies; and as all de-
pended on one bold impreflion, he led them in-
flantly to scale the walls. Three diftind bo-
dies, one of Germans, another of Spaniards,
and the last of Italians, the three different na-
tions of whom the army was composed, were ap-
pointed to this service; a separate attack was as-
signed to each; and the whole army advanced to
support them as occasion should require. A
thick mist concealed their approach until they
reached almost the brink of the ditch which
surrounded the suburbs having planted their

ladders

o, 0 K ladders in a moment, each brigade rufled on
iV.
-L-,. to the aiTault with an impetuosfty heightened by

national emulation. They were received at firfl
with fortitude equal to their own ; the Swiss in
the Pope's guards, and the veteran foldicrs who
had been assembled, fought with a courage be-
coming men to whom the defence of the noblest
city in the world was entrusted. Bourbon's
troops, notwithstanding all their valour, gained
no ground, and even began to give way when
their leader, perceiving that on this critical mo-
ment the fate of the day depended, threw him-
elffrom his horse, prefed to the front, snatched
a fcaling-ladder from a soldier, planted.it against
the wall, and began to mount it, encouraging his
men with .is voice -and hand to' follow him.
Bourbon But at that very inflant, a.mufket bullet.from the

' ramparts pierced his groin with a wound,. which

be immediately felt to. be. mortal; but he re-
tained so much presence of mind as to desire
those who were near him to cover his body with
a cloak, that his death might not dishearten his
troops; and soon after he expired with a courage
worthy of a better cause, and which would have
entitled him to the highest praise, if he had thus
fallen.in defence of his country, not at the head
of its enemies".

x Mem. de Bellay, iot. Guic. . xviii, p. 445, &c.
Oeuv de:Brant. iv.. z57, &c.

; *
3 . Tmrn;-

THIS fatal event could not be concealed from B o0 0

IV.

the army; the soldiers soon miffed their general, '
whom they were accustomed to fee in every time Thecty
of danger; but inRead of being dilheartened by tken.
their loss, it animated them with new valour;
the name of Bourbon resounded along the line,
accompanied with the cry of blood and revenge.
The veterans who defended the walls, were soon
overpowered by numbers; the untrained body
of city recruits fled at the fight of danger, and
the enemy, with irrefitible violence, rufled into.
the town.

DURING the combat, Clement was employed

at the altar of St. Peter's in offering up to Heaven
unavailing prayers for vi&tory. No sooner was
he informed that his troops began to give way,
than he fled with precipitation; and with an in-
fatuation till more amazing than any thing al-
ready mentioned, instead of making his escape
by the opposite gate, where there was no enemy
to oppose it, he shut himself up, together with
thirteen cardinals, the foreign ambassadors, and
many persons of difin&ion, in the caRle of St.
Angelo, which, froin his late misfortune, he
might have known to be an insecure retreat.
In his way from the Vatican to that fortress, he
saw his troops flying before an enemy, who pur.
sued without giving quarter, he heard the cries
and lamentations of the Roman citizens, and be-
held the beginning of those calamities which his

VOL. II. B b own

B 0 K own credulity and ill conduc had brought upon

his fubjeats.

51z7.
plandedc. IT is imporffble to describe, or even to imagine

the misery and horror of that scene which fol-
lowed. Whatever a city taken by torm can
dread from military rage, unrestrained by difci-
pline; whatever excesses the ferocity of the Ger-
mans, the avarice of the Spaniards, or the licen-
tioufnefs of the. Italians could commit, these
the wretched inhabitants were obliged to susser.
Churches, palaces, and the houses of private per-
sons were plundered without diftin&ion. No age,
or characer, or sex, was exempt from injury.
Cardinals, nobles, priests, matrons, virgins, were
all the prey of soldiers, and at the mercy of men
deaf to the voice of humanity. Nor did there
outrages cease, as is usual in towns which are car-
zied by aflaulr, when the first fury of the storm
was over; the Imperialists kept poffeflion of Rome
several months; and, during all that time, the in-
folence and brutality of the soldiers hardly abated.
Their booty in ready money alone amounted to
a million of ducats what they raised by ransom$
and exactions far exceeded that fum. Rome,
though taken several different times by the north-
ern nations, who over-ran the Empire in the fifth
and sixth centuries, was never treated with so
much cruelty by the barbarous and heathen Hunsa

T Jov. Vit. Colon. 165.

Vandals,

Vandals, or Goths, as now by the bigoted sub- B o 0
je&s of a catholick Monarchz. --

15X7.
AFTER Bourbon's death, the command of the The Pope

besleged in

Imperial army devolved on Philibert de Chalons thealfte'of
prince of Orange, who with difficulty prevailed st A"sc^.
on as many of his soldiers to defif from the pil-
lage as were necessary to inveit the castle of St.
Angelo. Clement was immediately sensible of
his error in having retired into that ill-provided
and untenable fort. But as the Imperialists,
scorning discipline, and intent only on plunder,
puihed the siege with little vigour, he did not
despair of holding out until the duke d'Urbino
fihould come to his relief. That general advanced
at the head of an army compored of Venetians,
Florentines, and Swiss, in the pay of France, of
sufficient strength to have delivered Clement from
the present danger. But d'Urbino, preferring
the indulgence of his hatred against the family
of Medici to the glory of delivering the capital
of Christendom, and the head of the church, pro-
nounced the enterprize to be too hazardous ; and,
from an exquisite refinement in revenge, having
marched forward so far, that his army being seen
from the ramparts of St. Angelo, flattered the
Pope with the profpet of certain relief, he im.
mediately retired'. Clement, deprived of every

z Jov. Vit. Colon. 166. Guic. 1. xviii. 440, &c. Corn.

inent. de capta urbc Romte ap. Scardium, ii. 230. JUlloa
Vita dell. Carlo V. p. 10o, &c. Gianonne HiR. of Nap. B.
axi c 3. . i. 507. a Gui¢. 1. xviii. 450.

B b z resource,

B3 0 K resource, and reduced to such extremity of famine

IV.

--.- as to feed on asses flefhb, was obliged to capi,
Jun.6.' tulate on such conditions as the conquerors were
SremTfa pleased toprefcribe. Heagreedto pay fourhun-
rifn'. idred thousand ducats to the army; to surrender

to the Emperor all the places of strength belong-
ing to the church; and, besides giving hostages,
to remain a priobner himself until the chief ar-
ticles were performed. He was committed to
the care of Alarcon, who, by his severe vigilance
in guarding Francis, had given full proof of his
being qualified for that office; and thus, by a
singular accident, the fame man had the custody of
the two most illustrious personages who had been
made prisoners in Europe during several ages.

The Em. THE account of this extraordinary and unex,
haonur e peted event was no less surprising than agreeable
l",ut' to the Emperor. But in order to conceal his joy

from his fubjeas, who were filled with horror at
the fuceels and crimes of their countrymen, and
to lessen the indignation of the reft of Europe,
he declared that Rome had been assaulted without
any order from him. He wrote to all the princes
with whom he was in alliance, disclaiming his
having had any knowledge of Bourbon's iuiten-
tion'. He put himself and court into mourning,
commanded the rejoicings which had been order.
ed for the birth of his son Philip to be ltopped;
and employing an artifice no less hypocritical than

j Joy. Vit. Colon. 167.
Rufcelli Lettere di Principi, ii. 23+.

O gross,

gross, he appointed prayers and procelfions B o I K
throughout all Spain for the recovery of the -
Pope's liberty, which, by an order to his gene- '57
rals, he could have immediately granted himd.

THE good fortune of the house of Austria was Solin*n.

^ r r * * r v ' vades Hua.

no less conspicuous in another part of Europe. gary.
Solyman having invaded Hungary with an army
three hundred thousand firong, Lewis II. King of
that country, and of Bohemia, a weak and un-
experienced prince, advanced ralhly to meet him
with a body of men which did not amount to
thirty thousand. With an imprudence still more
unpardonable, he gave the command of these
troops to Paul Tomorri, a Franciscan monk,
archbishop of Golocza. This aukward general,
in the dress of his order, girt with its cord,
marched at the head of the troops; and, hurried
on by his own presumption, as well as by the im-
petuofity of nobles who despised danger, but
were impatient of long service, he fought the
fatal battle of Mohacz, in which the King, the Ai9'
flower of the Hungarian nobility, and upwards of
twenty thousand men, fell the vi&ims of his folly
and ill-condut. Solyman, after his victory, Drfenrc
seized and kept pofleffion of several towns of th^Hnund
greatest strength in the southern provinces of d-ehof

thdr Kin!-

Hlungary, and, over-running the reft of the
country, carried near two hundred thousand per-
sons into captivity. As Lewis was the last male

d Sleid. log. Sandov. . 8zz. Mauroc. Hif.Veneta,lib,
iii. 220.

Of

B °0 K of the royal family of Jagellon, the Archduke

IV.
*t.--. Ferdinand claimed both his crowns. This claim

'527. was founded on a double title; the one derived

from the ancient pretensions of the house of
Austria to both kingdoms; the other from the
right of his wife, the only filser of the deceased
Monarch. The feudal institutions, however, sub-
fited both in Hungary and Bohemia in such
vigouri and the nobles pofleffed such extensive
power, that the crowns were still elective, and
Ferdinand's rights, if they had not been power-
fully supported, would have met with little re-
gard. But his own personal merit;.. the refpe&r
due to the brother of the greatest Monarch in

rerdinand Christendom; the necessity of chufing a prince
si;.a. able to afford his fubjecs fbme additional protec-

tion against the Turkish arms, which, as they-
had recently felt their power, they greatly dread-
ed; together with the intrigues of his sifter, who
had been married to the late King, overcame the
prejudices which the.Hungarians had conceived
against the Archduke as a foreigner;. and though
a cqnfiderable party voted for the Vaywode of
Tranfilvania, at length secured Ferdinand the
throne of that kingdom. The Rfates of Bohemia
imitated the example of their neighbour king-
dom; but in order to ascertain and secure their
own privileges, they obliged Ferdinand, before
his coronation, to subscribe a deed which they
term. a Reverse, declaring that he held that crown
not by any previous right, but by their gratuitous
and voluntary eletion. By such a vast acceflion

7 of

of territories, the hereditary poffeflion of which B OO K
they secured in process of time to their family,
the princes of the house of Austria attained that 1527
pre-eminence in power which hath rendered them
so formidable to the tef of Germany'.

THE dissensions between the Pope and Empe- PrFpres of

ror proved extremely favourable to the progress atRioo.
of Lutheranilin. Charles, exasperated by Cle-
ment's condu&, and fully employed in opposing
the league which he had formed against them,
had little inclination, and less leisure, to take any
measures for suppressing the new opinions in Ger-
many. In a diet of the Empire held at Spires, June 5.
the state of religion came to be confidered, and I5z6.
all that the Emperor required of the princes was,
that they would wait patiently, and without en-
couraging innovations, for the meeting of a ge-
neral council which he had demanded of the Pope.
They, in return, acknowledged the convocation
of a council to be the proper and regular ftep to-
wards reforming abuses in the church; but con-
tended, that a national council held in Germany
would be more effecual for that purpose than
what he had proposed. To his advice, concern-
ing the discouragement of innovations, they paid
io little regard, that even during the meeting of
the diet at Spires, the divines who attended the

c Steph. Broderick Procancelarii Hungar. Clades in campo

Mohacz ap Scardiam, ii. 218. P. Barre His. d'Allcmagne,
tom. viii. part i. p. 198.

P!c or

p

B O 0 K Ele&or of Saxony and Landgrave of Heffe-Ca'el

thither, preached publickly, and administered the
'527. sacraments according to the rites of the Reform-

ed Church'. The tmperor's own example em-
bolden'ed the Germans to treat the Papal authority
with little reverence. During the heat of his re-
fentment against Clement,-he had published a
long reply to an angry beieve which the Pope had
intended as an apology for his own condu&. In
this manifesto, the Emperor, after having enu-
merated many instances of that Pontiff's ingra-
titude, deceit, and ambition, all which he painted
in the strongest and most aggravated colours, ap-
pealed from him to a general council. At the
fame time he wrote to the college of Cardinals,
complaining of Clement's partiality and in uftice;
and requiring them, if he refused of delayed to
call a council, to manifest their concern for the
peace of the Christian Church, so shamefully ne-
gle&ed by its chief pastor, by summoning that
assembly in their own names. This manifesto,
little inferior in virulence to the irive&ives of
Luther himself, was dispersed over Germany
with great industry, and being eagerly read by
persons of every rank, did much more than coun-
terbalance the effet of all Charles's declarations
againlt the new opinions.

' Sleid. 103. s Goldat. Polit. Imper. p. 984. /-

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. .'
