TH E '

HIS TORY

OF

SCOTLAND

DURING THE REIGNS OF

Qyeen MARY and of King JAMES VI.

TILL

His AccESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A

REVIEW of the SPOTTISH HISToRY previous to that Period

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

Py WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D,

VOLUME I.

THE FIFTH EDITION.

DUBLIN:

?RINTED FOR JAMES WILLIAMS IN SKINNER-RO W.

MDCCLXVI.

F,1

I :I

# PREFACE.

P R E F A C E.
I Deliver this book to the world with all the dif-

fidence and anxiety naturali to an, Author on

publishing his firfit performance. The time I have
employed, and the pains I have taken, in order to
render it worthy of the public approbation, it is,
perhaps, prudent to conceal, till it be known
whether that approbation shall ever be bestowed
upon it.

BUT, as I have departed, in many inflances,

from former Historians, as I have placed faas i: a
different light, and have drawn charaders with new
colours, I ought to account for this conduct to my
readers , and to produce the evidence, on which,
at the distance of two centuries, I presume to con-
tradi& the testimony of less remote, or even of co-
temporary historians.

THE tranfaDions in Mary's reign gave rife to

two parties, which were animated againit each other
with the fiercest political hatred, embittered by re-
ligious zeal. Each of there produced historians of
considerable merit, who adopted all their senti-
ments, and defended all their adions. Truth was
not the role obje& of these Authors. Blinded by
prejudices, and heated by the part which they
themselves had a&ed in the scenes they describe,
they wrote an apology for a facion, rather than
the history of their country. Succeeding Historians
have followed these guides almost implicitly. and
have repeated their errors and mifreprelentations.
But as the fame passions which inflamed parties In
that age have descended to their posterity; as il-
most every event in Mary's reign has become the
objet of doubt or of dispute ; the eager fpirip of
controversy loon discovered, that without fume evi-
dence more authentic and more impartial than that
of Historians, none of the points in question could

A 2 be

be decided with certainty. Records have there-
fore been searched, original papers have been pro-
duced, and public archives, as well as the repofi-
tories of private men, have been ransacked by the
zeal and curiosity of writers of different parties.
The attention of Cecil to colle& whatever related
to that period, in which he aded to conspicuous a
part, hath provided such an immense store of ori-
ginal papers for illuffrating this part of the English
and Scottish history, as are almost fufficient to fatif-
fy the utmost avidity of an Antiquarian. Sir Ro-
bert Cotton (whose library is now the property of
the public, made great and valuable additions to
Cecil's colledion ; and from this magazine, Digges,
the compilers of the Cabbala, Anderson, Keith,
Haynes, Forbes, have drawn most of the papers
which they have printed. No History of Scotland,
that merits any degree of attention, has appeared
since thele collections were published. By con-
fulting them, I have been enabled, in many in-
fiances, to cortre the inaccuracies of former His-
torians, to avoid their mniftakes, and to detert their
mifreprefen tations.

BUT many important papers have escaped the

notice of those industrious ColleCtors, and after all
they have produced to light, much Hill remained
in darknecs, unobserved or unpublished. It was
my duty to search fur these, and I found this un-
pleasant talk attended with considerable utility.

T~ i library of the honourable faculty of Advo-

cates at Edinburgh, contains not only a large col-
ledion of original papers relating to the affairs of
Scotland, but copies of others no less curious, which
have been preserved by Sir Robert Cotton, or are
extant in the public offices in England. Of all these,
the Curators of that library were pleased to allow
me the perusal.

THOUGH the Rritifh Mufaeum be not yet open

to the public, Dr. Birch, whose obliging disposition

is

is well known, procured me access to that noble
colletion, which is worthy the magnificence of a
great and polifhcd nation.

THAT vast and curious collecion of papers re-

lating to the reign of Elizabeth, which was made
by Dr. Forbes, and of whicdl he published only two
volumes, having been purchased since his death,
by the Lord Viicount Royfton, his Lordship was
to good as to allow me the use of fourteen Volumes
in Quarto, containing that part of them which is
connected with m\ lubjet.

Sia Alexander Lick Lurrmmunicated to me a very

valuable collection of origiInal papers, in two large
Volumes. They relate chi,-fly to the reign ot James.
Many or them are rmarkd with Archbishop Spots-
wood's hand; ar.A ;r appeals from several passages
in his !:iftory, thai le had perused them with great
atten tion.

Ma. Caiderwood, an eminent Presbyterian Cler-

gyman of the last centuryv, ccmp;hiled an Eiftory of
Scotland from the beginning o! the R.ign of James
V. to the death of James VI. In fix large Volumes;
wherein he has iidltrted many papers of confe-
quence, which are no where elCe to be found. A
copy of this history, which ftili remains in manus-
cript, in the pcilellon of the Church of Scotland,
was put into my hands by my worthy friend the
Reverelnd Kir. George Wifhart, principal Clerk of
the Church.

SIR David Dalrymple not only communicated to

me the papers w~ic!h he has colleted relating to
Gowrie's con si racy ; but by explaining to me his
sentiments with regard to that problematical pas-
sage in the Scrtifh history, has enabled me to
place that tranfation in a light which difpells much
of the darknlfs and confusion in which it has been
hitherto involved.

MR. Goodall, though he knew my sentiments

with regard to the condudt and characer of Queen

Mary

M.iry to be extremely different from his own, com-
muni-cated to me a volume of manuscripts in his
po;ieilion, which contains a great number of valua-
ble pa,'' i opied from the originals in the Cottoni-
an Library and Paper Office, by the late Reverend
Mr Crawford, Regius Profeifor of Church Hiffory
in the University of Edinburgh. I likewise re-
ceived from him the original Regiffer of letters
kept by the Regent Lenox during his adminiffra-
tion.

1 HAVE consulted all these papers, as far as, I

thought they could be of any ule, towards illuftra-
ting that period of which I write the hiffory. With
what filccefs I have employed them to confirm
what was already known, to ascertain what was
dubious, or to determine what was controverted,
the public muff judge.

I MIGHT easily have drawn, from the different

repositories to which I had access, as many papers
as would have rendered my Appendix equal in size
to the most bulky collection of my predeceflors.
But I have satisfied myself with publi(hing a few
of the most curious among them, to which I found
it necefTary to appeal as vouchers for my own ve-
racity. None of these, as far as 1 can recollect,
ever appeared in any former collecion.

I HAVE added to the Appendix a Critical Dif-

fertation concerning the murder of King Henry, and
the genuineness of the ueen's letters to Bothwell.
The fats and observations which relate to Mary's
letters. I owe to my friend Mr. John Davidson,
one of the Clerks to the Signet, who hath examined
this point with his usual acuteness and induffry.

THE

# BOOK I. Containing a review of the SCOTTISH History previous to the death of JAMES V.

THE -

H I S TOR Y

O F

SCOTLAND.

BOOK It.

Containing a review of the SCOTT isu Hifory previous

to the death of JAMES V.

THE firfl ages of the Scottish Hiffory are BooK I.

dark and fabulous. Nations, as well as
men, arrive at maturity by degrees, and Theorigi

the events, which happened during their infancy or fabulous
early youth, cannot be recollected, and deserve not and ob-
to be remembered. Thegrofs ignorance, which an- fcure.
ciently covered all the North of Europe, the conti-
nual migrations of its inhabitants, and the frequent
and deftrudive revolutions which these occasioned,
render it impoflible to give any authentic account
of thaorigin of the different kingdoms now establish-
ed there. Every thing beyond that (hort period, to
which well attested annals reach, is obscure; an im-
mense space is left for invention to occupy, each na-
tion, with a vanity inseparable from human nature1
hath filled that void with events calculated to display
its own antiquity, and lustre. And history which
ought to record truth and to teach wisdom, often
sets out with retailing fiAions and absurdities.

THE Scots carry their pretensions to antiquity at Origin of

high, as any of their neighbours. Relying upon the Scotn.
uncertain legends, and the traditions of their bards,

Vo. I. B still

;Q·\

BooK I. itill more uncertain, they reckon up a series of kings

Y1 several ages before the birth of Christ . and give a

particular detail of the occurrences, which happen-
ed in their reigns. But with regard to the Scots,
as well as the other northern nations, we receive
the earliest accounts on which we can depend, not
from their own, but from the Roman authors.

A. D. 8i.'When the Romans, under Agricoa,y first carried

their arms into the northern parts of Britain, they
found it poffeffed by the Caledonians, a fierce and
warlike people , and having repulsed, rather than
conquered them, they ereted a strong wall be-
tween the firths of Forth and Clyde, and there fix-
ed the boundaries of their empire. Adrian, on
account of the difficulty of defending such adiftant
frontier, contracted the limits of the Roman pro-
vince in Britain, by building a second wall, which

A.D. r±. ran between Newcffile and Carlisle. The ambiti-

on of succeeding Emperors endeavoured to recover
what Adrian had abandoned; and the country be-
tween the two walls was alternately under the do-
minion of the Romans, and the Caledonians. A.
bout the beginning of the fifth century, the inroads
of the Goths and other Barbarians obliged the Ro-
mans, in order to defend the centre of their em-
pire, to recal those legions, which guarded the
frontier provinces ; and at that time they quitted
all their conquefls in Britain.

A.D. 4zr. THEIR long residence in the iffand had polished

in some degree, the rude inhabitants, and the Bri-
tons were indebted to their intercourse with the
Romans, for the' art of writing, and the use of
numbers, without which it is impossible long to
preferre the memory of past events.

'NORTH BRITAIN was, by their retreat, left

under the dominion of the Scots and Pifts. The
former, who were not mentioned by any Roman
author, before the end of the fourth century, were

probably

probably a colony of the Celta or Gauls; their as- BooK L.
finity to whom appears from their language, their ' >
manners, and religious rites ,; circumstances more
decisive, with regard to the origin of nations, than
either fabulous traditions, or the tales of ill-inform-
ed, and ctedulous Annalifls. The Scots, if we
may believe the common accounts, fettled at first
in Ireland ,; and extending themselves by degrees,
landed at last on the coasts opposite to that, island,
and fixed their habitations there. Fierce and
bloody wars were, during several ages, carried on
between them and the Pidts. At length, Kenneth
II. the fixty-ninth King of the Scots (according to A.D. 838.
their own fabulous authors) obtained a complete
victory over the Picds, and united under one mo-
narchy, the whole country, from the wall of Adrian,
to the northern ocean. And his kingdom became
known by its present name, which it derived from
a people who at first fettled there as strangers, and
remained long obscure and inconsiderable.

FROM this period, the history of Scotland would Hifory of

merit some attention, were it accompanied with Scotlandr
any certainty; But as our remote antiquities are obscure.
involved in the fame darkness with those of other
nations, a calamity peculiar to ourselves has thrown
almost an equal obscurity over our more recent
tranfadtions. This was occasioned by the malici-
ous policy of Edward I. of England. Towards
the end of the thirteenth century, this monarch
called in question the independence of Scotland ;
pretending that that kingdom was held as a fief of
the crown of England, and fubjeAted to all the
conditions of a feudal tenure. In order to elta-
blifh his claim, he seized the public archives, he
ransacked churches and monasteries, and getting
poflefion, by force or fraud, of many historical
monuments, which tended to prove the antiquity ot
freedom of the kingdom, he carried Ibme of them
into England, and commanded the reft to beburn-

B 2 ct

T-*rm. have been the effe& of this fatal event, but some
ay nnes Eimperfe Chronicles had escaped the rage of Ed-

ward i foreign writers had recorded some impor-
tant fads relating to Scotland ,; and the traditions
concerning recent occurrences were fresh and wor-
thy of credit. There broken fragments, John de
Fordun, who lived in the fourteenth century, col-
leced with a pious industry, and from them pick-
ed out materials, which he formed into a regular
history. His work was received by his country-
men with applause ; and as no recourse could be
had to more ancient records, it supplied the place
of the authentic annals of the kingdom. It was
copied in many monalteries, and the thread of the
narrative was, continued by different monks, thro'
the subsequent reigns. In the, beginning of the
sixteenth century, John Major and Hecor Boethius
published their histories of Scotland, the former a
fuccind and dry writer, the latter a copious and
florid one, and both equally credulous. Not ma-
ny years after, Buchanan undertook the fame work;
and if his accuracy and impartiality had been, in
any degree, equal to the elegance of his taste, and
to the purity and vigour of his style, his history
might be placed on a level with the most admired
compositions of the ancients. But, instead of re-
jeding the improbable tales of Chronicle writers,
he was at the utmost pains to adorn them; and
hath cloathed with all the beauties and graces of
fition, those legends, which formerly had only
its wildness and extravagance.

THE hiflory of Scotland may properly be di-

Four re- vided into four periods. The first reaches from
markable the origin of the monarchy, to the reign of Ken-
arasin the neth II. The second from Kenneth's conquest of
bhry the Pids, to the death of Alexander Ill. The third

extends to the death of James V. The last, from

thence

thence to the acceflion of James VI. to the crown 8os> J.
of England. --

THE first period is the regipn of pure fable and

conjectdue, and ought to be totally negleted, or
be abandoned to the industry and credulity of an-
tiquaries. Truth begins to dawn in the second pe-
riod, with alight, feeble at first, but gradually in-
creasing; and the events which then happened,

.

may be slightly touched, but ::rerit no particular
or laborious enquiry. In the third, period, the
history of Scotland, chiefly by means of records
preserved in England, becomes more authentic -
not only are events related, but their! caules and
effeas explained ; the charatcers of the actors are
displayed ; the manners of the age described; the
revolutions in the constitution -pointed out: and
here every Scotsman thould begin, not to read only,
but to study the history of his country. During
the fourth period, the affairs of Scotland were so
mingled with those of other nations, its situation in
the political state of Europe was Co importantb its
influence on the operations of the neighbouring
kingdoms was so visible, that its history becomes
an obje&t of attention to Foreigners, and; without
some knowledge of the various and extraordinary
revolutions which happened there, they cannot
form a just notion either of the most illustrious e-
vents, or of the charadters of the most diftinguilhed
personages in the" sixteenth century.

THE following history is confined to the last of A review

these periods. To give a view of the political state ofthethird
of the kingdom, during that which immediately ra"
preceded it, is the design of this preliminary Book.
The imperfe knowledge which strangers hpve of
the affairs of Scotland, and the prejudices Scots
men themselves have imbibed with regard to the
various revolutions in the government of their
country, render such an introduacion equally ne-
ceffary to both.

B 3 The

Bsot I. The period, from the death of Alexander III to

"J-' the death of James V. contains upwards of two

cerituries and an half, from the year i z26, to the
year 1542.

Ir opens with the famous controversy, concern-

ing the independence of Scotland. Before the u-

Rifeofthe nion of the two kingdoms, this was a question of
ontrovern- much importance. If the one crown had been
ing the in- considered not as imperial and independent, but
dependen- as feudatory to the other, a treaty of union could
ceofScot- rit have been concluded on equal terms, and every

advnntnge whichthe dependent kingdom procured,
mltff have been esteemed the concession of a So-
vereign to hisvaffal. Accordingly, about the be-
girnning of the prefentcentury, and while a treaty
of union between the two kingdoms was on foot,
this controversy. was agitated with all the heat,
which national animofities naturally inspire. What
was then a fubjed of feiious concern, the union of
the two kingdoms hath rendered a matter of mere
ciiridfity. But thoughlthe objeds, which at that
time warmed and initreited both nations exist no
longer hi quellion which appeared so momentous
to our ricefeors, cannot be altogether indifferent
or unin:ftructive to us.

'SoME of the northern counties of England were
early in the hands of the Scottish kings, who, as
far back as the feudal cultoms can be traced, held
these poffeflions of the Kings of England, and did
homage to them on thit account. This homage,
due only for the territories which they held in Eng-
land, was in no wife d erogatory from their royal
dignity. Nothing is more fmitable to feudal ideas,
than that the fame person should be both a Lord
and a Vaflal, independent in one capacity, and de-
pendent in another*. The Crown of England was

without

A very singular proof of this occurs in the French biilory.

Arpin fold the vicompte of the city Bourges to Philip i. who

did

*without doubt imperial and independent, though Boot I.
the Princes who wore it were, for many ages, the ''
vanfals of the Kings of France; and, in confe-
.quence of their paffeltions in that kingdom, bound
to perform all the services, which a feudal Sove-
reign has a title to exact. The fame was the con-
dition of the Monarchs of Scotland; -free and in-
dependent as Kings, but, as poflefling EngliQl ter-
ritories, vassals to the King of England. The
Engli(h Monarchs, satisfied WirJh their legal aunl
uncontroverted rights, were neither capable, nor
had any thoughts of ufurping more. England,
when conquered by the Saxons, being divided by
them into many small kingdoms, was in no condi-
tion to extend its dominion over Scotland, united
at that time under one Monarch. And though
these petty principalities were gradually formed
into one kingdom, the reigning Princes exposed t9
continual invasions of the Danes, and often fi4bje.&-
ed to the yoke of those formidable pirates, fekldor
turned their arms towards Scotland, and were ut-
terly incapable of eitablihi'ng new rights in that
country. The first Kings of the Norman race,
busied with introducing their own laws and man-
ners into the kingdom which they had conquered,
or with maintaining themselves on the throne whidc
some of them poffeffed by a very dubious title,
were as little solicitous to acquire new authority,

B4 or

did homage to the Count of Sancerre for a part of there lands,
which he eld of that Nobleman, A. D. rt oo. I believe that
no example, of a King's doing homage to one of his own subjeCts,
is to he met with in the hillories either of England or Scotland.
Philip le bel abolished this pratice in France, A. D. 13oz. He-
naut. Abrege Cbronol. Somewhat similar to this, is a charter of
the Abbot of Melrofs, A. D. 53t, conflituting James V. the
Bailiff or Steward of that abbey, veftirg in him all the powerk
which pertained to that office, and requiring him to be answerable
to the Abbot for his exetrcifofthe fame. drchiiv. publ. Edin.

BooK I. or to form new pretensions in Scotland. An un-

--' V'°expeted calamity that befel one of the Scotch

Kings, first encouraged the English to think of
bringing his kingdom under dependence. William
King of Scotland being taken prisoner at Alnwick,
Henry II. as the price of his liberty, not only ex-
torted from him an exorbitant ransom, and a pro-
miCe to surrender the places of greatest ftrerigth in
his dominions, but compelled him to do homage
for his whole kingdom. Richard I. a generous Princt
solemnly renounced this claim of homage, and
ablolved William from the hard conditions which
Henry had imposed. Upon the death of Alexan-
der III. near a century after, Edward I. availing
himfelfof the situation of affairs in Scotland, ac-
quired an influence in that kingdom, which no
Engli(h monarch before him ever poffeffed, and
imitating the interested policy of Henry, rather
than the magnanimity of Richard, revived the
claim of sovereignty to which the former had
pretended.

Pretenfi- NIARGARIT of Norway, Grand-daughter of
ons of Alexander, and heir to his Crown, did not long
Bruce uandrvive him. The right of fucceflion belonged to
Baliol ex-
;mincd. the descendants of David Earl of Huntington, third

son of King David I. Among these, Robert Bruce,
and John Baliol, two illuifrious competitors for the
Crown, appeared. Brucewas the son of Ifabcl Earl
David's second daughter ; Baliol, the grandson of
Margaret the eldest daughter. According to.the
rules of fuccefiion, which are now efiablifhed, the
right of Baliol was preferable, and notwithftaad-
ing Bruce's plea of being nearer in blood to Earl
David, Baliol's claim, as the representative of his
mother and grandmother would be deemed incon-
teftible. But, in that age, the order of fucceiion
was not ascertained with the fame precision. The
question appeared to be no leTs intricate, than it
was important. And though the prejudices of the

people,

people, and perhaps the laws of the kingdom, fa- BooK I
voured Bruce, each of the rivals was supported by '^
a powerful faction. Arms alone, it was feared,
muff terminate a dispute too weighty for the laws
to decide. But, in order to avoid the mileries of
a civil war, Edward was chosen Umpire, and both
parties agreed to acquiesce in his decree. This
had well nigh proved fatal to the independence of
Scotland ,; and the nation by its eagerness to guard
against a civil war, was not only exposed to that
calamity, but almost subjected to a foreign yoke.
Edward was artful, brave, enterprising, and com-
manded a powerful and martial people, at peace
with the whole world. The anarchy which pre-
vailed in Scotland, and the ambition of Compe-
titors ready to sacrifice their country in order to
obtain even a dependent Crown, invited him first
to seize, and then to subjeCt the kingdom. The
authority of an umpire, which had been unwarily
bestowed upon him, and from which the Scots
dreaded no dangerous consequences, enabled him
to execute his schemes with the greater facility.
Under pretence of examining the question with the
utmost lolemnity, he funimoned all the Scottish Ba-
rons to Norham, and having gained Come, and
intimidated others, he prevailed on all who were
present, not excepting Eruce and Baliol, the com-
petitors, to acknowledge Scotland a fief of the
English Crown, and to swear fealty to him as their
Sovereign or Liege Lord. This flep led to another
still more important. As it was vain to pronounce
a sentence which he had not power to execute,
Edward demanded pofieffion of the kingdom, that
he might be able to deliver it to him whole right
should be found preferable. And such was the
pufilanimity of the nobles, and the impatient am-
bition of the competitors, that both assented to this
ifrange demand, and Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl
of Angus was the only man, who refused to fur*

render

BOOK I. render the cafttles in his cuflody to the enemy of

M his country. Edward finding Baliol the moss ob-

fequious and the least formidable of the two com-
petitors, soon after gave judgment in his favour.
Baliol once more profeffed himself the vatfal of
England, and submitted to every condition which
the Sovereign whom he had now acknowledged
was pleased to prescribe.

ED\WARD, having thus placed a creature of his

own upon the throne of Scotland, and compelled
the nobles to renounce the ancient liberties and
independence of their country, had reason to con-
l!udc that his dominion was now fully eftablilhed.
Eut he began too soon to assume the matter; his
new v'rfals, fierce and independent, bore with
impatience a yoke, to which they were not accuf-
tomed. Provoked by his haughtiness, even the
paflivc spirit of Ealiol began to mutiny. But Ed-
ward, who had no longer use for such a pa-
geant King, forced him to resign the Crown,
and openly attempted to seize it as fallen to him-
self, by the rebellion of his vassal. At that cri-
tical period, arose Sir WVilliam Wallace, a hero,
to whom the fond admiration of his countrymen
hath ascribed many fabulous aAs of prowess,
though his real valour, as well as integrity and

ilfdom, is fuich as needs not the heightenings of

fidion. He, almost tingle, ventured to take arms
in defence of the kingdom, and his boldness re-
vived the spirit of his countrymen. At lft, Ro-
bert Erucc, the grandson of him who flood in
competition with Ealiol, appeared to assert his
own rights, and to vindicate the honour of his
country. The nobles, nfhamed of their former
baseness, and inragcd at the many indignities of-
fered to the nation, crowded to his flandard. In
order to crush him at once, the Englith Monarch
entered Scotland, at the head of a mighty army.
Many battles were fought and the Scots, though

often

otten vanquished, were not subdued. The ardent Boor L
zeal with which the nobles contended for the in- -
dependence of the kingdom, the prudent valour
of Bruce, and above all a national enthufialm,
inspired by luch a cause, baffled the repeated es-
forts of Edward, and countcrbalanced all the ad-
vantages which he derived from the number, and
wealth of his fubjeds. And though the war con-
tinued with little intermiflion upwards of seven-
ty years, Bruce and his posterity kept pofeffion of
the throne of Scotland, and ruled with an authority
not inferior to that of its former Monarchs.

BUT while the sword, the ultimate judge of all

disputes between contending nations, was employ-
ed to terminate this controversy, neither Edward
nor the Scots teemed to distrust the justice of their
cause; and both appealed to history and records,
and from there produced, in their own favcrur,
lfch evidence as :hey pretended to be unanfwer-,
able. The letters and memorials addressed by
each party to the Pope, who was then reverenced
as the common father, and often appealed to as
the common judge of all Christian Princes, are flill
extant.The fabulous tales of the early British history;
The partial teffimony of ignorant Chroniclers ; sup-
pofititious treaties and charters ; are the proofs, on
which Edward founded his title to the sovereignty
of Scotland ;.and the homage, done by the Scottish
Monarchs for their lands in England, is prepof-
teroufly fuippofed to imply the fubjedion of their* Ander-
whole kingdom *. Ill founded, however, as their fon's His-
right was, the English did not fail to revive it, in torical
all the subsequent quarrels between the two king- Effaycon-
doms ; while the Scots disclaimed it with the ut- he ie-
mol Indignation. To this, we muff irrpute thependency,
fierce and implacable hatred to each other, which &c.
long inflamed both. Their national antipathies
were excited, not only by the usual circumstances
of frequent hoflilitics, and reciprocal injuries ; but

the

Boo, I. the English considered the Scots as vassals who
- had preiumed to rebel, and the Scots, in their turn,

regarded the E:nglish, as ufurpers who aimed at en-
lhaving their country.

sae30 AT the time, when Robert Bruce began his
the king- reign in Scotland, the lame form of government
dom when was established in all the kingdoms of Europe.
Bruce he- And the fuirprifing similarity, in their conflitution
gan his and laws, demonifrates that the nations which

overturned the Roman empire, and ereded thele
kingdoms, though divided into different tribes,
and dilt:igui(hed by different names, were origi-
nally the fime people. When we take a view of the
feudal system of laws and policy, that itupendous
and singular fabric ereated by them ; the first ob-
ject that strike: ';s is the King. And when we are
told that he is the sole proprietor of all the lands
within his dominions, that all his fubjeCs derive
their poffefions from him, an..! in return confe-
crate their lives to his service ; when we hear that
all marks of diftintion, and titles of dignity, flow
from him as the only fountain of honour ; when
we behold the most potent Peers, on their bended
knees, and with folded hands, swearing fealty at his
feet, and acknowledging him to be their Sovereign,
and their Liege Lord ; we are apt to pronounce
him a powerful, nay an absolute Monarch. No
conclusion however, would be more rash, or worse
founded. The genius of the feudal government
was purely ariftocratical. With all the ensigns of
royalty, and with many appearances of despotic
power, a feudal King was the mofl limited of all
Princes

BEFORE they sallied out of their own habitations

Origin of to conquer the world, many of the northern nati-
the feudal ons seem not to have been fubje1 to the govern-
Govern- *
ment, and ment of kings * ; and even where monarchical
its ariflo- government was established, the prince poffeffed
cratical but little authority. A general rather than a king,
genius, his
* Caf lib.
vi. c. 23.

his military command was extensive, his civil ju- BooK I.
rifdidion almost nothing*. The army which he led
was not composed of soldiers, who could be corn- de Mor.
pelled to serve, but of such as voluntarily followed Germ.c.7,
his standard t. There conquered not for their ,i.
leader, but for themselves; and being free in t C.r ib.
their own country, renounced not their liberty
when they acquired new settlements. They did
not exterminate the antient inhabitants of the
countries, which they flibdued, but seizing the
greater part of their lands, they took their persons
under protedion. And the difficulty of main-
taining a new conqueff, as well as the danger of
being attacked by new invaders, rendering it ne-
ceffary to be always in a posture of defence, the
form of government which they established, was
altogether military, and nearly resembled that to
which they had been accustomed in their native
country. Their general still continuing to be the
head of the colony, part of the conquered lands
were allotted to him; the remainder, under the
name of beneficia or fiefs, was divided amongst his
principal officers. As the common safety required
that these officers should, upon all occasions, be
ready to appear in arms, for the common defence,
and ihould continue obedient to their general, they
bound themselves to take the field, when called,
and to serve him with a number of men, in pro-
portion to the extent of their territory. These
great officers, again, parcelled out their lands
among their followers, and annexed the fame con-
dition to the grant. A feudal kingdom was pro-
perly the encampment of a great army , military
ideas predominated, military lubordination was
established, and the pofleflion of land was the pay
which soldiers received for their personal ser-
vice. In consequence of there notions, the pof-
fellion of land v as granted during plealire only,
and kings were elective. In othler words, a!n ,tl- ccr

BoOK I. cer disagreeable to his general was deprived of
' -' his pay, and the person who was most capable of

conducting an army, was chosen to command it.
Such were the first rudiments, or infancy of feu-
dal government.

BUT long before the beginning of the four-

teenth century, the feudal lyftem had undergone
many changes, of which the following were the
most considerable. Kings formerly ebe:ive, were
then hereditary, and fiefs granted'at first duiing
pleasure, dcfcended from father to son, and were
become perpetual. There changes, not lets ad-
vantageous to the nobles, than to the prince, made
no alteration in the ariffocratical spirit of the feu-

General dal constitution. The king, who at a distance,
caures seemed to be invested with majefly and power,
which li- appears on a nearer view, to possess none of thole
nited the advantages, which beltow on monarchs their gran-
pher eudal deur and authority. His revenues were scanty ,
monarchs. he had not a standing army ,; and he enjoyed no

proper jurifdi&ion.

AT a time when pomp and splendor were un-

Their re- known, even in the palaces of kings ,; when the
venues officers of the crown received little salary besides
werermall. the fees and perquisites of their office: when em-

baffles to foreign courts were rare; when armies
were composed of soldiers who fcrved without pay ;
it was not necefTary that a king should posses a
great revenue; nor did the condition of Europe,
in those ages, allow its princes to be opulent. Com-
merce made little progress in the kingdoms,
where the feudal government was eflablifhed. In-
flitutions, which had no other obje6t but to inspire
a mnartial spirit, to train men to be soldiers, and
to make arms the only honourable profeflion, na-
turally discouraged the commercial arts. The re-
venues, atifing from the taxes imposed on the dif-
.feren r branchcs of commerce, were by confcquence
ii:c.i:fidik:able, iand the prince's treifury received

little

little supply from a source, which among a trading RooK 1.
people, flows with such abundance, and is almost -l "'
inexhaustible. A fixed tax was not levied even on
land; such a burthen would have appeared intole-
rable to men who received their eftlates, as the re-
ward of their valour, and who considered their
service in the field as a full retribution for what
they pofleffed. The king's demefnes, or the portion
of land which he still retained in his own hands
unalienated, furnished subsistence to his court, and
defrayed the ordinary expence of government *.
The only slated taxes which the feudal law obliged
vassals to pay to the king, or to thole of whom they
held their lands, were three ; one when his eldest
_on was made a knight , another when his eldest
daughter was married ;, and a third in order to ran-
son him if he should happen to be taken prisoner.
Betides there, the king received the feudal casual-
ties of the ward, marriage, &c. of his own vassals.
And, on some extraordinary occasions, his fubjei1s
granted him an aid, which they distinguished by
the name of a benevolence in order to declare that he
received it not in consequence of any right,
but as a gift, flowing from their good-will -.
All these added together, produced a revenue,
scanty and precarious, which far from enabling the
king to attempt any thing that could excite the
jealousy or fear of the nobles, kept him in continual
indigence, anxiety, and dependence.

Noa could the king supply the defeat of his re- They had

venues, by the terror of his arms. Mercenary no stand-
troops and standing armies were unknown as long ing arne.
as the feudal government subsisted in vigour.
Europe was peopled with soldiers. The vassals of
the king, and the fub-vaffals of the barons were.
all obliged to carry arms. And while the poverty

* Craig. de Feud lib i. Dieg. I4 Du Cange Glo(l: voc.

Dominicumn. t Du Cange voc Auxiluun.

oft.

BooK I. of princes prevented them from fortifying theii
'v'-' frontier towns, while a campaign continued but a

few weeks, and while a fierce and impetuous
courage was impatient to bring every quarrel to
the decision of a battle, an army without pay, and
with little discipline, was fufficient for all the pur-
poses both of the security and of the glory of a
nation. Such an army, however, far from being
an engine at the king's disposal, was often no le(s
formidable to him than to his enemies. The more
warlike any people were, the more independent
they became; and the fame persons being both fol-
diers and subjeCts, civil privileges and immunities
were the consequence of their vidories, and the
reward of their martial exploits. Conquerors,
whom mercenary armies, under our present forms
of government, often render the tyrants of their
own people, as well as the fcourges of mankind,
were commonly, under the feudal constitution, the
most indulgent of all princes to their fubjeCs, be-
cause they ttood most in need of their afliftance.
A prince, whom even war and victories did not
render the master of his own army, poffeffed no
shadow of rifilitary power during times of peace.
His disbanded foidiers mingled with his other fuib-
jeds; not a single man received pay from him;
many ages elapsed even before a guard was ap-
pointed to defend his person ; and, destitute of
that great instrument of dominion a flanding ar-
my, the authority of the king continued always
feeble, and was often contemptible.

Their ju- NOR were these the only circumstances, which
rifdiAion contributed towards deprffling the regal power.
was limit- By the feudal system, the king's judicial authority
ed. was extremely circumscribed. At first, princes

seem to have been the supreme judges of their peo-
ple, and, in person heard and determined all con-
troverfies among them. The multiplicity of causes
soon made it n;ecessary to appoint judges, who, in

the

the king's name, decided matters, that belonged BOOK I.
to the royal jurifdidtion. But the Barbarians, who' '
overran Europe, having destroyed most of the great
cities, and the countries which they seized bzing
cantoned out among powerful barons, who w.re
blindly followed by numerous vassals, whom, in
return, they were bound to protect from every
injury; the administration of justice was greatly
interrupted, and the execution of any legal sentence
became almofl impracicable. Theft, rapine, mur-
der, and disorder of all kinds prevailed in every
kingdom of Europe, to a degree almost incredible,
and scarce compatible with the subsistence of civil
society. Every offender fheltercd himself under
the protection of some powerful chieftain, who
screened him from the purfiits ofjultice. To
apprehend, and to puniflh a criminal, often re-
quired the union and effort of half a kingdom '

* A remarkable inflance of this occurs in the following

history, so late as the year 1561. Mary, having appointed a
court of justice to be held on the borders, the inhabitants of
no less than eleven counties were summoned to guard the perton,
who was to ad as judge, and to enable him to entorce his
decisions, The words of a proclamation, which afford
such a convincing proof of the feebleness of the feudal govern-
ment, deserve our notice. --" And because it is necessary for the
execution of her highnefs's commandments, and service, that
her justice be well accompanied, and her authority lufticiently
fortified, by the concurrence of a good power of her faithful
fubjeds-Therefore commands and charges all and sundry
Earls, Lords, Barons, Free-holder', Landed-men, and other
Gentlemen, dwelling within the said counties, that they, and
every one of them, with their kin, friends, servants, and
houlhold-men, well bodin in feir of war in the moll fubltan-
tious manner. [i. e. compleatly armed and provided,J and with
twenty days victuals, to meet and to pass forward with him to the
borough of Jedburgh, and there to remain during the laid space
of twenty days, and to receive such direction and commands,
as Ihall he given by him to them in our Sovereign Lady's name,
for quiernels of the countiy; and to put the lame in execution
under the pain of losing their life, lands, and goods." Keith's
Hill. of Scotland, 198.

VOL. I. C

. - In

Boor I. In order to remedy these evils, many persons of
'-' distinction were entrusted with the administration

of justice within their own territories. But what
we may prelume was, at firit, only a temporary
grant, or a personal piivilege, the incroaching fpi-
rit of the nobles toon converted into a right, and
rendered hereditary. The lands of some were
ereAed into Baronies, those of others into Regalities.
The jurisdiction of the former was extensive, that
of the latter, as the name implies, royal and almost
unbounded. All causes, whether civil or crimi-
nal, were tried by judges, whom the lord of the
regality appointed ,; and if the king's courts call-
ed any person within his territory before them,
the lord of regality might put a fltop to their pro-
ceedings, and by the privilege of repledging, re-
move the cause to his own court, and even punish
his vaflal, if he submitted to a foreign jurifdic-

* Craig. tion *. Thus, almost every question, in which
lib. iii. any person, who refid.d on the lands of the no-
Dieg. 7. bles, was interested, being determined by judges

appointed by the nobles themselves, their vassals
were scarce sensible of being, in any degree, sub-
je& to the crown. A feudal kingdom was split
into many small principalities, almost indepen-
dent, and held together by a feeble and com-
monly an imperceptible bond of union. And
the king was not only stripped of the authority
annexed to the person of a supreme judge, but his
revenue fiffered no small diminution, by the lots
of those pecuniary emoluments, which were in
that age, due to the person who adminiftred jus-
tice.

IN the fame proportion that the king funk in

power, the nobles role towards independence.
Not satisfied with having obtained an hereditary
right to their fiefs, which they formerly held
during pleasure, their ambition aimed at some-
thing bolder, and by introducing entails, endea-

voured

voured, as far as human ingenuity and invention BooK I.
can reach that end, to render their poffeflions '-"'
unalienable and everlafling. As they had full
power to add to the inheritance transmitted to
them from their ancestors, but none to diminish
it; time alone, by means of marriages, legacies,
and other accidents, brought continual accefiions
of wealth, and of dignity; a great family, like
a river became considerable from the length of
its course, and as it rolled on, new honours and
new property flowed fiiccetlively into it. What-
ever influence is derived from titles of honour, the
feudal barons likewise pofleffed in an ample man-
ner. These marks of diftindtion are, in their own
nature, either official or personal, and being an-
nexed to a particular charge, or bestowed by the
admiration of mankind upon illustrious charadters,
ought to be appropriated to these. But the son,
however unworthy, could not bear to be firipped
of that appellation, by which his father had been
distinguished. His presumption claimed, what his
virtue did not merit; titles of honour became
hereditary, and added new lustre to nobles al-
ready in poffeflion of too much power. Something
more audacious, and more extravagant still re-
mained. The supreme direcion of all affairs,
both civil and military, being committed to the
great officers of the crown, the fame and safety of
Princes, as well as of their people, depended upon
the fidelity and abilities of there officers. But fich
was the preposterous ambition of the nobles, and
so fuccefsful, even their wildet attempts to ag-
grandize themfrlves, that in all the kingdoms
'where the feu lal inflitutions prevailed, most of
these offices were annexed to great families, and
held, like fiefs, by hereditary right. A Person,
wholl n, mlutifiul behaviour rendered him odious
to Ihis P' ince, or whose incapacity expofcd him to
the co;l'nempt of the people, often held a place of

C2 ')\ver

BOOK I. power and trust, of the greatest importance to
' ' both. In Scotland, the offices of Lord Juflice

General, Great Chamberlain, High Steward,
High Constable, Earl Marshal, and High Ad-
miral, were all hereditary ; and in many coun-
ties, the office of Sheriff was held in the fame

manner.

NOBLES, whose property was so extensive, and

whole power To great, could not fail of being tur-
bulent and formidable. Nor did they want in-
firuments for executing their boldest designs.
That portion of their lands, which they parcelled
out among their followers, supplied them with a
numerous band of faithful and determined vassals;
while that, which they retained in their own
hands, enabled them to live with a princely fplen-
dour. The great hall of an ambitious baron was
often more crowded than the court of his Sove-
reign. The strong cafitles, in which they resided,
afforded a secure retreat to the discontented and
seditious. A great part of the revenue was spent
upon multitudes of indigent, but bold retainers.
And if at any time they left their retreat, to ap-
pear in the court of their fQvereign, they were
accompanied, even in times of peace, with a valt
train of armed followers. The usual retinue of
William the sixth earl of Douglas consisted of
2000 horse. Those of the other nobles were mag-
nificent and formidable in proportion. Impatient
of subordination, and forgetting their proper rank,
such potent and haughty Barons were the rivals,
rather than the fubjedts of their Prince. They
often despised his orders, insulted his person, and
wrested from him his crown. And the history of
Europe, during several ages, contains little else,
but the accounts of the wars and revolutions, oc-
cafioned by their exorbitant ambition.

BuT, if the authority of the barons far exceed-

ed its proper bounds in the other nations of

Europe,

Europe, we may affirm that the balance which BooK I.
ought to be preserved between a King and his T '
nobles was intirely loft in Scotland. The Scottish poTer
nobles enjoyed, in common with those of other greater in
nations, all the means for extending their autho- Scotland
riry, which arise from the ariftocratical genius ofthan in
the feudal government. Betides there, they ingdo

.

poffefled advantages peculiar to themselves,
the accidental sources of their power were confi-
derable; and singular circumstances concurred
with the spirit of the constitution to aggrandize The par-
them. To enumerate the most remarkable ofticular causes of
there, will serve both to explain the political state this.
of the kingdom, and to illustrate many important
occurrences, in the period now under our review.

I. THE nature of their country was one cause The na-

of the power and independence of the Scottish ture of the
nobility. Level and open countries are formed for country.
servitude. The authority of the supreme ma-
giftrate reaches with ease to the most distant
corners, and when nature has erected no barrier
and affords no retreat, the guilty or obnoxious
are soon deteced, and punished. Mountains, and
sens, and rivers set bounds to despotic power, and
amidst these, is the natural feat of freedom and
independence. In such places, did the Scottish
nobles usually fix their residence. By retiring to
his own castle, a mutinous Baron could defy the
power of his Sovereign; it being impracicable to
lead an army through a barren country, to places,
almost inaccessible to a tingle man. The fame
causes, which checked the progress of the Roman
arms, and rendered all the efforts of Edward I.
abortive, often proteaed the Scottish nobles, from
the vengeance of their Prince; and they owed
their personal independence, to those very moun-
tains and marshes, which saved their country from
being conquered.

C s II. THE

Boor. I. 11. THE want of great cities in Scotland con-
""-' tributed not a little to increase the power of the
number of nobility and to weaken that of the Prince. Where-
great ci- ever inumbers of men assembled together, order
ties. mufft be established, and a regular form of go.

vernment infituted, the authority of the magif-
trate must be recognized, and his decisions meet
with prompt and full obedience. Laws and fubor-
dination take rife in cities; and where there are
few cities as in Poland, or none as in Tartary, there
are few or no traces of any fort of police. But
under the feudal governments, commerce, the
chief means of assembling mankind, was neglea-
ed; the nobles in order to strengthen their in-
fluence over their vassals, resided among them,
and seldom appeared at court, where they found
a superior, or dwelt in cities, where they met with
equals. In Scotland, the rich counties in the
south lying open to the English, no town situated
there could rife to be great or populous amidit
continual inroads and alarms ; the residence of our
monarchs was not fixed to any particular place;
many parts of the country were barren and un-
cultivated ; and in consequence of these peculiar cir-
cumitances, added to the general causes flowing
from the nature of the feudal inflitutions, the towns
in Scotland were extremely few, and very inconfi-
derable. The vassals of every Baron occupied a
diftin& portion of the kingdom, and formed a fe-
parate and almost independent society. Instead of
giving aid towards reducing to obedience their fedi-
tious Chieftain, or any whom he took under his pro-
te&ion, they were all in arms for his defence,
and obftru&ed the operations of justice to the
utmost. The prince was obliged to connive at
criminals, whom he could not reach ; the nobles,
conscious of this advantage, were not afraid to

offend ;

offend; and the difficulty of puniihing almost as- BooK I.
sured them of impunity.

III. THE division of the country into clans had The infti-

no small effed in rendering the nobles considerable. tution of
The nations, which overran Europe, were origi- a
nally divided into many small tribes; and when
they came to parcel out the lands which they had
conquered, it was natural for every chieftain to be-
flow a portion, in the first place, upon those of
his own tribe or family. These all held their lands
of him ; and as the safety of each individual de-
pended on the general union, these small societies
clung together, and were distinguished by some
common appellation, either patronymical, or local,
loag before the introdution of surnames, or en-
figrs armorial. But when these became common,
the descendants and relations of every Chieftain
assumed the fame name and arms with him; other
vassals were proud to imitate their example, and
by degrees they were communicated to all those
who held of the fame superior. Thus clanfhips
were formed; and in a generation or two, that
consanguinity which was, at first, in a great mea-
sure, imnaginary, was believed to be real. An ar-
tificial union was converted into a natural one;
men willingly followed a leader, whom they re-
garded both as the superior of their lands, and the
chief of their blood, and served him not only with
the fidelity of vassals, but with the affection of
friends. In the other feudal kingdoms, we may
observe such unions as we have described, imper-
sealy formed; but in Scotland, whether they we'e
the produ&ion of chance, or the effea of policy,
or introduced by the Irish colony above mentioned,
and strengthened by carefully preserving their ge-
neal9gies both genuine and fabulous, clanihips
were universal. Such a confederacy might be
overcome, it could not be broken , and no change
of manners, or of government, has been able, in

C 4 some

which are founded upon prejudices so natural to
the human mind. How formidable were nobles
at the head of followers, who, counting that cause
julf and honourable which their Chief approved,
were ever ready to take the field at his command,
and to sacrifice their lives in defence of his person,
or of his tame ? Against such men, a King con-
tended with great disadvantage, and that cold ser-
vice, which money purchases, or authority extorts,
was not an equal match for their ardor and zeal.

The finall IV. THE smallness of their number may be
number of mentioned among the caifes of the grandeur of
the nobles. the Scottish nobles. Our annals reach not back to

the first division of property in the kingdom ; but
so far as we can trace the matter, the original pof-
feflions of the nobles seem to have been extensive.
The ancient Thanes were the equals and the ri-
vals of their prince. Many of the Earls and Barons,
who succeeded them were matters of territories no
less ample. France and England, countries wide
and fertile, afforded settlements to a numerous
and powerful nobility. Scotland, a kingdom nei-
ther extensive nor rich, could not contain many
such! overgrown proprietors. But the power of an
aristocracy always diminishes, in proportion to the
increase of its numbers; feeble if divided among a
multitude ; irresistible if centered in a few. When
nobles are numerous, their operations nearly re-
femble those of the people, they are roused only
by what they feel, not by what they apprehend ;
and submit to many arbitrary and oppreflive a~ts,
before they take arms against their Sovereign. A
fmnall body, on the contrary, is more sensible, and
more impatient; quick in discerning, and prompt
in repelling danger; all its motions are as sudden,
as those of the other are flow. Hence proceeded
the extreme jealousy, with which the Scottish no-
bles observed their monarchs, and the fierceness

with

with which they opposed their encroachments. Bo I
Even the virtue of a Prince did not render them
less vigilant, or less eager to defend their rights ;
and Robert Bruce, notwithstanding the splendor
of his viaories, and the glory of his name, was
upon the point of experiencing the vigour of their
resistance, no less than his unpopular descendent
James III. Besides this, the near alliance of the
great families, by frequent intermarriages, was the
natural consequence of their small number. And
as consanguinity was, in those ages, a powerful
bond of union, all the kindred of a nobleman in-
terefted themselves in his quarrel, as a common
cauie, and every contest the king had, though
with a single Baron, soon drew upon him the arms
of a whole confederacy.

V. THOSE natural connexions both with their Their lea-

equals, and with their inferiors, the Scottish nobles gues and
itrengthened by a device, which if not peculiar to combina-
themselves, was at least more frequent among tions'
them, than in any other nation. Even in times
of profound peace, they formed associations, which
when made with their equals, were called leagues
of mutual defence; and when with their inferiors,
bonds of manrent. By the former, the contracting
parties bound themselves mutually to assist each
other, in all causes, and againit all persons. By
the latter, protetion was stipulated on the one
hand, and fidelity and personal fcrvice promised
on the other*. Self-prefervation, it is probable, * AS. 30.
forced men at first into therfe confederacies, and Parl. 1424
while disorder and rapine were universal, while A. 43.P.
government was unsettled, and the authority 0of'555
laws little known or regarded, near neighbours
found it necessary to unite in this manner for their
security, and the weak were obliged to court the
patronage of the strong. By degrees, there as-
fociations became Co many alliances offenfive and
defrnfive against the throne ; and as their obliga-

tion

Book I. tion was held to be more sacred than any tie what-
---v-. ever, they gave much umbrage to our Kings, and

contributed not a little to the power and indepen-
dence of the nobility. In the reign of James II,
William the eighth Earl of Douglas entered into a
league of this kind with the Earls of Crawford,
Ross, Murray, Ormond, the Lords Hamilton, Bal-
veny, &c. and so formidable was this combination
to the King, that he had recourse to measures no
less violent than unjust in order to diflolve it.

The fre- VI. THE frequent wars between England and
quent wars Scotland proved another cause of augmenting the
with Eng- power of the nobility. Nature has placed no bar-

rier between the two kingdoms; a river, almost
every where fordable, divides them towards the
eat; on the weft they are separated by an imagi-
nary line. The small revenues of our Kings pre-
vented them from fortifying, or placing garrisons
in the towns on the frontier ,; nor would the jea-
lousy of their fubjecds have permitted such a me-
thod of defence. The Barons, whole eflates lay near
the borders, considered themselves as bound both
in honour and in interest to repel the enemy. The
wardcnfjbips of the different marches, offices of great
trufl and dignity, were always beflowed on them.
This gained them the leading of the warlike coun.
ties in the south ; and their vassals, living in a
state of perpetual hoflility, or eijoying at bcft an
insecure peace, became more inured to war than
even the redt of their countrymen, and more wil-
ling to accompany their chieftain in his most hardy
and dangerous enterprizes. It was the valour, no
less than the number of their followers, that ren-
dered the Donglafcs great. The nobles in the
northern and midland counties were often dutiful
and obsequious to the crown, but our monarchs
always found it impracticable to subdue the muti-
nous and ungovernable spirit of the borderers. In all
our domestic quarrels, those, who could draw to'lheir

fide

fide the inhabitants of the southern counties, were BooK I.
sure of vitory ; and conscious of this advantage, C'cbJ
the Lords who poffeffed authority there, were apt
to forget the duty which they owed their Sovereign,
and to aspire beyond the rank of fubjeds.

VII. THE calamities which befel our Kings, The fre-

contributed more than any other cause to diminish quent mi-
the royal authority. Never was any race of mo- norities
narchs so unfortunate as the Scottiflh. Of fix fuccef- which
five Princes, from Robert III. to James Vi. not one happened

in Scot-

died a natural death , and the minorities, during land.
that time were longer, and more frequent, than
ever happened in any other kingdom. From Ro-
bert Bruce to James VI. we reckon ten princes ;
and seven of these were called to the throne, while
they were minors, and almost infants. Even the
mofl regular and betl eflablifhed governments feel
sensibly the pernicious effets of a minority, and
either become languid and inadive, or are thrown
into violent and unnatural convulsions. But, un-
der the imperfed and ill adjusted system of go-
vernment in Scotland, these effecs were flill more
fatal; and the fierce and mutinous spirit of the no-
bles, unrefitrained by the authority of a King,
scorned all fubjedion to the delegated jurifdidion
of a regent, or to the feeble commands of a mi-
nor. She royal authority was circumfiribed with-
in narrower limits than ever ; the prerogatives of
the crown, naturally inconsiderable, were reduced
almost to nothing; and the ariftocratical power
gradually ruoe upon the ruins of the monarchical.
Left the personal power of a regent should enable
him to ad with too much vigour, the authority,
annexed to that office, was sometimes rendered
inconsiderable, by being divided ; or if a tingle re-
gent was chosen, the greater nobles, and the heads
of the more illuflrious families, were seldom raised
to that dignity. It was often conferred upon men,
who poffeffed little influence, and excited no jea-

lousy.

Boot I. lousy. They, conscious of their own weakness
, ^--- were obliged to overlook rome irregularities, and

to permit others : and, in order to support their au.
thority, which was destitute of real strength, they
endeavoured to gain the most powerful and adive
Barons, by granting them poffeflions and immuni-
ties, which railed them to still greater power,
When the King himself came to assume the reins
of government, he found his revenues wasted or
alienated, the crown lands seized or given away,
and the nobles Co accustomed to independence, that
after the struggles of a whole reign, he was seldom
able to reduce them to the fame slate, in which

Review of they had been at the beginning of his minority, or
theevents to wrest from them what they had usurped during
to the no- that time. If we take a view of what happened to
blesduring each of our Kings, who was so unfortunate as to
eachmino- be placed in this situation, the truth and impor-
tyo. tance of this obfcrvation will fully appear.
David IL The minority of David II. the fun of Robert

Bruce, was disturbed by the pretensions of Ed-
ward Baliol, who relying on the aid of England,
and on the support of tome difaffected barons among
the Scots, invaded tile kingdom. The success
which at first attended his arms, obliged the young
King to retire to France ; and Baliol took posies-
sion of the throne. A frnall body of the nobles,
however, continuing faithful to their exiled Prince,
drove Baliol out of Scotland ; and after an ab-
fence of nine years, David returned from France,
and took the government of the kingdom into his
own hands. But nobles, who were thus wasting
their blood and treasure in defence of the crown,
had a right to the undiflturbed poiTeilion of their
ancient privileges, and even Come title to arrogate
new ones. It seems to have been a maxim, in that
age, that every leader might claim as his own,
the territory which his s(word had won from the
enemy. Great acquisitions were gained By the

nobility

nobility in that way , and to these the gratitude and BOOK I.
liberality of David added, by distributing, among '-v
such as adhered to him, the vast pofkeflions which
fell to the crown by the forfeiture of his enemies.
The family of Douglas, which began to rife above
the other nobles, in the reign of his father, aug-
mented both its power and its property, during his
minority.

JAMES I. was seized by the English during the 1405.

continuance of a truce, and ungenerously detained James I.
a prisoner, almoif nineteen years. During that
period, the kingdom was governed, first by his
uncle Robert Duke of Albany, and then, by Mur-
do his son. Both these noblemen aspired to the
crown, and their unnatural ambition, if we may
believe most of our historians, not only cut Ihort
the days of Prince David, the King's elder brother,
but prolonged the captivity of James. They flat-
tered themselves, that they might flep with less
opposition into a throne, when almost vacant ; and
dreading the King's return, as the extintion of
their authority, and the end of their hopes, they
carried on the negociations for obtaining his liberty,
with extreme remissness. At the fame time, they
negleaed nothing that could either sooth or bribe
the nobles to approve their icheme. They flack-
ened the reins of government , they allowed the
prerogative to be encroached upon; they fuffered
the most irregular ats of power, and even wan-
ton inflances of opprflion, to pals with impunity;
they dealt out the patrimony of the crown among
those whose enmity they dreaded, or whose favour
they had gained ,; and reduced the royal authority,
to a slate of imbecillity, from which succeeding
monarchs laboured in vain to raise it.

DURING the minority of James II. the admi- 1437.

niftration of affairs and the cuflody of the King's JameIll.
person were committed to Sir William Crichton,

and

' ^" cord were the effets of their conjunt authority,

and each of them, in order to strengthen himself,
bestowed new power and privileges upon the great
men, whose aid he courted. While the young
Earl of Douglas, encouraged by their divisions, e-
reded a fort of independent principality within
the kingdom ; and forbidding his vassals to acknow-
ledge any authority but his own, he created
Knights, appointed a privy council, named officers
civil and military, aflumed every ensign of royalty,
but the title of King, and appeared in public with
a magnificence more than royal.

EIGHT persons were chosen to govern the king-

dom, during the minority of James III. Lord Boyd,

;Jmcs II. however, by seizing the person of the young King,

and by the afcendait which he acquired over him,
soon engrossed the whole authority. He formed
the ambitious projec of railing his family to the
fame pitch of power and grandeur with those of
the prime nobility; and he effeAed it. While
intent on this, he relaxed the vigour of govern-
ment, and the barons became accustomed, once
more, to anarchy and independence. The power,
which Boyd had been at so much pains to acquire
was of no long continuance, and the fall of hs fa-
mily, according to the fate of favourites, was fud-
den and destructive; but upon its ruins, the fa-
mily of Hamilton rose, which Coon attained the
highest rank in the kingdom.

James V. As the minority of James V. was longer, it was

likewise more turbulent than those of the preced-
ing Kings. And the contending nobles, encou-
raged or protected either by the King of France,
or of England, formed themselves into more re-
gilar fadtions, and disregarded more than ever
the restraints of order and authority. The French
[.ad the advantage of feeing one, devoted to their
intercit, raidcl to be regent. This was the' Duke

of

of Albany, a native of France, and a grandson of BooK I.
James II. But Alexander Lord Home, the most '--v--
eminent of all the Scottish peers, who Ifrvived the
fatal battle of Flowden, thwarted all his measures,
during the first years of his administration ; and
the intrigues of the Queen Dowager, sifter of
Henry VIII. rendered the latter part of it ro leis
feeble. Though supported by French auxiliaries,
the nobles despised his authority, and regardless
either of his threats, or his intreaties, perempto-
rily refused, two several times, to enter England,
to the borders of which kingdom he had led them.
Provoked by these repeated instances of contempt,
the regent abandoned his troublesome flation, and,
retiring to France, preferred the tranquillity of a
private life, to an office destitute of real authority,
Upon his retreat, Douglas Earl of Angus became
master of the King's person, and governed the
Kingdom in his name. Many efforts were made
to deprive him of his usurped authority. But the
numerous vassals and friends of his family adhered
to him, because he divided with them the power
and emoluments of his office; the people reveren-
ced and loved the name of Douglas ; he exercised
without the title of regent, a fuller and more abfo-
lute authority than any who had enjoyed that
dignity ; and the ancient, but dangerous pre emi-
nence of the Douglafes seemed to be restored.

To these and to many other causes, omitted or

unobserved by us, did the Scottish nobility owe tbat
exorbitant and uncommon power, ot which in-
itances occur, so frequently in our history. No-
thing, however, demonstrates so fully the extent
of their power, as the length of its duration. Many
years after the declension of the feudal system rn
the other kingdoms of Europe, and when the arms
or policy of Princes had, every where, shaken, or
laid jt in ruins, the foundations of that ancient

fabric

BooK I. fabric remained, in a great measure, firm and
"-v*- untouched in Scotland.
The pow- THE powers, which the feudal inflitutions vest-
£r ot the
feudal no- ed in the nobles, Loon became intolerable to all the
bles be- Princes of Europe, who longed to poflefs some-
came in- thing more than a nominal and precarious authority.
tolerable Their impatience to obtain this, precipitated Hen-

ry III. of England, Edward II. and some other
weak Princes, into rath and premature attempts
against the privileges of the Barons, in which they
were disappointed, or perished. Princes, of great-
er abilities, were content to mitigate evils which

The at- they could not cure ; they fought occupation for
humble the turbulent spirit of their nobles, in frequent
the nobles wars;, and allowed their fiery courage to evaporate
fuccefstul in foreign expeditions, which, if they brought no
n ranee other advantage, secured at least domeltic tran-
England. quillity. But, time and accidents ripened the

feudal governments for deftrudtion. Towards the
end of the fifteenth century, and beginning of
the sixteenth, all the Princes of Europe attacked,
as if by concert, the power of their nobles. Men
of genius then undertook with success, what their
unskilful predecessors had attempted in vain. Lewis
XI. of France, the moit profound and the most
adventurous genius of that age, began, and in a
single reign almost compleated the scheme of their
deftrucion. The sure but concealed policy of
Henry VII. of England produced the fhme effeEt.
The means, indeed, employed by these monarchs
were very different. The blow which Lewis
firuck was fiudden and fatal. The artifices of
Henry resembled those flow poisons, which waste
the conifitution, but become not mortal till some
diflant period Nor did they produce confe-
quences less opposite. ILewis boldly added to the
crown whateve r lie wrested from the nobles.
Henry undermined his Barons by encouraging
them to fell their lands, which enriched the eom-
mnons, and gave them a w.'ight in the legislature

unknown

unknown to their predeceflors. But while these BooK I.
great revolutions were carrying on in two king-

" "

doms, with which Scotland was intimately con- nobles
nedted, no alteration happened there ; the King continue
neither extended his own prerogative, nor enabled to gather
the commons to encroach upon the ariftocr:cy , fiength
the nobles not only retained their ancient p iviklgcs land.
and poffelfions, but daily made new acquilitions.

THIS was not owing to thle inattention of our OurKings

Princes, or to their want of ambition. They were endeavour
abundantly sensible of the exorbitant power of the t,, the
nobility, and extremely solicitous to humble that royal au-
order. They did not, however, poflts means flif thority.
ficient for accomplishing that end. The resources
of our monarches were few, and the progress which
they made inconsiderable. But as the number of General
their followers, and the extent of their jurifdiaion, means to-
were the two chief circumstances which rendered warend.s th
the nobles formidable ; in order to counterballance
the one, and to restrain the other, all our Kings
had recourse to the fame expedients.

I. AMONG nobles of a fierce courage, and ofEncou-

unpolifhed manners, surrounded with vassals bold rage di-
and licentious, whom they were bound by interest cord a-

Sumong the

aud honour to protect, the causes of discord were nobles.
many and unavoidable. And as the contending
parties could seldom agree in acknowledging the
authority of any common superior or judge, and
their impatient spirit would seldom wait the flow
decisions ofjuftice, their quarrels were usually ter-
minated by the sword. The offended Baron aff'm-
bled his vassals, and wasted the lands, or shed the
blood of his enemy. To forgive an iniury, was
mean, to forbear revenge infamous or cowardly *.

Hence

* The spirit of revenge was encouraged, not only by the man-

ners, but, what is more remarkable, by the laws ot thole ages.
If any ptrfon thought the prosecution of an injury offered to his
Iamily, too troublebomie, or too dangerous, the Saliclue laws per-
mitted him publickly to defil: from demanding vengeance but

VOL. i. D the

b Con, and under the name of deadly feuds, subsisted
for many generations, with unmitigated rancour.
It was the interest of the crown to foment rather
than to extinguish these quarrels, and by scatter-
ing or chenrhing the feeds of discord among the
nobles, that union which would have rendered tlhe
aristocracy invinciblc, and which must at once
have annihilated the prerogative, was tffetAually
prcvented. To tile fame cause, our Kings were
indebted for the fihccefs, with which they sometimes
attacked the molt powerful chieftains. They em-
pluyed private revenge to aid tlhe impotence of
public laws, and arming againit the person who
1had incurred their displeasure, those rival families
which had willed his fall, they rewarded their
f-rvice, by sharing among them the spoils of the
vanqiulfhed. But this expedient, though it served
to hiumble individuals, did not weaken the body
of tlie nobility. Thole, who were now the initru-
ment~

, of their Prince's vengeance, became, in

a short time, the objets of his fear. Having ac-
quiied power and wealth by serving the crown,
they, in their turn, set up for independence : and
though there might be a flucduation of power, and
of propery , though old families fell, and new
ones role upon their ruins , the rights of the arifto-
cracy remained intire, and its vigour unbroken.

the fnme laws, in order to punish his cowardice, and want of
afftlion to his iamily, deprived him of the right of succession.
IIenaut. Abiege Chronoil. p. 81. Among the Anglo-Saxons,
we find a singular inflitution diflinguifhed by the name of fodali-
tium ; a voluntary association, the object whereof was the perfo-
nal security ot those who joined in it, and which the feebleness
of government at that time rendered necessary. Among other
regulations, which are contained in one of those frill extant, the
t2,liouing delerics notice. " If any associate lhall either eat or
1tiink with a perlon who has killed any member of thefodalitium,
unlils in tie prel~nce of the King, the Bilhop, or the Count, and
un~ctl hle can prove that lie did not know the person, letrhim pay
:a r'iat litC." Hick's Diflert. Epiftolar. apud Thefaur. Ling

c.ptuCtir. \ ul. i. p. -z .

II. As the administration ofjuftice is one of the lBOOK 1.

mofi powerful ties between a King and his lubjeats, Extnd-
all our monarchs were at the utmot: pains to cir- the juri-
cumfcribe the jurisdiction of the Barons, and to diaion of
extend that of the crown. The external forms of the King's
subordination, natural to the feudal lyftein, favour courts.
ed this attempt. An appeal lay from the judges
and courts of the Barons, to thole of the King.
The right, however, ofjudgiig in the first instance,
belonged to the nobles, and they easily found means
to defeat the effed of appeals, as well as of many
other feudal regulations. The royal jurifdictioxn
was almost confined within thenarrow limits of the
King's demefnes, beyond which, his judges claimed
indeed much authority, but poffeTfed next to none.
Our Kings were sensible of these limitations, and
bore them with impatience. But it was impoflible
to overturn in a moment, what was so deeply
rooted ; or to firip the nobles, at once, of privi-
leges which they had held so long, and which were
wrought almost into the frame of the feudal con-
ftitution. To accomplish this, however, was an
objed of uniform and anxious attention to all our
princes. James I. led the way, here, as well as
in other instances, towards a more regular and per-
fed police. He made choice, among the estates
of parliament, ofa certain number of persons, whom
he diftinguithed by the name of Lords of Sr'/iln,
and appointed them to hold courts for determining
civil causes, three times in the year, and forty
days at a time, in whatever place he pleased to name.
Their jurifdieion extended to all matters, which
formerly came under the cognizance of the King's
council, and being a committee ofl pirliament,
their decisions were final. Jam;\s il. ohtain.cd a
law, annexinog al! rgalities, which should be
forfeited, to the crown, and ',,cla;ii ;h, rni, t ,(
jurisdiction to be unalienable for the future. Jinmes
Ill. 'impolcd I\' cr, penalties upon tlho!i jI.t, s 1;p-

D i' iL:tt'd

BooK I. pointed by the Barons, whose decisions should be
-'""'' found on a review to be unjust , and by many other

regulations, endeavoured to extend the authority
of his own court*. James IV. on pretence of re-

»Ad. 26. medying the inconveniencies ariting from the short
p. 1469. termsof the court ofSeflion, appointed other judges
An. 94. called Lords of daily council. The Sef/ion was an
P. 4,3-. ambulatory court, and met seldom: the Daily
At. 99. Council, was fixed, and fat constantly at Edinburgh;
P. 487. and though not compofedofmembersofparliament,

the famec powers, which the Lords of Setfion enjoy-
ed, were vetied in it. At lait, James V. ereded
anew court, that flill subsists, and which he named
the College of Jujlice, the judges or Senators of which
were called Lords of Council and Sej/ion. This court
not only exercised the fame jurifdidion which for-
merly belonged to the Seflion and Daily Council,
but new rights were added. Privileges of great
importance were granted to its members, its forms
were prescribed, its terms fixed, and regularity,
power and splendor conferred upon it. The per-
bons conflitutedjudges in all these different courts,
had, in many refpeds, the advantage of those who
presided in the courts of the Barons; they were
more eminent for their skill in law, their rules of
proceeding were more uniform, and their decisions
more consistent. Such judicatories became the ob-
jets of confidence, and of veneration. Men wil-
lingly fuibmitted their property to their determina-
tion, and their incroachments on the jurifdiclionsof
the nobles were popular, and for that reason fuc-
cefsful. By devices of a similar nature, the jurif-
didtion of the nobles in criminal causes was restrain-
ed, and the authority of the court of 7ufliciary ex.
tended. The crown, in this particular, gaining
inlenfibly upon the nobles, recovered more ample
authority ; and the King, whose jurifdi&tion once
reiemblcd that of a Baron, rather than that of

*

a Sovereign*, came more and more to be confide- BooK I.
red as the head of the community, and the fu- ?
preme ditpenfer of justice to his people. There
acquisitions of our Kings, however, though com-
paratively great, were in reality inconsiderable ,;
and notwithstanding all their efforts, many of the
separate jurisdictions poffeffed by the nobles re-
mained in great vigour; and their final abolition
was reserved to a distant and more happy period.

BUT besides these methods of defending their Each of

prerogative, and humbling the aristocracy, which our Kings
may be considered as common to all our Princes, we pursued

[ome plan

thall find, by taking a review of their reigns, that of hum-
almost every one of our Kings, from Robert Bruce bling the
to James V. had formed some particular system nobles.
for deprefling the authority of the nobles, which

was

* The most perse~ idea of the feudal fyflem of government

may be attained by attending to the slate of Germany, and to the
history of France. In the former, the feudal inflitutions still sub-
fit with great vigour ; and though altogether abolithed in the
latter, the public records have been so carefully preserved, that
the French lawyers and antiquaries have been enabled, with more
certainty and precision, than those of any other country in Europe,
to trace its rife, its progress, and revolutions. In Germany, eve-
ry principality may be considered as a fief, and all its great Princes
as vassals, holding of the Emperor. They possess all the feudal
privileges ; their fiefs are perpetual; their jurifditions within
their own territories, separate and extensive ; and the great offices
of the empire are all hereditary, and annexed to particular fami-
lies. At the fame time, the Emperor retains many ot the prero-
gatives of the feudal monarchs. Like them, his claims and pre-
tensions are innumerable, and his power fimall ; his jurildition
within his own demefnes, or hereditary countries, is compleat ;
beyond the bounds of these it is almost nothing. And to perma-
nent are feudal principles, that although the feudal lyftem be o-
verturned in almost every particular itate in Germany, and al-
though its Princes have all become absolute, the original feudal
confitution of the empire lRill remains ; and ideas peculiar to that
form of government, direct all its operations, and determine the
rights of all its Plinces. Our obletrvaions with regard to the
linmitd jurifdiaion of Kings under the feudal governments, are
Ireatly illufratcd by what happened in France. The fcblenefs

D 3 and

Booi I. was the objed both of their jealousy and terror.
'Vy ^ This conduct of our monarchs, if we refl satisfied

with the accounts of their historians, must be con-
fidered as flowing entirely from their resentment
against particular noblemen , and all their attempts
to humble them, must be viewed as the sallies of
private passion, not as the consequences of any ge-
neral plan of policy. But, though some of their
acions may be imputed to those paflions, though
the difktrcnt genius of the men, the temper of the
times, and the Rate of the nation necessarily occa-
fioned great variety in their schemes, yet, without
being chargeable with excefiive refinement, we may

This affirm that their end was uniformly the fame. And
proved by the projet of reducing the power of the ariftocra-
a review cy, tometimes avowed, and pursued with vigour ;
of thee- sometimes concealed, or seemingly suspended ; was
vents in
their never altogether abandoned.
reigns. No Prince was ever more indebted to his nobles

than Robert Bruce. Their valour conquered the

Robert kingdom, and placed him on the throne. His gra-
iruce. titude and generosity betlowed on them the lands

of the vanqui(hed. Property has seldom undergone
greater or more sudden revolutions, than those to
which it was fubjeA, at that time, in Scotland.
Edward I having forfeited the estates of most of the

and dotage of the descendants of Charlemaigne encouraged the
Peers to usurp an independant jurifdidion. Nothing remained in
the hands of the crown ; all was seized by them. When Hugh
Capet ascended the throne, A. D. 987. he kept poflellion of his
private patrimony the ComtC of Paris, and all the jurifdition,
which the Kings his successors exercised for some time, was with-
in its territories. There were only four towns in France, where
he could eflablilh Gr ands Baillis, or royal judges; all the other
lands, towns, and baillages belonged to the nobles. The me-
thods to which the French monarchs had recourse for extending
their jurifd'tion were exacly limilar to those employed by our
Plinces Henaut's Abreg6, p. 61i7, &c. De L'Efpritdes Loix,
Liv. 30. ch. 2o, &c. "*

ancient

ancl~nt Scottish Barons, granted them to his En- BooK I.
glifh fubjeds. These were expelled by the Scots,
and their lands seized by new mailers. Amidst
such rapid changes, confusion was unavoidable,
and many poffefled their lands by titles extremely
defedtive. During one of those truces between the
two nations, occasioned rather by their being wea-
ry of war, than desirous of peace, Robert formed
a scheme for checking the growing power and
wealth of the nobles He summoned them to ap-
pear, and to shew by what rights they held their
lands. They assembled accordingly, and the quef-
tion being put, they fiarted up, at once, and drew
their swords, " By these, said they, we acquired our
lands, and with these we will defend them." The
King, intimidated by their boldness, prudently
dropt the projet. But so deeply did they resent
this attack upon their order, that notwithstanding
Robert's popular and splendid virtues, it occasion-
ed a dangerous conspiracy against his life.

DA v D his Con, at firlt an exile in France, after- David II.

wards a prisoner in England, and involved in con-
tinual war with Edward III. had not leisure to at-
tend to the internal police of his kingdom, or to
think of retrenching the privileges of the nobility.

OuR historians have been more careful to relate Robert II.

the military, than the civil tranfadions of the reign
of Robert II. Skirmishes and inroads of little con-
sequence, they describe minutely, but with regard
to every thing that happened, during several years
of tranquillity, they are altogether silent.

THE feeble administration of Robert III. mult Robertlll.

likewise be passed over slightly. A Prince, of a
mean genius, and of a frail and sickly constitution,
was no fit person to enter the lilts with adive and

D 4 martial

a-any of their rights.

THE civil tranfadions in Scotland are better

James I. known since the beginning of the reign of James I.

and a compleat series of our laws supplies the de-
feats of our historians. The English made Come
amends for their injustice in detaining that Prince a
priolner, by their generous care of his education.
During his long relidence in England, he had an
opportunity of observing the feudal system in a more
advanced Hiate, and refined from many of the im-
perfeations which frill adhered to it, in his own
kingdom. He saw there, nobles great, but not in-
dependent ; a King powerful, though far from ab-
solute ; he saw a regular administration of govern-
ment; wife laws enaced ; and a nation flourishing
and happy, becaule all ranks of men were accuf-
tomed to obey them. Full of these ideas, he re-
turned into his native country, which presented to
him a very different scene. The royal authority,
never great, was now contemptible, by having
been so long delegated to regents. The ancient
patrimony and revenues of the crown, were almost
totally alienated. During his long absence, the
name of a King was little known, and less regard-
ed. The licence of many years had rendered the
nobles independent. Universal anarchy prevailed.
The weak were exposed to the rapine and oppref-
sion of the strong. In every corner Come barbarous
chieftain ruled at pleasure, and neither feared the
King, nor pitied the people'.

* A cotemporary Monkilh writer defcriba there calamities ve-

ry feelingly, in his rude Latin. In diebus illis, non erat lex in
Sco:ia, fed quilibet potentiorum juniorem opprefit ; et totum
regnum suit unum latrocinium £ homicidis, depradationes,incea-
dia, et catera maleficia remanferunt impunica £ et juftitia relega-
ta extra terminos regni exulavit. Chartular. Moray. spud lanes
Eff[y, vol. i. p. 72z. JAlES

JAMES was too wife a Prince to employ open BooK I.

force to corre& such inveterate evils. Neither'-'
the men, nor the times would have born it. He
applied the gentler, and less offenfive remedy of
laws and statutes. In a parliament held imme-
diately after his return, he gained the confidence
of his people, by many wife laws, tending visibly
to re-establish order, tranquillity, and justice in
the kingdom. But, at the fame time, that he
endeavoured to secure there bleflings to his sub-
jeds, he discovered his intention to recover those
poffeflions of which the crown had been unjustly
bereaved ,; and for that purpose obtained an ad
by which he was impowered to summon those,
who had obtained crown lands during the three
last reigns, to produce the rights by which they
held them *. As this statute threatened the pro- * Aft. 9.
perty of the nobles, another which passed in a Tub- P. 144.-
sequent parliament, aimed a dreadful blow at their
power. By it, the leagues and combinations, which
we have already described, and which rendered the
nobles Co formidable to the crown, were declar-
ed unlawful -t. Encouraged by this success in the t AA. 30.
beginning of his enterprize, James's next step was P. 1424.
still bolder and more d-cifive. During the fitting
of parliament, he seized at once, his cousin Mur-
do duke of Albany, and his sons; the Earls of
Douglas, Lenox, Angus, March, and above twen-
ty other Peers and Barons of prime rank. To all
of them, however, he was immediately reconciled,
except to Albany, and his Ions, and Lenox.
These were tried by their Peers, and condemned ;
for what crime is now unknown. Their execu-
tion fitruck the whole order with terror, and their
forfeiture added vast poffeflions to the crown. He
seized, likewise, the earldoms of Buchan and Stra-
thern, upon different pretexts; and that of Mar fell
to hima by inheritance. The patience and inactivity of

.V3 rapidly towards aggrandizing the crown, are amaz-
ing. The only obflrudtion he met with was from
a llight infurreaion headed by the Duke of Alba-
ny's youngest son, and that was easily suppressed.
The splendor and presence of a King, to which
the great men had been long unaccustomed, in-
spired reverence: James was a Prince of great
abilities, and conduAed his operations with much
prudence. He was in friendship with England,
and closely allied with the French King: He was
adored by the people, who enjoyed unuiual security
and happiness under his adminiflration : And all
his acquilitions, however fatal to the body of the
nobles, had been gained by attacks upon individu-
als; were obtained by decisions of law; and being
founded on circumstances peculiar to the perfobns
who fuffered, might excite murmurs and apprehen-
fions, but afforded no colourable pretext for a ge-
neral rebellion. It was not so with the next attempt
which the King made. Encouraged by the facility
with which he had hitherto advanced, he ventured
upon a measure that irritated the whole body of
the nobility, and which the event shews either to
have been entered into with too much precipitan-
cy, or to have been carried on with too much vio.
lence. The father of George Dunbar Earl of March
had taken arms against Kobert 11I. the King's fa-
ther ,; but that crime had been pardoned, and his
lands restored by Robert Duke of Albany. James,
on pretext that the regent had exceeded his power,
and that it was the prerogative of the King alone
to pardon treason, or to alienate lands annexed to
the crown, obtained a sentence declaring the par-
don to be void, and depriving Dunbar of the earl-
dom. Many of the great men held lands by no
other right than what they derived from grants of
the two Dukes of Albany. Such a decision, tho'

they

iey had reason to expect it in consequence of the :BooK I.
atute which the King had obtained, occasioned -
general alarm. Though Dunbar was, at present,
ie only fufferer, the precedent might be extend-
A, and their titles to poffeflions, which they con-
dered as the rewards of their valour, might be
ibjecded to the review of courts of law, whole
orms of proceeding, and jurifdidion, were in a
nartial age little known, and extremely odious.
7error and discontent spread fast upon this disco-
ery of the King's intentions; the common dan-
;er called on the whole order to unite, and to
nake one bold iRand, before they were stripped
jccellively of their acquisitions, and reduced to a
tate of poverty and insignificance. The preva-
ence of these sentiments among the nobles encou-
aged a few desperate men, the friends or follow-
:rs of those who had been the chief fufferers under
he King's administration, to form a conspiracy
igainft his life. The first uncertain intelligence of
his was brought him, while he lay in his camp
,efore Roxburgh cafitle. He durst not confide in
.obles, to whom he had given to many causes of
lifguit, but instantly difiniffed them and their vas-
als, and retiring to a monastery near Perth, was
oon after murdered there, in the molt cruel man-
Ter. All our historians mention, with astonish-
ment, this circumstance of the King's disbanding
uis army, at a time, when it was ib neceflary for
his preservation. A King, fay they, fiurrounded
with his Barons, is secure from secret treason, and
may defy open rebellion. But those very Barons
were the persons whom he chiefly dreaded ; and it
s evident, from this review of his adminifiration,
that he had greater reason to apprehend danger, than
to expeA defence, from their hands. It was the
misfortune of James, that his maxims and man-
ners vere too refined for the age in which he lived.
Happy ! had he reigned in a kingdom more civi-
lizcd ; his lovq of peace, of justice, and of ele-

gance,

Boon I. gance, would have rendered his schemes success-
Sful ; and inflead of perishing because he had at-

tempted too much, a grateful people would have
applauded and seconded his efforts to reform and
to improve them.

James II. CIICHTON, the molt able man of those, who

had the direcdion of affairs during the minority of
James II. had been the minister of James I. and
well acquainted with his resolution of humbling the
nobility. I-e di d not relinquish the design, and
he endeavoured to inlpire his pupil with the fame
fentinments. But what James had attempted to es-
set slowly, and by legal means, his f(n and Crich-
ton purtued with the impetuosity natural to Scots-
men, and with the ficrcenefs peculiar to that age.
William the sixth earl of Douglas was the first
victim to their barbarous policy. That young no-
bleman (as we have already obierved) contemning
the authority of an infant prince, almost openly re-
nounced his allegiance, and aspired to indepen-
dence. Crichton, too high-fpirited to bear such
an insult, but too weak to curb or to bring tojuftice
so powerful an offender, decoyed him by many
promises to an interview in the cafttle of Edin-
burgh, and, notwithflanding these, murdered both
him and his brother. Crichton, however, gained
little by this aCt of treachery, which rendered him
univerflilly odius. Wiiliam the eighth Earl of
Douglas was no lcEs powerful, and no les formi-
dable to the crown. Ey forming the league v.,hich
we already mentioncd with the Earl of Crawfilrd
and other Barons, he had united against his So-
vereign almofl one half of his kingdom. Eut his
credulity led him into the fame snare, which had
been fatal to the former Earl. Relying on the
King's promi ;s, who had now attained to the
yeazs of manhood, and having obtained a safe con-
duca under the great feal, he ventured to*meet
him in Stirling castle. James urged him to dif-

solve

foive that dangerous confederacy into which he had Booi I.
entered ; the Earl obstinately refused; " If you '
-' will not," said the enraged monarch, drawing
his dagger, ' this shall ," and flabbed him to the
heart. An action so unworthy of a King filled the
nation with afloniihment, and with horror. The
Earl's vassals ran to arms with the utmost fury,
and dragging the safe conduct, which the King had
granted and violated, at a horfe's tail, they march-
ed towards Stirling, burnt the town, and threat-
ened to besiege the castle. An accommodation
ensued, on what terms is not known. But the
King's jealousy, and the new Earl's power and re-
fentment, prevented it from being of long conti-
nuance. Both took the field, at the head of their
armies, and met near Abercorn. That of the
Earl, composed chiefly of borderers, was far fupe-
rior to the King's both in number, and in valour ,
and a single battle must, in all probability, have
decided whether the house of Stewart or of Doug-
las was henceforth to possess the throne of Scot-
land. B-ut, while his troops impatiently expeced
the signal to engage, the Earl ordered them to
retire to their camp, and Sir James Hamilton of
Cadyow, the person in whom he placed the great-
eft confidence, convinced of his want of genius to
improve an opportunity, or of his want of courage
to seize a crown, deserted him that very night.
This example was followed by many , and the
Earl, despised, or forsaken by all, was faon driven
out of the kingdom, and obliged to depend for
his subsistence, on the friendship of the King of
England. The ruin of this great family, which had
so long rivalled and overawed the crown, and the
terror with which fich an example of unfuccefsful
ambition filled the nobles, secured the King, for
ftme time, from oppofltion ;-and the royal autho-
rity remained uncontrouled and almolt abllute.

* Jaines

B oo I. James did not fuffer this favourable interval to
,--"-- pals unimproved , he procured the consent of par-

liament to laws more advantageous to the prero-
gative, and more subversive of the privileges of
the aristocracy, than were ever obtained by any
former or subsequent monarch of Scotland.

By one of there, not only all the vast poffeflions

of the Eari of Douglas were annexed to the crown,
but all prior and future alienations of crown lands
were declared to be void, and the King was im-
powered to seize them at pleasure, without any
process or form of law, and oblige the poffeffors to

* A&. 4!. refund whatever they had received from them *.
1' '455. A dreadful infirument of oppression in the hands

of a Prince.

ANOTHER law prohibited the warden(hip of the

marches to be granted hereditaiily ; retfrained, in
several instances, thejurifdi&ion of that othce ; and

t Ibid. extended the authority of the King's courts "t.
At. 42. By a third, it was enacted, that no Regality, or

exclusive right of adminiftring justice within a
man's own lands, should be granted in time to

t Ibid. come, without the consent of parliament 1, a con-
AR. 43. dition, which implied almost an express prohibi-

tion. Thole nobles who already poffeffed that
great privilege, would naturally be follicitous to
prevent it from becoming common, by being be-
flowed on many. Thole, who had not themselves
attained it, would envy others the acquisition of
itnch a flattering diftinAion ; and both would con-
cur in rejeding the claims of new pretenders.

By a fourth aa, all new grants of hereditary

offices were prohibited, and those obtained since

" Act. 44. the death of the last King were revoked §.

EACH of there fiatutes undermined some of the

great pillais, on which the power of the aristocracy
reied. During the remainder of his reign, this
Prince pnrfiwd t,, plan which he had begun, with
the utmont vigcur; and had not a sudden 'death,

occafionll

occasioned by the splinter of a cannon which burst BooK I.
near him at the siege of Roxburgh, prevented his ,---
progress, he wanted neither genius nor courage to
pertect it: and Scotland might, in all probabi-
lity, have been the first kingdom in Europe, lwhich
would have seen the subversion of the feudal f) f-
tern.

JAMES IIl. discovered no less eagerness than his

father or grandfather to humble the nobility ; but
far inferior to either of them in abilities and address,
he adopted a plan extremely impolitic, and his
reign was disastrous, as well as his end tragical.
Under the feudal governments, the nobles were
not only the King's miniffters, and poffeffed of all
the great offices of power or of trust; they were,
likewise, his companions and favourites, and scarce
any but them approached his person, or were en-
titled to his regard. But James, who both feared
and hated his nobles, kept them at an usual dil-
tance, and bestowed every mark of confidence and
affeaion upon a few mean persons, of profeflions
so dishonourable, as ought to have rendered them
unworthy of his pretence. Shut up with these, in
his caffle of Stirling, he seldom appeared in public,
and amused himself with architecture, music, and
other arts, which were then little cfteemed. The
nobles beheld the power and favour of there mini-
ons, with indignation. Even thle sanguinary mea-
fures of his father provoked them less than his
neglet. Individuals alone fuffered by the former ,
by the latter, every man thought himself injured,
because all were contemned. Their discontent was
much heightened by the King's recall'

g all rights

to crown lands, hereditary offices, regalities, and
every other concefiion, which was detrimental to
his prerogative, and which had been extorted during
his minority. Combinations among themiflves,
secret intrigues with England, and all the usual

* prc-

BooK I. preparatives for civil war, were the effects of their

v ' refeni'tment. Alexander Duke of Albany, and John

Earl of Mar, the King's brothers, two young men
of turbulent and ambitious spirits, and incensed
against James, who treated them with the fame
coldness, as he did the other great men, entered
deeply into "all their cabals. The King detected
their designs, before they were ripe for execution,
and seizing his two brothers, committed the Duke
of Albany to Edinburgh caftlie. The Earl of Mar
havingremonftrated with too much boldness against
the King's conduc, was murdered, if we may be-
lieve our hifiorians, by his command. Albany,
apprehensive of the fame fate, made his escape out
of die caflle, and fled into France. Concern for the
King's honour, or indignation at his measures, were
perhaps the motives, which first induced him to
join the malecontents. But James's attachment to
favourites rendering him every day more odious to
the nobles, the profped of the advantages which
might be derived from their general difaffedion,
added to the refentmcnt which he felt on account
of his brother's death, and his own injuries, soon
inspired Albany with more ambitious and criminal
thoughts. He concluded a treaty with Edward IV.
of England, in which he afflumed the name of
Alexander King of Scots, and in return for the
ratriifance which was promised him towards dethron-
ing his brother, he bound himself, so soon as he
was put in poifeflion of the kingdom, to swear
fealty and to do homage to the English monarch,
to renounce the ancient alliance with France, to
contrad a new one with England, and to surrender
rome of the strongest castles, and most valuable

* Ahercr. counties in Scotland *. That aid, which the Duke
Mart. so barely purchased at the price of his own honour,

A ach

v. and the independence of his country, was pundu-

4" ally granted him, and the Duke of Gloucester with

ra povweC !tul arml', indu..fcd him towards Scotland.

The

The danger of a foreign invasion obliged James to Boot I.
implore the afliftance of those nobles whom he had- -
so long treated with contempt. Some of them were
in close confederacy with the Duke of Albany, and
approved of all his pretensions. Others were im-
patient for any event, which would restore their or-
der to its ancient pre-eminence. They took the
field, however, at the head of a powerful army of
their followers, but with a fironger dilpofition to
redress their dwn grievances, than to annoy the ene-
my ,; and with a fixed resolution of punishing those
minions, whose insolence they could no longer to-
lerate. This resolution they executed, in the camp
near Lawder, with a military dispatch and rigour.
Having previously concerted their plan, the Earls
of Angus, Huntly, Lenox, followed by almost all
the Barons of chief note in the army, forcibly en-
tered the apartment of their Sovereign, seized all
his favourites, except one Ramsay, whom they
could not tear from the King, in whose arms he
took shelter, and without any form of trial, hanged
them instantly over a bridge. Among the most
remarkable of those who had engrofled the King's
affe&ion, were Cochran, a mason, Hommil a taylor,
Leonard a smith, Rogers a musician, and Torfifan
a fencing-mafter. So despicable a retinue discovers
the capriciousness of James's charatAer, and ac-
counts for the indignation of the nobles, when they
beheld the favour, due to them, bestowed on such
unworthy objecs.

JAMES had no reason to confide in an army to

little under his command, and difmiling it, shut
himself up in the castle of Edinburgh. After va-
rious intrigues, Albany's lands and honours were
at length restored to him, and he seemed even to
have regained his brother's favour, by some impor-
tant Cervices. But their friend(hip was not of long
duration. James abandoned himself, once more,

VoL. 1. E to

~'t-v- who had fuffered at I,awder, did not deter others,

from courting that dangerous pre-eminence. Al-
bany, on pretext that anl attempt had been made to
take away his life by poison, fled from court, and
retiring to his caftie of I)unbar, drew thither a
greater number of Barons than attended on the
King himkilf. At the fame time, lie renewed his
former confederacy with Edward ; the Earl of An-
gus openly negotiated that infamous treaty; other
Barons were ruady to concur with it ; and if the
sudden death of Edward had not prevented Alba-
ny's receiving any aid from England, the crown of
Scotland would probably have been the reward of
this unworthy combination with the enemies of his
country. But, instead of any hopes of reigning in
Scotland, he found, upon the death of Edward,
that he could not reside there in safety, and fying
first to England, and then to France, he feerns from
that time to have taken no part in the affairs of his
native country Em'boldened by his retreat, the
King and h.is Minilters multiplied the insults which
they offered to the nobility. A standing guard, a
thing unknown under the feudal governments, and
inconsistent with the famitiaritr and confidence
with which monarchs then lived amidst their nobles,
was raised for the King's defence, and the com-
mand of it given to Ratmfay, lately created Earl of
Bothwell, the fame petibon who had To narrowly es-
caped when his companions were put to death at
Lawder. And, as if this precaution had not been
fufficient, a proclamation was issued forbidding any
person to appear in arms within the precints of

* Ferrieri- the court ,

; which, at a time, when no man of

us, 398. rank left his own house without a numerous reti-

nue of armed followers, was, ih eftie, debarring
the nobles from all access to the King. James, at
the fame time, became fonder of retirement than

'ever;

ever; and funk in indolence, or fuperfititon, or BOOK I.
attentive only to amusements, devolved his whroe -
authority upon his favourites. So many injuries
provoked the most considerable nobles to take arms,
and having persuaded or obliged the Duke of Roth-
fay, the King's eldest Con, a youth of fifteen, to set
himlelf at their head, they openly declared their
intention of depriving James of a crown, of which
he had discovered himself to be so unworthy.
Rouzed by this danger, the King quitted his re-
tirement, took the field, and encountered thern
near Bannockburn; but the valour of the Border-
ers, of whom the army of the malecontents was
chiefly cornpofed, soon put his troops to flight, and
he himself was slain in the pursuit. Suspicion, in-
dolence, immoderate attachment to favourites, and
all the vices of a feeble mind, are visible in his
whole condu t; but the chara&er of a cruel and
unrelenting tyrant seems to be unjuflly affixed to
him by our historians. His neglec of the nobles
irritated, but did not weaken them , and their dif-
content, the immoderate ambition of his two bro-
thers, and their unnatural confederacies with En-
gland, were fufficient to have disturbed a more
vigorous administration, and to have rendered a
prince of superior talents unhappy.

THE indignation, which many persons of rank

expressed against the condut of the conspirators,
together with the terror of the sentence dof excorm-
munication which the Pope pronounced againtE
them, obliged them to use their vitory with great
moderation and humanity. And being confcioud
how deteffable the crime of imbruing their hands
in the blood of their Sovereign appeared, they en-
deavotred to regain the good opinion of their
countrymen, and to atone for their treatment of
the father, by their loyalty and duty rtowards the
ftn. They placed him instantly on the throne, James IV.

E, a and

lJooK I. and the whole kingdom ibon united in acknow-

Skledging his authority.

JAMLS IV. was naturally generous and brave ;

he felt, in an high degree, all the paflions which
animate a young and noble mind. He loved mag-
nificence, he delighted in war, and was eager to
obtain fame. During his reign, the ancient and
hereditary enmity between the King and nobles
seems almnofl intirely to have cealed. He envied
not their splendor, because it contributed to the
ornament ot his court , nor did he dread their pow-
er, which he considered as the security of his king-
dom, not as an object of terror to himself. This
confidence, on his part, met with the proper re-
turn of duty and affection, on theirs ; and, in his
war with England, he experienced how much a
King, beloved by his nobles, is able to perform.
Though the ardour of his courage, and the spirit
of chivalry, rather than the profped of any natio-
nal advantage, were the motives of that expediti-
on ; such was the zeal of his subjects for the King's
glory, that he was followed by as gallant an army,
as ever any of his ancestors had led upon English
ground. But tho' James himself formed no scheme
dangerous or detrimental to the aristocracy, his
reign was distinguished by an event, extremely fa-
tal to it ; and one accidental blow humbled it more
than all the premeditated attacks of preceding
Kings. In the rash and unfortunate battle of Flow-
den, a brave nobility chose rather to die, than to
desert their Sovereign. Twelve Earls, thirteen
Lords, five eldest sons of noblemen, and an in-

* Abr. ii. credible number of barons, fell with the King '.
S4o. The whole body of the nobles, long and sensibly,

felt this dilafter , and if a Prince of full age had
then alcended the throne, their consternation and
feebleness would have afforded him advantages,
which no former monarch ever poffeffed.

* BUT

BuT James V. who succeeded his father, was an BooK I.

infant of a year old ; and though the office of re- Jae V.
gent was conferred on the Duke of Albany, a man
of genius and enterprize, a native of France, and
accufftomed to a government where the power of
the King was already great though he made ma-
ny bold attempts to extend the royal authority ,
though he put to death Lord Home, and banished
the Earl of Angus, the two noblemen of greatest
influence in the kingdom, the arifftocracy loft no
ground under his administration. A stranger to
the manners, the laws, and the language of the
people whom he was called to rule, he adced, on
some occasions, rather like a Viceroy of the French
King, than the governor of Scotland ; but the no-
bles asserted their own privileges, and contended
for the interest of their country, with a boldness,
which convinced him of their independence, and
of the impotence of his own authority. After fe-
veral unfuccefsful struggles, he voluntarily retired
to France, and the King, being then in his thir-
teenth year, the nobles agreed that he should as-
fume the government, and that eight persons should
be appointed to attend him by turns, and to ad-
vise and assist him in the administration ps public
affairs. The earl of Angus, who was one of that
number, did not long remain satisfied with such
divided power. He gained rome of his colleagues,
removed others, and intimidated the reft. When
the term of his attendance expired, he flill retain-
ed authority, to which all were obliged to submit,
because none of them was in a condition to dispute
it. The affecion of the young King was the only
thing wanting, to fix and perpetuate his power.
But an active and high-fpirited Prince submitted,
with great impatience, to the restraint, in which
he was kept. It ill suited his years, or dilpolition,
to be confined as a prisoner, within his own pa-
lace; ,o be treated with no respect ; and to be

E 3 depriv-

'""v'" caiions, conceal his indignation and resentment.

Angus foresaw that he had much to dread from
thele, and as he could not gain the King's heart,
he refolvcd to make sure of his person. James was
continually firrounded by the Earl's fpics an coar
fidans , many eyes watched all his motions, and
oblfrved every step he took. But the KiSg's ca,
gerncfs to obtain liberty eluded all their vigilance.
He cliaped from Falkland, and fled to the caale
of Stirling, the residence of the QOeen his mother,
and the only place of strength in the kingdom
which was not in tlhe hands of the Douglafes. The
nobles, of whom some were influenced by their
hatred to Angus, and others by their refpedt for
the King, crowded to Stirling, and his court was
loon filled with persons of the greatest diftintion.
The Earl, though astonished at this unexpesked
revolution, resolved, at first, to make one bold
putfl for recovering his authority, by marching to
Stirling at the head of his followers; but he want-
ed either courage, or strength to execute this re-
bfolution. In a parliament held ioon after, he and
his adherents were attainted, and after escaping
from many dangers, and enduring much misery,
he was at length obliged to fly into England, for
refuge.

JAMEs had now not only the name, but, though

extremely young, the full authority of a King. He
was inferior to no Prince of that age in gracefulness
of peribn, or in vigour of mind. His understand-
ing was good, and his heart warm ; the former
capable of great improvement, and the latter sus-
ceptible of the best impreflions. But according to
the usual fate of Princes who are called to the throne
in their infancy, his education had been neglefted.
1 iis private preceptors were more ready to flatter,
tlman to infir tut him. It was the interest of those
SIho governed the kingdom, to prevent him from

know-

knowing too much. And the Earl of Angus, in IoQa 1.
order to divert him from business, gave him an ear-
ly tatfe for such pleasures, as afterwards occupied
and engrossed him more thap became a King. Ac-
cordingly, we discover in James all the features of
a great, but uncultivated spirit. On the one hand,
violent pallions, implacable resentment, an immo-
derate desire of power, an~d the utmost rage at dil-
appointment. On the other, love to his people,
zeal for the punishment of private oppressors, con-
fidence in his favourites, and the most engaging
openness and affability of behaviour.

WHAT he himself had fuffered from the exor-

bitant power of the nobles led him early to imitate
his predecessors, in their attempts to humble them.
The plan he formed for that purpose was more
profound, more systematic, and pursued with great-
er conflancy and fleadinefs, than that of any of
his anceflors. Andr the influence of the events
in his reign upon those of the subsequent period,
render it necessary to explain his conduct, at greater
length, and to enter into a more minute detail of
his ations. He had penetration enough to disco-
ver those defecs in the schemes, adopted by former
Kings, which occasioned their miscarriage. The
example of James I. had taught him, that wife laws
operate slowly on a rude people, and that the fierce
spirit of the feudal nobles was not to be subdued by
thlefe alone. The effects of the violent matnlres of
James II. convinced him, that the oppreflion of one
great family is apt either to excite the fiifpicion and
resentment of the other nobles, or to enrich with its
spoils some new family, which would soon adopt
the fame sentiments, and become equally formidable
to the crown. He saw, from the fatal end of
James III that negled1 was f1ill more intolerable to
thle nob!es than opprclion, and that the minifiry of

E 4 \ v\

BooK I. new men and favourites was both dishonourable,
' v' and dangerous to a prince. At the fame time, he

felt that the authority of the crown was not fuffi-
cient to counterbalance the power of the ariftocra-
cy, and that without Come new acceflion of strength,
he could expect no better success in the struggle
than his ancestors. In this extremity, he applied
himself to the clergy, hoping that they would both
relith his plan, and concur, with all their influence,
in enabling him to put it in execution. Under the
feudal government, the church being reckoned a
third estate, had its representatives in parliament ;
the number of there was considerable, and they
poffeffed great influence in that assembly. The
superstition of former kings, and the zeal of an
ignorant age, had bestowed upon ecclefiafticks,
a great proportion of the national wealth, and the
authority which they acquired by the reverence of
the people, was superior even to that which they
derived from their riches. This powerful body,
however, depended entirely on the crown. The
Popes, notwithflanding their attention to extend
their ufurpations, had negledted Scotland as a dif-
tant and poor kingdom, and permitted its kings to
exercise powers, which they disputed with more
considerable princes. The Scottish monarchs had
the sole right of nomination to vacant bifhopricks

* Epift. and abbeys * , and James naturally concluded,
Reg. Scot. that men who expected preferment from his fa-
*" A97' vour, would be willing to merit it, by promoting
,,- p his designs. Happily for him, the nobles had not
5 4o. yet recovered the blow which fell on their order at

Flowden, and if we may judge either from their
conduc, or from the character given of them by
Sir Ralph Sadler the English envoy in Scotland,
they were men of little genius, of no experience in
business, and incapable of ading either with una-
nimity, or with vigour. Many of the clergy, on
the other hand, were distinguished by their great

abilities,

abilities, and no leCs by their ambition. Various BooK I.
causes of difgult had arisen between them and the '---
nobles, who despised their charadter, and envied
their power, or their wealth. By acting in concert
with the king, they not only gratified him, but
avenged themselves, and hoped to aggrandise their
own order, by deprefling those, who were theirfole
rivals. Secure of so powerful a concurrence, James
ventured to proceed with greater boldness. In the
first heat of resentment, he had driven the Earl of
Angus out of the kingdom; and sensible that a per-
son to far superior to the other nobles in abilities,
might create many obstacles, which would retard,
or render ineffectual all his schemes, he folcmnly
swore, that he would never permit him to return
into Scotland, and, notwithflanding the repeated
folicitations of the king of England, he adhered to
his vow with unrelenting obitinacy. He then pro-
ceeded to repair the fortifications of Edinburgh,
Stirling, and other castles, and to fill his magazines
with arms and ammunition. Having taken there
precautions by way of defence, he began to treat
the nobility with the utmost coldness and reserve.
Those offices, which they were apt, from long pof-
feflion, to confider as appropriated to their order,
were now bestowed on ecclefiaftics, who alone pof-
sessed the King's ear, and together with a few gen-
tlemen of inferior rank, to whom he had commu-
nicated his schemes, were entrusted with the ma-
nagement of all public affairs. There ministers were
chosen with judgment; and Cardinal Beatoun, who
soon became the most eminent among them, was a
man of superior genius. They served the King with
fidelity, they carried on his meafiures with vigour,
with reputation, and success. James no longer con-
cealed his contempt of the nobles, and fiiffered no
opportunity of mortifying them to elcape. Slight
offences were aggravated into real crimes, and

puiT ied

Bool I. punished ,.,ith severity. Every accusation against

--- persons of rank was heard with pleasure, every ap-

pearance of guilt was examined with rigour, and
every trial proved fatal to those who were accused :
the baniflhing Hepburn Earl of Bothwell for rea-
sons extremely frivolous, the beheading the Master
of Forbes without fufficient evidence of his guilt,
and the condemning Lady Glamis, a filter of the
Earl of Angus, to be burnt for the crime of witch-
craft, of which even that credulous age believed her
innocent, are monuments both of the King's hatred
of the nobility, of the severity of his government,
and of the firetches he made towards absolute pow-
er. By these ats of authority, he tried the spirit
of the nobles, and how much they were willing to
bear. Their patience increased his contempt for
them, and added to the ardour and boldness with
which he pursued his plan. Meanwhile they ob-
served the tendency of his schemes with concern,
and with resentment; but the King's sagacity, the
vigilance of his miniffers, and the want of a proper
leader, made it dangerous to concert any measures
for their defence, and impoflible to adt with becom- |
ing vigour. James and his counsellors, by a
false ftcp which they took, presented to them, at
length, an advantage which they did not fail to im-

MOT IVES, which are well known, had promp-

ted Henry VIII. to disclaim the Popc's authority,
and to frize the revenues of the regular clergy. His
ifyiem of reformation hitisfied none of his fubjots.
Some were enraged because he had proceeded so
far, others murmured because he proceded no
farther ; and by his imperious temper, and alter-
nate perfecutions of the zealots for Popery, and the
converts to the Protestant opinions, he was equal-
ly formidable to both. Henry was afraid that this
general diffacisfaition of his people might encou-

.rage

rage his enemieson the continent to invade his king- Booa I.
dom. He knew that both the Pope and Emperor .-v--
courted the friend/hip of the King of Scots, and en-
deavoured to engage him in an alliance- against
England. He resolved, therefore, to disappoint
the effeds of their negociations, by entering into
a closer union with his nephew, and tor that purpole
sent ambafladors into Scotland, to propose a perfo-
nal interview with him at York. It was plainly
James's interest to accept of this invitation ; the al-
fiftanceof so powerful an ally, the high honours which
were promiled him, and the liberal subsidies he
might have obtained, would have added no little
dignity to his domestic government, and must
have greatly facilitated the execution of his favour-
ite plan. On the other hand, a war with England,
which he had reason to apprehend, if he rejeAed
Henry's offers to friendship, was inconsistent with
all his views. This would bring him to depend on
his barons ; an army could not be railed without
their afliftance: to call nobles incensed against
their prince into the field, was to unite his enemies,
to make them sensible of their own flrength, and
to afford them an opportunity of revenging their
wrongs. James, who was not ignorant that all
these consequences might follow a breach with En-
gland, listened at first to Henry's proposal, and
consented to the interview at York. But the cler-
gy dreaded an union, which must have been efta-
blifhed on the ruins of the church. Henry had ta-
ken great pains to infuse into his nephew his own
sentiments concerning religion, and had frequently
solicited him, by ambassadors, to renounce the u.
fiurped dominion of the Pope, which was no less
diihonourable to princes, than grievous to their
fubjeAs. The clergy had hitherto, with great ad-
dress, diverted the King from regarding therfe fol-
licitations. But, in an amicable conference, Henry

* expeded,

BOOK I. expected, and they feared that James would yield
~ --- to his intreaties, or be convinced by his arguments.

They knew that the revenues of the church were
anl alluring object to a Prince, who wanted money,
and who loved it , that the pride and ambition of
ecclefiaftics railed the indignation of the nobles ,;
that their indecent lives gave offence to the people ;
that the Protefiant opinions were spreading fast
throughout the nation ; and that an universal de-
section from the eftablithed church, would be the
consequence of giving the smallest degree of en-
couragement to there principles. For there reasons,
they employed all their credit with the King, and
had recourse to every artifice and insinuation, in
order to divert him from a journey, which must
have been so fatal to their interest. They endea-
voured to inspire him with fear, by magnifying the
danger to which he would expole his person, by
venturing so far into England, without any security
but the word of a Prince, who having violated
every thing venerable and sacred in religion, was
no longer to be trusted; and by way of compenfa-
tion for the sums which he might have received
from Henry, they offered an annual donation of
50,000 crowns; they promised to contribute libe-
rally towards carrying on a war with England, and
flittered him with the profpeC of immense riches,
ariflng from the forfeiture of persons, who were to
be tried and condemned as heretics. Influenced
by these considerations, James broke his agreement
with Henry, who, in expecation of meeting him,
had already come to York , and that haughty and
impatient Monarch resented the affront, by decla-
ring war against Scotland. His army was soon
ready to invade the kingdom. James was obliged
to have recourse to the nobles, for the defence of
his dominions. At his command, they assembled
their followers; but with the fame dispositions,
which had animnatcd their ancestors in the reigfi of

James

James III. and with a full resolution of imitating BooK I.
their example, by punishing those to whom they --'
imputed the grievances, of which they had rea-
son to complain , and if the King's Ministers had
not been men of abilities, superior to those of James
ill. and of considerable interest even with their ene-
mies, who could not agree among themselves what
viAims to sacrifice, the camp of Fala would have
been as remarkable as that of Lawder, for the da-
ring encroachments of the nobility on the preroga-
tive of the Prince. But though his ministers were
saved by this accident. the nobles had Coon another
opportunity, of discovering to the King, their dit-
fatisfaCion with his government, and their con-
tempt of his authority. Scarcity of provisions, and
the rigour of the season having obliged the English
army which had invaded Scotland, to retire, James
imagined that he could attack them, with great
advantage, in their retreat ; but the principal ba-
rons, with an obitinacy and disdain, which greatly
aggravated their disobedience, refused to advance
a fRep beyond the limits of their own country. Pro-
voked by this insult to himself, and fufpictous of
a new conspiracy against his ministers, the King
iniRantly disbanded an army, which paid so little
regard to his orders, and returned abruptly into
the heart of the kingdom.

AN ambitious and high spirited Prince could not

brook such a mortifying affront. His hopes of fuc-
cess had been rash, and his despair upon a difap-
pointment was exceflive. He felt himself engaged
in an unneceflary war with England, which, instead
of yielding him the laurels and triumphs that he
expedted, had begun with such circumstances, as
encouraged the insolence of his subjects, and ex-
posed him to the scorn of his enemies. He saw how
vain and ineffectual all his projects to humble the
nobles had been, and that, though in times of

peace,

SooK I. peace, a prince may endeavour to depress them,
-.-v--- they will rife, during war, to their former impor-

tance and dignity. Impatience, resentment, in-
dignation filled his bosom by turns. The violence
of these paftions altered his temper, and, perhaps
impaired his reason. He became pensive, sullen,
and retired. He seemed, through the day, to be
Iwallowed up in profound meditation, and through
the night, he was disturbed with those visionary
terrors, which make impreliton upon a weak un-
derflandirg only, or a dilordered fancy. In order
to revive tie King's spirits, an inroad on the weft-
ern bord'ris was concerted by his ministers, who
prevailed upon thle Barons in the neighbouring pro-
vincecs, to raise as many troops as were thought ne-
celtary, and to enter the enemy's country. But
nothin;g couldk remove the King's aversion to his
nobility, or diminilh his jealouly of their power.
He would not even entrust them with the command
of the forces xu hich they had alTembled ; that was
reserved for Oliver Sinclair his favourite, who no
Iboner appeared to take poffefiron of the dignity
conferred upon him, than rage and rindignation
occasioned an universal mutiny in the army. Five
hundred Engli.h, who happened to be drawn up
in fight, attacked the Scots in this disorder. Ha-
tred to the King, and contempt of their general,
produced an effect, to which there is no parallel
in history. They overcame the fear of death, and
the love of liberty , and ten thousand men furren-
dered to a number so far inferior, without striking
a tingle blow. No man was delirous of a vitory,
which would have been acceptable to the King;
and to his favourite ; few endeavoured to save
themfelies by flight ; the English had the choice
of what prisoners they pleased to take; and almost
every perfbn of diftinttion, who was engaged in
the expeditjon, remained in their. hands. This
aflonilhing event was a new proof to the King

of

of the general difaffeEion of the nobility, and a BooK L
new diicovery of his own weakness, and want of '
authority. Incapable of bearing these repeated
insults, he found himself unable to revenge them.
The deepest melancholy and despair succeeded to
the furious transports of rage, which the firfi ac-
count of the rout of his army occasioned. All the
violent pallions, which are the enemies of life,
preyed upon his mind, and waited and consumed a
youthful and vigorous constitution. Some authors
of that age impute his untimely death to poison -
but the diseases of the mind, when they rile to an
height, are often mortal; and the known effeds of
disappointment, anger, and resentment upon a fan-
guine and impetuous temper, fufficiently account
for his unhappy fate. " His death (says Drummond)
proveth his mind to have been raised to an high
ltrain, and above mediocrity; he could die, but
could not digest a difafter." Had James survived
this misfortune, one of two things must have hap-
pened : either the violence of his temper would
have engaged him openly to attack the nobles, who
would have found in Henry a willing and powerful
protecor, and have derived the fame afliftance
from him, which the malecontents, in the fiicceed-
ing reign, did from his daughter Elizabeth; in
that cafe, a dangerous civil war would have been
the certain consequence. Or, perhaps, necessity
might have obliged him to accept of Henry's offers,
and be reconciled to his nobility. In that etent
the church would have fallen a sacrifice to their
union, a Reformation, upon Henry's plan, would
have been established by law, a great part of the
temporalities of the church would have been seized,
and the friendship of the King and Barons would
have been cemented by dividing its spoils. Sucit

S

BOOK I. SuCH were the efforts of our Kings, towards re*
^-'. ducing the exorbitant power of the nobles. If they

were not attended with success, we must not, for
that reason, conclude that they were not conduced
with prudence. Every circumflance seems to have
combined against the Crown. Accidental events
concurred with political causes, in rendering the
best concerted meafiures abortive. The affaflination
of one King, the sudden death of another, and the
fatal despair of a third, contributed no less than its
own natural fIrength, to preserve the aristocracy
from ruin.

AMIDST there struggles, the influence which our

Kings poffeffed in their parliaments, is a circum-
fiance seemingly inexplicable, and which merits
particular attention. As there assemblies were com-
posed chiefly of the nobles, they, we are apt toima-
gine, must have dictated all their decisions ; but,
instead of this, every King found them obsequious

Theextra- to his will, and obtained such laws, as he effeem-
ordinary ed necessary for extending his authority. All things
of the were conduted there with dispatch and unanimity;
Scottish and, in none of our historians, do we find an in-
Kings in ifance of any opposition formed against the court
Pariva- in Parliament, or mention of any difficulty in car-
ment. rying through the measures which were agreeable

to the King. In order to account for this singular
fad, it is necessary to enquire into the origin and
conflitution of Parliament.

THE genius of the feudal government, uniform

'he rea- in all its operations, produced the fame effets in

ifmall, as in great societies ; and the territory of a
Baron, was, in miniature, the model of a kingdom.
He poffeffed the right ofjurifdidion, but those, who
depended on him, being free men, and not slaves,
could be tried by their Peers only; and, therefore,
his vassals were bound to attend his courts, and to
allit both in passing and executing his sentences.

When

When assembled, on there occasions, they establish- BooK I.
ed, by mutual consent, such regulations, as tended v'
to the welfare of their small tociety ; and often
granted, voluntarily, such supplies to their Superior,
as his neceflities required. Change now a single
name : in place of Baron, substitute King, and we
behold a Parliament in its firflt rudiments, and ob-
serve the first exertions of those powers, which its
members now poffers as Judges, as Legislators,
and as dispensers of the public revenues. Suita-
ble to this idea, are the appellations of the King's
Court*, and of the King's Great Council, by which, * Du
Parliaments were anciently distinguished ; and Cange,
suitable to this, likewise, were the constituent mem- Curia.
bers of which it was compoled. In all the feudal
kingdoms, those who held of the King in cbiefwere
bound, by the condition of their tenure, to attend
and to aflift in his courts. Nor was this esteemed
a privilege, but a service. It was exacted likewise
of Bishops, Abbots, and the greater ecclefiaftics,
who holding vast poffeflions of the Crown, were
deemed fubje& to the fame burden. Parliaments
did not continue long in this fiate. Cities gradually
acquired wealth, a considerable (hare of the pub-
lic taxes was levied on them, the inhabitants grew
into estimation, and being enfranchised by the So-
vereign, a place in Parliament was the contequence
of their liberty, and of their importance. But as
it would have been absurd to confer inch a privilege,
or to impose such a burden on a whole community,
every burrough was permitted to clihufe one or two
of its citizens to appear in the name of the corpo-
ration , and the idea of reprfentation was first in-
troduced in this manner. An innovation, flill
more important, naturally followed. l'hle vaflals
of the Crown were originally few in number, and
extremely powerful; but as it is impollible to ren-
der property fixed and permanent, many of their
poffeflibns came, gradually, and by various methods

VOL. I. F of

BooK I. of alienation, to be split and parcelled out into dif-

- --ferent hands. Hence arose the diftinaion between

the Greater and the LeJfer Barons. The former
were those who retained their original fiefs undivi-
ded, the latter were the new and lets potent vassals
of the Crown. Both were bound, however, to
perform all feudal services, and, of consequence,
to give attendance in Parliament. To the lesser
Barons, who formed no inconsiderable body, this
was an intolerable grievance. Barons sometimes
denied their tenure, burroughs renounced their
right of eleting, charters were obtained, contain-
ing an exemption from attendance ; and the anxie-
ty, with which our anceffors endeavoured to get
free from the obligation of fitting in Parliament, is
surpassed by that only, with which their posterity
solicit to be admitted there. In order to accommo-
date both parties, and, at once, to secure to the
King a fufficient number of members in his great
council, and to save his vassals from an unnecessary
burden, an easy expedient was found out. The
obligation to personal attendance was continued
upon the Greater Barons, from which the Lesser
Barons were exempted, on condition of their elect-
ing, in each county, a certain number of Repre-
fentatives, to appear in their name. Thus a Parlia-
ment became compleat in all its members, and was
compoled of Lords Spiritual and Temporal, of
Knights of the (hires, and of Burgesses. As many
causes contributed to bring government earlier to
perfecion in England, than in Scotland ; as the
rigour of the feudal inflitutions abated sooner ; and
its defe1s were supplied with greater facility in
the one kingdom, than in the other ; England led
the way in all there changes, and Burgesses, and
Knights of the (hire appeared in the Parliaments of
that nation, before they were heard of in ours.

A. D. Burgesses were first admitted into the Scottimh Par-
z3s6. liaments by Robert Bruce' ; and in the preamble to
Aer-the
cromby, . the
635.

the laws of Robert III. they are ranked among the BOOK I.
conflituent members of that assembly. The Lesser '

'

Barons were indebted to James I. for a statute ex- 1427.
empting them from personal attendance, and permit-
ting them to ele&t reprelentatives , the exemption
was eagerly laid hold on, but the privilege was ob
little valued, that, except one or two initances, it
lay negledted during to years and James VI. first
obliged them to fend representatives regularly to*Effayson
Parliament*. Brir. An-

A SCOTTrISH Parliament, then, consisted anci- tiq.Eff: II.

ently of Great Barons, of Ecclefiaftics, and a few Dalrymp.
representatives of burroughs. Nor were these di- Feud.
vided, as in England, into two houses, but composed Prop.ch.8.
one assembly, in which the Lord Chancellor pre-
fidedt. And, in rude ages, when the science of
government as extremely imperfect, among a
martial people, unacquainted with the arts of
peace, ft rangers to the talents which make a figure
in debate, and despising them, Parliaments were
not held in the fame estimation as at present ; nor
did haughty Barons love those courts, in which
they appeared, with such evident marks of inferi-
ority. Parliaments were often hastily aflembled,
and it was, probably, in the Kings power, by the

+ In England, the Peers and commons seem early to have met

in separate houses; and James I. who was fond of imitating the
Engliih in all their customs, had probably an intention of introdu-
cing Come considerable diflin~tion between the Greater and Lesser
Barons in Scotland i at least he determined that their conlulta-
tions should not be carried on under the direCtion of the fame Pre-
fidenr ; for by his law, A. D. 1327. it is provided, " that out of
the Commiflioners of all the thires shall be chosen a wife and expert
man, called the Common Speaker of the Parliament, who 0hall
propose all and sundry needs and causes, pertaining to the Com-
mons in the Parliament or general council." No such Speaker,
it would Item, was ever chosen ; and by a subsequent law the
Chancellor was declared perpetual President of Parliament.

F z manner

*

BOOK I. manner in which he issued his writs for that purpose,
- to exclude those who were averse from his measures.

At a time when deeds of violence were common,
and the restraints of law and decency were little
regarded, no man could venture with safety to op-
pose the King in his own court. The Great Barons,
or Lords of Parliament, were extremely few ; even

* And. so late as the beginning of the reign of James VI.*
CoI.v i. they amounted only to fifty three. The ecclefiaf-
pref 40. tics equalled them in number, and being devoted

implicitly to the Crown, for reasons which have
been already explained, rendered all hopes of vic-
tory in any struggle desperate. Nor were the no-
bles themselves so anxious, as might be imagined,
to prevent aAs of Parliament favourable to the roy-
al Prerogative, conscious of their own strength,
and of the King's inability to carry there ads into
execution without their concurrence, they trusted
either to elude, or to contemn them ; and the fta-
tute revoking the King's property, and annexing
alienated jurifdidions to the Crown, repeated in
every reign, and violated and derpifed as often, is
a standing proof of the impotence of laws, when
opposed to power. So many concurringcaufes are
fufficient, perhaps, to account for the ascendant,
which our Kings acquired in Parliament. But
without having recourse to any of there, a fiagle
circumstance, peculiar to the conflitution of the
Scottish Parliament, the mentioning of which we
have hitherto avoided, will abundantly explain
this fad, seemingly so repugnant to all our reason-
ings concerning the weakness of the King, and the
power of the nobles.

As far back, as our records enable us to trace

the constitution of our Parliaments, we find a com-
mittee, distinguished by the name of Lords qfAr-
ticles. It was their business to prepare, and to di-
gest all matters which were to be laid before the

Parliament,

Parliament ; every motion for a new law was firit BooK I.
madc there, and approved or rejeded by them ^
at pleasure; what they approved was formed into
a bill, and prcfented to Parliament ; what they re-
jedted could not be introduced into the house.
This committee owed the extraordinary powers
vetted in it, to the military genius of the ancient
nobles; too impatient to submit to the drudgery
of civil business, too impetuous to observe the
forms, or to enter into the details neceflary in con-
duting it, they were glad to lay that burden upon
a small number, while they themselves had no
other labour than simply to give, or to refuse their
fandCion to the bills, which were presented to them.
The Lords of Articles, then, not only direded the
whole proceedings of Parliament, but poffeffed a ne-
gative before debate. That committee was chosen
and constituted in such a manner, as put this va-
luable privilege entirely in the King's hands. it is
extremely probable, that the King once had the
sole right of nominating the Lords of Articles*.
They came afterwards to be eleded by the Parlia-
ment, and consisted of an equal number out of each
estate, and most commonly of eight Temporal and

eight

* IT appears from authentic records, that a Parliament was

appointed to be held March 12, i 66, and that the Lords of Ar-
ticles were chosen and met on the 7th, five days before the affem-
bling of Parliament. If they could be regularly eleaed to long
before the meeting of Parliament, it is natural to conclude, that
the Prince alone poffeffed the right of electing them. There are
two different accounts of the manner of their election at that time,
one by Mary herself, in a letter to the Archbilhop of Glasgow,
" We, accompanied with our nobility for the time, pars to the I'ol-
" buith of Edinburgh, for holding of our Parliament on the 7th
" day of this instant, and eleced the Lords Articulars." It we
explain thefre words, according to striA Grammar, we mufl con-
clude that the Queen herself elected them. It is, however, more
probable that Mary meast to fay, that the nobles then prelcnt with
her, viz. her pri' y couunellors, and others, eledcd the lords of

0 F 3 Articlcs.

BooK I. eight Spiritual Lords, of eight representatives of bur-

1*v"'* roughs, and of the eight great officers of the Crown.

Of this body, the eight ecclefiaftics, together with
the officers of the Crown, were entirely at the King's
devotion, and it was scarce poflible that the choice
could fall on such Temporal Lords and Burgesses as
would unite in opposition to his measures. Capa-
ble either of influencing their election, or of gain-
ing them when elecTed, the King commonly found
the I nrds of Articles no less obsequious to his will,
than his own privy council, and by means of his
authority with them, he could put a negative
upon his Parliament before debate, as well as after
it ; and what may seem altogether incredible, the
most limited Prince in Europe adually poffeffed,
in one inflance, a prerogatiye which the most abfo-
lute could never attain*.

To

Articles. Keith's Hill. ofScotland, p. 351. The other account
is Lord Ruthven's, who exprefly affirms that the Queen herself
eleaed them. Keith's Append. z6. Whether we embrace the
one or the other of these opinions, is of no consequence. If the
privy counsellors and nobles attending the court had a right to
cleA the Lords of Articles, it was equally advantageous for the
Crown, as if the Prince had had the tole nomination of them.

* HAVING deduced the history of the committee of Lords of

Articles, as low as the fubjce of this preliminary book required,
it may be agreeable, perhaps to some of my readers, to know the
tubfequent variations in this singular inflitution, and the political
use which our Kings made of there. When Parliaments became
imore numerous, and more considerable by the admiflion of the
reprefenratives of the Lesser Barons, the preserving their influence
over the Lords of Articles became, likewise, an objeA of greater
importance to our Kings. James VI. on pretence, that the Lords
of Articles could not find leilure to confider the great multitude
of affairs laid before them, obtained an adl, appointing four per-
Ibns to be named out of each e/late, who should meet twenty

-7- at.2 22. days before the commencement of Parliament f, to receive all
p. 594. fupplications, &c. and rejeting what they thought frivolous,

should engross in a book what tlhey thought worthy the attention

q9

To this account of the internal conflitution of Boos I.

Scotland, it will not be improper to add a view of -"""'
the political slate of Europe at that period, where Eatofeat
the following history commences. A thorough the bcgin-
knowledge of that general fyfltem, of which every ning ot the
kingdom in Europe forms a part, is not less requi- .6th cen-
site towards understanding the history of a nation, tury.
than an acquaintance with its peculiar govern-
ment and laws. The latter may enable us to com-
prehend domestic occurrences and revolutions, but
without the former, foreign tranfadtions muff be
altogether myflerious and unintelligible. By attend-
ing to this, many dark passages in our history may
be placed in a clear light ; and where the bulk of

of the Lords of Articles. No provision is made in the act for the
choice of this felek body, and the King would, of course, have
claimed that privilege. In 1633, when Charles I. was beginning
to introduce there innovations which gave so much offence to the
nation, he dreaded the opposition of his Parliament, and in order
to prevent that, an artifice was made nfe of to secure the Lords
of Articles for the Crown. The Temporal Peers were appointed
to chufe eight Bilhops and the Bithops eight Peers ; there sixteen
met together, and elated eight Knights of the Ihire, and eight
Burgesses, and to these the crown officers were added as usual.
If we can only suppose eight persons of so numerous a body, as
the Peers of Scotland were become, by that time, attached to the
court, these, it is obvious, would be the men whom the Bilhopa
would chute, and of consequence, the whole Lords of Articles
were the tools and creatures of the King. This practice, to in-
confiflent with liberty, was abolithed during the civil war ; and
the flatute of James VI. was repealed. Atter the Restoration,
Parliaments became more servile than ever. What was only a
temporary device, in the reign of Charles I. was, then, converted
into a standing law. " For my part, says the author from whom
" I have borrowed many of these particulars, I thould have
" thought it lets criminal in our Refloration Parliament, to have
" openly beflowed upon the King a negative before debate, than,
" in such an underhand artificial manner, to betray their confli-
" tuents, and the nation." Essays on Brit. Antiq. 51. It is pro-
bable, however, from a letter of Randolph's to Cecil to. Aug.
ISto, printed in the Appendix, that this parliament had Ibone
appearance of ancient precedent tojuflify their unworthy conduct.

 F 4 hfloloians

BOOK I. hiflorians have seen only the effect, we may be
- able to discover the caule.

TH1e subversion of the feudal government in

France, and its declension in the neighbouring king-
doms occalioned a remarkable alteration in the po-
litical ifate of Europe. Kingdoms, which were in-
considerable when broken, and parcelled out among
nobles, acquired firmnels and strength, by being
united into a regular monarchy. Kings became
conscious of their own power and importance.
They meditated schemes ofconqueft, and engaged
in wars at a diflance. Numerous armies were
railed, and great taxes imofed for their fubfii-
tence. Conhderable bodies of infantry were kept
in conflant pay , that service grew to be honoura-
ble ; and cavalry, in which the strength of Euro-
pean armies had hitherto consisted, though proper
enough for the thort and voluntary excursions of
Barons wholi served at their own expence, were
found to be unfit either for making, or defending
any important conquert.

IT was in Italy, that the powerfll monarchs of

France and Spain and Germany first appeared to
make a trial of their new strength. The division
of that country into lb many small tfates, the lux-
ury of the people, and their effeminate aversion to
arms, invited their more martial neighbours to an
cafy prey. The Italians, who had been accustom-
y.d to mock battles only, and to decide their quar-
rels by innoccnrand bloodlels viEtories, were afto-
nifhed at the light of real war ; and as they could
not resist the torrent, they luffered it to take its
course, and to spend its rage. Intrigue and policy
iupplied the want of strength ,; and neceflity and
lelf-preflrvation led that ingenious people to the
great lccret of modern politics, by teaching them
how to balance the po\wer of one Prince, by throw-
ing that of another into the opposite scale. By this
happy device, the liberty of Italy w as long prefer,-

ed.

ed. The scales were poised by very skilful hands ; Boor .
the smallest variations were attended to, and no'--v
Prince was allowed to retain any superiority, that
could be dangerous.

A SYSTEM of conduct, pursued with so much

success in Italy, was not long confined to that coun-
try of political refinement. The maxim of pre-
serving a balance of power is founded Co much
upon obvious reasoning, and tlhe situation of Eu-
rope rendered it To necessary, that it Coon became a
matter of chief attention to all wife politicians.
Every flep any Prince took was observed by all his
neighbours. Ambassadors, a kind of honourable
spies, authorized by the mutual jealousy of Kings,
resided almost constantly at every different court,
and had it in charge to watch all its motions. Dan-
gers were foreseen at a greater distance, and pre-
vented with more ease. Confederacies were formed
to humble any power which role above its due pro-
portion. Revenge or felf-defence were no longer
the only causes of hostility, it became common to
take arms out of policy ; and war, both in its com-
mencement, and in its operations, was more an
exercise of the judgment, than of the pallions of
men. Almost every war in Europe became gene-
ral, and the most inconsiderable states acquired im-
portance, because they could add weight to either
lcale.

FRANCIS I. who mounted the throne of France

in the year 1515, and Charles V. who obtained the
Imperial crown in the year 1519, divided between
them the strength and affections of all Europe.
Their perpetual enmity was not owing either to per-
fonal jealousy, or to the caprice of private paflion,
but was founded so much in nature and true policy,
that it subsisted between their posterity for several
ages; and, notwithitanding their prelent acciden-
tal and unnatural union, muff again revive. Charles

* mc-

8oo00 1. succeeded to all the dominions of the house of Au-

[vJ stria. No tamily had ever gained so much by wife
and fortunate marriages. By acquifirions of this
kind the Austrian Princes rose, in a short time,
from obscure Counts of Hapfbourg, to be Arch-
dukes of Austria, and Kings of Bohemia, and were
in poffeflion of the imperial dignity by a fort of he-
reditary right. Betides there territories in Germany,
Charles was heir to the crown of Spain, and to all
the dominions which belonged to the houfle of Bur-
gundy. The Burgundian provinces engrossed, at
that time, the riches and commerce of one half of
Europe; and he drew Irom them, on many occa-
lions, those immense films, which no people with-
out trade and liberty are able to contribute. Spain
furnished him a gallant and hardy infantry, to whose
discipline he was indebted for all his con.quefls.
And at the fame time, by the discovery of the new
world, a vein of wealth was opened to him, which
all the extravagance of ambition could not exhaust.
These advantages rendered Charles the first Prince
in Europe; but he wished to be more, and openly
aspired to universal monarchy. His genius was of
that kind which ripens slowly, and lies long con-
cealed ; but it grew up without observation, to an
unexpeded height and vigour. H-e poffeffed, in
an eminent degree, the charadceriftic virtues of all
the different races of Princes to whom he was al-
lied. In forming his schemes, he discovered all
the subtlety and penetration of Ferdinand his grand-
father ; he pursued them with that obstinate and in-
flexible perfevernce which has ever been peculiar
to the Auflrian blood; and in executing them, he
could employ the magnanimity and boldness of his
Burgundian Ancestors. His abilities were equal
to his power, and neither of them would have been
infcrinr to his designs, hlad not Providence, in pitry
to rm:ankirnd, and i: or:dcir to pi efcrve them tron_ the

the worst of all evils, Universal Monarchy, railed BooK I,
up Francis I. to defend the liberty of Europe. His ^-v*-
dominions were less extensive, but more united
than the Emperor's. His fubje&s were numerous,
ative, and warlike, lovers of glory, and lovers ot
their King. To Charles power was the only objet
of desire, and he pursued it with an unwearied and
joyless industry. Francis could mingle pleasure
and elegance with his ambition, and though he
negleted some advantages, which a more phleg-
matic or more frugal Prince would have improv-
ed, an ative and intrepid courage supplied all his
defeAs, and checked or defeated many of the Em-
peror's designs.

THE reft of Europe observed all the motions of

there mighty rivals, with a jealous attention. On
the one fide, the Italians saw the danger which
threatened Christendom, and in order to avert it,
had recourse to the expedient, which they had of-
ten employed with success. They endeavoured to
divide the power of the two contending Monarchs
into equal scales, and by the union of several small
states, to counterpoise him, whole power became
too great. But, what they concerted with much
wisdom, they were able to execute with little vi-
gour ; and intrigue and refinement were feeble
fences against the incroachments of military power.

ON the other fide, Henry VIII. of England held

the balance with leTs delicacy, but with a stronger
hand. He was the third Prince of the age in dig-
nity and in power; and the advantageous situation
of his dominions, his domestic tranquillity, his
immense wealth, and absolute authority rendered
him the natural guardian of the liberty of Europe.
Each of the rivals courted him with emulation ; he
knew it to be his interest to keep the balance even,
and to refrain both, by not joining intirely with
either of them. But he was seldom able to reduce
his ideas to practice; he was governed by caprice
more than by principle ,; and the paflions of the

''' King. Vanity and resentment were the great springs

of all his undertakings, and his neighbours easily
found the way, by touching these, to force him
upon many rash and inconsistent enterprises. His
reign was a perpetual series of blunders in politics,
and while he esteemed himself the wisest Prince in
Europe, he was a constant dupe to those, who found
it necessary, and could submit to flatter him.

IN this situation of Europe, Scotland, which had

hitherto wasted her strength in the quarrels between
France and England, emerged from her obscurity,
took her iRation in the system, and began to have
tome influence upon the fate of distant nations.
Her alliftance was, frequently, of consequence to
the contending parties, and the balance was often
so nicely adjufied, that it was in her power to make
it lean to either fide. The part alligned her, at
thisjundure, was to divert Henry from carrying
his arms into the continent. That Prince, having
routed the French at Guinegat, and invested Te-
rouenne, France attempted to divide his forces, by
engaging James IV. in that unhappy expedition
which ended with his life. For the fame reason,
Francis encouraged and aflifled the Duke of Al-
bany, to ruin the families of Angus and Home,
which were in the interest of England, and would
willingly have persuaded the Scots .to revenge the
death of their King, and to enter into a new war
with that kingdom. Henry and Francis having
united not long after against the Emperor, it was
the interest of both Kings, that the Scots should
continue inaaive; and a long tranquillity was the
effed of their union. Charles endeavoured to break
this, and to embarrals Henry by another inroad of
the Scots. For tills end, he made great advances
to James V. flattering the vanity of the young
>.".oarch, by clectirg him a Knight of the Golden

licece,

Fleece, and by offering him a match in the impe- BooK I.
rial family ; while, in return for these empty ho- '
nours, he demanded of him to renounce his alli-
ance with France, and to declare war against En-
gland. But James, who had much to lose, and
who could gain little by embracing the Emperor's
proposals, rejeeted them with decency, and keep-
ing firm to his ancient allies, left Henry at full li-
berty to at upon the continent with his whole
strength.

HENRY himself began his reign, by imitating

the example of his anceifors with regard to Scot-
land. He held its power in such extreme contempt,
that he was at no pains to gain his friendship; but
on the contrary, he irritated the whole nation, by
reviving the antiquated pretensions of the crown of
England to the sovereignty over Scotland. But his
own experience, and the example of his enemies,
gave him a higher idea of its importance. It was
impoflible to defend an open and extensive frontier,
against the incursions of an ative and martial peo-
pie. During any war on the continent this obliged
him to divide the strength of his kingdom. It
was necessary to maintain a kind of army of obfer-
vation in the north of England ; and after all pre-
cautions, the Scottith borderers, who were superior
to all mankind in the practice of irregular war,
often made fuccefsful inroads, and spread terror and
desolation over many counties. He fell, at last,
upon the true secret of policy, with refped to Scot-
land, which his predecessors had too little penetra-
tion to discover, or too much pride to employ.
The situation of the country, and the bravery of
the people made the conquert of Scotland impofli-
ble; but the national poverty, and the violence of
faaion rendered it an easy matter to divide, and to
govern it. He abandoned, therefore, the former
design, and resolved to employ the utmost addrels
in executing the latter. It had not yet become ho-

nourable

Iv-' ther, under the more decent name of a subsidy.

But, in all ages, the fame arguments have been
good in courts, and of weight with miniflers, sac-
tious leaders, and favourites. What were the argu-
ments, by which Henry brought over to many to
his interest during the minority of James V. we

"Burn know by the original warrants still extant *, for re-
Si p. 7 mitting considerable sums into Scotland. By a

proper distribution of these, many persons of note
were gained to his party, and a fation which held
secret correspondence with England, and received
all its diretions from thence, appears henceforward
in our domeflic contefls. In the sequel of the his-
tory, we shall find Henry labouring to extend his
influence in Scotland. His successors adopted the
fame plan, and improved upon it. The affairs of
the two kingdoms became interwoven, and their
interests were often the fame. Elizabeth divided
her attention almost equally between them, and the
authority, which the inherited in the one, was not
greater than that, which the acquired in the other.

THE

# BOOK II.

THE

HISTORY

O F

SCOTLAND.

BOOK II.

MARY Queen of Scots was born a few days BOOK. II.

before the death of her father James V. v'

The situation in which he left the kingdom alarm- Dec. '4,
ed all ranks of men, with the profped of a turbu- Birth of
lent and disastrous reign. A war against England Mary, and
had been undertaken without neceflity, and car- ftateofthe
ried on without success. Many persons of the firftj iadom'
rank had fallen into the hands of the EngliTh, in
the unfortunate rout near the firth of Solway, and
were fill prisoners at London. Among the ref of
the nobles there was little union, either in their
views, or in their affecions, and the religious dif-
putes, occasioned by the opinions of the reformers,
growing every day more violent, added to the rage
of those faaions which are natural to a form of go-
vernment nearly ariftocratical.

THE government of a Queen was unknown in

Scotland, and did not imprint much reverence in
the minds of a martial people. The government
of an infant Queen was fRill more deiritute of real
authority , and the profpea of a long and feeble
minority invited to faAion by the hope of impunity.
James had not even provided the common remedy
against the disorders of a minority, by committing
to proper persons the care of his daughter's educa-

tion,

Boor 1! tion, and the administration of affairs in her name.
' ^' " Though he saw the clouds gathering, and foretold

that they would quickly burst into a iform, he was
so little able to disperse them, or to defend his daugh-
ter and kingdom against the imminent calamities,
that, in mere despair, he abandoned them both to
the mercy of fortune, and left open to every pre-
tender, the office of Regent, which he could not
fix to his own fatisfation.

Pretenfi- CARDINAL. Beatoun, who had for many years
onsofCar- been considered as prime minister, was the firit who
dinal Bea- claimed that high dignity , and in fipport of his
tountothe . r i j °

i n. » i *L i

regentcy pretensions, he produced a testament *, which he
*Sadler's himself had forged in the name of the late King ;
Lett. 161. and without any other right, inflantly assumed the

title of Regent. He hoped, by the afliftance of the
clergy, the countenance of France, the connivance
of the Queen Dowager, and the support of the
whole Popish f<taion, to hold by force, what he
had feizcd on b\ fraud. But Beatoun had enjoyed
power too long to be a favourite of the nation.
Those among the nobles who willhed for a Refor-
mation in religion dreaded his severity, and others
considered the elevation of a Churchman to the
highest office in the kingdom as a depreflion of
themselves. At their infligation, James Hamilton
Earl of Arran, and next heir to the Queen, rouzed
himself from his inativity, and was prevailed on
to aspire to that station, to which proximity of

EarlofAr-blood gave him a natural title. The nobles, who
ran chosen were atfemblcd for that purpose, unanimously con-
Regent. ferred on him the office of regent ; and the public

voice applauded their choice.

Characer No two men ever differed more widely in difpo-
of Bea- fition and characer, than the Earl of Arran and
toun. Cardinal ileatoun. The Cardinal was by nature of

immoderate ambition , by long experience he had
acquired address and refinement ; and insolence
grew upon him from continual success. His high

flation

flation in the church placed him in the way of BooK IT.
great employments; his abilities were equal to the ----
greatest of these ; nor did he reckon any of them
to be above his merit. As his own eminence was
founded upon the power of the church of Rome,
lie was a zealous defender of that superstition, and
for the fame reason an avowed enemy to the doctrine
of the Reformers. Political motives alone deter-
mined him to support the one, or to oppose the
other. His early application to public business
kept him unacquainted with the learning and con-
troverfies of the age ; he gavejudgment, however,
upon all points, in dispute, with a precipitancy,
violence, and rigour, which cotemporary historians
mention with indignation.

THE character of the Earl of Arran, was, in al- Of Arran.

moit every thing, the reverse of Beatoun's. He
was neither infeted with ambition, nor inclined
to cruelty : the love of cafe extinguished the for-
mer, the foftnefs of his temper preserved him from
the latter. Timidity and irresolution were his pre-
dominant failings, the one occasioned by his natu-
ral constitution, and the other arising from a con-
fcioufnefs that his abilities were not equal to his fla-
tion. With there difpofitionshe might have enjoyed
and adorned private life ; but his public conduc¾
was without courage, or dignity, or confiltence.
The perpetual slave of hisown tears, and, by con-
sequence, the perpetual tool of those, who found
their advantage in praaifing upon them. But as
no other person could be set in opposition to the
Cardinal, with any probability of success, the na-
tion declared in his favour with so general a consent,
that the artifices of his rival could not withitand
its united strength. Schemesof

THE Earl of Arran had scarce taken poffeflion Henry

of his new dignity, when a negociation was opened VIII. with

Vot. I. G iregard 10
VoL. I. G ,th Scotland.

BooK It. with England, which gave birth to events of the
-- most fatal consequence to himself, and to the kilng-

dom. After the death of James, Henry VIII. was
no longer afraid of any interruption from Scotland
to his designs against France ; and immediately
conceived hopes of rendering this security perpetual,
by the marriage of Edward his only fbn with the
young Queen of Scots. He communicated his in-
tention to the prisoners taken at Solway, and pre-
vailed on them to favour it, by the promise of li-
berty, as the reward of their success. In the mean
time, he permitted them to return into Scotland,
that, by their presence in the Parliament which the
Regent had called, they might be the better able
to persuade their countrymen to fall in with his
proposals. A cause, entruffted to such able and
zealous advocates, could not well mils of coming
to an happy ifTue. All those who feared the Car-
dinal, or who desired a change in religion, were
fond of an alliance, which afforded proteaion to
the doArine which they had embraced, as well as
to their own persons, against the rage of that power-
ful and haughty Prelate.

III con- BuT Henry's rough and impatient temper was
duted by incapable of improving this favourable conjundure.
himfdef. Address and delicacy in managing the fears, and

follies, and interefits of men, were arts with which
he was utterly unacquainted. The designs he had
formed upon Scotland were obvious from the mar-
riage which he had proposed, and he had not dex-
terity enough to disguise, or to conceal them. In-
flead of yielding to the fear orjealoufy of the Scots,
what time and accidents would soon have enabled
him to recover, he, at once, alarmed and irritated
the whole nation, by demanding that the Queen's
person should be immediately committed tohiscuf-
tody, and that the government of the kingdom
should be put in his hands during her minority.

i-E NRY

HI-ENRY could not have prescribed more ignomi- Boo, II.

nious conditions to a conquered people, and it is no
wonder they were rejected, with indignation, by Odious to
men who scorned to purchase an alliance with Eng- though in
land, at the price of their own liberty. The par- part ac-
liament of Scotland, however, influenced by the cepted by
nobles who returned from England; desirous ofthemb
peace with that kingdom ; and delivered, by the
Regent's confining the Cardinal as a prisoner, from March 12.
any opposition to which he might have given rife; 543.
consented to a treaty of marriage and of union, but
upon somewhat a more equal footing. And after
some dark and unfuccefsful intrigues, by which his
ambassador endeavoured to carry off the young
Queen and Cardinal Beatoun into England, Henry
was obliged to give up his own proposals, and to
accept of theirs. On his fide, he consented that
the Queen should continue to reside in Scotland,
and himself remain excluded from any share in the
government of the kingdom. On the other hand,
the Scots agreed to fend their sovereign into Eng-
land as soon as (he attained the full age of ten years,
and instantly to deliver fix persons, of the first rank,
to be kept as hostages by Henry till the Queen's
arrival at his court.

THE treaty was still so manifestly of advantage Favoured

to England, that the Regent loft much of the pub- by the Re-
lic confidence by consenting to it. The Cardinal, gent.
who had now recovered liberty, watched for such
an opportunity of regaining credit, and he did not
fail to cultivate and improve this to the utmost.
He complained loudly, that the Regent had be- Opposed
trayed the kingdom to its most inveterate enemies, by the
and sacrificed its honour to his own ambition. He Cardinal.
foretold the extinAion of true catholic religion,
under the tyranny of an excommunicated heretic;
but above all, he lamented to fee an aincient king-
dom consenting to its own slavery, descending into
the ignominious fation of a dependent province

G 2 and,

Boo. II. and, in one hour, the weakness or treachery of a

S ftingle man surrendering every thing for which the

Scottilh nation had struggled and fought during so
many ages. There remonftrances of the Cardinal
were not without effect. They were addressed to
prejudices and paflions which are deeply rooted in
the human heart. The fame hatred to the ancient
enemies of their country, the famejealoufy of na-
tional honour and pride of independence, which,
at the beginning of the present century, went near
to prevent the 5cots from consenting to an union
with England, upon terms of great advantage, did,
at that time, induce the whole nation to declare
against the alliance which had been concluded. In
the one period, an hundred and fifty years of peace
between the two nations, the habit of being sub-
jected to the fame King, and governed by the fame
maxims, had considerably abated old animofities,
and prepared both people for incorporating. In
the other, injuries were still fresh, the wounds on
both sides were open, and, in the warmth of resent-
ment, it was natural to seek revenge, and to be a-
verse from reconcilement. At the union in 1707,
the w ifdom of parliament despised the groundless
murmurs occasioned by antiquated prejudices , but
in 1543, the complaints of the nation were better
founded, and urged with a zeal and unanimity,
which it is neither juff, nor safe to disregard. The
rage of the people rose to such an height, that the
English ambassador could hardly be protected from
their insults. The clergy contributed a great fum
towards preserving the church from the dominion
of a Prince, whose system of Reformation was so
fatal to their power. The nobles, after having
mortified the Cardinal, io lately, in such a cruel
manner, were, now, ready to applaud and to fe-
cond him, as the defender of the honour and liber-

ty of his country. A RG Y' I L,

ARGYLL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other power. BOOK IT.

ful Barons declared openly against the alliance with '"-
England. By their afliftance, the Cardinal seized almot thec
on the persons of the young Queen and her mother, whole na-
and added to his party the splendor and authority tionagainft
of the royal name *. He received, at the fame the En-
time, a more real acceflion to his strength, by the gliih.
arrival of Matthew Stewart Earl of Lenox, whose Hit. of
return from France he had earnestly follicited. This Scotl. 30.
young nobleman was the hereditary enemy of the
houle of Hamilton. He had many claims upon
the Regent, and pretended a right to exclude him,
not only from succeeding to the .rown, but to de-
prive him of the poiellion of his private fortune.
The Cardinal flattered his vanity, with the profpedt
of marrying the Queen Dowager, and affected to
treat him with so much reipect, that the Regent
became jealous of him as a rival in power.

THIS suspicion was artfully heightened by the

Abbot of Pailley, who returned into Scotland fbme
time before the Earl of Lenox, and aded in con-
cert with the' Cardinal. He was a natural brother
of the Regent, with whom he had great credit; a
warm partizan of France, and a zealous defender
of the established religion. He took hold of the
Regent by the proper handle, and endeavoured to
bring about a change in his feotiments, by working
upon his fears. The desertion of the nobility, the
difaffedion of the clergy, and the rage of the peo-
ple; the resentment of France, the power of the
Cardinal, and the pretensions of Lenox, were all
represented with aggravation, and with their most
threatning afped.

MEAN while, the day appointed for the ratifica-

tion of the treaty with England, and the delivery
of the hostages approached, and the Regent was
still undetermined in his own mind. He aded to
the last, with that irresolution and inconsistence,

* G 3 which

BooK II. which is peculiar to weak men, when they are to
'.L unfortunate as to have the chief part in the conduct

of difficult affairs. On the 25th of August, he
ratified the treaty with Henry, and proclaimed the
Cardinal, who still continued to oppose it, an ene-

Obliges my to his country. On the 3d of September, he
theRegent secretly withdrew from Edinburgh, met with the
to re- Cardinal at Callender, renounced the friendship of
noundcete England, and declared for the interests of France*.
with En- HENRY, in order to gain the Regent, had not
gland. spared the most magnificent promises. He had of-
* Sadler, fered to give the Princess Elizabeth in marriage to
339 356. his eldest Ton, and to constitute him King of that

part of Scotland, which lies beyond the river Forth.
But upon finding his interest in the kingdom to be
leTs considerable than he had imagined, the English
monarch began to treat him with little refpet.
The young Queen was now in the custody of his
enemics, who grew every day more numerous and
more popular. They formed a separate court at
Stirling, and threatened to ele& another Regent.
The French King was ready to afford them his
protection, and the nation, out of hatred to the
Englith would have united in their defence. In
this situation, the Regent could not retain his au-
thority, without a sudden change of his measures ;
and though he endeavoured, by ratifying the trea-
ty, to preserve the appearances of good faith with
England, he was obliged to throw himlelf into the
arms of the party, which adhered to France.

And to SOON after this sudden revolution in his political
persecute principles, the Regent changed his sentiments con-
the Re- cerning religion. The spirit of controversy was
formers. then new and warm ; books of that kind were ea-

gerly read by men of every rank; the love of no-
velty, or the convition of truth, had led the Re-

gent

gent to express great esteem for the writings of the Poor I.
Reformers; and having been powerfully supported '-m
by those who had embraced their opinions, he, in
order to gratify them, entertained, in his own fa-
mily, two of the most noted preachers of the Protef-
tant docrine, and, in his firfl Parliament, consent-
ed to an ad, by which the laity were permitted to
read the fcripturesin a language which they under-
flood. Truth needed only a fair hearing to be an
over-match for error. Absurdities, which had long
imposed on the ignorance and credulity of man-
kind, were detected and exposed to public ridicule;
and under the countenance of the Regent, the Re-
formation made great advances. The Cardinal
observed its progrels with concern, and was at the
utmost pains to obfiruat it. He represented to the
Regent his great imprudence in giving encourage-
ment to opinions, so favourable to Lenox's preten-
lions , that his own legitimacy depended upon the
validity of a sentence of divorce, founded on the
Pope's authority ,; and that by fuffering it to be
called jn question, he weakened his own title to the
fucceffon, and furnilhed his rival with the only ar-
gument, by which it could be rendered doubtful*.
These insinuations made a deep impreflion on the
Regent's timorous spirit, who, at the profpeit of
such imaginary dangers, was as much flartled as
the Cardinal could have wished ; and his zeal for
the Protestant religion was not long proof againfl

* TH pretensions of the Earl of Lenox to the fucceflron

were thus founded. Mary, the daughter of James II. was mar-
ried to James Lord Hamliton. Elizabeth, a daughter of that
marriage, was the wife of Matthew Earl of Lenox, and the pre-
sent Earl was her grandson. The Regent was likewise the grand-
bon of the Princess Mary. But his father having married Janet
Beaton the Regent's mother, after he had obtained a divorce from
Elizabeth Home his former wife, Lenox pretended that the fen-
tence of divorce was unjust, and that the Regent, being born
while Elizabeth Home was still alive, ought to be considered as
illegitimate. Crawt. Peer. 192.

G 4 his

BOOK II. his fear. He publickly abjured the doctrine of the
' Reformers in the Franciscan church at Stirling, and

declared not only for the political, but the religious
opinions of his new confidants.

THE Protestant doctrine did not fuffer much by

his apoftacy. It had already taken so deep root in
the kingdom, that no discouragement or severity
could extirpate it. 'Ihe Regent indeed contented
to every thing, that the zeal of the Cardinal thought
necessary for the preservation of the established
religion. The reformers were persecuted with all
the cruelty, which superstition inspires into a bar-
barous people. Many were condemned to that
dreadful death, which the church has appointed
for the punishment of its enemies ,; but they fuffer-
ed with a spirit so nearly resembling the patience
and fortitude of the primitive martyrs, that more
were converted, than terrified by such fpedacles.

Beatoun THE Cardinal, however, was now in poffefion
the chief of every thing his ambition could desire; and ex-
direaionofercifed all the authority of a Regent, without the
affairs. envy of the name. He had nothing to fear from

the Earl of Arran, who having by his inconstancy
forfeited the public esteem, was contemned by one
half of the nation, and little truited by the other.
The pretensions of the Earl of Lenox were the on-
ly thing which remained to embarrass him. He
had very fuccefsfully made use of that nobleman to
work upon the Regent's jealouly and fear, but as
he no longer flood in need of such an initrument,
he was willing to get rid of him with decency. Le-
nox soon began to fufped his intention ; promises,
flattery, and refpet were the only returns he had
hitherto received for fubitantial services; but at
last the Cardinal's artifices could no longer be con-
cealed, and Lenox, instead of attaining power and

dignity

only to procure these for another. Resentment and "
disappointed ambition pushed him on to seek re-
venge on that cunning prelate, who, by sacrificing
his interest, had so ungenerously purchased the Earl
of Arran's friendship. He withdrew, for that rea-
0on, from court, and declared for the party at en-
mity with the Cardinal, which, with open arms,
received a convert, who added so much luffre to
their cause.

THE two faCtions which divided the kingdoms

were still the fame, without any alterations in their
views or principles ; but, by one of those strange
revolutions, which were frequent in that age, they
had, in the course of a few weeks, changed their
leaders. The Regent was at the head of the par-
tizans of France and the defenders of Popery, and
Lenox in the fame station with the advocates for
the English alliance, and a reformation in religion.
The one laboured to pull down his own work,
which the other upheld v.ith the fame lhand, that
had hitherto endeavoured to destroy it.

LENOX'S impatience for revenge got the itart

of the Cardinal's aetivity. He surprised both him
and the Regent by a sudden march to Edinburgh
with a numerous army ,; and might easily have
crushed them, before they could prepare for their
defence. But he was weak enough to listen to pro-
pofals for an accommodation , and the Cardinal
amused him To artfully, and spun out the treaty to
such a length, that the greater part of the Earl's
troops, who served, as is usual wherever the feudal
inititutions prevail, at their own expence, deflrted
him , and in concluding a peace, instead of giving
the law, he was obliged to receive it. A second
attempt to retrieve his affairs ended yet more unfor-
tunately. One body of his troops was cut to pieces,
and the reft dispersed ; and with the poor remains
of a ruined party, he muff either have submitted

to

' ' if the approach of an English army had not brought

him a short relief.

Henry in- HENRY was not of a temper to bear tamely the
vades indignity, with which he had been treated, both

by the Regent and Parliament of Scotland, who,
at the time when they renounced their alliance with
him, had entered into a new and ftriaer confede-
racy with France. The rigor of the season retard-
ed for Come time the execution of his vengeance.
But in the spring, a considerable body of infantry
which was defined for France, received orders to
fail for Scotland, and a proper number of cavalry
was appointed to join it by land. The Regent
and Cardinal little expeced such a visit. They had
trusted that the French war would find employment
for all Henry's forces ; and, from an unaccountable
security, were wholly unprovided for the defence
of the kingdom. The Earl of Hartford, a leader
fatal to the Scots in that age, commanded this ar-
my, and landed it, without opposition, a few miles

May 3, above Leith. He was quickly maiter of that place ;
Ss44- and marching direacly to Edinburgh, entered it

with the fame cafe. After plundering the adjacent
country, the richest, and most open in Scotland, he
set on fire both these towns ; and upon the approach
of Come troops gathered together by the Regent,
put his booty on board the fleet, and with his land
forces retired safely to the English borders, deliver-
ing the kingdom, in a few days, from the terror of
an invasion, concerted with little policy, carried on
at great expence, and attended with no advantage.
If Henry aimed at the conquest of Scotland, he
gained nothing by this expeditin ; if the marriage
he had proposed, was still in his view, he loft a
great deal. Such a rough courtship, as the Earl of
Huntly humorously called it, disgusted the whole
nation; their aversion for the match grew into ab-

horlence ,

horrence ; and exasperated by so many indignities, BOOK It.
the Scots were never, at any period, more attached -
to France, or more alienated from England.

THE Earl of Lenox alone, in spite to the Re-

gent and French King, continued a correspondence
with England, which ruined his own interest, with-
our promoting Henry's. Many of his own vassals
preferring their duty to their country before their
affedion to him, refilled to concur in any design to
favour the public enemy. Ar.d after a few feeble
and unfuccet~ful attempts to ditlurb the Regent's
administration, he was obliged to fly for fafcty to
the court of England, where Henry rewarded ser-
vices which he had the inclination, but not the
power to perform, by giving him in marriage his
niece the Lady Margaret Douglas. This unhappy
exile, however, was destined to be the father of a
race of kings. He law his bon Lord Darnley
mount the throne of Scotland, to the perpetual ex-
clulion of that rival \viwo now triumphed in his
ruin. And, from that time, his posterity have held
the sceptre in two kingdoms, by one of which he
was calt out as a criminal, anrd by the other re,
ceived as a fugitive.

MEAN while hostilities were continued by both A peace

nations, but with little vigour on either fide. The concuinded.
hiflorians of that age relate minutely the circum-
Itances of several skirmishes and inroads, which as
they did not produce any considerable effcdt, at this
distance of time, dleerve no remembrance *. Ar

latt

* Though this war was dilinguilhed by no important or de-

cifive adtion, it was, however, extremely ruincus to individuals.
There flill remain two original papers, which give us famne idea
of the miseries, to which the molt fertile counties in the king-
dom were exposed, by the ludden and dellrudtive incursions of
the borderers. The firlt feenis to be the report made to Henry
by the.Englifh wardens of the marches, for the year I 544, and
contains their exploits from the ad of July, to the r thl of No-

vember.

Boost II. last an end was put to this languid and ina(tive war,
T by a peace, in which England, France, and S'cot-
June1546. land were comprehended. Henry laboured to ex-

clude the Scots from the benefit of this treaty, and
to reserve them for that vengeance, which his at-
tention to the affairs of the continent had hitherto
delayed. But although a peace with England was
of the last consequence to Francis I. whom the Em-
peror was preparing to attack with all his forces,
he was too generous to abandon allies, who had
served him with fidelity, and he chose rather to pur-
chafe Henry's friendship with disadvantage to him-

vember. The account it gives of the different inroads, orfoir-
rays, as they are called, is very minute ; and in conclusion, the
fum total of mtifchief they did is thus computed ;

Towns, towers, fledes, barnekyns, paryfhe-churches,

baffel-houles caLl down or burnt - 192

Scots slain - - - 403
Prisoners taken - - - - 8 6
Nolt, i. e. horned cattle, taken - - 10,386
Sheep - - - - i ,492
Nags and geldings - - - - 1,296
Goats - - - - 200
Bolls of corn - - 85o
Inight-gear, i. e. houfhold furniture, not reckoned.

Haynes' htate papers, 43.

The other contains an account of an inroad by the Earl of

Hartford, between the 8th and 23d of September, 1S45 ; the
narrative is more general, but it appears that he had burnt,
razed, and defaroyed in the counties of Berwick and Roxburgh
only,

Monalteries and Friar- houses - - 7
Castles, towers, and piles - - 16
Market towns - - - - 5
Villages - - - - 243

Milns - - - - 13

Hospitals - - - - 3

All there were calft down or burnt. Haynes 52. As the Scots
were no less Ikilful in the practice of irregular war, we may
conclude that the damage which they did in England was not in-
considerable; and that their raids were no lets wasteful, than
the forrays of the Englith.

self,

self, than to leave them exposed to danger. By BooK If.
yielding some things to the interest, and more to v
the vanity of that haughty Prince ,; by fubmillion,
flattery, and address, he, at length, prevailed to
hlave the Scots included in the peace agreed upon.

AN event which happened a short time before

the conclusion of this peace, rendered it more ac-
ceptable to the whole nation. Cardinal Beatoun
had not used his power with moderation, equal to
the prudence by which he attained it. Notwith-
flanding his great abilities, he had too many of the
paflions and prejudices of an angry leader of a sac-
tion, to govern a divided people with temper. His
resentment against one party of the nobility, his
insolence towards the reft, his severity to the Re-
formers, and, above all, the barbarous and illegal
execution of the famous George Wifhart, a man
of honourable birth, and of primitive fandity, wore
out the patience of a fierce age; and nothing but
a bold hand was wanting to gratify the public with
by his deftruaion. Private revenge, inflamed and
fantified by a false zeal for religion, quickly sup-
plied this want. Norman Leflv, the eldest son of
the Earl of Rothes, had been treated by the Car-
dinal with injustice and contempt. It was not the
temper of the man, or the spirit of the times, qui-
etly to digefl an affront. And as the profeflion of
his adverlary icreened him from the effects of hat
is called an honourable resentment, he refblved to
take that fatisfadion, which he could not demand.
This resolution deserves as much censure, as the
singular courage and condu& with which he put
it in execution excite wonder. The Cardinal, at
that time, resided in the cattle of Saint Andrew's,
which he had fortified at great expnce, and in the
opinion of the age had rendered it impregnable.
His retinue was numerous, the town at his devo-
tion, and the neighbouring country futl of his

v dertook to friiiprifie his castle, and to aflaflinate him-

frlf, and their ld.ccefs was equal to the boldness
of the attempt. Early in the morning they leized
on the gate of the caitle, which was set open to
the workmen who weie employed in finishing the
fortifications ; and having placed lentries at the
door of the Cardinal's apartment, they awakened
his numerous domeftics one by one, and turning

May :9, them out of the caffle, they without noise, or tu-
1a,6, mult, or violcnce of any other pcrfon, delivered

their country, though by a most unjustifiable ac-
tion, from an ambitious man, whose pride was in-
supportable to the nobles, as his cruelty and cun-
ning were the great checks to the Reformation.

The Re- His death was fatal to the Catholic religion, and
gent at- to the French interest in Scotland. The tame zeal
tempta in
vain to for both continued among a great party in the na-
seize the tion, but when deprived of the genius and autho-
murderers, rity of so skilful a leader, was of small consequence.

Nothing can equal the consternation which a blow
so unexpeced occafioncd among his adherents;
while the Regent secretly enjoyed an event, which
removed out of his way a rival, who had not only
cclipfed his greatness, but almost extinguilhed his
power. Decency, lowcver, the honour of the
church, the importunity of the Qeen Dowager and
her fation, [Iis engagements with France, and,
above all these, the desire of recovering his cldclt
lon, whom the Cardinal had detained for Tome time
at St. Andrew's in pledge of his fidelity, and who,
together with thle cafttl!e, had fallen into the hands
of the conpirators, induced him to take arms in
order to revenge the death of a man he hated.

Ht" threatned vengeance, but was unable to exe-

cute it. One part of military fciencc, the art of at-
tacking fortified places, was then unknown in Scot-
l-:.d. The weapons, the discipline, and impetuosity

of

lieges, as they were aItive in the field. An hun- -v-'
dred and fifty men, which was the greatest number
the conspirators ever assembled, resifted all the es-
forts of the Regent for five months *, in a place, * Epift.
which a ftingle battalion, with a few battering can- Reg. Scot.
ion, would now reduce in a few hours. This tedi- z. 379.
ous siege was concluded by a truce. The Regent
undertook to procure for the conspirators an abfo-
lution from the Pope, and a pardon in Parliament ;
and upon obtaining there, they engaged to furren-
der the castle, and to set his ion at liberty.

IT is probable, that neitherof them were sincere

in this treaty. On both sides, they fought only to
amuse, and to gain time. The Regent had applied
to France for alliftance, and expected soon to have
the conspirators at mercy. On the other hand, if
Lefly and his associates were not at first incited by
Henry to murder the Cardinal, they were, in the
sequel, powerfully supported by him. Notwith-
standing the silence of cotemporary historians, there
are violent presumptions of the former ; of the lat-
ter there is undoubted certainty t. During the t Kc;tl,
siege, the conspirators had received from England 60.
supplies both of money and provisions; and as
Henry was preparing to renew his proposals con-
cerning the marriage and the union he had projeCt-
ed, and to fecopd his negotiations with a numerous
army, they hoped, by concurring with him, to be
in a situation, in which they would no longer need
a pardon, but might claim a reward.

TH E death of Henry blasted all these hopes. It

happened in the beginning of next year, after a January
reign of greater splendor than true glory i bustling, 28, as47.
though not ative; oppreflive in domestic govern-
ment, and in foreign politics wild and irregular.
But the vices of this Prince were more beneficial to
mankii]d, than the virtues of others. His rapaci-

. ouifnefs,

BOOK II. onuhers, his profusion, and even his tyranny, by
-v---' deprelling the ancient nobility, and by adding new

property and power to the Commons, laid the foun-
dations of the Britilh liberty. His other paflions
contributed no less towards the downfal of Popery,
and the eftablilhment of religious freedom in the
nation. His refentmcnt led him to abolish the
power, and his covetoulhefs to seize the wealth of
the church; and by withdrawing these supports,
made it easy, in the following reign, to overturn
the whole fabric of superstition.

FRANCIS I. did not long survive a Prince, who

had been alternately his rival and his friend , but
his successor Henry II. was not neglectful of the

Troopsar- French intcreft in Scotland. He Cent a confider-
rive from able body of men, under the command of Leon
France. Strozzi, to the Regent's afliftance. By their long r

experience in the Italian and German wars, the
French had become as dextrous in the conduat of [.
sieges, as the Scots were ignorant; and as the bold-
ness and despair of the conspirators could not de-
fend them againfl their superior art, they, after a

Force the ihort refiltance, surrendered to Strozzi, who en-
St. An- gaged, in the name of the King his malter, for the
drew'sto iccuiity of their lives ; and as his prisoners tranf-
surrender. ported them into France. The caitle itself, the

monument of Beatoun's power and vanity, was de-
molifhed, in obedience to the canon law, which,
with admirable policy, denounces its anathemas
even against the houles in which the sacred blood
of a Cardinal happens to be shed, and ordains them

*Burn. to be laid in ruins .
Hifl. Ref. TH i; archbilhoprick of St. Andrew's was bestow-

S338 ed by the Regent upon his natural brother John

Hamilton Abbot of Paisley.

New THE delay of a few weeks would have Caved the
breach conspirators. Those Ministers of Henry VIII. who

'ith En- -
geid. had the chief direaion of affairs during the mino-

rity

with regard to Scotland, by the maxims of their v
late maltter, and resolved to frighten the Scots into
a

treaty, which they had not abilities or address to

bring about by any other method.

BUT before we proceed to relate the events which
their invasion of Scotland occasioned, we shall flop
to take notice of

a circumstance unobserved by co-

temporary historians, but extremely remarkable for
the discovery it makes of the sentiments and spirit,
which then prevailed among the Scots. The con-
Fpirators against Cardinal Beatoun found the Re-
gent's eldest son in the castle of St. Andrew's, and
is they needed the protection of the Englifn, it was
:o be feared that they might endeavour to purchase
r, by delivering to them this important prize. The
)refumptive heir to the. Crown, in the handsqf the
ivowed enemies of the kingdom, was a dreadful
profpe&. And in order to avoid it, the Parlia-
nent fell upon a very extraordinary expedient. By
in adt made of purpose, they excluded " the re-
' gent's eldeit, son frotn all right of fucceflion,
' public or private, so long as he should be detain-
' ed a prisoner, and itubftituted in his place, his
' other brothers, according to their seniority, and
" in failure of them, those who were next heirs to
' the Regent*." SucceiTion by hereditary right is *EpiR.
In idea so obvious and so popular, that a nation Reg. Scot,
eldoni ventures to make a breach in it, but in cafes 2. 359
>f extreme neceility. Such a neceflity did the Par-
iament discover in the present situation. Hatred
o England, founded on the memory of pail hofli-
ties, and heightened by the smart of recent inju-
ies, was the national passion. This diaated that
incommon flatute, by which the order of lineal
acceifion was To remarkably broken. The modern
heories, which represent this right as divine and
inalienable, and that ought not to be violated upon

Voe. I. H any

BooK It. any consideration whatsoever, seem to have been
' 'f then altogether unknown.
Scotland IN the begining of September, the Earl of Hart-
thcEnglilh ford, now Duke of Somerset, and protedtor of Eng-

land, entered Scotland at the head of i 8,ooo men,
and, at the fame time, a fleet of 60 ships appeared
on the coast, tofecond his land forces. The Scots
had for rome time o~ferved this storm gathering,
and were prepared for it. Their army was almost
double to that of theenemy, and posted to the great-
eft advantage on a rising ground, above Mussel-
bargh, not far from the banks of the river Efke.
Both there circumitances alarmed the Duke of
Somerset, who saw his danger, and would willing-
ly have extricated himself out of it, by a new over-
ture of peace on conditions extremely reasonable.
Butthis moderation being imputed to fear, his pro-
pofals were rejected with that scorn, which the
confidence of success inspires; and if the condu&t
of the Regent, who commanded the Scottish army,
had been in any degree equal to his confidence, the
destruction of the English must have been inevita-
ble. They were in a situation, precisely similar to
that of their countrymen under Oliver Cromwell,
in the following century. The Scots had chosen
their ground so well, that it was impoflible to force
them'to give battle; afew-days had exhausted the
forage and provision of a narrow country ; the fleet
could only furnish a scanty and precarious liubfift-
ence ; a retreat therefore was necessary ; but dif-
grace, and perhaps ruin, were the confequencesof
retreating.

ON both these occasions, the national heat and

impetuosity of the Scots saved the Ertgli'h, and pre-
cipitated their own country into the utmrnoft danger.
The undisciplined courage of the private men be-
came impatient at the fight of an enemy. The
General was afraid of nothing, but that the English
would cfcape from him by flight , and leading his

firong

strong camp, he attacked the Duke of Somerset Booat it.
near Pinkey, with no better success than his raih- '^

Battle of

ness deserved. The Proteaor had drawn up his Pie.
troops on a gentle eminence, and had now the ad- September
vantage of ground on his Tide. The Scottish army io, 1547,
consisted almost intirely of infantry, whose chief
weapon was a long spear, and for that reason their
files were very deep, and their ranks close. They
advanced towards the enemy in three great bodies,
and as they passed the river, were considerably ex-
posed to the fire of the English fleet, which lay in
the bay of Muftelburgh, and had drawn near the
shore. The English cavalry, flulhed with an ad-
vantage which they had gained in a Ikirmifh rome
days before, began the attack with more impetu-
olity, than good conduc. A body Co firm and
compact as the Scots, eaily refirted the impreflion
of cavalry, broke them, and drove them off the
field. The Englith infantry, however, advanced,
and the Scots were at once exposed to a flight of
arrows, to a fire in flank from 400 foreign Fufileers
who fervrd the enermy, and to their cannon which
were planted behind the infantry, on the highel
part of the eminence. The depth and clofeaefs of
their order making it impoflible for the Scots to
tfand long in this situation , the Earl of Angus,
who commanded the vanguard, endeavoured t6
dchage his ground, and to retire towards the main
body. But hai friends unhappily mistook this mo-
tion for a flight, 'nd fell into confusion. At that
very inflant, the broken cavalry having rallied, re-
turned to the charge i the foot pursued the advan-
tage they had gained ; the profpc& of viaory re-
doubled the ardour of both : and, in a moment,
the rout of the Scottillh army became universal,
and irretrievable. The encounter in the field was
not long, nor bloody ,; but in the pursuit, the Eng-
lifh discovered all the rage and fierceness, 'which

iH 2 national

BDOK II. national antipathy, kindled by long emulation, and

-- inflamed by reciprocal injuries, is apt to inspire.

The pursuit was continued for five hours, and to a
great ditlance. All the three roads, by which the
Scots fled, were tlrewed with spears and swords,
and targets, and covered with the bodies of the
slain. Above 0o,oo men fcll on this day, one of
the most fatal Scotland had ever seen. A few were
taken prilbners, and among there Tome persons of
diftintcion. And the Protedor had it now in his
power to become matter of a kingdom, out of which,
not many hours before, he was almost obliged to
retire with infamy*.

BUT

* The following paiTage in a curious and rare journal of the

ProtcAoo's expedition into Scotland, written by W. Patten, who
was joined in commiflion with Cecil, as Judge Marshal of the ar-
my, and printed in i 548, deserves our notice; as it gives a just
idea of the military discipline of the Scots at that time. " But
what after I learned, specially touching their order, their armour,
and their manner as well of going to offend, as of flanding to de-
fend, 1 have thought necessary here to utter. Hack-butters have
they few or none, and appoint their fight molf commonly always
a-foot. They come to the field well furnithed all with jack and
fkult dagger and buckler, and swords all broad and thin, of ex-
ceeding good temper, and universally so made to slice, that as I
never saw none so good, so think I it hard to devile the better.
Hereto every man his pike, and a great kercher wrapped twice
or thrice about his neck, not for cold, but for cutting. In their
array towards joining with the enemy, they cling and thrust to
near in the fore rank, shoulder and Ihoukler together, with their
pikes in both their hands Itraight afore them, and their followers in
that order tb hard at their backs, laying their pikes over their
foregoers tioulders, that, if they do aiTail undiscovered, no force
can we'll withfltand them. Standing at defence they thrust thoul-
tders l;lewife so nigl together, the lore ranks well nigh to kneel-
ing, Itoop low before, their fellows behind holding their pikes
with both hIands, and therewith in their left their bucklers, the
one end of the pike againtt their right foot, and the other against
the cn.n:y brealt-high ; their followers crofling their pike points
with :hemn forward ; and thus each with other ft nigh as space and
pilce will tufter, through the whole ward, so thick, that as easily
halhl a bare finger pierce thrnugh the (kin of an angry hedge ,iog,

t,., any cncoun:c the fron: nt tlieir pike'." (ther curious parricu-

I.1r s arc lboti in this journ:il, from which Sir John Hayward has
huIcwr.a 'it au;ccuntr of this expedition. Life of Edward VI. 279,
&c. * 'Ihe

BUT this victory, however great, was of no real sooi II.

utility, for want of skill, or of leilure, to improve T vc-
it. Every new injury rendered the Scots more a- o f
verse from an union with England, and the Prc- little bene-
tedtor neglected the only measure, which would fit to the
have made it necessary for them to have given English.
their consent to it. He amused himself in wasting
the open country, and in taking or building ieveral
petty catles ; whereas by fortifying a few places
lwhich were accefiible by Tea, he would have laid
the kingdom open to the English, and, in a thort
time, the Scots must either have accepted of his
terms, or have submitted to his power. By such an
improvement of it, his viAory at Dunbar gave
Cromwell the command of Scotland. The battle
of Pinkey had no other teffecA but to precipitate the
Scots into new engagements with France. The
situation of the Englilh court may, indeed, be plead-
ed in excuse for the Duke ot Sumerlet's condu't.
That cabal of his enemies, which occasioned his tra-
gical end, was already formed ; and while he tri-
umphed in Scotland, they secretly undermined his
power and credit at home. Self-prefervation, there-
fore obliged him, to prefer his safety befbre his
fame, and to return without reaping the fruits of
his vicory. At this time, however, the cloud blew
over; tihe conspiracy by which he fell was not yet
ripe for execution ; and his prelence suspended it,
effict for ibme time. The fiupreme power itill re-
maining in his hands, he employed it to recover the
opportunity, which he had loft. A body of troops,
by his command, seized and fortified Haddingtoun, Apil.
a place, which, on account of its diflance from the 1 548.
lea, and from any English garrison, could not be
defended without great expence and danger.

The length of the Scots pike or spear was appointed by adt 44.

P. 1471. to be fix ells ; i e. eighteen feet fix inches.

H 3 ME AN

Boo0 IL MEAN while the French gained more by the
''f ' defeat of their allies, than the Englilh did by their
Sco ntoe viaory. After the death of Cardinal Beatoun,
ciofr uni- Mary of Guise, the Queen Dowager, took a con-
os with fiderable ihare in the diredion of affairs. She was
France. warmly attached by blood, and by inclination, to

the French interest ; and, in order to promote it,
improved with great dexterity every event which
occurred. The spirit and strength of the Scots were
broken atPinkey; and in an afferbly of nobles which
met at Stirling to consult upon the lituation of
the kingdom, all eyes were turned towards France,
no profped of safety appearing but in afliftance
from thence. But Henry II. being then at peace
with England, the Queen represented that they
could not expet him to take part in their quarrel,
but upon views of personal advantage ,; and that
without extraordinary conceflions in his favour, no
assistance in proportion to their present exigencies
could be obtained. The prejudices of the nation
powerfully seconded these representations of the
Queen. What often happens to individuals took
place among the nobles in this convention; they
were swayed entirely by their passions, and in order
to gratify them, they deserted their former prin-
ciples, and disregarded their true interest. In the
violence of resentment, they forgot that zeal for
the independence of Scotland, which had prompted
them to reject the proposals of Henry VIII. and by

And't of- offering, voluntarily, their young Queen in mar-
ser their riage to the Dauphin eldest son of Henry II and
Queen in which was ftiil more, by proposing to lend her
marnage
to the immediately into France to be educated at hiscourt,
Dauphia. they granted, from a thirit of vengeance, what for-

merly they would not yield upon any consideration
of their own safety. To gain at once fich a kingdom
as Scotland, wasa matter of nofmall consequence to

France.

France. Henry, without hesitation, accepted the Boor II
offers of the Scottish ambafladors, and prepared -
for the vigorous defence of his new acquisition. Six
thousand veteran soldiers, under the command of
Monsieur Deflf, aflifted by Come of the best officers,
who were formed in the long wars of Francis I. ar-
rived at Leith. They served two campaigns in Scot-
land, with a spirit equql to their former fame. But
their exploits were not considerable. The Scots
loon became jealous of their designs, and neglected
to support them with proper vigour ; and the cau-
tion of the English, in adting wholly upon the de-
fenfive, prevented them from attempting any enter-
prize of consequence ; and obliged them to exhaust
their strength in tedious sieges, undertaken under
many disadvantages. Their efforts, however, were
not without rome benefit to the Scots, by compel-
ling the Engli(h to evacuate Haddingtoun, and to
surrender several small forts, which they poffeffed
in different parts of the kingdom.

BUT the consequences of these operations of his

troops were it ill of greater importance to the French
King. The diversion which they occasioned en-
abled him to wrest Boulogne out of the hands of
the Englith ; and the influence of his army in Scot-
land obtained the concurrence of Parliament with
the overtures made to him, by the aflembly of no-
bles at Stirling, concerning the Queen's marriage
with the Dauphin, and her education at the court
of France. In vain did a few patriots remonstrate
against such extravagant conceflions, by which Scot-
land was reduced to be a province of France ; and Therreaty
Henry, from an ally, raised to be matter of the for that
kingdom; by which, the friendlhip of France be purced
came more fatal than the enmity of England , and c
every thing was fondly given up to the one, that
had been bravely defended againit the other. A
point of Co much consequence was hastily decided,

SH4 in

Bpoo II. in a Parliament, assembled in the camp before Had-
,-v-, dingtoun : the intrigues of the Queen Dowager, the
June , zeal of the clergy, and resentment against England,

had prepared a great party in the nation for luch a
step; the French General and Ambassador, by their
liberality and promises, gained over many more.
The Regent himlelf was weak enough to Itoop to
the offer of a pension from France, together with
the title of Duke of Chatelherault in that kingdom.
A considerable majority declared for the treaty, and
the interest of a faction was preferred before the
honour of the nation.

Mary tent HAVING hurried the Scots into this rath and fa-
to beedu- tal resolution, the source of many calamities to
cated in themselves, and to their Sovereign, the French al-

lowed them no time for reflection or repentance.
The fleet, which had brought over their forces,
was still in Scotland, and without delay, convoy-
ed the Quecn into France. Mary was then fix
years old, and by her education in that court, one
of the politelt, but most corrupted in Europe, she
acquired every accomplilhment that could add to
her charms as a woman, and contracted many of
those prejudices, which occasioned her misfortunes
as a Queen.

FROM the time that Mary was put into their

hands, it was the interest of the French to fuffer
the war in Scotland to langiifh. The recovering
of the Boulonnois was the object Henry had most
at heart ; and a flight divtrfion in Britain was sus-
ficient to divide the attention and flrength of the
E'.nglifh, wh(fe domestic faAions deprived both
their arms and councils of their accuitomed vigour.
The evernm:nt of England had undergone a great
revolution. The Duke of Somerfet's power had been
acquired with too much violence, and was exer-
cicd with too little moderation, to be of long conti-
nuance. Many good qualities, added to great love
of his country, could not atone for his ambition

in

in ufurping the sole diredion of affairs. Many of BooK II.
the most eminent courtiers combined against him ;
and the earl of Warwick their leader, no less am-
bitious, but more artful than Somerset, conduAed
his measures with so much dexterity, as to raiie
himself upon the ruins of his rival. Without the
invidious name of proteaor, he succeeded to all
the power and influence, of which Somerset was de-
prived, and he quickly found peace to be necelTary
for the efltablifhment of his new authority, and the
execution of the vast designs he had conceived.

HENK Y was no ifranger to War wick's situation, Peacecon-

and improved his knowledge of it to good purpose, cluded.
in conduting the negociations for a general peace.
He prescribed what terms he pleased to the English
Minister, who scrupled at nothing, however advan- March 24,
tageous to that Monarch and his allies. England sso.-
coinented to restore Boulogne and its dependencies
to France, and gave up all pretensions to a treaty
o'f marriage with the Queen of Scots, or to the con-
quest of her country. A few small forts, of which
,lhe English troops had hitherto kept poffeflion, were
razed; and peace between the two kingdoms was
established on its ancient foundation.

BOTH the Eritifh nations loft power, as well as

reputation, by this unhappy quarrel. It was on
both sides a war of emulation and resentment, ra-
ther than of interest , and was catried on, unde- the
influence of national animofities, which were blind
to all advantages. The French, who entered into
it with greater coolness, conduced it with more
skill; and by dextroufly availing themselves of
every circumifance which occurred, recovered poi-
leflion of an important territory which they had loft,
and added to their monarchy a new kingdom. The
ambition of the English Minister betrayed to them
the former; the iniconfiderate rage of the Scots a-
gainfit their ancient enemies beflowed on them the
latter., their own address and good policy merited
both.

Ta us e

Bo9K IL IMMEDIATELY after the conclusion of the peace,
"7--' the French forces left Scotland, as much to their
The Scots own fatisfadion, as to that of the nation. The
become
jealous of Scots soon found, that the calling to their afliftance
theFrench. a people more powerful than themselves, was a

dangerous expedient. They beheld, with the ut-
most impatience, those who had come over to pro-
te&t the kingdom, taking upon them to command
in it; and on many occasions they repented the
rath invitation they had given. The peculiar ge-
nius of the French nation heightened this disgust,
and prepared the Scots to throw off the yoke, be-
fore they had well begun to feel it. The French
were, in that age, what they are in the present, one
of the most polished nations in Europe. But it is
to be observed, in all their expeditions into foreign
countries, whether towards the south or north, that
their manners have been remarkably incompatible
with the manners of every other people. Barba-
rians are tenacious of their own cufftoms, because
they want knowledge and tafle to discover the rea-
fonablenefs and propriety of customs which differ
from them. Nations, which hold the first rank in
politeness, are frequently no less tenacious out of
pride. The Greeks were so in the ancient world;
and the French are the fame in the modern. Full
of themselves ; flattered by the imitation of their
neighbours ; and accustomed to confider their own
modes as the standards of elegance, they (corn to
disguise, or to lay aside the diftinguilhing manners
of their own nation, or to make any allowance for
what may differ from them among others. For
this reason, the behaviour of their armies has, on
every occasion, been insupportable to strangers,
and has always exposed them to hatred, and often
to deftruhion. In that age, they over-ran Italy
four several times, by their valour, and loft it, as
often, by their insolence. The Scots, naturally an
irascible and high-fpirited people, and who,.of all

nations,

nations, can least bear the moit difiant insinuation Book I.
of contempt, were not of a temper to admit all'^ '
the pretensions of such ailuming guefis. The
symptoms of alienation were soon visible ; they fe-
conded the military operations of the French troops
with the utmost coldnelcs, and their difguit grew in-
sensibly to a degree of indignation that could hardly
be restrained ; and on occasion of a very Qight
accident, broke out with fatal violence. A pri-
vate French soldier engaging in an idle quarrel
with a citizen of Edinburgh, both nations took
arms, with equal rage, in defence of their country-
men. The Provost of Edinburgh, his lbn, and le-
veral citizens of ditinction, were killed in the fray;
and the French were obliged to avoid the fury of
the inhabitants, by retiring out of the city. Not-
withitanding the ancient alliance of France and
Scotland, and the long intercourse of good offices
between the two nations, an aversion for the French
took its rile at this time, among the Scots, the es-
feds whereof were d ...\ iv felt, and operated pow-
erfully through the fubiequent period.

FROM the death of Cardinal ieatoun, nothing Progrefsof

has been said of the state of religion. While tle the Refor-
war with England continued, the clergy had no Li- matlon.
sure to molest the Protestants; and they were not
yet considerable enough to expect any thing more
than connivance and impunity. The new dcctrints
were (till in their infancy , but during this fhlrt in-
terval of tranquillity, they acquired Itrength, and
advanced, by large and firm fleps, towards a full
establishment in the kingdom. The fri ft preachers
against popery in Scotland, of whom feverai had
appeared during the reign of James V. were more
eminent for zeal and piety, than for learning. Their
acquaintance with the principles of the Reformation
wasqpartirl, and at second hand; Co fme of them had
beoe educated in England , all of them had borrow-

ed

BOOK II. ed their notions from the books published there ;
''v"' and, in the first dawn of the new light, they did not

venture far before their leaders. But, in a short
time, the dotrines and writings of the foreign Re-
formers became generally known ; the inquisitive
genius of the age pressed forward in quest of truth ;
the difcovcry of one error opened the way to others,
the downfal of one imposture drew many after it;
the whole fabric, which ignorance and superstition
had ereced in times of darkness, began to totter ;
and nothing was wanting to compleat its ruin, but a
daring and active leader to direct the attack. Such
was the famous John Knox, who, with better qua-
lifications of learning, and more extensive views
than any of his predecessors in Scotland, pofleffed
a natural intrepidity of mind, which set him above
fear. He began his public ministry at St Andrew's
in the year 1547, with that fuccels, which always
accompanies a bold and popiular eloquence. In-
stead ofamufing himself with i: ping the branches,
he struck diretly at the rot of popery, and at-
tacked both the doCtrine and discipline of the efta-
blifhed church, with a vehecmence peculiar to him-
self, but admirably suitable to the temper and wish-
es of the age.

AN adversary to formidable as Knox, wruld not

have easily escaped the rage of the clergy, who ob-
served the tendency and progress of his opinions,
with the utmost concern. But, at firit, he retired
foi lafety into the castle of St. And: .v's, and while
the conspirators Kept poffellion ,in ', preached pub-
lickly under their protection. The great revolution
in England, which followed upon the death of
Henry VIII. contributed no less than the zeal of
Knox, towards demolishing the Popith church in
Scotland. Henry had loosened the chains, and
lightened the yoke of Popery. The Ministers of his
son Edward VI. cast them off altogether, and efta-

biflhed

blifhed the Protestant religion upon almost the fame BooK II.
footing, whereon it now flands in that kingdom.
The influence of this example reached Scotland, and
the happy effeas of ecclefialtical liberty, in the one
nation, inspired the other with an equal desire of re-
covering it. The Reformers had, hitherto, been
obliged to condut themselves with the utmost cau-
tion, and seldom ventured to preach, but in private
houses, and at a distance from court; they gained
credit, as happens on the first publication of every
new religion, chiefly among persons in the lower
and middle rank of life. But several noblemen of
the greatest diftindion, having, about this time,
openly espoused their principles, they were no lon-
ger under the neceflity of ating with the fame re-
serve; and with more security and encouragement,
they had likewise greater fuccers. The means of
acquiring and Ipreading knowledge became more
common, and the spirit of innovation, peculiar to
that period, grew every day bolder and more uni-
versal.

HAPPILY for the Reformation, this spirit was

fill under some restraint. It had not yet attained
firmness and vigour, fufficient to overturn a fyfiem,
founded on the deepest policy, and fupporred by
the most formidable power. Under the present cir-
cumftances, any attempt towards ation must have
been fatal to the Protestant dotrines , and it is no
small proof of the authority, as well as penetration
of the heads of the party, that they were able to
restrain the zeal of a fiery and impetuous people, till
that critical and mature juncture, when every itep
they took was decisive and fuccefsful.

ME A N WH ii their cause received reinforcement,

from two different quarters, whence they never
could have expeced it. The ambition of the
houle of Guise, and the bigotry of Mary of En-

glar:d

*

BooK II. gland battened the subversion of the Papal thront
'%''' in Scotland ; and by a lingular disposition of Pro-

vidence, the persons who opposed the Reformation
in every other part of Europe with the fierceR zeal,
were mnde initruments for advancing it in that
kingdom.

The MA iv of G life poffeffed the fame bold and as-
Q'een pirirng spirit, which distinguished her family. But
afpireG in her it was softened by the female charafter, and
the office accompanied with greater temper and address. Her
of Regent. brothers, in order to attain the high objects at which

they aimed, ventured upon such daring measures,
as luired their great courage. Her designs upon the
supreme power were concealed with the utmost care,
and advanced by address and refinements more na-
tural to her Ifeo. By a dextrous application of those
talents, she had accquired a considerable influence
on the councils of a nation, hitherto unacquainted
with the governm'ent of women ; and without the
smallest right to any (hare in the administration of
affairs, had engrofled the chief direaion of them
into her own hands. But she did not long reft fa-
tisfied with the enjoymercnt of this precariois power,
which the fickleness of the Regent, or the ambition
of those who governed him, might so easily diflurb i
and the began to set o01 foot new intrigues, with a
design of undcrming him, and of opening to her-
self a way ,o fuccee'd him in that high dignity.
Her brothers entered warmly into this lfheme, and
supported it with all their credit at the court of
France. The French King willingly concurred in
a measure, by '~ hich he hoped to bring Scotland
en:irelv under management, and in any future broil
with England, to turn its whole force upon that
kingdom.

IN order to arrive at the desired elevation, the

Q_" en I):Dwager hlad only one of two ways to chure;
either

, iolently to wrctf the power out of the hands

of the iegcnt, or to obtain it by his conlnt. Un-

der

der a minority, and among a warlike and fa&ious Boo» IT.
people, the former was a very uncertain and dan- '"'
gerous experiment. The latter appeared to be no
less impraticable. To persuade a man voluntarily
to abdicate the supreme power ; to descend to a le-
vel with those, above whom he was raised ; and to
be content with the second place where he hath held
the firit, may well pass for a wild and chimerical
projea. This, however, the Queen attempted;
and the prudence of the attempt was fufficiently
justified by its success.

THE Regent's inconstancy and irresolution, toge-

ther with the calamities which had befallen the
kitgdom under his administration, railed the pre-
judices both of the nobles and of the people against
him, to a great height; and the Queen secretly
fomented these with much induffry. All who wilh-
ed for a change met with a gracious reception in
her court, and their spirit of difaffe&ion was nou-
ri(hed by such hopes and promises, as, in every age,
impose on the credulity of the fatious. The fa- Courtsthe
vourers of the Reformation being the most nume- Reformers.
rous and spreading body of the Regent's enemies,
the applied to them, with a particular attention;
and the gentleness of her disposition, and seeming
indifference to the religious points in dispute, made
all her promises of proteaion and indulgence pa's
upon them for sincere. Finding so great a part of
the nation willing to fall in with her measures, the
Queen set out for France, under pretence of visit-
ing her daughter, and took along with her those O.tg 15o.
noblemen, who poffeffed the greatest power and
credit among their countrymen. Softened by the
pleasures of an elegant court, flattered by the civi-
lities of the French King, and the caresses of the
house of Guise, and influenced by the seasonable
distribution of a few favours, and the liberal pro-
'mite of many more, they were brought to approve
of all the Queen's prctelFions.

WHI L!

BooK II. WHILE the advanced by these flow but sure

fe ifeps, the Regent either did not foresee the danger
which threatened him, or negledted to provide a-
gainft it. The fizft discovery of the train which
was laid, came from two of his own confidants,
Carnegie of Kinnaird, and Panter Bishop of Ross,
whom the Queen had gained over to her interest,
and then employed as the most proper inrtruments
for obtaining his consent. The overture was made
to him in the name of the French King, enforced
by proper threatenings, in order to work upon his
natural timidity, and sweetened by every promise
that could reconcile him to a proposal so disagree-
able. On the one hand, the confirmation of his
French title, together with a considerable pension,
the parliamentary acknowledgment of his right of
fucceflion to the Crown, and a public ratification
of his conduct during his regency, were offered
him. On the other hand, the displeasure of the
French King, the power and popularity of the
Queen Dowager, the difaffection of the nobles,
with the danger of an after-reckoning, were re-
presented in the strongest colours.

IT was not poflible to agree to a proposal so ex-

traordinary and unexpected, without some previous
struggle; and had the archbishop of St. Andrew's
been present to fortify the irresolute and passive fpi-
rit of the Regent, he would, in all probability, have
rejected it with disdain. Happily for the Queen,
the sagacity and ambition of that Prelate could, at
this time, be no obftrudtion to her views. He was
lying at the point of death, and in his absence, the
influence of the Queen's agents on a flexible tem-
per counterballanced several of the strongest pal-
tions in the human mind, and obtained his consent
to a voluntary surrender of the supreme power.

Dec.I551. 1.PTER gaining a point of such difficulty, with

so much eate, the Queen returned into Scotland, in

, fui

full expectation of taking immediate poffeflion of Boox II-
her new dignity. But, by this time, the Archbi---
shop of St. A ndrew's had recovered of that diftem-
per, which the ignorance of the Scottish physicians
had pronounced to be incurable. This he owed to
the afliltance of the famous (Carden, one of thole
irregular adventurers in philosophy, of whom Italy
produced so many about this period. A bold ge-
nius led him to rome useful dilcoveries, which me-
rit the esteem of a more discerning age; a wild ima-
gination engaged him in those chimerical sciences,
wvhich drew the admiration of his cotemporaries.
As a pretender to affrology and magic, he was re-
vered and confillted by all Europe; as a proficient
in natural philosophy, he was but little known.
The Archbilhop, it is probable, considered him as
a powerful magician, when he applied to him for
relief; but it was his knowledge as a philosopher,
which enabled him to cure his disease*.

TOGETHER with his health, the Archbishop re-

covered the entire government of the Regent, and
quickly persuaded him to recall that dishonourable
promise, which he had been seduced by the artifices
of the Q~ueen to grant. However great her furprize
and indignation were, at this fresh instance of his
inconstancy, she was obliged to dissemble, that the
might have leisure to renew her intrigues with all
parties ; with the Protestants, whom (he favour-
ed and courted more than ever ; with the nobles,
to whom the rendered herself agreeable by various
arts, and with the Regent himself, in order to
gain whom, the employed every argument. But

* Carden himfelfwas more defireus of being considered as an

Astrologer than a Philosopher; in his book De Genituris, we
ind a calculation of the Archbiflhop's nativity, from which he
reteads both to have prediced his disease, and to have effeed
is cure. He received, from the Archbithop, a reward of 1800oo
:rowns. A great fuui in that age. Dc Vita fua, p. 32.

VoL. 1. I whatever

BooK II. whatever impreflions her emissaries might have
--'"- made on the Regent, it was no easy matter to over-

reach or to intimidate the Archbishop. Under his
management, the negociations were spun out to a
great length, and his brother maintained his flation
with that addreis and firmness, which its impor-
tance lb well merited. The univcrfal defection of
the nobility, the growing power of the Protestants,
who all adhered to the Queen Dowager, the reite-
rated fbllicitations of the French King, and, above
all, the interposition of the young Queen, who was
now entering the twelfth year of her age, and
clai [ned a right of nominating whom the pleased to
be Regent, obliged him, at last, to resign that

Reon high office, which he had held

many years. He ob-

to resign tained, however, the fame advantageous terms for
his office. himself, which had been formerly stipulated.
Sheobrains IT was in the Parliament which met on the ioth
the Regen- of April, 1554, that the Earl of Arran executed
cy. this extraordinary resignation ; and at the fame

time Mary of Guise was raised tothat dignity, which
had been to long the objeA of her wishes. Thus,
with their own approbation, a woman, and a ftran-
ger, was advanced to the supreme authority over a
fierce and turbulent people, who fcldom submitted,
without reluctance, to the legal and ancient govern-
ment of their native Monarchs.

Reforma- WHILE the Queen Dowager of Scotland contri-
tion conti- buted tb much towards the progress of the Refor-
nues to mation, by the protection which the afforded it,
makegreat from motives of ambition; the English Q.ueen, by
progress. her indiscreet zeal, filled the kingdom with persons

active in promoting the fame cause. Mary afcen-
ded the throne of England, on the death of her

July 6, brother Edward, and Coon after married Philip II
'553. of Spain. To the persecuting spirit of the Ronifll

superstition, and the fierceness of that age, the
added the private resentment of her own, and

S of

of her mother's fufferings, with which she loaded BooK II.
the Reformed Religion ; and the peevishness and '
severity of her natural temper carried the acrimony
of all there paflions to the utmost extreme. The
cruelty of her persecution equalled the deeds of
those tyrants, who have been the greatest reproach
to human nature. The bigotry of her clergy could
scarce keep pace with the impetuosity of her zeal.
Even the unrelenting Philip was obliged, on rome
occasions, to mitigate the rigour oefher proceedings.
Many among the most eminent Reformers fuffered
for the dodtrines which they had taught; others
fled from the florm. To the greater part of there,
Switzerland and Germany opened a secure asylum;

and not a few, out of choice or neceility, fled into
Scotland. What they had seen and felt in England,
did not abate the warmth and zeal of their indig-
nation against Popery. Their attacks were bolder
and more fuccefsful than ever; and their dotrines
made a rapid progress among all ranks of men.

THESE doctrines, calculated to re&ify the opi-

nions, and to reform the manners of mankind, had
hitherto produced no other effects but they loon
began to operate with greater violence, and proved
the occasion, not only of subverting the established
"eligion, but of shaking the throne, and endanger-
ng the kingdom. The causes which facilitated
:he introduc&ion of there new opinions into Scotland, A riew of
mnd which disseminated them to fast through the the politi-
lation, merit, on that account, a particular and cal causes
:areful inquiry. The Reformation is one of the tribuoed
;reateft events in the history of mankind, and in towards
vhatever point of light we view it, is inftrutive that.
nd interesting.

TrH revival of learning in the 15th and 16th
enturies rouzed the world from that lethargy, in
vhich it had been funk for many ages, The hu-
nan mind felt its own firength, broke the fetters

.I z of

:looK II. of authority by which it had been so long restrain-
^Y ed, and venturing to move in a larger sphere, push-

ed its inquiries into every fubjet, with great
boldness, and surprising success.

No sooner did mankind recover the capacity of

exercising their realon, than religion was one of the
first objects which drew their attention. Long be-
fore Luther published his famous Theses, which
fijook the Papal throne, science and philosophy had
laid open, to many of the Italians, the impoflture
and ablurdity of the eftablilhed superstition. That
iubtle and refining people, satisfied with enjoying
thole discoveries in secret, were little disposed to
assume the dangerous charader of Reformers, and
concluded the knowledge of truth to be the prero-
gative of the wife, while vulgar minds must be
overawed and governed by popular errors. But,
animated with a more noble and disinterested zeal,
the German Theologian boldly ere&ed the tandard
of truth, and upheld it with an unconquerable in-
trepidity, which merits the admiration and grati-
tude of all succeeding ages.

THE occalion of Luther's being first disgusted

with the tenets of the Romish church, and how,
from a small rupture, the quarrel widened into an
irreparable breach, is known to every one who has
been the least conversant in history. From the
heart of Germany, his opinions spread, with aflo-
nifhing rapidity, all over Europe; and wherever
they came, endangered or overturned the ancient,
but ill founded system. The vigilance and address
of the court of Rome, and the power and bigotry
of the Austrian family, suppressed these notions on
their first appearance, in the southern kingdoms of
Europe. But the fierce spirit of the north, irrita-
ted by multiplied impositions, could neither be
mollified by the fame arts, nor subdued by the fame

force ;

and byothers out of avarice, it easily bore down -
:he feeble opposition of an illiterate and immoral
:lergy.

THE fuperitition of Popery seems to have grown
:o the modt extravagant height, in those countries
which are situated towards the different extremities
,f Europe. The vigour of imagination, and fen-
ribility of frame, peculiar to the inhabitants of
routhern climates, rendered them susceptible of the
Jeepeft impreflions of superstitious terror and cre-

Julity. Ignorance and barbarity were no less fa-
vourable to the progress of the fame spirit, among
the northern nations. They knew little, and were
diipofed to believe every thing. The most glaring
absurdities did not shock their gross understandings,
and the most improbable fictions were received
with implicit assent and admiration.

ACCORDINGLY, that form of Popery, which pre-

vailed in Scotland, was of the most bigotted and
illiberal kind. Those doarines which are most apt
to shock the human underfianding, and those le-
gends which farthest exceed belief, were proposed
to the people without any attempt to palliate or dif-
guise them, nor did they ever call in question the
reasonableness of the one, or the truth of the other.

THE power and wealth of the church kept pace

with the progress of superstition ; for it is the na-
ture of that spirit to observe no bounds in its re
Sped and liberality towards those, whose charater
it efieems sacred. TPhe Scottish Kings early demon-
ftrated how much they were under its influence, by
their vast additions to the immunities and riches of
the clergy. The profuse piety of David I. who
acquired on that account the name of Saint, tranf-
ferred almost the whole crown-lands, which were
at that time of great extent, into the hands of

I 3 ecclefiafiics.

BooK II. ecclefiaftics. The example of that virtuous Prince

3 was imitated by his fucceflors. The spirit spread

among all orders of men, who daily loaded the
priesthood with new poffelions. The riches of the
church all over Europe were exorbitant ; but Scot-
land was one of those countries, wherein they had
farthefr exceeded the just proportion. The Scot-
tifh clergy paid one half of every tax imposed on
land ; and as there is no reason to think that, in
that age, they would be loaded with any unequal
(hare of the burden, we may conclude, that, by
the time of the Reformation, little less than one
half of the property in the nation had fallen into
the hands of a society, which is always acquiring,
and can never lose.

THE nature, too, of a considerable part of their

property extended the influence of the clergy.
Many estates, throughout the kingdom, held of
the church; church-lands were let in lease at an
easy rent, and were poffefled by the younger Cons,

*Keith and descendants of the best families*. The con-
521. Not. nexion betweenfuperior and vassal, between land-
(b). lord and tenant, created dependencies, and gave

rife to an union of great advantage to the church ;
and in estimating the influence of the Popish eccle-
fiaftics over the nation, there, as well as the real
amount of their revenues, muit be attended to,
and taken into the account.

THIS extrordinary share in the national property

was accompanied with proportionable weight in
the supreme council of the kingdom. At a time,
when the number of temporal Peers was extreme-
ly small, and when the LeiTer Barons and repre-
fentatives of Burroughs Celdom attended Parlia-
ments, the ecclefiaflics formed a considerable body
there. And it appears from the ancient rolls of
Parliamen , and from the manner of chufing the
Lords of Aricles, that the proceedings of that

, high

high court must have been, in a great measure, un- BOOK 11.
der their diredion*.

THE reverence due to their sacred character, Hitt.ofthe

which was often carried incredibly far, contributed ch. of
not a little towards the growth of their power. Scot. 449.
The dignity, the titles, and precedence of the Po-
pilh clergy are remarkable, both as causes and es-
seAs of that dominion, which they had acquired
over the reff of mankind. They were regarded
by the credulous laity as beings of a superior Ipecies;
they were neither lubjea to the fame laws, nor
tried by the fame judges. Every guard, that reli-
gion could supply, was placed around their power,
their poffeflions, and their persons ; and endeavours
were used, not without success, to represent tlhem
all as equally sacred.

THE reputation for learning, which, however

inconsiderable, was wholly engrossed by the clergy,
added to the reverence which they derived from
religion. The principles of fobund philotbphy, and
of a juff taste, were altogether unknown , in place
of these, were substituted studies, barbarous and
uninifruCive; but as the ecclefiaftics alone wcie
conversant in them, this procured them efleem,
and a very little knowledge drew the admiration
of rude ages which knew nothing. War was the
sole profeflion of the nobles, and hunting their
chief amusement ,; they divided their time between
these; unacquainted with the arts, and tunim-
proved by science, they difdained any employmenIt
foreign from military affairs, or which rtquired
rather penetration and address, than bodily vigour.
Wherever the former were necessary, the clergy
were entrusted ; because they alone were properiy
qualified for the trust. Almost all the high olices
in civil government devolved, on this account, in-
to their hands. The Lord Chancellor was tlec 1irfi
lubject in the kingdom, both in dig:: irt aind 'n ,:o)< r.
Fron1 t:ih, carli.tt ages of t!ic moinuiirchlv, to I -

1 ~ ~ l

Boo, II. death of Cardinal Beatoun, fifty-four persons had
'- - hdeld that high office, and ofthefe, forty -three had
<Crawrf been ecclefiaftics*. The Lords of Seflion were fu-
Oflic. of
State. preme Judges in all matters of civil right; and by

its original conflitution, the President and one half
of the Senators in this court were churchmen.

To all this we may add, that the clergy being

separated from the reft of mankind by the law of
celibacy ; and undiftraded by those cares, and un-
incumbered with those burdens which occupy and
oppress other men, the interest of their order be-
came their only object, and they were at full leisure
to puriue it.

T'HE nature of their fun&ion gave them access

to all persons, and at all seasons. They could em-
ploy all the motives of fear and of hope, of terror
and ofconfolation, which operate most powerfully
on the human mind. They haunted the weak and
the credulous, they besieged the beds of the tick
and of the dying They fuffered few to go out of
the world without leaving marks of their liberality
to the church; and taught them to compound
with the Almighty for their fins, by beftowing riches
upon those, who called themselves his servants.

WHEN their own industry, or the superstition of

mankind failed of producing this effeA, the eccle-
liaftics had influence enough to call in the aid of
law. Whoever died intestate, was presumed to have
destined his moveables to pious uses. The church
took poffellion of them The children, the wife,
the creditors of the persons deceased were often ex-
cluded from any share in what was esteemed a fa-

tEffayson cred propertyt. As men are apt to trust to the
Antiq, continuance of life with fooli(h confidence, and
Z74. childishly shun every thing, that forces them to

think of their mortality, many die without fettling
their affairs by will, and the bold usurpation of the

clergy

vestiges in our laws, though none in our historians, L
may be reckoned among the most plentiful tburces
of the wealth of the church.

AT the fame time, no matrimonial or teftamen-
tary cause could be tried but in the spiritual courts,
and by laws which the clergy themselves had fram-
ed. The penalty, too, by which the decisions of
there courts were enforced, added to their autho-
rity. A sentence of excommunication was no less
formidable, than a sentence of outlawry. It was
pronounced on many occasions, and against various
crimes

: and besides excluding those, upon whom

it fell, from Christian privileges, it deprived them

of all their rights as men, or as citizens ,; and the
aid of the secular power concurred with the super-
Itition of mankind, in rendering the thunders of
the church no less destructive than terrible.

To there general causes, may be attributed the

immense growth both of the wealth, and power of
the Popish church; and without entering into any
more minute detail, this may serve to discover the
foundations, on which a structure to flupendous was
ereated.

BUT though the laity had contributed, by their

own superstition and profufenefs, to raise the clergy
From poverty and obscurity to riches and eminence,
they began, by degrees, to feel and to murmur at
their incroachments. No wonder haughty and mar-
tial Barons should view the power and poffelions
of the church with envy; and regard the lazy and
naaive character of churchmen with the utmost
:ontempt. While, at the fame time, the indecent
:nd licentious lives of the clergy gave great and
uft offence to the people, and considerably abated
:he veneration, which they were accustomed to yield
to that order of men.

IMMENSE wealth, extreme indolence, gross igno-

rance,

BooK I1. rance, and, above all, the severe injuntion of ce-

v^ libacy, had concurred to introduce this corruption

of morals among the clergy ; who, presuming too
much upon the fubmiiion of the people, were at
no pains either to conceal, or to disguise their own
vices. According to the accounts of the Reform-
ers, confirmed by several Popiflh writers, the most
open and scandalous dissolution of manners pre-
vailed among the Scottish clergy *. Cardinal Bea-
toun, with the fame public pomp, which is due to
a legitimate child, celebrated the marriage of his
natural daughter with the Earl of Crawford's font;
and, if we may believe Knox, he publickly conti-
nued to the end of his days a criminal correfpon-
dence with her mother, who was a woman of rank.
The other prelates seem not to have been more re-
gular and exemplary than their Primate t.

MEN of such charaders ought, in reason, to have

been alarmed at the firfit clamours railed against
their own morals, and the doArines of the church,
by the Protestant preachers; but the Popith eccle-
tiaftics, either out of pride or ignorance, negleCted
the proper methods for silencing them. Instead of
reforming their lives, or disguising their vices, they

* Winzet. ap. Keith Append. zoz, ao5. Leds. de Reb. Gest.

Scot. 232.

t The marriage articles subscribe with his own hand, in which

he calls her my daughter, are still extant. Keith, p. 42.

f A remarkable proof of the dissolute manners of the clergy

is found in the public records. A greater number of letters of
legitimation was granted during the first thirty years after the
Reformation, than during the whole period, that has elapsed
since that time. Thele were obtained by the sons of the Popift
clergy. The ecclefifltics, who were allowed to retain their be-
nefices, alienated them to their children; who, when they ac-
quired wealth, were defiuoua that the stain of ilegitimacy might
no longer remain upon their families. In Keith's Catalogue of
Ite Scottifu Bibhopt, we find several instances of such alienations
of church lands, by the Popilh incumbents, to their natural chil-
dren.

affedced

hile the Reformers, by their mortifications and V
ufterities, endeavoured to resemble the firit propa-
ators of Christianity, the Popish clergy were com-
,ared to all those persons, who are most infamous,
n

history, for the enormity and scandal of their
rimes.

ON the other hand, instead of mitigating the ri-
;our, or colouring over the absurdity of the efla-
lifhed doatrines ; instead of attempting to found
hem upon scripture, or to reconcile them to reason ;
hey left them without any other support or recom-
nendation, than the authority of the church, and
he decrees of councils. The fables concerning
)urgatory, the virtues of pilgrimage, and the me-
its of the faints, were the topics, on which they
nfifted in their discourses to the people ; and the
luty of preaching being left wholly to Monks of
he lowest and most illiterate orders, their compo-
itions were still more wretched and contemptible,
han the fubjeCs on which they insisted. While
he Reformers were attended by crowded and ad-
niring audiences, the Popith preachers were either
iniverfally deserted, or listened to with scorn.

THE only device which they employed in order
o recover their declining reputation, or to con-
irm the wavering faith of the people, was equally
mprudent and unfuccefsful. As many do&rines
if their church had derived their credit, at first,
rom the authority of false miracles, they now en-
leavoured to call in these to their aid *. But those * Spots
ying wonders, which were beheld with unfufpici- wood, 69
,us admiration, or heard with implicit faith, in
imes of darkness and of ignorance, met with a
'cry different reception, in a more enlightened pe-
iod. The vigilance of the Reformers deteted
herfe impoftures, and exposed not only them, but

the

BooK II. the cause, which needed the aid of such artifices,
Sto ridicule.

As the Popish ecclefiaftics became more and

more the objects of hatred and of contempt, the
discourses of the Reformers were listened to as to
many calls to liberty , and betides the pious indig-
nation which they excited againit those corruptdoc-
trines, which had perverted the nature of true
Christianity; betides the zeal, which they inspired
for the knowledge of truth, and the purity of reli-
gion; they gave rife also, among the Scottish no-
bles, to other views and paflions. They hoped to
(hake off the yoke of ecclesiastical dominion, which
they had long felt to be oppreflive, and which they
now discovered to be unchristian. They expeAed
to recover poffeflion of the church revenues, which
they were now taught to confider as alienations
made by their ancefftors, with a profusion no less
undifcerning than unbounded. They flattered them-
selves, that a check would be given to the pride
and luxury of the clergy, who would be obliged,
henceforward, to confine themselves within the
[phere, peculiar to their sacred charater. An aver-
sion for the established church, which flowed from
so many concurring causes, which was railed by
considerations of religion, and heightened by mo-
tives of policy, spread fast through the nation, and
excited a spirit, that burst out, at last, with irre-
fiftible violence.

RELICI OUS considerations, alone, were fufficient

to have rouzed this spirit. The points in contro-
verfy with the church of Rome were of so much
importance to the happiness of mankind, and so
essential to Christianity, that they merited all the
zeal v.ith which the Reformers contended in order
to eflablifh them. But the Reformation having
been represented as the effedt of Come wild and en-
thufiaflic frenzy in the human mind, this attempt

our anceffors embraced and propagated the Pro- -
teftant dotrines, by taking

a view of the political

motives, alone, which influenced them, and by
fhewing how naturally these prompted them to adt
with so much ardor, will not, perhaps, be efltecm-
ed an unnecessary digreflion. We now return to
the course of the history.

THE Qujeen's elevation to the office of Regent ,55.

seems to have transported her, at firfit, beyond the
known prudence, and moderation of her characer.
She began her administration, by conferring upon The
foreigners several offices of trust and of dignity ; a Queen
step, which both from the inability of strangers to Reg he
discharge these offices with vigour, and from the adniini-
envy which their preferment excites among the na- firation
tives, is never attended with good consequences. with some
Vilmort was made Comptroller, and entrusted with noUlar
the management of the public revenues; Bonot
was appointed Governor of Orkney; and Rubay
honoured with the custody of the Great Seal, and
the title of Vice Chancellor *. It was with the * Lefly,
highest indignation, that the Scots beheld offices of de Reb.
the greatest eminence and authority, dealtout among Geot.
strangers. By these promotions they conceived the
Queen to have offered an insult both to their under-
flandings, and to their courage; to the former, by
supposing them unfit for thole tfations, which their
ancestors had filled with so much dignity; to the
latter, by imagining that they were tame enough
not to complain of an affront, which, in no former
age, would have been tolerated with impunity.

WHILE their minds were in this disposition, an

incident happened which inflamed their aversion
from French councils to the highest degree. Ever
since the famous contest between the houses of Va-
lois and Plantagenet, the French had been accuf-
tomed to embarrass the English, and to divide their
strength by the sudden and formidable jncurfions of

their

Boon II. their allies, the Scots. But, as there inroads were
'v ' lfeldom attended with any real advantage to Scot-

land, and exposed it to the dangerous resentment
of a powerful neighbour, the Scots began to grow
leis tractable than formerly, and scrupled, any lon-
ger, to serve an ambitious ally at the price of their
own quiet and security. The change, too, which
was daily introducing into the art of war, rendered
the 4;liiftance of the Scottish forces of less import-
ance to the French Monarch. For there reasons,
He1nry having resolved upon a war with Philip II.
and foreseeing that the Queen of England would
take part in her hulband's quarrel, was extremely
folcitous to secure, in Scotland, the alliftance of
some troops, which would be more at his command
than an undisciplined army, led by chieftains who
were almost independent. In prosecution of this
design, but under pretence of relieving the nobles
from the expence and danger of defending the bor-

55. ders, the Queen Regent proposed, in Parliament,

to regifier tihe value of lands throughout the king-
dom, to impose on them a small tax, and to apply
that revenue towards maintaining a bodyof regular
troops, in conflant pay. A fixed tax upon land,
which the growing expence of government hath in-
troduced into almost every part of Europe, was
unknown, at that time, and teemed altogether in-
conliftent with the free and independent fpiritof the
feudal government. Nothing could be more shock-
ing ro a generous and brave nobility, than the en-
trulting, to mercenary hands, the defence of those
territories which had been acquired, or preserved,
by the blood of their ancestors. They received this
proposal with the utmotf indignation. About 300
of the Lefier Barons repaired in a body to the Queen
Regent, and represented their sense of the intended
innovation, with that manly and determined bold-
ners, which is natural to a free people, in a martial

age.

irm a tone, and supported by such formidable num-
)ers, the Queen prudently abandoned a scheme,
vhich the found to be universally odious. As the

)teen herself was known perfectly to understand
he circumifances and temper of the nation, this
-neafure was imputed wholly to the suggestions of
ier foreign counsellors , and the Scots were ready
o proceed to the most violent extremities against
hem.

THE French, initead of extinguishing, added Attempts
luel to the flame. They had now commenced hof- to engage
ilities against Spain, and Philip had prevailed on doe kina
he Queen of England, to reinforce his army with war with
i

considerable body of her troops. In order to de- England.

)rive him of this aid, Henry had recourse, as he
projeted, to the Scots ,; and attempted to excite
them to invade England. But, as Scotland had
nothing to dread from a Princess of Mary's charac-
ter, who, far from any ambitious scheme of dif-
Lurbing her neighbours, was wholly occupied in
endeavouring to reclaim her heretical fubjecs ; the
nobles, who were assembled by the QOeen Regent
at Newbottle, listened to the folicitations of the
French Monarch with extreme coldness, and pru-
dently declined engaging the kingdom in an enter-
prize so dangerous and unnecessary. What the
could not obtain by persuasion, the Queen Regent
brought about by a fIratagem. Notwithltanding
the peace which subsisted between the two king-
doms, she commanded her French soldiers to re-
build a small fort near Berwick, which was appoint-
ed, by the last treaty, to be razed. The garrison
of Berwick sallied out , interrupted the work; and
ravaged the adjacent country. This insult rouzed
the fiery spirit of the Scots, and their promptness
to revenge the least appearance of national injury
diflipated, in a moment, the wife and pacific refo-
lutiorns which they had so lately formed. War was

determined,

BooK II. determined, and orders instantly given for raising

- a numerous army. But before their forces could

assemble, the ardor of their indignation had time
to cool, and the English having discovered no in-
tention to push the war with vigour, the nobles re-
fumed their pacific system, and resolved to fland

'556. altogether upon the defensive. They marched to

the banks of the Tweed, they prevented the incur-
fions of the enemy, and having done what they
thought fufficient for the safety and honour of their
country, the Queen could not induce them, either
by her intreaties, or her artifices, to advance ano-
ther iftp.

WHILE the Scots perfifled in their inactivity,

D'Oyfel, the Commander of the French troops,
who polfeffed entirely the confidence of the Queen
Regent, endeavoured, with her connivance, to en-
gage the tvo nations in holtilities Contrary to the
orders of the Scottish General, he marched over the
Tweed with his own soldiers, and invested Werk,
a garrison of the English. The Scots, instead of
seconding his attempt, were enraged at his pre-
ltmption. The Queen's partiality towards France
had long been suspeCted; but it was now visible
that (he wantonly sacrificed the peace and safety
of Scotland, to the interest of that ambitious and
assuming ally. Under the feudal governments, it
was in camps, that lubjeCts were accuflomed to
address the boldest remonftiances to their Sove-
reigns. 'While arms were in their hands, they felt
their own firength ; and at that time all their re-
presentations of grievances carried the authority
of commands. On this occasion, the indignation
of the nobles broke out with such violence, that the
Queen, perceiving all attempts to engage them in
action to be vain, abruptly dismissed her army, and
retired with the utmolt shame and disgust; having
discovered the impotence of her own authority,

without

without effeaing any thing which could be of ad- BOOK II.
vantage to France.

IT is observable, that this first inflance of con-

tempt for the Regent's authority can, in no degree,
be imputed to the influence of the new opinions in
religion. As the Queen's pretensions to the Re-
gency had been principally supported by those who
favoured the Reformation, and as she flill needed
them for a counterpoise to the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's, and the partizans of the house of Hamil-
ton ; they were now treated by her with great re-
fpe&t, and even admitted to no inconsiderable share
in her favour and confidence. Kirkaldy of Grange,
and the other surviving conspirators against Cardi-
nal Beatoun, were, about this time, recalled by her
from banishment; and, through her connivance,
the Protestant preachers enjoyed an interval of tran-
quillity, which was of great advantage to their
cause. Soothed by these inflances of the Queen's
moderation and humanity, the Protestants left to
others the office of remonfirating ; and the lead-
ers of the opposite faction set them the first exam-
ple of disputing the will of their Sovereign.

As the Queen Regent felt how limited and pre- The

carious her authority was, while it depended on the Quen'
poise of these contrary fadions, she endeavoured to airhriae
establish it on a broader and more secure foundation, Dauphin.
by hastening the conclusion of her daughter's mar-
riage with the Dauphin. Amiable as the Qeen of
Scots then was, in the bloom of youth, and confi-
derable as the territories were, which she would
have added to the French monarchy ; reasons were
not wanting to dilTffuade Henry from compleating
his first plan of marrying her to his (on. The Con-
fiable Montmorency had employed all his interest
to defeat an alliance, which refleced so much lufire
on the Princes of Lorrain. He had reprefenr'd the
impoflibility of maintaining order and tranquillity

VOL. I. K among

BooK II. among a turbulent people, during the absence of
-'----" their Sovereign ; and for that reason, had advised

Henry to bestow the young Qgeen upon one of
the Princes of the blood, who, by residing in Scot-
land, might preserve that Kingdom an useful ally
to France, which, by a nearer union to the Crown,
would become a mutinous and ungovernable pro-

* Melv. vince *. But, at this time, the Confltable was a
Meri. i5. prisoner in the hands of the Spaniards, and the

Princes of Lorrain were at the height of their glo-
ry ; and their influence, seconded by the charms
of the young Queen, triumphed over the prudent,
but envious remonftrances of their rival.

Dec. 14, THE French king accordingly applied to the Par-

s'57. liament of Scotland, which appointed eight of its

members -t to represent the whole body of the na-
tion, at the marriage of the Qgeen. Among the
persons on whom the public choice conferred this
honourable character, were some of the most avow-
ed and zealous advocates for the Reformation ,
by which, may be estimated the degree of refpet
and popularity, which that party had now attain-
ed in the kingdom. The inftrutions of the Par-

t Keith liament to those Commifioners still remain t, and
Append. do honour to the ,,ifdom and integrity of that as-

fembly. At the fame time that they manifefied,
with refped to the articles of marriage, a laudable
concern for the dignity and interest of their Sove-
reign, they employed every precaution which pru-
dence could dicdate, for prefirving the liberty and
independence of the nation, and for securing the
fucceilion of the Crown in the house of Hamilton.

- Viz. The Archbilhop of Glasgow, the Bilhop of Ross, the

Bishop of Orkney, the Earls of Rothes and Caflils, Lord Flem-
ing, Lord Setcon, the Prior of St. Andrew's, and John Erskine of
Dun.

WITH

WITH regard to each of these, the Scots obtain- BooK I.

ed whatever fatisfadion their fear orjealoufy could '"v^'
demand. The young Queen, the Dauphin, and of the
the King of France ratified every article, with the French in
most solemn oaths, and confirmed them by deeds the mar-
in form, under their hands and seals. But on the riage trea-
part of France, all this was one continued (cene of tY.
ltudied and elaborate deceit. Previous to these pub-
lic tranfadions with the Scottish deputies, Mary had
been persuaded to subscribe privately three deeds,
equally unjust, and invalid , by which, failing the
heirs of her own body, Ihe conferred the kingdom
of Scotland, with whatever inheritance or fucceflion
might accrue to it, in free gift upon the Crown of
France, declaring all promises to the contrary,which
the necellity of her affairs, and the follicitations of
her fubjeds had extorted, or might extort from
her, to be void and of no obligation '. As it gives Corps
us a proper idea of the charader of the French Diplomat.

torD. v. 2 I.

court under Henry II. we may observe that the Keith,73.
King himself, the Keeper of the Great Seals, the
Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, were
the persons engaged in conduting this perfidious
and dishonourable projet. The Queen of Scots
was the only innocent actor in that scene of iniqui-
ty. Her youth, her inexperience, her education
in a foreign country, and her deference to her un-
cle's will, must vindicate her, in the judgment of
every impartial person, from any imputation of
blame on that account.

THIS grant, by which Mary beltowed the inhe-

ritance of her kingdom upon strangers, was con-
cealed with the utmost care from her fubjeds.
They seem, however, not to have been unacquaint-
ed with the intention of the French to overturn the
settlement of the fuccefflion in favour of the Duke
of Chatelherau'lt. The zeal, with which the Arch-
bilhop of St. Andrews opposed all the meaflires of
the Qucen Regent, evidently proceeded from the

K 2 fears

BooK I1. fears and fufpiciois of that prudent prelate, on this
--I hcad +.
April 14, THJE marriage, however, was celebrated with

1558- great pomp; and the French, who had hitherto as-

fected to draw a veil over their designs upon Scot-
land, began now to unfold their intentions without
any disguise. In the treaty of marriage, the depu-
ties had agreed that the Dauphin should aflfume the
name of King of Scotland. This they considered
only as an honorary title, but the French laboured
to annex to it some solid privileges and power.They
insisted that the Dauphin's title should be publickly
recognized ,; that the Crown Mlatrimonial should be
conferred upon him;, and that all the rights pertain-
ing to the husband of a Queen should be vefled in
his perfobn. By the laws of Scotland, a person who
married an heirers kept poffeflion of her estate dur-
ing his own life, if he happened to survive her and

* Reg. the children born of the marriage *. This was cal-
Maj. Jib. led the courtesy of Scotland. The French aimed at
"

5 applying this rule, which takes place in private in-

heritances, to the fuccellion of the kingdom; and
that seems to be implied in their demand of the
Crown Matrimonial, a phrase peculiar to the Scot-
tilh hiltorians, and which they have neglected to
explain. As the French had reason to expect diffi-
culices in carrying through this measure, they began
with founding the deputies who were then at Paris.
The English, in the marriage articles between their
Queen and Philip of Spain, had set an example to
the age, of that prudent jealousy and reserve, with
which a foreigner should be admitted so net- the
throne. lFull of the fame ideas, the Scottish depu-
ties had, in their oath of allegiance to the Dauphin,

-f- About this time, the French seem to have had rome design

of reviving the Earl of Lenox's pretensions to the Succeflion,
ii, order to intimidate and alarm the Duke of Chatelherault.
Hlaynes, 215, 219. Forbes Collect. vol. i. 189. edpreffed

expressed themselves with remarkable caution *. BOOK II.
Their anfwier was in the fame spirit, refpecful, but ,
firm ; and discovered a fixed resolution of condent-

Ap eih,

ing to nothing, that tended to introduce any alte- 20.
ration in the order of fucceflion to the Crown.

FoUR of the deputies t- happening to die before

they returned into Scotland, this accident was ui:i-
verfally imputed to the effeds of poison, which was
supposed to have been given them by the emit-aries
of the house of Guise. The hillorians of all nations
discover an amazing credulity with respect to flories
of this kind, which are so well calculated to please
the malignity of fobme men, and to gratify the love
of the marvellous which is natural to all, that, in
every age, they have been swallowed without exa-
mination, and believed contrary to reason. No
wonder the Scots should easily give credit to a iul-
picion, which received fich strong colours of pro-
bability, both from their own resentment, and from
the known character of the Princes of Lorrain, so
little scrupulous about thejuftice of the ends which
they pursued, or of the means which they employ-
ed, For the honour of human nature, it mull,
however, be observed, that as we can discover no
motive, which could induce any man to perpetrate
such a crime, so there appears no evidence to prove
that it was committed. Eut the Scots of that age,
influenced by national animofities and prejudices,
were incapable of examining the circumstances of the
cafe with calmness, or of judging concerning them
with candour. All parties agreed in believing the
French to have been guilty of this detestable adion ;
and it is obvious how much this tended to increase
the aversion for them, which was growing among
all ranks of men.

NOTWITtISTA n'DIN the cold reception which The Re-

tlicir propoal concerning the Crown A1atrimonial ,ir,:.l,

t-[ The B;lhop of Orkney, the Earl of Rothes, the Earl of .,t, to

C.,tlils, iend Lord Fleming. grant it.

K 3 met Nov. 2()

---v--- ventured to move it in Parliament. The partizans

of the House of Hamilton, suspicious of their de-
iigns upon the fuccelinon, opposed it with great zeal.
But a party, which the feeble and unsteady condua
of their leader had brought under much difreputa-
tion, was little able to withstand the influence of
France, and the address of the Queen Regent, fe-
conded, on this occasion, by all the numerous ad-
herents of the Reformation. Beftides, that artful
Princess dressed out the French demands in a less
offTnfive garb, and threw in so many limitations, as
seemed to render them of small consequence. There
either deceived the Scots, or removed their scruples;
and in compliance to the Queen, they passed an act,
conferring the Crown Matrimonial on the Dauphin;
and, with the fondest credulity, trusted to the frail
security of words and statutes, against the danger-
ous encroachments of power .

Continues THE concurrence of the Protestants, with the
to court Queen Regent, in promoting a measure so accept-
the Prote- able to France, while the Popish clergy, under the

influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, op-

tMelv.47. posed it with so much violence t, is one of thole

singular circumstances, in the condu& of parties,
for which this period is so remarkable. It may be
ascribed, in Tfme degree, to the dextrous manage-
ment of the Qyeen, but chiefly to the moderation
of thoie who favoured the Reformation. The pro-
tefnants were, by this time, almost equal to the Ca-
tholics both in power, and in number; and, con-

* The ALt of Parliament is worded with the utmost care,

with a view to guard againit any breach of the order of Succef-
sion. But the Duke, not relying on this alone, entered a solemn
proteflation to secure his own right, Keith, 76. It is plain,
that he fulpefted the French of having some intention to let aside
his right ot licceffion ; and, indeed, it' they had no design of
that kind, the eagerncfi ith

ii which they urged their demand,

was ch;ldJih.

* fcious

fcious of their own Qtrength, they submitted with RooK It.
impatience to that tyrannical authority, with which '" '
the ancient laws armed the ecclefiafticks against
them. They longed to be exemptLd from this
opprellivejurifdiCtion, and publickly to enjoy the
liberty of profelting those opinions, and of exer-
cifing that worship, which to great a part of the
nation deemed to be founded in truth, and to be
acceptable to the Deity This indulgence, to which
the whole weight of priestly authority was oppof-
ed, there were only two ways of obtaining. Ei-
ther violence muff extort it from the relutant hand
of their Sovereign, or by prudent compliances,
they might expedt it from her favour, or her gra-
titude. The former is an expedient for the redress
of grievances, to which no nation has recourle fud-
denly; and fubjeds seldom venture upon refill-
ance, which is their last remedy, but in cafes of
extreme neceflity. On this occasion, the Reform-
ers wifely held the opposite course, and by their
zeal in forwarding the Queen's designs, they hop-
ed to merit her protecion. This disposition the
Queen encouraged to the utmost, and amuled themr
so artfully with many promises, and rome concefli-
ons, that, by their aflifiance, she surmounted in
Parliament the tforce of a national, and perhaps a.
laudable jealousy, which would, otherwise, have
swayed with the greater number.

ANOTHER circumstance contributed somewhat to

acquire the Regent such considerable influence in
this Parliament. In Scotland, all the bithopricks,
and those abbeys which conferred a title to a feat
in Parliament, were in the gift of the Crown *. *SeeBooi.
From the time of her accellion to the regency, the I.
Queen had kept in her own hands almost all those
which became vacant, except luch as were, to the
great dilguft of the nation, beflowed upon foreign-
ers. Among these, her brother the Cardinal -of
1 .oramn had obtained the abbeys of Kelfo and Mil-

K 4 roiA,

BooK II. ross, two of the most wealthy foundations in the

- kingdom *. By this condud, the thinned the ec-

* Lefly, clefiallical bench t-, which was entirely under the
202. influence of the Archbishop of St. Andrew's, and

which, by its numbers and authority, usually had
great weight in the house, Co as to render any op-
position it could give, at that time, of little con-
sequence.

THEi Earl of Argyll, and James Stewart Prior

of St. Andrew's, one of the most powerful, and the
other the molt popular leader of the Protestants,
were appointed to carry the Crown and other en-
signs of royalty to the Dauphin. But from this
they were diverted by the part they were called to
ad, in a more interesting scene, which now be-
gins to open.

Elizabeth BEFORE we turn towards this, it is neceflary to
succeeds observe, that on the I7th of November, Mary of
o the .England finished her short, and inglorious reign.
England. Her fitfer Elizabeth took poffillion of the throne

without oppolition; and the Protestant religion was,
once more, eflablifhed by law in England. The
accefion of a Queen, who, under very difficult cir-
cumflances, had given itrong indications of those
eminent qualities, which, in the sequel, rendered
her reign so illustrious, attracded the eyes of all Eu-
rope. Among the Scots, both parties observed her
first emotions with the utmost concern, as they ea-
fily foresaw that the would not remain long an in-
different fpedtator of their transactions.

lUNDER many ditcouragemenrs, and much op-

pression, the Reforination advanced towards a full
ettablifhmcnt in Scotland. All the low country, the
most populous, and, at that time, the most warlike
part of the kingdom, was deeply tinaured with the

+ It appears from the rolls of this Pa'liamnent, which Lefly

calls a very lull one, that only seven Bilhops and sixteen Abbots
wcre prcfent. Proseltant

Protestant opinions ; and if the fame imprefflions BooK II.
were not made in the more difiant counties, it was
owing to no want of the fame dispositions among
the people, but to the scarcity of preachers, whole
mofi indefatigable zeal could not satisfy the avidity
of thole, who desired their inhtruetlons. Among a
people bred to arms, and so prone to mutiny as the
Scots ; and in an age, when religions pafions had
taken such strong pofleflion of the human mind, and
moved and agitated it with so much violence ,; the
peaceable and regular demeanor of so numerous a
party is truly astonishing. From the death of Mr.
Patrick Hamilton, the first who fuffered in Scotland
for the Protestant religion, thirty years had elapsed,
and during so long a period, no violation of pub-
lic order or tranquillity had proceeded from that
fece* ; and though rouzed and irritated by the moilt
cruel excesses ofecclefiaftical tyranny, they did, in
no instance, transgress those bounds of duty which
the law prescribes to fubjedts. Besides the pru-
dence of their own leaders, and the protetion which
the Queen Regent, from political motives, afford-
ed them, the moderation of the Archbishop of St.
Andrew's encouraged this pacific disposition. That
Prelate, whose private life cotemporary writers
tax with great irregularitiest, governed the church, tKnox,
for frome years, with a temper and prudence of Buchanan.
which there are few examples in that age. But Keith,zo8.
Come time before the meeting of last Parliament,
the Archbishop departed from those humane max-
ims, by which he had hitherto regulated his con-
du ,; and whether, in spite to the Queen, who
had entered into so close an union with the Pro-
teftants, or in compliance with the importunities

* The murder of Cardinal Beautoun was occasioned by pri-

vate revenge,eand being contrived and executed by Lixteen per-
sons only, cannot, with ju(tice, be imputed to the whole Pro-
tcetant party. o-f

Boo, II. of his clergy, he let loose all the rage of perfecu-

v tion againit the Reformed ; sentenced to the flames

an aged priest, who had been convited of em-
bracing the Proteflant opinions; and summoned
several ohers, fuipeded of the fame crime, to ap-
pear before a synod of the clergy, which was soon
to convene at Edinburgh.

NOTHING could equal the horror of the Protest-

ants at this unexpected and barbarous execution,
but the zeal, with which they espoused the defence
of a cause, that now seemed devoted to deftrution.
They had immediate recourse to the Queen Re-
gent ; and as her success in the Parliament, which
was then about to meet, depended on their con-
currence, she not only (heltered them from the
impending storm, but permitted them the exercise
of their religion, with more freedom than they had
hitherto enjoyed. Unsatisfied with this precarious
tenure, by which they held their religious liberty,
the Protestants laboured to render their poffelTion
of it more secure and independent. With this
view, they determined to petition the Parliament
for rome legal protection, against the exorbitant
and oppreflivejurifdidion of the ecclefiaflical courts,
which, by their arbitrary method of proceeding,
founded in the canon law, were led to sentences
the most shocking to humanity, by maxims the
mofl repugnant tojuflice. But the OQeen, who
dreaded the effeds of a debate on this delicate sub-
jet, which could not fail of exciting high and dan-
gerous paflions, prevailed on the leaders of the par-
ty, by new and more solemn promises of her pro-
tedion, to defif; from any application to Parliament,
where their numbers and influence would, in all
probability, have procured them, if not the entire
rcdrcds, at leafi, some mitigation oftheir grie-
vanCcS.

'TIEY npplicd to an;othcr afilcnbly, to a convo-

ca.i'.. of the P1o ilh clergy, but with thle Cfme ill

luccc ls,

success, which hath always attended every propo- RooK I!.
fal for Reformation, addressed to that order of men.
To abandon usurped power, to renounce lucrative
error, are lacrifices, which the virtue of individuals
has, on some occasions, offered to truth ; but from
any society of men, no such effort can be expeeted.
The corruptions of a society, recommended by
common utility, and justified by universal praAice,
are viewed by its members, without shame or hor-
ror ; and Reformation never proceeds from tlhem-
selves, but is always forced upon them by some
foreign hand. Suitable to this unfeeling and inflex-
ible spirit, was the behaviour of the convocation iin
the present conjuncture. All the demands of the
Protestants were rejeaced with contempt; and the
Popish clergy, far from endeavouring, by any pru-
dent conceflions, to sooth and to reconcile such a
numerous body, asserted the doctrines of their
church, concerning some of the most exceptionable
articles, with an ill-timed rigour, which gave new
offence+ . *Keith,8i.

DURING the fitting of the convocation, the Pro-

teftants first began to fufped some change in the
Regent's disposition towards them. Though join-
ed with them for many years, by interest, and u-
nited, as they conceived, by the ifrongeft ties of
affetion and of gratitude, ihe discovered, on this
occasion, evident symptoms, not only of coldnets, Is59-
but of a growing disgust and aversion. In order
to account for this, our historians do little more
than produce the trite observations concerning the
influence of prosperity to alter the charaeter, and
to corrupt the heart. The Qgeen, fay they, ha-
ving reached the utmost point to which her ambi-
tion aspired, no longer preserved her acuitomed
moderation, but, with an insolence usual to the
fortunate, looked down upon those, by whole as-
fitTance she had been enabled to rile so high. But

\it

sooK II. it is neither in the depravity of the human heart, nor
- in the ingratitude of the Queen's disposition, that
'559- we muff search for the motives of her present con-

duct. These were derived from another, and a
more remote bfource, which in order to clear the
subsequent tranfaaions, we thall endeavour to
open with forme care.

Ambitious THE ambition of the Princes of Lorrain had
views of been no less fuccefsful than dtaring , but all their
thePrinces schemes were distinguished by being vast and un-
ofLorraia. bounded. Though strangers at the court of France,

their eminent qualities had raised them, in a short
time, to an height of power, superior to that of all
other fubjeds, and had placed them on a level even
with the Princes of the blood themselves. The
church, the army, the revenue, were under their
diretion. Nothing but the royal dignity remain-
ed untainted, and they were elevated to a near al-
liance with it, by the marriage of the Queen of
Scots to the Dauphin. In order to gratify their
own vanity, and to render their niece more worthy
the heir of France, they set on foot her claim to
the Crown of England, which was founded on
pretences not unplaufible.

THE tragical amours and marriages of Henry

VIII. are known to all the world. Moved by the
caprices of his love, or of his resentment, that im-
patient and arbitrary Monarch had divorced or
beheaded four of the fix Queens, whom he mar-
ried. In order to gratify him, both his daughters
had been declared illegitimate by Ac of Parlia-
ment ,; and yet, with that fantastic inconfiflence
which diftinguilhes his charader, he, in his last
will, whereby he was impowered to fettle the or-
der of fucceflion, called both of them to the throne,
upon the death of their brother Edward ; and at
the fame time, pafing by the posterity of his eldest
fifler Margaret Queen of Scotland, he appointed

the

f

the line of succession to continue in the descendents BooK II.
of his younger filter, the Dutchess of Suffolk.

In consequence of this destination, the validity t559"

whereof was admitted by the English, but never
recognized by foreigners, Mary had reigned in
England, without the lealt complaint of neighbour-
ing Princes. But the fame causes, which facilita-
ted her acceflion to the throne, were obltacles to
the elevation of her sifter Elizabeth, and rendered
her pofleflion of it precarious and insecure. Rome
trembled for the Catholic faith, under a Protestant
Queen of such eminent abilities. The fame fu-
perftitious fears alarmed the court of Spain. And
France beheld, with indignation a throne, to which
the Queen of Scots could form so many pretensions,
occupied by a rival, whose birth, in the opinion of
all good catholics, excluded her from any legal
right of succession. The impotent hatred of the
Roman Pontiff, or the flow councils of Philip II.
would have produced no sudden or formidable es-
sect. The ardent and impetuous ambition of the
Princes of Lorrain, who, at that time, governed
the court of France, was more decisive, and more

per-

to be dreaded. Infligated by them, Henry, soon fuade Ma-
after the death of Mary, persuaded his daughter-in- ry to a-
law and her husband to assume the title of King fume the
and Queen of England. They affected to publish title of
this to all Europe. They used that style and ap- England.
pellation in public papers, rome of which still re-
main*. The arms of England were engraved on *Anders.
their coin and plate, and born by them on all oc- Diplom.
cations. No preparations, however, were made to cot. No.
support this impolitic and premature claim. Eli-
zabeth was already seated on her throne ; the pof-
sessed all the intrepidity of spirit, and all the arts
of policy, which were neceifary for maintaining
that station. England was growing into reputation
for naval power. The marine of France had been

utterly

BooK II. utterly negleded , and Scotland remained the on-
'--v-- ly avenue, by which the territories of Elizabeth

Re59.to could be approached. It was on that fide, there-

invade fbre, that the Princes of Lorrain determined to
England. make their attack* ; and, by using the name and

Forbes pretentious of the Scottish Queen, they hoped to
Collet. i. rouze the English Catholics, formidable at that
23. 277. time by their zeal and numbers, and exasperated

to the utmost against Elizabeth, on account of the
change which the had made in the national religion.

In orderto Ir was vain to expecd the assistance of the Scot-
this,nccef- tifh Proteflants to dethrone a Queen, whom all
fary th Eturope efleemed the guardian and defender of the
Reforma- reformed faith. To break the power and reputa-
tion in tion of that party in Scotland, became, for this
Scotland. reason, a necessary flep towards the invasion of

England. With this the Princes of Lorrain re-
solved to open their scheme. And as persecution
was the only method for fupprefling religious opi-
nions, known in that age, or ditated by the def-
potic and sanguinary spirit of the Romish fuperfti-
tion, this, in its utmolt violence, they determined
to employ. The Earl of Argyll, the Prior of St.
Andrew's, and other leaders of the party, were

-; Forbes i. marked out by them for immediate deflruaiont,;
15-. and they hoped, by punishing them, to intimidate

their followers. Infirudions for this purpose were
sent from France to the Queen Regent. That hu-
mane and sagacious Princess condemned a measure,
which was equally violent and impolitic. By long
residence in Scotland, lbe had become acquainted
with the eager and impatient temper of the nation;
the well knew the pow er, the number, and popu-
larity of the Proteltant leaders; and had been a
witness to the intrepid and unconquerable refolu-
tion which religiousfervour could inspire. What,
then, could be gained by rouzing this dangerous
spirit, which, hitherto, all the arts of policy had

9scarce

scarce been able to restrain ? If it once broke loose, BooK II.
the authority of a Regent would be little capable -
to subdue, or even to moderate its rage. And if, l559'
in order to quell it, foreign forces were called in,
this would give the alarm to the whole nation, irri-
tated already at the excellive power which the
French poffeffed in the kingdom, and suspicious of
all their designs. Amidst the shock which this
might occasion, far from hoping to exterminate the
Protestant doctrine, it would be well if the whole
fabric of the established church were not shaken,
and perhaps overturned from the foundation.
These prudent remonifrances made no imprellion
on her brothers, precipitant, but inflexible in all
their resolutions, they insisted on the full and ri-
gorous execution of their plan. Mary, passionately
devoted to the interest of France, and ready, on all
occasions, to sacrifice her own opinions to the in-
clinations of her brothers, prepared to execute their
commands, with implicit fubmifflion* ; and, contra- Mel. 48.
ry to her own judgment, and to all the rules of found Mem. de
policy, she became the instrument of exciting civil Cafflenau.
commotions in Scotland, which ended with the

. J.bb6

ruin of the French power, and of the Popilh reli-
gion in that kingdom.

FROM the time of the Qjeen's competition for The Re-

the Regency with the Duke of Chatelherault, the gent alters
Popish clergy, under the direction of the Archbi- dua with
shop of St Andrew's, had set themselves in oppofi- regard to
tion to all her measures. Her first step towards the Pro-
the execution of her new scheme, was to regaintcftants.
their favour. Nor was this reconcilement a matter
of difficultv. The Popish ecclefia1tics, separated from
the reft of mankind by the law of celibacy, the
boldest and most fuccefsful invention of human po-
licy, and combined among themselves in the closest
and most sacred union; have been accustomed, in
every age, to sacrifice all private and particular pas-

fions

BooK II. fions to the dignity and interest of their order. De-
'-"-'-- lighted on this occasion, with the prospeCt of tri-

'559. umphing over a faction, whole encroachments they

had long dreaded, and animated with the hopes
of re-eftabli(hing their declining grandeur on a
firmer batlls ; they, at once, cancelled the memory
of past injuries, and engaged to second the Queen
in all her attempts to check the progress of the Re-
formation. The Queen, being secure of their as-
liftance, openly approved of the decrees of the
convocation, by which the principles of the Re-
formers were condemned , and at the fame time,
the iflued a proclamation, enjoining all persons to
observe the approaching festival of Easter, accord-
ing to the Romish ritual.

As it was no longer polible to mistake the

Q.een's intentions, the Proteflants, who saw the
danger approach, in order to avert it, employed the
Earl ofGlencairn, and Sir Hugh Campbell of Lou-
don, to expoflulate with her, concerning this
change, towards severity, which their former ser-
vices had so little merited, and which her reiterat-
ed promises gave them no reabon to expec. She,
without dilguife or apology, avowed to them her
resolution of extirpating the Reformed religion out
of the kingdom. And, upon their urging her for-
mer engagements, with an uncourtly, but honest
boldnels, file to far forgot her usual moderation,
as to utter a Sentiment, which, however apt those
of royal condition may be to entertain it, prudence
fhou!d teach them to conceal as much as possible.
" The promif's of Princes, says the, ought not
to be too carefully remembered, nor the perform-
ance of them exacted, unless it suits their own con-
veniency."

Summons THE indignation, which betrayed the Queen into
their this rash expreflion, was nothing in comparison of
preachers that, with which ihe was animated, upon hearing
bcforeher. that the public cxercife of the Reformed ,religion

had been introduccd into the town of Pcrtm. At

once, the threw off the malk, and commanded all BooK II.
the Protefiant preachers in the kingdom to be tum- ' '
moned to a court ofjuftice, which was to be held 559"
at Stirling on the tenth of May. The Protestants,
who, from their union, began, about this time, to
be diftinguithed by the name of the CONGREG ATION,
were alarmed, but not intimidated by this danger ;
and inflantly resolved not to abandon the men, to
whom they were indebted for the most valuable of
all bleflings, the knowledge of truth. At that time,
there prevailed in Scotland, with refped to criminal
trials, a custom, introduced, at first, by the infti-
tutions of vassalage and clanfhip, and tolerated,
afterwards, under a feebfe government ; any person
accused of a crime was accompanied to the place of
trial, by a retinue of his friends and adherents, as-
fembled for that purpose, from every corner of the
kingdom. Authorized by this ancient pradice, the
Reformed convened, in great numbers, to attend
their paltors to Stirling. The Queen dreaded their
approach with a train so numerous, though unarm-
ed, and in order to prevent them from advancing,
she empowered John Erskine of Dun, a person of
eminent authority with the party, to promise, in
her name, that the would put a flop to the intend-
ed trial, on condition, the preachers and their re-
tinue advanced no nearer to Stirling. Erikine,
being convinced himself of the Queen's sincerity,
served her with the utmost zeal. And the Protef-
tants, averse from proceeding to any act of violence,
listened with pleasure to To pacific a proposition.
The preachers, with a few leaders of the party,
remained at Perth ; the multitude, which had ga-
thered from different parts of the kingdom, uif-
perfed, and retired to their own habitations.

BuT, notwithstanding this solemn promise, the Breaks a

Queen, on the tenth of May, proceeded to call to promiie on
trial the persons who had been lummoned, and up- hey had

.VoL. I. 1 on relied.

Boor 11. on their non-appearance, the rigour ofjuftice took

'3 Dplace, and they were pronounced outlaws. By this

't59" ignoble artifice, Co incompatible with real dignity,

and so inconsistent with that integrity which should
prevail in all tranfaations between Sovereigns and
their subjects, the Queen forfeited the esteem and
confidence of the whole nation. The Protgftants,
shocked no less at the indecency, with which ihe
violated the public faith, than at the danger which
threatened themselves, prepared boldly for their
own defence. Erikine, enraged at having been
made the initrument for deceiving his party, in-
flantly abandoned Stirling, and repairing to Perth,
added to the zeal of his associates, by his reprefen-
tations of the Queen's inflexible refoblution to sup-
press their religion.

This oc- THE popular rhetoric of Knox powerfully fe-
cafions an conded his representations: He having been car-
inirrecc- ried a prisoner into France, together with the other
erth.n persons taken in the caifle of St. Andrew's, loon

made his escape out of that country; and residing
sometimes in England, sometimes in Scotland, had,
at last, been driven out of both kingdoms by the
rage of the Popish clergy, and was obliged to re-
tire to Geneva. Thence he was called by the lead-
ers of the Protestants in Scotland; and, in compli-
ance with their follicitations, he set out for his na-
tive country, where he arrived a few days before
the trial appointed at Stirling. He hurried in-
flantly to Perth, to share with his brethren in the
common danger, or to assist them in promoting
the common cause. While their minds were in
that ferment, which the Queen's perfidioufnefs
and their own danger occasioned, he mounted the
pulpit, and by a vehement harangue against ido-
latry, inflamed the multitude with the utmost rage.
The indiscretion of a priest, who, immediately as-
ter Knox's sermon, was preparing to celebrate mals, and

and began to decorate the altar for that purpose, BooK II.
precipitated them into immediate ation. With '-'
tumultuary, but irresistible violence, they fell upon 'ss9'
the churches in that city, overturned the altars,
defaced the pictures, broke in pieces the images;
and proceeding next to the monasteries, they, in a
few hours, laid those sumptuous fabrics almost le-
vel with the ground. This riotous infiurredion was
not the effe of any concert, or previous delibera-
tion: censured by the reformed preachers, and
publickly condemned by the persons of most pow-
er and credit with the party, it must be regarded
merely as an accidental eruption of popular rage*.

BuT to the Queen herself, there proceedings ap- The Re-

peared in a very different light. Besides their ma- gent
nifeft contempt for her authority, the Proteflants marches
had violated every thing in religion, which the

m.

esteemed venerable or holy ; and, on both there ac-
counts, the determined to inflia the severest venge-
ance on the whole party. She had already drawn
the troops in French pay to Stirling ; with these,
and what Scottith forces the could levy of a sudden,
the marched dire&ly to Perth, in hopes of furprif-
ing the Protestant leaders, before they could affem-
ble their followers, whom out of confidence in her
disingenuous promises they had been rashly induced
to dismiss. Intelligence of these preparations and
menaces was fbon conveyed to Perth. The Pro-
teftants would, gladly, have soothed the Queen, by
addretfes both to herself, and to the persons of great-
eft credit in her court; but finding her inexorable,
they, with great vigour, took measures for their
own defence. Their adherents, animated with zeal
for religion, and eager to expose themselves in to
good a cause, flocked in such numbers, to Perth,
that they not only secured the town from danger,
but, within a few days, were in a condition to take

* Knox, Hilt. 27, ia8

SI. 2? rl.

---' with an army 7000 strong.
'1559 NEITHER party, however, was impatient to en-

gage. The Queen dreaded the event of a battle
with men, whom the fervour of religion raised above
the sense of fear, or of danger. The Protestants
beheld with regret, the Earl of Argyll, the Prior
of St. Andrew's, and some other eminent persons
of their party, still adhering to the Queen; and
destitute of their aid and counsel, declined ha-
zarding an ation, the ill success of which might
have proved the ruin of their cause. The profpet
of an accommodation was for these reasons highly
acceptable to both sides: Argyll and the Prior, who
were the Q.een's commiflioners for conduAing the
negociation, seem to have been sincerely desirous of
reconciling the contending fations ; and the Earl
of Glencairn arriving unexpectedly with a powerful
reinforcement to the Congregation, augmented the

\ treaty Q.een's eagerness for peace. A treaty was accord-
ancluded. ingly concluded, in which it was flipulated, that

both armies should be disbanded, and the gates of
Perth set open to the Queen ; that indemnity should
be granted to the inhabitants of that city, and to
all others concerned in the late insurrection ; that no
French garrison should be left in Perth, and no
French soldiers should approach within three miles
of that place ; and that a Parliament ihould imme-
diately be held, in order to compose whatever diffe-
rences might flill remain *.

Keith, TH E Leaders of the Congregation, difiruftful of
?' the Queen's sincerity, and lenfible that conceflions,

flowing not from inclination, but extorted by the

(ay 29. neceffity' of her affairs, could not long remain in

force, entered into a new aflociation, by which they
bound themselves, on the first infringement of the
present treaty, or on the least appearance of danger
to their religion, to reassemble their followers, and

I

to take arms in defence of what they esteemed the BooK II.
cause of God, and of their country '.

THE Queen, by her condud, demonstrated there, *?9.

precautions to be the result of no groundless or un- , 3.
necessary fear. No sooner were the Protestant forces Broken by
dismissed, than she broke every article in the treaty. theRegent
She introduced French troops into Perth, fined Come
of the inhabitants, banished others, removed the.
Magistrates out of office, and, on her retiring to
Stirling, the left behind her a garrison of 60o men,
with orders to allow the exercise of no other reli-
gion than the Roman Catholic. The situation of
Perth, a place at that time of Come strength, and
a town the most proper of any in the kingdom for
the station of a garrison, seems to have allured the
Qieen to this unjufftifiable, and ill-judged breach
of public faith ; which the endeavoured to colour,
by alledging that the body of men left at Perth was
entirely composed of native Scots, though kept in
pay by the King of France.

THE Queen's scheme began gradually to unfold ;

it was now apparent, that not only the religion, but
the liberties of the kingdom were threatened; and
that the French troops were to be employed as in-
ftruments for subduing the Scots, and wreathing the
yoke about their necks. Martial as the genius of
the Scots then was, the poverty of their country
made it impossible to keep their armies long affem-
bled , and even a very small body of regular troops
might have proved formidable to the nation, tho'
consisting wholly of soldiers. But, what number
of French forces were then in Scotland, at what
times, and under what pretexts they returned, after
having left the kingdom in 1550, we cannot,
with any certainty, determine. Cotemporary his-
torians often feledc, with little judgment, the cir-
cumftances which they transmit to posterity , and,

L 3 with

BOOK II. with refpeA to matters of the greatest curiosity and
'----' importatnce, leave succeeding ages altogether in the

'559- dark. We may conjeaure however, from some

passages in Buchanan, that the French and Scots in
French pay, amounted at least to 3000 men, under
the command of Mons: D'Oyfel, a creature of the
house of Guise ; and they were soon augmented to
a much more formidable number.

THE Queen, encouraged by having so confider-

able a body of well disciplined troops at her com-
mand, and instigated by the violent counsels of
D'Oyfel, had ventured, as we have observed, to
violate the treaty of Perth, and, by that rash a&ion,
once more threw the nation into the most dangerous

The Pro- convulsions. The Earl of Argyll and Prior of St.
tetants a- Andrew's inflantly deserted a court, where faith and
gain take honour seemed to them to be no longer regarded.

Irms. The Barons from the neighbouring counties repair-
ed to them, the preachers rouzed the people to
arms, and wherever they came, the fame violent
operations, which accident had occasioned atPerth,
were now encouraged out of policy. The enraged
multitude was let loose, and churches and monas-
teries, the monuments of ecclefiaRic pride and lux-
ury, were sacrificed to their zeal.

IN order to check their career, the Queen, with-

out losing a moment, put her troops in motion;
but the zeal of the Congregation got the start, once
more, of her vigilance and acivity. In that war-
like age, when all men were accuflomed to arms,
and on the least profpet of danger were ready to
run to them, the leaders of the Protestants found
no difficulty to raise an army. Though they set
out from St. Andrew's with a slender train of an
hundred horse, crowds flocked to their flandards
from every corner of the country through which
they marched, and before they reached Falkland, a

village

village only ten miles distant, they were able to meet Booz IL
the Queen with superior force *,

THE Queen, furprized at the approach of to for- .« ^"

midable a body, which was drawn up by its leaders 14,.
in such a manner, as added greatly in appearance
to its numbers, had again recourie to negociation.
She found, however, that the preservation of the
Protestant religion, their zeal for which had at first
rouzed the leaders of the Congregation to take
arms, was not the only object they had now in
view. They were animated with the warmest love
of civil liberty, which they conceived to be in im-
minent danger, from the attempts of the French
forces ; and thete two paflions mingling, added re- They aim
ciprocally to each other's strength. Together with at redress-
more enlarged notions in religion, the Reformation ing civil as

well as re-

filled the human mind with more liberal and gene- ligious
rous sentiments concerning civil government. The grievances.
genius of Popery is extremely favourable to the
power of Princes. The implicit fubmiflion to all
her decrees, which is exaced by the Romilh Church,
prepares and breaks the mind for political fervi-
tude; and the doArines of the Reformers, by over-
turning the established system of fuperitition, weak-
ened the firmest foundations of civil tyranny. That
bold spirit of enquiry, which led men to rejet the-
ological errors, accompanied them in other Iciences,
and discovered every where the fame manly zeal
for truth. A new study introduced at the fame
time, added greater force to the spirit of liberty.
Men became acquainted with the Greek and Ro-
man authors, who described exquisite models of
free government, far superior to the inaccurate and
oppreflive system eftablithed by the feudal law ,
and produced such illustrious examples of public
virtue, as wonderfully suited both the circumfian-
ces, and spirit of that age. Many, among the mofl
eminent Reformers, were themselves considerable

I, 4 mailers

Boot II. maflers in ancient learning, and all of them ea-
"-'-" gerly adopted the maxims and spirit of the anci-
- 1559. ents, with regard to government *. The most

ardent love of liberty accompanied the Protestant
religion, throughout all its progress ; and wherever
it was embraced, it rouzed an independent spirit,
which rendered men attentive to their privileges
as fubjedts, and jealous of the encroachments of
their Sovereigns. Knox, and the other preachers
of the Reformation, infused generous sentiments
concerning government into the minds of their
hearers, and the Scottish Barons, naturally free
and bold, were prompted to assert their rights with
more freedom and boldness than ever. Instead of
obeying the Queen Regent, who had enjoined them
to lay down their arms, they demanded not only
the redress of their religious grievances, but, as a
preliminary toward fettling the nation, and fecur-
ing its liberties, required the immediate expulsion
of the French troops out of Scotland. It was not
in the Queen's power to make fb important a con-
ceflion, without the concurrence of the French Mo-
narch, and as some time was requisite in order to
obtain that, the hoped, during this interval, to re-
ceive such reinforcements from France, as would
insure the accomplishment of that design, which
she had twice attempted with unequal flrength.
Mean while, the agreed to a ceflation of arms for

unc 13. eight days, and before the expiration of these,

* The exceflive admiration of ancient policy was the occasion

of Knox's famous book concerning the Government of WVomen,
wherein, contornmable to the maxims of the ancient Jegiflators,
which modern experience has proved to be ill-founded, he pro-
nounces the elevation of women to the lupreme authority, to
he utterly detlrudive of good government. His principles, au-
thiorities, and examples were all drawn from ancient writers.
The fame oblervation may be made with regard to Buchanan's
Dialogue, De 'fure Regni apud Scotos. It is founded not on the
i;aixitns of teudal, but of ancient government.

engaged

engaged to transport the French troops to the south Boo K I[.
fide of the Forth ; and to fend commiflioners to St. "--'
Andrew's, who should labour to bring all diffe- '559'
rences to accommodation. As (he hoped, by means
of the French troops, to overawe the Proteflants
in the southern counties, the former article in the
treaty was punctually executed ,; the latter, having
been inserted merely to amuse the Congregation,
was no longer remembered.

By these reiterated and wanton instances of perfidy, A second
the Queen loft all credit with her adversaries ; and treaty vio-
no safety appearing in any other course, they again ate
took arms with more inflamed resentment, and
with bolder and more extensive views. The re-
moving of the French forces had I. id open to them
all the country situated between Forth and Tay.
The inhabitants of Perth alone remaining fubjeted
to the insolence andexadions of the garrison, which
the Queen had left there, implored the anliftance
of the Congregation for their relief. Thither they
marched, and having, without effet, required the
Queen to evacuate the town in terms of the former
treaty, they prepared to besiege it in form. The
Queen employed the Earl of Huntly and Lord Er-
fkine to divert them from this enterprize. But
her wonted artifices were now of no avail; repeat-
ed so often they could deceive no longer; and
without listening to her offers, the Protestants
continued the siege, and soon obliged the garrilon
to capitulate.

AFTER the loTs of Perth, the Queen endeavour- Rapid

ed to seize Stirling, a place of Come flrength, and, march and
from its command of the only bridge over the Forth, fuccels ot

c * the Protw-

of great importance. But the leaders of the Con- tte.
gregation, having intelligence of her design, pre-
vented the execution of it, by an hafly march thi-
ther, with part of their forces. The inhabitants,
heartily attached to the caule, let open to them

the

BOOK II. the gates of their town. Thence they advanced,
^-v53 with the fame rapidity, towards Edinburgh, which

'559. the Queen, on their approach, abandoned with

precipitation, and retired to Dunbar.

TH, Protestant army, wherever it came, kind-

led, or spread the ardour of Reformation, and the
utmost excelles of violence were committed upon
churches and monasteries, the former were spoiled
of every decoration, which was then esteemed fa-
cred , the latter were laid in ruins. We are apt,
at this distance of time, to condemn the furious zeal
of the Reformers, and to regret the overthrow of
so many stately fabrics, the monuments of our an-
ceftors magnificence, and among the noblest orna-
ments of the kingdom. But, amidst the violence
of a Reformation, carried on in opposition to legal
authority, some irregularities were unavoidable ;
and perhaps no one could have been permitted
more proper to allure and interest the multitude,
or more fatal to the grandeur of the established
church. However absurd and ill-founded the fpe-
culative errors of Popery may be, some inquiry and
attention are requisite towards discovering them.
The abuses and corruptions, which had crept into
the public worship of that church, lay more open
to observation, and by striking the senses, excited
more universal disgust. Under the long reign of
Heathenism, superstition seems to have exhausted
its talent of invention, To that when a superstitious
fpilit seized Christians, they were obliged to imi-
tate the Heathens in the pomp and magnificence
of their ceremonies, and to borrow from them the
ornaments and decorations of their temples. To
the pure and simple worship of the primitive Chris-
tians, there succeeded a (pecies of splendid idola-
try, nearly resembling those pagan originals
whence it had been copied. The contrariety of
itch oblervances, to the spirit of Christianity, was

almost

'I

almost the first thing, in the Romish system, which BooK II.
awakened the indignation of the Reformers, who C
applying to these, the denunciations in the Old 'j59'
Testament against idolatry, imagined that they
could not endeavour at fupprefling them, with too
much zeal. No talk could be more acceptable to
the multitude, than to overturn those feats of fu-
perftition ; they ran with emulation to perform it,
and happy was the man whose hand was most ad-
venturous and fuccefsful in executing a work esteem-
ed so pious. Nor did their leaders labour to restrain
this impetuous spirit of Reformation. Irregular
and violent as its sallies were, they tended dire&ly
to that end which they had in view ; for by demo-
lifhing the monasteries throughout the kingdom,
and setting at liberty their wretched inhabitants,
they hoped to render it impoflible ever to rebuild
the one or to re-assemble the other.

BuT amidst these irregular proceedings, a cir-

cumftance, which does honour to the conduct and
humanity of the leaders of the Congregation, de-
serves notice. They Co far reitrained the rage of
their followers, and were able Co to temper their
heat and zeal, that few of the Roman Catholics
were exposed to any personal insult, and nota tingle
man fuffered death*. *Lefly,

AT the fame, time we discover, by the facility with 235.

which these great revolutions were effcted, how
violently the current of national favour ran towards
the Reformation. No more than 300 men march-
ed out of Perth under the Earl of Argyll and Prior
of St. Andrew'st; with this inconsiderable force -Keith,94.
they advanced. But wherever they came, the
peoplejoined them in a body; their army was seldom
leCs numerous than 5000 men; the gates of every
town were thrown open to receive them ; and,

without

BooK II. without striking a tingle blow, they took poffeflion

-v of the capital of the kingdom.
'5;59- TH Is rapid and affonifhing success seems to have

encouraged the Reformers to extend their views,
and to rife in their demands. Not satisfied with
their first claim of toleration for their religion, they
now, openly, aimed at establishing the Protestant
dodrine on the ruins of Popery. For this reason,
they determined to fix their residence at Edinburgh;
and, by their appointment, Knox and some other
preachers taking poffeflion of the pulpits, which

.. had been abandoned by the affrighted clergy, de-

claimed againit the errors of Popery, with such
fervent zeal, as could not fail of gaining many
profelytes.

IN the mean time, the Queen, who had pru-

dently given way to a torrent which the could not
refill, observed with pleasure, that it now began to
subside. The leaders of the Congregation had
been above two months in arms, and by the ex-
pencesofa campaign, protraded so long beyond
the usual time of service in that age, had exhausted
all the money, which a country, where riches did
not abound, had been able to fipply. The multi-
tude, dazzled with their success, and concluding
the work to be already done, retired to their own
habitations. A few, only, of the more zealous or
wealthy Barons remained with their preachers at
Edinburgh. As intelligence is procured in civil
wars with little difficulty, whatever was tranfad!ed
at Edinburgh, \;as soon known at Dunbar. And
the Queen, regulating her own condua by the si-
tuation of her adversaries, artfully amused them
with the profped of an immediate accommodation ;
while, at the fame time, the, by fludied delays,
spun out the negociations for that purpose, to such
a length, that, in the end, the party dwindled to
an inconsiderable number, and, as if peace had
been already re-eflabhlhed, became careless of mi-

/ litary

litary discipline. The Queen, who watched for BooK II.
such an opportunity, advanced unexpe&edly, by '
a sudden march in the night with all her forces, ls59-
and appearing before Edinburgh, filled that city
with the utmost coniternation. The Protestants,
weakened by the imprudent dispersion of their fol-
lowers, durit not encounter the French troops in
the open field ; and were even unable to defend
an ill fortified town, against their assaults. Un-
willing, however, to abandon the citizens to the
Queen's mercy, they endeavoured, by facing the
enemies army, to gain time for colleting their own
associates. But, the Queen, in spite of all their
refiflance, would have easily forced her way into
the town, if the seasonable conclusion of a truce
had not procured her admiflion, without the effu-
sion of blood.

THEIR dangerous situation easily induced the A third

Congregation to listen to any overtures of peace ; treaty.
and as the Queen was looking daily for the arrival
of a strong reinforcement from France, and ex-
pe&ed great advantages from a cessation of arms,
the also agreed to it upon no unequal conditions.
Together with a suspension of hoflilities, from the
24th of July to the loth of January, it was ftipula-
ted in this treaty, that, on the one hand, the Pro-
teftants should open the gates of Edinburgh next
morning to the Qu!een Regent; remain in dutiful
fubjeAion to her government ; abitain from all
future violation of religious houses; and give no
interruption to the elfablilhed clergy, either in the
discharge of their funAions, or in the enjoyment of
their benefices. On the other hand, the Queen a-
greed to give no molestation to the preachers or pro-
effors of the Protestant religion ; to allow no other
form of worthip in Edinburgh but the Reformed ;
and to permit the free and public exercise of it all
over the kingdom. The Queen, by these liberal

conceflions

BooK II. conceflions in behalf of their religion, hoped to sooth
'' ^ the Protestants, and expe&ed, from indulging their

1559. favourite paflion, to render them more compliant

with refpec to other articles, particularly the ex-
pulfion of the French troops out of Scotland. The
anxiety which the Queen expressed for retaining
this body of men, rendered them, more and more,
the objects of national jealousy and aversion. The
immediate expullion of them was therefore demand-
ed a-new, and with greater warmth ; but theQueen,
taking advantage of the difirefs of the adverse par-
ty, eluded the request, and would consent to no-
thing more, than that a French garriion ihould not
be introduced into Edinburgh.

THE desperate fiate of their affairs, impoled on

the Congregation the neceflity of agreeing to this
article, which, however, was very far from giving
them fatisfadion. Whatever apprehensions the
Scots had conceived, from retaining the French
forces in the kingdom, were abundantly justified
during the late commotions. A small body of
those troops, maintained in constant pay, and ren-
dered formidable by regular discipline, had check-
ed the progress of a martial people, though anima-
ted with zeal both for religion and liberty. The
smallest addition to their number, and a confidera--
ble one was daily expedted, might prove fatal to
public liberty, and Scotland might be exposed to
the danger of being reduced from an independent
kingdom, to the mean condition of a province, an-
nexed to the empire of its powerful ally.

IN order to provide against this imminent cala-

mity, the l)uke of Chatelherault, and Earl of
Huntly, immediately after concluding the truce,
desired an interview with the chiefs of the Congre-
gation. These two noblemen, the most potent, at
that time in Scotland, were the leaders of the
party, which adhered to the established church.

They

/

They had followed the Queen, during the late corn- BooK II.
motions, and having access to observe more nar-
rowly the dangerous tendency of her councils, their tSs9.
abhorrence of the yoke which was preparing for
their country, surmounted all other considerations,
and determined them rather to endanger the reli-
gion which they profeffed, than to give their aid
towards the execution of her pernicious designs.
They proceeded farther, and promised to Argyll,
Glencairn, and the Prior of St. Andrew's, who
were appointed to meet them, that if the Queen
should, with her usual insincerity, violate any arti-
cle in the treaty of truce, or refuse to gratify the
wishes of the whole nation, by difmifling her French
troops, they would, then, initantly join with their
countrymen, in compelling her to a measure, which
the public safety, and the preservation of their li-
berties, rendered necessary *. * Knox,

AaorT this time, died Henry II. of France; '4·

.

just when he had adopted a system with regard to July 8
the affairs of Scotland, which would, in all proba-
bility, have restored union and tranquillity to that
kingdom t. Towards the close of his reign, the t Melv.
Princes of Lorrain began, visibly, to decline in 49-
favour, and the Constable Montmorency, by the
assistance of the Dutchess of Valentinois, recovered
that ascendant over the spirit of his master, which
his great experience, and his faithful, though often
unfortunate services, seemed justly to merit. That
prudent minister imputed the infurreations in Scot-
land wholly to the Duke of Guise and Cardinal of
Lorrain, whose violence and precipitant councils
could not fail of transporting, beyond all bounds
of moderation, men, whose minds were poffeffed
with that jealousy, which is inseparable from the
love of civil liberty, or inflamed with that ardour
which accompanies religious zeal: And, in order
to convince Henry, that he did not load his rivals
with any groundlefsaccufation, he prevailed to have

Mli.

BOOK II. Melvil *, a Scottish Gentleman of his retinue, dif-
"-"-'J patched into his native country, with inflrudions
*Th.t- to observe the motions both of the Regent, and of
thorofthe her adversaries ; and the King agreed to regulate
Memoirs. his future proceedings, in that kingdom, by Mel-

vil's report.

DID history indulge herself in these speculations,

it would be amusing to enquire what a different
direction might have been given by this resolution,
to the national spirit; and to what a different issue,
Melvil's report, which would have set the condua
of the malecontents in the most favourable light,
might have conduaed the public disorders. Per-
haps, by gentle treatment, and artful policy, the
progress of the Reformation might have been
checked, and Scotland brought to depend upon
France. Perhaps, by gaining poffeflion of this
avenue, the French might have made their way into
England, and, under colour of supporting Mary's
title to the Crown, they might have re-established
the Roman Catholic religion, and destroyed the li-
berties of that kingdom. But, into this boundless
field of fancy and conjeture, the hiflorian must
make no excursions; to relate real occurrences, and
to explain their real causes and effeAs, is his pecu-
liar and only province.

Accefion THE tragical and untimely death of the French
of Francis Monarch put an end to all moderate and pacific
II. to the
Crown ofmealures, \ith regard to Scotland, The Duke of
France. Guise, and the Cardinal his brother, upon the ac-

cellion of Francis II. a Prince void of genius, and
without experience, assumed the chief diredion of
French affairs. Allied so nearly to the throne, by
the marriage of their niece the Queen of Scots
with the young King, they now wanted but little
of regal dignity, and nothing of regal power.
This power did not long remain inacive in
their hands. The fame vast schemes of ambi-
tion, which they had planned out under the for-

mer

mer reign, were again retumed; and they vwereBooK it.
enabled, by poffeling luclh ample authority, to pur-
lue them with more vigour, and greater probabi- l559
lity of ifuccels. They blehld, \ith infinite regret,
the progress of the Protestant religion in Sctland .
and fenlible what an inlurmountable obltacle it
would prove to their deligns, they bent all their
firength to check its growth, before it rote to any
greater height. For this purpote, they carried on
their preparations with all pollible expedition, a:ad
encouraged the Queen thtir filter, to expedt, in a
short time, the arrival of an army, ito powerful, as
the zeal of their advrifaries, however dfpeeratr,
would not venture to oppose.

NOR were the Lords of the Congregation citii r

ignorant of those violent counsels, which prevailed
in the court of France,. since the death of Hlnry,
or careless of providing against the danger, \which
threatened them from that quarter. The luccels of
their caule, as well as their perlbnal safety, depend-
ing entirely on the unanimity and vigour of their
own relblutions, they endeavoured to guard against
divilion, and to cement together more closely, by
entering into a strider bond of confederacy and
mutual defence, Two persons concurred in this
new alfociation, who brought a great accellion both
of reputation and of power to the party. Thele
were the Duke of Chatelherault, and his eldcft lfol
the Earl of Arran. This young nobleman, hav-
ing resided some years in France, where he co:n-
manded the Scottilh guards, lihd imbibed the P'ro-
teftant opinions concerning religion. Hurried along
by the heat of youth, and the zeal of a prolelytc,
he had uttered lentiments, with refped to the points
in controverly, which did not suit the temper of a
Ibigotted court, intent, at that juncture, on the ex-
t;lnclin of the Protellant religion ; in order to ac-
compnlifhl which, the glreatllt xcekles of violence
were conmmitted. '1 lie church was i'lif~Icd to

\ reak

VOL. I. 1I its

--"' rely. Courts were ereaed in different parts of
'559- France, to take cognizance of this crime, and by

their sentences, several persons of diftindion were
condemned to the flames.

BUT, in order to inspire more universal terror,

ihe Princes of Lorrain resolved to feled, for a fa-
crifice, some pcrlfn, whole fall might convince all
ranks ot men, that neither splendor of birth, nor
eminence in ltatin, could exempt from punish-
ment, thole who Ihould be guilty of this unpar-
donable tranf'gremion The Earl of Arran was the

*

Thuan. pertbn defli~ed to bc the unhappy vitim *. As he
lib. xxiv. was allied to one throne, and the prefilmptive heir
p. 462. to another ; as he poffeffed the first rank in his own

Fran country, and enjoyed an honourable fiation in

France; his condemnation could not fail of mak-
ing the desired impression on the w hole kingdom.
But the Cardinal of Lorrain having let fall frome
expreflions, which raised Arran's suspicions of the
design, he escaped the intended blow by a timely
flight. Indignation, zeal, resentment, all prompt-
ed him to seek revenge upon there persecutors
of himself and of the religion which he pro-
sessed ,; and as he pafled through England, on his
return to his native country, Elizabeth, by hopes
and promises, inflamed thole paflions, and sent him
back into Scotland, animated with the fame impla-
cable aversion to France, which po!Teffed a great

KarlotAr- parr of his countrymen. He quickly communi-
an .joins cated there lentiments to his father the Duke of
he Pro- Chatellerault, who was already extieamly difgufled
cllants. .

with the meaflures carrying on in Scotland ; and as
it was the fate of that nobleman to be governed, in
every instance, by those about him, he now fuffered
hintii'i t'o be drawn from the Q(een Regent; and

hav-

/

having joined the Congregation, was considered, Boot II.
from that time, as the head of the party.

BUT with refpe& to him, this diftindion was 1559.

merely nominal. James Stewart, Plior of St. An-
drew's, was the person who moved and actuated
the whole body of the Proteflants, among whom,
he poffefTed that unbounded confidence, which his
strenuous adherence to their interest, and his great
abilities, so justly merited. He was the natural
son of James V. by a daughter of Lord Erskine,
and as that amorous Monarch, had left several
others a burden upon the Crown, they were all de-
ftined for the church, where they could be placed
in Rations of dignity and affluence. In consequence
of this resolution, the Priory of St Andrew's had
been conferred upon James : but, during o0 busy a
period, he Coon became disgusted with the indo-
lence and retirement of a monastic life; and his
enterprising genius called him forth, to act a prin-
cipal part on a more public and conspicuous thea-
tre. The scene, in which he appeared, required
talents of different kinds: Military virtue, and po-
litical discernment, were equally necessary in order
to render him illustrious. These he poffeffed in an
eminent degree. To the most unquestionable per-
fonal bravery, he added great (kill in the art of'
war, and in every enterprize his arms were crown-
ed with success. His sagacity and penetration in
civil affairs enabled him, amidst the reeling and
turbulence of facions, to hold a prosperous course.
While his boldness in defence of the Reformation,
together with the decency, and even severity of his
manners, secured him the reputation of being fin-
cerely attached to religion, without which, it was
impoflible, in that age, to gain an ascendant over
mankind.

IT was not without reason, that the Queen dread-

ed the enmity of a man, Co capable to obftrud
her designs. And as (he could not, with all her

M z address,

BOOK I1. addrels, make the least impreflion on his fidelity to

Shis aolbciates, the endeavoured to lessen his influ-

s159. ence, and to icatter among them the feeds ofjea-

louly and distrust, by insinuating that the ambition
of the Prior, alpired beyond the condition of a
fubjed, and aimed at nothing lets than the Crown
itielf.

AN accusation To improbable gained but little

credit. Whatever thoughts of this kind, the pre-
lumption of unexpeded success, and his elevation
to the highest dignity in the kingdom, may be al-
ledged to have inspired, at any subsequent period,
it is certain that, at this juncture, he could form no
uIch vast design. To dethrone a Queen, who was
lineal heir to an ancient race of Monarchs; who
had been guilty of no aaion, by which the could
forfeit the esteem and affedion of her fubjeds ; who
could employ, in defence of her rights, the forces
of a kingdom, much more powerful than her own ;
and to substitute, in her place, a person, whom the
illegitimacy of his birth, by the pracice of all ci-
vilized nations, rendered incapable of any inheri-
tance, either public or private; was a projed, so
chimerical, as the moll extravagant ambition would
scarce entei tain, and could never conceive to be
pradicable. The promise, too, which the Prior
made to Melvil, of residing conifantly in France,

* Melvil, on condition the public grievances were redressed*;
54. the confidence repoled in him by the Duke of Cha-

telherault and his (in, the prelumptive heirs to the
Crown ; anid the concurrence of almost the whole
Scottith nobles, in promoting the measures, by
which he gave offence to the French court, go far
towards his vindication from those illegal and cri-
minal deligrs, with the imputation of which, the
Qieen endeavoured, at that time, to load him.

Troopsar- THE arrival of a thousand French soldiers com-
nive trom peniatcd, in some degree, four the loss which the
France Qeen
and fortify
Leith.

Queen sustained by the defecion of the Duke of BooK II.
Chatelherault. These were, immediately, com-
manded to fortify Leith, in which place, on account 1559-
of its commodious harbour, and its situation in the
neighbourhood of Edinburgh, and in a plentiful
country, the Queen resolved to fix the head quar-
ters of her foreign forces. This unpopular mea-
sure, by the manner of executing it, was rendered
frill more unpopular. In order to bring the town
entirely under their command, the French turned
out a great part of the ancient inhabitants, and
taking poffeflion of the houses, which they had ob-
liged them to abandon, presented, to the view of
the Scots, two objeas equally irritating and offen-
five; on the one hand, a number of their country-
men expelled their habitations by violence, and
wandering without any certain abode ; on the other,
a colony of foreigners, fettling, with their wives
and children, in the heart of Scotland, growing
into strength by daily reinforcements, and openly
preparing a yoke, to which, without rome timely
exertion of national spirit, the whole kingdom muff,
of necessity, filbmit.

IT was with deep concern that the Lords of the The Pro-

Congregation beheld this bold and decisive flep, teftantsre-
taken by the Queen Regent: nor did they hesitate, oiagaten
a moment, whether they (hould employ their whole this.
strength, in one generous effort, to rescue their re-
ligion and liberty from impending deftrudtion. But,
in order to juffify their own conduc, and to throw
the blame entirely on their adversaries, they resolved
to preserve the appearances of decency and respect
towards their fuiperiors, and to have no recourse to
arms, without the molt urgent and apparent necel-
fity. They joined, with this view, in an address Sept. 29.
to the Regent, representing, in the lirongeft terms,
their diffatisfaAion with the mealires (he was pur-

1M 3 Cuin g,

BooK II. suing, and beseeching her to quiet the fears and
%vJ-'jealoufies of the nation, by defifting from fortifying

'559- Leith. The Queen, conscious of her prelent ad-

vantageous fituation', and elated with the hopes of
fresh succours, was in no disposition for listening to
demands, utterly inconfiutent with her views, and
urged with that bold importunity, which is so little
acceptable to Princes.

The Re- THE suggestions of her French Counsellors con-
gent difre- tributed, without doubt, to alienate her still farther
gards their from any scheme ofaccommodation. As the Queen
rerTon- -
ftrances. was ready, on all occalions, to diicover an extraor-

dinary deference for the opinions of her countrymen,
her brothers, who knew her secret disapprobation of
the violent measures they were driving on, took
care to place near her such persons, as betrayed her,
by their insinuations, i-nto many actions, which her
own unbiaffed judgment would have highly con-
demned. And as their fnccefs in the present junc-
ture, when all things were hastening towards a cri-
sis, depended entirely on the Queen's firmness, the
Princes of Lorrain did not trust wholly to the in-
fluence of their ordinary agents ; but, in "order to
add the greater weight to their counsels, they called
in aid the Ministers of religion ; and, by the autho-
tity of their sacred character, they hoped effedually
to recommend to their fifler, that fyitem of severity

* Lefly, which they had espoused *. With this view, but
2zs. Caf- under pretence of confounding the Protestants by
tlnau, ap. the ikill of such able malters in controversy, they
Jcbb, vol.

i. 446,

[ appointed several French divines to reside in Scot-

473. land. At the head of thrfe, and with the charac-

ter of legate from the Pope, was Pelleve Bilhop of
Amiens, and afterwards Archbishop and Cardinal

1- Davila, of Sens, a furious bigot, t servilely devoted to the
Brantoie. house of Guie, and a proper initrument for re-

commending or executing the most outrageous
measures.

AMIDST

AMIDST the noise and danger ofcivil arms, these IBOOK Ir.

Doctors had little opportunity to display their ad- -
dress in the use of their theological weapons. But 'SS9-
they gave no small offence to the nation by one of
their adions. They persuaded the Qgeem to seize
the church of St. Giles in Edinburgh, which had
remained, ever since the late truce, in the hands of
the Proteitants; and having, by a new and solemn
consecration, purified the fabric from the pollution,
with which they supposed the profane ministrations
of the Protestants to have defiled it, they, in dire&
contradiaion to one article in the late treaty, re-
eftablithed there the rites of the Romish church.
This, added to the indifference, and even contempt,
with which the Queen received their remonftrances,
convinced the Lords of the Congregation, that it
was not only vain to expec any redress of their
grievances at her hands, but absolutely neceflary
to take arms in their own defence.

THE eager and impetuous spirit of the nation, as They take

well as every conrrfideration of good policy, prompt- arms in
ed them to take this bold step without delay. It their own
was but a small part of the French auxiliaries which defeace.
had as yet arrived. The fortifications of Leith,
though advancing fast, were still far from being
compleat. Under these circumstances of difadvan-
tage, they conceived it poflible to furprize the
Queen's party, and, by one sudden and decisive
blow, to prevent all future bloodshed and conten-
tion. Full of these expedations, they advanced
rapidly towards Edinburgh with a numerous army.
But it was no easy matter to deceive an adversary, Oft. 6.
Co vigilant and attentive as the Queen Regent.
With her usual sagacity, the both foresaw the dan-
ger, and took the only proper course to avoid it.
Initead of keeping the field against enemies, fupe-
rior in number, and formidable on a day of battle,
by the ardour of their courage, the retired into

M 4 Leith,

Boor II. Leith, and determined patiently to wait the arrival

-3 of new reinforcements light and unfinished as the
'5S9' fortifications of that town.then were, the did not

dread the efforts of an army, provided neither
with heavy cannon, nor with military stores, and
utterly ignorant of the method of attacking any
place fortified with more art than those ancient
towers, ereded all over the kingdom, in defence
of private property against the incursions of ban-
ditii.

NOR did the Queen, mean while, negledt to

have recourse to those arts, which the had often
employed, to weaken or divide her adversaries. By
private bollicitations and promises, the shook the
fidelity, or abated the ardor of rome. By open re-
proach and accusation, ihe blasted the reputation,
and diminished the authority of others. Her emif-
faries were every where at work, and, notwithftand-
ing the zeal for religion and liberty, which then
animated the nation, they seem to have laboured
not without success. We find Knox, about this
period, abounding in complaints of the lukewarm
and languid fpirir, which had begun to spread a-

* Knox, mong his party *. But if their zeal slackened a lit-
S8o. tie, and fiffered a momentary intermillion, it soon

blazed up with frelh vigour, and role to a greater
height than ever.

Renew' THE Queen herfelfgave occasion to this, by the
their re- reply which (he made to a new remonstrance from
monftran- the Lords of the Congregation. Upon their arri-
ces. val at Edinburgh, they once more represented to

her the dangers arising from the increase of the
French troops, the fortifying of Leith, and her
other measures, which they conceived to be deftruc-
tive to the peace and liberty of the kingdom; and
in this address, they spoke in a firmer tone, and
avowed more openly than ever, their resolution of
proceeding to the utmoit extremities, in order to
put a flop to such dangerous encroachments. To

a remon-

a remonfirance of this nature, and urged with Co BooK II.
much boldness, the Queen replied in terms no leTfs '-
vigorous and explicit. She pretended that the was '^9"
not accountable to the confederate lords for any
part of her conduc ; and upon no representation
of theirs, would (he either abandon measures,
which (he deemed necessary ; or dismiss forces,
which she found useful, or demolilh a fortification,
which might prove of advantage. At the fame
time, she required them, on pain oftreafon, to dif- But with-
band the forces which they had assembled. outfuccefs.

THIS haughty and imperious stile founded harsh-

ly to Scottith nobles, impatient from their national
charader, of the slightest appearance of injury ;
accustomed, even from their own Monarchs, to the
most respectful treatment, and poffefing, under an
ariftocratical form of government, fuich a (hare of
power as equalled, at all times, and often control-
led that of the Sovereign. They were fenlible, at
once, of the indignity offered to themselves, and
alarmed with this plain declaration of the Queen's
intentions , and as there now remained but one step
to take, they wanted neither public spirit nor refo-
lution to take it.

B3Tr, that they might not seem to depart from Deliberate

the eftabli(hed forms of the constitution, for which, concern-
even amidst their most violent operations, men al- ing the

course

ways retain the greatest reverence, they anTembled which
the whole Peers, Barons, and Representatives of theyought
burroughs who adhered to their party. These form- to take.
ed a convention, which exceeded in number, and OA. 21.
equalled in dignity, the usual meetings of parlia-
ment. The leaders of the Congregation laid before
them the declaration which the Queen had given in
answer to their remonstrance; represented the una-
voidable ruin, which the measures, the therein
avowed and justified, would bring upon the king-

dom ;

BooK I. dom ; and requiring their direction with regard to

'' the obedience due to an adminiflration Co unjust and
a599 oppressive, they submitted to their decision, a quef-

tion, one of the most delicate and interelting that
can poflibly fall under the consideration of (ubjeCs.

THIS assembly proceeded to decide, with no less

dispatch, than unanimity. Strangers to those forms,
which protrac buiinefs; unacquainted with the arts,
which make a figure in debate; and much more
fitted for adion, than discourse , a warlike people
always hasten to a conclusion, and bring their de-
liberations to the (horteft issue. It was the work
but of one day, to examine and to resolve this nice
problem, concerning the behaviour of fubjeds to-
wards a ruler who abuses his power. But, however
abrupt their proceedings may appear, they were not
deflitute of lolemnity. As the determination of the
point in doubt, was conceived to be no less the of-
tice of divines, than of laymen, the former were
called to allift with their opinion. Knox and Wil-
lox appeared for the whole order, and pronounced,
without hesitation, both from the precepts and ex-
amples in scripture, that it was lawful for fubjedfts
not only to resist tyrannical princes, but to deprive
them of that authority, which, in their hands, be-
comes an infitrument for destroying thole, whom
thle Almighty ordained them to protec. The de-
cifion of persons, revered so highly for their sacred
characer, but more for their zeal and their piety,
had great weight with the whole aflembly. Not
fitisfied with the common indiscriminate manner of
signifying conlent, every person present was called

They de- in his turn to declare his lentiments, and rising up
prive the in order, all gave their fuffrages, without one dif-
hueen0of fenting voice, for depriving the Queen of the of-
of Regent. feie of Regent, which Ihe had exercised to much
* Knox, to the detriment of the kingdom .
*84. . THIS

THIS extraordinary sentence was owing no lets Boao It.

to the love of liberty, than tozeal for religion. In 'C-'
the ad of deprivation, religious grievances are The right
slightly mentioned; and the dangerous incroach- of their
ments of the Queen upon the civil conflitution are condut.
produced by the Lords of the Congregation, in
order to prove their conduct to have been not only
just, but necessary. The introducing foreign troops
into a kingdom, at peace with all the world ; the
seizing and fortifying towns in different parts of the
country; the promoting strangers to offices of
great power and dignity ; the debasing the current
coin* ; the subverting the ancient laws ,; the impo-
sing of new and burden ome taxes; and the at-
tempting to subdue the kingdom, and to oppress
it's liberties, by open and repeated ads of violence,
are enumerated at great length, and placed in the
firongeft light. On all these accounts, the Congre-
gation maintained that the nobles, as counsellors
by birth-right to their monarehs, and the guardians
and defenders of the conflitution, had a right to
interpose ; and therefore, by virtue of this right,
in the name of the King and Queen, and with ma-
ny exprellions of duty and fubmiflion towards them,
they deprived the Queen Regent of her office, and
ordained, that, tor the future, no obedience flould
be given to her commandst-'. Vio-

* THE flandard of money in Scotland was continually varying.

In the i6th of James V. A. D. 1529, a pound weight of gold,
when coined, produced io81. of current money. But un-
der the Queen Regent's adminifiration, A. D. 5 56, a pound
weight of gold, afEhough the quantity of alloy was considerably
encreakfd, produced 1441. current money. In 529, a
pound weight of lyevr, when coined, produced 91. as.; but
in 556, it produced 131. current money. Ruddim. Prafat. ad
Andcrf Diplomat. Scot2. p. o, 81. from which it appears, that
this complaint, which the malecontents often repeated, was not
altogether destitute of tfoundation.

+t M. Cafllenau, after condemning the dangerous councils of

the Princes of Lorrain with regard to the affairy vs Scotland, ac-

I... i. I

BooK II. VIOLENT as this ation may appear, there wanted
'v'-' not principles in the constitution, nor precedents in

'559' the history of Scotland, tojuftify and to authorize

it. Under the ariftocratical form of government
cftablifhed among the Scots, the power of the So-
vereign was extremely limited. The more confi-
derable nobles were themselves petty Princes, pof-
felling extensive jurifdidions, almost independent
of the crown, and followed by numerous vassals,
who, in every contest, espoused their chieftain's
quarrel, in opposition to the King. Hence the
many initances of the impotence of regal authority,
which are to be found in the Scottish history. In
every age, the nobles not only claimed, but exer-
cifed the right of controuling the King. Jealous
of their privileges, and eager to take the field in
defence of them, every error in administration was
observed, every encroachment upon the rightsofthe
aristocracy excited indignation, and no Prince ever
ventured to transgress the boundaries, which the
law had prescribed to prerogative, without meeting
resistance, which shook, or overturned his throne.
Encouraged by the spirit of the constitution, and
countenanced by the example of their ancestors,
the Lords of the Congregation thought it incum-
bent on them, at this juncure, to inquire into the
mnal-adminiftration of the Queen Regent, and to
preserve their country from being enslaved or con-
quered, by depriving her of the power to execute
such a pernicious scheme*.

knowledges, with his usual candour, that the Scots declared war
against the Queen Regent, rather from a desire of vindicating
their civil liberties, than from any motive of religion. Mem. 446.

* THE a~ ofdeprivation, and a letter from the Lords of the

Congregation to ihe Queen Regent, are (ill extant, Knox, 184.
They discover not only, that masculine and undaunted spirit, na-
tural to men capable of Co bold a resolution ; but are remarkable

for

for a precision, and vigour ofexprefion, which we are furprized BOOK II.
to meet with in an age to unpolifhed. The fame observation may '--' -
be made with respect to the other public papers of that period. a 559.
The ignorance or bad taste of an age may render the compositions
of authors by profeflion obscure, or affected, or absurd ; but the
language of business is nearly the fame at all times ; and where-
ever men think clearly, and are thoroughly interefited, they cx-
press themfclvcs with perspicuity and force.

THE

# BOOK III.

THE

HISTORY

o F

SCOTLAND.

B O O K III.

BoOK III. H E Lords of the Congregation soon found,

l that their zeal had engaged them in an under-

' 59- taking, which it was beyond their utmost ability to

The Co accomplish. The French garrison, despising their
gregation
involved in numerous, but irregular forces, refused to lurren-
difficulties. der Leith, and to depart out of the kingdom ,; nor

were they fufficiently skilful in the art of war to re-
duce the place by force, or poffeffed of the artillery,
or magazines, requisite for that purpose ; and their
followers, though of undaunted courage, yet be-
ing accustomed to decide every quarrel by a battle,
were firangers to the fatigues of a long campaign,
and soon became impatient of the severe and con-
ftant duty which a liege requires. The Queen's
cmiffaries, who found it easy to mingle with their
countrymen, were at the utmofi pains to heighten
their disgust, which discovered itflfd at first in mur-
murs and complaints, but on occasion of the want
of money for paying the army, broke out into open
mutiny. The most eminent leaders were scarce
lecure from the unbridled insolence of the loldiers;
while some of inferior rank, interposing too rashly
in order to quell them, were torn ini pieces by their
rage. I)ilcord, conflernation, and perplexity
rtigned in the camp of the Reformers. The Duke,
tiic.r (Gneira!', funk with his ulual timidity, under

the

the terror of approaching danger, and dircovercd Boox 1II.
the manifest symptoms of repentance for his rath- 'L -'
nvefs, in efpouling such a delperate caule. '559.

IN this situation of their affairs, the Congregation Apply to

had recourse to Elizabeth, from whose protecion Elizabeth
they could derive their only reasonable hopes of for aflit-
success. Some of their more sagacious leaders, hav-ce.
ing foreseen that the party might probably be in-
volved in great difficulties, had endeavoured to fe-
cure a resource in any such exigency, by entering
into a secret correspondence with the court of En-
gland*. Elizabeth, aware of the dangerous designs * Burn.
which the Princes of Lorrain had formed against Hill. Ref
her Crown, was early sensible of how much impor- 3.Append.
tance it would be, not only to check the progress Ap endih,
of the French in Scotland; but to extend her own 21.
influence in that kingdomt ; and perceiving how t See
effecually the present infurredions would contri- Append.
bute to retard or defeat the schemes formed again .
England, (he listened with pleasure to these appli-
cations of the malecontents, and gave them pri-
vate afturances of powerful support to their cause.
Randolph3, an agent extremely proper for con-1 Keith,
du.ting any dark intrigue, was dispatched intoAppend.
Scotland, and residing secretly among the Lords of 29.
the Congregation, observed and quickened their
motions Money seemed to be the only thing
they wanted at that time; and it was owing to a
seasonable remittance from England§, that the

§ Knox.

Scottish nobles had been enabled to take the field, z24.Keith,
and to advance towards Leith. But as Elizabeth Append.
was diftruftful of the Scots, and studious to pre- 4+.
serve appearances with France, her subsidies were
bestowed at first with extreme frugality. The
subsistence of an army, and the expences of a siege
soon exhausted this penurious fiupply, to which
the Lords of the Congregation could make little

addition

BOOK III. addition from their own funds ; and the ruin and
"-"" dispersion of the party mull have inltantly fol-

'559" lowed.

She sends IN order to prevent this, Cockburn of Ormifton
them small was lent, with the utmost expedition, to the go-
feus of vernors of the town and cafltie of Berwick. As Ber-

wick was, at that time, the town of grcateft im-
portance on the Scottish frontier, Sir Ralph Sadler
and Sir James Crofts, perlons otconliderable figure,
were employed to command there, and were en-
trufled with a dilcretionary power of supplying the
Scottish maleconter.ts, according to the exigency
of their affaiis. From them Cockburn received
4000 crowns, but little to the advantage of his
party. The Earl of Bothwell, by the Queen's in-

which ftigation, lay in wait for him on his return, dif-
intercet- perfed his followers, wounded him, and carried off
ed. the money.

THIs unexpedfed difappoi::tment proved fatal

to the party. In mere despair, lforne of the more
zealous attempted to assault Leith, but tle French
beat them back with disgrace, seized their cannon,
and pursuing them to the gates of Edinburgh,
were on the point of entering along with them.
All the terror and confusion, which the profped of
pillage or maaacre can excite in a place taken by
florm, filled the city on this occasion. The inha-
bitants fled from the enemy by the opposite gate ,
the forces of the Congregation were irresolute and
dismayed ; and the Queen's partizans in the town
openly insulted both. At laal, a few of the nobles
'cntured to face the enemy, who, after plundering
:ome hoiiuts in the suburbs, retired with their
booty, and delivered the city from this dreadful
alarm.

A SecoND ikirmilh, which happened a few days

after, was no lesc unfortunate. Tlie French sent
out a detachment to intercept a convoy of provi-
co:s which wsas ddigncd for Edinburgh. The

Lords

Lords of the Congregation, having intelligence of BooK III.
this, marched in all haste with a considerable body -
of their troops, and falling upon the enemy between 1559.
Reftalrig and Leith, with more gallantry than good
conduat, were almott surrounded by a lecond party
of French, who advanced in order to fipport their
own men. In this lituation a retreat was the only
thing which could have laved the Scots ; but a re-
treat over marshy ground, and in th, face of an
enemy superior in number, could not long be con-
dudted with order. A finall body of the enemy
hung upon their rear, horse and foot fell into the They re-
utmost confusion, and it was entirely owing to the eir(h in
caution of the French, that any of the party escaped confusion.
being cut in pieces.

ON this fccond blow, the hopes and spirits of

the Congregation funk altogether. They did not
think themselves secure, even within the walls of
Edinburgh, but instantly determined to retire to
some place at a greater distance from the enemy.
In vain did the Prior of St. Andrew's, and a few
others oppose this cowardly and ignominious flight.
The dread of the present danger prevailed over both
the sense of honour, and zeal for the caule. At
midnight, they set out from Edinburgh, in great Novem. 6.
confusion, and marched without halting till they
arrived at Stirling.

DURING this last insurrection, the great body of

the Scottish nobility joined the Congregation. The
Lords Seton and Borthwick were the only persons
of rank who took arms for the Qucen, and aflifled
her in defending Leith*. Bothwell openly tavour- Keith,
ed her caule, but resided at his own houme. The Append.
Earl of Huntly, conformable to the crafty policy 3
which distinguishes his charater, amufedt the lead-
ers of the Congregation, whom he had engaged to
aflift, with;many fair piomilfs, but nevel joined
them with a tingle mant. The Earl of Morton, Keith,
a member of the Congregationi, fluduated in a Append.
state of irrcfolution, and did not adt heartily for 33. Knox,

VOL. I. N the 22.

BOOK III. the common cause. Lord Erikine, Governor of
< Edinburgh camlle, though a Protestant, maintain-

55'9. ed a ncutrality, which he esteemed becoming the

dignity of his office ,; and having been entrusted by
Parliament with the command of the principal
fortrels in the kingdom, he resolved that neither
fation (hould get it into their hands.

Ma;tland A FEW days before the retreat of the Congrega-
revotshe tion, the Queen fuffered an irreparable loss by the
Queen defedion uo her principal Secretary, William Mait-
Dowager. land of Lethington. His zeal for the Reformed re-

ligion, together with his warm remonftrances againit
the violent measures which the Queen was carry-
ing on, exposed him so much to her resentment,
and to that of her French Counsellors, that he, ful-
peding his life to be in danger, withdrew secretly
from Leith, and fled to the Lords of the Congre-

*Knox, gation* ; and they, with open arms, received a
192. convert, whole abilities added both strength and

reputation to their cause. Maitland had early ap-
plied to public bufinels admirable natural talents,
improved by an acquaintance with the liberal arts ;
and, at a time of life, when his countrymen of the
:ame quality were following the pleasures of the
chace, or serving as adventurers in the armies of
France, he was admitted into all the secrets of the
cabinet, and put upon a level with persons of the
most consummate experience in the management
of affairs. He poffefled, in an eminent degree, that
intrepid spirit, which delights in pursuing bold de-
signs, and was no less master of that political art
and dexterity which is necessary for carrying them
on with fucccfs But these qualities were deeply
tindturcd with the neighbouring vices. His address
ibmetimes degenerated into cunning ; his acuteness
bordered upon excess of subtlety and refinement ;
his invention, over fertile, fuggefled to him, on
some occasions, chimerical fvitems of policy, little
suitable to the genius of the age ; and his enter-

prifing

prifing spirit engaged him in projects vast and fplen-Boon III'
did, but beyond his utmost power to execute. All -
the cotemporary writers, to whatever faction they '59'
belong, mention him with an admiration, which
nothing could have excited but the greatest fupe-
riority of penetration and abilities.

THE precipitate retreat of the Congregation in-

creased, to such a degree, the terror and confusion
which had seized them at Edinburgh, that before
they reached Stirling, their army dwindled to an
inconsiderable number. The fpiiit of Knox, how-
ever, flill remained undaunted and eredt, and
having mounted the pulpit, he addrelffd to his def-
ponding hearers, an exhortation which wonderfully
animated and revived them. The heads of this
discourse are inserted in his history*, and afford a Knox,
striking example of the boldness and freedom of'93-
reproof assumed by the first Reformers, as well as
a specimen of his own skill in chufing the topics
most fitted to influence and rouze his audience.

A MEETING of the leaders being called, to con- TheLords

fider what course they should hold, now that their oftheCoa-
own resources were all exhaulted, and their deftruc- gteganio
tion appeared to be unavoidable, without foreign gain to
aid ; they turned their eyes once more to England, Elizabeth.
and resolved to implore the alliftance of Elizabeth
towards finilhing an enterprize, in which they had
so fatally experienced their own weaknels, and the
strength of their adversaries. Maitland, as the most
able negociator of the party, was employed in this
embassy. In his absence, and during the inactive
leafon of the year, it was agreed to dilmifs their
followers, worn out by the tatiguesof a campaign,
which had so far exceeded the usual time of tervice.
But, in order to preserve counties most devoted to
their interest, the Prior of St. Andrew's, with part
of the lead.ers, retired into Fife. The Duke of

N z Chatelherault,

BooK III. Chateiherault, with the reft, fixed his residence at

Sv Hamilton. There was little need of Maitland's

Z559. addrels or eloquence to induce Elizabeth to take

his country under her protection. She observed
the prevalence of the French counsels, and the
progrcF of their arms in Scotland, with great con-
cern , and as the well foresaw the dangerous ten-
dency of their schemes in that kingdom, the had
already come to a resolution with regard to the part
she herfllf would ad, if their power there thould
grow fill more formidable.

Motives IN order to give the Queen and her privy coun-
which de- cil a full and diftind view of any important mat-

her o as- ter which might come before them, it seems to
fil them. have been the practice of Elizabeth's Ministers to

prepare memorials, in which they clearly stated the
point under deliberation, laid down the grounds of
the conduct, which they held to be moit reafona-
ble, and proposed a method for carrying their plan
into execution. Two papers of this kind, written
by Sir William Cecil with his own hand, tfill re-

*Burn.vol. main* ; they are intitled, " A (hort difcufion of
iii Append. " the weighty matter of Scotland," and do honour
283 Keith, to the indufiry and penetration of that great Mini-
Append. Iter. The motives, which determined the Qeen

to efpoufc so warmly the defence of the Congrega-
tion, are reprefcnted with perspicuity and force ;
and the confiquences of fuffcring tie French to
cftablifh thelniflves in Scotland, are predicted with
great accuracy and discernment.

HE la\ s it down as a principle, agreeable to the

laws both of God and of nature, that every society
hath a right to defend itself, not only from present
dangers, but from such as may probably ensue ; to
which, he adds, that nature and reason teach eve-
ry Prince to defend himself by the fame means,
which his adversaries employ to distress him.
Upon these grounds, he eflablifhes the right of

England

England to interpose in the affairs of Scotland, and ROOK IIt.
to prevent the conquefi of that kingdom, at which '""-
the French openly aimed. The Fre-nch, he observes, 559'
are the ancient and implacable enemies of
England. Hostilities had subsisted between the
two nations for many centuries. No treaty of peace,
into which they entered, had ever been cordial or
sincere. No good effed was therefore to be ex-
pected from the peace lately agreed upon, which
being extorted by present neceflity, would be ne-
gligently observed, and broken on the slightest
pretences. In a very Ihort time, France would
recover its former opulence ; and though now
drained of men and money by a tedious and unfuc-
cefsful war, it would quickly be in a condition for
acting, and the restless and martial genius of the
people would render ad-tion necessary. The Prin-
ces of Lorrain, who at that time had the entire di-
rection of French affairs, were animated with the
most virulent hatred against the English nation.
They openly called in question the legitimacy of
the Q.een's birth, and by advancing the title and
pretensions of their niece the Queen of Scotland,
studied to deprive Elizabeth of her Crown. With
this view, they had laboured to exclude the Eng-
lifh from the treaty of Chateau en Cambrefis, and
endeavoured to conclude a separate peace with
Spain. They had persuaded Henry II. to permit
his daughter-in-law to assume the title and arms of
Queen of England ; and even since the conclusion
of the peace, they had solicited at Rome, and ob-
tained a bull, declaring Elizabeth's birth to be il-
legitimate. And though the wisdom and modera-
tion of the Conflable Montmorency had, for some
time, checked their career, yet these reitraints
being now removed by the death of Henry II. and
the difgracGe of his Minifler, the utmofl excefies
of violence were to be drcaded from their furiouts

N 3 ambirton,

BooK III-ambition, armed with sovereign power. Scotlana

i"^' is the quarter, whence they can attack England

'l59- with most advantage. A war on the borders of

that country exposes France to no danger, but one
unficcefsful aCtion there may hazard the Crown,
and overturn the government of England. In po-
liticalcondud, it is childish to wait till the designs
of an enemy be ripe for execution. The Scottish
nobles, after their utmost efforts, have been o-
bliged to quit the field ,; and far from expelling
the invaders of their liberties, they behold the
French power daily increasing, and must at last
cease from fitruggling any longer in a contest Co un-
equal. The invading of England will immediately
follow the reduction of the Scottish malecontents,
by the abandoning of whom to the mercy of the
French, hlizabeth will open a way for her enemies
into the heart of her own kingdom, and expose it
to the calamities of war, and the danger of con-
quest. Nothing therefore remained but to meet
the enemy while yet at a distance from England,
and by supporting the Congregation with a powerful
army, to render Scotland the theatre of the war,
to crush the designs of the Princes of Lorrain in
their infancy, and, by such an early and unexpeced
effolrt, to expel the French out of Britain, before
their power had time to take root, and grow up to
any formidable height. But as the matter was of
as much importance, as any which could fall under
the consideration of an Engli(h Monarch, wisdom
and mature counsel were necessary in the first place,
and afterwards vigour and expedition in condu&;
the danger was urgent, and, by losing a single mo-
ment, might become unavoidable*.

THESE arguments produced their full effea up-

* TH E arguments which the Scots employed, in order to ob-

tain Elizabeth's atilance, are urged with great force, in a paper
of Maitland's. See Appendix, No. II.

on

on Elizabeth, who was jealous, in an extreme de-Bookn Il.
gree, of every pretender to her Crown, and no leis -
anxious to preserve the tranquillity and

t appinefs Lss9.

of her fubjedts. From these motives she had aded,
in granting the Congregation an early supply of
money ; and from the fame principles the deter-
mined, in their exigency, to afford them more es-
fedual aid. One of Maitland's attendants was in-
ftantly dispatched into Scotland with the strongest
assurances of her protection, and the Lords of the
Congregation were desired to fend commillioners
into England, to conclude a treaty, and to fettle
the operations of the campaign, with the Duke of *Keith,
Norfolk*. I 4.

MEAN while, the Qu.een Regent, from whom The

no motion of the Congregation could long be con- Queen
cealed, dreaded the luccelsof this negociation with Dowager meanwhil
the court of England, and foresaw how little t sends her
would be able to resist the united efforts of Lhe two French
kingdoms. For this reason she determined, if pof troops
fible, to get the start of Elizabeth ; and by ven agatni
turing, notwithstanding the inclemency of the
winter season, to attack the malecontenrs in their
present dispersed and helpless situation, the hoped
to put an end to the war, before the arrival of their
English allies.

A CONSIDERABLE body of her French forces,

who were augmented, about this time, by the ar-
rival of the Count de Martigues, with a thousand
veteran foot, and some cavalry, were commanded
to march to Stirling. Having there crossed the
Forth, they proceeded along the coast of Fife, de-
ftroying and plundering, with excellive outrage,
the houlfs and lands of those whom they esteemed
their enemies. Fife was the most populous and
powerful county in the kingdom, and most devo-
ted to the Congregation, who had hitherto drawn
from thence :iiheir most considerable lupplies, both
of men andi provisions, and thecrefore, besides

N 4 punishing

BOOK III. punishing the difafleaion of the inhabitants, by
--- pillaging the country, the French proposed to seize

1559. and tortify St. Andrew's, and to leave in it a gar-

ritbn lifficicnt to bridle the mutinous spirit of the
piovince, and to keep poffeflion of a port lituated
on the main ocean.

BUT on this occasion, the Prior of St. Andrew's,

Lord Ruthven, Kirkaldy of Grange, and a few ol
the mofl adive leaders of the Congregation, per-
formed, by their bravery and good conduct, a ftr -
vice of the utmofl importance to their party. Hav-
ing aliambled fix hundled horse, they infefied the
French with continual incursions, beat up their
quarters, intercepted their convoys of provilions,
cut otff their itraggling parties, and so haraled

' Knox, them with perpetual alarms, that they prevented
202. them for more than three weeks from advancing*.

i60o. A. last the Prior, with his feeble party, was

conitrained to retire, and the French set out from
Kirkaldy, and began to move along the coast to-
wards St. Andrew's. They had advanced but a
few miles, when from an eminence they descried

.inuary a powerful fleet fleering its course up the Firth of
3J' Forth. As they knew that the Marquis D'Elbeuf

was, at that time, preparing to fail for Scotland
with a numerous army, they hastily concluded
that there ships belonged to him, and gave way to
the most immoderate transports of joy, on the
profpet of this lonig-expected ficcour. Their great
guns were already fired to welcome their friends,
and to 1pread the tidings and terror of their arrival
among their enemies, when a i-nall boat from the

Ihe Eng- opposite coast landed, and blaited their premature
lith fleet and Ihort-lived triumph, by informing them, that
arrives it was the fleet of England which was in fight, in-
to their tended for the aid of the Congregation, and was

Tnoce. koon to be tollowed by a formidable land armyt.
o. THROt j GH-

THROUGHOUT her whole reign, Elizabeth was BooK III.

cautious, but decisive ,; and by her promptitude in '-^
executing her resolutions, joined to the deliberation 1560.
with which ihe formed them, her adminifiration
became remarkable, no less for its vigour, than for
its wisdom. No fooncr did she determine to afford
her protedtiun to the Lords of the Congregation,
than they experienced the activity, as well as the
extent of her power. The fealbn of the year would
not permit her land army to take the field ,; but left
the French should, in the mean time, receive new
reinforcements, Ihe inflantly ordered a strong fqua-
dron to cruize in the Firth of Forth. She seems,
by her inftrudions to Winter her Admiral, to have
been defirousof prefervi ng the appearancesof friend-
ship towards the French *. But these were only ap- * Keith,
pearances ,; if any French fleet thould attempt to Appendix,
land, he was commanded to prevent it, by every adt 4s5
ofhoftility and violence. It was the fight of this
squadron, which occasioned at first ob much joy
among the French, but which loon inspired them
with such terror, as saved Fife from the effetas of
their vengeance. Apprehensive of being cut off
from their companions on the opposite ihore, they
retreated towards Stirling with the utmost precipi-
tation, and, in a dreadful season, and through roads
almost impassable, arrived at Leith, harassed and
exhausted with fatigue -. + Knox,

THE Englifir fleet cast anchor in the road ofZ 03

Leith, and continuing in that flation till the con-
clufion of peace, both prevented the garrison of
Leith from receiving succours of any kind, and con-
fiderably facilitated the operations of their own for-
ces by land.

SooN after the arrival of the English squadron, They con-

the Commiflioners of the Congregation repaired to elude a
Berwick, and concluded with the Duke of Norfolk, peacwith
a treaty, the bond of that union with Elizabeth, Feb. d7.

which

Booi III. which was of so great advantage to the cause. To
'--^- give a check to the dangerous and rapid progress of

'56o. the French arms in Scotland, was the profefled de-

sign of the contracting parties In order to this,
the Scots engaged never to fuffer any closer union
of their country with France and to defend them-
selves to the uttermost against all attempts of con-
quests and for their assistance, Elizabeth promised
to employ, in Scotland, a powerful army, which
the Scots undertook to join with all their forces; no
place in Scotland was to remain in the hands of (he
English ; whatever Ihould be taken from the enemy
was either to be razed, or kept by the Scots, at their
choice ; if an invasion ihould be made upon Eng-
land, the Scots were obliged to aflift Elizabeth with
part of their forces; and to ascertain their faithful
observance of the treaty, they bound themselves to
deliver hoffages to Elizabeth, before the march of
her army into Scotland ; in conclusion, the Scots
made many protetations of obedience and loyalty
towards their own Queen, in every thing not in-

- Kno, consistent with their religion, and the liberties of
2,7. their country *.
The Eng- THE English army, consisting of fix thousand
lifh army foot, and two thousand horse, under the command
Jays siege of Lord Grey of Wilton, entered Scotland early in
April ?. the Spring. The members of the Congregation as-

fembled from all parts of the kingdom to meet their
new allies; and having joined them with great mul-
titudes of their followers, they advanced together
towards Leith. The French were little able to keep
the field against an enemy Co much superior in num-
ber. A firong body of troops, deflined for their
relief, had been scattered by a violent florm, and
had either perished on the coat of France, or with
difficulty had recovered the ports of that kingdom*.

Memt de But they hoped to be able to defend Leith, till the
-aftel. Princes of Lorrain should make good the magnifi--

': scent

cent promiles of assistance, with which th~ey daily Boor Ill.
encouraged them~or till fearcity of proviftons thould
confirain the Englt to retire into their own coun. '560.
try. In order to hasten this latter event, they did
not negledt the usual, though barbarous precaution
for dittrefling an invading enemy, by burning and
laying wa~te all the adjacent country *. The zeal, * Knox,
however, of the nation fruffrated their intentions ,225.
eager to contribute towards removing their oppref-
fors, the people produced their hidden flores to Aup-
port their friends, the neighbouring counties filp-
plied every thing necessary, and far from wanting
th~blitence, the Englilh found in their camp, all
forts of provisions, at a cheaper rate, than hadl for
some time been known in that part of the kin~g-
dom -f-. -t Knox,

ON the approach of the Englilh army, the Qgeen bd

Regent retired into the castle of Edinburgh. Her
hiealth was now in a declining slate, and her mind
broken and depressed by the misfortunes of her ad-
miniffration. To avoid the danger and fatigue of a
siege, the committed h~erself to the protedtion of
Lord Erikine. This nobleman itill preserved his
neutrality, and by his integrity and love of his
country, merited equally the efleemr of both parties.
He received the Qgeen herlelf with the utmost ho-
nour and refpedt, but took care to admit no such
retinue, as might endanger his command of the
caffle f. f Forbes'o

A FEw days after they arrived in Scotland, the COllea.

Englilh inveffed Leith. The garrison, that up solir3.
within the town, was almost hialf as numerous as ,,22
the army which fat down before it, and by an ob- April. 6.
flinate defence protraded the siege to a great length·.
The circumitances of this siege, related by cotem-
parary historians, men without knowledge or ex-
perience in the art of war, are often obscure and
imperfeca, and at this difiance of time are not con-
fiderable enoughi to be entertaining.

AR1

BOOK It. AT firil the French endeavoured to keep poffeC-

- - sion of the Hawk Hill, a rising ground not far dif-

Apri I. tant from the town, but were beat from it with

great laughter, chiefly by the furious attack of the
Scottish cavalry. Within a few days, the French
had their full revenge ; having sallied out with a
fitrong body, they entered the English trenches,
broke their troops, nailed part of their cannon, and
killed at least double the number they had loft in
the former Ikirmith. Nor were the Englilh more
fortunate in an attempt which they made to take the
place by allault ; they were met with equal courage,

May 7. and repulsed with considerable loTs. From the de-

tail of tihee circumstances by the writers of that
age, it is easy to obierve the different characters of
the French and English troops. The former, train-
ed to war, under the acive reigns of Francis I.
and Henry II. defended themselves not only with
the bravery, but with the skill of veterans. The
latter, who had been more accutfomed to peace,
fiill preserved the intrepid and desperate valour
peculiar to the nation, but discovered few marks
of military genius, or of experience in the practice
of war. Every misfortune or disappointment dur-
ing the siege must be imputed to manifest errors
in condud. The success of the besieged in their
t(lly was owing entirely to the security and negli-
gence of the English : many of their officers were
absent; their bfoldiers had left their flations ; and
the trenches were almost without a guard. The
ladders, which had been provided for the assault,
wanted a great deal of the neceflary length ,; and
the troops employed in that service were ill sup-
ported. The trenches were opened, at firif, in an
improper place ; and as it was found expedient to
change the ground, both time and labour were loft.
The weakness of their own Generals, no less than
,he ir-cngth of the Frcn,.h .garri!on, rendered the

progress

progress of the English wonderfully flow. The BooK III.
length, however, of the siege, and the loss of part ' '
of their magazines by an accidental fire, reduced i560°
the French to extreme diftre(s, which the profped
of relief made them bear with admirable fortitude.

WHILE the hopes and courage of the French

protrated the siege so far beyond expecation, the
leaders of the Congregation were not idle. By new
associations and confederacies, they laboured more
perfetly to unite their party. By publickly ratify-
ing the treaty concluded at Berwick, they endea-
voured to render the alliance with England firm and
indissoluble. Among the subscribers of these pa-
pers, we find the Earl of Huntly, and some others
who had not hitherto concurred with the Con-
gregation in any of their measures *. Several of" Burn.
these Lords, particularly the Earl of Huntly, fill vol. iii.
adhered to the Popish church; but on this occasion, Knox,zz.
neither their religious sentiments, nor their former
cautious maxims, were regarded ; the torrent of na-
tional resentment and indignation against the French
hurried them on -t'.

THE Queen Regent, the instrument, rather than

the cause of involving Scotland in those calamities,
under which it groaned at that time, died during
the height of the siege. No Princess ever pofleffed
qualities more capable of rendering her adminiftra-

"-t The dread of the French power did, on many occasions,

surmount the zeal, which the Catholic nobles had for their re-
ligion. Betides the presumptive evidence for this, arising from
the memorial mentioned by Burner, Hiflory of the Reformation,
vol. iii. 281, and publilhed by him, App. p. 278 ; the inftruc-
tions of Elizabeth to Randolph her agent, put it beyond all
doubt, that many zealous Papilis thought the alliance with Eng-
land to be neceifary for preserving the liberty and independence
of the kingdom. Keith, t58. Huntly himself began a corref-
pondence with Elizabeth's Ministers, before the march of the
Englilh army into Scotland. Hayness State Papers, 261, 263.
See Append. No. Il.

tion

BooK III. ton illustrious, or her people happy. Of much

CrY' di cernment, and no less address ; of great intrepi-
Deh6on dity, and equal prudence;, gentle and humane, with-
charader out weaknes ;, zealous for her religion, without bi-
of the gotry ; a lover ofjuftice without rigour. One cir-
Queen cumtlance, however, and that, too, the excess of a
Dou ager. virtue, rather than any vice, poisoned all these great

qualities, and rendered her government unfortunate,
and her name odious. Devoted to the interest of
France, her native country, and attached to the
Princes of Lorrain her brothers, with molt paflion-
ate fondness f the departed, in order to gratify them,
from every maxim, which her own wisdom or hu-
manity would have approved. She outlived, in a
great measure, that reputation and popularity,which
had smoothed her way to the highest ifation in the
kingdom; and many examples of falfhood, and
some of severity, in the latter part of her admini-
ftration, totally alienated from her the affecions of
a people, who had once placed in her an unbound-
ed confidence. But, even by her enemies, thele un-
justifiable a&ions were imputed to the facility, not
to the malignity of her nature; and while they tax-
ed her brothers, and French counsellors, with rash-
ness and cruelty ; they still allowed her the praise

* Buchan. of prudence and of lenity *. A few days before
324. her death, the desired an interview with the Prior

of St. Andrew's, the Earl of Argyll, and other chiefs
of the Congregation. To them she lamented the
fatal issue of those violent councils, which she had
been obliged to follow ,; and, with the candour na-
tural to a generous mind, confeffed the errors of
her own administration, and begged forgiveness of
those, to whom they had been hurtful; but, at
the fame time, she warned them, amidst their firug-
gles for liberty, and the shock of arms, not to lose
fight of the loyalty and fubjedion, which was due

-- Lefly, to their sovereign 1-. The remainder of her time,
de Rebus ihe
Gest. Scot.

222.

lhe employed in religious meditations and exercises. Boor III.
She even invited the attendance of Willox, one of s
the most eminent among the Reformed preachers, t560.
listened to his inftruA.ions with reverence and at-
tention t, and prepared for the approach of death t Knox,
with a decent fortitude. az8.

NOTHINGw could now Cave the French troops, shut Motivesof
up in Leith, but the immediate conclusion of a theFrench
peace, or the arrival of a powerful army from the to con-
continent. The Princes of Lorrain amused their pece.
party in Scotland, with continual expectations of the
latter, and had thereby kept alive their hopes and
their courage. But at last, the firuation of France,
rather than the terror of the English arms, or the
remonftrances of the Scotti(h malecontents, con-
strained them, though with reluctance, to turn their
thoughts towards pacific councils. The Protestants
in France were, at that time, a party formidable by
their number, and more by the valour and enter-
prifing genius of their leaders. Francis II. had
treated them with extreme rigour, and discovered,
by every flep he took, a fettled resolution to extir-
pate their religion, and to ruin thole who profeffed
it. At the profpe& of this danger to themselves,
and to their cause, the Protestants were alarmed,
but not terrified. Animated with zeal, and inflam-
ed with resentment, they not only prepared for their
own defence, but resolved by some bold action, to
anticipate the ichemes of their enemies; and as the
Princes of Lorrain were esteemed the authors of all
the King's violent measures, they marked them
out, to be the first victims of their indignation.
Hence, and not from any disloyalty to the King,
proceeded the famous conspiracy of Amboise ; and
though the vigilance and good fortune of the Prin- March 5;-
ces of Lorrain discovered and disappointed that de-
sign, it was easy to observe new Itorms gathering
in every province of the kingdom, and ready to

burst

-" In this situation, the ambition of the house of Lor-
i560 rain was called off from the thoughts of foreign

conquests, to defend the honour and dignity of the
French crown, and inflead of sending new rein-
forcements into Scotland, it became necessary to

* Lfly withdraw the veteran troops already employed in
224. that kingdom .
The nego- IN order to conduc an affair of tb much impor-
ciationsfor tance and delicacy, the Princes of Lorrain made
that pur- choice of Monluc Bishop of Valence, and of the
pole. Sicur de Randan. As both thekc, especially the for.

mer, were reckoned inferior to no perlons of that
age, in address and political rtfincmcnt; Elizabeth
opposed to them ambafladors of equal abilities i
Cecil her Prime Minilfcr, a man perhaps of the
greatest capacity who had ever held that office;
and Wotton Dean of Canterbury, grown old in
the art of negociating under three fucceflive Mo-
narchs. The interests of the French and Englith
courts were soon adjuffted by men of so great dex-
terity in business; and as France easily consented to
withdraw those forces, which had been the chief
occalion of the w ar; the other points in dispute,
between that kingdom and England, were not mat-
ters of tedious, or of difficult difcuflion.

THIe grievances of the Congregation, and their

demands upon their own Sovereigns for redress,
employed lunger time, and required to be treated
with a more dclicate hand. After so many open
attempts, carried on by command of the King and
Qceen, in order to overturn the ancient conffitu-
tion, and to fupprels the religion which they
had embraced, the Scottish nobles could not think
themrclves secure, without fixing Ibme new barrier
againlt the future encroachments of regal power.
But the legal steps towards accomplifiing this were
not so obvious. The French ambaiffadors confi-

dered

Jered the entering into any treaty with the fubjeas, Boo0K III.
and with rebels, as a condescension unworthy the'
dignity of a Sovereign; and their scruples on this '560.
head might have put an end to the treaty, if the
impatience of both parties for peace had not fug-
gefled an expedient, which seemed to provide for
the security of the fubjed, without derogating from
the honour of the Prince. The Scottish nobles
agreed, on this occalion, to pass from the point ofArticles of
right and privilege, and to accept the redress of
their grievances, as a matter of favour. Whatever
additional security their anxiety for personal safety,
or their zeal for public liberty, prompted them to
demand, was granted in the name of Francis and
Mary, as acts of their royal favour and indulgence.
And left concelfions of this kind should seem pre-
carious, and liable to be retraded by the fame
power, which had made them, the French Ambaf-
lador agreed to insert them in the treaty with Eli-
zabeth, and thereby to bind the King and QOeen *Keith.
inviolably to oblerve them*. 134, &c.

IN relating this transaction, cotemporary hifto-

rians have founded the concelfions of Francis and
Mary to their Scottish fubjeds, with the treaty be-
tween France and England ; the latter, besides the
ratification of former treaties between the two king-
doms, and stipulations with regard to the time and
manner of removing both armies out of Scotland,
contained an article, to which, as the source of
many important events, we (hall often have occa-
lion to refer. The right of Elizabeth to her crown
is, thereby, acknowledged in the strongest terms
and Francis and Mary solemnly engage, neither to
assume the title, nor to bear the arms of King and
Queen of England in any time to come.

HONOURABLE as this article was for Elizabeth

herself, the conditions she obtained for her allies the

VOL. I. O Scots

Cv*-- luc and Randan consented, in the name of Francis
July 60. and Mary, that the French forces in Scotland should

inftantlv be sent back into their own country, and
no foreign troops be hereafter introduced into the
kingdom, without the knowledge and consent of
Parliament; that the fortifications of Leith and
Dunbar thould immediately be razed, and no new
fort be ereded without the permiflion of Parlia-
ment ; that a Parliament should be held on the
first day of Augullt, and that assembly be deemed
as valid, in all refpe(ts, as if it had been called by
the exprels commandment of the King and Queen ;
that, conformable to the ancient laws and customs
of the country, the King and Queen should not de-
clare war, or conclude peace, without the concur-
rence of Parliament; that, during the Queen's ab-
fence, the administration of government should be
veiled in a council of twelve persons, to be chosen
out of twenty-four named by Parliament, seven of
which council to be eleted by the Queen, and five
by the Parliament; that hereafter, the King and
Queen should not advance foreigners to places of
trust or dignity in the kingdom, nor confer the of-
fices of Treasurer or Comptroller of the revenues
upon an ecclefiatic ; that an act of oblivion, abo-
lifhing the guilt and memory of all offences, com-
mitted since the 6th of March, 1558, should be
palled in the ensuing Parliament, and be ratified
by the King and Queen ; that the King and Queen
thould not, under colour of punishing any violation
of their authority during that period, seek to de-
prive any of their fubjets of the offices, benefices,
or estates which they now held ; that the redress
due to churchmen, for the injuries which they had
fiftained during the late infurre6dions, should be
left entirely to the cognizance of Parliament. With
regard to rei-gious controversies, the Ambassadors d-cd2.,cd

declared that they would not presume to decide, Boo, III.
but permitted the Parliament, at their firit meeting, -
to examine the points in difference, and to represent s6o.
their sense of them to the King and Queen*. * Keith,

To Iuch a memorable period, did the Lords of '37e' c.

the Congregation, by their courage and perleve- of it.
rance, condu& an enterprize, which, at firfit, pro-
mifed a very different issue. From beginnings ex-
tremely feeble, and even contemptible, the party
grew by degrees to great power ; and being favour-
ed by many fortunate incidents, baffled all the es-
forts of their own Queen, aided by the forces of a
more considerable kingdom. The sovereign au-
thority was, by this treaty, transferred wholly into
the hands of the Congregation ; that limited prero-
gative, which the Crown had hitherto poilffed,
was almost entirely annihilated ,; and the ariftocra-
tical power, which always predominated in the
Scottish government, became supreme and incon-
troulable. By this treaty, too, the influence of
France, which had long been of much weight in
the affairs of Scotland, was greatly diminifhcd, and
not only were the present incroachments of that
ambitious ally restrained, but, by confederating
with England, protecion was provided against any
fiuture attempt from the fame quarter. At the fame
time, the controversies in religion being left to the
consideration of Parliament, the IProteltants might
reckon upon obtaining whatever decision was most
favourable to the opinions which they protfffed.

A FEw days after the conclution of the treaty,

both the French and English armies quitted Scot-
land.

THE eyes of every man in that kingdom were A Parlia-

turned towards the approaching Parliament. A ment held.
meeting, fiummoned in a manner so extraordinary,
at fiuch a critical juncure, and to deliberate upon

0 2 matters

Boo, III. matters of so much consequence, was expeded
- ^ * with the utmost anxiety.

1560. A SCOTTIs Parliament, suitable to the ariflocra-

tical genius of the government, was properly an
assembly of the nobles. It was composed of Bi-
shops, Abbots, Barons, and a few commillioners
of burroughs, who met altogether in one house.
The Lesser Barons, though poffeffed of a right to
be present, either in perlon, or by their reprefenta-
tives, seldom exercised it. The expence of attend-
ing, according to the falhion of the times, with a
numerous train of vassals and dependants; the in-
attention of the age, to any legal or regular system
of government; but above all, the exorbitant au-
thority of the greater nobles, who had drawn the
whole power into their own hands, made this pri-
vilege of so little value, as to be almost negleded.
It appears from the ancient rolls, that during times
of tranquillity, few comminlioners of burroughs,
and almost none of the Lesser Barons, appeared in
Parliament. The ordinary administration of go-
vernment was abandoned without scruple orjealou-
fy, to the King and to the greater Barons. But in
extraordinary conjunctures, when the struggle for
liberty was violent, and the spirit ofoppolition to
the Crown rose to an height, the BurgeTes and
Lefer Barons were rouzed from their inactivity,
and flood forth to vindicate the rights of their coun-
try. The turbulent reign of James III. affords ex-

* Keith, amples in proof of this oblervation*. The public
'47. indignation againfl the rath designs of that weak

and ill-advifed Prince, brought into Parliament,
bedides the Greater nobles and prelates, a confide-
rable number of the Lesser Barons.

THE fame causes occasioned the unuflial conflu-

ence of all orders of men to the Parliament, which
met on the firit of Augufi. The universal paflion
fur liberty, civil and religious, which had seized

the

the nation, fuffered few persons to remain uncon- BooK III.
cerned fpedtators of an aifembly, whose ads were
likely to prove decilive with refped to both. From '560
all corners of the kingdom, men flocked in, eager
and determined to aid, with their voices in the le-
nate, the fame cause, which they had defended
with their swords in the field. Betides a full con-
vention of Peers, Temporal and Spiritual, there
appeared the representatives of almost all the bur-
roughs, and.above an hundred Barons, who, though
ot the lesser order, were Gentlemen of the first rank
and fortune in the nation*. *Keith,

THE Parliament was ready to enter on business 146.

with the utmost zeal, when a difficulty was flarted
concerning the lawfulness of the meeting. No
Commillioner appeared in the name of the King
and Queen, and no fignificatiun of their consent and
approbation was yet received. There were deemed,
by many, eflential to the very being of a Parlia-
ment. But, in opposition to this sentiment, the
express words ofthe treaty of Edinburgh were urged,
by which this assembly was declared as valid, in all
refpeds, as if it had been called and appointed by
the express command of the King and Queen.
As the adherents of the Congregation greatly
out-numbered their adversaries, the latter opinion
prevailed. Their boldest leaders, and those of
most approved zeal, were chosen to be Lords of the
Articles, who formed a committee of ancient use,
and of great importance in the Scottith Parliament.
The deliberations of the Lords of the Articles
were carried on with the molf unanimous and adive
zeal. The aA of oblivion, the nomination of
twenty four persons, out of whom the council, en-
trusted with flipreme authority, was to be eleded ;
and every other thing prescribed by the late treaty,
or which tfemed necessary to render it effedual,

0 3 palled

Book III. passed without dispute or delay. The article of re-

"Y" ligion employed longer time, and was attended

Its ro with greater difficulty. It was brought into Parlia-
ceedings ment by a petition from those who had adopted
with re- the principles of the Reformation. Many dodrines
gard to of the Popish church were a contradiction to reason,
religion, and a dilgrace to religion , its dilcipline had be-

come corrupt and opprellive , and its revenues
were both exorbitant and ill applied. Against all
there, the Protefltants remonfirated with the utmost
severity of stile, which indignation at their abfuir-
dity, or experience of their pernicious tendency,
could inspire ; and encouraged, by the number
and zeal of their friends to improve such a favour-
ablejuncture, they aimed the blow at the whole
fabric of Popery ; and besought the Parliament to
interpose their authority for redcifying these multi-

* Knox, plied abuses*.
237' SEVERAL prelates, zealously attached to the an-

cient frlperftition were present in this Parliament.
But during these vigorous proceedings of the Pro-
telfants, they flood confounded, and at a gaze,
and persevered in a silence which was fatal to their
cause. They cfteemed it impollible to relift or di-
vert that torrent of religious zeal, which was (till
in its full strength ; they dreaded that their oppo-
fition would irritate their adversaries, and excite
them to new acts of violence ; they hoped that the
King and Queen would loon be at cifilre to put a
flop to the career of their insolent fubjeds, and
that, after the rage and havock of the present florm,
the former tranquillity and order would be reflored
to the church and kingdom. They were willing,
perhaps, to sacrifice the doctrine, and even the
power of the church, in order to insure the safety
of their own persons, and to preserve the pofTehion
of those revenues, uwhich were still in their hands.
From whatever moti\vs they aded, their lilence,

wvhich

which was imputed to the consciousness of a bad BOOK III.
cause, afforded matter of great triumph to the Pro- "
teftants, and encouraged them to proceed with 1?60.
more boldness and a;lacrity*. Knox,

THE Parliament did nut think it enough to con-

demn those dodrines mentioned in the petition of
the Protestants ; they, moreover, gave the fandion
of their approbation to a Confeflion of Faith pre-
lented to them by the Reformed teacherst, and t Id. ibid.
composed as might be expeAed from such a per-
formance at that juncure, on purpose to expose the
absurd tenets and pradices of the Romish church.
By another ad, the jurifdicion of the ecclesiastical
courts was abolished, and the causes, which for-
merly came under their cognizance, were transfer-
red to the decilion of civil judges_. By a third t Keith,
statute, the exercise of religious worship, according '5'"
to the rites of the Romish church, was prohibited.
The manner in which the Parliament inforced the
observation of this law discovers the zeal of that
aflembly; the first tranfgreflion fubjeded the offen-
der to the forfeiture of his goods, and to a corpo-
ral punishment, at the dilcretion of the judge ; ba-
ni(hment was the penalty of a second violation of
the law ; and a third a6t of disobedience was de-
clared to be capital§. Such (irangers were men, 5 Knox,
at that time to the spirit of toleration, and to the 254.
laws of humanity ; and with such indecent haste
did the very persons, who had just escaped the ri-
gour of ecclesiastical tyranny, proceed to imitate
thofeexamples of severity, of which they themselves
had so justly complained.

TH e vigorous zeal of the Parliament overturned, With re-

in a few days, the ancient system of religion, which gard tothe

revenues

had been established so many ages. In reforming of the
the dodrine and discipline of the church, the no church.
bles kept pace with the ardor and expetations
even of Knox himself. But their proceedings,

0 4 with

BOOK III. with refped to these, were not more rapid and im-

C--v'°petuous, than they were flow and dilatory when
i560. they entered on the consideration of ecclesiastical

revenues. Among the lay members, (bme were
already enriched with the spoils of the church, and
others devoured in expectation the wealthy bene-
fices which still remained untouched. The altera-
tion in religion had afforded many of the dignified
ecclefiaftics themselves, an opportunity of gratify-
ing their avarice or ambition. The demolition of
the monasteries, having let the Monks at liberty
from their confinement, they inflantly dispersed all
over the kingdom, and commonly betook them-
selves to some secular employment. The Abbot,
if he had been so fortunate as to embrace the prin-
ciples of the Reformation from convicion, or 1o
cunning as to efpoule them out of policy, fcized
the whole revenues of the fraternity, and, except
what he allowed for the fubiflience of a few super-

* Keith, annuated Monks*, applied them entirely to his
496. own use. The proposal, made by the Reformed
Append. teachers, for applying these revenues towards the
190, 1g9. maintenance of Miniffers, the education of youth,

and the support of the poor, was equally dreaded
by all these orders of men. They opposed it with
the utmost warmth, and by their numbers and au-

tSee Ap- thority, easily prevailed on the Parliament to give
pend. No. no ear to fiuch a diiagreeable demandt. Zealous
IV. as the first Reformers were, and animated with a

spirit superior to the low considerations of interest,
they beheld there early symptoms of felfifhnels and
avarice among their adherents, with indignation ,
and we find Knox exprefling the utmost fenfibilit\
of that contempt, with which they were treated by
many, from whom he expected a more generous

2 K, zK6. concern for the success of religion, and the honour
Thevai- of its Ministers4.
dityofthis A DIFFICULrTY hath been tfarted, with regard
Parliament to the acts of this Parliament, concerning religion.
called in T' his
quelltion.

This difficulty, frivolous in itself, and at this dif- BooK III.
tance of time of no importance, is founded on the -
words of the treaty of Edinburgh. By that, the '56o.
Parliament was permitted to take into consideration
the slate of religion, and to signify their sentiments
of it to the King and Queen. But, instead of pre-
renting their desires to their Sovereigns, in the hum-
ble torm of a supplication or address, the Parlia-
mnent converted them into so many acts; which,
although they never received the royal assent, ob-
tained, all over the kingdom, the weight and au-
thority of laws. In compliance with their injunc-
tions, the eftablilhed system of religion was every
where overthrown, and that recommended by the
Reformers introduced in its place. The partiality
and zeal of the people overlooked or supplied any
defedt in the form of there ads of Parliament, and
rendered the observance of them more universal
than ever had been yielded to the statutes of the
moit regular or constitutional aflembly. By those
proceedings, it muff, however, be confeffed, that
the Parliament, or rather the nation, violated the
laift article in the treaty of Edinburgh, and even
exceeded the powers which belong to fubjecls. But
when once men have been accultomed to break
through the common boundaries of fubjecaion; and
their minds are inflamed with the paflions which
civil war inspire; it is mere pedantry or ignorance
to measure their conduct by those rules, which
can be applied, only where government is in a slate
of order and tranquilllty. A nation, when obliged
to employ such extraordinary efforts in defence of
its liberties, avails itfelfof every thing which can
promote this great end ; and the necellity of the
cafe, and the importance of the objec, justify any
departure fiom the common and eflablithed forms
of the conifitution.

IN

BoOK III. IN consequence of the treaty of Edinburgh, as
t-L v well as by the ordinary tforms of business, it became
Amba6"a- necefhary to lay the proceedings of Parliament be-
dors lent fore the King and Queen. For this purpose, Sir
bythePar-James Sandilands of Calder Lord St. John, was
li|ment to appointed to repair to the court of France. After
Fance. holding a course so irregular, the nobles had no rea-

son to flatter themselves that Francis and Mary
would ever approve their condut, or confirm it,
by their royal assent. The reception of their Am-
baflldor was no other than they might have expec-
ed. He was treated by the King and Queen with
the utmost coldness, and dismissed without obtain-
ing the ratification of the Parliament's proceedings.
From the Princes of Lorrain and their partizans,
he endured all the scorn and insult, which it was

* Knox, natural for them to pour upon the party he repre-
2j .Buch. fented,.
Andto THOUGH the Earls of Morton, Glencairn, and
Elizabeth. Maitland of Lethington, the ambassadors of the

Parliament to Elizabeth their protedrefs, met with
a very different reception; they were not more fuc-
cefsful in one part of the negociation intrufted to
their care. The Scots, sensible of the security which
they derived from their union with England, were
desirous of rendering it indissoluble. With this
view, they empowered these eminent leaders of their
party, to testify to Elizabeth their gratitude for
that seasonable and effectual aid which the had as-
forded them, and at the fame time, to beseech her
to render the friendlhip between the nations perpe-
tual, by condescending to marry the Earl of Arran,
who, though a fulbjec, was nearly allied to the
royal family of Scotland, and, after Mary, the un-
doubted heir to the Crown.

To the former part of this commillion Elizabeth

lillened with the utmost fatisfadion, and encouraged

"' the Scots, in any future exigency, to hope for the

continuance

continuance of her good offices, with regard to the Boo III.
latter, she discovered those sentiments to which the '-- '
adhered throughout her whole reign. Averse from '560.
marriage, as tome pretend through choice, but
more probably out of policy, that ambitious Prin-
cess would never admit any partner to the throne;
but delighted with the entire and uncontrolled ex-
ercife of power, file sacrificed to the enjoyment of
that, the hopes of transmitting her Crown to her
own posterity. The marriage with the Earl of
Arran could not be attended with any such extra-
ordinary advantage, as to shake this rcfolution ;, he
declined it, therefore, but with many expreflions *Burn. 3
of good-will towards the Scottish nation, and of Append.
refpet for Arran himself*. 3oS.Keith,

Tow A RDS theconclulion of this year, diflingnifh- I s4 &c.

ed by so many remarkable events, there happened The death

of Francis

one of great importance. On the 4th of Decem- I[
ber, died Francis II. a Prince of a feeble conftitu-
tion, and of a mean understanding. As he did not
leave any issue by the Queen, no incident could
have been more fortunate to thole, who, during
the late commotions in Scotland, had taken part
with the Congregation. Mary, by the charms of
her beauty, had acquired an entire ascendant over
her husband ; and as the transferred all her influence
to her uncles the Princes of Lorrain, Francis fol-
lowed them implicitly in whatever track they were
pleased to lead him. The power of France, under
such direaion, alarmed the Scottish malecontents,
with apprehensions of danger, no less formidable,
than well-founded. The intestine disorders which
raged in France, and the seasonable interpolition of
England in behalf of the Congregation, had hither-
to prevented the Princes of Lorrain from carrying
their designs upon Scotland into execution. But
under their vigorous and decisive administration, it
was impoflible that thecommotions in France could
be of long continuance, and many things might

fall

ROOK III. fall in to divert Elizabeth's attention, for the future,
'--~' from the affairs of Scotland. In either of these

1560 events, the Scots would fland exposed to all the

vengeance, which the resentment of the French
court could inflit. The blow, however long sus-
pended, was unavoidable, and must fall at last with
iedoubled weight. From this proiped and expec-
tation of danger, the Scots were delivered by the
death of Francis ; the ancient confederacy of the
two kingdoms had already been broken, and by
this event, the only bond of union which remained
was dissolved. Catherine of Medicis, who during
the minority of Charles IX. her second ton, engrossed
the entire direetion of the French councils, was far
Irom any thoughts of vindicating the Scottish
Queen's authority. Catherine and Mary had been
rivals in power during the reign of Francis II. and
had contended for the government of that weak
and unexperienced Prince ,; but as the charms of
the wife easily triumphed over the authority of the
mother, Catherine could never forgive such a dif-
appointment in her favourite pallion, and beheld
now, with secret pleasure, the difficult and perplex-
ing scene, on which herdaughter-in-law was about
to enter. Mary, overwhelmed with all the sorrow
which so fad a reverse of fortune could occasion,

* Henaut, slighted by the QOuen mother* , and forsaken by
340en the tribe of courtiers, who appear only in the fun-
44. fline of prosperity, retired to Rheims, and there,
Mary re- in (olitude, indulged her grief, or hid her indigna-
tires from tion. Even the Princes of Lorrain were obliged to
t courn . contract their views; to turn them from foreign to

domestic objeds ; and instead of forming vast pro-
jets with regard to Britain, found it necessary to
think of acquiring, and establishing an interest with
the new administration.

IT is impollible to describe the emotions of joy,

which, on all these accounts, the death of the

French

French Monarch excited among the Scots. They BooK ltI.
regarded it as the only event, which could give Cv-*
firmness and flability to that lyfltem of religion and 56°0
government, which was now introduced ; and it is
no wonder cotemporary historians (hould ascribe it
to the immediate care of Providence, which, by
unfqrefeen expedients, can tecure the peace and
happiness of kingdoms, in'tholt lituations, where
human prudence and invention would utterly
despair*. * Knox,

ABOUT this time, the Proteflant church in Scot- 2bl.

land began to assume a regular form. Its princi- men of
ples had obtai:'ned the lanction of public authority, Prelbyteri-
and some fixed external policy became necellary for an church
the government and pref rvatio:i of the infant to- power.
ciety. The model introduced by the Reformers,
differed extremely from that, which had been td
long eflablilhtd. I he motivts, which induced them
to depart so far from the ancient system, deserve
to be explained.

As the vices of the clergy had, at firfl, excited

the indignation of mankind, and rouzed that fpi it
of enquiry, which proved so fatal to the whole
Popish system : as this dilguft at the vices of ec
clefiaftics was loon transferred to their perlbns, and
shifting from them, by no violent transition, fettled
at last on the ofices which they enjoyed ; the effecs
of the Reformation would naturally have extended
not only to the dodiine, but to the government
of the Popih church; and the Fame spirit which
aboliflhed the former, would have overturned the
latter. But, in a great part of Germany, in Eng-
land, and in the northern kingdoms, its operations
were checked by the power and policy of their Prin-
ces ; and the ancient Episcopal jurifdidion, under
a few limitations, was flill continued in those
churches. The Episcopal hierarchy appears to be
more conformable to the practice of the church,
since Christianity became the cftablihced religion of

the

BOOK III. the Roman empire. The ecclcfiaftical government

u'v--^ was, at that time, plainly copied from the civil ;

'560o the first not only borrowed its form, but derived its

authority from the latter ; and the diocelets and
juritdit ions of Patriarchs, Archbifhops, and Bishops,
correlpoinded with the divilion and constitution of
the empire. In Switzerland, and the Low-countries,
the nature of the government allowing full scope
to the genius of the Reformation, all pre-eminence
of order in the church was decfroyed, and an equa-
lity eftablilhed more suitable to the spirit of repub-
lican policy. The lituation of the primitive church
fggeltted the idea, and furnished the model of the
latter lyftem, which has since been called Pre/byte-
rian. The first Christians, oppreifcd by continual
perlecutions, and obliged to hold their religious
aflemblies by flealth, and in corners, were con-
tented with a form of government extremely simple.
The influence of religion concurred, with the sense
of danger, in extinguiflhing among them, the spirit
of ambition, and in preserving a parity of rank,
the effec of their fufferings, and the cause of many
of their virtues. Calvin, whole decisions were re-
ceived, among the Protestants of that age, with
incredible fubmilfion, was the patron and reflorer
of this scheme of ecclefiafltical policy. The church
of Geneva, formed under his eye, and by his di-
rection, was etteemed the mott peirfeE model of
this government ; and Knox, wl:ho, during his refi-
dence in that city, had studied and admired it,
warmly recommended it to the imitation of his
countrymen.

AMONG the Scottifl nobility, some hated the

persons, and others coveted the wealth of the dig-
nitied clergy ; and by abolishing that order of men,
the fornmer indulged their resentment, and the lat-
ter hoped to gratify their avarice. The people,
inflamed with the most violent aversion to Popery,
ai,d approving of every (chime that departed far-

thLft

theft from the pradtice of the Romish church, were BOOK III.
delighted with a system, so admirably suited to '"''
their predominant paflion. While the friends of i560.
civil liberty beheld, with pleasure, the Protestant
clergy pulling down, with their own hands, that
fabric of ecclefiaflical power, which their prede-
ceflors had reared with so much art and industry ;
and flattered themselves, that by lending their aid
to strip churchmen of their dignity and wealth,
they might entirely deliver the nation from their
exorbitant and oppreclive jurildiction. The new
mode of government easily made its way among
men, thus prepared, by their various interests and
patlions, for its reception.

BUT, on the first introdution of his fyfiem,Knox

did not deem it expedient to depart altogether from
the ancient form*. Inflead of Bishops, he pro- Spotr-
poled to eftabiifh ten or twelve Superintendants in wood,'18.
different parts of the kingdom. Thele, as the
name implies, were impowered to infped the life
and doarine of the other clergy. They presided
in the inferior judicatories of the church, and per-
formed several other parts of the Episcopal function.
Their jurifdli6ion, however, extended to sacred
things only ,; they claimed no feat in Parliament,
and pretended no right to the dignity, or revenues,
of the former Bishops.

THE number of inferior clergy, to whom the

care of parochial duty could be committed, was
still extremely small ; they had embraced the prin-
ciples of the Reformation at different times, and
from various motives; during the public commo-
tions, they were scattered, merely by chance, over
the different provinces of the kingdom ,; and, in
a few places only, were formed into regular clafles
or societies. The first General Assembly of the
church, which was held this year, bears all the Decem 2-
marks of an infant and unformed society. The
members \vcre but few in number, and of no

cu '-J era -

BoOK III. considerable rank ; no uniform or confillent rule

t

^ seems to have been oblerved in eleCting them.
S56o. From a great part of the kingdom no reprefenta-

tives appeared. In the name of Come entire coun-
ties, but one person was present , while, in other
places, a tingle town or church lent leveral mem-
bers. A convention, so feeble and irregular, could
possess no great authority , and conscious of their
own weakness, the members put an end to their

SKeith, debates, without venturing upon any decision of
498, much importance'.

1561. IN order to give greater strength and contiftence

to the Presbyterian plan, Knox, with the atliftance
of his brethren, composed the firfit book of dilci-
pline, which contains the model or platform of the

1- Spotfw. intended policy+. They presented it to a conven-
'52z tion of estates, which was held in the beginning
Jan. IS. of this year. Whatever regulations were propolcd

with regard to ecclefiaftica! discipline and jurllnic-
tion, would have easily obtained the fandion o(l
that assembly ; but a design to recover the patri
mony of the church, which is there infiuuated, met
with a very different reception.

IN vain did the clergy ditplay the advantages

which would accrue to the public, by a proper
application of ecclesiastical revenues. In vain did
they propose, by an impartial diltribution of this
fund, to promote true religion, to encourage learn-
i:n, and to support the poor. In vain did they
even intermingle threatnings of the divine difplea-
'ure, against the urnjuf: detainers of what was ap-
propriated to a sacred use. The nobles held fal
the prey, which they had seized , and beflowing

no, upon the proposal, the name of a devout imagination,

z;6. they affeded to confider it, as a projea altogether
The visionary, and treated it with the utmost fcornt.
Queen In- TIrs convention appointed the Prior of St. An-
tead tore- drew's to repair to the Queen, and to invite her to
iurn into
bcoliand. rctt.r a1

return into her native country, and to assume the BooK IIr.
reins of government, which had been too long 1
committed to other hands. And though some of '561'
her fubje-ts dreaded her return, and others foresaw
dangerous consequences with which it might be at-
tended*, the bulk of them desired it with so much * See Ap-
ardor, that the invitation was given with the great- pndix,No.
eft appearance of unanimity. But the zeal of the
Roman Catholics got the start of the Prior in pay-
ing court to Mary; and Lefly, afterwards Bishop
of Ross, who was commiflioned by them, arrived
before him, at the place of her refidencet. Lefly Led,
cndeavoured to infuse into the Queen's mind fufpi- 327.
cions of her Protestant fubjeds, and to persuade her
to throw herself entirely into the arms of those who
adhered to her own religion. For this purpose, he
insisted that the should land at Aberdeen; and as
the Protestant dotrines had made no confidera-
ble progress in that part of the kingdom, he gave
her assurance of being joined, in a few days, by
20,000 men ; and flattered her, that with such an
army, encouraged by her presence and authority,
the might easily overturn the Reformed Church,
before it was firmly fettled on its foundations.

BUT at this junture, the Prirnces of Lorrain were

not disposed to listen to this extravagant and dan-
gerous proposal. Intent on defending themselves
against Catherine of Medicis, whole insidious policy
was employed in undermining their exorbitant pow-
er, they had no leisure to attend to the affairs of
Scotland, and wilhed their niece to take poffeflion
of her kingdom, with as little dilturbance as pof-
fible. The French officers, too, who had served
in Scotland, difluaded Mary from all violent mea-
fures; and, by representing the power and number
of the Protefiants to be irrefiftable, determined her
to court them by every art; and rather to employ
the leading men of that party as her Miniffers,

VoL. I. P than

UOOK II- than to provoke them, by a fruitless opposition, to

" become her enemies*. Hence proceeded the con-
1561. fidence and affedion, with which the Prior of St.

Andrew's was received by the Queen. His repre-
fentation of the Rfate of the kingdom gained great
credit; and Lefly beheld, with regret, the new
channel in which court favour was likely to run.

ANOTHERK Convention of Estates was held in

May. The arrival ofan Ambaflador from France,
seems to have been the occasion of this meeting.
He was inftruded to fllicit the Scots to renew their
ancient alliance with France, to break their new
confederacy with England, and to reflore the Po-
pith ecclcfiatics to the poffellion of their revenues,
and the exercise of their functions. It is no easy
matter to form any conjeAure concerning the in-
tentions of the French court, in making there extra-
ordinary and ill-timed propositions. They were
rejeted with that scorn, which might well have

'- Knox, been expected from the temper of the nationt.
269' 273 IN this Convention, the Protestant clergy did not

obtain a more favourable audience than formerly,
and their profped of recovering the patrimony of
the church flill remained as diflant and uncertain as
ever. But with regard to another point, they found
the zeal of the nobles in no degree abated. The
book of discipline seemed to require, that the mo-
numents of Popery, which till remained in the

:t Spot(- kingdom, should be dcmolifhed + ; and, though
wood,53' neither the fame pretence of policy, nor the fame

ungovernable rage of the people, remained to jufti-
fy or excuse this barbarous havock, the Convention,
considering every religious fabric as a relit of idola-
try, passed sentence upon them by an ac in form ;
and persons, the most remarkable for the ativity
of their zeal, were appointed to put it in execution.

Abbies,

Abbies, cathedrals, churches, libraries, records, BooK III.
and even the sepulchres of the dead, perithed in ^
one common ruin. The first florm of popular infur- 56
reftion, though impetuous and irresistible, had ex-
tended only to a few counties, and soon spent its rage;
but now a deliberate and universal rapine compleat-
ed the devastation of every thing, venerable and
magnificent, which had escaped its violence*. woSp7t

IN the mean time, Mary was in no haste to re- Mary be-

turn into Scotland. Accustomed to the elegance, gins topre-
splendor, and gaiety of a polite court, the still fond- pare for it.
ly lingered in France, the scene of all there enjoy-
ments, and contemplated with horror, the barba-
rifm of her own country, and the turbulence of her
fubjeds, which presented her with a very different
face of things The impatience, however, of her
people, the persuasions of her uncles, but above all,
the fludied and mortifying negleet, with which
the was treated by the Queen Mother, forced her
to think of beginning this disagreeable voyaget. + Bran-
But while the was preparing for it, there were sown tomeJebb,
between her and Elizabeth, the feeds of that per- vol.ii.482.
ional jealousy and discord, which imbittered the
life, and shortened the days of the Scottith Queen.

THE ratification of the late treaty of Edinburgh Origin of

was the immediate occasion of this fatal animosity ; thedilcord
the true causes of it lay much deeper. Almoflt between

* i her and

every article, in that treaty, had been executed by Elizabeth.
both parties, with a scrupulous exatiefs. The for-
tifications of Leith were demolilhed, and the armies
of France and England withdrawn within the ap-
pointed time. The grievances of the Scottish male-
contents were redressed, and they had obtained
whatever they could demand for their future fecu-
rity. With regard to all there, Mary could have
little reason to decline, or Elizabeth to urge, the
ratification of the treaty.

P 2 TIHE

1OOK III. THE sixth article remained the only fuurce of
'-","contclt and difficulty. No minitfer ever entered

653

l more deeply into the (chemes of his Sovereign, or
pursued them with more dexterity and success than
Cecil. In the conduct of the negociation at Edin-
burgh, the found understanding of this able politi-
cian had proved gecatl\ an overmatch for Monluc's
refinements in intrigue, and had artfully induced
the French Ambafladors, not only to acknowledge
that the Crowns of England and Ireland did of right
belong to Elizabeth alone, but also to promise, that
in all times to come, Mary should abiftain from
using the titles, or bearing the arms of those king-
doms.

THE ratification of this article would have been

of the most fatal consequence to Mary. The Crown
of England was an object worthy of her ambition.
Her pretensions to it gave her great dignity and im-
portance in the eyes of all Europe. By many, her
title was efleemed preferable to that of Elizabeth.
Among the English themselves, the Roman Catho-
lics, who formed, at that time, a numerous and
active party, openly espoused this opinion , and
even the Protestants, who fipported Elizabeth's
throne, could not deny the Queen of Scots to be
her immediate heir. A proper opportunity to avail
herfelfof all there advantages, could not, in the
course of things, be far distant, and many incidents
might fall in, to bring this opportunity nearer than
was expected. In there circumstances, Mary, by
ratifying the article in dispute, would have loft that
rank which the had hitherto held among the neigh-
bouring Princes ; the zeal of her adherents muff
have gradually cooled , and the might have re-
nounced, from that moment, all hopes of ever
wearing the English crown.

NONE of there beneficial consequences escaped

the penetrating eye of Elizabeth, who, for this
reason, had recourse to every thing, by which the

could

could hope either to sooth or frighten the Scottish BooK H1.
Queen into a compliance with her demands

; and

if that Princess had been so unadvi(ed as to ratify ',
the rash conceflions of her Ambassadors, Elizabeth,
by that deed, would have acquired an advantage,
which, under her management, muff have turned
to great account. By such a renunciation, the
question, with regard to the right of fticceilion,
would have been left altogether open and undeci-
ded ,; and, by means ol that, Elizabeth might either
have kept her rival in perpetual anxiety and de-
pendance, or, by the authority of her Parliament,
the might have broken in upon the order of lineal
fucceflion, and transferred the Crown to lbme other
descendant of the royal blood. The former con-
dudt the observed towards James VI. whom, du-
ring his whole reign, the held in perpetual fear and
iiubjetion. The latter, and more rigorous method
of proceeding, would, in all probability, have been
employed against Mary, whom, for many reaobne,
she both envied and hated.

NOR was this step beyond her power, unprece-

dented in the history, or inconsistent with the con-.
ftitution of England. Though fucceflion by here-
ditary right be an idea so natural and to popular,
that it has been eftablilhed almost in every civilized
nation, yet England affords many memorable in-
tfances of deviations from that rule. The Crown
of that kingdom having once been seized by the
hand of a conqueror, this invited the bold and en-
terprifing in every age to imitate such an illuhlrious
example of fortunate ambition, From the time of
William the Norman, the regular course of descent
had seldom continued through three fuccellive
reigns. Thole Princes, whole intrigues or valour
opened to them a way to the throne, called in the
authority of the great council of the nation to con-
firm their dubious titles. Hence Parliamentary
and hereditary right became in England of equal

P 3 consideration.

BOOK 11I. consideration. That great allembly claimed and
t ~aCtually poilelred a power of altering the order of

ls*.' regal tiiceellion ; and even lo late as Henry VIII.

an act of Parliament had authorized that capricious
Monarch rt lIttle the order of tlicceliioin at his
plealure. The Englilh, jealous of their religious
liberty, and avrle from the dominion of firangers,
would have e:,gerly adopted the pallions of their
Sovereign, and .might have been calily induced to
exclude the Scottish line from the right of ficceed-
ing to the Crown. .Thele seem to have been the
viewsof both Qjieens, and there were the ditiicultics
which retarded thie ratification of the treaty of
Edinburgh.

BI.P, if the Liurces of their discord were to be

trced1 t.o hligher than this treaty, an inconsiderable
alieratioK) in the words of it, might have brought
t'e rcfelnt quection to an amicable ilTue. The in-
definite and ambiguous expreltion, which Cecil had
inferred i~nto the trnary, might have been changed
into one more limited, but more precise; and Ma-
ry, i~iftfad of promising to abiftain from bearing
the titde of Qieen of Eugland in all times to come,
night have engaged not to afihme that title, du-
ring the life of Elizabeth, or the lives of her lawful
posterity.

So cH an amendment, however, did not suit the

views of either Q.een. Though Mary had been
obliged to suspend, for fme time, the prosecution
of her title to the Englilh crown, the had not,
however, rclinquilhed 'it. She determined to re-
vive her claim, on the firlr prospect of success, and
was -tivwilling to bind herself, by a positive engage-
ment, not

to take advantage of any such fbrtunate

occurrence. Nor would the alteration have been
more acceptable to Elizabeth, who, by agreeing
to it, would have tacitly recognized the right of
her rival to ahcend the thrbne after her decease.
Iiut neither the Scottish nor Englilh Queen durst

avow

avow these secret sentiments of their hearts. Any BOOK Ill-
open discovery of an inclination to diliurb the tran- -""-'
quillity of England, or to wrest the Ifeptre out of
Elizabeth's hands, might have proved fatal to Mary.
Any suspicion of a delign to alter the order of fuc-
ccllion, and to fct aside the claim of the Scottith
Queen, would have exposed Elizabeth to much and
deterved censure, and have railed up againi:l
her many and dangerous enemies. Thete, how-
ever carefully concealed, or artfully dilguiled,
were, in all probability, the real motives which
determined the one Qjeen to follicit, and tile other
to refuse the ratification of the treaty, in its origi-
nal form ; while neither had recourse to that expli-
cation of it, which to an heart unwarped by poli-
tical interest, and lincerelv desirous of union and
concord, would have appeared so obvious and na-
tural.

BUT though considerations of interest firit occa-

fioned this rupture between the Britilh Queens, ri-
valfhip of another kind contributed to widen the
breach, and female jealousy increased the violence
of their political hatred. Elizabeth, with all those
extraordinary qualities, by which the equalled or
surpassed such of her sex, as have merited the
greatest renown, discovered an admiration of her
own person, to a degree, which women of ordinary
underflandings either do not entertain, or prudently
endeavour to conceal. Her attention to drels, her
follicitude to display her charms, her love of flat-
tery, were all excellive. Nor were there weakneffcs
confined to that period of life, when they are more
pardonable. Even in very advanced years, the
wisest woman of that, or perhaps of .any other age,
wore the garb, and alTeited the manners of a girl*.

* Johnllon Hil. Rer. Irrican. 346, 347. Carre. vol. iii. 69,).

Catalogue ot Royal anid NubLc Authors. Article I.'x.

1' 4 Thlough

BooK Ill. Though Elizabeth was as much inferior to Mary,

iLin beauty, and gracefulness of pcrfon, as she ex-

5 '6' celled her in political abilities, and in the arts of

government, the was weak enough to compare

* Melvil, herself with the Scottith Queen * ; and as it was
98. impollible the could be altogether ignorant how

much Mary gained by the compariobn, the envied
and hated her as a rival, by whom the was eclipsed.
In judging of the conduc of Princes, we are apt
to ascribe too much to political motives, and too
little to the paflions which they feel in common
with the reft of mankind. In order to account for
Elizabeth's present, as well as her fublequent con-
duct towards Mary, we mufft not always confider
her as a Q.een, we must sometimes regard her as
a woman.

ELIZABETH, though no stranger to Mary's diffi-

culties with refped to the treaty, continued to urge

-t Keith, her, by repeated applications, to ratify it t. Mary,

7,
5 '60, under various pretences, fill contrived to gain
&c. time, and toelude the request. But while the one

Queen follicited with persevering importunity, and
the other evaded with artful delay, they both flu-
died an extreme politeness of behaviour, and load-
ed each other with profeflions of sisterly love, with
reciprocal declarations of unchangeable esteem and
amity.

Elizabeth IT was not long before Mary was convinced,
reufsMa- that, among Princes, these expreflions of friendship
condut. are commonly far distant from the heart. In fail-

ing from France to Scotland, the course lies along
the English coast. In order to be safe from the in-
tluts ot the English fleet, or in cafe oftempeftuous
weather, to secure a retreat in the harbours of that
kingdom, Mary lent M. D'Oyfel to demand of
Elizabeth a safe conduc during her voyage. This
request, which decency alone obliged one Prince to
irai:t to another, Elizabeth rejeAed, in such a man-

ner,

ier, as gave rife to no flight suspicion of a design, BooK III.
either to obftruC the paflage, or to intercept the -
person of the Scottith Queen * K 56.

THIS ungenerous behaviour of Elizabeth filled ,7,.

Mary with indignation, but did not retard her de- Camden.
parture from France. She was accompanied to See Ap-
Calais, the place where she embarked, in a manner o. V
luitable to her dignity, as the Qceen of two power- Mary be-
ful kingdoms. Six Princes of Lorrain her uncles, gins her
with many of the molt eminent among the French voyage.
nobles, were in her retinue. Catherine, who fe-
cretly rejoiced at her departure, graced it with
every circumflance of magnificence and refpe'1.
After bidding adieu to her mourning attendants,
with a fad heart, and eyes bathed in tears, Mary
left that kingdom, the short, but only scene of her
life, in which fortune smiled upon her. While the
French coast continued in fight, the intently gazed
upon it, and musing, in a thoughtful posture, on
that height of fortune whence the had fallen, and
presaging, perhaps, the disasters and calamities
which imbittered the remainder of her days, the
sighed often, and cried out, " Farewel, France !
" Farewel, beloved country, which I thall never
" more behold !" Even when the darkness of the
night had hid the land from her view, ihe would
neither retire to the cabin, nor taste food, but com-
manding a couch to be placed on the deck, the
there waited the return of day, with the utmost
impatience. Fortune soothed her on this occasion ;
the galley made little way during the night. In
the morning, the coast of France was still within
fight, and (he continued to feed her melancholy
with the profped; and as long as her eyes could
diftinguith it, to utter the fame tender expreflions
of regret t. At last a brisk gale arore, by the fa-

+ Brantome, 483. He himself was in the fame galley with the

(oueen. vour

ROOK III. vour of which for some days, and afterward under
^>'v the cover o( a thick fog, Mary escaped the English
Aiesin flet, w hich lay in wait to intercept her*; and on
Scotland. the 19th of Augutt, after an absence of near thir-
* Goodal, teen years, landed atfely at Leith in her native
vol. i..7s. kingdon.
_ateln. IMAR. Y was received by her fubjetds with shouts

and acclamations us joy, and with every demon-
Itration of welcome and regard, But as her arrival
was unexpcated, and no suitable preparation had
been made for it, they could not, with all thcir
eflrits, hide trom her the poverty of the country,
and were obliged to conduct her to the palace of
Holyrood-houte with little pomp. The Queen ac-
cullomed from her infancy to splendor and magni-
ficence, and fond of them, as was natural at her
age, could not help oblerving the change in her
siltation, and seemed to be deeply affected with

+ Brant

t.

State of NEVER did any Prince ascend the throne at a
the king- juncture which called for more wisdom in council,
don at or more courage and flteadinefs in adtion. The

rage of religious controversy was flill unabated.

hlie memory of pail oppreflion exasperated the

I'ruteftants the finart of recent injuries rendered
the Papifts desperate ; both were zealous, fierce,
a nd irreconcileable. 'lihe ablzence of their Sovereign
had accuflomed the nobles to independence; and
during the late commotions, they had acquired
such an increase of wualtlh, as threw great weight
into the scale of the ariflocracy, which flood not in
need of any acceflion of power. The kingdom
had long been under the government of Regents,
who exercised a delegated jurifdidion, attended
with little authority, and which infpircd no reve-
rence. A state of pure anarchy had prevailed for
the two last years, withiut a Regent, wi [ant a

.h fuipreme council, without the power, or even the
Apped. f): m of a regular government r. Ai licentious fbi-

<)z. rit,

rit, unacquainted with subordination, and disdain- BooK III.
ing thle restraints of law and justice, had spread '--
among all ranks of men. The influence of France, ' s6.
the antient ally of the kingdom, was withdrawn
or defpiied. The English, of enemies become
confederates, had grown into confidence with the
nation, and had gained an ascendant over all its
councils. The Scottish Monarchs did not derive
more splendor or power trom the friendship of the
former, than they had reason to dread injury and
diminution from the interposition of the latter.
Every consideration, whether of interest, or of felt
prelervation, obliged Elizabeth to depress the roy-
al authority in Scotland, and to create the Prince
perpetual difficulties, by fomenting the spirit of
dilhaffection among the people.

IN this posture were the afhfirs of Scotland, wherin

the adminidiration fell into the hands of a young
Queen, not nineteen years of age, unacquainted
with the manners and laws of her country, a ftran-
ger to her fubjeds, without experience, without
allies, and almofit without a friend.

ON the other hand, in Mary's situation we find

Come circumitances, which, though they did not
balance these diildvantages, contributed, however,
to alleviate them ; and, with skilful management,
might have produced great effects. Her (ubjeds,
unaccustomed so long to the residence of their Prince,
were not only dazzled by the novelty and splendor
of the royal presence, but inspired with awe and re-
verence. Besides the places of power and profit
bellowed by the favour of a Prince, his protedtion,
his familiarity, and even his smiles, confer honour
and win the hearts of men. From all corners of
the kingdom, the nobles crouded to testify their
duty and affcdtion to their Sovereign, and studied,
by every art, to wipe out the memory of past mif-
conduCt, and to lyi in a flock of future merit. The

aiiu :emen ts

nooK III. amusements and gaiety of her court, which was
'-~'filled with the most accomplished of the French no-

j6*'. bility, who had attended her, began to soften and

to polish the rude manners of the nation. Mary
herself poffeffed many of there qualifications, which
raise affedion, and procure esteem. The beauty
and gracefulness of her pertbn drew universal ad-
miration, the elegance and politeness of her man-
ners commanded general respect. To all the charms
of her own sex, the added many of the accomplilh-
ments of the other. The progress fie had made in
all the Arts and Sciences, which were then esteem-
ed necelfary or ornamental, was far beyond what
is commonly attained by Princes; and all her other
qualities were rendered more agreeable by a cour-
teous affability, which, without leltening the digni-
ty ofa Prince, fleals on the hearts of fubjeds with
a bewitching insinuation.

FROM thele circumitances, notwithitanding the

threatning afped of affairs at Mary's return into
Scotland, notwithstanding the clouds which ga-
thered on every hand, a political observer would
have prediCled a very different issue of her reign;
and whatever sudden guls offation he might hive
expedted, he would never have dreaded the de-
Iri uctive violence of that storm which followed.

WHILE all parties were contending who (hould

discover the molt dutitul attachment to the Queen,
the zealots and impatient spirit of the age broke
out in a remarkable instance. On the Sunday after
her arrival, the Queen commanded mass to be ce-
lebrated in the chapel of her palace. The first ru-
,nour of this occasioned a secret murmuring among
the Protestants who attended the court ; complaints
and threatnings soon followed , the servants be-
longing to the cha.pel were insulted and abused ;
;and, if the prior of St. Andrew's had not seasonably
interpofcd, the rnotcrs might have proceeded to the

K ox, *
z. u t no ft exceli- '. +'1I "

IT is impossible, at this difiance of time, and Boo' I11L

under circumstances so very different, to conceive
the violence of that zeal against Popery, which then
pof2feIed the nation. Every instance of condelcen-
sion to the Papifts was esteemed an aa of apoftacy,
and the toleration of a tingle mars pronounced to be
more formidable to the nation than the invasion of, Knox
ten thousand armed men *. Under the influence ,7.
of these opinions, many Protestants would have
ventured to go dangerous lengths , and, without
attempting to convince their Sovereign by argu-
ment, or to reclaim her by indulgence, would have
abruptly denied her the liberty of worshipping God
in that manner, which alone the thought accepta-
ble to him. But the Prior of St. Andrew's, and
other leaders of the party, not only restrained this
impetuous Ipirit ; but, in 1pite of the murmurs of
the people, and the exclamations of the preachers,
obtained for the Queen and her domeltics the un-
disturbed exercise of the Catholic religion. Near
an hundred years after this period, when the vio-
lence of religious animofities had begun to subside,
when time and the progress of learning had inlarged
the views of the human mind, an English house of
Commons refused to indulge the wife of their Sove-
reign in the private use of the mars. The Protef-
tant leaders deserve, on this occasion, the praise
both of wisdom and of moderation for condu& so
different. But, at the fame time, whoever reflets
upon the encroaching and sanguinary spirit of Po-
pery, will be far from treating the fears and caution
of the more zealous Reformers as altogether imagi-
nary, and destitute of any real foundation.

THE Protestants, however, by this compliance

with the Queen's prejudices, obtained a proclama-
tion highly favourable to their religion. The Re-
formed docrine, though eftablithed all over the

kingdom,

Boor III. kingdom, had never received the countenance cr
-- fanttion of royal authority. On this occasion, the
' g'.. Queen declared any attempt towards an alteration

Auguftzg.
* Keith, or f'bverflon of it, to be a capital crime*.
504. THE Queen, conformable to the plan which had
Sheem- been concerted in France, committed the admini-
ploys only firation of affairs entirely to Proteflants. Her
i'roteltants .
in the ad- council was filled with the molt eminent perlons of
miniiirati- that party ; not a single Papist was admitted into
on. any degree of confidence t. The Prior of St. An-
tKnox, drew's and Maitland of Lethington seemed to hold
2%. the firfi place in the Qucen's affeCion, and poffefled

all the power and reputation of favourite Miniflers.
Her choice could rot have fallen upon persons
more acceptable to her people ; and, by their pru-
dent advice, Mary condudted herlilf with Ib much
moderation and dtfcrence to the sentiments of the
nation, as could not fail of gaining the affetdion of

t Lefly, her fb jects t, the firmest foundation of a Prince'."
235. power, and the only genuine lourceof his happiness

and glory.

Attempts A CORDIAL reconcilement with Elizabeth was
to gain E-another object of great importance to Mary ; and
lizabeths though she seems to have had it much at heart, in

the beginning of her administration, to accomplish
such a desirable conjuncion, yet many events oc-
curred to widen, rather than to close the breach.
The formal otiices of friendship, however, are fel-
dom neglcted among Princes, and Elizabeth, who
had attempted so openly to obftrud the Q.een's
voyage into Scotland, did not fail, a few days after
her arrival, to command Randolph to congratu-
late her ltfe return. Mary, that the might be on
equal terms with her, Cent Maitland to the English
court, with many ceremonious expretlions of re-

gKeiih, gard for blizabeth j. Both the Ambafladors were
1s,, &:c. received with the utinoft civility ; and on each

fide, the profcfmonsof kindness, as they were made

with

with little sincerity, were listened to with propor- Boox III.
tional credit.

BOTH were intrufted, however, with something i56z.

more than mere matter of ceremony. Randolph
urged Mary, with fresh importunity, to ratify the
treaty of Edinburgh. Maitland cndeavoured to
amuse Elizabeth, by apologizing for the dilatory
conduc of his Mistress with regard to that point.
The multiplicity of public affairs since her arrival
in Scotland, the importance of the question in dif-
pute, and the absence of many noblemen, with
whom the was obliged in decency to consult, were
the pretences offered in excuse for her conduct;
the real causes of it were those, which have already
been mentioned. But in order to extricate herself
out of there difficulties, into which the treaty of
Edinburgh had led her, Mary was brought to yield
a point, which formerly the seemed determined
never to give up. She instructed Maitland to fig-
nify her willingners to disclaim any right to the
crown of England, during the life of Elizabeth,
and the lives of her posterity , if, in failure of there
the were declared next heir by ad of parliament*. *Camden,

RIEASONABLE as this proposal might appear to387.Buch.

Mary, who thereby precluded herself from diftur- 3z9
bing Elizabeth's poffeflion of the throne, nothing
could be more inconsistent with Elizabeth's interest,
or more contradictory to a paflion, which predomi-
nated in the chara6ter of that Princess. Notwith-
flanding all the great qualities which threw such
lustre on her reign, we may observe, that the was
tinctured with ajealoufy of her right to the Crown,
which often betrayed her into mean and ungenerous
actions. The peculiarity of her situation heighten-
ed, no doubt, and increased, but did not infuse
this paflion. It descended to her from Henry VII.
her grandfather, whom, in several features of his

character,

hooK Ill. charaaer, the nearly resembled. Like him she
3'- fuffered the title by which the held the Crown, to
'561. remain ambiguous and controverted, rather than

submit it to parliamentary difcuflion, or derive any
addition to her right, from such authority. Like
him, the observed every pretender to the fuccellion,
not only with that attention, which prudence pre-
scribes ,; but with that aversion which suspicion in-
spires. The present uncertainty with regard to the
right of fucceflion, operated for Elizabeth's advan-
tage, both on her fubjeds, and on her rivals. A-
mong the former, every lover of his country re-
garded her life as the great lecurity of the national
tranquillity ,; and chole rather to acknowledge a
title that was dubious, than to search for one that
was unknown. The latter, while nothing was de-
cided, were held in dependence, and obliged to
court her. The manner in which the received this
ill-timed proposal of the Scottish Queen, was no
other than might have been expected. She reje&t-
ed it in a peremptory tone, with many expreflions
of a resolution never to permit a point of so much
delicacy to be touched.

Sept. ABOUT this time, the Queen made her public

entry into Edinburgh with great pomp. Nothing
was negleated, which could express the duty and
affection of the citizens towards their Sovereign.
But amidst these demonfitrations of regard, the ge-
nius and sentiments of the nation discovered them-
selves, in a circumstance, which, though incon-
fiderable, ought not to be overlooked. As it was
the mode of the times to exhibit many pageants at
every public solemnity ; most of thefre on this oc-
cation, were contrived to be representations of the
vengeance which the Almighty hath infliced upon

* Keith, idolaters¶. Even while they studied to amuse and
I89. to

to flatter the Queen, her fubjeds could not refrain BoorK In.
from testifying their abhorrence of that religion '?r '
which she profeffed. .56,.

To restore the regular administration ofjuftice, Restrains

and to reform the internal police of the country, th licence
became the next objeA of the Qyeen's care. The derers.
laws enated for preservation of public order, and
the security of private property, were nearly the
fame in Scotland, as in every other civilized coun-
try. But the nature of the Scottish constitution,
the impotence of regal authority, the exorbitant
power of the nobles, the violence of faAion, and
the fierce manners of the people, rendered the ex-
ecution of there laws feeble, irregular, and partial.
In the counties which border on England, this de-
sec was most apparent; and the consequences of
it most sensibly felt. The inhabitants, strangers
to induifry, averse from labour, and unacquainted
with the arts of peace, subsisted intirely by spoil
and pillage, and being confederated in fepts or
clans, committed there excesses not only with im-
punity, but even with honour. During the unset-
tied state of the kingdom from the death of James
V. this dangerous licence had grown to an unusual
height ; and the inroads and rapine of those free-
booters were become no less intolerable to their
own countrymen, than to the Englifh.Toreftrain and
punish there outrages, was an acion equally popu-
lar in both kingdoms. The Prior of St. Andrew's
was the person chosen for this important service,
and extraordinary powers, together with the title
of the Queen's lieutenant, were vested in him for
this purpose.

NOTHING can be more surprising to men, accuf-

tomed to regular government, than the prepara-
tions made on this occasion They were such as
might be expeAed in the rudest and most imperfec
state of society. The freeholders of eleven several
counties, with all their followers completely armed,

VoL. . Q were

BooK 11I. were lummoned to allift the Lieutenant in the dif-
_-.-J, charge of his office. Every thing resembled a mi-
,561. litary expedition, rather than the progress of a court
*Keith, of juflice'. The Prior executed his commiflion
198. with luchi vigour and prudence, as acquired him a

great increase of reputation and popularity among
his countrymen. Numbers of the banditti fuffered
the punishment due t ttheir crimes , and, by the
impartial and rigorous administration of justice,
order and tranquillity were restored to that part of

The Pa- the kingdom.
pills at- DUR I NG the absence of the Pr ir of St. Andrew's,
tempt, in the leaders of the Popish fadtion seem to have taken
vain,to get some steps towards insinuating themselves into the
ith her. Queen's favour and confidenceef. Eut the Arch-
t Ibid. bishop of St. Andrew's, the most remarkable per-
203. son in the party for abilities and political address,

was received with little favour at court ; and what-
ever secret partiality the Queen might have towards
those who profeffed the fame religion with herself,
the discovered no inclination, at that time, to take
the adminiffration of affairs out of the hands, to
which she had already committed it.

THE cold reception of the Archbishop of St.

Andrew's was owing to his connection with the
house of Hamilton ; from which the QuOeen was
much alienated. "The Duke of Guise and the Car-
dinal could never forgive the zeal, with which the
Duke of Chatelherault and his ion the earl of Arran
had espoused the cause of the Congregation. Princes
seldom view their successors without jealousy and
diflrufl. The Prior of St. Andrew's, perhaps,
dreaded the Duke as a rival in power. All these
causes concurred in infusing into the Queen's mind
an aversion fr that family. The Duke, indulging
his love of retirement, lived at a difitance from
court, without taking pains to insinuate himself
into favour ; and though the Earl ofArran openly
aspired to marry the Queen, he, by a most unpar-

donable

donable aA of imprudence, was the only nobleman Boot l1I.
of diflincdion who opposed Mary's enjoying the ex-
ercife of her religion, and by rashly entering a pub- 5
lic protestation against it, entirely forfeited her fa-
vour*. At the fame time, the sordid parsimony of * Keith,
his father obliged him either to hide himself in zo0, 2o0.
some retirement, or to appear in a manner unbe- Knox,286.
coming his dignity as first Prince of the blood, or
his high pretensions as suitor to the Queent. His +Keith,
love, inflamed by disappointment, and his impati- '96.
ence, exasperated by negledt, preyed gradually on
his reason; and, after many extravagancies, broke
out at last in ungovernable frenzy.

TOWARDS the end of the year, a Convention of

Estates was held chiefly on account of ecclesiastical Dec. 20.
affairs. The aflembly of the church, which fat at
the fame time, presented a petition, containing
many demands with refped to the fupprefling of Po-
pery, the encouraging the Proteflant religion, and
the providing for the maintenance of the clergy $. 1 Keith,
The last was a matter of great importance, and 20o.
the steps taken towards it deserve to be traced.

THOUGH the number of Protestant preachers Anew re-

was now considerably increased, many more were gulation
still wanted in every corner of the kingdom. No concerning
legal provision having been made for them, they tehfe the
had hitherto drawn a scanty and precarious subsist- church.
ence from the benevolence of their people. To
fuffer the Ministers of an eliablifhed church to con-
tinue in this slate of indigence and dependence, was
an indecency equally repugnant to the principles of
religion, and to the maxims of found policy ; and
would havejufltified all the imputations of avarice,
with which the Reformation was then loaded by its
enemies. The revenues of the Popish church were
the only fund, which could be employed for their
relief ; but during the three last years, the slate of
these was greatly altered. A great majority of

,.L Abbots,

RooK III. Abbots, Priors, and other heads of religious houses,
-^-' had, either from a sense of duty, or from views of

56i' interest, renounced the errors of Popery ; and,

notwithstanding this change in their sentiments,
they retained their ancient revenues. Almost the
whole order of Bishops, and several of the other
dignitaries, Rill adhered to the Romith superstition :
and though debarred from every spiritual function,
continued to enjoy the temporalities of their bene-
fices. Some laymen, especially those who had been
active in promoting the Reformation, had, under
various pretences, and amidiR the licence of civil
wars, got into their hands poffeflions, which be-
longed to the church. And thus, before any part
of the ancient ecclefiaflical revenues could be ap-
plied towards the maintenance of the Protestant
Ministers, many different interefls were to be ad-
jufted , many claims to be examined ; and the
prejudices and paflions of the two contending par-
ties required the application of a delicate hand.
After much contention, the following plan was ap-
proved by a majority of voices, and acquiesced in
even by the Popish clergy themselves. An exad
account of the value of ecclesiastical benefices
throughout the kingdom was appointed to be ta-
ken. The present incumbents, to whatever party
they adhered, were allowed to keep poffeflion:
two thirds of their whole revenue were reserved for
their own use, the remainder was annexed to the
Crown ,; and out of that, the Queen undertook to

SKeith, aflign a fufficient maintenance for the Protestant
Append. clergy*.
17s. As most of the Bilhops and several of the other
Knox,i94. dignitaries were still firmly attached to the Popiflh

religion, the extirpation of the whole order, rather
than an ad of such extraordinary indulgence, might
have been expeted from the zeal of the preachers,
and from the spirit which had hitherto animated
the nation. But, on this occasion, other principles

obflru&ed

obstruCted the operation of such as were purely re- BooK III.
ligious. Zeal for liberty, and the love of wealth, --

'

two paflions extremely opposite, concurred in deter- 56,'
mining the Protestant leaders to fall in with this
plan, which deviated so manifestly from the max-
ims, by which they had hitherto regulated their
condu&c.

IP the Reformers had been allowed to aSt with-

out controul, and to level all diftindions in the
church, the immense revenues annexed to ecclefi-
altical dignities could not, with any colour ofjuflice,
have been retained by those in whole hands they
now were; but mufft either have been distributed
among the Protestant clergy, who performed all
religious offices, or must have fallen to the Queen,
from the bounty of whose ancestors, the greater
part of them was originally derived. The former
scheme, however suitable to the religious spirit of
many among the people, was attended with mani-
fold danger. The Popith ecclefiaftics had acquired
a (hare in the national property, which far exceed-
ed the proportion that was consistent with the hap-
pinefs of the kingdom; and the nobles were de-
termined to guard against this evil, by preventing
the return of those vast poflfefions into the hands
of the church. Nor was the latter, which exposed
the constitution to more imminent hazard, to be
avoided with less care. Even that circumscribed
prerogative, which the Scottish Kings pofleffed,
was the objed of jealousy to the nobles. If they
had allowed the Crown to seize the spoils of the
church, such an increase of power must have fol-
lowed that acceflion of property, as would have
railed the royal authority above controul, and have
rendered the most limited Prince in Europe the most
absolute and independent. The reign of Henry
VIII. presented a recent and alarming example of
this nature. The wealth which flowed in upon that

QL3 Prince,

BOOK IIl. Prince, from the suppression of the monasteries, not

'v' only changed the maxims of his government, but
5561- the temper of his mind ,; and he who had formerly

submitted to his Parliaments, and courted his peo-
ple, dictated, from that time, to the former, with
intolerable iniblence ; and tyrannized over the lat-
ter with unprecedented severity : and if his policy
had not been extremely short sighted, if he had not
squandered what he acquired, with a profusion
equal to his rapaciousness, and which defeated his
ambition, he might have established despotism in
England, on a balis Co broad and strong, as all the
efforts of the fubje(s would never have been able to
shake. In Scotland, where the riches of the cler-
gy bore as great a proportion to the wealth of the
kingdom, the acquisition of church-lands would
have been of no less importance to the Crown, and
no less fatal to the aristocracy. The nobles, for
this realbn, guarded against such an increase of the
royal power, and thereby secured their own inde-
pendence.

AVARICE mingled itself with their concern for

the interest of their order. The re-uniting the pof-
feflions of the church to the Crown, or the bestow-
ing them on the Protestant clergy, would have been
a fatal blow both to those nobles, who had, by fraud
or violence, seized part of there revenues, and to
those Abbots and Priors who had totally renounced
their ecclesiastical charader. But as the plan, which
was proposed, gave Come fandtion to their ufurpa-
tions, they promoted it with their urmoft influence.
The popish ecclefiaftics, though the lopping offa
third of their revenues was by no means agreeable
to them, consented, under their present circum-
flances, to sacrifice a part of their poffellions, in
order to purchase the secure enjoyment of the re-
mainder; and after deeming the whole irrecoverably
iof0, they considered whatever they could retrieve as

l0

Lo much again. Many of the aincient dignitaries BooK III.
were men of noble birth ,; and as they no longer
entertained hopes of re storing the Popish religion, 156'.
they wished their own relations, rather than the
Crown, or the Protestant clergy, to be enriched with
the fpoilsof the church. Tthey connived, for this
reason, at the encroachmcnts of the nobles; they
even aided their avarice and violence ; they dealt
out the patrimony of the church among their own
relations, and by grantingfeus and perpetual leases
of lands and tithes, gave, to the utmost of their
power, rome colour of legal pofleiion, to what was
formerly mere usurpation. Many vestiges of such
alienations still remain'. The nobles, with the * Keith,
concurrence of the incumbents, daily extended their 507.
encroachments, and gradually stripped the ecclefiaf- Spoitf,
tics of their richest and molt valuable pofelions.
Even that third part, which was given up in order
to silence the clamours of the Proteflant clergy,
and to be some equivalent to the Crown for its
claims, amounted to no considerable fum. The
thirds due by the more powerful nobles, especially
by such as had embraced the Reformation, were
almost universally remitted. Others, by producing
fraudulent metals; by estimating the corn, and
other payments in kind, at an under value ; and by
the connivance of collectors; greatly diminished the
charge against themfelves-t and the nobles had t Keith.
much reason to be satisfied with a device which, at Appen"d
so small expence, secured to them such vast pof- Spoit.
feflions. 183.

NOR were the Proteflant clergy considerable The Pro-

gainers by this new regulation .; they found it to teflant
be a more easy matter to kindle zeal, than toclergy no
extingui(h avarice. Those very men, whom for- ganers by
merly they had Iwayed with ablolute authority,
were rnow deaf to all their remonflrances The
Prior of St. Andrev 's, the Earl of Argyll, the Earl
of Mucrton, and Maitland, all the mott zealous

Q.4 leaders

<r aflign, or, as it was called, to modify their stipends.

iS6'. An hundred merks Scottish was the allowance which

their liberality afforded to the generality ofMinifters.

* Knox, To a few three hundred-merks were granted*.
301. About twenty- four thousand pounds Scottith appears

to have been the whole fum allotted for the mainte-
nance of a national church eflablifhed by law, and
esteemed, throughout the kingdom, the true church

t Keith, of God t-. Even this fum was paid with little ex-
Append. adnefs, and the Ministers were kept in the fame

8. poverty and dependance as formerly.
*,62. THE gentleness of the Queen's adminiflration,

Diffenti- and the elegance of her court, had mitigated, in
tonsmong Come degree, the ferocity of the nobles, and ac-

cuftomed them to greater mildness and humanity,
while, at the fame time, her presence and authority
were a check to their factions and tumultuary
spirit. But, as a slate of order and tranquillity
was not natural to the feudal aristocracy ; it
could not be of long continuance , and this year
became remarkable for the most violent eruptions
of intestine discord and animosity.

AMONG the great and independent nobility of

Scotland, a Monarch could possess little authority,
and exercise no extensive or rigorous jurifdidion.
The interfering of interest, the unsettled state of
property, the frequency of public cpmmotions, and
the fierceness of their own manners, fowed, among
the great families, the feeds of many quarrels and
contentions. There, as we have already observed
were decided not by law, but by violence. The
offended Baron, without having recourse to the Mo-
narch, or acknowledging his superior authority, as-
fembled his own followers, and invaded the lands
of his rival in an hoflile manner. Together with
his eflate and honours, every nobleman transmitted

some

rome hereditary feud to his posterity, who were BooK 11I.
bound in honour to adopt and to prosecute it with

L r * 56s.

the fame inveterate rancour. 56

SUCH a dissention had subsisted between the house

of Hamilton and the Earl of Bothwell, and was
heightened by mutual injuries during the late comr-
motions*. Both the Earl of Arran and Bothwell *Keith,
happening to be in waiting at the fame time, their 2'5.
followers quarrelled frequently in the fitreets of
Edinburgh, and excited dangerous tumults in that
city. Ait last, the mediation of their friends, par-
ticularly of Knox, brought about a reconcilement, February.
but an unfortunate one to both there noblement-. t Knox,

A FEW days after, Arran came to Knox, and 30s-

with the utmost terror and confusion, confeffed first
to him, and then to the Prior of St. Andrew's that,
in order to obtain the role dire&ion of affairs, Both-
well and his kinsmen the Hamiltons, had conspired
to murder the Prior, Maitland, and the other fa-
vourites of the Queen. The Duke of Chatelhe-
rault regarded the Prior as a rival, who had sup-
planted him in the Queen's favour, and who filled
that place at the helm, which he imagined to be
due to himself, as first Prince of the blood. Both-
well, on account of the personal injuries which he
had received from the Prior during the late com-
motions, was no less exasperated against him. But
whether he and the Hamiltons had agreed to
cement their new alliance, with the blood of their
common enemy, or whether the conspiracy existed
only in the frantic and disordered imagination of
the Earl of Arran, it is impoflible, amidit the
contradition of biftorians, and the defe&ivenefs of
records, positively to determine. Among men in-
flamed with resentment, and impatient for revenge,
rash expreflions might be uttered, and violent and
criminal expedients proposed; and on that foun-
lation, Arran's difkmpered fancy might rear the

whole

' "^ persons accused, denied their guilt with the utmost

'562 confidence. But the known charaders of the men,

and the violent spirit of the age, added greatly to
tlhe probability of the accusation, and abundantly
julfily the condud of the Queen's Ministers, who
confined Bothwell, Arran, and a few of the ring-
leaders, in separate prisons, and obliged the Duke
to surrender the strong castle of Dunbarton, which

*Knox, he had held ever since the time of his resigning the
307, 3o8. office of Regent.*
Keih. ' THE designs of the Earl of Huntly against the.
The Earl Prior of St. Andrew's were deeper laid, and pro-.
of Hunt- duced more memorable and more tragical events.
ly's enmity George Gordon Earl of Huntly, having been one
Queen's of the nobles who conspired against James III. and
Ministers. who raised his son James IV. to the throne, enjoyed

a great lhare in the confidence of that generous
Prince ,; By his bounty, great accellions of wealth

Oficers ^oand power were added to a family, already opulent
State, 56. and powerful. On the death of that Monarch,

Alexander the next Earl, being appointed Lord
Lieutenant of all the counties beyond Forth, left
the other nobles to contend for offices at court; and
retiring to the north, where his estate and influence
lay, relided there, in a kind of princely indepen-
dence. 1 he Chieftains in that part of the king-
dom dreaded the growing dominion of such a dan-
gerous neighbour, but were unable to prevent his
encroachments. Some of his rivals he secretly un-
dermined, others he subdued by open force. His
estate far exceeded that of any other fubjed, and
his/uperiorities andjurifdiiions extended over many
of the northern counties. With power and pofeIf-
fions so immense, under two long and feeble mino-
rities, and amidst the shock of civil commotions,
the Earls of HuIntiv might have indulged the most
lc-\ated hlcps. But happily for the Crown, an

adtive

ative and enterprising spirit was not the charade- BooK lII[
riftic of that family, and whatever objed their am- '-
bition might have in view, they chole rather toac- l265.
quire it by political address, than-to itize it openly,
and by force of arms.

THE conduct of George the present Earl, during

the late commotions, had been perfectly suitable
to the character of the family, in that age, dubi-
ous, variable, and crafty. While the success of
the Lords of the Congregation was uncertain, he
allifted the Queen Regent in her attempts to crush
them. When their affairs put on a better afped,
he pretended to join them, but never heartily fa-
voured their cause. He was courted and feared by
each of the contending parties ; both connived at
his encroachments in the north a and, by artifice
and force, which he well knew how to employ al-
ternately, and in their proper places, he added
every day to the exorbitant power and wealtlh
which he poffeffed.

HE observed the growing reputation and autho-

rity of the Prior of St. Andrew's, with the great-
eftjealoufy and concern, and considered him as a
rival who had engrossed that (hare in the Q.een's
confidence, to which his own zeal for the Popish
religion seemed to give him a preferable title.
Personal injuries soon increased the mifunder-
Itanding occasioned by rivalfhip in power. The
Queen having determined to reward the services
of the Prior of St. Andrew's, by creating him
an Earl, (he made choice of Mar, as the place
whence he should take his title; and, that he might
be better able to support his new honour, beflowed
upon him, at the fame time, the lands of that Feb. to.
name. There were part of the royal demefnes*, 'Craw.
but the Earls of Huntly had been permitted, for Peer. 297.
several years4 to keep poffellion of them.t On this t- Buch.
occasion, the Earl, not only complained, with some 334.
reafun, of the !ils wvhich he fuftaincd, but had

real

BOOK III.real cause to be alarmed at the intrusion of a for-

S-'midable neighbour into the heart of his territories,

'562. who might be able to rival his power, and excite

his oppressed vassals to shake off his yoke.

June27. AN incident, which happened obon after, en-

creased and confirmed Huntly's suspicions. Sir
John Gordon, his third son, and Lord Ogilvie had
a dispute about the property of an estate. This dif-
pute became a deadly quarrel. They happened
unfortunately to meet in the streets of Edinburgh,
and being both attended with armed followers, a
fcuffe ensued, in which Lord Ogilvie was danger-
oufly wounded by Sir John. The Magistrates
seized both the offenders, and the Queen comman-
ded them to be ftridtly confined. Under any re-
gular government, such a breach of public peace
and order would expose the person offending, to
certain punirhment. At this time, rome severity
was necessary, in order to vindicate the Queen's
authority from an insult, the most heinous which
had been offered to it, since her return into Scot-
land. But in an age accustomed to licence and
anarchy, even this moderate exertion of her power
in ordering them to be kept in custody, was deemed
an at of intolerable rigour; and the friends of each
party began to con vene their vassals and dependants,
in order to overawe, or to frustrate the decisions of

SKeith, jufice*. Mean while, Gordon made his escape out
223. of prison, and flying into Aberdeen(hire, com-

plained loudly of the indignity with which he had
been treated ; and as all the Queen's acions were,
at this juncture, imputed to the Earl of Mar, this
added not a little to the resentment, which Huntly
had conceived against that nobleman.

AuguR. AT the very time when thefre paflions fermented,

with the utmost violence, in the minds of the
Earl of Huntly and his family, the Queen happened
to let out on a progress into the northern parts of

the

the kingdom. She was attended by the Earls of Booi.I H.
Mar and Morton, Maitland, and other leaders of -' '
that party. The presence of the Queen, in a s562.
country where no name greater than the Earl of
Huntly's had been heard of, and no power superior
to his had been exercised, for many years, was an
event, of itself, abundantly mortifying to that
haughty nobleman. But while the Queen was en-
tirely under the direction of Mar, all her aAions
were more apt to be misrepresented, and construed
into injuries ; and a thousand circumstances could
not but occur to awaken Huntly'sjealoufy, to offend
his pride, and to inflame his resentment. Amidst
the agitations of To many violent pailions, some
eruption was unavoidable.

ON Mary's arrival in the north, Huntly employ-

ed his wife, a woman capable of executing the com-
milfion with abundance of dexterity, to sooth the
Queen, and to intercede for pardon to their Con.
But the Queen peremptorily required, that he thould
again deliver himself into the hands of justice, and
rely on her clemency. Gordon was persuaded to
do Co ; and being enjoined by the Queen to enter
himfelfprifoner in the catle of Stirling, he promised
likewise to obey that command. Lord Erskine,
Mar's uncle, was, at that time, Governor of this fort.
The Queen's severity, and the place in which the
appointed Gordon to be confined, were interpreted
to be new marks of Mar's rancour, and augmen-
ted the hatred of the Gordons againit him.

MEAN time, Sir John Gordon set out towards Sept. I.

Stirling ; but instead of performing his promise to
the Queen, made his escape from his guards, and
returned to take the command of his followers,
who were riting in arms, all over the north.
There were destined to second and improve the
blow, by which his father proposed secretly, and
at once, to cut off Mar, Morton, and Maitland,

his

- perpetrating this horrid deed were frequently ap-

1562. pointed ; but the executing of it was wonderfully

prevented, by some of thole unforeseen accidents,
which (o often occur to disconcert the schemes, and

Keith, to intimidate the hearts of afluaflns*. His own
230. houle at Strathbogie was the last and most conve-

nient Icene, appointed for committing the intended
violence. But, on her journey thither, the Queen
heard of young Gordon's flight and rebellion, and
refusing, in the first transports of her indignation, to
enter under the father's roof, by that fortunate ex-
preflion of her resentment, saved her Miniftersfrom

SKnox, unavoidable deftruwtion f.
31,1. Takearms THIE ill filccefs of thele efforts of private revenge
against the precipitated Huntly into open rebellion. As the
Queen. Qtjeen was entirely under the direction of his rivals,

it was impoflible to work their ruin, without violat-
ing the allegiance which he owed his Sovereign.
On her arrival at Inverness, the commanding officer
in the castle, by Huntly's orders, shut the gates a-
gainft her. Mary was obliged to lodge in the town,
which was open anddefencelefs; but this, too, was
quickly surrounded by a multitude of the Earl's fol-

. Crawls lowers +. The utmost conflernation seized the
Officers ot Queen, who was attended by a very slender train.
State 57,
se She every moment expeded the approach of the re-

bels, and Ibme thips were already ordered into the
river to fecureher elfape. The loyalty of the Mon-
roes, Frazers, Mackintofhes, and some neighbour-
ing clans, who took arms in her defence, saved her
from this danger. By their aflifiance, she even for-
ced the cattle to surrender, and inflided on the Go-
vernor the puniflhment which his insolence deserved.

THIS open at of disobedience vas the occasion

of a measure more galling to Huntly than any
the Queen had hitherto taken. Lord Erskine,
having pretended a right to the earldom of Mar,

Stewart

Stewart resigned it in his favour ; and at the fame BooK III.
time Mary conferred upon him the title of Earl of 'I" '
Murray, with the effate annexed to that dignity, 56
which had been in the poffeffion of the Earl of
Huntly since the year I548*. From this he con- * CrawE
cluded that his family was devoted to defirution ; Peer. 359-
and dreading to be firipped, gradually, of those
poffeflions, which, in reward of their services, the
gratitude of the Crown had bestowed on himself,
or his anceflors, he no longer disguised his inten-
tions, but, in defiance of the Queen's procla-
mation, openly took arms. Instead of yielding
those places of strength, which Mary required him
to surrender, his followers dispersed or cut in pieces
the parties which fte dispatched to take poflefion
of them t- ; and he himself, advancing with a con- + Knox
fiderable body of men towards Aberdeen, to which 3'9-
place the Queen was now returned, filled her small
court with coniternation. Murray had only a
handful of men in whom he could confide +. In t Keith.
order to form the appearance of an army, he was 230.
obliged to call in the afliftance of the neighbouring
barons ; but as most of these either favoured Hunt-
ly's designs, or flood in awe of his power, from them
no cordial or effettual service eould be expeced.

'WrITH there troops, however, Murray, who Oaober

could gain nothing by delay, marched briskly to- 8.
wards the enemy. He found them at Corrichie,
potted to great advantage; he commanded his
northern associates inflantly to begin the attack ;
but on the first motion of the enemy, they treache-
roufly turned their backs ; and Huntly's followers,
throwing aside their spears, and breaking their
ranks, drew their swords, and rulhed forward to
the pursuit. It was then, that Murray, gave proof He is de-
both of steady courage, and of prudent condua. feared by
He stood immoveable, on a rising ground, with the the Earlof

small Murray.

BooK III. small but trusty body of his adherents, who pre-
'--·'tfienting their spears to the enemy, received them

'562. with a determined resolution, which they little ex-

pected. The Highland broad sword is not a
weapon fit to encounter the Scottish spear. In every
civil commotion, the superiority of the latter has
been evident, and has always decided the contest.
On this occasion, the irregular attack of Huntly's
troopswas easily repulsed by Murray's firm battalion.
Before they recovered from the confusion occasioned
by this unforeseen resistance, those who had begun
the flight, willing to regain their credit with the
viaorious party, fell upon them, and compleated
the rout. Huntly himself, who was extremely cor-
pulent, was trodden to death in the pursuit. His
sons, Sir John and Adam, were taken, and Murray,
returned in triumph to Aberdeen with his prisoners.

TH E trial of men taken in acual rebellion against

their Sovereign was extremely short. Three days
after the battle, Sir John Gordon was beheaded at
Aberdeen. His brother Adam was pardoned on
account of his youth. Lord Gordon, who had
been privy to his father's designs, was seized in
the south, and upon trial found guilty of treason;
but, through the Queen's clemency, the punith-
ment was remitted. The first Parliament proceed-
ed againit this great family, with the utmost
rigour of law, and reduced their power and for-
tune to the lowest ebb*.

As

* This conspiracy of the Earl of Huntly is one of the molt in-

tricate and mysterious passages in the Scottish history. As it was
a tranfaition purely domestic, and in which the Englilh were
little interested, few original papers concerning it have been found
in Cecil's ColleCtion, the great storehouse of evidence and infor-
mation with regard to the affairs of this period.

Buchanan supposes Mary to have formed a design about this

time, of destroying Murray, and of employing the power of

the

As the fall of the Earl of Huntly is the moll imr- BOOK II.

portant event of this year, it would have been im- ,-6-.

proper

the Earlof Huntly for this purpose. But his account of this
whole tranfaaion appears to be To void of truth, and even of
probability, as to deserve no serious examination. At that time,
Mary wanted power, and seems to have had no inclination to
commit any ad of violence upon her brother.

Two other hypotheses have been advanced, in order to ex-

plain this matter; but they appear to be equally removed from
truth.

I. It cannot well be conceived, that the Queen's journey to

the north was a scheme concerted by Murray, in order to ruin
the Earl of Huntly. i. Huntly had resided at court almost ever
since the Queen's return, Keith, 198. Append. 175, &c.
This was the proper place in which to have seized him. To
attack him in Aberdeenlhire, the feat of his power, and in the
midst of his vassals, was a projet equally absurd and hazardous.
2. The Queen was not accompanied with a body of troops,
capable of attempting any thing against Huntly by violence; her
train was not more numerous, than was usual in times of greatest
tranquillity, Keith, 230. 3. There remain two original letters
with regard to this conspiracy, one from Randolph the Englith
Resident, and another from Maitland, both directed to Cecil.
They talk of Huntly's measures as notoriously treasonable. Ran-
dolph mentions his repeated attempts to affaflinate Murray,
&c. No hint is given of any previous resolution, formed by
Mary's Ministers, to ruin Huntly and his family. Had any such.
design ever existed, it was Randolph's duty to have discovered it ;
nor would Maitland have laboured to conceal it from the Englifih
secretary. Keith, 229, 232.

II. To suppose that the Earl of Huntly had laid any plan for

seizing the Queen, and her Ministers, teems to be no lets im-
probable. t. On the Queen's arrival in the north, he laboured,
in good earnest, to gain her favour, and to obtain a pardon for
his ton. Knox, 31s. 2. He met the Queen, fiftl at Aberdeen,
and then at Rothemay, whither he would not have ventured to
come, had he harboured any such trea:onable resolution. Knox,
31'8. 3. His condua was irresolute and wavering, liike that of
a man dilconcerted by an unforeseen danger, not like one exe-
cuting a concerted plan. 4. The most conftderable persons of
his clan submitted to the Queen, and found surety to obey her
commands, Keith, 226. Had the Earl been previously deter-
mined to rife in armas against the Queen, or to seize her Minilters,
it is probable he would have imparted it to his piincipal followers,
nor would they have dcferted him in this manner

\'oi 1. R For

I30Ko III.proper to interrupt the narrative, by taking notice
-- of leller tranlactions, which may now be related
156:. uith equal propriety.
An inter- IN the beginning of summer, Mary, who was de-
view be- firoils of entering into a more intimate correfpon-
tween Eli- dence and familiarity with Elizabeth, employed
zabethand Maitland to dclire a personal interview with her,
Mary pro- -
por-d. rmewhlcre in the nortli of England. As this pro-

pofal could not be rejccted with decency, the time,
the place, and the circumflances of the meeting were
infantlyv agreed upon. But Elizabeth was prudent
enough not to admit into her kingdom, a rival,
whoou;tflone herlff, so far, in beauty, and grace-
fulncfs of person ; and who excelled, Ib eminently,
in all thearts of insinuation and address. Under pre-
tence of being confined to London, by the attention
which the was obliged to give to the civil wars

* Keith, n France, the put off the interview for that season*,

and prevented her subjects from feeing the Scottish
Queen, the charms of whole appearance, and beha-

June 2. viour, the envied, and had some reason to dread.
Deccm. DURING this year, the Assembly of the church
25. met twice. In both these meetings, were exhibited

many complainrs of the poverty and dependence of
the church ; and many murmurs against the neg-
ligence or avarice of those, who had been appointed
to collet, and todiflribute the rmail fund, appro-

-- K.noT, printed for the maintenance of preachers t. A
3', 32j. petition, craving rcdrefs of t!hcir grievances, was

li rentcd to tlic Qjjecn ; but vitliout any effeft.
Tlhere was n, realon to expc& that Mary would
discover any for. ardnefs to grant the requefis of

For there realorns, 'we have, on the one hand, vindicated the

Earl of Murray homn any deliberate intention of ruining the fa-
iilv of Cordon ; and on the other hand, we have imputed the
violent conduit of the Earl of Huntly, to a sudden itart of re-
Eintiment, without charging hinm with any premeditated purpose
of icbellion.

f'.ch

such supplicants. And as her Miniffters, though all ooK III.
rnmf zealous Proteetants, were themselves growing "
rich on the inheritance of the church, they were 5-6"
equally regardltfs of the indigence and demands of
their brethern.

MARY had now continued above two years in a 1563-

slate of widowhood. Her gentle adminiflration tions with
had secured the hearts of her fubjeds, who were regard
impatient for her marriage, and wished the Crown to the
to descend in the right line from their ancient Queens
Monarchs. She herself was the most amiable mara~e.
woman of the age, and the fame of her accom-
plifhments, together with the favourable circum-
itance of her having one kingdom already in her
poffefilon, and the profped of mounting the throne
of another, prompted many different Princes to
solicit an alliance so illustrious. Sco:land, by its
situation, threw so much weight and power into
whatever scale it fell, that all Europe waited with
follicitude for Mary's determination ; and no event
in that age excited stronger political fears and jea-
loufies ; none interested more deeply the paflions of
several Princes, or gave rife to more contraditory
intrigues, than the marriage of the Scottish Queen.

THE Princes of the house of Austria remember- She is foil-

ed what vast proje6ts the French had founded on cited by
their former alliance with the Qicen of Scots ; and Pitines.
though the unexpeCced death, firif of Henry and
then of Francis, had hindered there from taking
effeI, yet if Mary Ihould again make choice of a
husband am; g the French Princes, the fame
designs might be revived and profecutcd with bet-
ter tuccefs.

IN order to prevent this, the Emperor entered in- By the

to a negociation with the Cardinal of Lorrain, who Archeuke
had proposed to marry the Scottith Queen to the
Archduke Charles, Ferdinand's third son. The mat-
ter was communicared to Mary ; and Melvil, who,
at that time, attended the Eledtor Palatine, was

R a comlnanded

- tion of the Allchduke a.
* Mel PHILIP II though no leIs apprehensive of Mary's
63, 6; falling once more into the hands of France, envied
Keith, 39. his uncle Ferdinand the acquisition of so important
See aplizc ; and as his own inflaiable ambition grasped
Append.
No VI. at al1 the kingdoms of Europe, he employed his
By Don ambafiador at the French court, to follicit the Prin-
Carlosof ces of Lorrain in behalf of his ibn Don Carlos, at
Spain. that time, the heir of all the extensive dominions,
ta46,e. which belonged to the Span ifh monarchy t.
Addit. a CATHERINE- of Medicis, on the other hand,
Labor. dreaded the marriage of the Scottish Queen with
ro

, 03. any of tle Austrian Princes, which would have ad-

Duke of ded ib much to the power and pretensions of that
Aniou. ambitious race. Her jealousy of the Princes of

Lorrain rendered her no less averse from an alliance,
which, by securing them the proteation of the Em-
peror or King of Spain, would give new boldness
to their entcrprifing spirit, and enable them to set
the power of the Crown, which they already rival-
led, at open defiance : And as the was afraid that
theie Iplendid proposals of the Austrian family
would dazzle the young Queen, she instantly dif-
patched Cattelnau into Scotland, to offer her in
marriage the Duke of Anjou, the brother of her
former husband, who soon after mounted the

t Caltela.

., , throne ofr France $.
Mary'sde- MARI attentively weighed the pretensions of so
liberations many rivals. The archduke had little to recom-
concerning mend him, but his high birth. The example of

. Henry ViI. was a warning against contrading a
marriage with the brother of her former husband;
nor could she bear the thoughts of appearing in
France, in a rank inferior to that which Ihe had for-
merly held in that kingdom. She listened there-
fore, with partiality, to the Spanish propositions,
and the proficct of such vast power and domrinions

flattered

flattered the ambition of a young and aspiring Boo' IL
Princess.

THREE several circumstances, however, concur- 3

red to divert Mary from any thoughts of a foreign
alliance.

THE first of these was the murder of her uncle

the Duke of Guise. The violence and ambition of
that nobleman had involved his country in a civil
war ; which was conduated with furious animosity,
and various fuccels. At last the Duke laid siege to
Orleans, the bulwark of the Protestant cause ; and
he had reduced that city to the la(t extremity, when
*he was affaflinated by the frantic z<al of Poltrot.
This blow proved fatal to the Queen of Scots.
The young Duke was a minor ; and the Cardinal
of Lorrain, though subtle and intriguing, wan'ed
that undaunted and enterprising courage, which
rendered the ambition of his brother to formidable.
Catherine instead of encouraging the ambition, or
furthering the pretensions of her daughter-in law,
took pleasure in mortifying the one, and in difap-
pointing the other. In this situation, and without
luch a proteCtor, it became necessary for Mary to
contract her views, and to proceed with caution ;
and whatever prospect of advantage might allure
her, (he could venture upon no dangerous or
doubtful measure.

THE second circumstance, which weighed with Tbeveiw

Mary, was the opinion of the Qjeen of England. beth.
The marriage of the Scottish Queen interested Eli-
zabeth more deeply than any other Prince; and
(he observed all her deliberations concerning it
with the most anxious attention. She herfelflfems
early to have formed a resolution of living unmar-
ried, and (he dilcovered no small inclination toim-
pole the fame law on the Q0een of Scots. She had
already experienced what use might be made of
Mary's power and pretensions, to invade her domi-

R 3 nions,

Boo III. nions, and to disturb her poffelfion of the Crown.
---- The death of Francis 11. haJ happily delivered her

1563' from this danger, which the determined to guard

against for the future, with the utmost care. As
the restless ambition of the Aufirian Princes, the
avowed and bigotted patrons of the Catholic iu-
perftition, made her, in a particular manner, dread
their neighbourhood, the instructed Randol, h, to
remonstrate, in the firongeft terms, againti any
al!iance with themn , and to acquaint Mary, that
as Lhe herflif ¢would confider such a match to be a
breach of the perlbnal fricndfhip, in which they
were Uo happily u;iit:d , tb the Englilh nation
would regard it, as the diifolution of that confede-
racy which now fubliltcd between the two king-
doms : That, in order to prefirve their own reli-
gion and liberties, they would, in all probability,
take fme flep prcj udicial to her right of fucce!ibon,
which, as (he wcll knew, they neither wanted
power nor pretences to invalidate, and set aside.
This threatning was accompanied with a promite,
but expreffld in very ambiguous terms, that ii
Mary's choice of a husband thould prove agreeable
to the English nation, Elizabeth would appoint
proper persons to examine her title to the fucceflion,
and, if well founded, command it to be publickly
rccognizcd. She oblerved, however, a mysterious
silence concerning the perion on who:n the w ifhed
the c':oice of the Scottish Queen to tall. The re-
vealir:g of this secret was rclcr\ed for some future
ncgociation. Mean while lie threw out some ob-
fcure hints, that a native of Britai:, or one not of
princely rank, would be her lafift and moll inof-

* Keitli, ftnfive choice*. An advice offered with fucli an
242, 245 air of fupcetiority and command, mortifiCd, 1no

doubt, tlhe pride of the Scottith Qucen. ut, un-
der her prtclnt circumnftanccs, the was obliged to
bear this indigi:; y )efiliture of all foreign alli't-
ance, and i:tcnt upon thel Englilhl fuccclltin, the

great

great object of her withes and ambition, it became BooK II.
necessary to court a rival, whom, without manifelt L
imprudence, the could not venture to offend. 56.

'HE inclination of her own fuibje(s was another, The feni-

and not the least confiderablecircumftance, which ,ments or
called for Mary's attention at this conjundure. her own
They had been taught, by the fatal experiment of fubjets.
her former marriage, to dread an union with any
great Prince, whole power might be employed to
opprels their religion and liberties. They trembled
at the thoughts of a match with a foreigner ; and
if the Crown should be firengthened by new domi-
nions or alliances, they fore(iw that the royal pre-
rogative would soon be ifretched beyond its ancient
and legal limits. Their cagerncfs to prevent this
could scarce fail of throwing them into the arms
of England. Elizabeth would be ready to affird
them her aid, towards obstructing a measure iodif-
agreeable to hercltf. 'Twaseafy for them to liize
the person of the Sovereign. By the afliflance of
the English fleet, they could render it difficult for
any foreign Prince to land in Scotland. The Ro-
man Catholics, now an inconliderable party in the
kingdom, and dispirited by the loss of the Earl of
Huntlv, could give no obltruction to their defig:s.
To what violent Lxtremes, the national abhorrence
of a foreign yoke might have been carried, is ma-
nifeft from the tran:;actions bloth previous, and sub-
sequent to the present period.

Foi< thefre reafu:os, Mary laid aside, at that time,

all thoughts of foreign alliance, and seemed wil-
ling to sacrifice her own ambition, in order to re-
move the jcaloufi s of Elizabeth, and to quiet the
fears of her own fubj&es.

Tn.r Parliament met this year, for the firfl time, A parhia-

since the Queen's return into Scotland. Mary'sad- ment held,
milifration had hitherto been extremely popuLur. May 26.

R 4 Her

BooK Il.Her Ministers poffeffed the confidence of the na-
^.-" -tion ; and, by consequence, the proceedings of

£56j. that afiembly were conducted with perfed unani-

mity. The grant of the earldom of Murray to the
Prior of St. Andrew's was confirmed : the Earl of
Huntly, and several of his vailals and dependants,
were attainted : the attainder against Kirkaldy of
Grange, and some of his accomplices in the mur-

Knox, der of Cardinal Beatoun, was reversed* : the at
330. of obli' ion, mentioned in the treaty of Edinburgh,

received the royal anction. But Mary, who had
determined never to ratify that treaty, took care
that this 1..nCtion fhculd not be deemed any ac*-
knowledgment of its validity; the granted her con-
fit.- rertely in conddcenfion to the Lords in Parlia-
R.i r, .':ho, on their knees, besought her to allay
the ical,:L.ics and apprehensions of her subjects, by

t, such a gracious law --.
wo ,ss. No attempt was made, in this Parliament, to
Nc:hing procure the Queen's aflent to the laws establishing
deterniin- the Protelfant religion. Her Ministers, though
ed with zealous Protestants themselves, were aware that
reigron, this could not be urged without manifest danger

and imprudence. She had consented, through
their influence, to tolerate and protec the reformed
do&rine. They had even prevailed on her to im-
prison and prosecute the Archbishop of St. An-
drew's, and Prior of Whithorn, for celebrating

tKeirh, mats contrary to her proclamation i. Mary, how-
239. ever, was fill passionately devoted to the Romish

fuperflition ; and though, from political motives,
the had granted a temporary protection to opinions,
which Ihe disapproved, there were no grounds to
hope that she would agree to eftablilh them for
perpetuity. The moderation of those who
proffffed it, was the best method for reconci-
ling the OQeen to the l'roteftant religion. Time
might abate her bigotry I-lr prejudices might
wear o0 gradually, and at lafl the might

yield

yield to the withes of her people, what their impor- BooK III.
tunity or their violence could never have extorted. ''*·
Many laws of importance were to be proposed in Is63.
Parliament ; and to defeat all these, by luch a fruit-
less and ill-timed application to the Queen, would
have been equally injurious to individuals, and de-
trincmntal to tht public.

THE zeal of the Protestant clergy was deaf to all Whichof-

these contiderations of policy. Eager and impa- sends the
tient, it brooked no delay : Severe and inflexible, it clergy.
would condescend to no compliances. The lead-
ing men of that order infited, that this opportunity
ofeftablilhing religion by law, was not to be ne-
gleetcd. They pronounced the moderation of the
courtiers apoftacy ; and their endeavours to gain
the Qieen, they reckoned criminal and servile.
Knox Lolemnly renounced the frienatfhip of the Earl
of Murray, as a man devoted to Mary, and so
blindly zealous for her service, as to become re-
gardlefs of those objects which he had hitherto es-
teemed molt sacred. This rupture, which is a
strong proof of Murray's sincere attachment to the
Queen at that period, continued above a year and
an half *. *Knox,

TH"E preachers being disappointed by the men 33'

in whom they placed the greatest confidence, gave
vent to their indignation in their pulpits. There
echoed more loudly than ever, with declarations
againfi idolatry ; with difinal presages concerning
the Queen's marriage with a foreigner ; and with
bitter reproaches against those, who, from interest-
ed motives, had deserted that cause, which they
once reckoned it their honour to support. The
people, inflamed by fuich vehement declamations, And occa-
which were dilated by a zeal more sincere than flonsa tu-
prudent, proceeded to rash and unjustifiable ats ,mol he
of violence. During the Queen's absence, on a people.
progress into the weft, mass continued to be cele-
brated in her chapel at Holy rood houle. The

Augu

multitude.

BooK III. multitude of those who openly resorted thither,

C'--^ 'gave great offence to the citizens of Edinburgh,
1563J who, being free from the reitraint which the royal

presence imposed, assembled in a riotous manner,
interrupted the service, and filled such as were pre-
sent, with the utmost consternation. Two of the

SKnox, ringleaders in this tumult were seized, and a day
3.35 appointed for their trial *
Knox tried KNox, who esteemed the zeal of these persons
onthatac- laudable, and their conduct meritorious, confider-
count, but ed them as fufferers in a good cause ; and in order
October,. to screen them from danger, he issued circular let-

ters, requiring all who profeffed the true religion,
or were concerned for the prefcrvation of it, to as-
femble at Edinburgh on the day of trial, that by
their prcl'nce, they might comfort and allift their

tlbid.z36.dil'reffd brethren t-. One ofthefe letters fell into

the Queen's hands. To allemble the fu~bjezts
without the authority of the Sovereign, was con-
fitrued to be treason, and a relolution was taken to
prof~cute Knox for that crime, bcfore the Privy

Decem. Council I-lppilv for him, his judges were not
5 . only zealous Protcilants, b.at the very men, who,

during the late commotioi.s, had openly refilltted,
and fct at dcfian:cc the Queen's authority. It wcs
under precedents, drawn fr< m their own condutd,
that lKnox endi avoured to fheltcr himfnelf. Nor
would it have been an easy mattir for thete Coun-
fellors to have found out a diftindtion, by whichl
they could censure him, without condemning them-
filvcs. After a long hearing, he was unanimously
acquitted. Sinclair Bishop of Ross, and President
of the Cmurt of Seflion, a zealous Papist, heartily
concurred with the other Counsellors in this deci-

.Kaox, sion I; a remarkable fad, which thews the unlit-
343. tied state of government in that age ,; the low con-

dition to which regal authority was then funk; and
the impunity with which fubjecls might invade

thole

those rights of the Crown, which are :v heiild IoC. ii
lacred.

THE marriage of the Scottith Queen continued iNc.,-

still to be the objet of attention and intaxgue. ...

,,

Though Elizabeth, even while the wished todliec& regard
Mary, treated her with a dilguftlul refcrve; though to the
she kept her, without necelii;y, in a state of u- marriage.
pence , and hinted often at the person, whom the
deflined to be her hutband, without directly men-
tioning his name , yet Mary framed all her actions
to express fitch a prudent refped for the English
Qeen, that foreign Princes began to imagin;e Ihe
had given herfllf up implicitly to her diredtion *. *Keith,
The proIpcct of this union alarmed Catherine of 248.
Medicis. Though Catherine had taken pleasure,
all along, in doing ill offices to the Queen of Scots;
though loon after the Duke of Guite's death, the
had put upon her a most mortifying indignity, by
flopping the payment of her dowry, by depriving
her fubjeC the Duke of Chatelherault of his pension,
and by beftowing the command of the Scottilh
Guards on a Frenchman -, t; he resolved, however, t Id. 244.
to prevent this dangerous con unltion of the British
(i2cens. For this purpose, the now employed all
her art to appease Mary t, to whom Ihe had given tSee Ap-
so many cautes of offrnce. The arrears ot her io.
dowry were instantly paid ; more puntual remit-
tances were promised for the future ; and offers
made, not only to restore, but to extend the pri-
vileges of the Scottilh nation in France. It was
ealy for Mary to penetrate into the motives of this
sudden change, the well knew the character of her
mother-in-law, and laid little flrefs upon profclrions
of friendship, which came from a Princcfs of such
a faile and unfeeling heart.

'THE negociat ion with England, relative to the

marriage, titffered no interruption, from this ap-
plication of the French Queen. As Mary, in com-

pliance

'-" ' motives of interest, determined Ipeedily to marry,
's6r" Elizabeth was obliged to break that unaccountable
Elizabeth silence, which the had hitherto affeced. The fe-
recom- cret was disclosed, and her favourite Lord Robert
nmendsLei- Dudley, afterwards Earl of Leiceffer, was declared
cerer to
her for a to be the happy man, whom the had chosen to be
husband. the husband of a Queen courted by so many
* Keith, Princes *.
25g. ELIZABETH'S wisdom and penetration were re-

markable in the choice of her Ministers; in diftin-
guifhing her favourites, those great qualities were
lets conspicuous. She was influenced in two cafes
so opposite, by meritof very different kinds. Their
capacity for business, their knowledge, their pru-
dence, were the talents to which alone she attended,
in chufing her Ministers; whereas beauty and
gracefulness of person, polished manners, and
courtly address, were the accomplifhmentson which
the beffowed her favour. She adted in the one cafe
with the wisdom of a Queen, in the other, the dif-
covered the weakness of a woman. To this Lei-
cefler owed his grandeur. Though remarkable
neither for eminence in virtue, nor superiority of
abilities, the Queen's partiality didtinguifhed him
on every occasion. She raised him to the highefl
honours, the bestowed on him the most important
employments, and manifefied an affedion so dif-
proportionate to his merit, that, in the opinion of
that age, it could be accounted for only by the

+ Cam- power of planetary influence t.
den, 549. THE high spirit of the Scottilh Queen could not
Mary of- well bear the first overture of a match with a sub
fended at jea. Her own rank, the splendor of her former
this. marriage, and the follicitations, at this time, of so

many powerful Princes, crouded into her thoughts,
and made her sensibly feel how humbling and dif-
refpeAful Elizabeth's propolal was. She diffem-
bled, however, with the English Resident , and

though

though the declared, in strong terms, what a de- Boo IIf.
gradation she would deem this alliance, which ' -
brought along with it no advantage, that could 1~64"
justify such neglect of her own dignity, she men-
tioned the Earl of Leicefier, notwithstanding, in
terms full of refped *. * Keith,

ELIZABETH, we may presume, did not with that zsz.

the proposal should be received in any other man- Elizabeth'

r i r . views in

ner. After the extraordinary marks ihe had given recom-
of her own attachment to Leicester, and while he mending
was ftillin the very height of favour, it is not pro- him.
bable the could think seriously of beftowing him
upon another. 'Twas not her aim to persuade,
but only to amuse Mary -t. Almost three years t Melvil,
were elapsed since her return into Scotland, and 104, 10o.
though follicited by her subjects, and courted by
the greatest Princes in Europe, she had hitherto
been prevented from marrying, chiefly by the arti-
fices of Elizabeth. And if, at this time, the En-
glifh Queen could have engaged Mary to listen to
her proposal in favour of Leicester, her power over
this creature of her own would have enabled her to
protrac the negociation at pleasure; and by keep-
ing her rival unmarried, the would have rendered
the profped of her fuccefion less acceptable to the

English. LEICESTER'S own situation was extremely deli-
cate, and embarrafling. To gain poffeflion of the
most amiable woman of the age, to carry away
this prize from Co many contending Princes, to
mount the throne of an ancient kingdom, might
have flattered the ambition of a subject, much more
considerable than he. He saw all these advanta-
ges, no doubt ; and, in secret, they made their
full imprellion on him. But, without offending
Elizabeth, he durif not venture on the most diffant
difcovery'of his sentiments, or take any flep to-
wards facilitating his acquilition of< b,'" tso wor-
tliy ofdefiire

CU;

"V^ irm. ,\ hich !he was at no pains to conceal*, might

SMeIv. nlpire him with hopes ofattairning the supreme rank

93, 94. in a kingdom, more illufirious than Scotland. Eli-

zabeth had often declared, that no:l!ing but her re-
folurion to lead a lingle li]e, and his bei ng born her
own lubicae, would have hindered her from chufing
the Earl of Leicester for a husband. Such confi -
derations of prudence are, however, often fur-
mounted by love ; and Leicefler might flitter him-
self, that the violence of her afectlion would at
length triumph both over the maxims of policy
and the scruples of pride. These hopes induced
him, now and then, to conclude the proposal of his
marriage with the Scottish Queen to be a project
for his deflrudion; and he imputed it to the malice
of Cecil, who, under the specious pretence of do-
ing him honour, intended to ruin him in the good

t Ibid. opinion both of Elizabeth and Mary t.
,or. A TREATY of marriage, proposed by one Queen,

who dreaded its success; listened to by another,
who was fccretly determined againlt it; and scarce
desired by the man himfrlf, whose interest and re-
putation it was calculated, in appearance, to pro-
mote ; could not, under so many unfavourable cir-
cum!rances, be brought to a fortnl:ate ifT.e. Both
Elizabeth and Mary continued, however, to adt
with equal dilnimulation. The former, notwith-
standing her fears of losing L-icefter, tflicited
warnmly in his behalf. The latter, though she be-
gan about this time to cast her eves upon another
fubiedt of England, did not, at once, venture si-
nally to rje&t Elizabeth's favourite.

Mary en- TIia prcrlfn towards whom Mary began to turn
ternim her thoughts, w:'; Henry Stewart Lord Darnly,
h""> ehl dcfl on of the Earl of .Lenox. That nobleman,
S,g,,^ry }rnhaving bIcin driven out of Scotland under the re-
Darn'. gency of the luke of Chatelherault, had lived in

b w:'il!bi':1':nt for tw\enty years. His wife, Ladv

nlargarct

MIargaret Douglas, was Mary's most dangerous ri- BOOK III.
val in her claim upon the English filcceflion. She c
was the daughter of Margaret, the eldest fiffer of '~564
Henry VIII. by the Earl of Angus, whom that
Q2jeen married after the death of her husband
James IV. In that age, the right and order of
lilccellon was not fettled with the fame accuracy,
as at prelcnt. Time, and the deciiion of almost
every cafe that can poilibly happen, have at last in-
troduced certainty into a matter, which, naturally,
is subject to all the variety, arising from the caprice
of lawyers, guided by obscure, and often imagina-
ry analogies. Lady Lenox, though born ofa fe-
cond marriage, was one degree nearer the royal
blood of England, than Mary. She was the daugh-
ter, Mary only the grandaughter of Margaret.
This was not the only advantage over Mary which
Lady Lenox enjoyed. She was born in England,
and by a maxim of law in that country, with re-
gard to private inheritances, " whoever is not born
in England, or at least of parents, who, at the
time of his birth, were in the obedience of the
King of England, cannot enjoy any inheritance in
the kingdom *." This maxim, Hales, an Englilh * Carte,
lawyer, produced in a treatise, which he published Eng vol.
at this time, and endeavoured to apply it to the iii. ,22.
right of fucceflion to the Crown. In a private
cause, there pretexts might have given rife to a
long and doubtful litigation ; where a Crown was
at flake, such nice disputes and subtleties were to
be avoided with the utmost care. If Darnly should
happen to contr.at an alliance with any of the pow-
erful families in England, or should publickly pro-
fess the Protestant religion, these plausible and po-
pular topics might be so urged, as to prove fatal to
the pretensions of a foreigner, and of a Papist.

liMA j. \va. aware of all this , and in order to

prevent any danger from that quarter, had early

endeavoure td

BaoK III. endeavoured to cultivate a friendly correfponden.e
-"-"-' with the family of Lenox. In the year 1562 *
S'564 both the Earl and theLady Margaret were taken
389. into custody by Elizabeth's orders, on account of

their holding a secret correspondence with the
Scottish Queen.

Elizabeth FROM the time that Mary became sensible of the
secretly difficulties, which would attend her marrying a so-
pleased reign Prince, the entered into a still closer connex-
wirh this. ion with the Earl of Lenox t, and invited him to

. 396. return into Scotland. This the endeavoured to

conceal from Elizabeth ; but a traniladion of lb
much importance did not escape the notice of that
discerning Princess. She observed, but did not in-
terrupt it Nothing could fall in more perfealy
with her views, concerning Scottish affhiis. She
vWas pleased to fee the pride of the Scottish Queen
stoop, at last, to the thoughts of taking a fubjea
to her bed. Darnly was in no situation to excite
her jealousy, or her fears. His father's estate lay
in England, and by means of this pledge, she hoped
to keep the negociation entirely in her own hands,
to play the fame game of artifice and delay, which
she had planned out, if her recommendation of
Leiceffer had been more favourably received.

As before the union of the two crowns, no sub-

jed of one kingdom could pats into the other with-
out the permiflion of both Sovereigns; no sooner
did Lenox, under pretence of prosecuting his
wife's claim upon the Earldom of Angus, apply to
Elizabeth for her licence to go into Scotland, than
he obtained it. Together with it, the gave him
letters, warmly recommending his person and cause

t Keith, to Mary'sfriendfhip and protection $. But, at the
155, a68. fame time, as it was her manner to involve all her

tranfaaions with regard to Scotland, in some de-
gree of perplexity and contradicion; f, e warned
Mary, that this indulgence to Lenox might prove-

fatal:

fatal to herself, as his return could not fail of re- Boo, Ihf
viving the ancient animosity between him and the '"'`
house of Hamilton. 1564

THIS admonition gave umbrage to Mary, and

drew from her an angry reply, which occasioned,
for some time, a total interruption of all correfpon-
dence between the two Queens *. Mary was not * Keith,
a little alarmed at this; the both dreaded the es- 2r3.
fedts of Elizabeth's resentment, and felt sensibly Melv. 83:
the disadvantage of being excluded from a free in-
tercourfe with England, where her AmbasSadors
had, all along, carried on with some success, secret
negociations, which increased the number of her
partizans, and paved her way towards the throne.
In order to remove the causes of the present dif-
ficulty, Melvil was sent express to the court of
England. He found it no difficult matter to bring
about a reconcilement; and soon re-established the
appearance, but not the confidence of friendship,
which was all that had subsisted, for some time,
between the two Queens.

DURING this negociation, Elizabeth's profeflions

of love toMary and Melvil's replies in the name of his
Mistress, were made in the language of the warm-
eft and most cordial friendship. But what Melvil
truly obterves, with refpe6t to Elizabeth, may be
extended without injuffice to both Queens. " There
was neither plain dealing, nor upright meaning, but
great diflimulation, envy and fear t." -t Melv.

LENOX, however, in consequence of the licence 'o4.

which he had obtained, set out for Scotland, and Lenox arrives in)
was received by the Qgeen, not only with the re- Scotland.
fpet due to a nobleman, so nearly allied to the
royal family, but treated with a distinguished fami-
liarity, which could not fail of inspiring him with
more elevated hopes. The rumour of his fon's
marriage to the QOeen began to spread over the
kingdom ; and the eyes of all Scotland were turn-

VOL. 1. S ed

HOOK III. ed upon him, as the father of their future Ma-

-

R lier. The Duke of Chatelherault was the first

3564. to take the alarm. He considered Lenox, as

the ancient hereditary enemy of the house of
Hamilton ,; and, in his grandeur, saw the ruin of
himself and his friends. But the Queen inter-
posed her authority to prevent any violent rup-
ture, and employed all her influence to bring a-

* Keith, bout an accommodation of their differences'.
259. THE powerful family of Douglas no less dread-

ed Lenox's return, from an apprehension, that he
would wrelt the earldom of Angus out of their
hands. But the Queen, who well knew how dan-
gerous it would be to irritate Morton, and other
great men of that name, prevailed on Lenox to
purchase their friendship, by allowing his Lady's

+ Id. 268. claim upon the earldom of Angus to dropt.
Not. (h) AFTER there preliminary steps, Mary ventured

to call a meeting of Parliament. The at of for-

\ See Ap- feiture, passed against Lenox in the year 1545,
pendix, was repealed, and he was publickly restored to the
No. ix* honours and estate of his ancestors t.
June 25. THE ecclesiastical tranfadions of this year were

Dc. not considerable. In the assemblies of the church,

the fame complaints of the increase of idolatry, the
fame representations concerning the poverty of the

The Cler- clergy, were renewed. The reply which the Q~een
ous o the made to these, and her promises of redress, were
Queen's more satisfying to the Protestants, than any they
zxal for had hitherto obtained'. But, notwithstanding her
Popery. declarations in their favour, they could not help
Sejt3, 39harbouring many fulpicions concerning Mary's

dcfigns againff their religion. She had never
once contented to hear any preacher of the reform-
el doctrine. She had abated nothing of her bigot-
ted attachment to the Romith faith. The genius
of that fuperflition, averse, at all times, from

toleration,

toleration, was, in that age, fierce and unrelent- BooK III.
ing. Mary had given her friends on the Continent a5
repeated afflurances of her resolution to re-establish
the Catholic church t. She had industriously a- t Carte,
voided every opportunity of ratifying the ads of ol. iii.
of Parliament 1560, in favour of the Reformation. 4'
Even the proteacion, which ever since her return,
ihe had afforded the Protestant religion, was mere-
ly temporary, and declared by her own proclama-
tion to be of force, only " till the should take
some final order in the matter of religion 1." Keith,
The vigilant zeal of the preachers was inattentive4, 50o.
to none of these circumstances. The coldness of
their principal leaders, who were, at this time, en-
tirely devoted to the court, added to their jealou-
fies and fears. These they uttered to the people,
inl language which they esteemed suitable to the
necelity of the times, which the Queen reckoned
difrefpecful, and insolent. In a meeting of the
General Assembly, Maitland publickly accused
Knox of teaching seditious docrine, concerning
the right of fubjeds to resist those Sovereigns, who
trespass against the duty which they owe to the
people. Knox was not backward to justify what
he had taught. And upon this general docrine
of resistance, fojuft in its own nature, but so de-
licate in its application to particular cafes, there
enlhued a debate, which admirably displays the ta-
lents and charaCter of both the difputants; the
acuteness of the former, embellilbhed with learning,
but prone to subtlety, the vigorous understanding
of the latter, delighting in bold sentiments, and fu- *KnoX,
perior to all fear *. 3496

Two years had already been consumed, in fruit- Difinmula-

less negociations concerning the marriage of the tion both
Scottih Queen. Mary had full leisure and oppor- of Eliza-
tunity to discern the fallacy and deceit of all Eliza- Mary,
beth's proceedings, with respect to that affair. But, with re-
ii ordecr to fct tlhe real intentions of the English gard toher

S 2 Q.een "arriage.

BOOK III. QCeen in a clear light, and to bring her to some
--v -' explicit declaration of her sentiments, Mary, at
j65". last, intimated to Randolph, that, on condition

her right of fucceflion to the Crown of England
were publickly acknowledged, ihe was ready to
yield to the lolicitations of his Mistress in behalf

t Keith of Leicefler t. Nothing could be farther than this
z69. from the mind and intention of Elizabeth. The

right of fucceflon was a mystery, which, during
her whole reign, her jealousy preterved untouched,
and unexplained. She had promised, however,
when she firflt began to interest herself in the mar-
riage of the Scottish Queen, all that was now de-
manded. How to retreat with decency, how to
elude her former offer, was, on that account, not
a little perplexing.

THE facility, with which Lord Darnly obtained

permillion to visit the court of Scotland, was ow-
ing, in all probability, to that embarraflnent.
From the time of Melvil's embassy, Lady Lenox
had warmly solicited this liberty for her son. Eli-
zabeth was no stranger to the ambitious hopes,
with which that young nobleman flattered himlclf.
She had received repeated advices from her Mini-
hters, of the sentiments, which Mary began to en-

* Keith, terrain in his favour '. It was entirely in her pow-
2,9, 261, er, to prevent his flirring out of London. In the
206. present conjunctture, however, nothing could be of

more advantage to her, than Darnly's journey in-
to Scotland. She had already brought one ador
upon the flige, who, under her management, had,
for a long time, amused the Scottiflh Queen. She
hoped, no lets abtulutely, to direc the motions of
IDarnly, who was likewise her fubjet ; and again
to involve Mary in all the tedious intricacies of ne-
gociation. There motives determined Elizabeth
and her Ministers to yield to the folicitations of
Lady Lenox.

vUT

BUT this deep laid scheme was in a moment dif- Boor III.

concerted. Such unexpeted events, as the fancy <
of poets ascribes to love, are, at some times, reall) D·a5-
produced by that paflion. An affair, which had rives in
been the objea of to many political intrigues, and Scotland.
had moved and interefited so many Princes, was
at last decided by the sudden liking of two young
persons. Lord Darnly was, at this time, in the
first bloom and vigour of youth. In beauty, and
gracefulness of perion, he surpassed all his cotem-
poraries; he excelled, eminently, in such arts, as
add ease and elegance to external form, and which
enabled it not only to dazzle, but to please. Mary Gains the
was of an age, and of a temper, to feel the full Queen's
power of these accomplishments. The imprefion heart.
which Lord Darnly made upon her, was visible,
from the time of their firfi interview. The whole
business of the court was to amuse, and entertain * Knox,
this illustrious guest *; and in all those scenes of 369-
gaiety, Darnly, whose qualifications were altoge-
ther superficial and ihowy, appeared to great ad-
vantage. His conquest of the Queen's heart be-
came compleat; and inclination now prompted her
to conclude a marriage, the first thoughts of which
had been suggested by considerations merely po-
litical.

ELIZABETH contributed, and perhaps not with-

out design, to increase the violence of this paflion.
Soon after Darnly's arrival in Scotland, the, in re-
turn to that meliage, whereby Mary had signified
her willingness to accept of Leieelter, gave an an-
fwer, in luch terms, as plainly unravelled her ori-
ginal intention in that intrigue t. She promised, ift Keith,
the Scottiih Queen's marriage with LIeicefter should a70.
take place, to advahce him to great honours ; but Append.
with regard to her title to the English Hucct-flon,'s8-
(he would neither fuffer any legal inquiry to be
made concerning it, nor permit it to be publicly

S 3 recognized,

Bo Il m. recognized, till she herself Ihould declare her refo-
3--lution never to marry. Notwithstanding Elizabeth's

'565. former promises, Mary had reason to exped every

thing contained in this reply ; her high spirit, how-
ever, could not bear, with patience, such a cruel
discovery of the contempt, the artifice, and moc-
kery, with which, under the veil of friendship, she
had been so long abused. She burst into tears of
indignation, and expressed, with the utmost bitter-
ners, her sense of that disingenuous craft, which

* Keith, had been employed to deceive her *.
Append. FpE natural effec of this indignation was to add
i59- to the impetuosity with which she pursued her own

scheme. Blinded by resentment, as well as by love,
ihe observed no defeEts in the man, whom Ihe had
chosen , and began to take the necessary steps to-
wards accomplishing her design, with all the im-
patience, natural to those paflions.

As Darnly was Co nearly related to the Qeen,

the canon law made it neceflary to obtain the Pope's
dispensation, before the celebration of the marriage.

SCamd. For this purpose, the early set on foot a negocia-
396. tion with the court of Rome t.
The SHE was busy, at the fame time, in procuring
French the consent of the French King and his mother.
court ' Having communicated her design, and the motives
thematch. which determined her choice, to Caftelnau the

French Ambassador, the employed him, as the most
proper person, to bring his court to fall in with her
views. Among other arguments to this purpose,
Caftelnau mentioned Mary's attachment to Darnly
which he represented to be to violent and deep-"
rooted, that it was no longer in her own power to

* Cafteln. break off the match *. Nor were the French Mi-
464- nifters backward in encouraging Mary's pallion.

Her pride would never stoop to an alliance with a
fubjed of France. By this choice, they were deli-
vered from the apprehention of a match, with any

o

to the Aufirian Princes, as well as the danger of BooK IIL
so close an union with Elizabeth; and as Darnly 3
profeffed the Roman Catholic religion, this suited a565"
the bigotted schemes which that court had adopted.

WHILE Mary was endeavouring to reconcileafo-Darnly

reign courts to a measure which the had To much dilgufts
at heart ; Darnly, and his father, by their beha- leveral of
viour, were raiting up enemies at home, to ob- eaobe.
firu~t it. Lenox had, during the former part of
his life, discovered no great compass of abilities,
or political wisdom ; and appears to have been a
man of a weak underifanding, and violent paflions.
Darnly was not superior to his father in under-
flanding, and all his palfions were (till more impe-
tuous *. Tothefe, he added that insolence, which * Keith,
the advantage of external form, when accompanied Z72, z73.
with no quality more valuable, is apt to inspire.
Intoxicated with the Queen's favour, he began al-
ready to assume the haughtiness of a King, and to
put on that imperious air, which majesty itfElfcan
iarce render tolerable.

IT was by the advice, or at least with the consent Particular-

of Murray, and his party, that Lenox had been lyMurray.
invited into Scotland -[t and yet, no sooner did he t Knox,
acqluire a firm footing in that kingdom, than he 367.
began to enter into secret cabals with those noble- Keith,274.
men, who were known to be avowed enemies to
Murray, and with regard to religion, to be either
neutrals, or favourers of Popery *. Darnly itill $ Keith,
more imprudent, allowed some ra(h expreflions con- 27z.
cerning those favours, which the Queen's bounty
had conferred upon Murray, to escape him II. Hid. 274.

BUIT, above all there, the familiarity which

Darnly cultivated with David Rizio the Italian,
contributed to increase the suspicion and disgust of
the nobles.

THE . low birth, and indigent condition of this

man, placed him in a station, in which he ought

S 4 naturally

BooK III. naturally to have remained unknown to potterity.
?.---y'1But what fortune called him to a&, and to fuffer

3565. in Scotland, obliges hiflory to descend from its

dignity, and to record his adventures. He was the
son of a musician in Turin, and having accompa-
nied the Piedmontefe AmbafTador into Scotland,
gained admiflion into the Queen's family, by his
ikill in music. His servile condition had taught
him suppleness of spirit, and insinuating manners.
He quickly crept into the Queen's favour, and her
French Secretary happening to return at that time
into his own country, was preferred by her to that
office. He now began to make a figure in court,
and to appear as a man of weight and consequence.
The whole train of fiuitors and expectants, who
have an extreme sagacity in discovering the paths,
which lead most direccly to success, applied to him.
His recommendations were observed to have great
influence over the Queen, and he grew to be con-
fidered, not only as a favourite, but as a Minister.
Nor was Rizio careful to abate that envy, which
always attends such an extraordinary and rapid
change of fortune. He studied, on the contrary,
to display the whole extent of his favour. He as-
feted to talk often, and familiarly, with the Queen
in public. He equalled the greatest and molt opu-
lent fubjeas, in richness of dress, and in the num-
ber of his attendants. He discovered, in all his
behaviour, that assuming insolence, with which un-
merited prosperity inspires an ignoble mind. It
was with the utmost indignation that the nobles
beheld the power ; it was with the utmofitdifficul-
ty, that they tolerated the arrogance of this un-
worthy minion. Even in the Queen's presence
they could not forbear treating him with marks of
contempt. Nor was it his exorbitant power alone,
which txafperated the Scots. They considered him,
and not wvithout reason, as a dangerous enemy to

the

the Protestant religion, and fufpeAed that he held Boot IIr
for this purpose, a secret correspondence with the b
court of Rome *. Buh.

IT was Darnly's misfortune to fall under the ma- 34o.

nagement of this man, who, by flattery and aflidu- Meiv. 107.
ity, easily gained on his vanity, and inexperience. Darnlyr,
Rizio's whole influence on the Qjeen was employ- eb ae
ed in his behalf, and contributed, without doubt, t Melv.
towards establishing him more firmly in her affcc- 111.
tions t. But whatever benefit he might reap from
his patronage, it did not counterbalance the con-
tempt, and even the infamy, to which he was ex-
posed, on account of his familiarity with such an
upitart.

THOUGH Darnly daily made progress in the

Queen's affeetions, the conduced herself, however,
with such prudent reserve, as to impose on Ran-
dolph the Englith Resident, a man otherwise shrewd
and penetrating. It appears from his letters at
this period, that he entertained not the least sus-
picion of the intrigue which was carrying on; and
gave his court repeated assurances, that the Scottish
Qjeen had no design of marrying Darnly :. In t Keith,
the midlt of his security, Mary dispatched Maitland ped
to signify her intention to Elizabeth, and to fi,licit 159.
her consent to the marriage with Darnly. This
embassy was the first thing, which opened the eyes

of Randolph. ELIZABETH affeded the greateCt furprize at this April IS.
sudden resolution of the Scotrifh Quieen, but with- Elizabeth

to reemany dndeclares t-
out reason. The train was laid by hertelf, and (he egaine the
had no cause to wonder when it took effed. She Qeen's
expressed, at the fame time, her disapprobation of marriage
the match, in the strongest terms; and pretended withDarn-
to foresee many dangers and inconvenienckis arising '
from it, to both kingdoms. But this, too, was
mere affectation. MIry had often and plainly de-
clared her resolution to marry. It was impo~fible
(he could make any choice more ilnoflinlive. The

danger

Boor III. danger of introducing a foreign interest into Britain,
~ which Elizabeth had ibjuftly dreaded, was entire-

56". ly avoided. Darnly though allied to both Crowns,

and pofleffed of lands in both kingdoms, could be
for , dable to neither. It is evident, from all there
circumstances, that Elizabeth's apprehenlions of
danger could not poflibly be serious , and that, in
all her violent declarations against Darnly, there
was much more of grimace than of reality *.

THERE were not wanting, however, political

motives of much weight, to induce that wife Prin-
cess to put on the appearance of great difplcafure.
Mary, intimidated by this, might perhaps delay
her marriage ; which Elizabeth delired to obftrudt
wv:i: n wveaknefs that little luited the dignity of her
mind, <: h tle elevation of her charader. Betides,
the tranquii,, of her own kingdom was the great
objeCt of E!izabeii 'olicy ; and by declaring her
diffatisfa&tion with I o ",'s conduct, the hoped to
alarm that party in Scot.; 4, which was attached
to the Englirh interest, ana to encourage such of
the nobles, as secretly difapprovcd the maich, open-
ly to oppose it. The feeds of discord would, by
this means, be scattered through that kingdom.
Intestine commotions might arise. Amidst these,
Mary could form none of those dangerous schemes,
to which the uni',n of her people might have prompt-
ed her. Elizabeth would become the umpire be-
tween the Scottish Queen, and her contending

* Even the Historians of that age acknowledge, that the mar.

riage of the Scottilh Queen with a lubje& was far from being dif-
agreeable to Elizabeth. Knox, 369, 373. Buchan. 339. Caf-
telnau, who, at that time, was well acquainted with the intrigues
of both the British courts, asserts, upon grounds of great proba,
bility, that the match was wholly Elizabeth's own work; Cafteln.
462. and that the rejoiced at the accomplithment of it, appears
from the letters of her own Ambassadors. Keith, 280, z88.

fubjeets.

fubjeas. And England might look on, with fe-Booi It,
curity, while a florm, which Ihe had raied, waft- i
ed the only kingdom, which could possibly disturb '1565
its peace.

IN prosecution of this scheme, the laid before her May i.

Privy Council the melfage from the Scottish Qgeen,
and contulted them with regard to the antwer she
should return. Their determination, it is easy to
conceive, was perfectly conformable to her secret
views. They drew up a remonstrance against the
intended match, full of the imaginary dangers,
with which that event threatened the kingdom *. *Keitb,
Nor did the think it enough, to signify her dif- 174.
approbation of the measure, either by Maitland, Se A-
Mlary's Ambafador, or by Randolph, her own Re- No. X.
lident in Scotland ; in order to add more dignity Sends
to the farce which the chose to a(t, the appointed Throg-
bir Nicholas Throgmorton her Ambassador Ex- ortonf t.
traordinary. She commanded him to declare, in
the firongeft terms, her diffatisfa-tion with the step
which Mary proposed to take; and, at the fame
time to produce the determination of the Privy
Council, as an evidence that the sentiments of the
nation were not different from her own. Not long
after, she confined Lady Lenox as a prisoner first
in her own houte, and then lent her to the Towert--. t Keith,

INTRLLIGENCE of all this reached Scotland, be- Append.

fore the arrival of the Englith Ambassador. In the o''-
first transports of her indignation, Mary resolved,
no longer, to keep any measures with Elizabeth
and sent orders to Maitland, who accompanied
Throgmorton, to return instantly to the English
court, and, in her name, to declare to Elizabeth,
that after having been amused Co long to (o little
purpose ; after having been fooled, and impofcd
on fogrofsly by her artifices; she was now resolved to
gratify her own inclination, and to aik no other con-
tent, but thatof her own subjects, in the choice of an
husband. Maitland, with his usual sagacity, foresaw
all the effects of such a rath and angry melthge, and

ventured

Boo III. ventured rather to incur the displeasure of his
'-"-' Mistress, bydifobeying her commands, than to be

565 made the inifrument of tearing asunder, To vio-

lently, the few remaining ties, which still linked

*Id. x6o. together the two Queens*.

MARY herself loon became feniible of her error.

She received the English Ambassador with refped :
justified her own conduct with decency; and though
unalterable in her resolution, she affected a wonder-
ful solicitude to reconcile Elizabeth to the measure;
and even pretended, out of complaisance towards
her, to put off the consummation of the marriage

j Keith, for rome monthst-f. It is probable, however, that
A7ppendi the want of the Pope's dispensation, and the prof-

pec of gaining the consent of her own fubje&ts,
were the real motives of this delay.

Murray's THIS consent Mary laboured with the utmost in-
averfionto duftry to obtain. The Earl of Murray was the
Darnly. person in the kingdom, whore concurrence was of

the greatest importance ; but the had reason to fear
that it would not be procured without extreme diffi-
culty. From the time of Lenox's ieturn into
Scotland, Murray perceived that the Queen's affec-
tions began gradually to be eftranigcd from him.
Darnly, Athol, l(izio, all the court favourites,
combined against him. His ambitious spirit could
not brook this diminution of his power, which his
former services had so little merited. He retired in-
to the country, and gave way to rivals, with whom

t Id. 272, he was unable to contend t. The return of the
274. Earl of Bothwell, his avowed enemy, who had been
Append. accused of a design upon his life, and who had refid-
'S.- ed for Come time in foreign countries, obliged him

to attend to his own safety. No intreaty of the
Queen could persuade him to a reconcilement with
that nobleman. He infilted on having him brought
to a public trial, and prevailed, by his importunity,
to have a day fixed for it. Bothwell durst not ap-
pear in oppolition to a man, who came to the place

of

of trial attended by 5000 of his followers on horse Boor III.
back. He was once more constrained to leave the '-^'
kingdom, but, by the Queen's command, the fen- I565.
tence of outlawry, which is incurred by non-appear-
ance, was not pronounced against him.* * Keith,

MARY, tcnfible, at the fame time, of how much ibid. I60.

importance it was, to gain a fitbjeA so powerful May 8.
and so popular as the Earl of Murray, invited him
back to court, and received him with many demon-
fitrations of refped and confidence. At last she de-
fired him to set an example to her other fubjedts
by fubcribing a paper, containing a formal approba-
tion of her marriage with Darnly. Murray had
many reasons to hesitate, and even to withhold his
assent. Darnly had not only undermined his credit
with the Queen, but discovered, on every occasion,
a rooted aversion to his person. By consenting to
his elevation to the throne, he would give him such
an acceflion of dignity and power, as no man wil-
lingly beflows on an enemy. The unhappy confe-
quences which might follow upon a breach with
England were, likewise, of considerable weight with
Murray. He had always openly preferred a confe-
deracy with England, before the ancient alliance
with France. By his means chiefly, this change in
the system of national politics had been brought
about. A league with England had been establish-
ed ; and he could not think of sacrificing, to a rash
and youthful paflion, an alliance of so much utility
to the kingdom ; and which he and other nobles
were bound, by every obligation, to maintaint. Keth ,
Nor was the interest of religion forgotten on this 169.
occasion. Mary, though surrounded by Protestant
Counsellors, had found means to hold a dangerous
correspondence with foreign Catholics. She had
even courted the Pope's protedtion, who had sent
her a subsidy of 8000ooo crowns I. Though Murray t Id. 20 .
had hitherto endeavoured to bridle the zeal of the Melv. 1S4.

refornced

BooK III. reformed clergy, and to set the Qieen's condufc in
'-^- the moil favourable light, yet her obilinate adhe-

1565" rence to her own religion, could not fail of alarm-

ing him, and by her resolution to marry a papist,
the only hope of reclaiming her, which remained,
was for ever cut off. Each of these considerations
had its influence on Murray, and all of them ucter-
mined him to decline complying, at that time,
with the Queen's request.

May 14. THE convention of nobles, which was affmbled
A Con- a few days after, discovered a greater diIpofition to
ventionof gratify the Qeen. Many of them, without lheita-
the nobles

. "' r t i

approves tion, expreflcd their approbation of the intended
ofthemar- ma.rch ; but as others were startled at the fame dan-
riage. gcrs which had alarmed Murray, or were influenced

by his example, to refuse their consent, another
Convention was appointed at Perth, in order to de-

* Keith, liberate more fully concerning this matter*.
83.o MEAN while, Mary gave a public evidence of
373. her own inclination, by conferring upon Darnly

titles of honour peculiar to the royal family. The
opposition the had hitherto met with, and' the many
contrivances employed to thwart and disappoint her
inclination, produced their usual effet on her heart,
they confirmed her paflion, and increased its vio-
lence. The simplicity of that age imputed an affec-

+ Keith, tion, so exceflive, to the influence of witchcraftt.
283. It was owing, however, to no other charm, than

the irrefifltible power of youth and beauty, over a
young and tender heart. Darnly grew giddy with
his prosperity. Flattered by the love of a Qgeen,
and the applause of many among her subjects, his
natural haughtiness and insolence became infupport-
ablc, and he could no longer bear advice, far lets
contradiction. I ord Ruthven, happening to be
ihe filft pcrlon who informed him that Mary, in
order to booth Elizabeth, had delayed, for some

time,

time, creating him Duke of Albany, he, in a Bool IIL
frenzy of rage, drew his dagger and attempted to
flab him*. It required all Mary's attention, to pre- . Keth,
vent his falling under that contempt, to which such Appendix,
behaviour delervedly exposed him. 60o.

IN no scene of her life was ever Mary's own ad- dMry's ad-

dress more remarkably displayed. Love sharpened gainingher
her invention, and made her ifudy every method of lubjec~s.
gaining her fubjeas. Many of the nobles the won
by her address, and more by her promises. On
tome the bestowed lands, to others the gave new
titles of honour t. She even condefcended to court t Ibid.
the Proteflant clergy; and having invited three of
their fuperintendants to Stirling, the declared, in
firong terms, her resolution to proted their religion,
expressed her willingness to be present at a confe-
rence upon the points in doarine which were dif-
puted between the Protcftantsand Papifts, and went
so far as to thow some desire to hear such of their
preachers, as were most remarkable for modera-
tion t. By there arts, the Queen gained wonder-
fully upon the people, who, unless their jealousy be no,
raised by repeated injuries, are always ready to view
the acions of their Sovereign with an indulgent eye.

ON the other hand, Murray and his associates

were plainly the dupes of Elizabeth's policy. She
talked in so high a strain, of her displeasure at the
intended match; the treated Lady Lenox with so
much rigour ; the wrote to the Scottish Queen in
flich tirong terms; the recalled the Earl of Lenox
and his son, in such a peremptory manner, and with
such severe denunciations of her vengeance, if they
should presume to disobey §; that all these expref- ) Keith,
fions of aversion fully persuaded them of her fin- 285, s26.
cerity. This belief fortified their scruples with re-
fpeA to the match, and encouraged them to oppose

it

BooK III. it. They began with forming among thernfelved
-- .. bonds of confederacy and mutual defence; they en-
1565 tered into a secret correspondence with the English

Resident, in order to secure Elizabeth's alliflance,

* Keiih, when it should become needful* , they endeavoured
289, 292, to fill the nation with such apprehensions of dan-
296" ger, as might counterbalance the influence of thole

arts, which the Queen had employed.

BESIDES these intrigues, there were secretly car-

ried on, by both parties, dark designs of a more
criminal nature, and more fuiitable to the spirit of

5s65 the age. Darnly, impatient of that oppotition,

Schemes which he imputed wholly to Murray, and resolving
of Darnly,
and Mur- at any rate to get rid of such a powerful enemy,
ray againit formed a plot to afltalinate him, during the meeting
eachother. of the Convention at Perth. Murray, on his part,

despairing of preventing the marriage by any other
means had, together with the Duke of Chatel-
herault, and the Earl of Argyll, concerted measures
for seizing Darnly, and carrying him a prisoner into
England.

IP either of there conspiracies had taken effec,

this convention might have been attended with con-
sequences extremely tragical ; but both were ren-,
dered abortive, by the vigilance or good fortune of
those against whom they were formed. Murray,
being warned of his danger by some retainers to
the court, who fill favoured his interest, avoided
the blow, by not going to Perth. Mary, receiving
intelligence of Murray's enterprize, retired with
the utmost expedition, along with Darnly, to the
other lide of Forth. Conscious, on both sides, of
guilt, and inflamed with resentment, it was im-
pollible they could either forget the violence,
which theCmielves had meditated, or forgive the
injurics, intended againfl them. From that
moment, all hope of reconcilement was at an

end,

ead, and their mutual enmity burst out with every Boor III.
symptom of implacable hatred +

ON 1565.

* THE reality of there two oppofiteconfpiracies has given oc-

cafion to many disputes and much contradition. Some deny that
any design was formed against the life of Murray ; others call in
question the truth of the conspiracy against Darnly. There seem,
however, to be good reasons for believing both ; though the zeal
and credulity of party-writers have added to each, many exag-
gerated circumflances. The following arguments render it pro-
bable, that some violence was intended against Murray.

I. This is positively asserted by Buchanan, 34'. a. The Eng-

lifh Resident writes to Cectl, that Murray was assuredly informed
that a design was laid to murder him at Perth, and delcribes the
manner in which this plot was to have been executed. Keith,
287. 3. Murray himlelfconflantly and publickly affirmed, that
such a design was formed againfl his life. Keith, App. to8. And
though he was called upon by the Queen to bring legal evidence
of his assertion, and a safe condut offered him, while he came to
court for that purpose ; Ibid. yet whoever confidets Murray's
situation, and the spirit of those who ruled in court at that time,
will scarce deem it any proof of his guilt, that he did not chule
to rilk his person on such security. 4. The furious pallions of
Darnly, the fiercenefi of his resentment, which scrupled at no
violence, and the manners of the age, render the imputation of
such a crime less improbable.

II. That Murray and his alfociates had resolved to felze Darn-

ly's person appears with Ltill greater certainty ; t. From the ex-
press testimony ofMelvil, i t . although Buchanan, p. 34', and
Knox, p. 377, asset, without any reason, to represent this as an
idle rumour. a. The question was put to Randolph, whether
the Governor of Berwick would receive Lenox and his son, if they
were carried prisoners to that place. This plainly thews, that
some such design was in hand, and Randolph did not discourage
it by the answer which he gave, Keith, 290. 3. The precipita-
tion, with which the Queen retired, and the reason she gave for
this sudden flight, are mentioned by Randolph. Keith, 291.
4. A great part of the Scottith nobles, and among theli the Earls
of Argyll and Rothes, who were themselves privy to the design,
assert the reality of the conspiracy. Good. vol ii. 358.

All there circumltanees leave little room to doubt of the truth

of both conspiracies. But we may observe how far this proof,
though drawn from public records, falls lhort, on both sides, of
legal and formal evidence. Buchanan and Randolph, in their
accounts of the conspiracy against Murray, differ widely in almost

VOL. J. T every

'c'- J her vassals by proclamation, and solicited them by
Mlaritun- her letters, to repair thither in arms, for the pro-
iions her teAion of her person against her foreign and do-
vaifals to meflic enemies *. She was obeyed with all the
take arms promptnels and alacrity, with which fubjeds run
Murray. to defend a mild and popular administration. This
* Keith, popularity, however, the owed in a great measure
298. to Murray, who had direded her adminifiration

with great prudence. Eut the crime of opposing
her marriage, obliterated the memory of his for-
mer fervicLs ; and Mary, impatient of contradic-
tion, and apt to confider those who disputed her
will, as enemies to her person, determined to let
him feel the whole weight of her vengeance. For
this purpole the summoned him to appear before
her upon a short warning, to answer tofiich things

every circumfrance. The accounts of the attempt upon Darnly,
are not more consistent. Melvil alledges, that thedefign of the
conspirators was to carry Darnly a prisoner into England ; the
proposal made to Randolph agrees with this. Randolph says,
that they intended to carry the Queen to St. Andrew's, and
Darnly to Catle Campbell. The Lords, in their declaration, as-
firm the design of the conspirators to have been to murder Darn-
ly and his father, to confine the Queen in Lochleven during life,
and to usurp the government. To believe implicitly, whatever
they find in an ancient paper, is a folly to which Antiquaries are
extremely prone. Ancient papers, however, often contain no-
thing more than the slanders of a party, and the lie of the day.
'The declaration of the nobles referred to, is of this kind ; it is
plainly rancorous, and written in the very heat of fation. Many
things affcrted in it, are evidently falle, or exaggerated. Let
Murray and his confederates be as ambitious as we can suppose,
they nmul have had some pretences, and plausible ones too, before
they could venture to imprilon their Sovereign for life, and to
seize the reins of government ; but, at that time, the Queen's
conduct had afforded no colourable excuse for proceeding to such
extremities. It is, likewile, remarkable, that in all the procla-
anations againfl Murray, of which Co many are publithed in Keith,
Appendix 1o8, &c. neither the violent attempt upon Darnly,
nor that which he is alledged to have foimcd against the Queen
herself, are ever once mentioned.

as

as thould be laid to his charge *. At this very BooK III
time, Murray, and the Lords who adhered to him, gm-
were aflembled at Stirling, to deliberate what course Keith,
they should hold, in such a difficult conjuncture. Appendix,
But the current of popular favour ran so strongly os8.
againit them; and, notwithstanding some fears
and jealousies, there prevailed in the nation such a
general disposition to gratify the Qgeen, in a mat-
ter which so nearly concerned her, that, without
coming to any other conclusion, than to implore
the Queen of England's protetion, they put an
end to their ineffectual consultations, and returned
every man to his own house.

TOGETHER with this discovery of the weakness

of her enemies, the confluence of her fubje6ts from
all corners of the kingdom, afforded Mary an a-
greeable proof of her own strength. While the
Queen was in this prosperous situation, she deter-
mined to bring to a period, an affair, which had
to long engrossed her heart, and occupied her at- Celebrates
tention. On the zgth July, she married Lord her mar-
Darnly. The ceremony was performed in the riage with
Queen's chapel, according to the rites of the Romith Darnly.
church; the Pope's bull, dispensing with their
marriage, having been previously obtained t. She t Keith,
iifued, at the fame time, proclamations, conferring 307.
the title of King of Scots upon her husband, and
commanding that henceforth all writs at law should
run in the joint names of King and Queen t. No- $ Ander-
thing can be a fironger proof of the violence of ion, i. 33.
Mary's love, or the weakness of her councils, than See Ape
this last ifep. Whether the had any right to chute pnd. No.
a husband, without consent of Parliament, was, in
that age, a matter of some dispute § ; that the had

§ Buchan.

no right to confer upon him, by her private au-41''
thority, the title and dignity of King ; or by a
simple proclamation, to raise her huiband to be the
Master of her people, teems to be beyond all doubt.
Francis II. indeed, bore the tame title. It was not,

T 2 however,

BooK III. however, the gift of the Qieen, but of the nation ;
'--\'- and the consent of Parliament was obtained, before

1565" he ventured to assume it. Darnly's condition, as

a Iubje&, rendered it still more necessary to have
the concurrence of the supreme Council in his fa-
vour. Such a violent and unprecedented stretch
of prerogative, as the substituting a proclamation
in place of an a& of Parliament, might havejuftly
alarmed the nation. But the Queen poffeffed so
entirely the confidence of her fubjeas, that not-
withitanding all the clamours of the malecontents,
no symptoms of general discontent appeared on that
account.

EVEN amidst that scene ofjoy, which always ac-

companies fuccefsful love, Mary did not fuffer
the course of her vengeance against the malecon-
tent nobles to be interrupted. Three days after
the marriage, Murray was again summoned to
court, under the severest penalties, and upon his
non-appearance, the rigour of justice took place,

* Keith, and he was declared an out-law *. At the fame
309, 310. time, the Queen set at liberty Lord Gordon, who

ever since his father's infurretion in the year 1562,
had been detained a prisoner ; the recalled the Earl
of Sunderland, who, on account of his concern in
that conspiracy, had fled into Slanders ; and the per-
mitted Bothwel to return again into Scotland. The
first, and last of these, were among the most pow-
erful fubjets in the kingdom, and all of them ani-
mated with implacable hatred to Murray, whom
they esteemed the enemy of their families, and the
author of their own fufferings. This common ha-
tred became the foundation of the ftriaeft union
with the Queen, and gained them an ascendant
over all her councils. Murray himself considered
this confederacy with his avowed enemies, as a
more certain indication than any measure the had
yet taken, of her inexorable resentment.

THE

THE malecontents had not yet openly taken up Boor II.

arms*. But the Qujeen having ordered her Tub-
jeAs to march against them, they were driven to Marches
the last extremity. They found themselves unable againf
to make head against the numerous forces, which Murray
Mary had assembled; and fled into Argylefhire, in afociates.
expedation of aid from Elizabeth, to whom they
had secretly dispatched a messenger, in order to
implore her immediate affitance f. t Keithi,

MEAN while, Elizabeth endeavoured to emba- 31.

rafs Mary, by a new declaration of disgust at herKnflx38o.
condua. She blamed both her choice of Lordizaeh
Darnly, and the precipitation with which she had in their ta-
concluded the marriage. She required Lenox andvour.
Darnly, whom the still called her fubjeets, to re-
turn into England ; and at the fame time, she warm-
ly interceded in behalf of Murray, whose behaviour
she represented to be not only innocent, but lau-
dable. This message, Co mortifying to the pride of
the Queen, and To full of contempt for her husband,
was rendered still more insupportable, by the petu-
lant and saucy demeanour of Tamworth, the per-
fton who delivered it 1. Mary vindicated her own.-
condua with warmth, but with great flrength of 398
reason ,; and rejeded the interceflion in behalf of
Murray, not without signs of resentment at Eliza-
beth's pretending to intermeddle in the internal go-
vernment of her kingdom II. II Keith's

SHN did not, on that account, intermit in Append.

the least the ardour, with which the pursued Mur-99'

* After their fruitlefa coofultation in Stirling, the Lords re-

tired to their own houses. Keith, 304. Murray was still at St.
Andrew's on July z22. Keith, 306. By the places of rendez-
vous, appointed for the inhabitants of the different counties,
August 4, it appears that the Queen's intention was to march in-
to Fife, the county in which Murray, Rothes, Kirkaldy, and
other chiefsof the malecontcnts resided. Keith, 310o. Their
tlight into the weft, Keith, 3 2, prevented this expedition, and
the former rendezvous was altered. Keith, 3 U 0.

T 3 iay

BooK Ill. ray and his adherents*. They now appeared
"-- openly in arms; and having received a small fuip-
. Kno . ply in money from Elizabeth t, were endeavour-
380. ing to raise their followers in the western coun-

ties. But Mary's vigilance hindered them from
aflcmbling in any considerable body. All her mi-
litary operations, at that time, were concerted
with willom, executed with vigour, and attended
with luccefs. In order to encourage her troops,
the herself marched along with them, rode with

$ Keith, loaded pifltols , and endured all the fatigues of
Append. war with admirable fortitude. Her alacrity infpir-
64. ed her forces with an invincible resolution, which,

together with their superiority in number, deter-
red the malecontents from facing them in the
field ,; but having artfully pasted the Queen's army,
they marched with great rapidity to Edinburgh,
and endeavoured to rouze the inhabitants of that

Aug. 31. city to arms. The QOjeen did not fuffer them to

remain long unmolested ; and, on her approach,
they were forced to abandon that place, and retire

ii Id. 3'5. in con fusion towards the western borders l|.

As it was uncertain, for some time, what rout

they had taken, Mary employed that interval in
providing for the security of the counties in the
heart of the kingdom. She .seized the places of

They are firength which belonged to the rebels ; and obli-
obliged to ged the considerable Harons in thcfe (hires, which
retire into Ihe mofi lifpeded, to join in associations for her
SKeith, defence

§ Having thus left all the country be-

Append. hind her in tranquillity, the, with an army t8,ooo
"13 strong, marched towards Dumfries, where the

* The moil considerable persons who joined Murray, were

the Duke of Chatelherault, the Earls of Argyle, Glencairn,
Rothes; Lord Boyd and Ochiltree; the Lairds of Grange,
Cunninghainhead, Balcomie, Carmylie, Lawers. Bar. Dreghorn,
P'ittarrow, Comptroller, and the Tutor of Pitcur. Knox, 382.

rebels

rebels then were. During their retreat, they BooK III
had sent letters to the Queen, from almost every ,----
place where they halted, full of fubminlion, and '565"
containing various overtures towards an accom-
modation. But Mary who determined not to flip
such a favourable opportunity of crushing the mu-
tinous spirit of her fubjets, rejeaed them with
disdain. As the advanced, the malecontents re-
tired; and, having received no effectual aid from
Elizabeth t, they despaired of any other means of
safety, fled into England, and put themselves un- + See Ap.
der the protection of the Earl of Bedford, War- pendix,
-I No. XII,
den of the marches. XIII.

NorTHING, which Bedford's personal friendship Otob. z20.

for Murray could supply, was wanting to render
their retreat agreeable. But Elizabeth herself treat-
ed them with extreme neglect. She had fully gain-
ed her end, and, by their means, had excited fiich Theymeet
discord and jealousies among the Scots, as would, with un-
in all probability, long difftrad and weaken Mary's expeaed

ill treat-

councils. Her business now, was to save appear- ment from
ances, and to justify herself to the Minitlers of Elizabeth.
France and Spain, who accused her of fomenting
the troubles in Scotland, by her intrigues. The
expedient the contrived for her vindication, firong-
ly displays her own charadter, and the wretched
condition of exiles, who are obliged to depend on
a foreign Prince. Murray, and Hamilton, Ab-
bot of Kilwinning, being appointed by the olther
fugitives to wait on Elizabeth, inflead of meeting
with that welcome reception which was due to
men, who, out of confidence in her promises,
had hazarded their lives and fortunes, could not
even obtain the favour of an audience, until they
'iad meanly consented to acknowledge, in the
presence of the French and Spanifl Ambafladors,
that Elizabeth had given them no encouranec-
ment to take arms. No (loner did they xnake this

T 4 declara-

1Boo III. declaration, than the aftonithed them with this re-
L 5

. ply, " You have declared the truth ; 1 am far

from setting an example of rebellion to my own
fubjeds, by countenancing those who rebel against
their lawful Prince. The treason, of which you
have been guilty, is deteflable; and as traitors I
banilh you from my prefence*." Notwithftand-

" Mv. ing this scene of farce and of falfhood, Co ditho-

nourable to all the persons who adted a part in it,
Elizabeth permitted the malecontents peaceably to
reside in her dominions, supplied them secretly
with money, and renewed her interceflion with the

t Knox, Scottish Qucen in their favour t.
389. THE advantage the had gained over them did

not satisfy Mary ; the reiblved to follow the blow,
and to prevent a party, which the dreaded, from
ever recovering any footing in the nation. With
this view, the called a meeting of Parliament ,
and in order that a sentence of forfeiture might

IDecem. be legally pronounced against the banithed Lords,
,. the summoned them, by public proclamation, to
. Keith, appear before it §.
3;o. THE Duke of Chatelherault, on his humble ap-

plication, obtained a separate pardon; but not
without difficulty, as the King violently opposed it.
He was obliged, however, to leave the kingdom,

j Knox, and to reside for some time in France tf.
389. THE numerous forces which Mary brought into

the field, the vigour with which the abed, and the
length of time (he kept them in arms resemble the
efforts of a Prince with revenues much more con-
fiderable than those which the poffeffed. But ar-
mies were then levied and maintained by Princes
at finall charge. The vailal followed his superior,
and the superior attended the Monarch, at his own
expence. Six huinred horsemen, however, and
three companies of foot, betides her guards, receiv-
ed regular pay from the Queen. This extraordi-

nary

nary charge, together with the deburfements occa- Boos Illj
fioned by her marriage, exhausted a treasury, which C-v'm
was far from being rich. In this exigency, many '565*
devices were fallen upon for raising money. Fines
were levied on the towns of St. Andrew's, Perth,
and Dundee, which were fufpeded of favouring the
malecontents. An unusual tax was imposed on the
boroughs throughout the kingdom; and a great
fum was demanded of the citizens of Edinburgh,
by way of loan. This unprecedented exaAion alarm-
ed the citizens. They had recourse to delays, and
started difficulties, in order to evade it. These Ma-
ry confitrued to be acts of avowed disobedience, and
instantly committed several of them to prison. But
this severity did not subdue the undaunted spirit of
liberty, which prevailed among the inhabitants. The
Queen was obliged to mortgage to the city, the
superiority of the town of Leith, by which she ob-
tained a considerable fum of money *. The thirds Knox,
of ecclesiastical benefices proved another source, 383, 386.
whence the Queen derived rome supply. About this
time, we find the Protestant clergy complaining
more bitterly than ever of their poverty. The ar-
my, it is probable, exhausted a great part of that
fund, which was appropriated for their mainte-
nance t. + Maid.

THE assemblies of the Church were not uncon- Hi;t. of

cerned fpeCators of the commotions of this turbu- Edinburg.
lent year. In the meeting Jun.24, several of the male- 27.

S1« Church

content nobles were present, and seem to have had affairs.
great influence on their decisions. The high ttrain
in which the assembly addressed the Queen, can be
imputed only to those fears andjealoulies, with re-
gard to religion, which they endeavoured to infuse
into the nation. The assembly complained, with
some bitterness, of the stop which had been put to
the progress of the Reformation by the Queen's ar-
rival in Scotland , they required not only the total

sup-

Boor III. fuppreflion of the Popish worship throughout the
' ' kingdom, but even in the Queen's own chapel ; and

" 6" besides the legal establishment of the Protestant re-

ligion, they demanded that Mary herself thould
publickly embrace it. The Queen, after some de-
liberation, replied, that neither her conscience, nor
her interest, would permit her to take such a ifep.
The former would for ever reproach her for a
change, which proceeded from no inward convic-
tion , the latter would fuffer by the offence, which
her apoftacy must give to the King of France, and

*Knox, her other allies on the continent *.
374, 376. IT is remarkable, that the prosperous situation

of the Queen's affairs, during this year, began to
work some change in favour of her religion. The
Earls of Lenox, Athol, and Caffils, openly attend-
ed mars ; the herself afforded the Catholics a more
avowed protection than formerly , and, by her

+ Id. 389, permiflion, some of the ancient Monks ventured
390. to preach publickly to the people "t.

THE

# BOOK IV.

TH E

HISTORY

O F

SCOTLAND.

B O O K IV.
BOOK IV.

A S the day appointed for the meeting of Par-

B IV,

liament approached, Mary and her Ministers s566.

were employed in deliberating concerning the course Mary'sde-
which it was molt proper to hold with regard to the liberations
exiled nobles. Many motives prompted her to set concer-
no bounds to the rigour of justice. The malecon- exiled nc-
tents had laboured to defeat a scheme, which her bles.
interest conspired with her paflions in rendering dear
to her ; they were the leaders of a party, whole
friendship the had been obliged to court, while the
held their principles in abhorrence ; and they were
firmly attached to a rival, whom the had good rea-
son both to fear and to hate.

BUT, on the other hand, several weighty confi-

derations might be urged. The noblemen, whole
fate was in suspense, were amongthe mofl powerful
fubjeats in the kingdom ; their wealth great, their
connedions extensive ; and their adherents nume-
rous. They were now at mercy, the objeQcs of
compaflion, and suing for pardon with the most
humble fubmifion.

IN those circumitances, an ac of clemency

would exal; the Queen's characer, and appear no
less splendid nvmong foreigners, than acceptable to
her own fubjc&s. Mary herfclf, though highly
incenfcd, was not inexorable ; but the King's rage

M;: - c·

BooK IV. was implacable and unrelenting. They were soli-

- cited in behalf of the fugitives, from various quar-
'566. ters. Morton, Ruthven, Maitland, and all who

had been members of the Congregation, were not
forgetful of their ancient union with Murray, and
his fellow-fufferers ; nor negledful of their safety,
which they esteemed of great importance to the
kingdom. Melvil, who at that time poffeffed the
Queen's confidence, seconded their follicitations.
And Murray, having stooped so low as to court
Rizio, that favourite, who was desirous of securing
his protetion against the King, whose displeasure
he had lately incurred, seconded the interceffions
of his other friends, with the whole of his influ-

* Meir. ence*. The interposition of Sir Nicholas Throg-
1zs. morton, who had lately been Elizabeth's Ambaf-

fador in Scotland, in behalf of the exiles, was of
more weight than all these, and attended with
more success. Throgmorton, out of enmity to
Cecil, had embarked deeply in all the intrigues
which were carried on at the English court, in
order to undermine the power and credit of that
Minister. He espoused, for this reason, the cause
of the Scottish Queen, towards whose title and
pretensions the other was known to bear little
favour; and ventured, in the present critical junc-
ture, to write a letter to Mary, containing the most
salutary advices with regard to her conduct. He
recommended the pardoning of the Earl of Mur-
ray and his allbciates, as a measure no less prudent
than popular. An action of this nature, says he,
the pure effec of your Majefty's generosity, will
spread the fame of your lenity and moderation, and
engage the English to look towards your accession
to their throne, not only without prejudice, but
with desire. By the falme means, a perfect har-
nmony will be reflored among your own subjects,
lwho, if any rupture ihould happen with England, will

will serve you with that grateful zeal, which your BOOK Iv.
clemency cannot fail of inspiring*.

THESE prudent remonftrances of Throgmorton, * Malv.

to which his reputation for wisdom, and known at- 1,9.
tachment to the Queen, added great authority, She re-
made a deep irpretion on her spirit. Her cour- solves to
tiers cultivated this happy disposition, and prevailed treat them
on her, notwithstanding the King's inflexible tern- mncy.
per, to sacrifice her own private resentment to the
interceflion of her fubjeAs, and the wishes of her
friends t. With this view, the Parliament, which t Id. ,zs
had been called to meet on the 4th of February,
was prorogued to the 7th of April t and in the

$ Good.

mean time, she was busy in considering the manner vol. i. zz4.
and form in which she should extend her favour to
the Lords who were under disgrace.

THOUGH Mary discovered, on this occasion, a Is diverted

mind naturally prone to humanity, and capable of frm this
forgiving, ihe wanted firmness, however, to refilt bythefoli-
the influence, which was fatally employed to difap- citations of
point the effects of this amiable disposition. About France,
this time, and at no great diflance from each other, and her

zeal for

two envoys arrived from the French King. The Popery.
former was intrufted with matters of mere ceremony February
alone , he congratulated the Queen on her mar- 3-
riage, and invested the King with the ensigns of the
order of St. Michael. The inftrudions of the lat-
ter related to matters of more importance, and pro-
duced greater effects §.

§ Keith,

AN interview between Charles IX. and his Sifter 325. Ap-

the Queen of Spain had been often proposed ; and pend. 67.
after many obstacles arising from the opposition of
political interest, was at last appointed at Bayonne.
Catherine of Medicis accompanied her Con ; the
Duke of Alva attended his Miltrefs. Amidst the
scenes of-public pomp and pleasure, which seemed
to be the role occupation of both courts, a scheme
was formed, and measures concerted, for extermi-
nating the Hugonots in France, the Protestants in

the

BOOK IV. the low countries, and for fupprefling the Reforma-

'- ' tion throughout all Europe*. The adtive policy
i
, u.u of Pope Pius IV. and the zeal of the Cardinal of
ib. ;7. ILorrain, confirmed and encouraged difpolitions, so

suitable to the genius of the Romish religion, and
to beneficial to their own order.

11 was an account of this holy league which the

second French envoy brought to Mary, conjuring
her, at the fame time, in the name of the King of
France, and the Cardinal of Lorrain, not to retlore
the leaders of the Protcflants in her kingdom to
power and favour, at the very time when the Ca-
tholic Princes were combined to deflroy tlat sect,

t Melv. in all the countries of Europe -.
I' 6. Pop R is a species of false religion, remakable

lor the strong polIcflion it takes of the heart. Con-
trived by men of deep inlight into the human cha-
racter, and improved by the experience and obfer-
vation of many fuccellive ages; it arrived at last to
a degree of perfeCtion, which no former lyfiem of
fuperitition had ever attained. There is no power
in the underflanding, and no pallion in the heart,
to which it does not present objects, adapted to
rouie, and to interest them. Neither the love of
pleasure, which, at that time, prevailed in the
court of France, nor the pursuits of ambition
which occupied the court of Spain, had secured
them from the dominion of bigotry. Laymen,
and courtiers, were agitated with that furious and
unmerciful zeal, which is commonly considered as
peculiar to ecclefiatics , and Kings and Miniflers
thought themselves bound, in conscience, to extir-
pate thie Protestant doCtrine. Mary herself was
deeply tinctured with all the prejudices of Popery ;
a patlionate attachment to that fuperflition is visible
in every part of her charader, and runs through all
the fcenrs of her life : the was devoted, too, with
the utmost fubmiiion to the Princes of Lorrain,
her uncles ; and had been accuftomcd, from her

infancy,

infancy, to listen to all their advices, with a filial BOOK IV.
refpedt. The profpeCd of refforing the public ex-
ercife of her own religion, the pleasure of com- ,566.
plying with her uncles, and the hopes of grati-
fying the French Monarch, whom the present
situation of her affairs in England made it necefiary
to court, counterbalanced all the prudent confi-
derations which had formerly weighed with her.
She instantly joined the confederacy, which had
been formed tor the deflruction of the Protestants,
and altered the whole plan of her conduct, with re-
gard to Murray and his adherents*. * See Ap-

To this fatal resolution may be imputed all the peN di.

fublequent calamities of Mary's life Ever since
her return into Scotland, fortune may be said to
have been propitious to her, rather than adverse ;
and if her prosperity did not rite to any great
height, it had, however, fuffered no considerable
interruption. A thick and fettled cloud of adver-
fity, with few gleams of hope, and none of real
enjoyment, covers the remainder of her days.

THE etlets of the new system, which Mary had

adopted, were soon viible. The time of the pro-
rogation of Parliament was shortened ; and by a
new proclamation, the i2th of March was fixed
for its mecting t. Mary refoived, without any fur- t Keith,
ther delay, to proceed to the attainder of the rebel 326.
Lords, and, at the fame time, determined to take
lfme flep toward the re-eflablifhment of the Ro-
mifh religion in Scotland T. The Lords of tlie
Articles were chosen, as usual, to prepare the buhi-

ness

$ It is not on the authority of Knox alone, that we charge the

Queen with the design of re-eflablilhing the Roman Catholic
religion. He, indeed, asserts that the altars, which Ihould have
been crected in the church of St. Giles, were already provided,
394. c. Mary herself, in a letter to the Archbilhop of Glasgow
her Ambassador in France, acknowledges, " that in that 'ar-
liament, Ihe intended to have done lbine good, with refpea to
relaoring the old religion." Keith, 331. 2, l'he Spiritual

Loids,

BooK IV. ness which was to come before the Parliament.
v- They were all pertons in whom the Queen could

S5s66. confide, and bent to promote her designs. The

ruin of Murray and his party seemed now inevi-
table, and the danger of the Reformed Church im-
minent, when an event unexpectedly happened,
which saved both. If we regard either the barba-
rity of that age, when such acs of violence were
common, or the mean condition of the unhappy

And pre- person who fuffered, the event is little remarkable ;
vented by but if we refied upon the circumfiances with which
theconfpi- it was attended, or upon the conlequences which
ray a- followed it, it appears extremely memorable; and
Rizio. the rife and progress of it deserve to be traced with

great care.

Darnly DARNLY'S external accomplishments had excited
loses the that sudden and violent paflion which railed him to
Queen's the throne. But the qualities of his mind corref-
affeAion. ponded ill with the beauty of his person. Of a

weak underflanding, and without experience, con-
ceited at the fame time of his own abilities, and
ascribing his extraordinary success entirely to his dif-
tinguifhed merit. All the Queen's favour made no
imprellion on such a temper. All her gentleness
could not bridle his imperious and ungovernable
ipirit. All her attention to place about him per-
sons capable of directing his conduct, could not

* Good. prefierve him from rash and imprudent adions*.
vol. i.Izz. Fond of all the amusements, and even prone to all

Lords, i. e. the Popish ecclefiaftics, had, by her authority, re-
fumed their ancient place in that affenibly, ibid. 3. She had
joined the confederacy at Bayonne, Keith, Append. 167. 4-.
She allowed mats to be celebrated in different parts of the king-
dom, ibid. and declared that the would have mars free for all men
who would hear it, Good. vol. i. a74. ;. Blackwood, who was
furnithed by the Archbilhop of Glasgow with materials for writing
his Martyre de Marie, affirms that the Queen intended to have
procured, in this Parliament, if not the re-efltablifhment of the
Catholic religion, at leaf foniething for the cafe of Catholics,
Jebb. vol. ii. 104.

theI

prone to all the vices of youth, he became, by de- BooK Iv.
grees, careless of her person, and a firanger to her ' V
company. To a woman, and a Queen, such be- i566.
haviour was intolerable. The lower the had
flooped in order to raise him, his behaviour ap-
peared the more ungenerous and criminal. And
in proportion to the strength of her first affection,
was the violence with which her disappointed pas-
sion, now operated. A few months after the mar-
riage, their domestic quarrels began to be obferv-
ed. The extravagance of Darnly's ambition gave
rife to there. Initead of being satisfied with a share
in the administration of government, or with the
title of King, which Mary, by an unprecedented
itretch of power, had conferred on him, he de-
manded the Crown Matrimonial with most info-
lent importunity*. And though Mary aUedged that * Keith,
this gift was beyond her power, and that the au- 329.
thority of Parliament must be interposed to bestow Knox,
it, he wanted either understanding to comprehend, 404"
or temper to admit fojuft a defence; and often re-
newed and urged his request.

RIzIo, whom the King had at firfl taken into Sufpeas

great confidence, did not humour him in there fol- Rizio to
lies. By this, he incurred Henry's displeasure; be the
and as it was impoflible for Mary to behave to- canuf ofit.
wards her husband with the fame affeaion, which
distinguished the first and happy days of their union,
he imputed this coldness, not to his own behaviour,
which had so well merited it, but to the insinuations
of Rizio. Mary's own coidua confirmed and
strengthened there suspicions. She treated this
firanger with a familiarity, and admitted him to a
share in her confidence, to which neither his first
condition, nor the office the had lately bestowed
upon him, gave him any title. He was perpetually
in her presence, intermeddled in every business,
and, together with a few favourites, was the com-
panion of all her private amusements. The haugh-

Vor.. I. U ty

Boor IV. ty spirit of Darnly could not bear the intrusion of

^"* h lUiIch an upstart; and impatient of any delay, and
z566. unrefirained by any scruple, he instantly resolved

to get rid of him by violence.

Rizio ha- AT the fame time, another design, which took
ted by the its rife from very different motives, was carrying on
th iesod against the life of Rizio. Morton, Ruthven, Lind-
nobles. fay, and Maitland, were the contrivers of it. In all

former commotions they had been ftriAly united
with Murray, though in the late insurrection they
had deserted him, for various reasons. Morton was
nearly allied to the family of Angus, and during
the minority of the present Earl, aaed as Chief of
the name of Douglas. Ruthven was married to the
King's aunt. Lindfay's wife was of the fame blood.
All there had warmly concurred with the Queen in
promoting'a marriage, which did To much honour
to the house of Douglas, and naturally expeted,
that under a King of their own blood, the chief
management of affairs would be committed to them.
Maitland, with his usual sagacity, foresaw that
Murray's opposition to the match would prove dan-
gerous and ineffecual; but whoever ruled at court,
he hoped, by his dexterity and talents to render
himfelfneceflary and of importance. They were
all equally disappointed in their expedations. The
King's headstrong temper rendered him incapable
of advice. The Qugeen could not help diftrufting
men who had been to long and To intimately con-
nedted with Murray, and gave herself up intirely
to such Counsellors as complied with all her incli-
nations. The return of that nobleman and his fol-
lowers was therefore the only event which could
restore Morton, Maitland, and their associates to
their former ascendant over the Queen's councils.
For this reason, nothing could be more mortifying
to them, than the resolution which Mary had taken
to treat the exiles with rigour. This they imputed
to Rizio, who, after he had engaged to aid Murray

with

with all his interest, was now the most active infiru- BooK IV.
ment in promoting the measures which were con- 766
certed for the ruin of that nobleman. This offici- i566.
ous zeal compleated the difguff which they had
conceived against him, and inspired them with
thoughts of vengeance, in no wife suitable tojuffice,
to humanity, or to their own dignity.

WHILE they were ruminating upon their scheme, They

the King communicated his resolution to be avenged combine
of Rizio to Lord Ruthven, and implored his aliht- in order
ance, and that of his friends, towards the execution to murdei
of this design. Nothing could be more acceptable him.
to them than this overture. They saw at once all
the advantages they would reap, by the concurrence
of such an associate. Their own private revenge
upon Rizio would pass, they hoped, for.an a& of
obedience to the King; and they did not despair
of obtaining the refloration of their banished friends,
and security for the Protestant religion, as the
price of their compliance with his will.

BuT as Henry was nolefs fickle, than rash, they

hesitated for Come time, and determined to advance
no farther, without taking every poflible precaution
for their own safety. They did not, in the mean
time, fuffer the King's resentment to abate. Mor-
ton, who was inferior to no man of that intriguing
age, in all the arts of insinuation and address, took
the young Prince under his management. He
wrought upon his ruling paflion, ambition to ob-
tain the Matrimonial Crown. He repreiented Rizio's
credit with the Queen to be the chief and only ob-
ftacleto his success in that demand. This minion,
alone, he said, poffeffed he confidence ; and out of
complaisance to him, her fuiibjeds, her nobility, and
even her husband, were excluded from any partici-
pation of her secret councils. Under the .ippear-
ance of a confidence merely political, he insinuated,
and the King perhaps believed, that a familiarity

U z of

-" 'might be concealed *. Such various and compl

1566. cated paflions raged in the King's bosom, with th

utmost fury. He became more impatient than eve
of any delay, and even threatened to strike the in
tended blow with his own hand. At last, pre
liminaries were fettle on both sides, and articles so
their mutual security agreed upon. I he King en
gaged to prevent the attainder of the banilhe,
Lords, to consent to their return into Scotland, to
obtain for them an ample remiflion of all theii
crimes, and to fippoit to the utmost of his power.
the religion which was now established in the king-
dom. On their parts, they undertook to procure
the Crown Matrimonial for Hen:ry, to secure his

* Of all our Historians, Buchanan alone avowedly accules

Mary of a criminal love for Rizio. 340. 344. Knox slightly
insinuates that such a suspicion was entertained, 391. Melvil, in
a conversation with the Queen, intimates that he was afraid her
familiarity with Rizio might be liable to misconstruction, 1o.
The King himself seems, both by Melvil's account, and by his
expostulation with the Queen, which Ruthven mentions, to
have given credit to there suspicions, Melv. 127. Keith. Appen-
dix, 123, 24. That the King's suspicions were firong is like-
wile evident from the paper publilhed Append. No. XV. But, in
opposition to theie lulpicions, and they are nothing more, we may
oblerve that Raulet the Queen's French Secretary was difiniffed
from her lervice, and Rinio advanced to that office in December
i 564. Keith 268. It was in consequence of this preferment,
that he acquired his gredt credit with the Queen, Melv. 107.
Darnly armnved in Scotland about two months after, Keith, 269.
The Queen immediately conceived (or him a paflion, which had
all the fymptoims of genuine and violent love. Rizio aided this
passion, aWd promoted the marriage with all his interest, Melv.
i 11. During Come months after the marriage, the Queen's
fondness for Darnly continued. She loon proved with child.
From this enumeration of circumnitances, it appears almost im-
possible that the Queen, unlcfs we suppose her to have been a
woman utterly abandoned, could carry on any criminal intrigue
with Rizio. But the silence of Randolph the Englilh Resident,
a man abundantly ready to mention, and to aggravate Mary's
faults, and who does not once insinuate that her confidence in
Rizio concealed any thing criminal, is in itself a fufficient vin-
dication of her innocence.

right

right of fucceilion, if the Q0cen ihould die before BooK IV.
him, and to defend that right to the uttermoir, a-
gainit whatever person thould prefimne to dispute 56s6.
it , and if either Rizio, or any other person, ihould
happen to be killed in proftcuting of the delign,
the King promised to acknowledge himnilf to be
the author of the enterprize, and to protect tholfe Good.
who were embarked in it * vol.i. 266

NOT HING now remained but to concert the plan Perpetrate

of operation, to chufe the adors, and to aflign them that crime
their parts in perpetrating this detcftable crime. the,
Every circumitance here paints and characterizes palace
the manners and men of that age, and fills us vwith
horror at both. The place, chofcn for commit-
ting such a deed, was the Queen's bedchamber.
Though Mary was now in the sixth month of her
pregnancy, and though Rizio might have been
seized elsewhere, without any difficulty, the King
pitched upon this place, that he might enjoy the
malicious pleasure of reproaching Rizio with his
crimes before the Queen's face. The Earl of Mor-
ton, the Lord High Chancellor of the kingdom,
undertook to direct an enterprize, carried on in
defiance of all the laws of which he was bound
to be the guardian. The Lord Ruthven, who
had been confined to his bed for three months, by
a very dangerous distemper, and who was still Ib
feeble that he could scarce walk, or bear the weight
of his own armour, was entrusted with the execu-
tive part; and while he himself needed to be tfiip
ported by two men, he came abroad to commit a
murder in the presence of his Sovereign

ON the 9th of March, Morton entered the court

of the palace with an hundred and sixty men;
and without noise, or meeting with any reliflance,
seized all the gates. While the Queen was at sup-
per with the Counters of Argyle, Kizio, and a few
domeftics, the King suddenly entered the apart-

U

3 ment,

SRuthven, clad in complete armour, and with that

1566' ghastly and horrid look which long licknefs had

given him. Three or four of his most trusty ac-
complices followed him. Such an unusual appear-
ance alarmed those who were present. Rizio in-
ftantly apprehended that he was the vicim at whom
the blow was aimed ; and in the utmost confterna-
tion retired behind the Queen, of whom he laid
hold, hoping that the reverence due to her person
might prove some protecion to him. The confpi-
rators had proceeded too far to be restrained by any
consideration of that kind. Numbers of armed
men rushed into the chamber. Ruthven drew his
dagger, and with a furious mien and voice, com-
manded Rizio to leave a place of which he was un-
worthy, and which he had occupied too long.
Mary employed tears, and entreaties, and threaten-
ings, to save her favourite. But, notwithstanding
all these, he was torn from her by violence, and
before he could be dragged through the next apart-
ment, the rage of his enemies put an end to his

* See Ap- life, piercing his body with fifty fix wounds*.
Pndix, ATHOL, Huntly, Bothwell, and other confidants

of the Queen who lodged in the palace, were
alarmed at the uproar, and filled with the utmost
terror on their own account ; but either no violence
was intended against them, or the conspirators durst
not shed the noblest blood in the kingdom, in the
fame illegal manner with which they had ventured
to take the life of a firanger. Some of them were
dismissed, and others made their escape.

Theycon- THE conspirators, in the mean time, kept pof-
fine he feflion of the palace, and guarded the Queen with
herelf. the utmost care. A proclamation was published by

the King, prohibiting the Parliament to meet on

the

the day appointed ; and measures were taken by BOOK IV.
him for preventing any tumult in the city*. Mur-

---

ray, Rothes, and their followers being informedof * Keith,
every flep taken against Rizio, arrived at Edinburgh Append.
next evening. Murray was graciously received both z 26.
by the King and Queen. By the former, on ac-
count of the Articles which had been agreed upon
between them ; by the latter, because flhe hoped to
prevail on him, by gentle treatment, not to take
part with the murderers of Rizio. Their power
the itill felt, and dreaded ; and the insult which they
had offered to her authority, and even to her per-
son, so far exceeded any crime (he could impute to
Murray, that in hopes of wreaking her vengeance
on them, the became extremely willing to be re-
conciled to him. The obligations, however, which
Murray lay under to men, who had hazarded their
lives on his account, engaged him to labour for
their safety. The Queen, who scarce had the li-
berty of choice left, was persuaded to admit Mor-
ton and Ruthven into her presence, and to grant
them the promise of pardon in whatever terms they
(hould deem necessary for their own security.

THE King, mean while, stood aflonifhed at the

boldness and success of his own enterprize, and un-
certain what course to hold. The Queen observed
his irresolution, and availed herself of it. Sheem But the
ployed all her art to disengage him from his new gains the
associates. His consciousness of the insult which he King. and
had offered to so illustrious a benefacrefs, inspired hera"
him with uncommon facility and complaisance. In
spite of all the warnings he received to distrust the
Queen's artifices, the prevailed on him to dismiss
the guards which the conspirators had placed on her
person ; and that fame night he made his escape
along with her, attended by three persons only, and
retired to Dunbar. The Lcheme of their flight had Mar:h i i.
been communicated to Huntly and Bothwell, and

U 4 they

BooK IV. they were quickly joined by them, and feteral other
'-"-of the nobles. Bothwell's estate lay in that cor-

566. ner of the kingdom, and his followers crouded to

their Chief, in such numbers, as loon enabled the
Queen to set the power of the conspirators at de-
fiance.

Is recon- THIS sudden flight filled them with inexpreflible
piledto the conflernation. They had obtained a promise of par-
exiled no- don ; and it now appeared from the Queen's con-

bl. duct, that nothing more was intended by this pro-

mise, than to amuse them, and to gain time. They
ventured, however, to demand the accomplishment
of it ; but their messenger was detained a prisoner,
and the Queen advancing towards Edinburgh, at
the head of 8coo men, talked in the highest (train
of resentment and revenge. She had the address,
at the fame time, to separate Murray and his affo-
ciates from the conspirators against Rizio. Senfi-
ble that the union of these parties would form a
confederacy, which might prove formidable to the
crown, the expressed great willingness to receive the

March 19. former into favour, towards the latter, she declared
The con- herlelf inexorable. Murray and his followers were
fpiratorsa- no leSs willing to accept of pardon, on her terms.

zio fly The conspirators against Rizio, deprived of every

into Eng- resource, and incapable of resistance, fled precipi-
land. tately to Newcaflle, having thus changed situations

with Murray and his party, who left that place, a
few days before.

No man io remarkable for wisdom, and even

for cunning as the Earl of Morton, ever engaged
in a more unfortunate enterprize. Deserted base-
ly by the King, who now denied his knowledge
of the conspiracy, by public proclamations;
and abandoned ungenerously by Murray and

' Mely. his party*, he was obliged to fly from his
,3o '

native country to resign the highefr office, and to

part

part with one of the molt opulent fortunes in the BooK IV,
kingdom. 1566.

ON her return to Edinburgh, Mary began to

proceed again those concerned in the murder of
Rizio with the utmost rigour of law. But, in praise
of her clemency, it must be observed, that only
two persons, and there of no considerable rank,
fuffered for this crime'. * Keith,

IN this conspiracy there is one circumstance, Appendix

which, though somewhat detached, deserves not to
be forgotten. In the confederacy between the King
and the conspirators, the real intention of which
was affaflination, the preserving of the Reformed
Church is, nevertheless, one of the most confider-
able articles ; and the fame men who were prepa-
ring to violate one of the first duties of morality,
affeAed the highest regard for religion. Hiflory
relates there extravagancies of the human mind,
without pretending tojuflify, or even to account
for them , and regulating her own opinions by the
eternal and immutable laws ofjuftice and of virtue,
points out such inconsistencies, as features of the
age which she describes, and records them for the
inftru~tion of ages to come.

As this is the second inflance of deliberate aflaf- An ec-

fination which has occurred, and as we Ihall here- count of
after meet with many other inflances of the fame the tre-
crime, the causes which gave rife to a practice so ",flinti-
Ihocking to humanity, deserve our particular at- onsinthat
tention. Resentment is, for obvious and wife rea- age.
sons, one of the strongest paflions in the human
mind. The natural demand of this paflion is, that
the person who feels the injury should himself in-
flit the vengeance due on that account. The per-
mitting this, however, would have been deftruAive
to society ; and punishment would have known no
bounds, either in severity or in duration. For this
reason, in the very infancy of the social slate, the
sword was taken out of private hands, and com-

mitted

BOOK IV. mitted to the Magistrate. But, at first, while laws
"'-c"-'aimed at restraining, they really strengthened the

1566 principle of revenge. The earliest and moit fim-

ple punishment for crimes was retaliation ; the of-
fender forfeited limb for limb, and life for life.
The payment of a compensation to the person in-
jured, succeeded to the rigour of the former infli-
tution. In both there, the gratification of private
revenge was the object of law ; and he who fuffered
the wrong, was the only person who had a right to
pursue, to exat, or to remit the punishment.
While laws allowed such full tcope to the revenge of
one party, the interests of the other were not neg-
leted. If the evidence of his guilt did not amount
to a full proof, or if he reckoned himlelf to be un-
justly accused, the person to whom a crime was im-
puted had a right to challenge his adversary to tingle
combat, and on obtaining the vidory, vindicated
his own honour. In almost every considerable cause,
whether civil or criminal, arms were appealed to,
in defence, either of the innocence, or the property
of the parties. Justice had seldom occasion to use
her balance; the sword alone decided every contest.
The passion of revenge was nourished by all there
means, and grew, by daily indulgence, to be in-
creibhly flrong. Mankind became habituated to
blool, not only in times of war, but of peace; and
ti-om this, as well as other causes, contrated an
,.nmazing fcrocity of temper, and of manners. This
1 crocitv, however, nmade it necessary to discourage
iie trial by combat ; to abolish the payment ofcom-
;Infationis in criminal cafes; and to think of
:rme milder method of terminating disputes
concerning civil rights. The punishments for
crimes became more severe, and the regulations
concerning property more fixed , but the Princes,
whofc province it was to infli&t the one, and to

ieforce the other, polleffed little power. Great of-
iin.is decpilcd their authority ; finaller ones fhel-

tered

tered themselves under th~e jurildiation of those, CooP lY.
from whole prote~tion they expeded impunity. ~~
The admin~ifration of juffice was extremely feeble 15 .
and dilatory. An attempt to punilh the crimes of
a Chieftain, or even of his vassals, often excited
rebellions and civil wars. 'To nobles, haughtyv and
independenit, among whom the caules of dicord
were many and unavoidable, who were quick in
dilcerning an injury, and impatient to revenge it ,
who esteemed it infamous to submit to an enemy,
and cowardly to forgive him , who concidered the
right of punithing those who had injured them, as
a privilege of their order, and a mark of indepen-
dence ; such flow proceedings were extremely un-
f~atisfadtory. The blood of their adverlary was, in
their opinion, the only thing which could wath away
an affront awhere that was not thed, their revenge
was disappointed, their courage became fulpeded,
and a Rtain was left on their honour. That ven-
geance, which the impotent hand of the Magiffrate
could not indlia, their own could easily execute ;
under governments so feeble, men aiflimed, as in
a slate of nature, the right of judging, and redref-
sing their own wrongs. Anid thus affailination, a
crime of all others the mast deffrudtive to faciety,
came not only to be allowed, but to be deemed
honourable.

Tas history of Eurrope, during th~e r4th and

r 5th centuries, abounds with deteitable inflances
of this crime. It prevailed chiefly amona the
French and Scots, between whom there was abclofe
intercourse at that time, and a furpriling refem-
blance in their national chara~ters. In I407, the
only brother of the King of France was miurdered
publickly in the fireets of Paris a and so far was
this horrible amton fromt meeting withi prope~rr pur-
nilbment, that an eminent lawye~r ~n~ asln.· :Ba :
plead in defence of it before the Pe(·r (, :. ii
and avowedly to mnaintainl the law full,

BooK IV. nation. In 1417, it required all the eloquence and

-- authority of the famous Gerfon, to prevail on the
3566. Council of Constance to condemn this proposition,

" That there are rome cafes in which affalination
is a virtue more meritorious in a Knight than in a
Squire, and more meritorious in a King than in a
Knight *." The number of eminent persons who

'L'Enfant. were murdered in France and Scotland, on account
Hilt.Conc.
de Conit. either of private, or political, or religious quarrels,

during the i5th and i6th centuries, is almost in-
credible. Even after those causes, which first gave
rife to this barbarous practice were removed'; after
the jurifdidtion of Magistrates, and the authority
of liws were better eftablilhed, and become more
universal , after the progtefs of learning and philo-
sophy had polished the manners, and humanized
the minds of men, this crime continued in some
degree. It was towards the close of the I7th cen-
tury before it disappeared in France. The addi-
tional vigour, which the royal authority acquired
by the accession of James VI. to the throne of
England, seems to have put a flop to it in Scotland.

THE influence, however, of any national custom,

both on the understanding and on the heart, and
how far it may go towards perverting or extinguish-
ing moral principles of the greatest importance, is
remarkable. The authors of those ages have per-
fedtly imbibed the sentiments of their cotempora-
ries, with regard to afhaflination , and they, who
had leisure to reflet, and to judge, appear to be
no more (hocked at this crime, than the persons,
who committed it during the heat and impetuosity
of paflion. Buchanan relates the murder of Car-
dinal Beatoun, and of Rizio, without exprefling
those feelings which are natural to a man, or that

- Buchan.indignation which became an hiflorian +. Knox,
9i, 345. whole mind was fiercer and more unpolifhed, talks

of the death of Beatoun and of the Duke of Guise,
not only without censure, but with the utmost ex-

ultation

ultation *. On the other hand, the Bishop of Ross BooK IV
mentions the affaflination of the Earl of Murray, .---
with some degree of applause t. Blackwood dwells

o Knox,

upon it, with the most indecent triumph, and as- 334-
cribes it direaly to the hand of God t. Lord Ruth- t Andcrf.
ven, the principal ator in the conspiracy against 3- 84
Rizio, wrote an account of it tome thort time be- Jebb. 2
fore his own death, and in all his long narrative
there is not one expreflion of regret, or one lymp-
tom of compunetion for acrime no less difhonoura-
ble, than barbarous §. Morton, equally guilty of Keith,
the fame crime, entertained the fame Lentiments Append.
concerning it; and in his last moments, neither he "9'
himself, nor the Ministers who attended him, seem
to have considered it as an adion which called for
repentance; even then he talks of David's slaughter
as coolly, as if it had been an innocent or commen-
dable deed II. The vices of another age astonish Il Crawf.
and shock us; the vices of our own become fami- Append.
liar, and excite little horror. I return from this
digreflion to the course of the hi(lory.

THE charm, which had at first attached the The

Qgueen to Darnly, and held them for Come time in Queen's
an happy union, was now entirely dissolved ; and hatred to
love no longer covering his follies and vices with its Darnl in-
friendly veil, they appeared to Mary in their full
dimension and deformity ¶. Though Henry pub- r See Ap-
lifhed a proclamation, disclaiming any knowledge end. No.
of the conspiracy against Rizio, the Queen was ful- "VIl
ly convinced, that he was not only acceflfory to the
contrivance, but to the commillion of that odious
crime * *. That very power, which with liberal * * Keith,
and unfufpicious fondness, she had conferred upon 3SO.
him, he had employed to infuilt her authority, to
limit her prerogative, and to endanger her perobn.
Such an outrage, it was impoflible any woman
could bear or forgive. Cold civilities, secret diftrufi,
frequent quarrels, succeeded to their former tranf-

ports

BOOK IV. ports of affedion and confidence. The Queen's
-v-' favours were no longer conveyed through his hands.
'566" The crowd of expetants ceased to court his patro-

nage, which they found to avail so little. Among
the nobles, some dreaded his furious temper, others
complained of his perfidioufnels; and all of them
deipiled the weakness of his understanding, and
the inconstancy of his heart. The people them-
selves observed some parts of his condued, which
little finted the dignity of a King. Addited to
drunkenness, beyond what the manners of that age
could bear, and indulging irregular passions, which
even the licentioufnels of youth could not excule,
he, by his indecent behaviour, provoked the Queen
to the utmost ; and the paflions which it occalion.
ed, often forced tears from her eyes, both in pub-
lic and in private*. Her aversion for him increased

*Keith, every day and could be no longer concealed. He
329. was often absent from court, appeared there with

little splendor, and was truffed with no power.
Avoided equally by thole who endeavoured to
please the Queen, who favoured Morton and his
associates, or who adhered to the house of Hamil-
ton, he was left almost alone in a negleaed and

-t Melvil, unpitied solitude+.
131, &c. ABOU T this time a new favourite grew into great
" he rifeofcredit with the Queen, and soon gained an ascend-
Bothwelts ant over her heart, which encouraged his enter-
tavour. prifing genius to form designs that proved fatal to

himself, and the occasion of all Mary's subsequent
misfortunes. This was James Hepbun Earl of
Bothwell, the head of an ancient family, and by
his extensive pofelfions and numerous vaflals, one
of the most powerful noblemen in the kingdom.
Even in that turbulent age, when so many vast pro-
jets were laid open to an aspiring mind, and in-
vited it to aaion, no man's ambition was more da-
ring than Bothwell's, or had recourse to bolder or

more

more singular expedients for obtaining power. BooK IV.
When almost every person of diftindion in the '<"^
kingdom, whether Papist or Protestant had joined ,566.
the Congregation in opposing the dangerous en-
croachments of the French upon the liberties of
the nation, he, though an avowed Protestant, ad-
hered to the Queen Regent, and ated with vigour
on her fide. The success which attended the arms
of the Congregation having obliged him to retire
into France, he was taken into the Queen's service,
and continued with her till the time of her return
into Scotland *. From that period, every flep of Anders.
his condu& towards Mary was remarkably dutiful; '. 90.
and amidst all the fhiftings of facion, we scarcely
ever find him holding any course which could be
offenfive to her. When Murray's proceedings with
regard to her marriage gave umbrage to the Queen,
she recalled Bothwell from that banishment into
which the had with reluctance driven him, and
considered his zeal and abilities as the most power-
ful supports of her authority. When the confpira-
tors against Rizio seized her person, he became
the chief instrument of recovering her liberty, and
served her, on that occasion, with so much fidelity
and success, as made the deepest impreflion on her
mind, and greatly increased the confidence which
the had hitherto placed in him t. Her gratitude f+ Ib. i.
loaded him with marks of her bounty ; the railed 92, 93-.
him to offices of profit and of trust, and tranfa6ed
no matter of importance without his advice t. By $ Melr.
complaisance, and anliduity, he confirmed and for- '33.
tified there dispositions of the Que7en in his favour,KnOX#396"
and insensibly paved the way towards that vast pro-
jea, which his immoderate ambition had perhaps
already conceived, and which, in spite of many
difficulties, and at the expence of many crimes,
he at last accomplithed.

THB

'-' ed. As her palace was defended only by a slender

'566. guard, it seemed imprudent to expose her person,

at this time, to the inuilts the might fuffer in a king-
dom torn by fadions, and prone to mutiny. For
this realbn, the Privy Council advised the Queen
to fix her residence in the caffle of Edinburgh, the
firongeft fortress in the kingdom, and the moit

* Keith, proper place for the security of her person *. In
335- order to render this security more perfec, Mary

laboured to extinguish the domefihc feuds which
divided lome of the principal nobles. Murray and
Argyll were exasperated againif Huntly and 13oth-
well, by reciprocal and repeated injuries. The
Queen, by her authority and intreaties, effeted a
reconcilement among them, and drew from them
a promise to bury their discords in everlasting obli-
vion. This reconcilement Mary had so much at

flbid.336. heart, that the made it the condition on which the
Appendix again received Murray into favour t.
'39- ON the I9th of June, Mary was delivered of her
.es °I, only Con James, a Prince whole birth was happy for

' the whole Island, and unfortunate to her alone.
His accession to the throne of England united the
two divided kingdoms in one mighty monarchy,
and established the power of Great Britain on a firm
foundation. While the, torn early from her son
by the cruelty of her fate, was never allowed to in-
dulge those tender paflions, nor to taste those joys
which fill the heart of a mother.

M LVl L was inifantly dispatched to London with

an account of this event. It struck Elizabeth, at
firif in a fenfib'e manner; and the advantage and
fiuperiority which her rival had acquired by the birth
of a Ton, forced tears from her eyes. But before
Melvil was admitted to audience, the had so far re-
covered the command of herself, as to receive him

not

not only with decency, but with exceflive cheerfil- Booc IV.
ness; and willingly accepted the invitation which ' 'y
Mary gave her, to stand godmother to her Con*. * M\v.

As Mary loved splendor and magnificence, the 138.

resolved to celebrate the baptism of the young Prince
with great pomp ; and for that purpose sent invi-
tations of the fame kind to the French King, and
to the Duke of Savoy, the uncle of her former
hulhand. +- See Ap-

THE Queen, on her recovery, dikcovered no pendix,

change in her sentiments with refped to the Kingt. No. xvii.
The death of Rizio, and the countenance he had The Qu.

continues

given to an ation so inbolent and unjuitifiable, were

to treat

11ill fresh in her memory. She was frequently pen- Darnly
five and dejected

: And though Henry limetimes withindif-

attended at court, and accompanied her in her pro terence &
greffes through different parts of the kingdom, he $e l.48.
met with little reverence from the nobles, while
Mary treated him with the greatest reserve, and did II Keith,
not fuffer him to possess any authority |l. The 350.
breach between them became every day more ap- Melv.'32.
parent §. Attempts were made toward a reconcile- Keithd
ment, particularly by Caltelnau the French Ambaf- s9.
fador, but after such a violent rupture, it was found
no easy matter to bind the nuptial knot a-new ; and
though he prevailed on the King and Qjieen to pals
two nights together *, we may, with great proba- * Ibid.
bility, pronounce this appearance of union, to
which Caftelnau truffted, not to have been sincere ,
we know with certainty that it was not lasting.

EOTHWELL, all this while, was the Queen's Her at-

prime confidant. Without his participation no bu- tachent
linefs was concluded, and no favour bellowed. To well in-
gether with this ascendant over her councils, Both- creases.
well, if we may believe the cotemporary hiitorians,
acquired no less sway over her heart. But at what
precise time, this ambitious Lord firit allowed the
lentiments of a lover to occupy the place of that
duty and refped which a fubjet owes his Sove-

V o L. I. X reign ;

1:ooK IV. reign; or when Mary, intfead of gratitude for his

~ ~ faithful services, felt a paflion of another nature ri-

'66. ling in her bosom, it is no ealy matter to determine.

Such delicate transitions of paflion can be discerned
only by those, who ale admitted near the persons of
the parties, and wvho can view the secret workings
of the heart with calm and acute observation. Nei-
ther Knox nor Buchanan enjoyed there advantages.
Their humble faition allowed them only a dittant
accef; to the Queen and her favourite. And the ar-
dor of their zeal, and the violence of their preju-
dices, render their opinions rath, precipitate, and
inaccurate. It is by the effets of this reciprocal
paflion, rather than by their accounts of it, that fib-
iequent historians can judge of its reality.

ADVENTUROUS as Bothwell's project to gain the

Queen may appear, it was formed and carried on
under very favourable circumstances. Mary was
young, gay, and affable. She poffeffed great fen-
fibility of temper, and was capable of the utmost
tenderness of affection. She had placed her love on
a very unworthy objec, who requited it with in-
gratitude, and treated her with negled, with info-
lence, and with brutality. All these Ihe felt, and
resented. In this situation, the attention and com-
plaifance of a man, who had vindicated her autho-
rity, and proteted her perbon ; who entered into
all her views, who soothed all her paflions, who
watched and improved every opportunity of infinu-

* Anders. ating his design, and recommending his paflion *,
1* 93,94 could scarce fail of making an impreflion on a

heart of such a frame as Mary's.

The King THE haughty spirit of Darnly, nursed up in flat-
resolves to tery, and accuflomed to command, could not bear
leave the contempt under which he had now fallen, and
Scotland. the ifate of insignificance to which he saw himself

reduced. But in a country, where he was univer-
sally hated or despised, he could never hope to form

a party,

a party, which would second any attempt he might BooK IV.
make to recover power. He addressed himself, LvM
therefore, to the Pope, and to the Kings of France '566
and Spain, with many profeflions of his own zeal
for the Catholic religion, and with bitter complaints
against the Queen, for neglecting to promote that
interest *: And soon after, he took a resolution, "Knox,
equally wild and desperate, of embarking on board 399-
a Ihip, which he provided, and of flying into so-
reign parts. It is almofl impoldible to form any
satisfactory conjecture concerning the motives
which influence a capricious and irregular mind.
He hoped, perhaps, to recommend himself to the
Catholic Princes on the continent, by his zeal for
religion, and that they would employ their interest
towards reinflating him in the poffellion of that
power which he had loft. Perhaps, he expeced
nothing more than the comfort of hiding the dif-
grace under which he was now fallen, among ftran-
gers, who had never been witnesses of his former
prosperity.

HE communicated the design to the French His capri.

Ambassador Le Croc, and to his father the Earl of cious be-
Lenox. They both endeavoured to diffwade him haviour.
from it, but without success. Lenox, who seems,
as well as his Con, to have loft the Queen's con-
fidence, and who, about this time, was seldom at
court, inflantly communicated the matter to her
by a letter. Henry, who had refused to accom-
pany the Queen from Stirling to Edinburgh, was
likewise absent from court. He arrived there,
however, on the Came day the received the ac-
count of his intended flight. But he was more than
usually wayward and peevilh; and tcrupling to
enter the palace, unless certain Lords who attend.
ed the Q.een were difmilfed, Mary was obliged to
meet him without the gates. At last he fiuffered
her to conduct him into her own apartment. She
endeavoured to draw from him the reasons of the

X fitrange

DooK IV. ftrangerefo!ution which he had taken, and to divert
-'"-'him from it. In1 spite however of all her argu-

;66. mentsand intreaties, he remained silent and inflexi-

ble. Next day the Privy Council, by her direc-
tion, e:poiitulated with him Io the Lame head.
Hec perfilted, notwithilanding, in his sullenness and
ob!tinac\ ; and neither deigned to explain the mo-
tives of his conducf, nor 1ignified any intention of
altering it. As he left the apartment, he turned
towards the Q.iecn, and told her, tlhat he should
not fee his face again, for a long time. A few days
alter, he wrote to Mary, and mentioned two things
as grounds of his dilguft. She herself, lie laid, no
longer admitted him into any confidence, and had
deprived him of all power, and the nobles, after
her example, treated him with open neglecl, so
that he appeared in every place w'ithout the digni-
ty and splendor of a King.

Mary en- NOTHING could be more mortifying to
deavours Mary, than this intended flight of the King's,
to pre- which would have spread the infamy of their do-
vent his .
intended meitic quarrel all over Europe. Compaflion for
flight, a Monarch who would then appear to be forced in-

to exile by her negled and il ulhge, might have
dilpol.d mankind to entertain sentiments concern-
ing the caulcs of their discord, little to her advan-
tage. I;i order, therefore, to prepoffels the minds
of her allies, and to screen her reputation from
any censure with which L)irnly might endeavour to
load it, the Privy council tranfinitted a narrative
of this whole tran fadion, both to the King, and to
the Queen Mother of France. It is drawn with
great art, and fers Mary's conduct in the most fa-
vourable point of light *

*Keith, ABOUT this time, the licence of the borderers
345, 3. 7-called for rcdrets; and Mary resolving to hold a

court of juffice at Jedburgh, tile inhabitants of fe-
veral adjacent counties were summoned to attend

f I. 33 their Sovereign in arms, according to custom t.
i. 3,i. Bothwell

Hothwell was, at that time, Lieutenant or War- IOOK IV-
den of all the marches, an onfice among the molt "'-'
important in the kIi'iom ; and though ulually
divided into thi ee dilti:cAt g-ove~ nmcnts, bestowed
by thie (Qeien's favonur uI pon hmi ;,'ne. In order
to display his own valour and adtivity in the dii-
charge of this trust, lie attempted to eiize a gang
of banditti, \vho, lurking among the marlhcs of
Liddeftiale, infltecd the ret elf the country. But
while he was laying hold of one of thole defpe- oo. 6.
rado's, he was wounded by him in fcveral places,
f, that his followers were obliged to carry him to
Hermitage ca'le. Mary instantly flew thither,
with an impatience which f rongly marks the anxi-
ety of a lover, but little fnitcd the: dignity ot a
Qieen *. linding that Both\well was threaten: d
with no dangerous lymptom, the returned that
fame day to Jedburgh. The fatigue of such a
journey, added to the anguish of mind the had
iuffered on Bothwell's account, t'hrew her next
morning into a violent fever -t. Her life was de- 1Keith,
(paired of, but her youth, and the ig:our of her3j '' 3',
constitution, resifted the malignity of I er diiafe.
During the continuance of the Qieen's illness, the
King, who resided at Stirling, never came near
Jedburgh t ; and when he afterwards thought fit t Ibid.

Append.

* The distance between Jedburgh and Hermitage is u 8 Scot- 133.

tifh miles, through a country almoff impassable. The Iealbn of
the year was far advanced. Bothwell seems to have been wound-
ed in a fcuffle, occasioned by the delpair of a single man, rather
than any open infurreacion of the borderers. It does not appear
that the Queen was attended thither by any considerable train.
Had any military operation been necetfary, a' is luppofed, Good.
vol. i. 304. it would have been extremely improper to rifque the
Queen's person in an expedition againil thieves. So loon as the
Queen found Uothwell to be in no danger, the inflantly returned ;
and after this we hear no more of the infurredion, nor have we
;any proof that the rioters took. refuge in i.ilanJ. No other
ire'!on but -that which we have produced, feiu uis llicient to
account tfor the Queen's conduct.

X 3 to

BOOK IV. to make his appearance there, he met with such a
Scold reception, as did not encourage him to make

Knox, any long flay*. Mary soon recovered strength

400. enough to, return along the caflern borders to

Dunbar.

HWHILE mie resided in this place, her attention

was turned towards England. Elizabeth, notwith-
standing her promile, and even proclamations to
the contrary, not only allowed, but encouraged

*I Cald Morton and his anfociates to remain in England -.
vol. ii. 5 Mary, on the other hand, afforded her proteAion

to several English fugitives. Each Queen watch-
ed the motions of the other with a jealous atten-
tion, and f-cretly countenanced the pradices,
which were cairying on, to disturb the adminiitra-
tion of her rival.

FoR this purpose, Mary's Ambaflador, Robert

Melvil, and her other emissaries, were extremely
active and fuccefsful. 'We may impute, in a good

The Eng- degree, to their intrigues, that spirit which appear-
lih Parlia- ed in the Parliament of England, and which raif-
went fa-
vours Ma- ed a form that threatened Elizabeth's domestic
ry's pre- tranquillity, more than any other event of her
tensions to reign, and required all her art and dexterity to
the fuccef- allay it.

ELIZABETH had now reigned eight years, with-

out discovering the least intention to marry. A
violent distemper, with which the had lately been
seized, having endangered her life, and alarmed
the nation with the profped of all there calamities
which are occasioned by a disputed and dubious
11ucceflion ; a motion was made, and eagerly listen-
ed to in both houses, for addrefling the Qgeen, to
provide against any fuiich danger in times to come,
either by signifying her own resolution to marry,
or by consenting to an ac eftablilhing the order ot

I D'Ewes fiiccelion to the Crown t. Her love to her sub-
tourn. or

t

i 'arl. o s.j s, her duty to the public, her concern for poile-

rity, it was pretended, not only called upon, but

obliged

obliged her to take one of these steps. The infu- BooK IV.
perable aversion which the had all along discovered ' 'J
for marriage, made it improbable that the would ,s66.
chufe the former; and if the complied with the
latter request, no title to the Crown could, with
any colour ofjuffice be set in opposition to that of
the Scottilh QOeen. Elizabeth was sagacious enough
to fee the remotest consequences of this motion,
and observed them with the greatest anxiety. Mary,
by refuting so often to ratify the treaty of Edin-
burgh, had plainly intimated a design of embra-
cing the first promising opportunity for prosecuting
her right to the Englilh Crown; and by her secret
negociations, (he had gained many to favour her
title*. All the Roman Catholics ardently wished * Melv.
for her fucceflion. Her gentleness and humanity had 136.
removed many of those apprehensions which the
Protestants entertained on account of her religion.
The court facion, which envied the power of Ce-
cil, and endeavoured to wrest the administration
out of his hands, advanced the pretensions of the
Scottish Queen in opposition to him. The union
of the two kingdoms was a desirable objedc to all
wife men in both nations; and the birth of the
young Prince was a security for the continuance of
this blefling, and gave hopes of its perpetuity.

UNDER these circumitances, and while the na- Elizabeth'i

:ion was in fuich a temper, a parliamentary decla- perplexity
ration of Mary's title would have been highly de- on that
trimental to Elizabeth. The present unsettled
state of the fucceflion left much in her power.
Her resentment alone might have gone far towards
excluding any of the competitors from the Crown ;
and the dread of this had hitherto restrained, and
overawed the ambition of the Scottish Queen. But
if this check should be removed, by the legal ac-
knowledgmnent of her title, Mary would be at full
liberty to pursue her dangerous dcfigns, and to aSt

X 4 without

BOOK IV. without fear or reserve. Her partizans were al-
'-'^-- ready meditating ichemes for infurrcCtions in dif-

, 66. ferent parts of the kingdom* ;and an ad of Parlia-
47. 'ment, recognizing the rights of that Princels,

vwhole pretenlions they favoured, would have been
nothing less than a signal to arms; and, notwith-
standing Elizabeth's just title to the affedions of
her subjects, might have (haken and endangered her
throne.

Mary en- WIit-ILE this matter remained in fifpence in
dcavours both houses, an account of it was transmitted to
toimprove Mary by Melvil her Ainbalthdor. As (he did not
thisppor- want advocates for her right, even among thole

who were near Elizabeth's person, the endeavour-
ed to cultivate the disposition which appeared to-
wards fettling the right of fucceflion in her favour,
by a letter to the Privy Counsellors of England.
She cxprefled in it a grateful sense of Elizabeth's
fiiendfhip, which (he aflribes chiefly to their good
otiices, with their Sovereign, in her behalf. She
declared her resolution to live in perpetual amity
with England, without urging or pursuing her
claim upon the Crown, any farther than mhould be
agreeable to the Queen. But, at the fame time,
as her right of luccetlion was undoubted, the hoped
it would be examined with candour, and judged
of with impartiality. The nobles who attended
her wrote to the English Privy Council in the fame

t Keith, strain t. Mary artfully gave these letters the air
754. of being nothing more than a declaration of her
Append. own, and of her fubje&ts gratitude towards Eliza-
'30. beth. But as she could not be ignorant of the

jealousy and fear with which Elizabeth observed
the proceedings of Parliament, a step lo uncom-
nion as this, of one Prince's entering into public
correlpondence with the Privy Counsellors of ano-
ther, could not be otherwise confitrued than as
t,;kcn with an intcntion to encourage the ipiric

whicli

which had already been railed among the Englith. Boor. IV.
In this light it seems to have appeared to Eliza-
beth herself*. But the disposition of her people

, Keith,

rendering it necessary to treat Mary's person with 357.
great decency, and her title with much regard,
ihe mentioned it to her only in the fofteft language.

NOTHING, however, could be a more cruel mor-

tification to a Princess of Elizabeth's character, than Elizabeth
the temper which both houses of Parliament disco- fooths and
vered on this occasion. She bent all her policy to Parliament.
defeat, or elude the motion. After allowing the
firif heat of their zeal to evaporate, the called into
her pretence a certain number of each house. She
soothed and caressed them ; he threatened and pro-
mifed; the remitted subsidies which were due ; and
refused those which were offered ; and in the end
prevailed to have this formidable motion put off
for that tfelion. Happily for her, the conduat of
the Scottish Queen, and the misfortunes which be-
fel her, prevented the revival of such a motion in
any future Parliament -t-.

MEAN time, in order to preserve the reputation

of impartiality, and that the might not drive Mary
into any desperate measure, the committed to the
Tower one Thornton, who had publithed some-
thing derogatory to the right of the Scottith linet$
and signified her displeasure againfl a member of

1 Camd.

the house of Commons, who seemed, by some 401.
words in a speech, to glance at Mary II.

AMIDST all her other cares, Mary was ever o- U Haynes,

licious to promote the interest of that religion 449'
which the profeffed. The re-eftablilhment of the ordinary
Romith doctrine seems to have been her favourite aep of
paflion, and though the design was concealed with Mary's in
care, and conduted with caution, (he pursued it favourof
with a persevering zeal. At this time, the ven-

t D'Ewcs Journ. to.- 1jo. Camd. 399. Melv. t9. Haynes,

tured

BooK IV. tured to lay aside fomewhatofher ufutal reserve ; and
'--v- the aid which the expeCed from the Popith Prin-

'1566 ces, who had engaged in the league of Bayonne,

encouraged her to take a step, which, if we confi.
der the temper of the nation, appears to be ex-
tremely bold. Having formerly held a secret cor-
refpondence with the court of Rome, she now re-
iblved to allowed a Nuncio from the Pope pdblick-
ly to enter her dominions. Cardinal Laurea, at
that time Bishop of Mondovi, was the person on
vwhorn Pius V. conferred this office, and along with
him hie f:u: the Queen a present of 20,o-0 o crowns'*.
It is not the charater of the Papal court, to open
its trealury upon diflant or imaginary hopes. The
buliicnfs ot the Nuncio in Scotland could be no
othc-l, than to attempt a reconciliation of the king-
dom to the Romith fee. Thus Mary herfilf un-
(tLrflood it; and in her anfwver to a letter which
the received from the Pope, after exprelfing her
grateful kinfe of his paternal care and liberality,
the promises that flhe would bend her whole
flrength towards the re-cftablifhment and propaga-
tion of the Catholic faith ; that she would receive
the Nuncio with every pollible demonstration of
refpecl, and concur, with the utmost vigour, in all
his defigus towards promoting the honour of God,
and refloring peace to the kingdom; that she would
celebrate the baptism of the Prince, according to

i'e ceremonies which the Romith ritual prescribes,
hivping that her subjects would be taught by this
:xa:nple, aglin to reverence the fticraments of the
church, which they had so long treated with con-
tempt ; and that the would be careful to iniftill
early into her son tihe principles of a lincere love
and attachment to the Catholic faith l-. But though
the Nuncio was already arrived at Paris, and had
f:ir: ovcr one of his attendants with I-art of the mo-
,r,-y, the Qjjeet did not think the juncture proper for

* Vita Card. ..aur. ap. Hurn. vol. iii. 3 5. Conzxi Vit'a

:'laria ap. Jcbb vol. ii. 5 1.

his

for his reception. Elizabeth was preparing to fend BOOK IV.
a magnificent embassy into Scotland, ngainft the "
time of the Prince's baptilnm , and as it \would have '!66.
been improper to offend her, the wilely contrived,
under various pretences, to detain Laurea at Pa-
ris *. The convulsions into which the kingdom * Keith,
was thrown soon after, made it impoflible fur him Append.
to pursue his journey any farther. '35.

AT' the very time that Mary was secretly carry-

ing on these negociations for subverting the Re-
formed Church, ihe did not scruple publickly to em-
ploy her authority towards obtaining for its Mini-
fters a more certain and comfortable subsistence f. - Keith,
During this year, the iflued several proclamations ,6i, 562.
and adts of council for that purpose, and readily Knox,
approved of every scheme which was propoled401.
for the more cffedual payment of their flipends.
This part of her conduat does little honour to
Mary's integrity; and though justified by the ex-
ample of Princes, who often reckon falfhood and
deceit among the necessary arts of government,
and even authorised by the pernicious casuistry of
the Roman Church, which transfers breach of faith
to heretics, from the lift of crimes, to that of du-
ties, such diflimulation, however, muff be num-
bered among those blemifles which never stain a
truly great and generous character.

As neither the French nor Piedmontefe Ambaf- Decemb.

fadors were yet arrived, tlie baptism of the Prince ionr ver-
was put off from time to time. Mean while Mary the King
fixed her residence at Craigmillar t. Such a retire- excessive.
ment, perhaps, suited the present temper of her t Keith,
mind, and induced her to prefer it before her own 355-
palace of Holy-rood-houfe. Her aversion for the
King grew every day more confirmed, and was be-
come altogether incurable. A deep melancholy
succeeded to that gaiety of spirit, which was natu-
ral to her. The rashness and levity of her own
choice, and the King's inigratitude and obstinacy,

filled

BooK IV. filled iher with Ihame and with delpair. A varie-

'-'-^ ty o( pailions preyed at once on a mind, all whole
1'5 tlenhtions were exq(1uiitc, and all its emotions

firong, and often extorted fiorn her, the lalt with
of the unfortunlate, that lil itlcif would come to

* Keith, an end *.
lret. vii. MuIR RAY and Maitlind oblervcd all those work
A divorce ings of lailioiis ill thle brealte ot the Q.jeen, ar:d
them pro- co1'1c-uI-''ki hopes of turning them to the advantage
posed. of tllheir ancient allociates, 'lorton, and the other

conllpirators againllt Rizio. They were flill in ba-
niliiment, and the Qeenl's eititeltnult against them
continucd unabated. Murray and the Secretary
flattered theml&lves, however, that her inclination
to be separated from D)arnly would surmount this
dcep-root.ed averlion, and that the hopes of an e-
vent so dcfirable Inighlt induce her to be reconciled
to the conipirators. It was easy to find reasons,
in the King's behaviour, on which to found a fen-
tence of divorce. lThis (entence they had intercit
enough to obtain, and to procure the ratification
of it in Parliament. In return for this service,
thei.y propolid to flipulate with the Queen to grant
a pairdiiei to Morton and his followers. The dc-
lign was first of all communicated to Argyle, who,
as well as Murray, owed his return to Scotland to
the conspiracy againfl Rizio. Huntly and iBoth-
well, who at that time direc'ted all Mary's council,
,, ere likedti;. admitted into thle concert. They
Ipced togelther in iiaking the overture to the
(Qcen, and enforced it with all Maitland's elo-

\ Andell. qucnce 1. But Mary, however dcfirous of obtain-
voi iv. ing that deliverance fiom I)arnly's caprices, with
1'r i. wlhich they endeavoured to allure her, had never-
,s". thelcfs good realons tor rejedcing the method, by

which they proposed to accomplilh it. The birth
of her son had greatly firen:igthencd her claim up-
on the Englilh luccetlion, and encouraged the abet-
t..c. of it to appear with greater boldnclii, and to

adct

a& with more vigour. She could scarce hope to Booc IV.
be divorced from her husband, without throwing "
lome imputation on her ion. This might open a '566.
new dispute with regard to the fuccellion, and put
it in the power of Elizabeth and her Ministers to
call in queifion the Prince's legitimacy, or at least
to fubjed it to all the delays and cavilsof a judicial
inquiry. The fear of thele inconveniencies weigh-
ed with Mary, and determined her rather to en-
dure her hard fate, than to seek relief, by ventur-
ing on such a dangerous experiment.

THE Earl of Bedford, and the Count de Brienne,

Englilh and French Ambafladors, being ar-
rived, Mary set out for Stirling, to celebrate the
baptism of her son. Bedfoid was attended by a
numerous and splendid train, and brought prelcnts
from Elizabeth, filitable to her own dignity, and
the refpec' with which the affcted, at that time,
to treat the Qieen of Scots. Great preparations
had been made by Mary, and the magnificence
displayed by her on this occalion, exceeded what-
ever had been formerly known in Scotland. The Dec. 17.
ceremony ittelf w as performed according to the
rites of the Romith Church. But neither Bedford,
nor any of the- Scottish nobles who profellcd the
Protestant religion, entered within the gates of the
chapel *. The spirit of that age, firm and un- * Keith,
complying, would not, upon any inducement, con- 360.
delcend to witness i.n action, which is esteemed
idolatrous.

HENRY'S behaviour, at this juncture, perfetly TheKing's

discovers the excels of his caprice, as well as of his capricious
folly. He chose to reside at Stirling, but confined behaviour
himself to his own apartment; and as the Queen afinothe
ditfrufed every nobleman who ventured to con- Prince.
verse with him, he was left in abillute solitude.
Nothing co'uld be more singular, or was less ex-
pected, than his chufing to appear in a manner,

that

BooK IV. that both publilhed the contempt under which he
^^"-"had fallen, and by exposing the Queen's domestic

l nhappinels to the oblerv'ation of lo many foreign-
ers, looked like a flep taken on purpole to mor.
nilv and to offend her. Mary felt this inlilt fen-
i bly ; and notwiihftanding all her eff)rts to as-
imern the gaiety which tiited the occasion, and
which 'as necIllary for the polite reception of her
g 't I(s, the was sometimes obliged to retire, in or-
d(.r to he at liberty to indulge her lorrow, and

* Keith, give vent to her tears*. The King fIthl pcrlifted
Pref vii. i:1 hiS; deihn of retiring into fircign parts, and

daily thric.tened to put it in txecutio(n '4.

THr: ccremrny of witrnelfig the Prince's bap-

tifin was not the e le bulinefs of Bedford's embassy.

1- Camden attirms, 40or. that Bedford was commanded by

Elizabeth not to give Darnly the title of King. As this was an
indignity, not to be borne, either by Maiy or her hufband,it hath
been aiTerted to be the cause of the King's absence from the cere-
mony of his Con's baptili. Keith, 360. Good. 319. But, I. No
such thing is to be found among Bedford's initruftions, the origi-
nal of which still remains. Keith, 356. 2. Bedford's advice to the
Queen by Melvil is utterly inconfillent with Canien's assertion.
Melv. 5 3. Melvil's account is confirmed by Elizabeth's inftruc-
tions to Sir Henry Norris, where she affirms that she commanded
Hedford to employ his befl offices towards reconciling Mary to her
husband, which he had attempted to no purpose. Digges's
Compl. Anibaff p. 13. A paper publihbed Append. No XVIII.
proves the fame thing. 3. Le Croc the French Resident men-
tions the King's ablence, but without giving that reason for it,
which has been founded on Camden's words, though, if that
had been the real one, he would scarce have failed to mention
it. His account of this matter is that which I have followed.
Keith, Fret vii. 4. He informs his court, that on account ot
the difference betwixt the King and the Queen, he had relfued
to hold any further correspondence with the former, though he
appears, in many initances, to have been his great confidant, ibid.
c. As the King was not prelent at the baprtiln, he seems to have
been excluded from any Ihare in the ordinary adminiltration of
business. Two aCs of Privy Council, one on the zoth, and the
other on the 21 lt of December, are found in Keith, 562. They
both run in the Queen's name alone. The King feema not to
have been precent This could not be owing to Elizabeth's in-
thuclions to Bedford.

His

His inftrudions contained an overture, which BooK IV.
ought to have gone far towards extinguishing those '
jealousies which had To long subsisted between the 5bei66h
two Queens. 1 he treaty of Edinburgh, which endea-
has been so often mentioned, was the principal oc- voursto
cation of there. The spirit, however, which had accommo-
risen to 'uch an height in the late Parliament, the datediffe-
power of the party which favoured the Scottih Mary.
Queen's title, the number and activity of her a-
gents in the different parts of the kingdom, alarmed
.Elizabeth, and induced her to forego any advan-
tage, which the ambiguous and artful expreflions
in that treaty might afford her. Nothing was now
demanded of Mary, but to renounce any title to
the Crown of England during Elizabeth's life,
and the lives of her pofferity; who, on the other
hand, engaged to take no ifep, which might
prove injurious to Mary's claim upon the luc-
cellion *. Keith,

MARY could not, with decency, reject a propofi- 356.

tion lo equitable; the insisted, however, that Eliza-
beth should order the right upon which the claim-
ed to be legally examined, and publickly recog-
nized, and particularly that the teflament of Hen-
ry VIII. whereby he had excluded the defcen-
dants of his eldest filter the Qncen of Scotland,
from the place due to them in the order of fuc-
ceflion, might be produced, and considered by the
English nobility. Mary's Ministers had credulous-
ly embraced an opinion, that this teflament which
they Co justly conceived to be injurious to their
Mifirefs, was a mere forgery; and on different
occasions had urged Elizabeth to produce it. Ma-
ry would have fuffered considerably by gaining
this point. The original testament is still extant,
and not the least doubt can be entertained of its
genuinenefe and authenticity. But it was not
Elizabeth's intention to weaken or to set aside the
title of the house of Stewart. She aimed at no-

thing

BoOK IV. thing more, than to keep the question concerning
--,-- tihe fucceflion perplexed and undecided, and by
I566. industriously eluding this request, the did real ter-

vice to lMary's caule *

A FEW days after the haptifm of the Prince,

Morton andl all the other conlpirators againfl Rizio
obtained their pardon, and leave to return into
Scotland. Mary, \vwho had hitherto continued in-
exorable to every intreaty in their behalf, yielded
at lati to the tolicirtations of lothwcll - He could
hope (or no fuccels in those bold dcligns on which
his ambition refolvcd to venture, without drawing
aid from every quarter. By procuring a favour for
Morton and his allociates, of which they had good
reason to delpair, he expected to ftcure a band of
faithful and determined adherents.

TH-. King fill remaincd at Stirling, in solitude,

and under contempt. His impatience in this fitua-
tion, together with the a!arm given him, by the ru-
mour of a delign to Icize his perlfn, and confine
him to prison |I, was the occalion of his leaving
that place in an abrupt manner, and retiring to
his father at Glalgow.

Decem. S. Two Atlimblies of the Church were held during
Church this )ear. New complaints were made, and upon
attairs. good grounds, of the poverty and contempt under

which the Proteflant clergy were iiffcrcd to lan-
guilh. Penurious as the allotment for their sub-

\ Keith, liflence was, they had not received the least part of
56z. wihat was due or the precding year {. Nothing

lcis than a zeal, ready to endure and to litffer every
thing tfor a good caulle, could have persuaded men
to adhere to a church, i indigent and so negledted.
The extraordinary expences, occasioned by the
Prince's baptiin, had exhaufled the Qhecen's trca-
fin y, and the tums aFpropriated for the ibtfinlence I
of the clergy were diverted into other channels

* Keith, 361, 358. Note (t) Murdin. 368.
-* Good. vol. i. 140. Mclv. 154. 1i Keith, Pref. viii.

The

The Queen was therefore obliged to prevent the 0oox IV.
just remonfirances of the assembly, by falling on
tome new method for the relief of the church. 566
Some symptoms of liberality, some ifretch towards
munificence might have been expeaed in an aflign-
ment which was made with an intention of soothing
and silencing the clergy. But both the QOeen and
the nobles held fast the riches of the church which
they had seized. A fumn, which, at the highest
computation, can scarce be reckoned equal to
9000/. flerling*, was deemed fufficient for the main- * Keith,
tenance of a whole national church, by men who 562.
had lately seen firkgle monasteries poffefled of reve-
nues far superior in value.

THEi ecclefiaftics in that age bore the grievances

which affeded themfelvcs alone with aflonifhing
patience, but wherever the Reformed religion was
threatencd, they were extremely apt to be alarmed,
and to proclaim, in the loudest manner, their ap-
prehentions of danger. A just occasion of this kind
was given them, a Ihort time before the meeting
of the Assembly. The usurped and oppreflive ju-
rifdiion of the spiritual courts had been abolilhed
by the Parliament 1560, and ('ommiffaries were
appointed to hear and determine the causes wvhich
foimerly came under their cognizance f. Among t Id. I5z.
the few ads of that Parliament, to which Mary had
paid any regard, this was one. She had confirm-
ed the authority of the Commilaries, and had
given them infirudions for diredting their proceed-
ings f, which are still of great authority in that f Keirh,
court. From that time there judges had continued 251.
in the uninterrupted exercise of their fundtion,
when of a sudden the Queen issued a proclamation,
restoring the Archbishop of St Andrew's to his
ancient juriflidicn, and depriving the Commitfaries
of all authority |I. j) Knox,

A MOTLVE which cannot be juflified, rendered °o3

the Q~ieen not unwilling to venture u11on this rath

Vo. . Y aion.

BooK Iv. adion. She had been contriving, for ftome time,
'"rT how to re-eftablilh the Popilh religion , and the re-

.,' tloring the ancient ecclefiaffics to their former ju-

rildiction, leemed to be a confiderablc flep towards
that end. The motive which prompted Bothwell,

Knox, to whoec influence over the Queen tills action muff

. '- be chiefly imputed *, was litll more criminal. Hi;

enterprising ambition had already formed that bold
dcfign, which lie loon after put in execution, anfd
the use which we lhall hereafter find him making
of that authority, which the Popish ccckfiaftics
regained, dilcovcrs the realins of his prelfut con-
duet, in contributing to revive tlhcir power. The
P'roreflant clergy were not unconcerned fpedators
of an event, which threatened their religion with
unavoidable deftirution ; but as they d(fpaitcd of
obtaining the proper remedy from the Queen her-
iiff, they addressed a remonflrance to the whoke
body of the Protestant nobility, full of that ardent
zeal for religion, which the danger to which it was

1- Keith, exposed at that time, seemed to require -t. What
S67. effeats this vehement exhortation might have pro-

duced, we have no opportunity of judging, the at-
tention of the nation being quickly turned towards
events of another, and more tragical nature.

The King IMMED[ ATrF.Y upon the King's leaving Stirling,
falls fackat and before he could reach Glasgow, he was seized
Glasgow. with a dangerous diflemper. The symptoms which

1567 attended it were violent and unusual, and in that

age it was commonly imputed to the effe6s of poi-

1 Melv. son . It is impofTible amidst the contraditions of
S54.Knox, historians, to decide with certainty concerning its
4C . nature, or its cause i. His life was in the utmost

danger;

ifU uchanan and Knox are positive that the King had been poi-

foned. 'Ihey mention the black and putrid pustules which broke
out all over his body. Buchanan adds, that Abernethy the King's
phylician plainly declared that poison was the cause of thele lynp-
tomis, and that the Queen refuled to allow her own physician to
attend him, 13uch. 349. Knox, 401. 2. Blackwood Caufin. &c.

Jebb

danger ; but after languithing for some weeks, the IooK IV'
vigour of his conflitution furmountcd the malignity1567.
of the disease.

MARYv's negle&t of the King, on this occasion, Negleted

was equal to that with which he had treated her by Mary.
during her illnels at Jedburgh. She no longer felt
that warmth of conjugal affedtion which prompts to
sympathy, and delights in all those tender offices
v hich sooth and alleviate sickness and pain. At
thisjuntture, the did not even put on tile appear-
ance of this paflion. Notwithtfanding the King's
danger, the amused herself with excurlions to dif-
ferent parts of the country, and fuffered near a
month to elapse before the visited him at Glasgow.
Ly that time, the violence of the distemper was over,
and the King, though weak and languishing, was
out of all danger.

THE breach between Mary and her hufhand was The

not occasioned by any of thoie Ilight disgusts, which breach be-
interrupt the dometic union, without dilolving it tween
altogether. Almost all the paflions, which operate rem re-
with greatest violence on a female mind, and drive
it to the most dangerous extremes, concurred in
raiing and fomenting this unhappy quarrel. In-
gratitude for the favours the had beflowed, contempt
of her perlbn, violations of the marriage-vow, en-

Jebb, vol. ii. 24, 19. assert, that the finall pox was the difeale
with which the King was seized. He is called a Pocki/b man
in the Queen's letter, Good. vol. ii. 5. 'The realon given by
French Paris for lodging the King at the Kirk ofFid4J, viz. left
the young Prince flhould catch the infetion it he Itid in the pa-
lace, seems to favour this opinion, Ander. vol. ii. 193. Carte
mentions it as a proof of Mary's tendernels to her hulband, that
though the never had the small pox herself, Ihe ventured to attend
him, vol. iii. 446. This, if it had been true, would have at-
Yorded a good pretence for not viliting him looner; but Mary
had the tinall pox in her infancy, Sadler's Letters. 3. Hithop
Lefly affirms, that the King's dileale was the French pox, Keith,
364. Note (b). In that age, this disease was efleemed Lo conta-
gious, that persons infketed with it were removed without the
walls of cities.

Y 2 croachments

BooK IV. croachments on her power, conspiracies againfl her

-"-" favourites, jealouvy, insolence, and obstinacy, were
1567. the injuries of which Mary had great reason to

complain. She felt them with the utmost sensibility ;
and added to the anguifhofdifappointed love, they
produced thole lymptoms of dcfpair which we
have already described. Her refectmentagainft the
King teems not to have abated from the tinme of his
leaving Stirling. In a letter written with her own
hand, to her ambassador in France, just before the
let out for Glasgow, no tokens of sudden reconcile-

Janua. 20. ment appear. On the contrary, the mentions,

with rome bitterness, the King's ingratitude, the
jealousy with which he observed her actions, and
the inclination he dilcovered to disturb her govern
ment, and at the fame time talks of all his attempts

* Keith, with the utmofl scorn *.
Pref. viii. AFTER this discovery of Mary's sentiments, i
Viits the was scarce to be expeeted that the would visit the
KGgw. King, or that any thing but marks of jealousy and

distrust hould appear in such an interview. This,
however, was far from being the cafe , the not
only visited Henry, but, by all her words and ac-
tions, endeavoured to express an uncommon affec-
tion for him: And though this made impreflion on
the credulous spirit of her husband, no lekf flexible,
on loime occasions, than obstinate on others ; yet,
to those who are acquainted with ihe human heart,
and who know how kidom and how slowly such
wounds in domestic happiness are healed, this fud-
den traifition will appear with a very suspicious
air, and will be conlidercd by them as the effcd of
artifice

tier dim- Bl T it is not on suspicion a!one, that Mary is
ululaiion. charged with diflimulation in this part of her con-

dua. Two of her famous letters to Eothv.ell
were written during her flay at Glasgow, and fully
lay oupeni this fiene of iniquity. t- e had fb f.r

lfucccidkd

succeeded in his ambitious and criminal design, as BOOK IV.
to gain an absolute ascendant over the Queen ; and 'c '
in a situation, such as Mary's, merit not to confpi- 1567
cuous, services of far inferior importance, and ad-
dress much less insinuating than Bothwell's, may
be supposed to steal imperceptibly on a female
heart, and entirely to overcome it. Among those
in the higher ranks of life, scruples with regard to
conjugal fidelity are, unhappily, neither many, nor
strong : Nor did the manners of that court, in
which Mary had been educated, contribute to in-
crease or to fortify them. The ,morous turn of
Francis I and Henry II. the wildness of the mili-
tary character in that age, and the liberty of ap-
pearing in all companies, which began to be allow-
ed to women, who had not yet acquired that deli-
cacy of sentiment, and those polished manners,
which alone can render this liberty innocent, had
introduced, among the French, a licentiousness of
morals that role to an astonishing height. Such ex-
amples, which were familiar to Mary from her in-
fancy, could hardly fail of diminishing that horror
of vice which is natural to a virtuous mind. The
King's behaviour would render the first approach
of forbidden sentiments less tlocking; rfeentment,
and disappointed love, would be apt to repref-nt
whatever soothed her revenge, as justifiable on that
account; and so many concurring causes might,
almost imperceptibly, kindle a new patfion in her
heart.

BuT whatever opinion we may form with regard The mo-

to the rife and progress of this pallion, the letters tives ofi
themfclves breathe all the ardour and tenderncfs of
love. The affeaion which Mary there expresses
for Bothwell, fully accounts for every subsequent
part of her condud ; which without admitting this
circumstance, appears altogether mysterious, in-
confifteht and inexplicable. That reconcilement
with her husband, of which, if we allw it to be

Y 3 genuine,

^-- count, is dilcovered, by the Qlueen's own confeflion,

1567. to have been mere artifice and deceit. As her a-

version for her husband, and the fiifpicious atten-
tion with which ihc obterved his conduct, became
untivcrftilly known, her ears were officioufly filled,
as is usual in ifuch cafes, with groundless or aggra-
vated accounts of his actions. By some, Ihe was
told, that the King intended to seize the perfobn of
the Prince his fobr, and in his name to lfurp the
government ; by others the was afllired, that he
resolved inifantly to leave the kingdom ; that a

* Keith vefel was hired for this purpose, and lay in the ri-
Pref. viii. ver Clyde ready to receive him *. The last was

what Mary chiefly dreaded. Henry's retiring into
a foreign country must have been highly dishonour-
able to the Queen, and would have entirely difcon-
certed Eothwell's measures. While he resided at
Glasgow, at a distance frem her, and in that part
of the kingdom where the intereftof his family was
greatetl, he might, with more facility, accomplish
his designs. In order, therefore, to prevent his
executing any such wild scheme, it was necessary,

Prevails on to bring him to some place where he would be more
him to immediately under her own eye. For this purpose,
come to the first employed all her art to regain his confi-
Edini- dence, and then proposed to remove him to the
burgh. neighbourhood of Edinburgh, under pretence, that

there he would have easier access to the advice of
physicians, and that the herfulf could attend him

. Ci.. \oo ithout being absent from her son t. The King

. i was weak enough to tLffer himself to be persuaded ;

and being still feeble and incapable of bearing fa-
tigue, was carried in a litter to Edinburgh.

Ti E place prepared for his reception was a house,

belonging to the Proveft of a collegiate church, cal-
led Kirk ofl:ield. It flood almofl upon the fame spot
where the houle belonging to the Principal of the

!Univerfiry

University now stands. Such a situation, on a ri- BOOK IV.
sing ground, and at that time in an open field, had -
all the advantages of healthful air to recommend it I 367.
but, on the other hand, tihe solitude of the place
rendered it extremely proper for the conmirlnlin of
that crime, with a view to which, it seems inani-
fcully to haye been chosen.

MARY continued to attend the King with, the Heismur-

most afliduous care. She seldom was ablert, from dered
him through the day ; the slept several nights in there.
the chamber under his apartment. She heaped on
him 0o many marks of tenderness and confidence,
as, in a great measure, quieted those suspicions
which had lb long diturbed him. But while he
was fondly indulging in dreams of the return of his
former happineSs, he flood on the very brink of
deftru&tion. On Sunday the ninth of February,
about eleven at night, the Queen left the Kirk of
Field, in order to be present at a marque in the
palace. At two next morning, the house in which
the King lay was blown up with gunpowder. The
noise and Ihock, which this sudden explosion oc-
cafioned, alarmed the whole city. The inhabitants
ran to the place whence it came. The dead body
of the King, with that of a servant who fleptin /he
fame room, were found lying in an adiacent garden,
without the city wall, untouched by fire, and with
no bruise or mark of violence.

SucH was the unhappy fate of Henry Stewart Hs cha.

Lord Darnly, in the twenty first year of his age. rader.
The indulgence of fortune, and his own external
accomplishments, without any other merit, ha4
railed him to an height and dignity, of which he
was altogether unworthy. By his folly and ingra-
titude, lie lolt the heart of a woman who doated on
him to diftradion. His inli;lncr and inconfla;icy
alienated froun liin li'cli of the noL Ls as hadl co

Y tibut

BOOK IV. tributed moid zealously towards his elevation. His
^^ le lity and caprice exposed him to the scorn of the

3567. people, who once revered him as the descendant

of their ancient Kings and heroes. Had he died a
natural death, his end would have been unlament-
ed, and his memory have been soon forgotten ,;
but the cruel circumitances of his murder, and the
remifnefs with which it was afterwards avenged,
have made his name to be remembered with regret,
and have rendered him the objed of pity to which
he had otherwise no title.

Bothwcll EVERY one's imagination was at work to guess
and the who had contrived and executed thisexecrable deed.
Queenfuf- The suspicion fell, with almost a general consent,
peted of on Bothwell * ; and some reflections were thrown
der. our, as if the Queen herself were no ft ranger to the
*Mel. crime. Of Bothwell's guilt there remains the fulleflt
u5. evidence, that the nature of the adion will admit.
vol. i, ,56. The Queen's known sentiments with regard to her

husband, gave a great appearance of probability
to the imputation with which fle was loaded -.

Two days after the murder, a proclamation was

issued by the Queen, offering a considerable re-
ward to any person who should discover those who

$ Anders had been guilty of such a horrid and detestable
vol i. 36. crime 4 ; and though Bothwell was now one of

the greatest (fbjeAs in the kingdom, formidable on
account of his own power, and prtcEed by the
Queen's favour, it was impoflible to suppress the
sentiments and indignation of the people. Papers
were aflixed to the most public places of the city,
accusing him of the murder, and naming his ac-
complices , picurcs appeared to the fame purpose,
and voices were heard in the middle of the night,
c!larging him with that barbarous acaion. Eut the au-
thors of theke rumours did not confine their accu-

t See Diffeltation concerning the murder qs Henry Darnly,

and the genuineness of Mary's letters to Bothwell. Appendix.

lations

fations to Bothwell alone, they insinuated that tile Booi IV.
Queen herself was accessory to the crime*. This - '
bold accusation, which so direacly attacked Mary's Anders.
reputation, drew the attention of the council , and vol. ii.
by engaging them in an inquiry after the authors of 5 6.
there libels, divertcd them from fcarching for the
murderers of the King t. It could scarce be ex- + Id. vol.
peled that Mary herself would be extremdy folici- i. 38.
tous to dilcover those who had rid her of an hus-
band, whom file had To violently hated. It was
Bothwell's interest, who had the fuipreme direction
of this, as well as of all other affairs, to flifle and
ftipprcfs whatever evidence should be offercd, and
to cover, if poflible the whole tranfaetion under
the vcil of darkness and of silence. Some inquiry,
however, was made, and some persons called be-
fore the council ; but theexamination was condut-
ed with the most indecent remifiTefs, and in fuich
a manner, as to let in no light upon the scene of
guilt $. t Id. vol.

IT was not her own filbjects alone who fufp' (led iv. 167,

Mary of having been accefibry to this unnatural '68.
crime ; nor did an opinion, fodifhonourable to her
character, owe its rife and progress to the jealoufv
and malice of her fadious nobles. The report of
the manner and circumftanccs of the King's mur-
der spread quickly over all Europe, and, even in
that age, which was accustomed to deeds of vio-
lence, it excited universal horror. As her unhappy
breach with her husband had long been matter of
public discourse, the first conjeAures which were
formed with regard to his death, were extremely to
her diladvantage. Her friends, at a loss what apo-
logy to offer for her conducd, called on her to pro-
fecute tlhe murderers with the utmoil diligence,
and expeeted that the rigour of her proceedings
would' prove the bel and fuller vindication of her
innocence §.

§ Keith,

eLENX, ix.

LENOX,

BOOK IV. LENOX, at the fame time, incited Mary to ven-
»-vm-- geance with incessant importunity. This nobleman

I 67. had Ihared in his fon's disgrace, and being treated
cues acy ',lary with neglect, usually resided at a distance
Bothwell Irtm cour:. Rouzed, however, by an event no
of thle les shocking t t te heart of a father, than fatal to
King's all his ,: iics ot ambition, he ventured to write
Feb. L. to the QiLccn, .1

to offct his advice with refpet

to the moi cil ...1 methoi for diicovcring and
convicting t'u

( ', aid fu cruelly deprived him

of a son, and ,. . .#: *hanid. He urged lhr to
prosecute those who ,. with vigour, and
to bring thacin :o a tpeeu, ...n . lHe declared his
own ulpicion of Bo! wvell, and ,; ti, "1 who were
namned as his accompics , he required that, out
of regard to decency, and in order to encu,rage
evidence to appear against them, the persons ac-
cured of such an atrocious crime (hould be com-
mitted to cuflody. or at Icaft excluded from her

* Keith, court and prefknce*.
Pref. ix. MAIlY was then at Seatoni, whither the had re-

tired after the burial of the King, whose body was
deposited among the Monarchs of Scotland, in a

1- Anders. private, but decent manner t. The former part of
vol i. 233. the Earl's d,:mand, coulld not, on any pretence, be

eluded ; and it was resolved to bring Bothwell im-
mediately to tiial. But, intelad of confining him

Stinust" to

any prifn, Mary admnittcd him into all her

favour councils, and allowed a pcrfon, universally reputed
him. the murderer of her husband, to enjoy all the fecu-
1 Id. ibid. rity, the dignity, and tlie power of a favourite t.
40, &c. The offices which Eothwell already poffeffed, gave

him the command of all the south of Scotland.
Thle cafile of Edinburgh, however, was a place of
too much consequence, not to with it in his own
power. The Qccn, in ord r to prevail on the
Earl of Mar to tiirrender it, consented to put the

March 19. perfn of tlhe young Prince in his hands, and im-

mediately bellowed the government of that impor-

tant

tant fortress upon Bothwell $. So many fleps in Boor IV.
her conduAt, inconsistent with all the rules of plr- "S6
dence, and of decency, must. be imputed to ani cx-, Anders.
cess either of folly or of love. Mary'a known vol.i. 23.
character fully vindicates her from the former , or Pret 64.
the latter, many and striking proofs soon ap, ,carcu Keith,

No direct evidence had yet appeared agaii.it :9ienso

Bothwell , but as time might bring to lignt thi his trial.
circumitances of a crime, in which so many ac-
complices were concerned, it was of great import-
ance to hurry over the trial, while nothing more
than general suspicions, and uncertain surmises,
could be produced by his accusers. For this rea-
son, in a meeting of Privy Council held on the 28th
of March, the 1 2th of April was appointed for the
day of trial. And the' the law allowed, and the
manner in which criminal causes were carried on in
that age required a much longer interval, it appears,
from several circumfiances, that this short space
was considerably contraated, and that Lenox had
only eleven days warning to prepare for accusing a
person, so far superior to himself, both in power
and in favour*. No man could be less in a con-

* The a8 of Privy Council, appointing the day of IBothwell's

trial, bears date March the 28th, which happened on a Thurf-
day. Anders. vol. i. 5o. The Queen's warrant to the mffe8iners,
impowering them to fummnon Lenox to he present, is dated on
the z29th. Anders. vol. ii. 97. He was summoned by public
proclamation at the cross of Edinburgh on the fame day. tbid.
o00. He was fumumoned at his dwelling-houfes in Glalgow
and Dumbarton the 30th of March, the atl and 2d days of
April. Ibid. Iot. He was tummoned at Perth, April It, Ibid. 1oz.
Though Lenox resided at that time 4o miles frorm Edinburgh.
the citation might have been given him sooner. Such an anne-
ceffary delay affords fonme cause for tufpicion. 'Tis true, Mary
in her letter, March 24th, invited Lenox to conic to Edinburgh
the enfiming week ; this gave hinm warning oIme days sooner,
that the intended to bring on the trial without delay. I~ut the
precise time could uot be legally, or crtainly known to Lenox
looner than i i or I z days, bctore the day on which In was re-
<luired to aippear. 1y the la.w and praL ic ot Scotland, at that
tuine. parties were fuamIIIILcLd inll Cs 0ol icalon so0 days pIrvious
to the tiitl.

BooK IV. dition to contend with an antagonist who was thus

C supported. Though Lenox's paternal eflate had
S567. been restored to him, when he was recalled into

Scotland, it seems to have been considerably im-
paired during his banishment. His vassals, while
he resided in England, had been accustomed to
some degree of independance, and he had not re-
covered that absolute ascendant over them, which
a feudal chief usually poffeffed. He had no reason
to expelc the concurrence of any of those factions
into which the nobles were divided. During the
thort period of his fon's prosperity, he had taken
luch fleps as gave rife to an open breach with Mur-
ray and all his adherents. The partizans of the
hoaule of Hamilton were his hereditary and mortal
enemies. Huntly was linked in the closest confe-
deracy with Bothwell ; and thus, to the difgracc of
the nation, Lenox flood alone in a cause, where
both honour and humanity called so loudly on his
countrymen to second him.

IT is remarkable too, that Bothwell himself was

present, and fat as a member in that meeting of
Privy Council, which gave diretions with regard
to the time and manner of his trial ,; and he flill
enjoyed not only full liberty, but was received into
the Queen's presence with the fame distinguished

SAnderl. familiarity as formerly.'.
vol. i. so. NOTHING could be a more cruel disappointment
Lenox to the wifles and resentment of a father, than such
craves a a premature trial; every flep towards which seemed
delay. to be taken by direaions from the person who was

himself accused of the crime, and calculated on
purpose to conceal rather than to detect his guilt.
Lenox foresaw what would be the issue of this
mock inquiry, and with how little safety to himself,
or success to his cause, he could venture to appear
on the day prefixed. In his former letters, though
under exprellions the most refpeftful, some fymp-

toms

toms of his didtrufing the Queen may be discovered. BooK IV.
He spoke out now in a plain language. He comrn- --
plained of the injury done him, by hurryingon the I67.
trial with such illegal precipitation. He reprefen-
ted once more, the indecency of allowing Both-
well, not only to enjoy personal liberty, but to re-
tain his former influence over her councils. He
again required her, as (he regarded her own honour,
to give bfome evidence of her sincerity in profecut-
ing the murder, by confining the person who was,
on good grounds, iufpeded to be the author of it ;
and, till that were done, he signified his own refo-
lution not to be present at a trial, the manner and
circumfitances of which were so irregular, and un-
satisfactory*. *Anders.

HE teems, however, to have expeaed little fuc- vol. i. 52.

cess from this application to Mary; and therefore, Appliesfor
at the fame time, besought Elizabeth to interpose, toEis -
in order to obtain such a delay as he demanded t. zabeth.
Nothing can be a fironger proof, how violently he +1 Good.
fufpeted the one Queen, than his submitting to vol. ii.
implore the aid of the other, who had treated his 352Z
son with the utmost contempt, and himself and fa-
mily with the greatest rigour. Elizabeth, who was
never unwilling to interpose in the affairs of Scot-
land, wrote instantly to Mary, advised her to delay
the trial for some time, and urged, in filch firong
terms, the fame arguments which Lenox had used,
as might have convinced her to what an unfavour-
able conltruction her conduct would be liable, if she
perfilled in her present method of proceeding (. t Andcrf.

NEITHER her intreatics, however, nor thole of Prest o.

Lenox, could prevail to have the ti ial put off On pee nd~
the day appointed, Bothwell appeared, but with No. XIX.
such

a formidable retinue, that it would have been h1e trial

dangerous to condemn, and impoflible to punish proceeds.
him. Betides a numerous body of his friends and
vassals assembled, according to cu~,im, frim dii:c-

Booi IV. rent parts of the kingdom, he was attended by a

' band of hired Ibldiers, who marched with flying

zs67" colours along the streets of Edinburgh *. A court

* Anders. of jufbce was held, with the -accullomed formali-
vol.i. 35. ties. An indicment was prelented againfl Both-

well, and Lenox was called upon to make good his
accuiation. In his name appeared Robert Cunning-
ham, one of his dependants. He excused his .Mat-
ter's abience, on account of the shortness of the
time, which prevented his aflembling his friends and
vaijals, without whole afiftance he could not, with
Ltfety, venture to set himself in opposition to such a
powerful antagonist. For this reason, he desired
the court to stop proceeding, and protefling that
any sentence which mhould be pafed at that time,
ought to be deemed illegal and void. Bothwell,
on the other hand, iniifted, that the court thould
iniflantly proceed to trial. One of Lenox's own
letters, in which he craved of the Queen to prose-
cute the murderers without delay, was produced.
Cunningham's objecions were over-ruled ;, and the
jury, confilting of Peers and Barons of the first
rank, found Bothwell not guilty of the crime.

Bothwellis No person appeared as an accuser, not a single
acquitted. witners was examined, nor any evidence produced

against him. The jury, under there circumstances,
could do nothing else but acquit him. Their ver-
di& however, was far from gratifying the wishes,
or silencing the murmurs of the people. Every
circumflance in the trial gave grounds for suspicion,
and excited indignation ,; and the judgment pro-
nounced, instead of being a proof of Bothwell's
innocence, was ettecmed an argument of his guilt.
Pafiuinades and libels were affixed to different pla-
ces, expreliing the fentimnents of the public, with
the utmost virulence of language.

THE jury themselves seem to have been aware of

the censure, to which their proceedings would be

exposed y

exposed ; and, at the fame time, that they return- BooK IV.
ed their verdid acquitting Bothwell, the Earl of
Caithness protested, in their name, that no crime 1567.
thould be imputed to them on that account, be-
cause no accuser had appeared, and no proof was
brought of the indiAment. He took notice, like-
wife, that the ninth initead of the tenth of Febru-
ary was mentioned in the inditment, as the day
on which the murder had been committed. A
circumiftance, which discovers the extreme inaccu-
racy of those who prepared the indiament ; and
at a time when men were disposed, and not without
reason, to be suspicious of every thing, this small
matter contributed to confirm and to increase their
suspicions *. * Bothw.

EVEN Bothwell himself did not rely on thejudg- der vol. A

ment which he had obtained in his favour, as a full 97, &c.
vindication of his innocence. Immediately afaer
his acquittal, he in compliance with acuftom which
was not then obsolete, published a writing, in
which he offered to fight, in ftingle combat, any
Gentleman of good fame, who should prefilme to
accuse him of being accessory to the murder of the
King.

MARY, however, continued to treat him, as if

he had been cleared by the most unexceptionable
and fatisfadory evidence. The ascendant he had
gained over her heart, as well as over her councils,
was more visible than ever , and Lenox, who
could not exped that his own person would be safe
in a country where the murderer of his son had been
absolved, without regard to justice, and loaded
with honours, in contempt of decency, fled with
precipitation towards England t. + Ke'th,

Two days after the trial, a Parliament was held, 378,

at the.opening of which the Queen distinguished a Parla-
Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the sceptre menat held.
before her $. Most of the aas passed in this AT- $ Id. ibid,
fembly, were calculated on purpose to strengthen his

- ed the ratification cf all the polTelions and honours

1567' which the partiality of the Queen had conferred

upon him; and the ac to that effed contained the
firongeft declarations of his faithful services to the
Crown, in all times pafl. The surrender us the
castle of Edinburgh by Mar was confirmed. The
law of attainder against Huntly was repealed, and
he, and his adherents, were restored to the eflates
and honours of their anccftors. Several of thofl
who had been on thej'ury which acquitted him,
obtained ratifications of the grants made in their
favour ; a:'d as pafquinades daily multiplied, a law
pafJRd, whereby those, into whose hands any pa-
pe'r of that kind fell, were commanded inflantly to
dcftroy it , and if, through their negled, it should
be allowed to spread, they were subjected to a capi-
tal punishment, in the fame manner as if they had

Keith, been the original authors *.

zso. BUT the absolute dominion, which Bothwell had

acquired over Mary's mind, appeared in the clear-
efl manner, by an ad in favour of the Proteltant
religiron, to which, at this time, the gave her aflent.
Mary's attachment to the Romih faith was uni-
form and superstitious , the had never laid aside
the dcfign, nor loft the hopes of restoring it. She
had, of late, come under new engagements to that
purpolt, and in consequence of these, had ven-
tured upon some fleps more public and vigorous
than any the had formerly taken. But Bothwell
\vas prompted, by powerful motives, to promote
this laiw. I e had been guilty of crimes, which
icni-ied him the objecd ofjult and universal deter-
ration. -Hec was meditating others, which he easily
foresaw would heighten the public indignation a-
gainft him. By this popular law, he might hope
to divert, or to delay the relentment of the nation,

and

and flattered himself that the obtaining this unex-BooK IV.
peCded and legal security for the Protestant religion,
would atone for much guilt, silence the clamours 567.
of the clergy, and induce the people to connive at,
or to tolerate his crimes. The ad itself was Co fa-
vourable to the dotrine of the Reformers, that
the Parliament, which met next year, under very
different leaders, could substitute nothing stronger
or more explicit in its place; and thought it fuffici-. Parl I.
ent to ratify it word for word*. To pals such an adt, Jac. VI.
was utterly inconfitent with all the maxims which c. 31.
Mary followed in every other period of her life;
but what could never be extorted from her by the
folicitations of the Assemblies of the church, or by
the intreaties of her people, the more powerful in-
fluence of Bothwell now obtained f.

EVERY step taken by Bothwell had hitherto been Bothwell

attended with all the success which his most fan- tP"nial "
guine wishes could expet. He had entirely gained forecom-
the Queen's heart; the murder of the King had mend him
excited no public commotion; he had been acquit-as an hus-
ted by his peers of any /hare in that crime ; and tbanoen
their decision had been, in some fort, ratified in
Parliament. But in a kingdom, where the legal
authority was so extremely limited, and the power
of the nobles so formidable, he durst not venture on
the last adion, towards which all his ambitious
projecs tended, without their approbation. In

"- Buchanan, Hilt. 355, not only omit taking any notice of this

law, but afterts, that the Qyeen, though the had given prtmifes
in favour of the refobrmed religion, refuled to permit any ast to
pass in support of it, and even dismissed the deputies of the
church with contempt, Spotfwood, o02. and Calderwood, vol.
ii. 41. both affirm the fame thing. It would not have been ne-
xflary to observe this instance of Buchanan's inaccuracy; but
hat an author To conversant in our laws as Spotfwood, and one
b indultriouaaa Cidlerwood, Ihould commit luch an error, when
lot only the original statute was extant in the records of Mary's
arliament, but even when the printed act of Murray's Parliament
ras before their eyes, is remarkable. Even Buchanan himfeif
as taken notice of thi att. Detectio, p. 8.

VOL. I Z Znrr

' ^tfoblutio:n of Parliament, invited all the nobles wh<

9Arl were pre1ent to an entertainment. Having fillec

* Good. the house with his friends and dependants, anc
vol ii.4i. surrounded it with armed men *, he opened to th<

company his intention of marrying the Queen,
whole consent, he told them he had already obtain-
ed ; and demanded their approbation of this match,
which, he said, was no less acceptable to their So-

- Ander. vercign, than honourable to himfelf't. Huntly
vol. i. 94. and Seaton, who were privy to all Bothwell's

schemes, and promoted them with the utmost
zeal; the Popish ecclefiaflics, who were absolute-
ly devoted to the Queer,, and ready to sooth all
her pallions, instantly declared their fatisfadion
with what he had propotcd. The reft, who dread-
ed, the exorbitant power which Bothwell had ac-
quired, and observed theQueen's growing affecion
towards him in all her ations, were willing to
make a merit of yielding to a measure, which they
could neither oppose, nor defeat. Some few were
confounded and inraged. But, in the end Both-
well, partly by promises and flattery, partly by
terror and force, prevailed on all who were present
to tfibfcribe a paper, which leaves a deeper slain
than any occurrence in that age, on the honour
and charader of the nation.

THIS paper contained the strongest declaration*

of Bothwell's innocence, and the most ample ac-
knowledgment of his good services to the kingdom.
If any future iaccufation ihould be broight against
him, on account of the King's murder, the sub-
fcribers promised to fland by him as one man, and
to hazard their lives and fortunes in his defence.
They recommended him to the Qieen, as the
most proper person the could chufe for a husband;
and if the (hould condescend to bellow on him that
mark of her regard, they undertook to promote
the marriage, and to join him with all their forces,

in opposing any person who endeavoured to ob- BooKl IV.
ftruCt it *. Among the subscribers of this paper,
we find bfome who were the Queen's chief confi- * Anders.
dants, others who were strangers to her counfls, vol. i.177.
and obnoxious to her displeasure; some who faith-
fully adhered to her, through all the viciflitudes
of her fortune, and others who became the prin-
cipal authors of her fufferings; some paflionately
attached to the Romith superstition, and others t Keith,
zealous advocates for the Protestant faith f. No 382.
common interest can be supposed to have united
men of such opposite principles and parties, in re-
commending to their Sovereign a flep to injurious
to her honour, and so fatal to her peace. This
strange coalition was the effect of much artifice,
and muff be considered as the boldest and most
matlerly firoke of Bothwell's address. It is obfer-
vable, that amidst all the altercations and mutual
reproaches of the two parties which arose in the
kingdom, this unworthy tranfadtion is seldom men-
tioned. Conscious on both sides, that in this parti-
cular, their condut could ill bear examinination,
and would redound little to their fame, they always
touch upon it unwillingly, and seem desirous that
it should remain in darkness, or be buried in obli-
vion. But as to many persons, who, both at that
time, and ever after pofifeTcd the Queen's favour,
fibfcribed this paper, the fulpicion becomes firong,
that Bothwell's ambitious hopes were neither un-
known to Mary, nor disapproved by her 1.

THESE

f Of all the different fyflems with regard to this tranfaAion,

that of Camden feens to be the least accurate, and the worf
founded. He supposes that Bothwell was hated by Murray,
Morton, &c. who had been his associates in the murder of the
King, and that they now wanted to ruin him. He affirms. at
the tame time, that the subscriptions to this paper were obtained
by them, out of tear that Bothwell amight fink in his hopes, and
betray the whole bloody secret. 404. But betides the abfiudity
of supposing, that any uiiau's enemies would contribute towards

Z a r.;r."-

BooK IV. THESE suspicions are confirmed by the mofl
'"' ' direct proof. Melvil, at that time, enjoyed a

1567. considerable (hare in her favour. He, as well as

his brother, kept a secret correspondence in Eng-
land, with those vwho favoured her pretensions to
that Crown. The rumour of her intended mar-
riage with Bothwell having spread early in that
kingdom, excited universal indignation; and Mel-
vil received a letter from thence, which repre-
fented, in the flrongeft terms, what would be
tlii fatal tffets of such an imprudent flecp. He put
this letter into the Queen's hands, and inforced
it with the utmofl warmth. She not only diire-
garded these remonftrances, but communicated
the matter to Bothwell; and Melvil, in order to
save his life, was obliged to fly from court, whi-
ther he durst not return, till the Earl's rage be-
gan to abate *. At the fame time, Elizabeth

warned

railing him to such high dignity, on the uncertain hopes of after-
wards depriving him of it; betides the impossibility of accom-
plifhing such a marriage, if it had been either unknown to the
Queen, or disagreeable to her; we may observe that this sup-
poition is destroyed by the direat testimony of the Queen herself,
who al:cribes the consent of the nobles to Bothwell's artifices,

,cho p'urchafed it by giving them to underfland that we *were con-
tent there'with. Anders. vol. i. 94. It would have been no small
advantage to Mary, if she could have reprelented the consent of
the nobles to have been their own voluntary deed. It is fill more
surprising to find Lefly ascribing this paper to Murray and his
faction. Anders vol. i 26. ' he Bilhop himself was one of the
persons who subscribed it. Keith, 383. '1 he King's commis-
lioners, at the conference held at York 1568, pretended that
none of the nobles, except the Earl of Huntly, would subscribe
this paper till a warrant fiom the Queen was produced, by
which they were allowed to do o ; this warrant they had in
their custody, and exhibited Anders. vol iv. Part ii. 59. This
differs from Buchanan's account, who fuppoles that all the nobles
preicnt ;ubfcribed the paper on the i9th, and that, next day,
they obtained the approbation oft what they had done, by way
of ficurity to themlelves, 3 5-

* Melv. 56. According to Melvil, Lord Herreis likewise

remonfirated against the marriage, and conjured the Queen, on

his

warned Mary of the danger and infamy to which BOOK IV.
the would expose herself, by such an indecent
choice; but an advice from her met with still * Aiderf
less regard * vo. i.r o6.

TH rEE days after the rising of Parliament, Mary Bothwell

went from Edinburgh to Stirling, in order to visit carries the
the Prince her Ton. Bothwell had now brought his Qneen by
schemes to full maturity, and every precaution be Dunbar.
ing taken, which could render it fate to venture on
the last and decilive step, the natural impetuosity of
his (pirit did not fiffer him to deliberate any lon-
ger. Under pretence of an expedition agail1t the
free-booters on the borders, he allembled his fol-
lowers, and marching out of Edinburgh with a
thousand horie, turned suddenly towards I.i nlith- April 24.
gow, met the Queen on her return near that place,
difperled her slender train without refifiance, tlized
on her person, and conducted her, together with a
few of her courtiers, as a prisoner to his cafile
of Dunbar. She expressed neither furprize, nor
terror, nor indignation, at such an outrage com-
mitted on her person, and such an infuilt offered to
her authority, but seemed to yield without thruggle
or regret t. Melvil was, at that time, one of her

" Keith,

his knees, to lay aside all thoughts of such a dishonourable al- 383
liance. 156. But it has been observed, that Hereis is one of
the nobles who subscribed the bond, April 19. Keith, 383. z.
That he is one of the witnesses to the marriage articles between
the Queen and Bothwell, May 14. Good. vol. ii. 6. 3. Ihat
he fat in council with Bothwell, May 17. Keith, 386. But
this remonstrance of Lord Herreis against the marriage hap-
pened before these, made by Melvil himself, i$7. Melvil's
remonstrance must have happened some time before the meeting
of Parliament ; for after offending Bothwell, be retired from
court; he allowed his rage time to lubfide, and had again joined
the Queen, when Ihe was seized, April 24. zi8. The time
which mull have elapsed, by this account of the matter, was
perhaps lufficient to have gained Herreis, from being an oppo-
lcr, to become a promoter of the marriage. Perhaps Melvil
may have committed some mitake with regard to this tfat, to
far as relates to Lord Herreis. He could not well be umiftakta
with regard to what himid:lf did.

Z 3 attendants,

'

i c iuformed him, that nothing was done without the

* Melv. Qeen's own conIent '. If we may rely on the
is. letters published in Mary's name, the scheme had

been conmmunicated to her, and every flep towards

- Good. it was taken with her participation and advice -t.
vol. ii. 37. BOT the Qcten and Bothwell thought it of ad-

vantage to employ this appearance of violence. It
affrdled her a decent excuse for her conduct ; and
while the could plead that it was owing to force
rather than choice, she hoped that her reputation,
among foreigners at leafl, would escape without
censure, or be exposed to lels reproach. Bothwell
could not help diftrufting all the methods which
had hitherto been used, for vindicating him from
any concern in the murder of the King. Something
was still wanting for his security, and for quieting
his guilty fears. This was a pardon under the
Great Seal. By the laws of Scotland, the most hei-
nous crime muff be mentioned by name in a par-
don, and then all lesser offences are deemed to be
included under the general clause, and all other

JParl. . crimes whatjoever ?. To seize the person of the
6z. Prince, is high treason ,; and Bothwell hoped, that

a pardon obtained for this, would extend to every

II And.vol. thing of which he had been accused II.
iv. Part ii. BorTHwELL, having now got the Queen's person
6sdivored. into his ha:ds, it would have been unbecoming
from his either a politician or a man of gallantry to have de-
own wife. layed consummating his schemes. For this pur-

pose, he inflantly commenced a fiuit, in order to
obtain a kntence of divorce from his wife Lady Jean
Gordon, the Earl of Huntly's fifler. This process
was carried on, at the fame time, before Protestant

April. 29. and Popith judges ; before the former, in thecourt

ofConlmifiaries ; and before the latter, in the fpi-
ritual court of the Archbifl.op of St. Andrew's,

whose

whose jurifdition the Qieen had lately restored. BooK IV.
The pretexts which he pleaded were trivial, or
scandalous. But his authority had greater weight I567'
than the juflice of his cause , and in both courts,
sentence of divorce was pronounced, with the fame
indecent and suspicious precipitancy *. v l.er2.

WHr ILE this infamous tranfacAion was carrying partii. 61.

on, the Queen resided at Dunbar ,; detained as a
prisoner, but treated with the greatest refped.
Soon after Bothwell, with a numerous train of his May 3.
dependants, conduted her to Edinburgh; but in-
flead of lodging her in the palace of Holy-rood-
house, he conveyed her to the castle, of which he
was governor. The discontent of the nation ren-
dered this precaution necessary. In an house un-
fortified, and of easy access, the Queen might have
been rescued without difficulty out of his hands.
In a place of fitrength, (he was secured from all the
attempts of his enemies.

ONE imall difficulty flill remained to be fur-

mounted. As the Queen was kept in a fort of
captivity by Bothwell, a marriage concluded in that
condition might be imputed to force, and be held
invalid. In order to obviate this, Mary appeared May sa.
in the court of feflion, and in presence of the Chan-
cellor, the other judges, and several of the nobility,
declared that mhe was now at full liberty ; and
though Bothwell's violence in seizing her person
had, at first excited her indignation, yet his ref-
pedful behaviour since that time had not only ap-
peafed her resentment, but determined her to raise
him to higher honours t.

" And.

WH AT there were soon became public. The title ,. 87.

of Duke of Orkney was conferred upon Bothwell;s m1 arried
and on the 15th of May his marriage with the tothe
Queen, which had so long been the object of his ee.
widhes, and the motive of his crimes, was folem-
nized. The ceremony was performed, in public,

Z 4 according

k" Adam Bothwell bishop of Orkney, one of the few

1567' prelates who had embraced the Reformation, and

*And.r 36. on the fame day, was celebrated in private, accord-
2. 276. ing to the forms prescribed by the Popish religion *.

The boldness with which Craig, the Minister who
was commanded to publish the banns, testified a-
gainft the design ; the small number of the nobles,
who were prdent at the marriage ; and the sullen
and difrcfpetfiul silence of the people, when the
Queen appeared in public; were manifest fymp-
toms of the violent and general diflatisfation of
her own fubjeas. The refulal of Du Croc the
French ambassador to be present at the nuptial ce-
remony or entertainment discovers the sentiments
of her allies, with regard to this part of her con-
dud; and although every other adion in Mary's
life could be justified by the rules of prudence, or
reconciled to the principles of virtue, this fatal
marriage would remain an inconteftible proof of
her rathnefs, if not of her guilt.

MARY'S first care was to offer some apology for

her condud, to the courts of France and England.
The inflrutions to her ambassadors still remain,
and are drawn by a masterly hand. But under all
the artificial and false colouring she employs, it is
easy to discover not only that many of the steps she
had taken were unjultifiable, but that the herself

t And. i. was conscious that they could not be justified tf.
89. THE title of King was the only thing, which was

not betlowed upon Bothwell. Notwithitanding her
attachment to him, Mary remembered the incon-
veniencies which had arisen from the rash advance-
ment of her former husband to that honour. She
agreed, however, that he should sign, in token of

tGood. 2. content, all the public writs ifiied in her name $.
60. This was notliing more than mere form, but, to-

gether

gether with it, he poffeffed all the reality of power. BooK IV.
The Queen's person was in his hands; (he was
surrounded more closely than ever by his creatures ,
none of her fubjeds could obtain audience without
his permiflion ; and, unless in his own presence,
none but his confidants were permitted to converse
with her *. The Scottish Monarchs were accuf- * Ander.
tomed to live among their fubjets as fathers or as ,. 136.
equals, without difiruft, and with little state ; arm-
ed guards flanding at the doors of the royal apart-
ment, difficulty of access, distance and retirement,
were things unknown, and unpopular.

THESE precautions were neceflary for fecuringEndea-

to Bothwell the power, which he had acquired. vours to
But, without being matter of the person of thebecome maiter of
young Prince, he esteemed all that he had gained thePrince'a
to be precarious and uncertain. The Queen had person.
committed her son to the care of the Earl of Mar.
The fidelity and loyalty of that nobleman were too
well known to expec that he would be willing to
put the prince into the hands of the man, who was
to violently suspeCted of having murdered his father.
Bothwell, however, laboured to get the Prince into
his power, with an anxiety, which gave rife to the
blackest suspicions. All his address as well as au-
thority were employed to persuade, or to force Mar,
into a compliance with his demands t. And it is oMel
no flight proof both of the firmness and dexterityBuch.36i.
of that nobleman, that he preserved a life of so
much importance to the nation, from lying at the
mercy of a man, whom fear or ambition might
have prompted to violent attempts againit it.

THE eyes of neighbouring nations were fixed, at General

that time, upon the greatevents, which had happenedindignation
in Scotland, during three months. A King mur-which the
dered, with the utmost cruelty, in the prime ofcdu@'
lis days, and in his capital city i the person sus -excited.

pecaed

C167. appear publickly in every place, but admnitted into

the preience of the Queen, difiinguifhed by her
favour, and entruded with the chief diretion of
her affairs ; fubjtaced to a trial, which was carried
on with nioft shameless partiality, and acquitted by
a feitence, which served only to confirm the sus-
picions ,o his guilt, divorced from his wife, on
pretences frivolous, or i:idecent; and after all this,
int-cad of meeting with the ignominy due to his
adions, or the punishment merited by his crimes,
permitted openly, and w'thout opposition, to mar-
ry a Queen, the wife of the Prince whom he had
allilinated, and the guardian of those laws which
he had been guilty of violating. Such a quick
fuccefion of incidents, so singular, and Co detefta-
ble, is not to be found in any other history.
They left, in the opinion of foreigners, a mark of
infamy on the charader of the nation. The Scots
were held in abhorrence all over Europe ; they
durst scarce appear any where in public ; and after
fuffering so many atrocious deeds to pals with im-
punity, they were univerlally reproached as men
void of courage, or of humanity, as equally re-
gardlefs of the reputation of their Q.een, and the

* Anderfl honour of their country *.
3o.Melv.1 THESs reproaches rouzed the nobles, who had
163. See been hitherto amused by Bothwell's artifices, or in-
Append. timidated by his power. The manner in which he
No. XX. exerciled the authority which he had acquired, his
combinea- repeated attempts to become maiter of the Prince's
gainal her person, together with Come rath threatnings against
and Both- him, which he let fall t, added to the violence and
weclv. promptness of their resolutions. A considerable
6,i. body of them assembled at Stirling, and entered

into an association for the defence of the Prince's per-
son. Argvll, Athol, Mar,Morton, Glencairn, Home,

Lindsay, I

Lindsay, Boyd, Murray of Tullibardin, Kirkaldy BOOK IV.
of Grange, and Maitland the Secretary, were the '- ->
heads of this confederacy*. Stewart Earl of Athol , Kh7.
was remarkable for an uniform and bigotted atach- 394-
ment to popery, but his indignation on account of
the murder of the King, to whom he was nearly
allied, and his zeal for the safety of the Prince,
overcame, on thisoccafion, all considerations of re-
ligion, and united him with the most zealous Pro-
teftants. Several of the other nobles aced, with-
out question, from a laudable concern for the safety
of the Prince, and the honour of their country.
But the spirit which some of them discovered, dur-
ing the subsequent revolutions, leaves little room
to doubt, that ambition or resentment were the
real motives of their conduct and that, on many
occasions, while they were pursuing endsjuft and
necessary, they were actuated by principles and pas-
fions altogether unjustifiable.

THE first accounts of this league filled the Queen

and Bothwell with great consternation. They were
no firangers to the sentiments of the nation, with
respeCt to their conduct; and though their marriage
had not met with public opposition, they knew that
it had not been carried on without the secret dif-
gust and murmurings of all ranks of men. They
foresaw the violence with which this indignation
would burst out, after having been To long sup-
pressed ; and in order to prepare for the storm,
Mary issued a proclamation, requiring her subjects May 28.
to take arms, and to attend her husband by a day
appointed. At the fame time, fhepublifhed a fort
of manifesto, in which she laboured to vindicate
her government from those imputations with which
it had been loaded, and employed the strongest
terms to express her concern for the safety and wel-
fare of the Prince her Ton. Neither of these produced
any considerable effet. Her proclamation was ill
obeyed, and her manifeffo met with little creditt. t hcil..-

39<).

^"--' "tions with no less ativity, and wii, ':luci nmore
Th567 fuccels. Among a warlike people, meni oL to much

Queen power and popularity found it an caly matter to raite
and Both- an army. They were ready to maich before the
well retire Queen and Eothwell were in a condition to resist
toDunbar. them. The cattle of Edinburgh was the place whi-

ther the Queen ought naturally to have retired,
and there her person might have been perfectly lase.
But the confederates had fallen on means to shake,
or corrupt the fidelity of Sir James Balfour the de-
puty governor, and lBothwel durst not commit to
im fuich an important trust. He conducted the
Queen to the caltle of Borthwick, and on the ap-
pearance of Lord Home, with a body of his fol-
lowers, before that place, he fled with precipitation
to Dunbar, and was followed by the Queen difguif-
ed in men's cloaths. The confederates advanced
towards Edinburgh, where Huntly endeavoured,
in vain, to animate the inhabitants to defend the
town against them. They entered without oppo-
fition, and were instantly joined by many of the
citizens, whole zeal became the firmest support of
their cause*.

g Keith, In order to set their own conduA in the most fa-

vourable light, and to rouze the public indignation
against Bothwell, the nobles published a declaration
of the motives which had induced them to take
arms. All Bothwell's past crimes were enumer-
ated, all his wicked intentions displayed and aggra-
vated, and every true Scotsman was called upon to
join them in avenging the one, and in preventing

1t Anders. the other t'.
vol. i. »z8. MEAN while, Eothwell assembled his forces at

Dunbar, and as he had many dependants in that
corner, he soon gathered luch strength, that he
ventured to advance towards the confederates.
Their troops were not numerous , the suddenness and

and secrecy of their ertcrprize gave their friends at BooK IV-
a difiance no time to join diem , and as it does not
appear that they were supported either with money
or fed with hopes by the Queen of England, they
could not have kept loi;g in a body. But on the Kit
other hand, Bothwell durst not rifque a delay*. 4o.
His army followed him with riluitance in this quar-
rel, and fcrved him with no cordial affedtion; so
that his olly hope of success was in furprizing the
enemy, or in striking the blow before his own
troops had leisure to recolleA themselves, or to
imbibe the fame unfavourable opinion of his ations,
which had spread over the reft of the nation. There
motives determined the Queen to march forward,
with an inconsiderate and fatal speed.

ON the first intelligence of her approach, the The no-

confederates advanced to meet her. They found bles march
her forces drawn up on the fame ground which the thef.
English had occupied before the battle of Pinkie. July i5.
The numbers on both sides were nearly equal; but
there was no equality in point of discipline. The
Q.een's army consisted chieflyof a multitude, hafti-
ly assembled, without courage or experience in
war. The troops of the confederates were corn-
posed of Gentlemen of rank and reputation, fol-
lowed by their mots trusty dependants, who were
no less brave than zealous t. t Cald.

Du Croc the French Ambassador, who was in vol.ii. 41,

the field, laboured, by negociating both with the nacom-
Queen and the nobles, to put an end to the quarrel modation
without the effufion of blood. He represented toattempted-
the confederates the Queen's inclinations towards
peace, and her willingness to pardon the offences
which they had committed. Morton replied, with
warmth, that they had taken arms not against the
Queen, but againlt the murderer of her husband,
and if he were given up tojuftice, or banished from
her presence, she (hould find them ready to yield

the

BooK IV. the obedience which is due from fuibjeds to their
--- --' Sovereign. Glencairn added, that they did not
1567. come to ask pardon for any offence, but to punish

those who had offended. Such haughty answers
convinced the ambassador, that his mediation would
be ineffecdual, and that their paflions were too high
to allow them to listen to any pacific propositions, or

SKeili, to think of retreating after having proceeded so far*.

THE Qjeen's army was posted to advantage, on

a riling ground. The confederates advanced to the
attack rebolutely, but slowly, and with the caution
which was natural on that unhappy field. Her
troops were alarmed at their approach, and disco-
vered no inclination to fight. Mary endeavoured
to animate them ; she wept, she threatened, the re-
proached them with cowardice, but all in vain. A
few of Bothwell's immediate attendants were eager
for the encounter; the reft flood wavering and irre-
solute,. and some began to fleal out of the field.
Bothwell attempted to inspirit them, by offering to
decide the quarrel, and to vindicate his own inno-
cence in tingle combat with any of his adversaries.
Kirkaldy of Grange, Murray of Tullibardin, and
Lord Lindsay contended for the honour of enter-
ing the lifts against him. But this challenge proved
to be a mere bravade. Either the consciousness of
guilt deprived Bothwell of his wonted courage, or
the Queen by her authority, forbad the combat t.

t Cald. AFTER the symptoms of fear discovered by her
vol. ii. 5o. followers, Mary would have been inexcusable, had

the hazarded a battle. To have retreated in the
face of an enemy, who had already surrounded the
hill on which (he flood, with part of their cavalry,
was utterly impracicable. In this situation, she
was under the cruel necessity of putting herself into
the hands of those fubjeats who had taken arms
against her. She demanded an interview with Kir-
kaldy, a brave and generous man, who command-

ed

ed an advanced body of the enemy. He, with Boot IV.
the content and in name of the leaders of the party, ""-'
promiEd that, on condition the would dismiss Both- 1567.
well from her presence, and govern the kingdom by
the advice of her nobles, they would honour and
obey her as their Sovereign*. * Good.

DUUING this parley, Bothwell took his last fare- vol. ii.

well of the Queen, and rode off the field with a Melv.165.
few followers. This dismal reverse happened ex Bothwell
adly one month after that marriage, which had obliged to
colft him so many crimes to accomplish, and which fly.
leaves so foul a stain on Mary's memory.

As soon as Bothwell retired, Mary surrendered

to Kirkaldy, who conduted her toward the con-
federate army, the leaders of which received her
with much refpet ; and Morton in their name,
made ample profeftions of their future loyalty and Mary fur-
obedience t. But (he was treated by the common r she noble
soldiers with the utmost insolence and indignity. t Good.
As she marched along, they poured upon her all the vol. ii.
opprobrious names, which are bestowed onlyon the '65-
lowett and most infamous criminals. Wherever
she turned her eyes, they held up before her a stand-
ard, on which was painted the dead body of the
late King, stretched on the ground, and the young
Prince kneeling before it, and uttering these words,
" Judge and revenge my cause, O Lord !" Mary
turned with horror from fich a (hocking fight.
She began already to feel the wretched condition
to which a captive Prince is reduced. She uttered
the most bitter complaints, the melted into tears,
and could scarce be kept from sinking to the ground.
The confederates carried her towards Edinburgh,
and, in spite of many delays, and after looking with
the fondness and credulity natural to the unfortunate
for Come extraordinary relief, fhearrived there. The
streets were covered with multitudes, whom zeal or
curiosity had drawn together, to behold such an

unusual

covered with dust, and bedewed with tears, was

1567. exposed as a fpedacle to her own fubjeds, and led

to the Provoft's house. Notwithitanding all her
arguments and intreaties, the fame standard was
carried before her, and the fame insults and re-
proaches repeated. A woman, young, beautiful,
and in distress, is naturally the objec of compaf-
sion. The comparison of their present misery with
their former splendour, usually softens us in fa-
vour of illustrious fufferers. But the people be-
held the deplorable situation of their Sovereign
with insensibility; and so firong was their perfua-
sion of her guilt, and so great the violence of their
indignatioh, that the fufferings of their Queen did
not, in any degree, mitigate their resentment, or
procure her that sympathy, which is seldom de-
nied to unfortunate Princes *.

* Melvil, 166. Bush. 364.

THE

# BOOK V.

THE

HIS TORY

O F

SCOTLAND.

BOOK V.

T H E confederate Lords had proceeded to such BooK V.

extremities against their Sovereign, that it '--"·

cow became almost impossible for them either to Dlibera-
tlop short, or to pursue a course less violent. Ma- tionsofthe
ny of the nobles had refuied to concur with them noblescon-
in their enterprize ; others openly condemned it. cerningthe
A fmail circumstance might abate that indignation Queen.
with which the multitude were, at present, anima-
ted against the QOeen, and deprive them of that
popular applause which was the chief foundation
of their power. There eonfiderations inclined some
of them to treat the Queen with great lenity.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary's affetion for

Bothwell continued as violent as ever ; the obfti-
nately refused to hearken to any proposal for diffolv-
ing their marriage, and determined not to aban-
don a man, for whose love the had already facri-
ficed so much *. If they should allow her to re- * Keith,
cover the supreme power, the first exertion of it 4'9, 446,
would be to recall Bothwell , and they had reason, 449.MeV
both from his resentment, from her conduct, and Append?x,
from their own, to expe& the severest effeAs of No XXI.
her vengeance. These considerations surmounted
every other motive ; and reckoning themselves ab-
solved, by Mary's incurable attachment to Both-
well, from the engagements which they had come
under when the yielded herfelfa prironer, they,

VOL. I. A a without

-I---- as their Queen, and without conluiting the reft of
T56e,.- the nobles, carried her next evening, under a flrong
prison her guard, ro the catle of Lochilevin, and signed a
in Loch- warrant to William Douglas the own:er of it, to
levin,. detain her as a prisoner. This cattle is fitnated in

a finall island, in the middle of a lake. Douglas,
to whom it belonged, was a near relation of Mor-
ton's, and had malried the Earl of Murray's mo-
ther. In this place, under tfiict cufldy, with a
few attendants, and fulijected to the insults of a
haughty woman, who boaletd daily of being the

* Keith, lawful wife of James V. Mary ifffered all the rigour

0 e and muiferies of captivity *
Note (b). IMMJ DI AE 'LV after the Queen's imprisonment,

the concfderates w.re at the utmolt pains to
strengthen their party ; they entered into new bonds
of association ; they atlttumed the title of Lords of
the secret Council, and without any other Iight, ar-
rogated to themselves the vwhole regal authority One
of their firit aCts of power was to learch the city of
Edinburgh for those who were concerned in the
murder of the King. This shew of zeal gained re-
putation to thcmfelves, and threw an obiique re-
fleAion on the Queen for her remissness. Several
fufpeacd persons were fcized. Captain Blackadder
and three others were condemned and executed.
MBur no Jircovery of importance was made. If we
btllcve some hiflorians-, they weic conviced by
flificient evidence. It we give credit to others,
their sentence was unjufi, and they denied, with
their last breath, any knowledge of the crime, for

tCald.vol. which they fiffered t.

'

A rawf.nexpcRed accident, however, put into the

Mem 35. hands of Miarv's enemies what they deemed the

fullell evidence of her guilt. Pothwell having left,
i:i the cafile of Edinburgh, a calker, contaning
several Ifmners a:d letters written witlh the QOccn's
own hand , he now le:t one of Iis confidants to

bring

bring to him this precious depofite. But as his BOOK V.
meflnger returned, he was intercepted, and the L
caflket seized by Morton *. The contents of it .Ander.
were always produced by the party, as the most vol. ii. 92.
ampleju tification of their own condu&t, and the Good. vol.
moflt unanswerable proof of their not having loaded ". 90.
their Sovereign with the imputation of imaginary

"t See Dif-

crimes t. fertation at

BUT the confederates, notwithttanding their ex- the end of

traordinary fuccels,, ;ere still far from being per- the Ap-
fedly at ease. That Io small a part of the nobles pendix.
should pretend to difpole of the person of their So- Shome of

the nobles

vereign, or to assume the authority which belong- favour the
ed to her, without the concurrence of the reft, ap Queen.
cared to many of tihat body to be unprecedented,
and presumptuous. Several of tlhee were now al-
iembled at Hamilton, in order to deliberate what
courle they should hold, in this difficult conjuncture.
The confederates made Come attempts towards a
coalition with them, but without effedt. They
employed the mediation of the assembly of the
Church, to draw them to a personal interview at
Edinburgh, but with no better fuccels. That
party, however, though its numbers were formi-
dable, and the power of its leaders great, soon loft
reputation by the want of unanimity and vigour ;
all its consultations evaporated in murmurs and
complaints, and no fchcme was concerted for ob-
firiditing the progrcls of the confederates :. i Keith

THERE appeared some profped of danger from 407

another quarter. Tlhis great revolution in Scotland interposes
had been carried on without any aid from Eliza in her be.
beth, and even without her knowledge §. And half.
though Ihe was far from being displeased to fee the

§ Id. 4t 5'

affairs of that kingdom embroiled, or a rival, whom
the hated, reduced to difftrefs ; the neither wihed
that it flould be in the power of the one fadion
entirtly to suppress the other, nor could Ihe view

Aaz the

< 7 offence. Notwithstanding the popular maxims by

1567" which the governed her own fubjeas, her notions

of royal prerogative were very exalted. The con-
federates had, in her opinion, encroached on the
authority of their Sovereign, which they had no
right to controul, and had offered violence to her
person, which it was their duty to esteem sacred.
They had set a dangerous example to other fubje-ts,
and Mary's cause became tl\V common cause of

* Kehth, Princes *. If ever Elizabeth was influenced with
41 z 4'i5 regard to the affairs of Scotland, by the feelings of

her heart, rather than by considerations of interest,

June 30. it was on this occasion. She instantly dispatched

Throgmorton into Scotland, with powers to nego-
ciate both with the Queen, and with the confe-
derates. In his inftrutions there appears a remarka-
ble solicitude for Mary's liberty, and even for her

t Id. 41 . reputation t. And the choice of an Ambassador,

to devoted to the interest of the Scottish Queen,
proves this solicitude to have been sincere. But
neither Elizabeth's friend(hip, nor Throgmorton's
zeal, were of much avail to Mary. The confede-
rates foresaw what would be the effects of there good
offices; and that the Queen, elated by the prof-
pedt of proteacion, would rejea with scorn the
overtures which they were about to make her.
They, for that reason, peremptorily denied Throg-
morton access to their prisoner ; and what propo-

1 Keith, fitions he made to them in her behalf, they either
417, 427. refused, or eluded t.
hScemesof MEAN while they deliberated with the utmost
the confe-
derate no- anxiety, concerning the settlement of the nation,
bles. and the future disposal of the Queen's person. Eli-

zabeth, observing that Throgmorton made no pro-
grefs in his negociations with them, and that they
would listen to none of his demands in Mary's fa-
vour, turned towards that party of the nobles who

were

were assembled at Hamilton, incited them to take Boor V.
arms in order to restore their Queen to liberty, and '" *
promiled to aflift them in such an attempt, to the ls 67
utmost of her power *. But they discovered no * See Ap-
greater union or vigour than formerly, and behav- ondixI
ing like men who had given up all concern either
for their Queen or their country, tamely allowed an
inconsiderable part of their body, whether we con-
fider it with refpeat to numbers, or to power, to
fettle the government of the kingdom, and to dif-
pose of the Queen's person at pleasure. Many
consultations were held, and various opinions arose
with regard to each of these. Some seemed defi-
rous of adhering to the plan on which the confede-
racy was at first formed , and after punishing the
murderers of the King, and diifolving the marriage
with Bothwell ,; after providing for the safety of
the young Prince, and the security of the Protestant
religion ; they proposed to re-establish the Qu.een
in the poffeffion of her legal authority. The fuc-
cess with which their arms had been accompanied,
inspired others with bolder and more desperate
thoughts, and nothing less would satisfy them than
the trial, the condemnation and puni(hment of the
Queen herself, as the principal conspirator againfi
the life of her husband and the safety of her Con t:
the former was Maitland's system, and breathed
too much of a pacific and moderate spirit, to be
agreeable to the temper or wishes of the party.
The latter was recommended by the clergy, and
warmly adopted by many laics; but the nobles
durst not, or would not venture on such an unpre-
cedented and audacious deed t.

 Keith, 42o, 42i, 422, 582.
1 THE intention of putting the Queen to death seems to have

beet carried on by some of her fubjeAs : at this time we often find
Elizabeth boaflting that Mary owed her life to her interposition.
Digges' Cpompl. Arnb. 14, &c. See Appendix, N* XVIIi.

A a 3 BorTH

BOOK V. Born parties agreed at last upon a scheme, nei-
! ther to moderate as rte one, nor so daring as the

The'567 other. lary was to be perfiiaded or forced to re-,
blige the sign the Crown ; the young Prince was to be pro-
Queen to claimed King, and the Earl of Murray was to be
resign the appointed to govern the kingdom during his mino-
e nTr- rity, with the name and authority of Regent. With

regard to the Qicen's own person, nothing was
determined. It fiems to have been the intention
of the confederates, to keep her in perpetual im-
prifonment ; but in order to intimidate herself, and
to overawe her partizans, they fiill reserved to
themselves the power of proceeding to more violent

extremes.

IT was obvious to foresee difficulties in the exe-

cution of this plan. Mary was young, ambitious,
high.fpir.ited, and accustomed to command. To
induce her to acknowledge her own incapacity for
governing, to renounce the dignity and power
which she was born to enjoy, to become dependant
on her own fubjecds, to content to her own bondage,
and to invest those persons, whom she considered
as the authors of all her calamities, with that ho-
nour and authority of which she herself was strip-
ped, were points hard to be gained. Thelt, how-
ever, the confederates attempted, and they did
not want means to insure firccefs. Mary had en-
dured, for several weeks, all the hardships and
terror of a prison ; no prospect of liberty appeared;
none of her fiubjeas had either taken arms, or so

* Keith, much as (blicited her relief *

, no person in whom

425s tlhe could confide was admitted into her presence ;

cven the Ambaiadors of the French King and Queen
of England were refukld access to her. In this so-
litary tfate, without a counrlilor or a friend, under
the preflire of diltrefs, and the apprehension of
danger, it was natural for a woman to hearken
aliioft to any overtures. The confederates took

adivantigce

advantage of her condition, and of her fears. They BooK V.
employed Lord Lindsay, the fiercest zealot in the ''6
party, to commuiIcate their scheme to the Queen, 567.
and to obtain her subscription to those papers which
were necellary for rendering it effec-tual. He exe-
cuted his commillion with harshness and brutality.
Certain death was before Mary's eyes, if the re-
fuTed to comply with his demands. At the fame
time, Ihe was informed by Sir Robert Melvil, in
the name of Athol, Maitland, Kirkaldy, the per-
sons among the confederates who were most atten-
tive to her interest, that a resignation extorted by
fear, and granted during her imprisonment, was
void in law, and might be revoked so soon as (he
recovered liberty. Throgmorton, by a note which
he found means to convey to her, fuggefled the
fame thing *. Deference to their opinion, as well* Keith,
as concern for her own safety, obliged her to yield 425. Note
to every thing which was required, and to sign all (b).Mev.
the papers which Lindsay presented to her. By 69
one of these the resigned the Crown, renounced all
(hare in the government of the kingdom, and con-
fented to the coronation of the young King. By
another, (he appointed the Earl of Murray Regent, July 24.
and conferred upon him all the powers and privi-
leges of that high office. By a third, the fubftitu-
ted some other nobleman in Murray's place, if he
;hould refuse the honour which was detigned for
him. Mary, when the subscribed thete deeds, was
bathed in tears; and while the gave away, as it
were with her own hands, the sceptre which (he
had fwaycd to long, (he felt a pang of grief and
indignation, one of the feverelt, perhaps, which
can touch the human heart t. "lIbid.43o.

THE confederates endeavoured to give this refig- crawf.

nation all the weight and validity in their power,

}ae VI.

by proceeding without delay to crown the young crowned,
Prince. 'The ceremony was performed at Stirling, and Mur-
on the 29th of July, with much solemnity, in ray chosen

A a 4 prcecncc

BooK V. presence of all the nobles of the party, a confidera

h i
ble number of Icfler Barons, and a great aflembli

's67" of the people. From that time, all public writ.
SKeith were ifltued, and the government carried on, ir
' Keith\

' name of James Vl*.

No revolution to great was ever effcded with

more ease, or by means bo unequal to the end. In a
warhlke age, and in lets time than two months, a part
of the nobles, who neithr poffeffed the chief power,
nor the greatert wealth in the nation, and who
never brought 30?oo men into the field, seized, im-
prifoncd, and dethroned their Qieen, and without
Ihedding a single drop of blood, let her son, an in-
sant of a year old, on the throne.

Reaonng DURING this rapid progress of the confederates,

Sartiea. the eyes of all the nation were turned on them, with

aftonilhment ; and various and contradictory o-
pinions were formed, concerning the extraordinary
steps which they had taken.

EVE? under the ariftocratical form of govern-

Iment, which prevails in Scotland, laid the favour-
ers of the Queen, and notwithifanding the exorbi-
tant privileges of the nobles, the Prince poffeffes
considerable power, and his perlbn is treated with
great veneration. No encroachments should be
made on the former, and no injury offered to the
latter, but in cales where the liberty and happiness
of the nation cannot be secured by any other means.
Such cales seldom exist, and it belongs not to any
part, but to the whole, or at least to a majoriiy of
the lbciety, to judge of their exiflence. By what
action could it iec pretended, that Mary had invad-
ed the rigits or propel ty of her libjetts, or what
fchemc had mie formed against the liberty and con-
flitution of the kingdom ? Were fears, fufpi-
cions, and flurmites, en iugh tojuftify the imprison-
ing, and the deposing a Queen, to whom the Crown
delcended ftrin L; loig a race of Monarchs ? The
principal author of whatever was reckoned culpable

in

in her condut, was now driven from her presence. Boot V.
The murderers of the King might have been -'-'
brought to condign punishment, the safety of the 56'.
Prince have been secured, and the Protestant reli-
gion have been eftabli(hed, without wresting the
Iceptre out of her hands, or condemning her to
perpetual imprisonment. Whatever right a free
Parliament might have had to proceed to such a ri-
gorous conclusion, or whatever name its determi-
nations might have merited, a sentence of this na-
ture, passed by a few nobles, without acknowledg-
ing or consulting the reft of the nation, must be
deemed a rebellion against the government, and a
conspiracy against the person of their Sovereign.

THE partizans of the confederates reasoned very

differently. 'Tis evident, said they, that Mary
either previously gave consent to the King's mur-
der, or did afterwards approve of that horrid ac-
tion. Her attachment to Bothwell, the power and
honours with which the loaded him, the manner in
which the fuffered his trial to be carried on, and
the indecent speed with which the married a man,
flained with so many crimes, raise firong suspicions
of the former, and put the latter beyond all doubt.
To have fuffered the supreme power to continue
in the hands of an ambitious man, capable of the
mofi atrocious and desperate adtions, would have
been disgraceful to the nation, dithonourable to the
Queen, and dangerous to the Prince. Recourse
was, therefore, had to arms. The Queen had
been compelled to abandon a husband, so unwor-
thy of herself. But her affecion toward him flill
continuing unabated; her indignation againit the
authors of this separation being visible, and often
expressed in the strongest terms ; they, by restoring
her to her ancient authority, would have armed her
with power to destroy themselves, have enabled
her to 'recal Bothwell, and have afforded her an op-
portunity of pursuing ichemes fatal to the nation,

ilth

ooK V. with greater eagernels, and with more iuccefs. No-
i- thing, therefore, remained, but by one bold a Jion

1567. to deliver themlelves and their country from all

future fears. The expedient they had chofcn was
no kls refpedful to the royal blood, than neceftary
for the public falcty. While one Prince was let
aside as incapable of governing, the Crown was
placed on his head, who was the undoubted repre-
fentative of their ancient Kings.

WH ATEVER opinion posterity may form on

comparing the arguments of the two contending
parties, whatever tentiments we may entertain con-
cerning the juflice or necelfity of that course which
the confederates held, it cannot be denied that
their condud, so far as regarded themselves, was
extremely prudent. Other expedients, lets rigorous
towards Mary, might have been found for lIttiing
the nation; but, alter the injuries they had already
offered the Qcen, there was none so effetflual for
securing their own iafety, or perpetuating their

Murray own power.
aflunes To a great part of the nation, the conduct of
the go- the confederates appeared not only wife, but jufl.
vernment. The King's acceilion to the throne was every

where proclaimed, and his authority submitted to
without opposition. And though several of the
nobles were flill aftembled at Hamilton, and seem-
ed to be entering into some combination against his
government, an aflbciation for supporting it was
tormed, and ligned by th many perotns of power

*Anders. and i:nfluence throughout the nation, as entirely
vol. ii. dilcou aged the attempt *
231. 'Tl'te return of the Earl of Murray, about this

time, added itrength to the party, and gave it a
regular and finished form. Soon after the mur-
t<lr ol the King, this nobleman had retired into
France, upon what pretence hitforians do not men-
tion. During his residence there, he had held a
cluo cvrrclpondence with the chiefs of the con-

federacty,

federacy, and, at their desire, he now returned. BOOK V.
He seemed, at first, unwilling to accept the office s-
of Regent. This hesitation cannot be ascribed to
the scruples either of diffidence, or of duty. Mur-
ray wanted neither abilities to entitle him, nor
ambition to aspire to this high dignity. He had
received the first accounts of his promotion with
the utmost fatisfadion, but by appearing to conti-
nue for some days in fufpence, he gained time to
view with attention the ground on which he was
to ad, to ballance the strength and resources of
the two contending fadtions, and to examine whe-
ther the foundation on which his future fame and
success must reft, were found and firm.

BEFORE he declared his final resolution, he wait-

ed on Mary at Lochlevin. This visit, to a sifter,
and a Queen, in a prison, from which he had nei-
ther any intention to relieve her, nor to mitigate
the rigour of her confinement, may be mentioned
among the circumstances, which discover the great
want of delicacy and refinement in that age. Mur- Keith,
ray, who was naturally rough and uncourtly in his 96.
manner *, expoftulated to warmly with the Queen
concerning her past condud, and charged her faults
so home upon her, that Mary, who had flattered
herself with more gentle and brotherly treatment
from him, melted into tears, and abandoned her- 1tlb. 445'
self entirely to despair -t. This interview, from
which Murray could reap no political advantage,
and wherein he discovered a spirit so severe and
unrelenting, may be reckoned among the most
bitter circumstances in Mary's life, and is cer-
tainly one of the most unjuflifiable in his condud.

SoON after his return from Lochlevin, Murray

accepted the office of Regent, and began to acd in
that charader without opposition.

AMIDST To many great and unexpeded events, Aug. 22.

the fate of Bothwell, the chief cause of them all,
hath been almost forgotten. After his flight from

the

BooK V. the confederates, he lurked for some time among
'"- ^ his vaials in the neighbourhood of Dunbar. But
Fat56 7 finding it impoilible for him to make head, in
Bothwell. that country, against his enemies, or even to fe-

cure himself from their pursuit, he fled for fhel-
ter to his kinsman the Bishop of Murray; and
when he, overawed by the confederates, was obli-
ged to abandon him, he retired to the Orkney
illes. Hunted from place to place, deserted by his
friends, and accompanied by a few retainers, as
delperate as himfclf, he fuffered at once the mi-
series of infamy, and of want. His indigence
forced him upon a course which added to his in-
famy. He armed a few small ships, which had ac-
companied him from Dunbar, and attacking every
veffcl which fell in his way, endeavoured to pro-
cure fubfiflence for himself and his followers by
piracy. Kirkaldy and Murray of Tullibardin
were Cent out against him by the confederates; and
surprising him while he rode at anchor, scattered
his small fleet, took a part of it, and obliged him
to fly with a tingle (hip towards Norway. On
that coast he fell in with a vessel richly laden, and
immediately attacked it; the Norwegians failed
with armed boats to its afliftance, and after a del-
perate fight, Bothwell and all his crew were taken
prisoners. His name and quality were both un-
known, and he was treated at first with all the
indignity and rigour, which the odious crime of
piracy merited. His real character was Coon dif-
covered i and though it saved him from the infa-
nmous death to which his associates were condemn-
ed, it could neither procure him liberty, nor mi-
tigate the hardships of his imprisonment. He lan-
guilhed ten years in this unhappy condition ; me-
lancholy and despair deprived him of reason, and
at last he ended his days unpitied by his country-

* M1v.. men, and unaflifted by fitrangers *. Few men
168. ever

iver accomplilhed their ambitious projeas by BoqK V.
worse means, or reaped from them less Catisfaai- "
on. The early part of his life was restless and 1567.
enterprising, full of danger and of vicillitudes.
His enjoyment of the grandeur, to which he at-
tained by so many crimes, was extremely short ;
imbittercd by much anxiety, and difquieted by
many fears. In his latter years, he fuffcred the
moil intolerable calamities, to which the wretched
are fubjeC, and from which persons who have
moved in Ib high a sphere are commonly exemp-
ted.

THE good effeCts of Murray's accession to the Succes of

regency were quickly felt. The party forming for the Re-
the Queen was weak, irresolute, and disunited , gentrs ad-
and no sooner was the government of the king- tion.
dom in the hands of a man, so remarkable both
for his abilities and popularity, than the nobles of
whom it was composed loft all hopes of gaining
ground, and began to treat separately with the
Regent. So many of them were brought to ac-
knowledge the King's authority, that Icarce any
appearance of opposition to the eftablithed go-
vernment was left in the kingdom. Had they ad-
hered to the Queen with any firmness, it is pro-
bable, from Elizabeth's disposition at that time,
that (he would have afforded them such afliftance
as might have enabled them to face their enemies
in the field. But there appeared so little vigour
or harmony in their councils, that the was difcou-.
raged from espousing their cause; and the Regent
taking advantage of their situation, obliged them
to submit to his government, without granting any
terms, either to themselves, or to the Q~ueen *. , Ke,

THR Regent was no less fuccefsful in his attempt, 447 40o.

to get into his hands the places of flrength in the 463.
kingdom. Balfour, the deputy-governor, furren-
dered the castle of Edinburgh ,; and as the reward
ps his treachery, in deserting l-othwell his patron,

BOOK V obtalled U:r -s of great advantage to himfilf. The

S"-'Gov i Hi:':.ar, who dilcovered more fide-

7

Is7 lity, was So.: i rtc.! to capitulate; some other

s;i forts furrenjered without resistance.

A Parlia- .: rs tace of tranquillity in the nation encourag-
rn men'. ed tin . <;'nt to call a meeting of Parliament. No-
Decemn. 5.thing was wadi ing to confirm the King's authority,

and the proceedings of the confederates, except the
approbation of this supreme court; and after the
lhccets which had attended all their measures,
there could be little doubt of obtaining it. The
numbers that resorted to an Aflembly, which was
called to deliberate on matters of Co much impor-
tance, were great. The meeting was opened with
the utmost foblemnity, and all its ads paflTd with
much unanimity. Many, however, of the Lords
who had discovered the warmest attachment to the
Queen, were present. But they had made their
peace with the Regent. Argyle, Huntly, and
Herreis acknowledged, openly, in Parliament, that
their behaviour towards the King had been un-
dutiful and criminal*. Their compliance, in this
manner, with the measures of the Regent's party,
was either the condition on which they were ad-
mitted into favour, or intended as a proof of the
sincerity of their reconcilement.

Confirms THE Parliament granted every thing the confe-
the pro- derates could demand, either for the safety of
ceedings their own persons, or the security of that form of
confede- government which they had established in the
rates, kingdom. Mary's resignation of the Crown was

accepted, and declared to be valid. The King's
authority, and Murray's election, were recognized,
and confirmed. The imprisoning the Queen, and
all the other proceedings of the confederates,
were pronounced lawful. The letters which Mary
had written to Bothwell were produced, and she

* Anders. vol. iv. 153. See Appendix, No XXIII.

was

was declared to be accessary to the murder of the BooK V.
King*. At the fame time, all the acis ut Parlid- '-^
ment 1560, in favour of the Protestant

l cngion 1567

weie publickly ratified; new statutes to the fame
purpole were enacted. And nothing that cculd
contribute to root out the remains of Popei y, or to
encourage the growth of the Reformation, was
negklected.

lr is observable, however, that the fame parsi-

monious firit prevailed in this Parliament, as in
that of 560o. The Proteflant clergy, notwith-
Standing many dilcouragements, and their extreme
poverty', had, for seven years, performed all reli-
gious offices in the kingdom. 'The expedients fal-
len upon for their fubfillcnce had hitherto proved
ineffectual, or were intended to be so. But, notwith-
tfanding their known indigence, and the warm re-
monftharces of the Aflembly of the church, which
met this year, the Parliament did nothing more
for their relief, than prescribe some new regula-
tions concerning the payment of the thirds of be-
nefices, which did not produce any considerable
charge in the lituation of the clergy.

A FEW days after the dissolution of Parliament, '568

four of Botrhwell's dependants were convicted of January 3.
btirg guilty of the King's murder, and fuiffered
death as traitors. Their confelflons broudht to
light many ciicumfianccs relative to the n anner
of committing that barbarous crime ; but they were
persons of a low rank, and seem not to have been
admitted into the secrets of the conspiracy t. + Anders.

NrTWIIHSTANDING the univerial fubmiflion to 1,6'

the Regent's authority, there flill abounded in the
kingdom many frcret murmurs and cabals. The
partizasi of the house of Hamilton reckoned NlMur-
ray's promotion an injury to the Duke of Charel-
herault, who, as firflt rince of the blood, had, in
their opinion, an undoubted right to be Rcgn.t.

* Good. vol. ii. 66. Anders. vol. ii. 20o6.

The

I' ' to move many to commiserate her cafe. All who

S t68. leaned to the ancient opinions in religion dreaded

the effeas of Murray's zeal. And he, tho' his abi-
lities were great, did not poifefs the talents requi-
site for soothing the rage or removing the jealousies
of the different fations. By insinuation, or address,
he might have gained or softened many, who had
opposed him; but he was a stranger to these gentle
arts. His virtues were severe; and his deportment
towards his equals, especially after his elevation to
the regency, difiant and haughty. This behaviour
offended Come of the nobles, and alarmed others.
The Queen's facion, which had been so easily dif-
perfed, began again to gather, and to unite, and
was recretly favoured by fbme who had hitherto

* Melv. zealously concurred with the confederates *.
r79. SUCH was the favourable disposition of the na-
Mary tion towards the Queen, when the recovered her
roes liberty, in a manner no less surprising to her friends,
Lochlevia. than unexpected by her enemies. Several attempts

had been made to procure her an opportunity of
escaping, which Come unforeseen accident, or the
vigilance of her keepers, had hitherto disappointed.
At last, Mary employed all her art to gain George
Douglas her keeper's brother, a youth of eighteen.
As her manners were naturally affable and infinu-
ating, the treated him with the most flattering dif-
tindion; the even allowed him to entertain the
most ambitious hopes, by letting fall rome expref-

1- Keith, lions, as if the would chufe him for her husband t.
469. At his age, and in such circumflances, it was im-

pollible to resist such a temptation. He yielded,
and drew others into the plot. On Sunday the
2d of May, while his brother fat at supper, and the
reft of the family were retired to their devotions,
one of his accomplices found means to fleal the
keys out of his brother's chamber, and opening the
gates to the Q.een and one of her maids, locked

them

them behind her, and then threw the keys into the BooK V'
lake. Mary ran with precipitation to the boat ~
which was prepared for her, and on reaching the
shore, was received with the utmost joy, by Doug-
las, Lord Seaton, and Sir James Hamilton, who,
with a few attendants, waited for her. She in-
flantly mounted on horseback, and rode full speed
towards Niddrie, Lord Seaton's feat in Weft-Lo-
thian She arrived there that night, without being
pursued or interrupted. After halting three hours,
Ihc Ice out for Hamilton ,; and travelling at the
fame pace, she reached it next morning.

On the firit news of Mary's escape, her friends Arrives at

whom, in their present disposition, a much fmnaller Hamilton,
accident would have rouzed, ran to arms In a few and raises
days, her court was filled with a great and splendid nume-
train of nobles, accompanied by such numbers of
followers, as formed an army above 6000 strong.
In their presence the declared that the resignation of
the Crown, and other deeds (he had signed during
her imprilonment, were extorted from her by fear.
Sir Robert Melvil confirmed her declaration ; and
on that, as well as on other accounts, a council of
the nobles and chief men of her party pronounced
all there tranfadions void and illegal. At the fame
time an association was formed for tIhe defence of May 8.
her person and authority, and subscribed by nine
Earls, nine Bilhops, eighteen Lords, and many
gentlemen of diftintion *. Among them, we Keith,
find several who had been present in the last Par- 475
liament, and who had signed the counter-aflociation
in defence of the King's government; but fuich
sudden changes were then to common, as to be
no matter of reproach.

AT the time when the Queen made her es- Confterna-

cape, the Regent was at Glasgow, holding a court tionof the
ofjuflice. An event so contrary to their expeca- Regen"'s

VOL. I.. B tos, adherents.

BoOK V. lionS, and 1b fatal to their schemes, gave a great

fT^u Ihock to his adherents. Many of them appeared

' wavering and irrctolute ; others began to carry on

private ncgociations with the Queen ; and some
openly rcvolted to her fide. In so difficult a junc-
ture, where his own fame, and the being of the
party depended on his choice, the regent's most
taithlifl aflociates were divided in opinion. Some
adviild him to retire, without loss of time, to Stir-
ling. The Q.cen's army was already firong, and
only eight miles distant ; the adjacent country was
full of the friends and dependents of the house of
Hamilton, and other Lords of the Queen's fation ;
Glasgow was a large and unfortified town ; hisown
train consisted of no greater number than was ufiu-
al in times of peace ; all these reasons pleaded for
a retreat. But on the other hand, arguments were
urged of no inconsiderable weight. The citizens
of Glasgow were well affected to the cause; the
vassals of Glencairn, Lenox, and Semple lay near
at hand, and were both numerous, and full
of zeal,; luccours might arrive from other parts of
the kingdom in a few days; in war, success depends
upon reputation, as much as upon numbers ,; re-
putation is gained, or loft, by the first itep one
takes , in his circumfitances, a retreat would be at-
tended with all the ignominy of a flight, and would
at once dispirit his friends, and inspire his enemies

His pru- with boldnels. In fich dangerous exigencies as
dent con- this, the superiority of Murray's genius appeared,
d u t' and enabled him both to chufe with wisdom, and

to ad with vigour. He declared against retreating,
and fixed his head quarters at Glasgow. And while
he amuled the Queen for some days, by pretending
to hearken to some overtures, which file had made
for accommodating their differences, he was em-
ployed with the utmost induffry, in drawing to-

gether

gether his adherents, from different parts of the BooK V.
kingdom. He was Coon in a condition to take the
field; and though far inferior to the enemy in i568.
number, he confided To much in the valour of his
troops, and the experience of his officers, that he
broke off the negociation, and determined to hazard
a battle *. * Buchan,

AT the fame time, the Queen's generals had 369.

commanded her army to move. Their intention
was, to condut her to Dunbarton-caftle, a place
of great strength, which the Regent had not been
able to wrest out of the hands of Lord Fleming the
governor 5 but if the enemy (hould endeavour to
interrupt their march, they resolved not to decline
an engagement. In Mary's situation, no resolution
could be more imprudent. A part only of her forces
was aflembled. Huntly, Ogilvie, and the northern
clans were toon expected; her fufferings had re-
moved, or diminished the prejudices of many a-
mongher fubjeas; the address with which the
surmounted the dangers that obftruded her escape,
dazzled and interested the people ; the sudden con-
fluence of so many nobles added lustre to her cause1
(he might assuredly depend on the friendship and
:ountenance of France ; she had reason to expe&
the protetion of England ; her enemies could not
>oflibly look for support from that quarter. She
iad much to hope from pursuing flow and cautious
neafures ; they had every thing to fear.

Bu T Mary, whose hopes were naturally sanguine,
ind her passions impetuous, was so elevated by her
udden transition from the depth of diflrefs, to
iich an unusual appearance of prosperity, that (he
ever doubted of success. Her army, which was
Imoft double to the enemy in number, confifLed
hiefly of the Hamiltons, and their dependants.
)f there the archbishop of St. Andrew's had the
hief direcion, and hoped, by a vicory, not only

Bb

. to

.., but to get the person of the Queen into his hands,

' 568 and to oblige her, either to marry one of the Duke's

sons, or at least to commit the chief diredtion of
her affairs to himself. His ambition proved fatal
to the Queen, to himself, and to his family *.

Battle of MARY'S imprudence, in resolving to fight, was
Langfide. not greater than the ill condut of her generals in

the battle. Between the two armies, and on the
road towards Dunbarton, there was an eminence
called Langfide-Hill. This the Regent had the
precaution to seize, and ported his troops in a small
village, and among some gardens and inclofures
adjacent. In this advantageous situation he waited
the approach of the enemy, whose superiority in
cavalry could be of no benefit to them, on such
broken ground. The Hamiltons who composed
the vanguard, ran To eagerly to the attack, that
they put themselves out of breath, and left the main
battle far behind. The encounter of the fpearmen
was fierce and desperate ; but as the forces of the
Hamiltons were exposed, on the one flank, to a
continued fire from a body of rriufqueteers, attack-
ed on the other by the Regent's most choice troops,
and not supported by the reft of the Queen's army,

Queen's they were Coon obliged to give ground, and the
army de- rout immediately became universal. Few vidtories,
seated. in a civil war, arid among a barbarous people, have

been pursued with Ik-s violence, or attended with
lets bloodshed. Three hundred fell in the field
in the flight scarce any were killed. The Regent
and his principal officers rode about, beseeching
the soldiers to spare their countrymen. The num-
ber of prifo:'ers was great, and among them many
pecri,>ns of diftindtion. The Regent marched back
to Glasgow, and returned public thanks to God

r Andcrf. vol. iv. 32. Melv. 18t. for

for this great, and, on his fide, almost bloodless BooK V.
viCtory . a568.

DURING the engagement, Mary flood on a hill,, Keith,

at no great distance, and beheld all that passed in 477.
the field, with such emotions of mind as are not Herflight.
easily described. When the saw the army, which
was her Jaft hope, thrown into irretrievable confu-
sion, her spirit, which all her past misfortunes had
not been able entirely to subdue, funk altogether.
In the utmost conflernation, the began her flight,
and so lively were her impreflions of fear, that ihe
never closed her eyes till Ihe reached the abbey of
Dundrenan in Galloway, full sixty Scottish miles
from the place of battle f. t Id. 481.

THESE revolutions in Mary's fortune had been

no less rapid, than singular. In the short (pace of
eleven days, the had been a prisoner at the mercy
of her most inveterate enemies ; the had seen a
powerful army under her command, and a nu-
merous train of nobles at her devotion ; and now
the was obliged to fly, in the utmost danger of her
life, and to lurk, with a few attendants, in a cor-
ner of her kingdom. Not thinking herself safe,
even in that retreat ; her fears impelled her to an
action, the most unadvised, as well as the most
unfortunate in her whole life. This was her reti-
ring into England, a flep, which, on many ac-
counts, ought to have appeared to her ra(h and
dangerous.

BEFORE Mary's arrival in Scotland, mutual dif- Rerolves

trust and jealoulies had arisen between her and Eli- on retiring
zabeth. All their subsequent transaCtions had con- into Eng
tributed to exasperate and inflame these pallions. a
She had endeavoured, by secret negociations and
intrigues, to disturb the tranquillity of Elizabeth's
government, and to advance her own pretensions
to the Englith Crown. Elizabeth, who poffeiled
greater power, and ated with less reserve, had
openly supported Mary's rebellious subjects, and

Bb 3 fomented

BOOK V. fomented all the dissensions and troubles in which
'j- her reign had been involved. The maxims of po-

I568. licy still authorized that Qjeen to pursue the fame

course; as by keeping Scotland in confusion, the
effeAually secured the peace of her owjp kingdom.
The Regent, after his vitory, had marched to
Edinburgh, and not knowing what course the
Queen had taken, it was several days before he

* Crawf. thought of pursuing her *. She might have been
Mem. 59. concealed in that retired corner, among fubjeds

devoted to her interest, till her party, which was
dispersed rather than broken by the late defeat,
should gather such strength, that the could again
appear with safety at their head. There was not
any danger, which the ought not to have run, ra-
ther than throw herself into the hands of an enemy,
from which the had already fuffered Lb many inju-
ries, and who was prompted both by inclination,
and by interest to renew them.

BUT on the other hand, during Mary's confine-

ment, Elizabeth had declared against the proceed-
ings of her fubjeds, and solicited for her liberty,
with a warmth which had all the appearance of fin-
cerity. She had invited her to take refuge in England,
and had promised to meet her in person, and to give
her fiuch a reception as was due to a Queen, and an
ally t-. Whatever apprehension Elizabeth might
entertain of Mary's designs, while the had power
in her hands, the was, at present, the objeA, not
of fear, but of pity ; and to take advantage of her
situation, would be both ungenerous and inhuman.
The horrors of a prison were fresh in Mary's me-
mory, and if the should fall a second time into the
hands of her fubjeds, there was no injury to which
the presumption of success might not embolden
them to proceed. To attempt cliaping into France,
was dangerous , and, in her situation, almost im-

[- Carmd. 489. Andet. vol. iv. 99. 1 Zo. Murdin, 369.

pofible ,

poflible ; nor could (he bear the thoughts of ap- RooK V.
pearing as an exile, and a fugitive, in that king-

,58

dom, where she had once enjoyed all the splendor
of a Queen. England remained her only asylum ;
and, in spite of the intreaties of Lord Herrcis,
Fleming, and her other attendants, who conjured
her, even on their knees, not to confide in Eliza-
beth's promises or generofiry, her infatuation was
invincible, and (he resolved to fly thither. Herreis
by her command, wrote to Lowther the deputy- tier re-
governor of Carlisle, to know what reception he C^arlite.
would give her ; and, before his answer could re-
turn, her fear and impatience were io great, that
she got into a filher-boar, :ind with about tenty
attendants, landed at Wirkington in Cumberland, May 16.
and thence the was conduated with many marks ol * kIith,
refpeL to Carlifle'. A Jerri

So soon as Mary arrived in England, the wrote vol. iv 2.

a long letter to the Queen, representin:g, in the Elizabeth
strongest terms, the injuries which she had filfehrtd deliberates
from her own fubjecs, and imploring that pity arnd cnin rhe
afliftance which her present situation demanded +. nianner of
An event so extraordinary, and the condut which treating
might be proper in consequence of it, drew the at- hCr.
tention, and employed the thoughts of Izatb.i th I . '2.
and her council. If their deliberations had been in-
fluenced by considerations of justice or gencr!iity
alone, they would not have f ound them long or in-
tricate. A Queen vanquibed by her own luljets,
and threatened by them with the loTs of her libL:rty,
or of her life, had fled from their violence, and
thrown herself into the arms of her nearest neigh-
bour and ally, from whom the had received repeated
assurances of friendthip and protetion. These cir-
cumftances entitled her to refped and to compaf-
sion, and required that she fhouldeither be reflored
to her own kingdom, or at least be left at full li-
berty to seek aid from any other quarter But vith

B b 4 Elizabeth

BooK V. Elizabeth and her counsellors, the question was not,
i what was moit just or generous, but what was molt

S'68" beneficial to herself, and to the Englih nation.
'.1 hree different resolutions might have been taken,
with regard to the Queen of Scots. To re-inflate
her in her throne, was one , to allow her to retire
into France was another ; to detain her in England,
was a third. Each of thele drew consequences as-
ter it, of the utmost importance, which were exa-

* Andcrf. mined, as appears from papers fill extant*, with
vol. iv. 34. that minute accuracy, which Elizabeth's Ministers
99.' 12. employed in all their consultations upon affairs of

monment.

To restore Mary to the full exercise of the royal

authority in Scotland, they observed, would render
her more powerful than ever. "The nobles who
were molt firmly attached to the English interert,
would quickly feel the utmost weight of her re-
fentment. And as the gratitude of Princes is fel-
dom strong or laflting, regard to her own interest
might ioon dflice the memory of her obligations to
El.zabeth, and prompt her to renew the alliance of
the Scottish nation with France, and revive her own
pretenlions to the Englifl Crown Nor was it pof-
fible to fetter and circumscribe the Scottilh Queen,
by any conditions that would prevent there dangers.
Her party in Scotland was numerous and powerful.
Her return, even without any fuipport from Eng-
land, would inspire her fiiends with new zeal and
courage , a tingle vi(ory might give them the fu-
pcriority, ~which they had loft by a single defeat,
and render Mary a moic formidable rival than ever
to Flizabeth.

TH E dangers arising from fuf1ering Mary to retire

into Ifrance, were no less obvious. The French
King could not refuse his alliflance towards reftor-
ing his fitter and ally to her throne. Elizabeth
wu nl. o;~ce more, Ice a foreign army in the illand,
ove: a\: ing the cots, and ready to ;ntcr her king-

dom ;

dom; and if the commotions in France, on account BOOK V.
of religion, were fettled, the Princes of Lorrain <-r-
might resume their ambitious projets, and the uni- '568.
ted forces of France and Scotland might invade
England, where it is weakest and most defenceless. Resolves

NOTHING therefore remained but to detain her to detain

her in

in England ; and to permit her either to live at li- England.
berty tliere, or to confine her in a prison. The
former was a dangerous experiment. Her court
would become a place of resort to all the Roman
Catholics, to the dithffteded, and to the lovers of
innovation. Though Elizabeth affeced to repre-
sent Mary's pretenlions to the English Crown as
altogether extravagant and ill-founded, the was not
ignorant that they did not appear in that light to
the nation, and that many thought them preferable
even to her own title. If the activity of her emif-
faries had gained her so many abettors, her own
personal infiucnce was much more to be dreaded ,
her beauty, her address, her lufferings, by the ad-
miration and pity which they would excite, could
not fail of making many converts to her party *. Anderl.

'TWAS indeed to be apprehended, that the vol. iv.

treating Mary as a pritoner would excite univer- 56, 60.
fal indignation against Elizabeth, and that by this
unexampled leverity towards a Queen, who im-
plored, and to whom the had promiled her pro-
teation, (he would forfeit the praise of justice and
humanity, which was hitherto due to her admini-
ftration. But the English Monarchs were often so
solicitous to secure their kingdom against the Scots,
as to be little scrupulous about the means which
they employed for that purpose. Henry IV. had
seized the heir of the Crown of Scotland, who was
forced, by the violence of a storm, to take refuge
in one of the ports of his kingdom ; and, in con-
tempt of the rights of hospitality, without rtgard-
ing his tender age, or the tears and intrcatics of

Is

BooK V. his father, detained him a prisoner for many years.
' ^'-" This ation though detefred by posterity, Eliza-

,568. beth resolved now to imitate. Her virtue was not

more proof than Henry's had been, against the
temptations of interest; and the poffeflion of a pre-
sent advantage was preferred to the profped of
future fame. The fatisfadion which the felt in
mortifying a rival, whose beauty and accomplilh-
ments the envied, had, perhaps, no less influence
than political considerations, in bringing her to
this resolution. But, at the fame time, in order
to (creen herself from the censure which this con-
dud merited, and to make her treatment of the
Scottish Queen look like the effecd of necellity, ra-
ther than of choice, the determined to put on the
appearance of concern for her interest, and of deep
sympathy with her fufferings.

May Zo. WITH this view, the instantly dispatched Lord

Scroope warden of the well marches, and Sir Fran-
cis Knollys her Vice-chamberlain, to the Queen of
Scots, with letters full of expreflions of kindners
and condolence. But, at the fame time, they had
private inftrudions to watch all her motions, and
to take care that the thould not escape into her

* AndLfe own kingdom *. On their arrival, Mary demand-
vol.iv. 36, ed a personal interview with the Queen, that the
70, 93. might lay before her the injuries which the had
miands ad- fuffered, and receive from her those friendly offi-
mittance ces which the had been encouraged to expect.
into Eliza- They answered, that it was with reluctance this
bets pre- honour was at present denied her ; that while (he

lay under the imputation of a crime to horrid as
the murder of her hufbhand, their Miftrels, to
whom he was to nearly allied, could not, without
bringing a slain upon her own reputation, admit
her into her presence ; but as loon as (he had clear-
ed herself from that aspersion, they promiled her

"t Ibid. a reception suitable to her dignity, and aid pro-
vol. iv. 8, portioned to her dirtrefs -4.
55. NOTHING

NOTHING could be more frivolous than this BOOK V.

pretence. It was the occasion, however, of lead- '--'
ing the Queen of Scots into the snare, in which Sh~568
Elizabeth and her Nlinifters wilhed to intangle to vindi-
her. Mary expressed the utmofi furprize at this care her
unexpeded manner of evading her request; but condu&.
as she could not believe Co many profelmions of
friendship to be void of sincerity, the frankly
offered to submit her cause to the cognizance of
Elizabeth, and undertook to produce fiuch proofs
of her own innocence, and of the falfhood of the
accusations brought againi her, as should fully
remove the scruples, and satisfy the delicacy of
the Englilh QOeen. This was the very point to takes ad-
which Elizabeth laboured to bring the matter. By vanageof
this appeal of the Scottish Queen, the became this offer.
the umpire between her and her fubjeets, and had
it entirely in her own power to protraet the inquiry
to any length, and to perplex and involve it in
endless difficulties. In the mean time, the was
furnished with a plausible pretence for keeping
her at a distance from court, and for refuting to con-
tribute towards replacing her on her throne. As
Mary's conduct had been extremely incautious,
and the presumptions of her guilt were many and
strong, it was poflible her fubjeas might make
good their charge against her; and if this (hould
be the result of the inquiry, the would, thence-
forth, cease to be the object of regard, or of com-
paflion, and the treating her with coldness and
neglect would merit little cenfire. In a mrttcr
so dark and mysterious, there was no probability
that Mary could bring proofs of her innocence, to
incontefted, as to render the condua of the En,-
lifh Queen altogether culpable. And perhaps, her
impatience under restraint, her ftfpicion of Eliza-
beth's partiality, or her discovery of her artifices,
might ehgage her inI filch cabals, as would jfiliy
the using her with greater rigour.

ELIZ A LELI

BooK V. ELIZAIBTH early foresaw all those advantages,
- which would arise from an inquiry into the con-
568. *dua of tfe Scottihh Queen, carried on under her

diredion. There was tome danger, however, that
Mary might discover her secret intentions too soon,
and by receding from the offer which the had
made, endeavour to disappoint them. But even
in that event, the determined not to drop the in-
quiry, and had thought of several different expe-
dients for carrying it on. The CountefsofLenox,
convinced that Mary was accessary to the murder of
her son, and thirlting for that vengeance which it was
natural for a mother to demand, had implored E-
lizabcth'sjufRice, and solicited her with many tears,
in her own name, and in her hufband's, to bring
the Scottith Queen to a trial for that crime *. The
parents of the unhappy Prince had a just right to
prefer this accusation; nor could the, who was
their nearest kinswoman, be condemned for listen-
ing to so equitable a demand. Betides, as the Scot-
tilh nobles openly acculed Mary of the fame crime,
and pretended to be able to confirm their charge
by fufficient proof; it would be no difficult matter
to prevail on them, to petition the Queen of Eng-
larnd to take cognizance of their proceedings a-
gainifl their Sovereign ; and it was the opinion of
the Englilh council, that it would be reasonable
to comply with the requests. At the fame time,
the obsolete claim of the tuperiority of England over
Scotland began to be talked of, and, on that account,
it was pretended that the decision of the contest
Ibetween Mary and her fuibjeds belonged of right
to Elizabeth. Rut tho' Elizabeth revolved all there
expedients in her mind, and keps them in reserve
to be made use of as occasion might require, the
wished that the inquiry into Mary's conduA thould
a1ppcar to be undertaken purely in compliance with

SCamd. 41 2. Haynes, 469. t Anders vol. iv. 37.

her

her own demand, and in order to vindicate her in- BooK V-
nocence, and lb long as that appearance could be '
preserved, none of the other expedients were to
be employed.

WHEN Mary confeuted to submit her cause to

Elizabeth, the was far from fufpeting that any bad
consequences could follow, or that any dangerous
pretensions could be founded on her offer. She
expeted that Elizabeth herself would receive, and
examine her defences*,; he meant to confider her
as an equal, for whose fatisfation (he was willing
to explain any part of her conduct that was liable
to censure; not to acknowledge her as a superior,
before whom (he was bound to plead her caule.
But Elizabeth put a very different sense on Mary's
offer. She considered herself as chosen to bejudge
in the controversy between the Scottish Queen and
her fubjeas, and began to act in that capacity.
She proposed to appoint commiflioners to hear the
pleadings of both parties, and wrote to the Regent
of Scotland, to impower proper persons to appear
before them, in his name, and to produce what he
could alledge in vindication of his proceedings a-
gainft his Sovereign.

MARY had, hitherto, relied with unaccountable Mary

credulity on Elizabeth's proftflion of regard, and Vfenddi
expeAed that so many kind speeches would, at lafi, at Eliza-
be accompanied with some suitable adions. But beth'con-
this proposal entirely undeceived her. She plainly dua.
perceived the artifice of Elizabeth's condudt, and
law what a diminution it would be to her own ho-
nour, to appear on a level with her rebellious Tub
jeds, and to lfand together with them at the bar of
a superior and a judge. She retracted the offer which
she had made, and which had been perverted to
a purpose so contrary to her intention. She de-
manded, with more earnestness than ever, to be ad-
mitted into Elizabeth's presence ; and wrote to her,

Anadcf. vol. iv. to,

in

iooi v. in a flrain very different from what the had for-
^ - merly used, and which fully dilcovers the grief and

'568. indignation that preyed on her heart.

" In my

- present situation, says the, I neither will, nor
" can reply to the accusations of my subjeCts. I
'- am ready, of my own accord, and out of friend-
" ship to you, to satisfy your scruples, and to vin-
" dicate my own conduet. My fubjedts are not
" my equals , nor will I, by submitting my cause
" to a judicial trial, acknowledge them to be so. 1
" fled into your arms, as into thole of my nearest
" relation and most perfect friend. I did you
" honour, as I imagined, in chufing you preferably
" to any other Prince, to be the reflorer of an in-
" jured Queen. Was it ever known that a Prince
" was blamed for hearing, in person, the complaints
" of those who appealed to his juflice, against the
" false accusations of their enemies ? You admitted
" into your presence my baffard brother, who had
" been guilty of rebellion , and you deny me that
' honour ! God forbid that 1 should be the occa-
" sion of bringing any slain upon your reputation.
" 1 expected that your manner of treating me
" would have added lufire to it Suffer me either
'* to implore the aid of other Princes, whose deli-
" cacy on this head, will be less, and their resent-
" ment of my wrongs greater ; or let me receive
" from vour hands that aliftance, which it becomes
" you, more than any other Prince, to grant; and
" by that benefit, bind me to yourself in the indif-

* Anders. " soluble tics of gratitude*".
vol.iv.94. T'HIs letter somewhat disconcerted Elizabeth's
June 20. plan, but did not divert her from the prosecution
beth'spre- of it. She laid the matter before the privy Council,
cautionsa- and it was there determined, notwithstanding the
gainaiher. intreaties and remonftrances of the Scottith Queen,

to go on with the inquiry into her conduct, and till
that were finished, it was agreed that Elizabeth could

not,

not, consistently with her own honour, or with the BOOK V.
safety of her government, either give her the aflif-
ance which the demanded, or permit her to retire 56.
out of the kingdom. And left she mhould have an
opportunity of cfcaping, while me resided to near
Scotland, it was thought advifeable to remove her
to rome place, at a greater diflance from the bor-

" Anders.

ders*.

WHIILE the English court was occupied in there Pi.rocd-

deliberations, the Regent did not neglect to improve ings of the
the victory at Langlide. That event was of the Regent a-
utmost impoi tance to him. It not only drove the gai"t the
Queen herself out of the kingdom, but left her ad-

ar.

herentsdifperfed, and without a leader, at his mer-
cy. He seemed reoblved, at frift, to proceed against
them with the utmoit rigour. Six persons of some
diftincion, who had been taken prisoners in the
battle, were tried and condemned to death as rebels
against the King's government. They were led to
the place of execution, but by the powerful inter-
ceflion of Knox they obtained a pardon. Hamil-
ton of Bothwellhaugh was one of the pumber, who
lived to give both the Regent and Knox reason to
repent of this commendable a& of lenity t. t Cald.

SOON after, the Regent marched with an army, vol.ii. 99.

consisting of 4000 horse and 0ooo foot, towards the
weft borders. The nobles in this part of the king-
dom were all of the Queen's faciion ; but as they had
not force fufficient to obftrua his progrels, he must
either have obliged them to submit to the King, or
would have laid waste their lands with fire and
sword. But Elizabeth, whose interest it was to
keep Scotland in confulion, by preserving the ba-
lance between the two parties, and who was endea-
vouring to sooth the Scottith Queen by gentle treat-
ment, interposed at her desire. After keeping the
field two weeks, the Regent, in compliance with the
Englift Ambassador, diiniffed his forces , and an

expedition,

BOOK V. expedition, which might have proved fatal to Iis
- opponents, ended with a few acts of severity.*

,6.'TH rebolution of the English Privy Council with

vol. 2.99. regard to M'lary's person, was loon carried into exe-
Mary car- cution . and, without regarding her remonftrances
ried to or complaints, she was conduAtd to Bolton, a caf-
Bolton tie of Lord Scroop's, on the borders of York(hiret.
+ Anders. I11 this place, her correspondence with her friends
vol iv. 14. in Scotland became more difficult, and any profpedt

of making her escape was entirely cut off. She now
felt hcrfeif to be entirely in Llizabcth's power, and
though treated as yet with the refpetW due to a
VQeen, her real condition was that of a prisoner.
Mary knew what it wa. to be deprived of liberty,
and dreaded it as the worst of all evils. While the
remembrance of her late imprisonment was still
lively, and the terror of a new one filled her mind,
Elizabeth thought it a properjundure to renew her

July zS. former proposition, that the would fiuffer the Regent

and his adherents to be called into England, and
consent to their being heard in defence of their own
conduct. And on her part, (he promired, whatever
Ihould be the ifTue of this inquiry, to employ all
her power and influence towards replacing Mary on

h:t ane her throne, under a few limitations, which were
inquiry be far from being unreasonable. Fear, impatience,
made into despair, as well as this fuothing promise, with which
her con- the proposition was accompanied, induced the Scot-
T Anders. tifh Q0een to comply ~.
vol. iv. IN order to persuade Elizabeth that (he desired no-
,09. thing so much as to render the union between them
Haynes, as cloe as poflible, she fhewed a disposition to relax
Her dilli- f:mewhat in one point, with regard to which, du-
mulation ring all her palt and fublequent misfortunes, she
with re- was uniformly inflexible. She exprefled a great
gard to re- veneration for the liturgy of the church of Eng-
lI'on. land ; the was often present at religious worthip,

according to the rites of the rtformed church ;

made

made choice of a Protestant clergyman to be her Boot V.
chaplain, heard him preach against the errors of ''
Popery with attention and seeming pleasure , and I 68
discovered all the symptoms of an approaching con-
version*. Such was Mary's known and bigotted at- * Anders.
tachment to the Popish religion, that it is impofli- vol. iv.
ble to believe her sincere in this part of her condu; ''3e
nor can any thing mark more strongly the wretch- aynes,
ednefs of her condition, and the excels of her fears, 509.
than that they betrayed her into diflimulation, in
a matter concerning which her sentiments were,
at all other times, scrupulously delicate.

AT this time the Regent called a Parliament, in ug. 8.

order to proceed to the forfeiture of those who re- A Parlia-
fused to acknowledge the King's authority. The meot in
Queen's faction was alarmed, and Argyle and Scotland.
Huntly, whom Mary had appointed her lieute-
nants, the one in the south, and the other in the
north of Scotland, began to assemble forces to ob-
ltrua this meeting. Compaflion for the Queen, and
envy at those who governed in the King's name,
had added To much strength to the party, that the
Regent would have found it difficult to withifand its
efforts. But as Mary had submitted her cause to
Elizabeth, the could not refuse, at her desire, to
command her friends to lay down their arms, and
to wait patiently till matters were brought to a de-
cifion in England. By procuring this ceflation of
arms, Elizabeth afforded as seasonable relief to the
Regent's faaion, as the had formerly given to the
Queen's t. t Anders.

THE Regent, however, would not consent, even vol. iv.

at Elizabeth's request, to put off the meeting of' 2s.
Parliament. But we may ascribe to her influence,
as well as to the eloquence of Maitland, who la-
boured to prevent the one half of his countrymen
from exterminating the other, any appearances of
moderation which this Parliament discovered in its
proceedings. The most violent opponents of the

Vo L. 1. Cc King's

BooK V. King's government were forfeited ; the reft were

'-" allowed still to hope for favour*.

Eli8th No looner did the Queen of Scots submit her
requiles caule to her rival, than Elizabeth required the Re-
the Re- gent to fend to York, deputies properly initruded
gent to for vindicating his condud, in presence of her com-
condua. mitlioncrs. It was not without hesitation and anxi-

ety, that the Regent contented to this meafuire.
His authority was already cftablilhed in Scotland,
and confirmned by Parliament. To fuffcr its vali-
dity now to be called in queflion, and fubjedted to
a foreign iurikldidion, was extremely niortifyiing.
To accuse his Sovereign before strangers, the an-
cient enemies of the Scottith name, was an odious
talk. To fail in this accusation was dangerous; to
succeed in it was difgraccfiul. But the ltrength of
the sdverfe faction daily increased. He dreaded the
interposition of the French King in its behalf. In
his situation, and in a matter which Elizabeth had
so much at heart, her commands were neither to
be disputed, nor disobeyed -t.

Both the THE necetilty of repairing in person to York ad-
Qu. and ded to the ignominy of the step which he was ob-

SppointF liged to take. All his afflciates declined the office ;

fioners. they were unwilling, it would seem, to expose them-

selves to the odium and danger with which it was
easy to fore~ee that the diicharge of it would be at-
tended, unleis he himl:lf conltented to (hare these
in common with them. The Earl of Morton,
Bothwell Biflop of Orkney, Piicaitn Commenda-
tor of DunfeAni!iig, and .1 ord Lindity ' were joined
with him in c .mmillion. Mlacgill of Kankeilor
and Balnaves of l:athill, two eminent Civilians,
George Buchanan his faithful adherent, a man
w\vhoe genius did honour to the age, Maitland, and
several others, were appointed to attend them as
afliflants. Maitlaird owed this difridntion to the
Regent's fear, rathlr than to his affl.dion. He had

*Buch. 371. 1 Buch. 37z. See Append. No XXV.

wai mly

warmly remonfirated againit this measure. He BooK V.
wished his country to continue in friendlhip with g
England, but not to become dependant on that na-
tion. He was desirous of re-establishing the Queen
in rome degree of power, nor inconsistent with that
which the King poffeffed; and the Regent could
nor, with safety, leave behind him a man, whole
views were Co contrary to his own, and who, by his
superior abilities, had acquired an influence in the
nation, equal to that, which others derived from
the antiquity and power of their families'.

MARY impowered Lefly Eilhop of Ross, Lord

Livingflon, Lord Boyd, Lord Herreis, Gavin Ha-
milton Commendator of Kilwinning, Sir John Gor-
don of Lochinvar, and Sir Jamnis Cockburn of Stir-
ling, to appear in her name t.

ELIZABETH nominated Thomas Howard Duke

of Norfolk, Thomas Ratcliff Earl of Sussex, and
Sir Ralph Sadler, her Commiflioners to hear both
parties.

THE fourth of October was the day fixed for The con-

opening the Conference. The great abilities of the ference at
deputies on both sides, the dignity of the judges York.
before whom they were to appear, the high rank
of the persons whose cause was to be heard, and
the importance of the points in dispute, rendered
the whole tranfaation no les illustrious, than it was
singular. The situation in which Elizabeth ap-
peared, on this occasion, strikes us with an air of
magnificence. Her rival, an in~dependant Queen,
and the heir of an ancient race of monarchs, was
a prisoner in her hands, and appeared, by her am-
baffadors, before her tribunal. The Regent of
Scotland, who represented the majefly, and posses-
fed the authority of a King, flood in perfobn at her
bar. And the fate of a kingdom, whole power her

* Buch. 372. Anders. vol. iv. 35,. Melv. 186, i88.
t Andetf. vol. iv. 33.

C c 2z ancellors

BooK V. ancestors had often dreaded but could never rub-
K "' due, was now absolutely at her ditpofal.
vis68of THE views, however, with which the several
V thediffc- parties consented to this conference, and the issue
rent par- to which they expeted to bring it, were extreme-
tics, ly different.

MARY's chief objeA was the recovering her for-

mer authority. This induced her to consent to a
measure, againfl which the had long struggled.
Elizabeth's promises gave her ground for entertain-
ing hopes of being restored to her kingdom; in
order to which, the would have willingly, made
manyconceflions to the King's party, and the in-
fluence of the Englilh QLeen, and her own impa-
tience under her present situation, might have led
her to many more*. The Regent aimed at no-
thing but securing Elizabeth's protetion to his
party, and seems not to have had the most distant
thoughts of coming to any compouition with Mary.
Elizabeth's views were more various, and her
schemes more intricate. She teemed to be full of
concern for Mary's honour, and solicitous that (he
should wipe off the aspersions which blemithed her
charadcer. This the pretended to be the intention
of the conference; amusing Mary, and eluding the
folicitations of the French and Spanish ambaffa-
dors in her behalf by repeated promises of aflifling
her, as soon as the could venture to do so, without
bringing disgrace on herself. But, under this veil
of friendlhip and generosity, Elizabeth concealed
fentimentsof a different nature. She expeded that
the Regent would accure Mary of being accessory
to the murder of her husband She encouraged him,
as far as decency would permit, to take this defpe-
rate fteptf. And as this accusation might terminate
two different ways, the had concerted measures
for her future condut suitable to each of thetc. If'

* Anders. vol. iv. 33. Good. vol. ii. 337. t Anders vol.

iv. 11, 45. Haynes, 487. the

the charge against Mary thould appear to be wellBooz V.
founded, the refoblved to pronounce her unworthy ""'
of wearing a Crown, and to declare that the would 1568"
never burthen her own conscience with the guilt of
an adtion so detestable, as the refioring her to her
kingdom . If it thould happen, that what her * Anders.
acculers alledged, did not amount to a proof ofvol.iv.ir.
guilt, but only of mal-administration, the deter-
mined to set on foot a treaty for restoring her, but
on such conditions, as would render her for ever
dependant on England, and the slave of her own
fubjedst. And as every flep in the progrels oft Id. ibid.
the conference, as well as the final result of it, was 16.
in her own power, the would (till be at liberty to
chufe which of these courses the would hold; or
if there appeared to be any danger or inconveniency
in pursuing either of them, the might protraa the
whole cause by endless delays, and involve it in in-
extricable perplexity.

THE conference, however, was opened with Complaint

much solemnity. But the very firit step discovered of the

 _,. ,

-', , . . * /« i ueen s

it to be Elizabeth's intention to inflame, rather than commiu-
to extinguish the diflentions and animofities among fioners a-
the Scots. No endeavours were used to reconcile aiinft the
the contending parties, or to mollify the fierceness egqent.
of their hatred, by bringing the Queen to offer
pardon for what was past, or her fubjets to pro-
mile more dutiful obedience for the future. On the OAfob. 8.
contrary, Mary's commiflioners were permitted to
prefer a complaint against the Regent and his par-
ty, containing an enumeration of their treasonable
adions, of their seizing her person by force of arms,
committing her to prison, compelling her to resign
the Crown, and making ute of her fon's name to
colour their usurpation of the whole royal autho-
rity. And of all these enormities, they required
such speedy and effedual redress, as the injuries of
one Queen demanded from the justice of another $. t Andcert

vol. iv.5Z.

Cc 3 IT

BooK V. Ir was then expeded that the Regent would

have disclosed the whole circumfiances of that un-

'I56. natural crime, to which he pretended the Queen

had been accessory, and would have produced evi-
dence in support of his charge. But far from ac-
cufing Mary, the Regent did not even answer the
complaints brought against himself. He discovered
a reluctance at the undertaking that office, and
flarted many doubts and scruples, with regard to
which, he demanded to be resolved by Elizabeth

* Haynes, herself*. His reserve and hesitation were no less
478. surprising to the greater part of the English com-

miflioners than to his own associates. They knew
that he could not vindicate his own conduct with-
out charging the murder upon the Queen, and he
had not hitherto shewn any extraordinary delicacy
on that head. An intrigue had been secretly car-
ried on, since his arrival at York, which explains
this mystery.

Intrigues THE Duke of Norfolk was, at that time, the
of Norfolk most powerful and most popular man in England.
with the His wife was lately dead , and he began already to
SRegent. form a projet,'which he afterwards more openly

avowed, of mounting the throne of Scotland, by a
marriage with the Qjeen of Scots. He law the in-
famy which would be the consequence of a public
accusation against Mary, and how prejudicial it
might be to her pretensions to the English fuccef-
sion. In order to save her this cruel mortification,
he applied to Maitland, and expressed his astonish-
ment at feeing a man of Ib much reputation for
-xifdom, concurring with the Regent in a measure
so dithonourable to themselves, to their Queen, and
to their country ; submitting the public transactions
of the nation tb thejudgment of foreigners; and
publilhing the ignominy, and exposing the faults of
their Sovereign, which they were bound, in good
policy, as well as in duty, to conceal and to cover.
It was easy for Maitland, whose sentiments were

* .the

the fame with the Duke's, to vindicate his own Boot V.
conduct. He assured him, that he had employed g
all his credit, to dissuade his countrymen from this '568.
measure; and would flill contribute, to the utmost
of his power, to divert them from it. This en-
couraged Norfolk to communicate the matter to the
Regent. He repeated and ernforced the fame argu-
ments which he had used with Maitland. He warn-
ed him of the danger to which he mutt expose him-
self, by such a violent action as the public accufa-
tion of his Sovereign. Mary would never forgive a
man, who had endeavoured to fix such a brand of
infamy on her charadcer. If the ever recovered
any degree of power, his deftrudion would be in-
evitable, and he would justly merit it at her hands.
Nor would Elizabeth screen him from this, by a
public approbation of his condut. For whatever
evidence of Mary's guilt he might produce, the was
resolved to give no definitive sentence in the cause.
Let him only demand that the matter should be
brought to decision, immediately after hearing the
proof, and he would be fully convinced how false
and insidious her intentions were, and, by confe-
quence, how improper it would be for him to ap-
pear as the accuter of his own Sovereign *. The
candour which Norfolk seemed to discover in these
remonftrances, as well as the truth which they
contained, made a deep impreflion on the Regent.
Hedaily received the strongest atlurances of Mary's
willingness to be reconciled to him, if he abstained
from accusing her of such an odious crime, together
with denounciations of her irreconcileable hatred,
if he adted a contrary part t. All there confidera-
tions concurred in determining him to alter his
purpose, and to make trialof the expedient which
the Duke had fiuggefted.

* Mel. 187. Hayrnes, 573.

" Anders. vol. iv. 77.

Good. vol. i. I 57. Sec Append. No XXVI.

Cc4 HE

c he proceeded farther, whether the Englith commis-

OQober 9. fioners were impowered to declare the Queen guilty,

by a judicial ad ; whether they would promise to
pals sentence, without delay ; whether the Queen
should be kept underfuch restraint, as to prevent her
from disturbing the government now established
in Scotland; and whether Elizabeth, if the ap-
proved of the proceedings of the King's party,

* Anders. would engage to proted it for the future *. The
vol.iv. s. paper containing there demands was signed by

himself alone, without communicating it to any

-Ibi. s6. of his attendants, except Maitland and Melvil t.

SMel9. Nothing could appear more natural than the Re-

gent's solicitude, to know on what footing he flood.
To have venturedon a flep so uncommon and dan-
gerous, as the accusing his Sovereign, without
previously ascertaining that he might take it with
safety, would have been unpardonable imprudence.
But Elizabeth, who did not exped that he would
have moved any such difficulty, had not impowered
her commillioners to give him that fatisfadtion which
he demanded. It became necessary to transmit
the articles to herself, and by the light in which
Norfolk placed them, it is easy to fee that he with-
ed that they thould make no flight impression on
Elizabeth and her Ministers. " Think not the
" Scots, said he, over-fcrupulous or precise. Let
" us view their condud, as we would with our
" own to be viewed in a like situation. The game
" they play is deep ; their estates, their lives, their
" honour are at flaked It is now in their own power
" to be reconciled to their Queen, or to offend her
" irrecoverably, and in a matter of so much im-
" portance, the utmost degree of caution is not ex-

t Anders. " ceffive 1.
vol. iv.77. WHI LE the Engli(h commiflioners waited for

fuller inftruAions with regard to the Regent's de-

mands,

mands, he gave in an answer to the complaint, Boa, V.
which had been offered in name of the Scottish
Queen. It was expressed in terms perfetly con- '"
formable to the fyftcm which he had at that time
adopted. It contained no insinuation of the Queen's
being accessory to the murder of her husband , the
bitterness of stile peculiar to the age was confidera-
bly abated ; and though he pleaded, that the infa-
my of the marriage with Bothwell, made it necef-
fary to take arms in order to dissolve it; though
Mary's attachment to a man so odious justified the
keeping her for some time under restraint; yet no-
thing more was said on there fubjets than was
barely requisite in his own defence. The Queen's
commiflioners did not fail to reply*. But while Oftob. 17.
the article with regard to the murder remained un-* Anders.
touched, these were only fkirmithes at a difiance, 64, go.
of no consequence towards ending the conteff, and
were little regarded by Elizabeth or her commis-
fioners.

THE conference had, hitherto, been conduaed Thecon-

in a manner which disappointed Elizabeth's views, ferencere-
and produced none of there discoveries which the moved to
had expeded. The distance between York and fter,
London, and the necessity of consulting her upon
every difficulty which occurred, consumed much
time. Norfolk's negociation with the Scottish Re-
gent, however secretly carried on, was not, in all
probability, unknown to a Princess so remarkable
for her sagacity in penetrating the designs of her
enemies, and feeing through their deepefl fchemest. t Good.
Instead, therefore, of returning any answer to the vol.ii.i(o.
Regent's demands, The resolved to remove the con- .A"d.vol
ference to Wefiminfter, and to appoint new corn- m,. a4.
miffioners, in whom the could more absolutely con-
fide. Both the Scottith Queen and the Regent tHaynes,
were brought, without difficulty, to approve of 484. An-
this resolution t. derl.vol.iv,

\v 94'

'-- of her commitlioners during the conference at York,
'56S. and how, by the tirength of their arguments, they

confounded her adverlaries, and silenced all their

* Good. cavils *. The dispute flood, at that time, on a
vol.ii.S 86, footing, which rendered her victory not only ap-
as4, 35o. parent, but easy. Her participation of the guilt

of the King's murder was the only circumfiance,
which could jutfify the violent proceedings of her
tiibjccdts. And while they induflrioufly avoided
mentioning that, her cause gained as much as that
of her adverfarics loft by lupprelfing tins capital
argument.

ELIZABETH reiolved that Mary ihould not enjoy

the fame advantage in the conference to be held at
WVeflminflter. She deliberated with the utmost anx-
iety, how the might overcome the Regent's fcru-
ples, and pcrfuade him to accule the Queen. She
considered of the molf proper method for bringing
Mary's commillioncrs to anfwcr such an accusation ;
and as Ihe foresaw that the promises with which it
was necefary to allure the Regent, and which it
was impollible to conceal from the Scottish Queen,
would naturally cxafperate her to a great degree,
she determined to guard her more narrowly than
ever ,; and though Lord Scroop had given her no
reason to diliruft his vigilance or fidelity, yet be-
cause he was the Duke of Norfolk's brother-in-law,
the thought it prope'r to remove the Queen as loon
as pollible to Tuthbury in Staffordfhire, and com-

tHaynes, mit her to the keeping of the Earl of Shrewsbury,
4s-. to whom that canfle belonged t.
Mary'sfuf- MARY began to fufped the defignof this second
picions of conference; and notwithstanding the fatisfadion she
Elizabeth's
intentions. exprceted at fceing her cause taken more immediate-
Otob. i.ly under the Queen's own eye $, she framed her
$ Andert. inftrudtions to her commillioners, in fuich a man-
vol. iv. 9;. ner,

ner, as to avoid being brought under the necellity Boor V,
of answering the accul'arion of her fubjeAs, if they -
(hould be fodefperate as to exhibit one againfl her*. , 6.
These suspicions were soon confirmed by a circum- vol.ii.349-
fiance extremely mortifying. The Regent having
arrived at London, in order to be prelent at the
conference, was immediately admitted into Eliza-
beth's presence, and received by her, not only with
reCpet, but with affecion. This Maryjuflly con-
fidered as an open declaration of that Qgeen's par-
tiality towards her adversaries. In the first emo- Nov. a,.
tions of her relentment, (he wrote to her commit- Claims a
fioners, and commanded them to complain, in the perlonal
presence of the Englilh nobles, and before the am- udipace
bafladors of foreign Princes, of the usage she had beth.
hitherto met with, and the additional injui ies which
the had reason to apprehend. Her rebellious Cub.
jeds were allowed access to the Queen, the was ex-
cluded from her presence ; they enjoyed full liberty,
the languished under a long imprisonment ,; they
were encouraged to accule her, in defending herself
the laboured under every disadvantage. For there
reasons the once more renewed her demand, of be-
ing admitted into the Queen's presence , and if that
were denied, the inftrudted them to declare, that
the recalled the consent (he had given to the con-
ference at Westminster, and protested, that what-
ever was done there, thould be held to be null and
invalid t.

" Good.

THIS, perhaps, was the most prudent resolution vol. ii s4

Mary could have taken. The pretences on which
(he declined the conference were plausible, and the
juncture for offering them well choten. But either the
Queen's letter did not reach her commillio,ners in due
time, or they Cuffered themselves to be deceived by
Elizabeth's profeflions of regard for their Mistress,
and consented to the opening of the conference S. Anders:

To the commiflioners who had appeared in her vol.iii. 25.

name at York, Elizabeth now added Sir Nicholas

Bacoon Nov. a5.

S- del and Leiceiter, Lord Clinton, and Sir William

. Anders Cecil*. The difficulties which obflruded the pro-
vol. iv. 99. ceedings at York were quickly removed. A fatif-

fying answer was given to the Regent's demands ,
nor was he so much disposed to hesitate, and raise
objections as formerly. His negociation with Nor-
folk had been discovered to Morton by some of
Mary's attendants, and he had communicated it to

t Melv. Cecil t. His perional fatety, as well as the conti-
191. nuance of his power, depended on Elizabeth. By

favouring Mary, the might, at any time, ruin him ;
and by a question which the arrfully started, con-
cerning the person who had a right, by the law of
Scotland to govern the kingdom during a minority,
the let him lee, that even without refltring the
Queen, it was an easy matter for her to deprive

( Haynes, him of the supreme diretion of affairs :. There
484. considerations, which were powerfully seconded by

molt of his attendants, at length determined the
Regent to produce his accusation against the Queen.

The Re- HE endeavoured to lessen the infamy, with which

gent - he was sensible this acion would be attended, by
Queen of protesting, that it was with the utmost reluctance
being ac- he undertook this disagreeable task ; that his party
ceiTory to had long fuffered their condua to be misconstrued,
bands ~ and had borne the worst imputations in silence, ra-
murder. ther than expose the crimes of their Sovereign to

the eyes of igrangers , but that now the insolence
and importunity of the adverse faction forced them
to publith, what they had hitherto, though with

j Anders. loss to themselves, endeavoured to conceal §. There
vol. iv. pretexts are decent ; and had the party discovered

Ss-. any delicacy or reserve, with regard to the Queen's

adions, in the reft of their conduc, might have
passed for the real principles by which they were
influenced. But their former treatment to the Qqeen

renders

renders it impoflible to give any credit of there pro- BooK V.
feflions. And the Regent, it is plain, was drawn g
by the neceflity of his affairs, and Elizabeth's ar-
tifices, into a lituation, where no liberty of choice
was left him , and was obliged either to acknow-
ledge himself to be guilty of rebellion, or to charge
Mary with having committed murder.

THE accusation itfelfwas conceived in the strong-

eft terms. Mary was charged, not only with hav-
ing consented to the murder, but with being accef-
fory to the contrivance and execution of it. Both-
well, it was pretended, had been screened from the
pursuits ofjuftice by her favour ; and the had form-
ed designs no less dangerous to the life of the young
Prince, than fubverlive of the liberties and confti-
tution of the kingdom. If any of there crimes
thould be denied, an offer was made, to produce
the most ample and undoubted evidence in confir-
mation of the charge*. * Anders.

AT the next meeting of the commiflioners, the vol. iv.

Earl of Lenox appeared before them; and after be-

Nv. 29.

wailing the tragical and unnatural murder of his
son, he implored Elizabeth's justice against the
Queen of Scots, whom he accused, upon oath, of
being the author of that crime, and produced pa-
pers, which, as he pretended, would make good
what he alledged. The entrance of a new ador on
the stage, Co opportunely, and at a juncture to cri-
tical, can scarce be imputed to chance. This con-
trivance was manifestly Elizabeth's, in order to in-
creare, by this additional accusation, the infamy of
the Scottish Queen t. t Id. ibid.

MARY'S commiflioners expressed the utmost fur- Her com-

prize and indignation at the Regent's presumption, miilioncrs
in loading the Queen with calumnies, which, as they refute to
affirmed, she had Co little merited. But, instead of nwer.
attempting to vidicate her honour, by a reply to Decnb.
the charge, they had recourse to an article in their

instructions,

-- mention in its proper place. They demanded an
'568. audience of Elizabeth and having renewed their

Miftrefs's requell, of a personal interview, they
protelted, if that were denied her, againll all the

* Anders future proceedings of the commillioners*. A pro-
vol. iv. teilation of this nature, offeredjuft at the critical
03, I58- time, when such a bold acculation had been prefer-

red againifI Mary, and when the proofs in support
of it were ready tobe examined, gave reason to sus-
ped that ihe dreaded the event of that examination.
This huipicion received the fIrongeft confirmation
from another circumflance ; Ross and Herreis, be-
fore they were introduced to Elizabeth, in order to
make this protettation, privately acquainted Leicef,
ter and Cecil, that as their Miltrefs had, from the
beginning, ,ifcovered an inclination towards bring-
ing the differences between herself and her fubjeds
to an amicable accommodation, so ihe was i1ill de-
firous, notwithstanding the Regent's audacious ac-
cufation, that they Ihould be terminated in that

-t Ibid. iv. manner t.
,34. SUCH moderation is scarce compatible with the
Cabala, firong resentment, which calumniated innocence na-
i'7- turally feels; or with that eagerness to vindicate it-

self which it always discovers. In Mary's situation,
an offer so ill-timed must be considered as a con-
feflion of the weakness of her cause. The known
character of her commifioners exempts them from
the imputation of fo!ly, or the suspicion of treache-
ry. Some secret convicion, that the conduct of
their Mifrefs could not bear so ftri& a scrutiny,
seems to be the most probable motive of this im-
prudent proposal, by which they endeavoured to
avoid it.

Dec. 4 IT appeared in this light to Elizabeth, and as-

forded her a pretence for rejeting it. She told
Mary's commiflioners, that, in the prefentjuntQure, nothing

nothing could be Co dishonourable to their Mistress, BooK V.
as an accommodation ; and that the Matter would
seem to be huddled up in this manner, merely to 56
suppress dilcovtries, and to hide her shame; nor
was it poflible that ihe could be admitted, with any
decency, into her presence, while the lay under the
infamy of such a public accusation.

UPON this repulse, Mary's commiflioners with-

drew; and as they had declined answering, there
seemed now to be no further reason for the Regent's
producing the proofs in support of his charge. But
without getting there into her hands, Elizabeth's
schemes were incompleat, and her artifice for this
purpose was as mean, but as fuccefsful as any the had
hitherto employed. She commanded her commis-
fioners to testify her indignation and displeasure at
the Regent's presumption, in forgetting so far the
duty of a fubjed, as to accuse his Sovereign of such
atrocious crimes. He, in order to regain the good
opinion of such a powerful protedrefs, offered to
shew that his accusations were not malicious, nor
ill-grounded. Then were produced, and delivered
to the Engl;fh commiflioners, the ads of the Scot-
tifh Parliament in confirmation of the Regent's au-
thority, and of the Queen's resignation ; the con-
feilions of the persons executed for the King's mur-
der , and the fatal casket which contained the let-
ters, sonnets, and contracs, that have been already
mentioned.

ELIZABETH having got there into her poffellion, Elizabeth

began to lay aside the exprellions of friendship and treats Ma-
refped which the had hitherto used it all her letters ry with
to the Scottilh Qieen. She now wrote to her in gou'r."
such terms, as if the presumptions of her guilt had
amounted almoll to certainty ; mhe blamed her for
refusing to vindicate herself from an accusation
which could not be left unanl\\ered, without a ma-
nifelt injury to ,er characer ; and plainly intimat-
ed, that unieit that were done, no change would be

Booc V. be made in her present situation*. She hoped that
'- v tfuch a discovery of her sentiments would intimidate
,. Mary, who was Icarce recovered from the mhock of

vol. iv. the Regent's attack on her reputation, and force
J79Y, 83. her to confirm her resignation of the Crown, to ra-
Good. vol. tify Murray's authority as Regent, and to consent
ii. z thar both herself and her 0on should reside in Eng-

land, under her protection. This (cheme Elizabeth
had much at heart ; (he proposed it both to Mary
and to her commiflioners, and neglected no argu-
ment, nor artifice, that could pollibly recommend
it. Mary saw how fatal this would prove to her
reputation, to her pretensions, and even to her per-
fonal safety. She rejeed it without hesitation.
' Death, laid the, is les dreadful than such an
" ignominious step. Rather than give away, with
" my own hands, the Crown which descended to
'' me from my ancestors, 1 will part with life; but
" the last words I utter, (hall be those of a Queen

t Haynes, " of Scotland t.
497. AT the fame time the seems to have been sensible
e Ap- how open her reputation lay to censure, while fie
xxvII. fiffered such a public accusation to remain unan-
Good. vol. fwered ; and though the conference was now dif-
ii. 274, solved, (he impowered her commiflioners to present
30' a reply to the allegatibns of her enemies, in which

(he denied, in the fitrongeft terms, the crimes im-

Dec. 24. putcd to her ,; and recriminated upon the Regent

and his party, by accusing them of having deviled

t Good. and executed the murther of the King 1. The
2. 285. Regent and his associates a(Terted their innocence

with great warmth. Mary continued to infifi on a
personal interview, a condition which the knew

§ Ibid. would never be granted §. Elizabeth urged her
2s3. to vindicate her own honour. But it is evident
Cabala, from the delays, the evasions, and subterfuges, to
'57- which both Queens had recourse by turns, that

AMary avoided, and Elizabeth did not desire to make
any further progrcfs in the inquiry. TuH

THE Regent was now impatient to return into Boon V.

Scotland, where his adversaries were endeavouring,
in his ablence, to raise some commotions. Before Fc 9.
he let out, he was called into the Privy Council, Difiniffes
to receive a final declaration of Elizabeth's senti- the Regent
ments. Cecil acquainted him, in her name, that without
on one hand nothing had been objected to his con- cpritnerp
du&, which the could reckon detrimental to his condemn-
honour, or inconsistent with his duty ; nor had he, ing his
on the other hand, produced any thing against his conduft.
Sovereign, on which the could found an unfavour-
able opinion of her acions ; and for this reason,
the relolved to leave all the affairs of Scotland,
precifecly in the fame situation, in which the had
found them, at the beginning of the conference.
The (Queen's commiflioners were diiiniffed much G. ,
in the fame manner *. 2 1d.

AFTER the attention of both nations had been 333.

fixed To earnestly on this conference, upwards of
four months, such a conclusion of the whole ap-
pears, at firit fight, trifling and ridiculous. No-
thing, however, could be more conformable to
Elizabeth's original views, or more subservient to
her future schemes. Notwithifanding her seeming But secret-
partiality, the had no thoughts of continuing neu- lyfupports
ter; nor was the at any loss on whom to befftow his party.
her protection. Before the Regent left London,
the supplied him with a considerable fum of money,
and engaged to filpport the King's authority to the
utmost of her power t. Mary, by her own con-
dtuA, fortified this resolution. Enraged at the re- t Id. 213.

Carte, j.

peated instances of Elizabeth's artifice and deceit, 478
which the had discovered during the progress of
the conference, and despairing of ever obtaining
any succour from her, the endeavoured to rouze
her own adherents in Scotland to arms, by impu-
ting such dhfigns to Elizabeth and Murray, as could
not fail to inspire every Scotchman with indignation.

Vuo.. .) d Mutrajy,

, BOOK V. Murray, she pretended, had agreed to convey the
x3 Prince her son into England ; to surrender to Eliza-

S'69" both the placesof greatest strength in the kingdom,

and to acknowledge the dependance of the Scottish
upon the English nation. In return for this, he
was to be declared the lawful heir of the Crown of
Scotland i and, at the fame time, the queflion with
regard to the English fuccellion was to be decided
in favour of the Earl of Hartford, who had promised
to marry one of Cecil's daughters. An account of
these wild and chimerical projeacs was spread in-
duftrioufly among the Scots. E Iizabeth, perceiving
it was calculated on purpose to bring her govern-
ment into difreputation, laboured to destroy its es-
sects, by a counter-proclamation, and became
more disgusted than ever with the Scottish Queen .

Efforts of THE Regent, on his return, found the kingdom
Mary's ad- in the utmost tranquillity. But the rage of the
berenrs a-
gainaf him. Queen's adherents, which had been fiufpended in

expedation that the conference in England would
terminate to her advantage, was now ready to
break out with all the violence of civil war. They
were encouraged, too, by the appearance of a lead-
er, whose high quality and pretensions intitled him
to great authority in the nation. This was the
Duke of Chatelherault, who had resided for some
years in France, and was now sent over by that
court, with a fminall supply of money, in hopes
that the presence of the firit nobleman in the king-
dom would strengthen the Queen's faction. Eli-
zabeth had detained him in England, for frome
months, under various pretences, but was obliged

Febr. z2. at l.!it to fuffer him to proceed on his journey. Ee-

fore his departure, Mary invcfted him with tihe
high dignity of her Lieutenant General in Scotland,
together

, ith the fantaflic tide of her adopted fa-

ther.

THE

* IayneF, 5co, 50'3. See Append. No XXVIIIl.

THE Regent did not give him time to form his Book

party into any regular body. He assembled an ar-
my, with his usual expedition, and marched to Hi,5s
GlaSgow. The followers of Argyll and Huntly, rous con
who composed the chief part of the Queen's sac- duabrea
tion, lying in very distant corners of the kingdom, herparty
and many of the Duke's dependants having fallen,
or having been taken in the battle of Langfide, the
spirit and firength of his adherents was totally bro-
ken, and an accommodation with the Regent was
the only thing, which could prevent the deftruion
of his estate and vassals. This was effeted without
difficulty; and on no unreasonable terms. The
Duke promised to acknowledge the authority both
of the King and of the Regent , and to claim no
jurifdition in consequence of the commission, which
he had received from the Qjueen. The Regent
bound himself to repeal the at, which had paifed
for attainting several of the Queen's adherents ; to
reffore all, who would submit to the King's govern-
ment, to the poffeffion of their estates and honours;
and to hold a Convention, wherein all the differen-
ces between the two parties should be fettled by
mutual consent. The Duke gave hostages for his
faithful performance of the treaty ; and, in token
of their sincerity, he and Lord Herreis accompanied
the Regent to Stirling, and visited the young King.
The Regent set at liberty the prisoners taken at
Langfide *. *Cabbala,

ARaoYLL and Huntly refused to be included in I61-

this treaty. A secret negociation was carrying on, Crawfu.o
in England, in favour of the captive Queen, with Mee.to6.
so much tuccefs, that her affairs began to wear a
better afped, and her return into her own kingdom
seemed to be an event not very distant. The
French King had lately obtained fitch advantages
over the Hugonots, that the extinaion of that par-
ty appeared to be inevitable, and France, by re-

L) d 2 covcring

loon V. co;ecring domcftic tranquillity, would be no longer
3 prevented from proteting her friends in Britain.

569 . These circumstances not only influenced Argyll

and Huntly, but made lb deep an impreflion on
the Duke, that he appeared to be wavering and
irrefolu;e, and plainly discovered that he wished to
evade the accomplishment of the treaty. The
Regent saw the danger of" allowing the Duke to
shake himself looie, in this manner, from his en-
gagements ; and instantly formed a retolution equal-
ly bold, and politic. He commanded his guards
to fcize Chatelherault in his own house in Edin-
burgh, whither he had come, in order to attend
the Convention agreed upon; and, regardlefseither
of his dignity as the firtt nobleman in the kingdom,
and next heir to the Crown, or of the promises of
personal security, on which he had relied, com-
mitted him and Lord Herreis, prisoners to the caltle
of Edinburgh *. A blow so fatal and unexpected

April 16. dilpirited the party. Argyll submitted to the King's

government, and made his peace with the Regent,
on very easy terms; and Huntly, being left alone,
was at last obliged to lay down his arms.

July 21. SOON after, Lord Boyd returned into Scotland,
in ropf and brought letters to the Regent both from the
of Mary English and Scottish Qjeens. A Convention was
rejected. held at Perth, in order to confider them. Eliza-

beth's letter contain.-d three different propofalswith
regard to Mary , that Ihe should either be restored
to the full poflflion of her former au;thority ; or
be admitted to reign jointly with the King her Ton ;
or at lealt be allowed to reside in Scotland, in aome
d:cent retirement, without any share in the ad-
nrinitlration of government. There overtures
were extorted by the importunity of Fenelon the
French amb.alhdor, and have tome appearance of
being favourainbl to the captive Qicen. They

* Ciawf. Men. I i. M:v. o202.

were,

were, however, perfectly suitable to Elizabeth's BooK V.
general iyftem with regard to Scottilh affairs. A- %-%.m
mong propositions so unequal and disproportionate, 1569.
she calily law where the choice would fall. The
two former were rejeced ; and long delays muff
necessarily have intervened, and many difficulties
have arisen, before every circumstance relative to
the last could be finally adjusted .*. 0 -

M aRY in her letter, demanded that her marri- 230.

age with Bothwell Ihould be reviewed by the pro-
perjudges, and if found invalid, Ihould be dissolved
by a legal sentence of divorce. This fatal marri-
age was the principal source of all the calamities she
had endured for two years ; a divorce was the
only tiling which could repair the injuries, her re-
putaion had fuffered by that flep. It was her in-
tcrefl to have proposed it early ; and it is not easy
to account for her long lilence with refped to this
point. Her particular motive for proposing it, at Norfolk's
this time, began to be so well known, that the fchemefor
demand was rejected by the Convention of eflates. nmarrving
They imputed it not so much to any abhorrence ofthe Q1eerz
Bothwell, as to her eagerness to conclude a mar- of scts
riage with the Duke of Norfolk.

THIs marriage was the object of that fcret ne-

gociation in England, which we have already men-
tioned ; but, like all those concerted for the relief
of the Queen of Scots, it ended tragically. The
fertile and projecing genius of Maitland first con-
ceived this scheme. During the conFerence at York,
he communicated it to the Duke himself, and to
the Bishop of Ross. The former readily cloued
with a scheme, so flattering to his ambition. The
latter confidetcd it as a probable device for refloring
his Miflrcfs to liberty, and replacing her on her
tlhrone. Nor was Mary, with whom Norfolk held
a currefpondence, by means of his fitter Lady

D d 3 Scroop,

BooK V. Scroup, averle from a measure, which would have
iv-'reflored her to her kingdom, with so much fplen-

1569. dor *. The sudden removal of the conference from

York to Weftminflter suspended, but did not break
off this intrigue. Maitland and Ross were still the
Duke's prompters, and his agents ; and many let-
ters and love-tokens were exchanged between him
and the Q.een of Scots.

Conceals BUT as he could not hope, that under an admi-
it froEnli- nifiration so vigilant as Elizabeth's, such an intrigue

could be kept long concealed, he attempted to de-
ceive her by the appearance of openness and can-
dor, an artifice which seldom fails of fuccels. He
mentioned to her the rumour, which was spread
of his marriage with the Scottish Queen ; he com-
plained of it as a groundless calumny; and dif-
claimed all thoughts of that kind, with many ex-
preflions full of contempt, both for Mary's charac-
ter, and dominions. Jealous as Elizabeth was of
every thing relative to the Queen of Scots, she
seems to have credited there profeflions |-. But,
itifead of discontinuing the negociation, he renew-
ed it with greater vigour, and admitted into it new
afbciates. Among these was the Regent of Scot-
land. He had given great offence to Norfolk, by
Ills public accusation of the Queen, in breach of
the concert into which he had entered at York.
He was then ready to return into Scotland. The
influence of the Duke, in the North of England,
was great. The Earls of Northumberland and
'Weflmorland, the molt powerful noblemen in that
part of the kingdom, threatened to revenge upon
the Regent, the injuries he had done his Sovereign.
In order to secure his safe retreat, he addrefced
Ihimtlif to Norfolk, and, after reome apology for his
past conduct, he insinuated that the Duke's scheme
of marrying the Queen his fifler was no lc-fs ac-

* Cand. 419. Hayncs, C73. State Trials, I. 73.
"t Haynes, $74. State Trials, i. 79, 80. ceptable

ceptable to him, than beneficial to both kingdoms ; BooK V.
and that he would concur, with the utmost ardor, C">
in promoting so desirable an event . Norfolk »Ander.
heard him with the credulity, natural to those, who 3. 34.
are paflionately bent upon any design. He wrote
to the two Earls to desist from any hofftile attempt
against Murray, and to that he owed his palfage
through the Northern Counties, without diflur-
bance.

ENcOURAGED by his success in gaining the Re- Gains the

gent, he next attempted to draw the English nobles consent of
to approve his delign. The nation began to def- theEngli'h
pair of Elizabeth's marrying. Her jealousy kept nobls.
the question with regard to the right of fuccellion
undecided. The memory of the civil wars, which
had desolated England for more than a century, on
account of the diiputed titles of the houses of York
and Lancaster, was still recent. Almost the whole
ancient nobility had perithed, and the nation itself
had been brought to the brink of deftruaion, in
that unhappy contest. The Scottish Queen, though
her right of fucceflion was generally held to be un-
doubted, might meet with formidable competitors.
She might marry a foreign and a Popish Prince,
and bring both liberty and religion into danger.
But, by marrying her to an Englishman, a zealous
Proteflant, the most powerful and most uiniverfally
beloved of all the nobles, an effeaual remedy feenm-
ed to be provided against all these evils. Tile great-
er part of the Peers, either diretly or tacitly, ap-
proved of it, as a salutary projed. The Earls of
Arundel, Pembroke, Leicester, and Lord Lumley
fiubfcribed a letter to the Scottish Queen, written
with Leicefter's hand, in which they warmly re-
commended the match, but infitled, by way of
preliminary, on Mary's promise, that filhe should at-
tempt nothing, in consequence of her pretensions to
the English Crown, prcjudicial to Elizabeth or to

Dd4 her

BooK V. her posterity; that the (hould consent to a league
--" offenfive and defensive between the two kingdoms ;

1569. that the should confirm the present eftablifhmentotf

religion in Scotland; and receive into favour such
of her fubjeAs as had appeared in armsagainft her.
Upon her agreeing to the marriage, and ratifying
these articles, they engaged that the English nobles
would not only concur in refforing her, immediate-
ly, to her own throne, but in securing to her that
of England, in reversion. Mary readily consented
to all there proposals, except the second, with re-
gard to which, ihe demanded bome time for con-
fulting her ancient ally the French King *.

'I HE whole of this negociation was industriously

concealed from Elizabeth. Her jealousy of the
Scottish Queen was well known, nor could it be
expeded, that the would willingly come intb a
measure, which tended to visibly to save the repu-
tation, and to increase the power of her rival. But,
in a matter of so much consequence to the nation,
the taking a few steps without her knowledge,
could scarce be reckoned criminal; and while every

'erfon concerned, even Mary and Norfolk them-
ielves declared that nothing should be concluded
without obtaining her content, the duty and allegi-
ance of fibjeds seemed to be fully preserved. The
greater part of the nobles regarded the matter in
this light. Those who conduced the intrigue, had
tarther and more dangerous views. They Taw the
advantages which Mary procured by this treaty,
to be present and certain; and the execution of
the promises vwhich (he came under, to be distant
and uncertain. They had early communicated their
icheme to the Kings of France and Spain, and ob-
tained their approbation -. A treaty, concerning
which they conulted foreign Princes, while they
concealed it ifom their own Sovereign, could not

* Andcrl vol. iii. 5i. Canid. 420. - Andcrf vol. iii. 6t. bc

be deemed innocent. They hoped, however, that Boor V.
the union of so many nobles would render it necef- -"-
fary for Elizabeth to comply; they flattered them- ' 69"
selves, that a combination so firong would be al-
together irresistible; and such was their confidence
of fuccels, that when a plan was concerted, in the
north of England, for rescuing Mary out of the
hands of her keepers, Norfolk, who was afraid that
if she recovered liberty, her sentiments in his fa-
vour might change, used all his interest to difluade
the conspirators hom attempting it *.

IN this situation did the affair remain, when Lord

Boyd arrived from England; and, betides the let-
ters which he produced publickly, brought others
in cyphers from Norfolk and Throgmorton to the
Regent, and to Maitland. These were full of the
mofi sanguine hopes. The whole nobles of Eng-
land concurred, said they, in favouring the design.
Every preliminary was adjusted; nor was it pofli-
ble that a scheme Co deep laid, conducted with so
much art, and supported both by power and by
numbers, could miscarry, or be defeated in the ex-
ecution. Nothing now was wanting, but the con-
cluding ceremony. It depended on the Regent to
hasten that, by procuring a sentence of divorce,
which would remove the only obitacle that stood in
the way. This was expected of him, in consequence
of his promise to No folk , and if he regarded ei-
ther his interest or his fame, or even his safety, he
would not fail to fulfil these engagements f.

BUT the Regent was now in very ditiTrent cir-

cumitances, from thole which had formerly indu-
ced him to afrfed an approbation of Norfolk's
schemes. He saw that the downfal of his own pow-
er muff be the firif consequence of the Duke's fuc-
cess. And if the Queen, who considered him as
the chief author of all her misfortunes, flhould re-

* Camd, 420. 1 Hayncs, 520z Spots. 23o. See Ap-

pendix, No XXIX.

cover

BooK V.cover her ancient authority, he could neverexpect
'--A favour, nor scarce hope for impunity. No wonder

1569. he declined a step so fatal to himself, and which

would have established the grandeur of another on
the ruins of his own. This refusal occasioned a de-
lay. But, as every other circumstance was fettled,
the Biflhop of Ross, in name of his Mistress, and
the Duke, in person, declared, in presence of the
French Ambassador, their mutual consent to the
marriage, and a contrad to this purpose was signed,
and entrufled to the keeping of the Ambassador *

Au-. 3. THE intrigue was now in lb many hands, that it
dilcovers could no; long remain a secret. It began to be whif-
theDuke's percd at c,.-irt; and E izabeth calling the Duke in-
delign and to her prelence, exprefled the utmost indignation at
defeats it. his conduct. and charged him to lay aside all thoughts

of proof)ccuting such a dangeroys design. Soon as-
ter, Leicester, who perhaps had countenanced the
project with no other intention, revealed the whole
circumstances of it to the Qieen. Pembroke, A-
rundel, Lumley, and Throgmorton were confined,
and examined. Mary was watched more narrow-
ly than ever ,; and Hastings Earl of Huntington,
who pretended to dispute with the Scottish Queen,
her right to the ficcellion, being joined in commis-
sion with Shrewsbury, rendered her imprisonment
more intolerable, by the excess of his vigilance and
rigour +. The Scottith Regent, threatened with
Elizabeth's displeasure, meanly betrayed the Duke;
put his letters in her hands; and furnished all the
intelligence in his power t. The Duke himself re-
tired first to Howard-houfe, and then, in con-
tempt of a fiummons to appear before the Privy
Council, fled to his feat in Norfolk. Intimidated
by the imprisonment of his associates ; coldly re-
ceived by his friends in that county; unprepared
for a rebellion ; and unwilling perhaps to rebel;

* Carte, vol. iii. 486. t Haynes, 525, 5~6, 530, 532.
f See Append. No XXX. he

le hesitated for some days, and at last obeyed a BooK V.
second call, and repaired to Windsor. He was first 7"''
kept as a prisoner in a private house, and then sent Ot9 3-
to the Tower. After being confined there upwards
of nine months, he was released upon his humble
fubmillion to Elizabeth, giving her a promile, on
his allegiance, to hold no farther correspondence
with the Scottish Queen *. During the progrels of * Haynes,
Norfolk's negociations, the Queen's partizans in 520, 597.
Scotland, who made no doubt of their issuing in
her reloration to the throne, with an increase of
authority, were wonderfully elevated. Maitland Mairland
was the foul of that party, and the person, whofl Pbie0on-
adivity and abi!ities the Regent chiefly dreaded. Regent.
He had laid the plan of that intrigue, which had
kindled such combuflion in England. He conti-
nued to foment the spirit of difaffedion in Scotland,
and had ftduced from the Regent Lord Home,
Kirkaldy, an'd several of his former associates.
While he enjoyed liberty, the Regent could not
reckon his own power secure. For this reason, he
employed Captain Crawfurd, one of his creatures,
to accuse him of being accessory to the murder of
the King; and under that pretence carried him a
prisoner to Edinburgh. He would foonhave been
brought to trial, but was saved by the friendship of
Kirkaldy, governor of the cafile, who, by pretend-
ing a warrant for that purpose from the Regent,
got him out of the hands of the person, to whole
care he was committed, and conduced him into
the castle, which, from that time, was entirely un-
der Maitland's command. The loss of a place of
lb much importance, and the defection of a man
() eminent for military skill as Kirkaldy, brought
the Regent into rome ditieputation, tor which,
lowever, the fliccefs of his ally Elizabeth abun-
lantly compensated.

THE

Boot V. THE intrigue carried on for refloring the Scot-
"-" tifh Queen to liberty having been discovered, and
Abel- dilappointed, an attempt was made, to the fame
lion a- purpolt, by force of arms; but with no better
gainft Eli- success. The Earls of Northumberland and Weft-
zabeth by morland, though little diflinguifhed by their per-
adryezs fonal merit, were two of the most ancient and pow-

erful of the English peers. Their estates in the
northern counties were great, and they poffeffed
that influence over the inhabitants, which was he-
reditary in the popular and martial families of Percy
and of Nevil. They were both attached to the Po-
pish religion, and discontented with the court,
where new men, and a new system prevailed. Ever
since Mary's arrival in England, they had warmly
cfpoufed her interell, and zeal for popery, oppofi-
tion to the court, and commiseration of her fuffer-
ings, had engaged them in different plots for her
relief. Notwithstanding the vigilance of her keep-
ers, they held a close correspondence with her,

* Haynes, and communicated to her all their designs *. They
S95" were privy to Norfolk's schemes; but the caution
Murdin, with which he proceeded did not suit their ardour

' 6z, and impetuosity. The liberty of the Scottilh

Queen was not their sole object. They aimed at
bringing about a change in the religion, and a
revolution in the government of the kingdom.
For this reason, they solicited the aid of the King
of Spain, the avowed and zealous patron of Po-
pery in that age. Nothing could be more delight-
ful to the reftleis spirit of Philip, or more necef-
fary towards facilitating his schemes in the Nether-
lands, than the involving England in the confiu-
lion and miseries of a civil war. The Duke of
Alva, by his direcion, encouraged the two Earls,
and promised, Co soon as they either took the field
with their forces, or surprised any place of
flrerngth, or rescued the Q2ieen of Scots, that he

would

,ody of troops. La Mothe, the governor of Dun- .
kirk, in the disguise of a sailor, founding the ports
where it would be most proper to land. And Chia-
pini Vitelli, one of Alva's ablest officers, was dif-
patched into England, on pretence of fettling some
:ommercial differences between the two nations ;
but in reality, that the rebels might be sure of a
leader of experience, so Coon as they ventured to
take arms '.

THE condua of this negociation occasioned ma- Defeated.
ny meetings and messages between the two Earls.
blizabeth was informed of these; and though the

suspected nothing of their real design, the conclud-
ed that they were among the number of Norfolk's
confidants. They were summoned, for this rea-
son, to repair to court. Conscious of guilt, and a-
fraid of discovery, they delayed giving obedience.
A second, and more peremptory order was iffuied.
This they could not decline, without thaking off
their allegiance. And as no time was left for deli- Nov. 9.
beration, they instantly ereAed their flandard a-
gainft their Sovereign. The re-establishing the ca-
tholic religion ; the fettling the order of fucceflion
to the Crown; the defence of the ancient nobili-
ty; were the motives they alledged tojuftify their
rebellion t. Many of the lower people flocked to
thliem, with such arms as they could procure; and
had the capacity of the leaders been, in any de-
gree, equal to the enterprize, it muff have soon
grown to be extremely formidable. Elizabeth ac-
ed l uith prudence and vigour; and was served by
ier iubjeGts with fidelity and ardor. On the firlt
·umour of an infurrediun, Mary was removed to
Coventry, a place of firength, which could nut be
aken without a regular fitee ; a detachment of
lie rjbcls, whichi was sent to rchlue htr, ictuintd

*" a'fre, vo| ;i. 4. 9. 4

. Ca, .. s.

.

"I ,Styp , \ ol. i. 547.

\\ ithout

---·'r rent parts of the kingdom; as they advanced, the

1569. malccontents retired. In their retreat their num-

bers dwindled away, and their spirits funlk. De-
fpair and uncertainty whither to direCt their flight,
kept together for lome time, a linall body of them,
among the mountains of Northumberland. But

Dec. 21. they were at length obliged to disperse, and the

chiefs took refuge among the Scottilh borderers.
The two Earls, together with the Counteis of
Northumberland, wandering for some days in the
waste of Liddifdale, were plundered by the bandit-
ti, cxpoled to the rigours of the fealbn, and left
destitute of the neceitaries of life. Westmorland
was concealed by Scot of Buccleugh and Ker of
Ferniherft, and afterwards conveyed into the Ne-
therlands. Northumberland was seized by the Re-
gent, who had marched with some troops towards
the borders, to prevent any imprcllion the rebels
might make on those mutinous provinces *.

Church AMIDST lo many surprising events, the affairs of
affairs, the church, for two years, have almost escaped

our notice. ItsGeneral Assemblies were held regular-
ly , but no business of much importance employed
their attention. As the number of the Protestant
clergy daily encrealfd, the deficiency of the funds,
set apart for their fubliftance, became greater. Ma-
ny cf1arts were made towards recovering the anci-
ent patrimony of the church, or at least so much of
it, ais was poffeffed by thePopilh incumbents, a race
of mcle, who were, now, not only ufllefs, but bur-
dcenfll~ to the nation. But though the manner in
which the Regent received their addrtfncs and com-
plaints, w~s very different from that to which they
had been aiccultomed, no ctiec-ual remedy was pro-
Sijddi and while they Ifltcrcd intolerable oppreflion,

* Cabbala, 17. CamJ. 4 z2a.

and groaned under extreme poverty, fair words, Boo, V.
and liberal promises, were all they were able to ob- ' ~

tain .

ELIZABETH began now to be weary of keeping Elizabeth

such a dangerous prisoner as the Scottish Queen. resolves to
During the former year, the tranquillity of her go- JMar ou
vernment had been disturbed, first by a secret corn- the Re-
bination of Come of her nobles, then by the rebel- gent.
lion of others; and the often declared, not with-
out reason, that Mary was the hidden craufe of both.
Many of her own fubjees favoured, or pitied the
captive Queen; the Roman Catholic Princes on the
continent were warmly interefied in her cause.
The detaining her any longer in England, the fore-
saw would make the pretext or occasion of perpe-
tual cabals and infurredions among the former, and
might expose her to the hostile attempts of the lat-
ter. She resolved, therefore, to give up Mary into
the hands of the Regent, whose security, no less
than her own, depended on preventing her from
reafcending the throne. The negociation for this
purpose was carried Ibme length, when it was dif-
covered by the vigilance of the Bithop of Rots, who
together with the French and Spanith Ambassadors,
remonstrated against the infamy of such an ation,
and represented the surrendering the Qneen to her
rebellious fubjeas, to be the fame thing, as if Eli-
zabeth should, by her own authority, condemn her
to instant death. This procured a delay ; and the
murder of the Regent prevented the revival of that
design t.

HAMILTON of Bothwellhaugh uwas the person

who committed this barbarous acion. He had
been condemned to death soon after the battle of
ILangfide, as we have already related, and owed
his life to the Regent's clemency. But part of his nut he is
etlate had been beltuwed upon one of the Regent's ":urdcred.

favourites,

* C.al vol. ii. ?, &c. -t ::,-, vol ii; .9i. Andcrf

vol. iii. .I.

BooK V. favourites, who ieized his house, and turned ou
' ' -' his wife naked, in a cold night, into the open fields

1570. where, before next morning, she became furiously

mad. This injury made a deeper impreflion on
him, than the benefit he had received, and from
that moment he vowed to be revenged upon the
Regent. Party-rage strengthened and inflamed
his private reientment. His kinsmen the Hamil-
tons applauded the enterprize. The maxims of
that age juffified the mofl desperate course he could
take to obtain vengeance. He followed the Regent
for some time, and watched for an opportunity to
strike the blow. He resolved at last to wait till his
enemy should arrive at Linlithgow, through which
he was to pass in his way from Stirling to Edin-
burgh. He took his stand in a wooden gallery,
which had a window towards the street ; spread a
feather-bed on the floor, to hinder the noise of his
feet from being heard , hung up a black cloth be-
hind him that his shadow might not be observed
from without ; and after all this preparation,
calmly expeted the Regent's approach, who had
lodged during the night in a house not far distant.
Some indiftin~d information of the danger which
threatened him, had been conveyed to the Regent,
and he paid to much regard to it, that he resolved
to return by the fame gate through which he had
e'nercd, and to fetch a compass round the town.
But as the croud about the gate was great, and
he liimflf unacquainted with fear, he proceeded
diredly along the !treet ,; and the throng of the
p.op!e obligi]ng him to move very slowly, gave the
til.liin time to take fb true an aim, that he (hot
him with a single bullet, through the lower part of
his bc!ly, and killed the horse of a gentleman wl,3
rode oi; his o'licr fide. Hi:; followers instantly
endeavoured to break into the houle whence the
blow had come, Lut the!y f Iu.d ct

i door ftronplv

b a~iicLJu--

ly barricaded ; and before it could be forced open, BooK V.
Hamilton had mounted a fleet horse, which flood 'v
ready for him at a back-paffage, and was got thr iO.
beyond their reach. The Regent died the fame
night of his wound. * Buchan.

THERE is no person, in that age, about whom Caf.

historians have been more divided, or whose cha- Mem.124.
raCdr has been drawn with such opposite colours. His cha-
Personal intrepidity, military Ikill, sagacity and rater.
vigour in the administration of civil affairs, are
virtues, which even his enemies allow him to have
poffeffed, in an eminent degree. His moral quali-
ties are more dubious, and ought neither to be
praised, nor censured, without great reserve, and
many diflin~tions. In a fierce age, he was capable
of using victory with humanity, and of treating the
vanquished with moderation. A patron of learning,
which, among martial nobles, was either unknown,
or despised. Zealous for religion, to a degree,
which distinguished him, even at a time, when
profeffions Qs that kind were not uncommon. His
confidence in his friends was extreme, and inferior
only to his liberality towards them, which knew
no bounds. A disinterested paflion for the liberty
of his country, prompted him to oppose the per-
nicious system, which the Princes of Lorrain had
obliged the Queen-mother to pursue. On Mary's
return into Scotland, he served her with a zeal and as-
section, to which he sacrificed the friendship of those
who were most attached to his person. But, on
the other hand, his ambition was immoderate
and events happened, that opened to him vaift
profpeas, which allured his enterprising genius,
and led him to aItions, inconsistent with the duty
of a fubjea. His treatment of the Qgeen, to whose
bounty he was so much indebted, was unbrotherly
and ingrateful. The dependance on Elizabeth, un-

VaL. I. Ee der

BOOK V. der which he brought Scotland was disgraceful to
' - to the nation. He deceived and betrayed Norfolk,

1570. with a baseness unworthy of a man of honour. His

elevation to such unexpe&ed dignity, inspired him
with new pations, with haughtiness and refrye;
and iniRead of his natural manner, which was
blunt and open, he affeted the arts ofdiflimula-
tion and refinement. Fond, towards the end of
his life, of flattery, and impatient of advice, his
creatures, by soothing his vanity, led him artray,
while his ancient friends flood at a distance, and
predided his approaching fall. But, amidst the
turbulence and confusion of that fadious period,
he dispensed justice with To much impartiality, he
reprefled the licentious borderers with so much
courage, and established such uncommon order
and tranquillity in the country, that his admini-
firation was extremely popular, and he was long
and affetionately remembered among the com-
mons, by the name of the Good Regent.

The END of the FIasT VOLUME,

L''

^ '
