The Situation of the World at the time of C HRIsT'S

Appearance. and its ConneCtion with the Succefi
of his Religion, confidered.

SE R
E 0

PREACHED BEFORE THE
SOCIETY in SCOTLAND For proF-r,,tng

CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE.

The Situation of the World at the T'ime ofCHRIST'S

Appearance, and its Conneftion with the Succefis
es his Religion, confidered. -

A
S E R M O N,

BREACHED BEFORE THM
SOCIETY in SCOTLAND for PROPAGATING

CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,

AT THE
Anniversary Meeting in the High Church of Edinburgh,

On Monday January 6. 1755.

Publihfed at the Desire of the SOCIETY.
BY WILLIAM ROBERTS ON, D.D.

Principal of the UIniverfity of Edinburgh.

THE SIXTH EDITION.

EDINBURGH:
PRINTED FOR ELPHINGSTON BALFOUR.

MDCC,XCI.

# COLOS. i. 26. Even the Mystery, which hath been hid from Ages and Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints.

A
8 E R M O N

U PO N
The Situation of the World at the Time of

CHRIST'S Appearance, &c.

COLOS. i. 26.

Even the Myjery, which hath been hid
from Ages and Generations, but now is
made manifef to his Saints.
THERE is no employment more de-

lightful to a devout mind than the

contemplation of the divine wisdom in the
government of this world. The civil his-
tory of mankind, opens a wide field for this
pious exercise. Careful observers may of-

ten,

( 6 )

ten, by the light of reason, form probable
conjectures with regard to the plan of
God's Providence, and can discover a fkil-
ful hand directing the revolutions of hu-
man affairs, and compafTing the best ends
by the mons effetual and surprising means:
But sacred hiflory, by drawing aside that
veil which covers the counsels of the Al-

mighty. lays open his designs to the view
of his creatures; and we can there trace
the fleps which he takerh towards accom.
plifihing them with more certainty, and
greater pleasure. The fads which inspired
writers relate are no less inftru:tive than
the doctrines which they teach. The latter
informs us that God is powerful, and wife,
and good ; the former discover those per-
fedions brought forth into adion, and con-
firm speculative opinions, by real and Rri-
king examples.

THE publication and establishment of

Chriflianity in the world is a remarkable
event of this kind, and contributes greatly
to illustrate, as well as to magnify, the di.

vine

( 7 )

vine power and wisdom. From beginnings
the most inconsiderable, and by-inftruments
the most unlikely, the Almighty, with in-
credible facility, raised that glorious fabric
of his church, which hitherto hath with-
flood all the rage of his enemies, and the
gates of hell, we believe, /hall not prevail
againjt it t. According to our Saviour's
beautiful image, 7he leafl of all feeds grew
up, and waxed a great tree, and spread out
its branches, and filled the earth t. The
hand of God Sheltered this feeble plant from
the fiorm ; and, by his care, it was reared,
and cultivated, and brought to maturity.
The wisdom and power of men united to
oppose the do&trine of God: But it con-
founded the former, and overcame the lat-
ter. Neither the bigotry of the Jews, nor
the superstition of the heathen, could refilt
its progress; and in vain did Herod and
Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and peo-
ple of Israel, gather themnelves together a-
gainji the Lord and his Anointed .,

MANY
* Math. xvi. x18. Mark iv. 32. Ai5s iv. 27.

MANY circumstances concurred in pro.

curing, for Chriflianity, such a favourably
reception and firm establishment in the
world. Whoever refleats upon the fitua-
tion of mankind at the time when it was
publiflied, w'ill find abundant reason to ad-
mire the divine wisdom, which disposed
these circumstances with so much art, and
improved them with such skill and sUccess,
71 he text naturally leads me to confider the
colidud and administration of Providence
in this pa)aticular light. The word of God,
I:lith the Apofile, the myfiery hid from ages,
anrd from generations, is now made manifesl
to his si'nts Why was the gospel of Christ
ob long concealed from the world ? Why
was it published at that time ? What do we
find in that particular jundure to render
the (dicovery of the Chriflian religion more
reccfliry, or the propagation of it more
Ituccefsful ?

IN the following'difcourfe, I shall endea-

vour to account for this part of the divine
Ceconomy, by feleding tome remarkable

cir-

( 9 )

circumstances in the fituatidn of mankind,
which prove that God manifefied the myf-
tery of the Gopel at a time when the world
stood most in need of such a revelation, and
was best prepared for receiving it.

THE appearance of Christ in so late an

age, was an objection raised, by his ancient
adversaries, against the truth of his million;
and modern infidels have not failed to re-
vive and to urge it, with their usual confi-
dence and triumph. But, if we can efta-
blifh the truth of our general proposition,
this cavil falls to the ground, and the divine
conduct is fully vindicated.

I. ABOUT the time of Christ's appear-

ance, there prevailed a general opinion, that
the Almighty would fend forth some emi-

nent messenger to communicate a more
perfect discovery of his will to mankind.
The Supreme Being conducts all his opera-
tions by general laws. It seems to be one
among these, that no perfection of any
kind can be attained of a sudden. The mo-

B tion

( 1J )

tion by whcklt his works advance towwardd;
their final and complete state is gradual andc
progreslive. This holds with regard to all
the productions in the natural, and all the
changes in the moral world. The fame
principle appears to have regulated the dif-
penfations of religion. The light of reve-
lation was not poured in upon mankind all
at once, and with its full splendour. The
obscurity of the dawn went before the
brightness of the noon-day. The will of
-God was at firAt made known by revela-
tions, useful indeed, but dark and inyfte-
rious. To there succeeded others more
clear and perfect. In proportion as the si-
tuation of the world made it necessary, the
Almighty was pleated. farther to open
and unfold his scheme. Men came, by de-
grees, to underiand. this progressive plan of
Providence, and to conceive how systems
temporary and incomplete might serve to
introduce that concluding and perse l re-
velation, which would declare the whol&
-council of God to man *.

Ts
* Aas xx. a7,

Ii )

TE! dignity 6f the perfci;empl6yed to

publis{h this'revelation, the virtues of' his
character, the glory of his kingdom, and
the signs of his -coming; were decribed b'h
the ancient Prophets with the utmost per-
fpicuity. Guided by thisJfre word of pro-
phecy, the Jews of that age concluded the
period, predetermined by God, to be then
completed; and that the fulne~f of inme
*being come, the promised Mefliah would
suddenly appear. Devout persons among
them waited day and night for the Confola-
lion of Ijrael * and the 'whole nation,
groaning under the Raman yoke, and fti-
mulated by the desire of liberty or of ven-
geance, expected their deliverer with the
most anxious impatience.

NOR were these expectations peculiar to

the Jews. By their dispersions among so
many nations; by their conversation with
the learned men among the Heathens; and
by the translation of their inspired writings

into
* Luke ii. 25, 38.

( 12 )

into a language almost universal; the prin-
ciples of their religion were spread all over
the East ; and it became the common be-
lief that a Prince would arise at that time
in Judea, who should change the face of
the world, and extend his empire from one
end of the earth to the other.

IN this due time, did the wisdom of God

fend forth his Son,- not to assume any

firange character, or to claim any new and
unknown dignity, but to fulfil all that had
beenJpoken by the mouth of his holy prophets
finee the world began '. While the eyes of
men were employed in search of the pro,
mifed Messiah ; while they watched every
sign that could indicate his coming ; arid
o'bserved every, circumRfance which could
lead them to difcover.him; while the ear- .
nef expectation of all creatures waited for
she revelation of God; at that happy and
favourable junfture w as the m.Tiery hid
f/oin ages manifested to the world. No'

wonder
5 pa~s i~iil.

( t3. )

wonder the Jews should receive our Savi.
our, on his first appearance, not only with-
out prejudice, but even with eagerness and
applause : No wonder the Gentiles should
gather together unto him, who had so long
been the desire of all nations *. Had Christ
been manifested at a more early period, the
world would not have been prepared to-
meet him with the fame fondness and zeal:
Had his appearance been pofiponed for a-
ny considerable time, men's expe&ations
would have begun to languish, and the
warmth of desire, from a delay of gratifica-
tion, might have cooled and died away.

II. BuT, it is not only from circum.

fiances peculiar to the Jews and neighbour.
ing nations, that we conclude the Christian,
religion to have been publifhsed at the molt
proper time: We propose to bring a farther
confirmation of this truth, from a survey of
the condition and circumstances of man.-

kind
.9(?n. Alx. 18S.; Hag. Ui. 7,

(: "4 )

kind in general.' Let .us venture then into
this large field, and take a view of the po-
litical, of the moral, of the religious, and
of the domeflic state of the world.

Wb. begin by confidering the political

slate of the world about the time of our
Saviour's appearance. The world, in the
moRl early ages, was divided into frmall in-
dependent states, differing from each other
in language, manners, laws, and religion.
The shock of so many oppofire interells,
the interfering of so many contrary views;
occasioned the molf violent convulsions and
disorder. Perpetual discord fubfifled be-
tween these rival states; hostility and blood-
shed never ceased, during that turbulent
and restless period. Commerce had not hi-
therto united mankind, and opened the
communication of one nation with another.

The world may now be confidered as one
vast society, closely cemented by mutual
wants; each part contributing its share to-
wards the subsistence, the pleasure, and im-
provement of the whole. But, in those

more

( 15 )

more simple ages, the intercourse betweeni
nations was extremely ineonfiderable. Voy-
ages into remote countries, in quest either
of wealth or of knowledge, were very rare.
Men moved in a narrow circle, little ac-
quainted with any thing beyond the limits
of their own fmnall territory, and utter ftran-
gers to the condition and character of dif-
tant nations.

AT last, the Roman ambition undertook

the arduous enterprize of conquering the
world, and condu&ced it with such refined
policy, irresistible courage, and inimitable
perseverance, as in the end crowned the
attempt with success. They trade down the
kingdoms, according to Daniel's prophetic
description, and by their exceeding firength
they devoured the whole earth *. By en-
flaying the world, however, they civilized
it; and, while they oppressed mankind,
they united them together. The fame laws
were every where established, and the fame

languages
Dan. vii. 7. 23. -

( 16 )

languages understood. Men approached
nearer to one another in sentiments and
in manners. The intercourse between the
most difrant corners of the earth was ren-
dered secure and agreeable. Satiated with
vicory, the first Emperors abandoned all
thoughts of new conquests. Peace, an un-
known blessing, was enjoyed throughout all
that vast empire; or, if a flight war was
waged on an outlying and barbarous fron-
tier, far from disturbing the tranquillity, it
scarcely drew the attention of mankind.

SUCH was the political slate of the world

when Christianity made its first appearance;
and, from this representation of it, many
circumstances concur to juftity the divine
wisdom, in choofing that particular con-
junaure for publishing it. During the
period, which I first described, the propa-
gation of any new religion muff have been
extremely flow and uncertain. How could
it have forced its way, through innumer-
able difficulties, arising from the unsettled

fRate

( 17 )

state of the world, from the fierceness and
animosity of hostile and divided nations ?
The power of God, no doubt, could have
surmounted all these obstacles: But it is

observable, that this power is never ex-
erted but on the most neceflary occa-
sions. The Almighty seldom effeds, by
supernatural means, any thing which could
have been accomplished by such as are
natural. Were we to judge *by maxims
merely human, the propagation of Chrifti-
anity, in those circumstances, would have
proved not only a dangerous, but an im-
possible enterprize.

BUT, favoured by the union and tran-

quility of the Roman empire, the disciples
of Christ executed their commission to
great advantage. The success and rapidity
with which they diffused the knowledge of
his name over the world are aftoniihing.
The epistle to the Co/oqians was written
about thirty years after our Saviour's afcen-
sion; and, even then, the Apofile could
assert, that the Gospel had been preached

C to

( i8 )

to every creature which is under heaven *,
i. e. through the whole extent of the Ro-
man empire. Nations were then accef-
fible, which formerly had been unknown.
Under this situation, into which the Provi-
dence of God had brought the world, the
joyfillJbund, in a few years, reached those
remote corners of the earth into which it
could not, otherwise, have penetrated for
many ages.

THIS view of our subject presents to us

an idea of the Christian religion, equal to
the greatest and most magnificent concep-
tion of the human mind. The noblest
people, that ever entered upon the stage of
the world, appear to have been only in.
firuments in the divine hand, for the exe-
cution of wife purposes concealed from
themselves. The Roman ambition and bra-
very paved the way, and prepared the
world for the reception of the Christian
doctrine: They fought and conquered,

that
Colo i. 23.

( '9 )

that it might triumph with greater ease.
HIowbeit, they meaned not Jo, neither did
their heart think Jfo o; but it was in their
heart to destroy and cut off nations not a
few *. By means of their victories, the
over-ruling wisdom of God eflablifhed an
empire, that, really possesses the perpetuity
and eternal duration, which they vainly ar-
rogated to their own: He erected a throne
,which /hall continuefor ever t; and of the
increase of that government there Jhall be
no end 2.

III. LET us confider the state of the

world, with regard to morals. We cannot
expel to find pure and undefiled virtue a-
mong those people who were destitute of
the instructions, the promises, and aflfl.-
tance of divine revelation. Unenlightened
reason often errs; Undireded virtue fre-
quently deviates from the right path. But,
even in those left favoured ages, righteous-

ness
· Ifa. x. 7. t Heb. i, 8. 4 Ifa. ix 7,

( 20 )

ness had not altogether perl/bed from the
earth ; and the nations which had not the
law did by nature the things contained in
the law *. The virtuous but feeble es-
forts of the human mind were encouraged
and seconded by several happy circumftan-
ces in the situation of the world, owing in
appearance to the sagacity of men, but or-
dained in reality by the wisdom of God.
One of these was of a singular nature, and
well deserves our particular attention.

WnE have already mentioned the early

division of the world into small indepen-
dent flates. These flates, uncorrupted by the
refinements of luxury, and animated with
the noblest of human passions, struggled for
liberty, and obtained it. Lawgivers, inti-
mately acquainted with human nature, deep
politicians, and lovers of mankind, arose in
different places, and founded those equal
and happy governments, which have been
the admiration and envy of all succeeding

ages.
* Rom. ii. 14.

( 21 )

ages. Temperance, frugality, decency, pu-
blic spirit, love to their fellow citizens,
magnanimity, were the virtues which flou-
riffied under such wife institutions. At the
fame time, in those fiall commonwealths,
the conduct of every citizen was fubjeded
to the eye of the magiflrate, and the na-
ture of the government obliged him to in-
sped their manners with severity. The
smallest crimes could not escape obferva-
tion: Even dangerous virtues were exposed
to censure. On this foundation of public
liberty did ancient virtue reft; an effed of
government little known in modern times,
wherein the views of legislators are confi-
ned to inferior objects. But from this
source were derived all those splendid ac-
tions among the heathens, which, on the
one hand, have'been so invidiously d;fplay-
ed by infidels, as a rep-oach to our holy
religion, and, on the other, fojufily cele-
brated by Christians, in order to rouze the
zeal and emulation of a degenerate age.

Vl RTUE,

( 2z )

VIRTUE, however, did not long enjoy

this temporary and precarious support.
Those wife institutions were the works of
men, and, like their authors, subjea to
decay. Some of them perifled by the ma-
lignity of internal diseases; and, if a vigo-
rous conflitution, or more skilful manage-
ment, prolonged the period of others, they
yielded at last to the violence of external
injuries. It was impossible either to divert
or resist the torrent of Roman power. It
gathered strength from opposition, and
bore down all nations before it: But, by
subduing the world, the Romans loft their
own liberty. Many causes, which it is not
our present business to explain, concurred
in producing this effect : Many vices, en-
gendered or nourished by profperiry, deli-
vered them over to the vilest race of ty-
rants that ever afflided or disgraced human
nature.

THE alliance between morals and go-

vernment was now broken; an influence
hitherto so friendly to virtue, became alto-

gether

( 23 )

gether malignant, and was exerted, with
most fatal effect, to poison and debate the
human mind. Together with despotic
power, entered all those odious vices,
which are usually found in its train; and,
in.a short time, they grew to an incredible
pitch. The colours are not too strong,
which the Apostle employs in drawing the
character of that age: Contemporary his-
torians justify him, when he describes it to
be alienated from the life of God, walking in
vanity through blindness of mind; to be past
feeling, given up to lasciviousness, and to

,work all uncleanness with greediness *.

IN this time of universal corruption, did

the wisdom of God manifest the Christian
revelation to the world, not to re-establish
virtue upon the fame insecure foundation
of civil government, but to ere& it upon
the eternal and immoveable basis of a reli-
gion, .which teacheth righteousness by the

autho-
P Ephef. iv. 17, 18, 19.

( 24 )

authority of God. What the wisdom of
men could do for the encouragement of
virtue in a corrupt world, had been tried
during several ages; and all human devi-
ces were found, by experience, to be of
very small avail: No jundure, then, could
be more proper for publishing a religion,
which, independent on human laws and
institutions, explains the principles of mo-
rals with admirable perspicuity, and ensor-
ces the pradnce of them by most persuasive
arguments. Had not Chriflianity appeared
to check and to mitigate the pernicious es-
seas of despotic unlimited empire, it is
hard to fay how far they might have gone
towards extinguishing the name and exer-
cife of virtue among men. This we know,
that, in a most dissolute age, and under the
worst government, the primitive Chriflians
attained to an eminence in every virtue, of
which there is no example in the hiflory
of mankind. The spirit of their religion,
superior to the corrupt genius of the age,
continued pure and vigorous; and men

saw

( 25 )

few with admiration, that, when every o-
ther foundation of virrue was overthrown,
the foundation of God flood /ire. immoveable
amidRf the floods which came, the rains that
de/ctnded, and the winds that blew and
beat upon it *.

IV. LET us confider the world with re-

gard to its religious frate. The national
character of the Jews seems to have been
deeply tinctured with superstition. Their
early education in Egypt, the example of
neighbouring nations, the influence of the
climate, but, above all, the perverseness of
their own disposition, rendered this impref.
sion indelible. Obstinately refilling all the
endeavours employed by the divine Lawgi-
ver to repress or to extirpate it, this super-
flitious spirit broke out on every occasion.
Delighted with the ceremonial prescriptions
of the law, the Jews utterly neglected the
moral: And, fond of such rites as please

D the
*Matth. viiiL 2s.

( 26 )

the imagination, they undervalued those
duties which improve the heart. This un-
happy bias was greatly increased by the,
doctrine of the Pharisees, which reduced
the prejudices, of their countrymen into a
regular system of fuperflition. By their
vain traditions, they added to the load of
ceremonies: By their wretched interpreta-
tions of the law, they abridged the number
of moral precepts. They openly preferred
the former before the latter ; and fubftitu-
ted observances frivolous and insignificant,
in the place of the weighty matters of the
law, judgment, mercy, and faith *.

WHILE the Pharisees undermined reli-

gion on one hand, their rivals the Saddu-
cees carried on a more bold and impious
a~ttack against it, from another quarter. By
denying the immortality of the foul, they
wounded religion in a vital part; and o-
verturned the doarine of future rewards

and punilhments, which hath been, and
must ever be, the chief foundation of vir-

tuous
*Matth. xiiii. 23.

( 27 )

tuous obedience. The prastice of these
two contending feds was perfectly suitable
to their principles. The followers of the

one were scandalous libertines ; the difci-
ples of the other, notorious hypocrites:
and, between them, the knowledge as well
as power of true religion were entirely
de(troyed. It was high time then for the
wiifom of God to vindicate his injured
law, and to revive languishing and de-
cayed religion, among his ancient people.
To recal the Jews from their former wan-
derings, the Almighty had with success
employed the minifiry of his holy Pro-
phets: But the malignant distempers of
that age would not have yielded to any
common remedy: A conceited and per-
verse generation would have listened to no
inferior messenger; and, therefore, the
great Prophet was sent forth in due time
to explain, to extend, and to perfea the
law, an.d to fill Zion with juh d amBnt and
righteouzifes '.

BUT
*Ifa. SxJi..

( 28 )

BUT the deplorable situation of the hea-

then world with regard to religion, called
flill more loudly for an immediate inter-
position of the divine hand. I shall not
mention the characters of the heathen dei-
ties, infamous for the most enormous

crimes; nor describe their religious wor-
ship, consisting frequently in the vilest and
molf shameful rites. Certain it is, the
more any man honoured such gods, the
worse he himself was; and the oftener he
served them, the more wicked he would
become.

The spirit and genius of heathenism, ac-

cording to the Apoflle's observation, were
in all things too much fuipetflitioas *. State-
ly temples, expensive sacrifices, pompous
ceremonies, magnificent feflivals, with all
the other circumstances of thew and fplen-
dour, were the objecds which false religion
presented to its votaries : But just notions
of God, obedience to his moral laws, pu-

.rity
* ACts xvli, 23,

( 29 )

rity of heart, and fandity of life, were not
once mentioned as ingredients in religious
service. Supertition never prevailed a-
mong any people, but at the expence of
morals. The heathen superstition, far
from giving any aid to virtue, seems not to
have had the least conne'dion with it. No

repentance of past crimes, no future a-
mendjment of condud, are ever prescribed
by it, as proper means of appearing their
offended deities. " Sacrifice a chosen vic-
tim ; bow down before an hallowed image;
be initiated in the sacred mysteries; and the
wrath of the Gods shall be averted, and
the thunder fihall drop from their hands."
Suitable to these sentiments is the beha-
viour of Balak King of Moab, described by
the Prophet Micah. That Prince had pro-
voked the God of Israel; and, in order to
regain his favour, thought of the fame
means, which superstition employs to miti-
gate the rage of its false Gods. Where-
with (fays le)Jhall I come before the Lord,
s.nd bow myjelf before the high God ? Shallb

I

( 30 )

I come before him with burnt offerings, with
calves of a year old? Will the Lord be plea.
fed with thousands of rams, or with ten
thousands of rivers of oil? Shall I give my
first born for my tranfgreflon, the fruit of my
body for the fin qs my foul *. To dojitfqly,
to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
God, were acceptable services, which made
no part in the system of heathen religion.

HAPPILY the wisdom and finplicity of

ancient government checked the progress
of this infectious principle, and corrected,
in some degree, its poisonous and deftruc-
tive qualities. But, no sooner had the ty-
ranny of the Roman Emperors removed
this restraint, by subverting liberty, than
superstition made its advances on the world
by sudden and mighty steps, and exercised
an uncontrolled dominion in every corner
of the earth. Tyranny and superstition,
like those other destroyers of mankind, fa-
mine and pestilence, are nearly allied. Su-

perftition
' Micah, vi. 6. 7. 2.

( 3,I )

pertition breaks the spirit, and prepares it
for tervitude. Tyranny, for this reason,
encourages superstition, and employs it as
an useful auxiliary to illegal power. Ac-
cordingly, Rome adopted the Gods of al-
most every nation which fte had conquer-
ed, and opened her temples to the grotfeft
fuperflitions. of the most barbarous people.
Her fool/j/h heart being darkened, flie chan-
ged the glory of the uncorruptible God into
an image made like to corruptible man, and
to birds and four-footed beasts, and creeping
things *.

AT this time, therefore, did a good God,

in pity to his deluded creatures, publish
the Chriflian revelation. By it, the God
of truth was made known; and the idols
of the nations were moved at his presence t.
Rational and sublime in its doctrines, hu-
mane and beneficent in its precepts, pure
and simple in its worihip; Christianity was
better calculated, than any other religion,

to
*Rom. i. 21I. 2 2. 2 3. Isa ix. 1.

to repress the inroads of fuiperftition, and
to eltablifh an acceptable and manly devo.
tion, consisting inspirit and in truth *. No
period can be mentioned, when inftruaion
in these important articles would have been
more seasonable or necessary. The absurd
fictions, and abominable practices of super-
flition, had gone near to extinguifli the na-
tural sentiments of the human mind, con-
cerning the supreme Being, and to banish
his name and worship from, the earth. No
wonder men, under these circumflances,
ffiould liften with joy to the Chriflian re-
velation, which delivered them from that
hateful yoke, and taught them to serve God
without ear, in holiness and righteousness
before him t.

V. LET us confider the world with re-

gard to its domestic situation; a view, per-
haps, less extensive and magnificent than
those which hitherto have engaged our at-

tention;
John iv. 24. f Luke i. 74.

( 33)

tention; but not less important. The pri-
vate and domestic situation of mankind is
the chief circumstance which forms their
character, and becomes the great source of
their happiness or misery. Any poison in
this fountain communicates itself to the
manners of men; any bitterness there in-
fees all the pleasures of life. Many cir-
cumfiances, of the most fatal influence on
domeflic virtue and happiness, occurto at-
tentive observers of the period under re-
view.

DOMESTIC society is founded in ,the u-

nion between husband and wife. Among
all civilized nations, this union hath been
esteemed sacred and honourable; and from
it are derived exquisite joys, which heigh-
ten all the pleasures, and alleviate all the
pains, in human life. In the ancient
world, there prevailed two practices e-
qually pernicious to the peace and happi-
ness of the married state. From the most
early times, polygamy seems to have been
universal amongst the eastern nations; and

E men

( 34 )

men married as many wives as their fancy
wished for, or their fortune could maintain,
Now, this practice not only appears to be
contrary to the intention of the Almighty,
who at first created but one person of each
sex, and hath since preserved an admirable
proportion between the number of males
and females whom he fends into the world;
but by it, likewise, were b.niflied from
domestic life all those enjoyments which
sweeten and endear it. Friendship, focig
al intercourse, confidence, and the mutual
care of children, were in a great measure
unknown: On the one hand, rigour, vo.
luptuoufnefs, jealousy; on the other, sub-
jedcion without love, fidelity, or virtue,
One half of the human species became the
property of the other; and the husband,
inlfead of being the friend and protecor of
a wife, was no better than the master and

tyrant over a slave. The envy and discord
which were introduced into the families of
.acob and Elkanah, by a plurality of wives,
are but imperfect picures of the enormi-

tie.

( 35 )

ties occasioned by the fame practice, under
maRters less virtuous, and in ages more dif-
solute and luxurious. Wherever the Chris-
tian religion is eftabliflhed, an end hath
been put to an institution so inconfiffent
with the felicity of domestic life. Marriage,
suitable to the ordinance of.God, is render-
ed a friendly and indissoluble alliance be-
tween two persons: And tranquillity, con-
fidence, and joy, bless an union begun and
cemented by mutual love.

IN the western parts of the world, the

maxims with regard to marriage were more

conformable to nature: One man was con-
fined to one woman: But, at the fame
time, their laws allowed a practice, which
introduced the most fatal disorders into do-
meftic life. The Almighty, because of the
hardncfs of their hearts, permitted the
Jews, on certain occasions, to give a wri-
ting of divorcement to their wives *. Ac-
cording to their usual custom, the Jews

firetched
* Mark x. 4. 5.

( 36)

firetched this indulgence to most extrava-
gant lengths; and, defining the cafes in
which they pretended divorces to be lawful,
with a minute and over-curious nicety,
they altogether perverted the institution of
God. Their Dotors permitted divorces
for causes so trivial and ridiculous, as can-
not be mentioned in a grave discourse.
The utmost dissolution of manners was the
effied of such licentious opinions: And our
Saviour found the abuses to be grown so
enormous, as to render the ftriaeft and
most precise limitations of the Mosaic pre-
cept absolutely necessary.

NOR was this matter on any better foot-

ing among the heathen nations. Divorces,
on very flight pretences, were permitted
both by the Greek and Roman legislators.
And, though the pure manners of those re-
publics restrained, for some time, the ope-
ration of such a pernicious institution;
though the virtue of private persons seldom
abused the indulgence which the laws al-
lowed them: Yet, no sooner had the pro-

gref£

grefs of luxury, and the establishment of
despotic power, vitiated the taste of men,
than the law with regard to divorces was
found to be among the worst corruptions
which prevailed in that abandoned age.
The facility of reparation rendered married
persons careless of obtaining or praaifing
those virtues which render domestic life
tranquil and delightful. The education of
children was neglected by parents, who
often met together with a scheme of fepa-
ration in both their thoughts. Marriage,
inflead of restraining, added to the violence
of irregular desire; and, under a legal
name, became the vilest and most shame.
less prostitution. From all there causes,
the married Rtate fell into difreputation
and contempt; and it became neceflary to
force men, by penal laws, into a society
where they expe&ed no secure or lasting
happiness. Among the Romans, domestic
corruption grew, of a sudden, to an incre-
dible height and perhaps, in the history
of mankind, we can find no parallel to the

undisguised

( 38 ).

undisguised impurity and licentloufnefs of
that age -. It was in a good time, there-
fore, that our Saviour abolished a practice,
which had been one of the most fertile
sources of those disorders. The bonds of
the marriage-union were rendered, by him,
almost indissoluble; and the cords of love
were drawn as close as possible. Political
projectors may please themselves with ima-
ginary advantages, resulting from the li-
berty of divorces; but reason, as well as
the experience of mankind, justify the wis.
dom of the divine decree concerning them.
If the manners of men be not extremely
pure and simple, the least indulgence in
this article hath always proved fatal to the
peace and virtue of domestic life ; and,
whatever remains of these we now find in
a dissolute age, must be entirely ascribed to
that regulation in the gospel t', which fu-
perficial reasoners represent as a grievance,
though it be in truth the greatest blefling
to mankind.

* Rom. i. a6. &c. t Matth. v. 3

IF ,the -lives of those, who are at the

head of domestic society, needed reforma-
tion, the sufferings of those who were sub-
jea to them merited relief.

So many are the wants of human focie-

ty, that far the greater part of mankind ia
condemned to constant toil and labour, in
order ;. fcpply ther. In the ancient world,
the condition of this numerous and use-
ful race of men differed widely from that
wherein they are now placed. They were
not freemen, but slaves, who then occu-
pied the inferior, though necessary, ftatior
in human life. Their labour was not a vo-
luntary duty to the society, which entitled
them to a reward; it was an hard task,
imposed without their consent, and exaded
with the utmost rigour. The number of
persons, reduced to this unhappy condi-
tion, was immense. In those parts of the
world, the history and situation of which
are best known, above two thirds of all the
inhabitants are computed to have been in a
fate of slavery, The pcrfons, the goods,

the

(.46)

the children of these slaves were the pro/
perty of their masters, disposed of at plea-
sure, and transferred, like any other posses.
sion, from one owner to another. No in-
equality of condition, no superiority in
power, no pretext of content, can justify
this ignominious depreflion of human na-
ture, or can confer upon one man the
right of dominion over the person of ano-
ther: But, not only doth reason condemn
this instirution as unjufR; experience pro-
ved it to be pernicious both to maRters and
slaves. The elevation of the former in-
spired them with pride, insolence, impa-
tience, cruelty, and voluptuoufnefs: The
dependent and hopeless Rate of the latter
dejected the human mind, and extinguished
every generous and noble sentiment in the
heart, Were I to mention the laws and
regulations of the moll civilized Rates a-
mong the ancients, concerning those un.
fortunate sufferers; were 1 to relate the
treatment which they met with, from per-
sons the most renowned for their virtue;

maxims

(4I )

maxims so inhumane, and adions so bar-
barous, would excite the strongest pity and
indignation, in an age which never beheld
the tyranny of the oppressor, nor heard the
groans of the captive.

IT is true, while men enjoyed those wife

infpitutions of government, which we for-
merly described, the slate of servitude did
not become altogether intolerable; many
expedients were used for mitigating the ri-
gour of command, and lightening the yoke
of obedience: But, upon establishing def-
potic government in the Roman Empire,
domestic tyranny rose, in a short time, to
an astonishing height. In that rank foil,
every vice, which power nourishes in the
great, or oppression engenders in the mean,
thrived, and grew up apace.

HERE, then, is an object worthy the at-

tention of that merciful God, who deli-
vereth the foul of the afflicted from violence,
who heareth the cry oj the needy, and him
who hath no helper *. The groans of

E such
* Psalms, Ixxii. 12.

( 42 )

such an innumerable multitude of his rea-
fonable creatures, bereaved of the nobleR
privileges of their nature, liberty and inde-
pendence, would not, we may believe, be
uttered in vain. He could npt always
keep silence, and be fill, when he beheld
their wretched Situation, so deftrudive of
happiness, and so fatal to virtue. At lait, the
divine wisdom interposed; and, when the
evil had become intolerable, and seemed to
be past cure, the prornugation of Chriftia-
nity brought an effe.dui! and timely reme-
dy.

IT is not the authority of any tingle de-

tached precept in the -ofpel, but the fpi-
rit and genius cf Chriflian religion, more
powerful than any particular command,
which hath abolilhed the pracdice of slave-
ry through the world. The temper, which
Christianity inlpired, was mild and gentle;
and the dodrines it taught added such dig-
nity and lufire to human nature, as rescued
it from the dishonourable servitude into
which it was funk. All men, of every con-

dition,

( 43 )

dition, are declared to be the offspring of
the fame God, and the heirs of the fame
heavenly inheritance : One Saviour re.
deemed them from iniquity by his death,
and one spirit worketh powerfully in their
hearts. Where-ever such opinions pre-
vail, no human creature can be regarded
as altogether insignificant and vile; even
the meanest acquire dignity; exterior di-
ftinlions disappear; and men approach
nearer to that original equality, in which
they were at first placed, and are still view-
ed by their Creator.

WHAT a wonderful and blessed change

hath Christianity produced in the face of the
world! Together with the knowledge of its
precepts, liberty, humanity, and domestic
happiness, diffused themselves over every
corner of the earth. It is deemed a virtue
to admire and to praise thofe-illuftrious per-
fonages who delivered mankind from the
rage of tyrants, and vindicated the violated
laws and constitution of their country:
And is no admiration due to the generous

fpiri,

( 44 )

spirit of that religion, which restored libee'
ty, not to one nation or society alone, but
rescued from the worst servitude, far the
greater number of the human race, and
acquired for them that happy freedom,
which they fill enjoy * ? When we behold
Christianity making its progress through
the world, and working, every where, such
an important alteration in the condition of
mankind; we may well apply to a tempo-
ral deliverance, what the Prophet spoke con-
cerning a spiritual salvation: Behold the
acceptable year of the Lord is come ! Liber-
ty is proclaimed to the captive, and the o.
pening of the prison to them that are bound;

they

The permifslon of slavery in our American colo-

nies, is a 1pecious, not a real objection against the
reasoning under this head. The genius and tenden.
cy of any religion are known by the operations of its
vigorous, not of its declining age. If, in a degene-
rate world, avarice hath revived an institution which
Christianity had utterly aboliflied ; this, like many
other vices which prevail among Chrihians, must be
charged upon the corruption of the human heart, not
upon that religion which testifies against it.

( 45

theyJhall reft from theirforrow, and from
their fear, and from the hard bondage
wherein they were made toferve b.

THE abolition of domestic slavery was

the occasion of another change in the man.
ners of men, which is no less remarkable,
Captives taken in war were, in all proba-
bility, the first persons fubjeded to perpe-
tual servitude: And, when the necessities
or luxuries of mankind increased the de-
mand for slaves, every new war recruited
their number, by reducing the vanquished
to that wretched condition. Hence pro-
ceeded the fierce and desperate spirit, with
which wars were carried on among ancient
nations. While chains and slavery were
the certain lot of the conquered, battles
were fought, and towns defended, with
rage and obstinacy, which nothing but
horror at such a fate could have inspired:
But, by putting an end to the cruel infli-
tution of slavery, Chriflianity extended its

mild
* Ifaiall, lxi. . ; xiv. 3.

mild influence to the pradice of war and
that barbarous art, softened by its humane
Ipirit, ceased to be so delfrudive. Secure,
in every event, of personal liberty, the
vanquished resifted with less obstinacy, and
the triumph of the victor became less cruel.
Thus, humanity was introduced into the
exercise of war, with which it appears to
be almost incompatible; and it is to the
merciful maxims of Chrillianity, much
more than to any other cause, that we muff
ascribe the little ferocity and bloodthed
Which accompany modern victories. Everi
where the passions of men are fiercelft and
most highly inflamed, the powerful genius
of our religion interposes, restrains the fu-
ry of war, and sets bounds to its destroy-
ing rage. The benevolent spirit of the
gospel delivereth the captive from his set-
ters, loofeth those who were appointed to
death *, and faith to thef word that is rea-
dy to devour, Return to thy scabbard, and
bejfill t.

IT

( 47 )

IT hath become a fashionable topic 4-

mong political reasoners to celebrate the
mildness and humanity of modern man-
ners, and to prefer the character of present
times, in that refped, before the ancient.
To what cause shall we ascribe this impor-
tant revolution in the sentiments and difpo-
fitions of mankind ? Not to the influence
of better infituted governments; for in
legislative wisdom the ancients far excelled
us: Not to the effects of a better-direded
education; that duty, shamefully neglect-
ed by us, was among them an object of
chief attention: Not to our superior re-
finements in elegant and polite arts; there
we must be content to equal, without pre-
tending to surpass, the ancients. The
Christian religion, hidfrom ages, but now
manifested to the world, is the only cause
capable of producing so great an effect.
That witfdom which is from above is pure
and peaceable, gentle, easy to be entreated,
full of mercy*. Genuine Christianity is

diftinguiihed

( 48 )

diSfinguifhed above all other religions, by
the mildness. of its spirit : The enemy of
every pradice which hardens the heart:
The encourager of every virtue which ren-
ders the character humane. Where-ever
it hath. been eflablifhed in purity, and prac-
tifed with zeal, kindness, long-fujffering, meek,
ness, charity *, are the graces which ac-
company it. Even the vices and inven-
tions of men, which have mingled them-
selves with the truths of God, have not
been able entirely to destroy their effects.
Under all disadvantages, the genius of the
gospel exerts itself, civilizing the fiercest'
and most barbarous nations, and inspiring
a gentleness of disposition, unknown to
any other religion. Together with the best
spiritual blessings, the most valuable tem-
poral mercies hfave been communicated to
the world, by Christianity. It not only
fandifies our fouls, but refines our manners;
and, while it gives the promised of the next

life,
* Col. iii. 12.

( 49 )

life, it improves and adorns the present $
That happy change, which the .wisdom. of
man could not effed, God in his good time
accomplished, by maniJfeling to the world
the myflery hid from ages and generations.

THESE oblervations, which we have

made, suggest many useful refletions, with
regard to the future and universal propa-
gation of Christian knowledge. At the
time when the disciples of Chrifi set out,
in obedience to their Lord's command, to
teach all nations: no undertaking could
appear, in the judgment of man, more wild
and impracticable. But, betide the bless-
ing of God, that accompanied them where-
ever they went, we have discovered several
circumstances in the situation of the world,
which contributed powerfully towards the
success and facility of their enterprize. Aid-
ed by these, the word of God increased, and
the number of dibiples multiplied great-
ly *. The weakneJf of God becamejironger

G than
* As, vi. 7.

(so

than men; and in a Jh/ort time he enableJ
the fooliJh things of the world to confound
the wife, the weak things of the world to
confound the things which are jlrong, and
things that are not, to bring to nought
things that are . That the fame effcTdual
oleffing of God still continueth to second
every sincere and vigorous attempt to spread
the knowledge of his name, we have good
reason to believe. What powerful, un-
known causes may co-operate with this
blessing of the Almighty, we are not per-
mitted yet to discover. It cannot, howe-

ver, be more improbable, that the influen-
ces of Chriflianity (hall reach farther, than
it once was, that they should reach so far.
Afrer we have seen the light of the gof-
pel penetrate into so many dark places
of the earth ; why doth it seem incredible,
thar its splendour should, at last, fill the
world, and scatter the remainder of dark.
ness which covereth the nations ?

IT
* I Cor. i. 25. 27. z8.

( 5I )

IT is obvious to observe one circum-

stance, which cannot fail of introducing
the gospel into diflant nations with great
advantage. That part of the world, where-
in Christianity is efiablifhed, infinitely fur-
passes the reft in all the sciences and im-
provements which raise one nation above
another in reputation or power. Of this
fuiperiority the Europeans have availed
themselves to the utinoft, in ever) project
for extending their empire or commerce;
and have brought a great part of the globe
into dependence, either upon their arts or
their arms. Now, the fame attainments
in science or policy, might be employed to
good purpose, on the fide of religion:
And, though hitherto tubfervient to the de-
signs of interest or ambition, may we not
flatter ourselves, that, at last, they shall
become noble initruments in the hand of
God, for preparing the world to receive the
gospel ?

TH.s glorious profpea may be difant;
but it is not imaginary. Even in a degene-

rate

( s'o )

rate age, zealous and aaive spirits have a-
risen, and societies have been formed, up-
on the generous plan of propagating the
knowledge of Chriftt to nations jar of,
which never heard his fame, nor havefeen
his glory *. What they have already done,
encourages the most sanguine hopes of far-
ther success. And, if it Ihall please God to
increase the number, and to firengthen the
hands. of such well- disposed persons; if he
fhail lee fit, to haflen his- time when one
JlJall become a thofaind, and a small one
firong ' : Then might we expeat that the
knowledge of the Lord would fill the earth,
as the waters over the sea : ; that the de-
fart wozld bljfam as the rose , and the
'wilderness become a fruit/ul field 1 Then
might the spirit of Christianity, which lan-
guilies so visibly in those places where
it hath long been planted, revive with
new vigour in unknown lands, and shine

with

9 Ifa. lxvi. 19. ' Ibid. Ix. 2. t Ibid. xi. 9.
§ Ibid. xxxv. r. I. Ibid. xxxii. 15.

( S3 )

with its first splendour, among the people
who now fit in darkness, and in the region
and fJadow of death *. Then might the
Jolitary places rejoice t, the barren break
forth into singing :, and the tongue of the
dumb praie/ the Lord §.

BUT the conversion of diflant nations is

not the chief care of the Society for propa.
gating Christian knowledge: An object
inearer at hand demands its more immedi.
ate attention. The Highlands and Islands
of Scotland present to us a scene, which we
would little exped in'a nation where true
religion and polished manners have long
flourished. There society fRill appears in a
rude and imperfect form: Strangers to in-
duftry, averse from labour, inured to ra-
pine ; the fierce inhabitants scorned all the
arts of peace, and flood ready for every
bold and desperate action. Attached to
their own customs, from ignorance and ha..

bit,

* Matth. iv. 16. s Ifa. xxxv. i. i Ibid. liv. I.
6 Ibid. xxxv. 6.

( 54)

bit, they have hitherto continued a separate
people: And, though the religion effab-
lithed among them be the fame which we
enjoy, its progress hath been imperfect;
and the fixed pastors were never able to
surmount the disadvantages of their fitua-
tion, or the obafinacy of their people. In
this neglected field, the enemies of our re-
ligion and liberty have sown the feeds of
the worfl fuperflition, and the most perni-
cious principles of government.

This field the Society has occupied ; and

has endeavoured, by its pious care, to ren-
der many of our deluded countrymen good
Christians, and useful fubjeds. Happily
for them, they do not labour alone in this
noble work. The reformation of the

Highlands was never totally neglected by
the Icgiflature : But, rouzed by a recent
danger, it hath merited of late more parti-
cular attention. Suitable to this view, laws

have been enacted with a most humane
fpir;. in order to retrieve that part of the
kingdom from ignorance and barbarilm,

and

(t ss )

and to introduce the fame regular govern-
ment and independence which are the
blessings of other BritiJ/ fubjets. From
these salutary laws, the members of the
Society expe&c great assistance in the pro-
fecution of their design.

IN the mean time, they adore the divine

goodness which hath opened the hearts of
many charitable peifons, whose liberality
hath .put it in their power to carry OP heir
plan with. vigour and success; enabling
them not only to begin a good work, but
in many places to bring it to great perfec-
tion. What a reproach will it be to an
age, wherein no hand is backward to.fip-
ply the most extravagant demands of luxu'.
ry and plealure, if this generous underta-
king (hall languish and decay for want of
support ! The pleasures, after which a
giddy generation run, are unworthy tn be
compared with that sacred j 'v which fills
the heart of a Chriflian who hath h-pne
instrumental i, rescuing an immort-:l foul
from vice, in adorning it with virtue, in

sea-

r :* ,- ,~ {

, : - y

~ .. . ' .. ...

feafoningit with grace, in. mtOlt/ing tnji
mnyflery 'of to

t hfpel to th fom whomQ it

it.id, and in feeding the' hungry witk.
the bread of life. If we ourselves have tafis.e
ed of the heavenly gift, if we have passed
from death to life, and have not only hear&d
the found, but felt the power of .the gof-
pel; the greater will be our zeal in com-
municating the fame glad tidings to others,
that they also may be persuaded to fly so .
refuge to the conJolations which are in
Chrifi: If honour to our blessed Redeemer
be the leading; rinciple in our hearts, we
will never rest satisfied, until his gloryfill the.
earth, and every knee bow to his facred.name.',
By endeavouring thus to. bless others, we
shall draw down the divine blessing up-.,
on ourselves. They that be wife /hall/hint,
as the brightness of the firmament; and they
that turn many to righteozfizefs, as the jars
for ever and ever *. H.>)

* Dan. xii. 13.

F I N I S.
