# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VI.

THE
H I S T 0

Y

O F
SC O T L A N D.

BOOK VI.

H E unexpected blow, by which the Regent was cut off,
itruck the King's party with the utmost contfernation.
Elizabeth bewailed his death as the most fatal disaster,

which could have befallen her kingdom; and was inconsolable to
a degree that little suited her dignity. Mary's adherents exulted,
as if, now, her refloration were not only certain, but near at hand.
The infamy of the crime naturally fell on those, who expressed
such indecent joy at the commiflion of it. And as the assassin made
his escape on a horse, which belonged to Lord Claud Hamilton,
and fled dircAly to Hamilton, where he was received in triumph,
it was concluded that the Regent had fallen a facrificc to the re-
fcntmcnt of the Qtecn's party, rather than to the revenge of a
private man. On the day after the murder, Scott of ltucclctili,
and Kcr of Ferniherfl, both zealous abettors of the Qcctn's caufc,

VOL I. II. l eterled

BOOKVI.

I570.

Disorders oc-
cafioned by
the Regent's
death.

BooKVr. entered England in an hofile manner, and plundered and burnt

570.- the coinltry, the inhabitants of which expeded no such outrage. If
'57o.

the Regent had been alive, they would scarce have ventured on
such an irregular incursion, nor could it well have happened so soon
after his death, unless they had been privy to the crime.

THIS was not the only irregularity, to which the anarchy that

followed the RIcgent's death gave occasfon. During such general
confusion, men hoped for universal impunity, and broke out into
exceflcs of every kind. As it was impoifible to reifrain these, with-

Steps taken out a fettled form of government, a Convention of the nobles was
towards eleft-
i,n, another held, in order to deliberate concerning the elecdion of a Regent.
Fcbn tz. The Queen's adherents refused to be present at the meeting, and

protested against its proceedings. The King's own party was irre-
solute, and divided in opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldy had
set at liberty, and who obtained from the nobles then assembled
a declaration acquitting him of the crime which had been laid to.
his charge, endeavoured to bring about a coalition of the two par-
ties, by proposing to admit the Queen to the joint administration
of government with her son. Elizabeth, adhering to her ancient
fyflem with regard to Scottish affairs, laboured, notwithstanding the
solicitation of Mary's fiiends -:;, to multiply, and to perpetuate the
fa&ions, which tore in. pieces the kingdom. Randolph, whom she
dispatche(l into Scotland on the first news of the Regent's death,
and who was her usual agent for such ferviccs, found all parties so
cxatpcratc(l by mutual injuries and so full of irrcconcilcable rancour,
that it (coil hin l;ttle trouble to inflame their animolity. The Con-
ventioI broke up without coming to any agreement; and a new
inc 'ting, to which the nobles of all parties were invited, w'as ap-
poillted oil the firfl of May -1'.

* Sec Appcnlt. NO I. 1 Crawf. Mcm. 131. Ctldicrw, 2. 157.

MEAN-

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who still continued to ac-

knowledge the King's authority, were at the utmost pains to restore
tome degree of harmony among their countrymen. They procured,
for this purpoic, an amicable conference among the leaders of the
two factions. But while the one demanded the restoration of the
Queen, as the only thing which could re-eflablifh the public tran-
-quillity; while the other esteemed the King's authority to be so
sacred, that it was, on no account, to be called in question or im-
paired; and neither of them would recede in the least point from
their opinions, they separated without any profped of concord.
Both were rendered more averse from reconcilement, by the hope
of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from France, with promises of
powerful succour to the Queen's adherents; and as the civil wars in
that kingdom seemed to be on the point of terminating in a peaces
it was expected that Charles would soon be at liberty to fulfil what
he promised. On the other hand, the Earl of Suffex was aflem-
bling a powerful army on the borders, and its operations could not
fail of adding spirit and strength to the King's party *.

BOOK I.

1570.

A coalition of
parties at-
tempted in
vain.
THOUGH the attempt towards a coalition of the factions proved Queen's party

in po{fliieon of

ineffectual, it contributed foimewhat to moderate, or suspend their LEcinbuigh.
rage; but they soon began to ad with their uftual violence. MIor-
ton, the most vigilant and able leader on the King's fidc, iblicitcd
Elizabeth to intcrpofe, without delay, for the safety of a party, ft
devoted to her interefi, and which flood so much in need of her
affitlance. The Chiefs of the Qieen's faction, aflcmbling at Lin-
lithgow, marched thence to Edinburgh; and Kirkaldy, twho was April o.,
both Governor of the cafllc, and Provofl of the town, prcvailed

.- Crawl. Mcrn. 1 31

B -,

CII

BooK VI. on the citizens, though with onime difliculty, to admit them within

tice gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of Athole, and
Maitland, acceded alrnoif openly to their party; and the Duke,
and Lord Herreis, having recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's
favour, refiucd the places, which they had formerly held in their
councils. Encouraged by the acquisitions of persons, so illustrious
by their birth, or to eminent for their abilities, they published a
proc:llamtion, declaring their intention to support the Queen's au-
thority, and seemed rcfolved not to leave the city before the meet--
ing of the approaching convention, in which, by their numbers
and influence, they did not doubt of securing a majority of voices
on their fide*".

E;.d avourto AT the fLme time, they had formed a design of kindling war
invOlve the
nation in a between the two kingdoms. And if they could engage them in
aT wit'Eng" hostilities, and revive their ancient emulation and antipathy, they

hoped, not only to dissolve a confederacy of great advantage to the
King's cause, but to reconcile their countrymen to the Queen,
Elizabeth's natural and most dangerous rival. With this view,
they had, immediately after the murder of the Regent, prompted
Scott and Ker to commence hoflilities, and had since instigated
them to continue and extend their depredations. As Elizabeth fore-
law, on the one hand, the dangerous confcquences of rendering this
a national quarrel; and rcfolved on the other, not to fuiicr i'Lch
an inhilt on her government to pass with impunity; she i l;cd a
i'locl.llnatil(, dcclaring that she imputed the outrages which ladl
leen coInmitted, not to the Scottifli nation, but to a few cdeiccrate
,ind ill-dclgnihng pcrfoni;; that, with tile formcr, (lic was rclblved

Crawf. M.
M . 37. Caldetw. 2. 176.

tO
4

to maintain an inviolable friendship, whereas the duty, which ihe BOOK VI.
owed to her own fubjeds, obliged her to chastise the licentiousness 570

1570.

of the latter'. Suffex and Scroop, accordingly, entered Scotland,
the one on the east, the other on the weft borders, and laid waste
the adjacent countries with fire and sword t. Fame magnified the
number and progress of their armies, and Mary's adherents, not
thinking thlcmfelves fafc in Edinburgh, the inhabitants whereof
were ill affe'ed to tleir cause, retired to Linlithgow. There, by April 28,
a public proclamation, they asserted the Queen's authority, and
sorbad giving obedience to any, but the Duke, or the Earls of Ar-
gyll and Huntly, whom she had conflituted her Lieutenants, in the
kingdom,

THE nobles who continued faithful to the King, though confi- Kng's party.

enter Edin-

derably weakened by the defection of so many of their friends, as- burgh.E
fembled at Edinburgh on the day appointed. They issued a coun- May I,
ter-proclamation, declaring those who appeared for the Queen,
enemies of their country; and charging them with the murder both
of the late King, and of the Regent. They could not, however,
prefumefo much on their own 'firength, as to venture either to cled
a Regent, or to take the field against the Quccen's party; but the
afliancc which they received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do
both. By her order, Sir William Drury marched into Scotland,
with a thousand foot, and three ihundred horse; the Kling's adhe-
rents joined him with a considerable body of troops, and ad-
vancing toward(s GlaTgow, wlicrc the advcrfc party had already'
beg ilin olilitics, by attaclking, tice caltlc, lthey forced theml to re--
tire, plundered the neiglhbouring cotu.lr, \vic'lh belongric to thi,:

Cald. 2. 181. (*,..2;, 174

I lamiltous>.

BooK VI. Hlamiltons, and, after seizing some of their castles, and razing

15 7 ~ others, returned to Edinburgh.
1570.

Motives of UNDER Drury's protetion, the Earl of Lennox returned into
Elizabeth's
conduEt with Scotland. It was natural to commit the government of the kingdom
regard to
ghemr. to him, during the minority of his grandson. His illustrious birth,

and alliance with the royal family of England, as well as of Scot-
land, rendered him worthy of that honour; and his resentment
against Mary being implacable, and his estate lying in England, and
his family residing there, Elizabeth confidered him as a man, who,
both from inclination, and from interest, would act in concert with
her, and ardently wished that he might succeed Murray in the of-
fice of Regent. But, on many accounts, she did not think it pru-
dent to discover her own sentiments, or to favour his pretensions too
openly. The civil wars in France, which had been excited by a
pretended zeal for religion, and carried on with a fierceness that did
it real dishonour, appeared now to be on the point of coming to
an issue; and after shedding the best blood, and wafting the richest
provinces in the kingdom, both parties desired peace with an ar-
dour that facilitated the negociations, which were carrying on for
that purpose. Charles IX. was known to be a passionate admirer
of Mary's beauty. Nor could he, in honour, susser a Queen of
France, and the most ancient ally of his crown, to languish in her
present cruel situation, without attempting to procure her relief.
He had, hitherto, been obliged to satisfy hinfelf with remonifrat-
ing, by his ambassadors, against the indignity, with which ihe had
been treated. But if he were once at full liberty to pursue his in-
clinations, Elizabeth would have every thing to dread from the im-
pctuofity of his temper, and the power of his arms. It therefore
became ncccfiary for her to act with tome reserve, and not to ap-

pear,
.5

pear, avowedly, to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con-
tempt of Mary's authority. The jealousy and prejudices of the
Scots required no less management. Had she openly supported
Lennox's claim; had (he recommended him to the Convention, as
the candidate, whom she approved; this might have rouzed the in-
dependant spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a discovery of her
intention, she might have defeated its success. For the!f reasons,
she hesitated long, and returned ambiguous answers to all the mef-
fages, which flhe received from the King's party. A more ex-
plicit declaration of her sentiments was at last obtained, and an
event of an extraordinary nature seems to have been the occasion
of it. Pope Pius V. having issued a bull, whereby he excommu-
nicated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom, and absolved her
fubjets from their oath of allegiance, Felton, an Engliihman,
had the boldness to fix it on the gates of the Bishop of London's
palace. In former ages, a Pope, moved by his own ambition,
or pride, or bigotry, denounced this fatal sentence against the
most powerful monarchs; but as the authority of the court of
Rome was now less regarded, its proceedings were more cautious;
and it was only when they were rouzed by some powerful Prince,
that the thunders of the church were ever heard. Elizabeth
therefore imputed this ftcp, which the Pope had taken, to a
combination of the Roman Catholic Princes against her, and sus-
pecd that some plot was on foot in favour of the Scottifi Queen.
In that event, she knew that the safety of her own kingdom de-
pended on prefcrving her influence in Scotland; and in order to
llrcnp-thcn this, she rlenewed her promises of protecting the
Kling's adherents, encouraged them to proceed to the clection of
a Regent, and even ventured to p,)int out thi Earl of Lenno:-,
;as the perfoii who had the belt title. That honour was accor-

ding/y

Boo K VI.

1570.

dingly conferred upon him, in a Convention of the whole party,
held on the ilth of July *,

THE Regent's first care was to prevent the meeting of the Par-

liament, which the Queen's party had summoned to convene at
Linlithgow. Having effeded that, he marched against the Earl of
Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the garrison,
which he had placed in Brechin, to surrender at discretion. Soon
after he made himself master of some other castles. Emboldened
by this successful beginning of his administration, as well as by the
appearance of a considerable army, with which the Earl of Suffex
hovered on the borders, he deprived Maitland of his office of fe-
cretary, and proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly, and other leaders
of the Queen's party, traitors and enemies of their country t.

IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the Queen's adherents

had recourse to the King of Spain :, with whom Mary had held a
close correspondence ever since her confinement in England. They
prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two of his officers to take
a view of the country, and to examine its coafis, and harbours; and
obtained from him a finall supply of money and arms, which were
fcnt to the Earl of Huntly II. But this aid, so disproportionate to
their cxigencies, would have availed them little. They were in-
dcltcd for their fafcty to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on,
under colour of rcfloring the captive Qucen to her throne. The
firfl fclps in this ncgociation had been taken in the month of May;
but hitherto little progrcfi; was made in it. The peace concluded be-
tween the Roman Catholics anid I-ugonots in France, and her apprc-

* SpOIrwo 240. C;l(l . 28. 8. Sec Append. N II1. '-1 Crawl. Mcin. I159.
Cald. 2.. Ilj. :: See Append. No III. 1 Aii(terf. 3. 123. Crawls. Mem. 153.

hcifions
BOOKVLo

1570.

Lennox elec-
ed Regent.

Mary's adhe-
rents nego-
ciate with
Spain.

Elizabeth pro-
p.lfcs a trc.ty
of nccnmmo-
d.ltion bec-
t\\i'cll Iqr alv
;'.] lher futL-
jcts.

henfions that Charles would interpose with vigour in behalf of
his fifter-in-law, quickened Elizabeth's motions. She asseted to
treat her prisoner with more indulgence, ihe listened more gracious-
ly to the follicitations of foreign ambassadors in her favour, and
seemed fully determined to replace her on the throne of her ancef-
tors. As a proof of her sincerity, ihe laboured to procure a cefla-
tion of arms between the two contending facions in Scotland. Len-
nox, elated with the good fortune, which had hitherto attended his
adminiflration, and flattering himself with an easy triumph over
enemies, whose estates were wafted, and their forces dispirited, re-
fused, for some time to come into this measure. It was not safe
for him, however, to dispute the will of his proteatrefs. A cefla-
tion of hostilities during two months, to commence on the third of
September, was agreed upon; and being renewed from time to
time, it continued till the firif of April next year *.

SOON after, Elizabeth despatched Cecil and Sir Walter Mildmay

to the Queen of Scots. The dignity of these ambassadors, the
former her prime Minister, the latter Chancellor of the Exchequer,
and one of her ablest counsellors, convinced all parties that the
negociation was serious, and that the hour of Mary's liberty was
now approaching. The propositions, which they made to her,
were advantageous to Elizabeth, but such as a Prince, in Mary's
situation, had reason to expegt. The ratification of the treaty of
Edinburgh; the renouncing any pretensions to the Englifll Crown
during Elizabeth's own life, or that of her posterity; the adhering
to the alliance between the two kingdoms ; the pardoning her fi-b-
jcds, who had taken arms against her; and her promising to hold

'* Spotfwood, 243.

Boo K VI.

I57o.

9
Vo L. II.

c

BOOKVI. no correspondence, and to countenance no enterprize, that might

570 difRurb Elizabeth's government; were among the chief articles. By

way of security for the accomplishment of these, they demanded
that some persons of rank should be given as hoflages, that the
Prince her son should reside in England, and that a few castles on
the border should be put into Elizabeth's hands. To some of thef:
propositions Mary consented; some the endeavoured to mitigate;
and others (he attempted to evade. In the mean time, Ihe tranf-
mitted copies of them to the Pope, to the Kings of France and'
Spain, and to the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that without
some timely and vigorous interposition in her behalf, fie would be
obliged to accept of these hard conditions, and to purchase liberty
at any price. But the Pope was a distant and feeble ally, and by
his efforts against the Turks, his treasury was entirely exhaufled.
Charles had already begun to meditate that conspiracy against the
Hugonots, which marks his reign with such infamy; and it rcquired
much leisure, and perfect tranquillity, to bring that execrable plan
to maturity. Philip was employed in fitting out that fleet, which
acquired so great renown to the Chriflian arms, by the vitory over
the infidels at Lepanto; the Moors in Spain threatened an infur-
rcdion; and his fubjetls in the Netherlands, provoked by much
opprcflion, and many indignities, were breaking out into open re-
bellion. All of them, for these different reasons, advised Mary,
without depending on their aid, to conclude the treaty on the bcll
terms sic could procure '¢.

. it;iiccsil' M MA Y, accordingly, consented to many of Elizableth's demands,
a1 tiril.cs1 il l,c °
condlui of it. and dicovcrcd a facility of dilpoliition, which promised frill fur-

' Aindlcrt. vol. iii. o10, 120,

ther
10

ther concefflons. But no concession she could have made, would BOOK VI.
have satisfied Elizabeth, who, in spite of her repeated profeflions
of sincerity to foreign ambassadors, and notwithstanding the so-
lemnity with which she carried on the treaty, had no other objed
in it, than to amuse Mary's allies, and to gain time *. After hav-
ing so long treated a Queen, who fled to her for refuge, in so un-
generous a manner, Ihe could not now dismiss her with fafcty.
Under all the disadvantages of a rigorous confinement, lMary had
found means to excite commotions in England, which were ex-
tremely formidable. What desperate effects of her just resent-
mcnt might be expeCted, if fie were set at liberty, and recovered
her former power ? What engagements could bind her, not to
revenge the wrongs she had suffered, nor to take advantage of the
favourable conjunctures that might prcent themselves ? Was it
possible for her to give such security for her behaviour, in times to
come, as might remove all suspicions and fears ? And was there not
good cause to conclude, that no future benefits could ever obliterate
the memory of past injuries ? It was thus Elizabeth reasoned; though
{he continued to at as if her views had been entirely different. She
appointed seven of her privy couniellors to be commissioners for
fettling the articles of the treaty; and as Mary had already named
the Bishops of Ross, and Galloway, and Lord Levingfton, for her
ambassadors, she required the Regent to imrpowcr proper persons to
appear in behalf of the King. The Earl of Morton, Pitcairn ab- IS7r.
bot of Dunfermling, and Sir James Macgill were the pcrfons chofcn
by the Regent. They prepared for their journey, as slowly as Eli-
zabeth herself could have wilhcd. At length they arrived at Lon-
don, and met the commissioners of the two OQuens. Mary's am- Feb. I)o

" Digges. Compl. Amb. 78.

II
C z

bahIudors

BOOK VI. baffadors discovered the strongest inclination to comply with every

'L57 ' thing, that would remove the obstacles, which flood in the way

of their mistress's liberty. But when Morton and his associates
were called upon to vindicate their conduct, and to explain the fen-
timents of their party, they began, in justification of their treat-
ment of the Queen, to advance such maxims concerning the li-
mited powers of Princes, and the natural right of fubjeas to re-
sift and to controul them, as were extremely shocking to Elizabeth,.
whose notions of regal prerogative were very exalted. With regard
to the authority which the King now possessed, they declared that
they neither had, nor could possibly receive inftrutions, to consent
to any treaty, that tended to subvert, or even to impair it, in the
least degree ~. Nothing could be more trifling and ridiculous, than
such a reply from the commissioners of the King of Scots, to the
Qeeen of England. His party depended absolutely on her protec-
tion, her hand had feated him on the throne, and to her power he
owed the continuance of his reign. With the utmost ease, fie could
have brought them to talk in a very different manner; and whatever
conditions Ihe might have thought fit to prescribe, they would have
had no other choice but to submit. This declaration, however, file

ft prnves afrcted to confider as an insuperable difficulty. And fining that
fruimefs.

there was no reason to dread any danger from the French King, who,
had not discovered that eagerness in support of Mary, which was
expclc&ed; the reply made by Morton furnished her with a pretence
M;Vrch zi foor putting a flop to the negociation, till the Regent fiould fend am-

bairatdors with more ample powers. Tinus after being anuufed for
ten montths w\ith the hopes of liberty, the 11unhappy Q2 cel of Scots
rcmainled under llricer cuflocly thaln ever, and witlhout any pro--

,'rc1l of cfcaping from it; while tliofLc lub jds, who fill adhered to

C ,1M1. 2. 7.34. D)igcs , 51. II'ancs, 52,, 52h..

llher,-
I 2

her, were exposed, without ally or protetor, to the rage of enemies, Boo K VI
whom their success in this negotiation rendered Rill more insolent*. "-

I57]:.

ON the day after the expiration of the truce, which had been

observed with little exaanefs on either fide, Captain Crawford of
Jordan-hill, a gallant and enterprising officer, performed a service,
of great importance to the Regent, by surprising the castle of Dun-
barton. This was the only fortified place in the kingdom, of which
the Queen had kept poiffefion, ever since the commencement of
the civil wars. Its situation on the top of an high and almost inac-
ceffible rock, which rifes in the middle of a plain, rendered it ex-
tremely strong, and in the opinion of that age, impregnable; as it
commanded the river Clyde, it was of great consequence, and
esteemed the most proper place in the kingdom for landing any so-
reign troops, that might come to Mary's aid. The strength of the
place rendered Lord Fleming the governor more secure than he
ought to have been, confidering its importance. A soldier, who had
served in the garrison, and had been disgusted by some ill usage,
proposed the scheme to the Regent, endeavoured to demonfirate that
it was pracicable, and offered himself to go the foremost man on
the enterprize. It was thought prudent to rifque any danger, for
so grcat a prize. Scaling-ladders, and whatever else was necetlr-y,
were prepared ll ithe utrmoft tfcrecy and dispatch. All the
avenuies to the castle were fcized, that no intelligence of the design
might rcach the governor. Towards evening, Crawvford marched
from Glalfow, with a finall but determined band. By midnight,
they arrived at the bottom of the rock. The moon was fct, and
thc fly, which hitherto lhad eecn cxtrclcly clcar, was covered
with a thick fog. It was whllre thc rock was highcfi, that tlhe a-

r Anllelcrl; 3. 91, \c.

fa.ia ilnt3

Dunbarton
castle furpriw-
ed behe Re-
gent,

BooKVI. failants made their attempt, because in that place there were few

7 i. sentinels, and they hoped to find them least alert. The first ladder

was scarce fixed, when the weight and eagerness of those who mount-
ed it, brought it to the ground. None of the assailants were hurt
by the fall, and none of the garrison alarmed by the noise. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the sock, and fastened the ladder
to the roots of a tree, which grew in a cleft. This place they all
reached with the utmost difficulty, but were Itill at a great distance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladders were made fast a second
time; but in the middle of the ascent, they met with an unforeseen
difficulty. One of their companions was seized with some sudden
fit, and clung, seemingly without life, to the ladder. All were at
a stand. It was impossible to pass him. To tumble him headlong
was cruel; and might occasion a discovery. But Crawford's pre-
ience of mind did not forsake him. He ordered the soldier to be
bound fast to the ladder, that he might not fall when the fit was
over: and turning the other fide of the ladder, they mounted, with
ease, over his belly. Day now began to break, and there still re-
mained an high wall to scale; but after surmounting so many greater
difficulties, this was soon accomplished. A sentry observed the first
man, who appeared on the parapet, and had jufi time to give the
alarm, before he was knocked on the head. The officers and fol-
diers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and more solicitous
about their own safety, than capable of making refiflance. The
assailants rushed forwards, with repeated shouts, and with the ut-
most fury; took poffffion of the magazine; seized the cannon; and
turned them again (t their enemies. Lord Flemiing got into a finall
boat, and fled all alone, into Ai-gylfliirc. Crawford, in reward of
his valour and good condlu&i, remained inafler of the cafile; and as
he did not lose a single man in the cntcrprize, lie enjoyed his iuc-
ccfs with uinmixcd plcafurc. Lady qlcming, Vcrac tle French

En voy,
14.

Envoy, and Hamilton Archbishop of St. Andrews, were the pri- BooKVI.
foners of greatest ditlintion- *. 71

VE RAC'S charaEter protected him from the usage, which lie me- Aiclibifliopcf

St. Andrews

ritcd by his activity in stirring up enemies againit the King. The put to dtath
Regent treated the lady with great politeness, and humanity. But by him.
a very different fate awaited the archbishop; lie was carried under
a firong guard to Stirling; and as he had formerly been attainted
by act of Parliament, he was, without any formal trial, condemn-
ed to be hanged; and on the fourth day after he was taken, the
sentence was executed. An attempt was made to convict him of be-
ing accessary to the murther both of the King and Regent, but these
accusations were supported by no proof. Our historians observe
that he was the first bishop in Scotland who died by the hands of
the executioner. The high offices he had enjoyed, both in church
and state, ought to have exempted him from a punishment, inflicted
only on the lowest criminals. But his zeal for the Queen, his abi-
lities, and his profession, rendered him odious and formidable to
the King's adherents. Lennox hated him as the person, by wholfc
counsels the reputation and power of the house of Hamilton were
supported. And party rage, and personal enmity, dictated that in-
decent sentence, for which some colour was fought, by imputing to
him such odious crimes-'-.

THIE lols of Dunbarton, and the fcvcre treatment of the Arch- I.;ilali I-

biliop, perplexed and enraged the Qirccn' p aarty; and liofiilities t'c o ;'.it
CIwere r-Cnewd with all the fiercences vw-hicl disappointment and in- Ilc'l : i, t:,l
dignation can inipire. Kirkaldy, who, luring tlh truce, ha1 takenll

dl"'.
carc to incrcalc tle number of his gar.iloni, and to provide Ceery

I S.'ot'\V. 52.

ZZ
5

15
"' BLIC 11. 3941·

thing neceflary for his defence, issued a proclamation declaring Len-
nox's authority to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded all who fa-
voured his cause to leave the town within fix hours; seized the
arms, belonging to the citizens; planted a battery on the steeple of
St. Giles; repaired the walls and fortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affeaions of the inhabitants leanied a different way,
held out the metropolis against the Regent. The Duke, Huntly,
Home, Herreis, and other chiefs of that faction, repaired to Edin-
burgh with their followers; and having received a finall fum of
money, and some ammunition from France, formed no contemptible
army within the walls. On the other fide, Morton seized Leith,
and fortified it; and the Regent joined him with a considerable bo-
dy of men. While the armies lay so near each other, daily fkir-
mifhes happened, and with various success. The Queen's party
was not strong enough to take the field against the Regent, nor was
his superiority so great as to undertake the siege of the castle, or of
the town *

SOME time before Edinburgh fell into the hands of his enemies,

the Regent had summoned a Parliament to meet in that place. In
order to prevent any objeCtion against the lawfulness of the meeting,
the members obeyed the proclamation as exactly as possible; and
assemblcd in a house at the head of the Canongate, which though
without the walls, lies within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy ex-
erted himself to the utmost to interrupt their meeting; but they
were so firongly guarded, that all his efforts were vain. They
passed an adt attainting Maitland, and a few others, and then ad--
journed to the 28th of August :-.

3t Crawf. Mem. 177.
BoolK VI

1751I

Both parties
hold parlia-
ments.
May 14.

* Cald. 2'. 233, &C.

THE other party, in order that their proceedings might be coun- 13oK VI.

tenanced by the fame flew of legal authority, held a meeting of "5"7
parliament soon after. There was produced in this aflembly, a de-
claration by the Q een, of the invalidity of that deed, whereby she
had resigned the crown, and consented to the coronation of her
son. Conformable to this declaration, an ac was past pronouncing
the resignation to have been extorted by fear; to be null in itfclf,
and in all its consequences; and enjoining all good subjects to ac-
knowledge the Queen alone to be their lawful Sovereign, and to
support those who aaed in her name. The present establishment
of the protestant religion was confirmed by another statute; and,
in imitation of the adverse party, a new meeting was appointed on
the 26th of August .

M.EANWHILE, all the miseries of civil war desolated the king- Mifcrabie

ccmdixio, of

dom. Fellow-citizens, friends, brothers, took different fides, and the kingdom.
ranged themselves under the flandards of the contending factions.
In every county, and almost in every town and village, King's-nzen
and Queen's-men were names of difiinftion. Political hatred dif-
solved all natural ties, and extinguished the reciprocal good-will
and confidence, which hold mankind together in society. Religious
zeal mingled itself with these civil diftindions, and contributed not
a little to heighten, and to inflame them.

THE factions which divided the kingdom were, in appearance, S'at oof..-

only two. But in both there, there were persons with views, and tions'
principles, so different from each other, that they ought to be dif-
tinguifhed. With some, confidcrations of religion were prcdomi-

* Crawf. Mem. 177.

17
VOL. II.

D

BooK VI. nant, and they either adhered to the Queen, because they hoped,

5 7 I by her means, to rc-eftablifll Popery, or they defended' the King's

authority, as the best support of the Protestant faith. Among thefi
the opposition was violent and irreconcileable. Others were influ-
enced by political motives only, or allured by views of interest; the
Regent aimed at uniting these, and did not despair of gaining, by
gentle arts, many of Mary's adherents to acknowledge the King's
authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of a
coalition, but on such terms, that the Qceen might be restored to
fomc flare in the government, and the kingdom shake off its de-
pendancc on England. Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious,
and the molf powerful man of the King's party, held a particular
courfc; and moving only as he was prompted by the court of Eng-
land, thwlarted every measure, that tended towards a reconcilement
of the faCtions; and as he served Elizabeth with much fidelity, he
derived both power and credit from her avowed protection.

THIE time appointed by both parties, for the meeting of their

parliaments, now approached. Only three peers and two biliops
appeared in that which was held in the Qeiin's name at Edin-
burgh. But contermptible as their numbcrs were, they pafned an a&t
for attainting upwards of -oo of the adveric faction. The meet-
ing at Stirling was numerous and plcendiRl. Th e Regent had pre-
vailed on the Earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Caflils, and Lorl tBoyd,
to acknowvlcdge, the King's authority. The thr-ce TI.-ls were among'
the most powerful noblemen in the kin;gdionl, and had hitherto
been zealous in the Q2ceen's caufc. Lord Boyd liad lcen on one of
Mary's commiflioncrs at York andl \\'t iiilcr, n l, inlcc thlat
time, liad been admitted into all her I(iol crcrt co(incils. 1But, dIl-
rig that turbulent period, tlic condul(lo i ullividtalls> as well as the

priinc'ipl(h:
i8

principles of facions, varied so often, that the sense of honour,
the chief prccervative of consistence in charater, was entirely loft;
and without any regard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one
party, and adopted all the violent passions of the other. The de-
fecion, however, of so many persons of diflinClion, not only weak-
ened the Queen's party, but added reputation to her adv-ersaries.

1
BooK VI.

1571.

l i

AFTER the example of the Parliament at Edinburgh, that at Stir- The Kirg'

ling began with framing a£as against the opposite facion. But in the dJ in tir;i ,.
midst of all the security, which confidence in their own numbers,
or distance from danger could inspire, they were awakened, early
one morning, by the thouts of the enemy in the heart of the town.
In a moment, the houses of every person of difiinllion were fir- Sept. 5-
rounded, and before they knew what to think of £o firange an
event, the Regent, the Earls of Argyll, Morton, Glencairn, Caf-
fils, Eglinton, Montrose, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cathcart,
Ogilvie, were all made prisoners, and mounted behind troopers,
who were ready to carry them to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the
author of this daring enterprize; and if he had not been induced,
by the ill-timed solicitude of his friends about his safety, not to
hazard his own person in conducting it, that day might have ter-
minated the contest between the two factions, and have reflored
peace to his country. By his direction, four hundred men, under
the command of Huntley, Lord Claud IIamiilton, and Scot of
Bucclcugh, fct out fromn Edinburgh, and tli bectter to conceal thcir
design, marched towards the South. PIut they ioon wvllced to tlic
right, and ]horlcs hayvil; beeln providcd fior tlel infanty, 1rolde ftli'iglih
to Stirling-. By four in the morning, they arrived there; not one
Icontry was polled onl the walls, not a tingle nan w;as awlc ;ah)out
Ilhc place., Thly met willh no refttilance from any pcrfoll tlic!v 1:,d

1D z i i/cld,

BooK VI. seized, except Morton. He defending his house with obstinate va--

lour they were obliged to set it on fire, and he did not surrender
'57'..

till forced out of it by the flames. In performing this some time
was consumed; and the private men, unaccultomed to regular dif-
cipline, left their colours, and began to rifle the houses and ihops of
the citizens. The noise and uproar in the town reached the castle.
The Earl of Mar sallied out with thirty soldiers, fired briskly upon
the enemy, of whom almost none but the officers kept together in
a body. The townsmen took arms to assist their governor; a sudden
panic itruck the assailants; some fled, some surrendered themselves
to their own prisoners; and had not the borderers who followed
Scott, prevented a pursuit, by carrying off all the horses within the
place, not a man would have escaped. If the Regent had not un-
fortunately been killed, the loss on the King's fide would have been
as inconsiderable, as the alarm was great. 7hink on the Archb/ifop
of St. Andrew's, was the word among the Queen's soldiers; and

The Regent 1ennox fell a sacrifice to his memory. The officer, to whom he
killed.

kiled. surrendered, endeavouring to protect him, loft his own life in his

defence. He was slain, according to the general opinion, by com-
nand. of Lord Claud Hamilton. Kirkaldy had the glory of concert-
ing this plan with great secrecy, and prudence; but Morton's fortu--
nate obstinacy, and the want of discipline among his own troops,.
deprived him of success, the only thing wanting to render this
equal to the most applauded military enterprizes of the kind .

MRTr choren As so many of the nobles were afemblcd, they proceeded, with-
I :gel t.
sui. o. out delay, to the clecion of a Regent. Argyll, Morton and Mar,.

werc candidates for the office. Mar was chocfn by a majority of

':' Mcv. 226. Caw. MRfcm,. 2ot.

groiccs,
20

voices. Amidst all the fierce difientions, which had prevailed so
long in Scotland, he had distinguished himself by his moderation,
his humanity, and his disinterestedness. And as his power was far
inferior to Argyll's, and his abilities not so great as Morton's, he
was, for these reasons, less formidable to the other nobles. His me-
rit, too, in having so lately rescued the Leaders of the party from
imminent deftrution, contributed not a little to his preferment.

WHILE these things were carrying on in Scotland, the tranfac-

tions in England were no less interesting to Mary, and still more fa-
tal to her cause. The parliament of that kingdom, which met in
April, passed an a&, by which it was declared to Le high treason,
to claim any right to the Crown during the life of the Queen; to
affirm that the title of any other person was better than hers; or to
maintain that the parliament had not power to fettle, and to limit
the order of fucceeffon. This remarkable statute was intended not
only for the security of their own sovereign, but to curb the restless
and. intriguing spirit of the Scottifli. Queen, -and her adherents--..

AT this time, a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth and the

Duke of Anjou, the French King's brother, was well advanced.
Both courts seemed to desire it with equal ardor, and gave out,
with the utmost confidence, that it could not fail of taking place.
Neither of them, however, wished its tuccefs; and they encouraged
it for no other end, but because it fcrvcd to cover or to promote
their particular deligns. The whole policy of Catherine of Medi-
cis was bent towards tlce accomplifhnicnt of her dcteflable project
for the (lefirucion of tile Iugunot chiefs ;and by carrying on a
negociation for the marriage of her ion witl a Princcis, whlo was
juilly eflccmed time protcdrefs of that party, by yielding fbmc things

' CamQi 4 ,3

G6 e ?

BooK Vi.

1571..

Proceedings
in England
ngainft Mary.

Marriegc nC-
gociated bc-
iwecn Eliza--
heth and thc
Duke ns
Anjiou

in point of religion, and by discovering an indifference with regard
to others, fhe-hoped to aimufe all the ProteiLants in Europe, and to
lull asleep the jealousy even of the I-iugonots themselves. Elizabeth
flattered herself with reaping adv-antages of another kind. During
the dependance of the negociation, the French could not, with de-
cency, give any open assistance to the Scottifil Queen; if they con-
ceived any hopes of success in the treaty of marriage, they would,
of course, interest themselves but coldly in her concerns; Mary her-
self muil be deje'ed at losing an ally, whom file had hitherto
reckoned her most powerful protector; and by interrupting her cor-
refpondence with France, one source, at least, of the cabals and in-
trigues which disturbed the kingdom, would be flopt. Both Queens
succeeded in their schemes. Catherine's artifices imposed on Eliza-
beth, and blinded the Hugonots. The French discovered the utmost
indifference about the interest of the Scottish Queen; and Mary,
confidering that court as already united with her rival, turned her-
self, for protetion towards the King of Spain'. Philip, whose
dark and thoughtful mind delighted in the myflery of intrigue,
had held a secret correspondence with Mary, for some time, by
means of the Bishop of Ross, and had supplied both herfclf and her
-alhercnts in Scotland with finall fums of money. Ridolphi, a Flo-
rentine gentleman, who resided at London under the character of
a banker, and who acted privately as an agent for the Pope, was
thc pci-fon whom the Bishop intrufled with this negociation. Mary
thoutght it ncccfnary, likcwife, to communicate the secret to the
Duke of Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately refcored to liberty,
ipon Iis iolcmn promise to have no firtlhcr intcrcourfI with tle
Q(Tccn of Scots; which, lhowevrcc, he regarded so little, that fie
took no llep in any matter of moment, without his advice. She

:; Digges, 144, 48. Cand, 143.

complained
Boo K VI

1571.

Nporfolk'scon-
fpiracy in fa-
vour c'f Mir'.

complained in a long letter, which lhe wrote to him in cyphers, of BooK VL
the baseness, with which the French court had abandoned ler in- ~I-jI
tereff; she declared her intention of imploring the affiflance of the
Spanifl Monarch, which was now her only resource; and recom-
mended Ridolphi to his confidence, as a person capable both of
explaining, and of advancing the scheme. The Duke commanded
Hickford, his secretary, to decypher, and then to burn this letter;
but whether he had been already gained by the court, or resolved
at that time to betray his matler, he disobeyed the latter part of
the order, and hid the letter, together with other treasonable pa-
pers, under the Duke's own bed.

RIDOLPHI, in a conference with Norfolk, omitted none of thof¢

arguments, and spared none of those promises, which are the usual
incentives to rebellion. The Pope, he told him, had a great fum
in rcadinefs to bestow in so good a cause. The Duke of Alva had
undertaken to land ten thousand men, not far from London. The
Catholics, to a man, would rife in arms. Many of the nobles were
ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half the nation had
turned their eyes towards him, and called on him to revenge the
unmerited injuries, which he himself had suffered ; and to rescue
an unfortunate Q(ncen, who offered him her periln, and her crown,
as the reward of his fN!cccis. Norfolk approved of the dlelign, and
though he rcft:lcd to give Ridolphi any letter of credit, allowed
him to uIl his nalmlc, in negociating with the Pope, and Alva :.
The Bifilop of- Iol', w, floo, uinl the violence of his temnper,' and im-
patience to procure reliefl lo l his Inireils, was apt to run into rafil
n11d defi)ratc dciigtl, advifcdl the Duke to aflcrimle fecrctly a few of
his followers, and at once to fcize Elizabeth's pcrfon. Iut this tlhe

'* Anildcrili, 3. I iO,

Dukc:

23,

BoOKVI. Duke rejected as a scheme, equally wild and hazardous. Mean

.IS7 I while, the English court had received some imperfect information

D fiovered by of the plot, by.intercepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and an acci-
Elizabeth.
Auulfi. ,dent happened, which brought to light all the circumstances of it.

'The Duke had employed Hickford to transmit to Lord Herreis
some money, which was to be difsributed among Mary's friends in
Scotland. A person not in the secret was intrufced with conveying
it to the borders; and he, suspecting it from the weight to be gold,
whereas he had been told that it was silver, carried it directly to the
privy council. The Duke, his domestics, and all who were privy,
Sept. 7. or could be suspected of being privy to the design, were taken into

.custody. Never did the accomplices in a conspiracy discover less
firmness; or servants betray an indulgent mailer with greater base-
ness. Every one confessed the whole of what he knew. Hickford
gave directions how to find the papers which he had hidden. The
Duke himself, relying at first on the fidelity of his associates, and
*believing all dangerous papers to have been destroyed, confidently
asserted his own innocence; but when their depositions, and the
papers themselves were produced, astonished at their treachery, he
acknowledged his guilt, and implored the Queen's mercy. His
offence was too heinous, and too often repeated, to obtain pardon;
and Elizabeth thought it necessary to deter her fubjeds, by his pu-
nithment, from holding correspondence with the Queen of Scots,
or her cmiffaries. Being tried by his Peers, he was found guilty
of high treason, and after several delays, suffered death for the
crime *

TIIE difcovcry of this conspiracy produced many effcts, cx-
trcmcly detrimental to Mary's intercl. The Bishop of Ross, who ap-

' Andcrf. 3. 149. State Trials, 1. 85.

pcared
-.4

peared by the confession of all concerned, to be the prime mover in
every cabal against Elizabeth, was taken into custody, his papers
searched, himself committed to the tower, treated with the utmost
rigour, threatened with capital puniimnnent, and after a long- con-
finement, set at liberty, on condition tlat he should leave the king-
dom. Mary was not only deprived of a servant, equally eminent
for his zeal, and his abilities, but was denied, fiom that time, the
privilege of having an ambassador at the Englifhl court. The Spa-
nifh ambassador, whom the power and dignity of the Prince he
represented, exempted from such insults as Ross had fufflered, was
commanded to leave England*. Mary herself was kept under
a ftricer guard than formerly, the number of her domcflics
abridged, and no person permitted to fee her, but in presence o-
her keepers -I

Boo3K V1.

1571.
AT the fame time, Elizabeth foreseeing the storm which was Elizabcth de.

dares openly

gathering on the continent against her kingdom, began to with againftthe
that tranquillity were restored in Scotland; and irritated by Mary's pt'"en
late attempt againit her government, fle determined to adt, with-
out disguise or ambiguity, in favour of the King's party. This re-
solution lhe intimated to the leaders of both factions. Mary, hle 0dlobcr 3.
told them, had held such a criminal correplondence with hcr
avowed enemies, and had excited thch dangerous conlliracics both
against her crown and life, that ilic would lhnccfortll confider licr
as unworthy of protetion, and would never conlent to rcflore llcr
to liberty, far less to replace her on her throne. Slie elxhorted
them, therefore, to unite in acknowledglingl the King's authorily.
Slhe promiecl to procure by her mneli:t ionl equnitable terms lor thllc[',
who had hitherto oppifed it. B3lut i: tlhe)y 1 ill continued rfciacllory

D inggcs, i63.
VoL,. 11.

] S API
IZ, Ann. 2, 50.

she threatened to employ her utmost power to compel them to sub-
mit *. Though this declaration did not produce an immediate es-
sec; though hostilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edin-
burgh; though Huntly's brother, Sir Adam Gordon, by his bra-
very, and good condut, had routed the King's adherents in the
North, in many encounters; yet such an explicit discovery of
Elizabeth's sentiments contributed not a little to animate one party,
and to depress the spirit and hopes of the other*.

As Morton, who commanded the Regent's forces, lay at Leith,

and Kirkaldy fiill held out the town and castle of Edinburgh, scarce
a day passed without a {kirmifh. And while both avoided any de-
cifive acion, they harassed each other by attacking small parties,.
beating up quarters, and intercepting convoys. These operations,
though little memorable in themselves, kept the passions of both
fastions in perpetual exercise and agitation, and wrought them up,
at last, to a degree of fury, which rendered them rcgardlefs-not
only of the laws of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of combat, that this.
implacable rage appeared; both parties hanged the prisoners they
took, of whatever rank or quality, without mercy, and without
trial. Great numbers suffercd in this fiocking manner; the un-
happy vicims were led, by fifties at a time, to execution; and it
was not till botl fides had minarted fevcrely, that they discontinucd
this barbarous practice, lo reproachful to the character of the na-
tion::. Mean while, thofc in the town and caflle, though they
hadc rcccived a fuipply of money from the Duke of Alva I|, began to
fuli-cr for want of provilions. As Morton had dctcroycd all the

; Sec Append. N" I\'.

1 Craw,. cmCe. 218, 220.

'1 Cald. 2. 289, 294. Strypc, 2. 6.

U Cald. 2. 345.

mills
BOOK VI.

'571.

I 572.

Hofllties
carried on be-
twcen tiem.

nills in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted finall garri- BooK VI.
sons in all the houses of strength around it, scarcity daily increased.

1572.

At last all the miseries of famine were felt, and they nmuf have
been soon reduced to such extremities, as would have forced them
to capitulate, if the Englifln and French ambassadors had not pro-
cured a suspension of hostilities, between the two parties .

TIHOUGH the negociation for a marriage between Elizabeth and League ,be-

the Duke of Anjou, had been fruitless, both Charles and the were lantd nd
dcfirous of concluding a defcnfive alliance between the two crowns. ' cE
He confidered such a treaty, not only as the bell device for blinding
the Protestants, againil whom the conspiracy was now ahnoft ripe
for execution; but as a good precaution likewise, against the dan-
gerous consequences, to which that atrocious measure might expose
him. Elizabeth, who had hitherto reigned without a single ally,
now saw her kingdom so threatened with intefline commotions, or
exposed to invasions from abroad, that ile was extremely felicitous
to secure the assistance of so powerful a neighbour. The difficul-
ties, arising from thefituation of the Scottish Queen, were the chief
occasions of any delay. Charles demanded tome terms of advan-
tage for Mary, and her party. Elizabeth refused to liflen to any
proposition of that kind. Her obstinacy overcame the faint eflorts
of the French Monarch. Mary's name was not to much as men-
tioned in the treaty, and with regard to Scottifl aflairs, a lhort IAril i-,,
article was inserted, in general and ambiguous terms, to this pur-
pose, " That the paltics c':itrasinxg fiall make no innovations ill
Scotland; nor tuffer an- firanger to enter, and to fomcnt the sac-
tions there; but it fl i11 be lawful Ifr the Q/ccn of lEn ;land to
chaflirc, by force of arms, .llofe Scots who shall continue to lihar-
bour the Englifl rcbcls now in Scotland
l -." In conlClllicncc of

Id. 3.46. 1 D)iggcs, 19o, 19I Camnd. .44.

I' ' t'

this treaty, France and England affeded to a& in concert with re-
gard to Scotland, and Du Croc, and Sir William Drury, appeared,
there, in name of their refpecive sovereigns. By their mediation,
a truce, for two months, was agreed upon, and during that time,
conferences were to LD' lheld between the leaders of the opposite
ifacions, in order to accommodate their differences, and restore
peace to the kingdom. This truce afforded a seasonable interval
of tranquillity to the Q(een's adherents in the South; but in the
North, it proved fatal to her intercft. Sir Adam Gordon had flill
maintained hi3 reputation and superiority there. Several parties,
under different officers, were fcnt againfl him. Some of them he
attacked in the field; againfi others he employed stratagem; and
as his courage and conduct were equal, none of his enterprizes
failed of success. He made war, too, with the humanity, which.
became so gallant a man, and gained ground by that, no less than
by the terror of his arms. If he had not been obliged, by the truce,
to suspend his operations, he would, in all probability, have brought
that part of the kingdom to submit entirely to the QMeen's au-
thority '*

NlO TWIT 1STANDING Gordon's bravery and success, Mary's in-

tcrctfl was on the decline, not only in her own kingdom, but among
the English. Nothing could be more ofienfive to that nation, jea--
Ious of forcigners, and terrified at the profpccd of the Spanish yokec
than her ncgociations with the Duke of Alva. The Parliancnt,
wh1ic(h met in IMay, pr-oceededl giailifi hlr as thle moll dangelrous
enemy of the kingdom ; and after a liolclmn c)nlflrncce between
the Lords and Commons, both houlCs agreedl I lringing in a bill
o (lcclare her guilty of highi trcafon,, and to deprive cher of all

" Claws. \Mcnm.
BooK VY.

1572.

Procced in c s
.-iii n Enlat·d
igailill Mvarvs.
28

r~,hit of fucceftlon to the crown. This great cazfe, as it was then BooK VI.
clled, occupied them during the whole session, and was carried 57.
,n with much unanimity. Elizabeth, though she applauded their
zeal, and approved greatly of the course they were taking, was
satisfied with fiewing Mary what she might expect from the resent-
ment of the nation; but as fle did not yet think it time to proceed
to the mofi violent extremity againfl her, fie prorogued the par-
liament %

THESE severe proceedings of the English parliament were not The Fench

lnezlcti her

more mortifying to Mary, than the coldness and neglec of her allies tieitl.
the French. The Duke of Montmorency, indeed, who came over
to ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a shew ofinterefling him-
felfin favour of the Scottish Qteen; but infead'of soliciting for her
liberty, or her refloration to her throne, all that he demanded wa3
a flight mitigation of the rigour of her imprisonment. And even
this finall requcft, he urged with so little warmth or impoi-tunity,
that no regard was paid to it +.

TIIE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much fatisfaciton, The rr;:i;.c 3

of I'.,,.

and fie cxxp)ccd from it a great increase of security. Sle now tull-
ed ielr Xwhole attention towards Scotland, where the animnotli.cb o
the t\w.o ji'tLi)ls were flill 1) lIighi, and lo many intcrfl-lrinl, intc-
rctls to le aCljtilcd, tliat a gencral pacification Icemcdl to be at a
:rc'at (lill;nlcc. 1Blt rwhile h lic labourcd to bring tlhem to si ome
;,i:'' m Ctllli, an, evC!t liapt)ilC d w( ich filled

i I greaI t lpart oI }I. .io;

v.idl' a/osi)liII ~ lv!, :,d il illi h -()or)I r. 'I'li'swas the :naillitcrc

l() lLI;.s.;

:.in atte(mipt, to wlich there is no plarallel in the lhiltory of a~li>oit'l,
ciielacr i)r tlhc (linnuilalttioni wlich led t: it, or for the cr'iyv ;i:.'.

'4 D'I'',vcs Journ. 206, &c.

29
. 1 j b b, 2.. 5 ~

b ], 1.' l ,

BOOK VT. barbarity, with which it was put in execution. By the most folemr

-5723 promises of safety and of favour, the leaders of the Protestants

were drawn to court; and though doomed to deflrudion, they
were received with carefles, loaded with honours, and treated, for
seven months, with every poflible mark of familiarity, and of con-
Augut 24. fidence. In the midit of their security, the warrant for their de-

ftruaion was issued by their sovereign, on whose word they had
relied; and, in obedience to it, their countrymen, their fellow-
citizens, and companions, imbrued their hands in their blood.
Ten thousand Protestants, without diftincqion of age, or fox, or
condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The fame barbarous or-
ders were sent to other parts of the kingdom, and a like carnage
ensued. This deed, which no Popish writer, in the present age,
mentions without detestation, was, at that time, applauded in Spain;
and at Rome, solemn thanksgivings were offered to God, for its
success. But among the Protestants it excited incredible horror; a
firiking picture of which is drawn by the French ambassador at the
court of England, in his account of his first audience after the
mal'acre. " A gloomy sorrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence,
as in the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers of the
royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers were ranged on each fide,
all clad in deep mourning, and as I passed through them, not one
befowed on me a civil look, or made the least return to my fa-
lutes *."

Detrimental BUT horror was not the only paflion, with which this event in-
t.Mrcty' il- spired the Protestants; it filled them with fear. They confidered

it as the prelude to some greater blow, and believed, not without
much probability, that all the Popish Princes had conlifircd the dc-

Carte, 3. 522.

1n.1 riion
30

flruction of their fed. This opinion did no small disservice to Ma-
ry's affairs in Scotland. Many of her adherents were Proteflants;
and, though they wished her restoration, were not willing, on that
account, to sacrifice the faith which they professed. They dreaded
her attachment to a religion, which allowed its votaries to vio-
late the molt solemn engagements, and prompted them to perpe-
trate the most barbarous crimes. A general confederacy of the
Protestants seemed to them, the only thing that could uphold the
Reformation againfi the league, which was formed to overturn it.
Nor could the present eftabliflment of religion be long maintained
in Britain, but by a ftrid union with Elizabeth, and by the con-
currence of both nations, in espousing the defence of it, as a com-
mon cause .

THE Regent took hold of this favourable conjuncture for nego-

ciating a general peace. And as he laboured for this purpose, with
the utmost zeal, and the adverse fation placed entire confidence in
his integrity, his endeavours could scarce have failed of being fuc-
cefsful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came so near to an agreement with
him, that scarce any thing remained, except the formality of signing
the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the disappointment lie
met wi th in his pretentions to the Regency; his abilitics, his wealth,
and the patronage of the court of England, gave him greater fwiay
with the party, than even the RlegenIt hiiIlfcf; and lie took plea-
fore in thwarting every mcafiure purfuicd by him. lie was asiaid
that if Mait!and and( his allociatcs recovered any fharc in the adini-
nifiration, his own infl tcnce woul(d bl confidciraly diminilied ; and
the Recgent, by tlheir means, would rl'eain tliat afecndant, which
bclongedtl to his Ilation. With him, conclli-cll r all thol, vwh were
in p))fillfion ol the lands, which belonged to any lo thel Q(2c's

* D.igcs, 2,14-, 2rt7.

BOOK VI.

1572.

The Regent
cndea ours tC
unitr bo'l:
partie¢,

3S

party..
5

BOOK0 VI. party. And his ambition, and their avarice, frustrated the Regent's

T --- _ pious intentions, and retarded a blefling so necefary to the kingdom,
I 57.

as the establishment of peace .
His death. SUCH a discovery of the felfifhnefs and ambition, which reigned

among his party, made a deep impression on the Regent, who loved
his country, and wiflled for peace with much ardor. This inward
gricf broke his spirit, and by degrees, brought on a fettled melan-
choly, that ended in a diflemper, of which he died on the 29th of
Oaober. He was, perhaps, the only person in the kingdom, who
could have enjoyed the office of Regent, without envy, and have
left it, without loss of reputation. Notwithitanding their mutual
animofities, both fations acknowledged his views to be honourable,
and his integrity to be uncorrupted t.

Morton clio- No competitor now appeared againIt Morton. The QOeen of
fen Regent.
Novem. 4. England powerfully supported his claim, and notwithifanding the

fears of the people, and the jealousy of the nobles, he was elected
Regent, the fourth, who in the space of five years, had held that
dangerous office.

As the truce had been prolonged to the firit of January, this gave

hin an opportunity of continuing the negociations with the oppo-
site party, which had been set on foot by his predcccfor. They
produced no cffcEls, however, till the beginning of the next
year.

BEFORE we proceed to thcfc, some events, hitherto untouched
defcrve our notice.

* Mclv. 233. Crawf. lMeli. 237.

1*- Id. 241.

TIIr,
S2

THE Earl of Northumberland, who had been kept prisoner in

Lochlevin, ever since his flight into Scotland in the year i569, was
given up to Lord Hunfdon Governor of Berwick; and being car-
ried to York, suffered there the punishment of his rebellion. The
King's party were so sensible of their dependence on Elizabeth's pro-
teeion, that it was scarce possible for them to refuse putting into
her hands a person who had taken up arms against her. But as a
fum of money was paid, on that account; and ihared between Mor-
ton and Douglas of Lochlevin, the former of whom, during his
exile in England, had been much indebted to Northumberland's
friendship, the abandoning this unhappy nobleman, in such a man-
ner, to certain deftru&ion, was deemed an ungrateful and merce-
nary aaion .

THIS year was remarkable for a considerable innovation in the

government of the church. Soon after the Reformation, the Popish
Bishops had been confirmed by law in poffeflion of part of their be-
nefices; but the spiritual jurifdition, which belonged to their or-
der, was exercised by fuperintendants, though with more moderate
authority. On the death of the Archbifllop of St. Andrew's, Mior-
ton obtained from the Crown a grant of the temporalities of that
fee. But as it was thought indecent for a layman to hold a benc-
fice, to which the cure of fouls was annexed, lie procured Douglas,
recLor of the University of St. Andrew's, to lbe chosen Archbishop;
and allotting himn a finall pcnlion out of the revenues of the fee, re-
tained the remailnder in his own hands. The nobles, who saw the
advantages they might reap fronm fich a prailicc, flUpportcd him
in the execution cos hlis plan. It gave g'reat offn'ccc, however, to 1he
clergy, who, inflicatl ol' perpetluating- an order1, whtol' liame alu
power was odious to them, wihe(ld tliat the :lccnts whic li iacd

VOL. II.

Boo0 VI.

1572.

AFiirs of the
church.

33

--, CF,'155'. MCIII, 55, ~22.. C z 11
J . ,; .; .

F;

!Ilong)Jed

34

belonged to it, might be employed in ftpplying fuchl parishes, as
were flill unprovided with fettled paflors. But on the one hand, it
would have been rash in the Clergy to have irritated, too much, noble-
men, on whom the very exiftcnce of the Protestant Church in Scot-
land depended; and Morton, on the other, conduCted his scheme
with such dexterity, and managed them with so much art, that it
was, at .las, agreed, in a convention composed of the leading men
among the Clergy, together with a committee of privy council,
"' that the name and office of archbishop, and bishop, should be con-
tinucd during the King's minority, and these dignities be conferred
upon the belt qu(alified among the Proteflant Ministers; but that with
regard to their spiritual jurifdi'tions, they should be fubjedc to the
,eneral aflemblly of the Church." The rules to be observed in
their cletion; and the pcrions who -were to supply the place, and
enjoy the privileges, which belonged to the Dean and Chapter in
tincs of Popery, wcre likewitc particularly fpecificde" . And the
wlhole being laid before the General Allemlly, after some exceptions
to the nameCs ocf £cwLi'L.jJp/~, DLean, C/ihapter', &c. and a protefla-
tion that it llionld be conlidlcrd only as a temporary conflitution,
till one more perfeCt could be introduced, it obtained the approba-
tion of that court ]. Even Knox, Vwho was prevented from attend-
ing the Aflemilliy by the ill slate of his health, though lie declaimed
loudly againll tlhe Sinoniacal padlion, to which Douglas owed his
preferment, and blamed the nomnination of a person, worn out with
age and inlirmities, to an oflicc, which required unimpaired vi-
golr blmtl ofi hlod a1nd miidt1, seems not to have condemned lie
picc;c(dilin-a of tlc (. cinvention; and in a letter to the afllmbhly,
nprnvcd (, ainle (;o' tleir mregulations with relpecCL to the celccion
of l3ilii], , a:; \ 'tlllIy of being carefully oblcrvcd :l. In1 co0lC-

Id(1 . -2 M

V

.1 1 1. 5-1.

: Scc Append. No. VT

qiucllcc
BooxV VI.

1572.

quence of the Aflembly's conlent to the plan agreed upon in the
Convention, Douglas was inllalled in his office; and at the iame
time, an archbishop of Glasgow, and a bishop of Dunkeld, were
chosen from among the Protestant Clergy. They were all admit-
ted to the place in parliament, which belonged to the eccleliaflical
order. But in imitation of the example set by Morton, such bar-
gains were made with them by different noblemen, as gave them
polreffion only of a very small part of the revenues belonging' to
their fees .

SOON after the dissolution of this Assembly, Knox, the prinme in-

ftrument of spreading and establishing the Reformed religion in
Scotland, ended his life, in the 6/th year of his age. Zeal, intre-
pidity, disinterestedness, were virtues which he poffefied, in an
eminent degree. He was acquainted, too, with the learning culti-
vated in that age; and excelled in that species of eloquence, which
is calculated to rouze, and to inflame. His maxims, however, were
often too severe, and the impetuosity of his temper exceflive. Rigid
and uncomplying himself, he filewed no indulgence to the infirmi-
ties of others. Regardless of the diftindions of rank and charader,
he uttered his admonion itions h an acrimony and vehemence, more
apt to irritate than to reclaim. This often betrayed himi into inde-
cent and undlutiful cxpreflions, with reiine to the QOeen's perlon
and conduIe Thole very qualitics, however, which now render
his charaler less amiable, fitted him to be tlie ilfrumnent of Pro-
vidcncie for advancingi the Ref-orlnmation amlonl g a fierce people, and
enabled him to face danlgers, a;ll to lil moiul t ollppofitionl,f Irom i wh ic
a pclrfon of at more gentle li)irit woild have ben apt1 to llrilnkl
alck. Ly an u xcaried ipl))Iicatiloll to itludy, and to builiilcls,

130 l- VI.

1q57 2.

Nov. 27.

chi&;l·. l of
K oox.

35
* S )ot, 2.(61,.

BooxtVI. as well as by the frequency and fervour of his public discourses,

'he had worn out a conflitution, naturally strong. During a linger-

ing illness, he discovered the utmost fortitude; and met the ap-
proaches of death, with a magnanimity inseparable from his cha-
racer. He was confiantly employed in ads of devotion, and com-
forted himself with those profpeas of immortality, which not only
preserve good men from desponding, but fill them with exultation
in their last moments. The Earl of Morton, who was present at
his funeral, pronounced his eulogium in a few words, the more
honourable for Knox, as they came from one, whom he had often
censured with peculiar severity. " There lies He, who never feared
the face of man ."t

57(.i' THOUGH Morton did not desire peace from such generous mo-

The Keg:ent
treat, with the tives as the former Regent, he laboured, however, in good earnest,
p.r;~y. to eflablift it. The public confusions and calamities, to which he

owed his power and importance when he was only the second per-
son in the nation, were extremely detrimental to him, now that he
was raised to be the first. While so many of the nobles continued
in arms againfi him, his authority, as Regent, was partial, feeble,
and precarious. Elizabeth was no less desirous of extinguiflling the
flame, which flhe had kindled and kept so long alive in Scotland t.
She had discovered the alliance with France, from which fle had
expeledl such advantages, to be no foundation of fccurity. And
though the appearances of fciendfhip fill fubfifctd between her
and that court, and Charles daily renewed his protefations of in-
violable adherence to the treaty, file was convinced, by a fatal cx-
amnple, how little flc ought to rely on the promises or oaths of that
perfidious Monarch. Her ambalitdor warned her that the French

* Spotfw. 266. CalJ. 2. 2?73.

-I1 Digcs, 299.

held
36

held a secret correfpondn.ce with Mary's adherents in Scotland,
and encouraged them in their obstinacy*. The Duke of Alva
carried on his intrigues in that kingdom, with less disguise, She
was persuaded that they would embrace the first fercne interval,
which the commotions in France, and in the Netherlands would
allow them, and openly attempt to land in Scotland. She resolved,
therefore, to prevent their getting any footing in the island, and
to cut off all their hopes of finding any assistance there, by uniting
the two parties.

THE situation of Mary's adherents enabled the Regent to carry

on his negociations with them to great advantage. They were now
divided into two factions. At the head of the one, were Chatclhe-
rault, and Huntly. Maitland and Kirkaldy were the leaders of the
other. Their high rank, their extensive property, and the num-
bers of their followers, rendered the former considerable. Tle lat-
ter were indebted for their. importance, to their personal abilities,
and to the firength of the castle of Edinburgh, which was in their
pofieflion. The Regent had no intention to comprehend both in
the famc treaty; but as he dreaded the Queen's party, if it remain-
ed entire, would be able to thwart and embarrass his adminifiration,
he resolved to divide and weaken it, by a separate negociation. -le
mnade the firlt overture to Kirkaldy and his aflociates, and cndca-
vourcd to renew the negociation ,itll tlhem, which, during the
life of his prcdecceflF)r, had been hbroken off by hils o-;n a.Iltiiccs.
IBut Kirrkaldy knew Morton's views, and t'filcm of goc-vernlment, to
)be very dificrent from tlhc s

of ti'c iOrmtcr Regicnil. Mitlaimt con-

idc- re(d Ihim as a perfloal an i iimplacablc cncmy. 'lhey rcccivcl 1 e-
peated affllranlccs of protc1ion firom lFrance. And thoLugh tile' sieC
of loclicllc employed the French arms at that til),', tlie ;lili

11. 296, 312.

BooK VI.

1573.

H;s overtures
rejeted by
Maiiland and
Kirl:aldy.

37

BoOK VI. hopes, which had so often deceived the party, still amused them,

15-73 a3nd they expected that the obflinacy of the Hugonots would soon

be subdued, and that Charles would then be at liberty to ad with
vigour in Scotland. Mean while, a supply of money was sent, and
if the caifle could be held out till Whitfunday, effeclual aid was
promifedl . Maitland's genius delighted in forming schemes, tlat
were dangerous; and Kirkaldy poffefled the intrepidity, necefliry
for putting them in execution. The castle, they knew, was so
lituated that it might defy all the Regent's power. Elizabeth, they
hoped, would not violate the treaty with France, by felnding for-
ces to his assistance; and if the French fllould be able to land any
considerable body of men, it might be possible to deliver the Queen
from captivity, or at least to balance the influence of France and
England, in such a manner, as to rescue Scotland from the difho-
nourable dependance on the latter, under which it had fallen. This
splendid but chimerical projeEt, they preferred to the friendship of
Morton. They encouraged the negociation, however, because it
served to gain time; they proposed, for the fame purpose, that
the whole of the Queen's party ihould be comprehended in it,
and that Kirkaldy ihould retain the command of the cafllc, fix
months after the treaty was signed. Hlis intcreft prompted the
Regent to rejedt the former; his penetration discovercd the danger
of complying with thle latter; and all hopes of accommodation
vanilhcd 11.

As soon as tlhe t!uce clxpircd, Kirkaldy begani to fire on the city

ol Edilllurl , wi'li, iV the returln of the inhalitallts wo\' lie
hlad exl)pllcd, ,
was c as '.calouflv as ever, to tll(C Il1iiig 's c;illc.

Ilut
1 1) I' --- ( . 1 1 1 111

Z 1 -

IMIL. ? S, &(_.

But as the Regent had now fct on foot a treaty with Chatelherault BooK VI.
and Huntly, the cessation of arms still continued with them..

157j.

TIhEY were lets scrupulous than the other party, and listened Accepted by

eagerly to his overtures. The Duke was naturally unsteady, and and l-untry.
the approach of old age increased his irrcfolution, and aversion to
aion. The mifcries of civil discord had afflicted Scotland, almost
five years, a length of time far beyond the duration of any former
contest. The war, instead of doing service, had been detrimental
to the Qieen; and more ruinous than any foreign invasion, to the
kingdom. In profcuting it, neither party had gained much ho-
nour; both had fuflerced great losSes; and had exhausted their own
eflates, in wafRing tholbC of their advcrfaries. The commons were
in the utmost mifcry, and longed ardently for a peace, wuhich might
terminate this fruitlcfs, but def'rui-ivc quarrel.

A GREAT flep was taken towards this clfirable event, by the Ar:iclcsofthe

treaty concluded at Perth, between the Regent on one hand, and Feb. 23.
Chatelherault and Hluntly on the other, under the mediation of
Killcgrcw, Elizabeth's amblafiador *. The chief articles in it were
tthere; that all the parties comprehended in the treaty ilhould declare
their approbation of the Reformed religion, now cllallithcd in the
kingdom ; that they llould fiibmit to the King's government, and
own iMlorton's authority as Regent; tlat they fliholdl acknowled
every thing done in opposition to the Kiing, filncc his coronation,
to be illegal; that on both frdtls, the prifoncir wh!io had beell taken
Ilcotiltl be fit at liberty, and the lands cllorcd t1 their proper own-
Crs; that the aCt ol attailndr p:(le:d :i.ilfl . (' (Q11'e'S adherents
i1houild b repealed, and illcillmity railtc(d 1lr all the 'rlin' ot'

w ich l tlhe liatd been

, uililty si :cc tlte ' I jthi l jiinc i.f,7;
l;i

e <:.. A.l,p.,, . No. VJ.

39

THE HISTORY
'BOOK VI. that the treaty should be ratified, by the common consent of both

~"-'-"y~ parties, in parliament .
SeegcoftLhe KIRKALDY, though abandoned by his associates, who neither

'fiefEdin. discovered follicitudc, nor made provision for his safety, did not lose

courage, nor entertain any thoughts of accommodation t. And
though all Scotland had now submitted to the King, he frill re-
tolved to defend the catle, in the Qeen's name; and to wait the
arrival of the promised succours. The Regent was in want of
every thing ncceflary for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who
determined, at any rate, to bring the diftintions in Scotland to a pe-
riod, before the French could find leiftire to take part in the quarrel,
soon afforded him sufficient supplies. Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with 1500 foot, and a considerable train of artillery. The
Regent joined him, with all his forces; and trenches were opened,
April 5;. and approaches regularly carried on, against the castle. Kirkaldy,

though dicfouraged by. the loss of a great fum of money, remitted
to him from France, and which fell into the Regent's hands,
through the treachery of Sir James Balfour, the most corrupt man

* Crawf. Mem. 25 r.

t Mclvil, whose brother Sir Robert was oneof those who joined with Kirkaldy in the

defence of the cattle, and who was himself strongly attached to their party, asserts that
Kirkaldy offered to accept of any reasonable terms of Ctollpofition, but tlht all his ofifrs
were rejcEted by the Regent, Mclv. 240. Iut as Elizabeth was, at that time, extrme-
Jy desirous of refcoring peace in Scotland, and her ambaflador Killcgrew, as well as
the Earl of Rothes, uscd their utmoll eCldeavours to persuade Kirkaldy to accede to the
treatyof Perth, it seems llore ci edible to impute the continuance of hostilities to Kirk-
aldy's obflinancy, his diflruft of Morton, or his hope of foreilgn aid, than to any other
ca' uc.

That tils was really the cafe, is evident fiomi the pofitivc testimony of Spotfw. 269,

-'70. Caind, 448. Johnft. His-. 3, 4. Diggcs, 334. Crawford's account agrees, in the
:nian, with theirs, Mcm. 263.

of
7

of that age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by despair.
Three and thirty days he resifted all the efforts of the Scots and
Englifl, who pushed on their attacks, with courage, and with
emulation. Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications were
battered down, and one of the wells in the cafile dried up, and the
other choaked with rubbifli. Even then, his spirit was unfubducd,
and he determined rather to fall gloriously behind the last intrench-
ment, than to yield to his inveterate enemies. But his garrison
was not animated with the fame heroic or desperate resolution,
and riling in a mutiny, forced him to capitulate. He surrendered
himself to Drury, who promised, in the name of his mistress, that
he should be favourably treated. Together with him, James Kir-
kaldy his brother, Lord Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil. a
few citizens of Edinburgh, and about 160 soldiers were made pri-
foners '.

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in pay during the

war, prevailed on their men to accompany them into the Low-coun-
tries, and entering into the service of the States, added, by their gal-
lant behaviour, to the reputation for military virtue, which has al-
ways been the charaderiftic of the Scottilh nation.

Trius by the treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, and the

filrrender of the cafilc, the civil wars of Scotland were brought to
a period. When we review tle slate of the nation, and compare
the flrength of the two faaions, Mary's partizans among the
nobles appear, manifefly, to have been fuiperior both in numbers,
and in po1wer. But tlicfe advantages were more than counterba-
lanced by others, lwhich their antagonills enjoyed. Political abi-

'* (ald. 2. 408. AMclv. 240. Crawf. Mcm. 265.
VOL. II.

BoOK VI.

1573.

May 29.

Rcview of rihe
clilirnilttri ts
b(.,1!1 ocs
G

litics,

BooK VI. lities, military skill, and all the talents, which times of action form,

or call forth, appeared chiefly on the King's fide. Nor could their
enemies boat of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur-
ray, tempered with wisdom; the profound sagacity of Morton;
the subtle genius, and insinuating address of Maitland; or the
successful valour of Kirkaldy; all which were, at first, employed
in laying the foundations of the King's authority. On the one fide,
measures were concerted with prudence, and executed with vi-
gour; on the other, their resolutions were rash, and their conduct
feeble. The people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompted
by indignation against the Queen, warmly supported the King's
cause. The Clergy threw the whole weight of their popularity into
the fame scale. By means of these, as well as by the powerful
interposition of England, the King's government was finally efta-
blifled. Mary loft even that shadow of sovereignty, which, amidst
all her sufferings, she had hitherto retained among part of her own
subjeCts. And as she was no longer permitted to have an ambaf-
fador at the court of England, the only mark of dignity which ihe
had, for some time, enjoyed there, she mull henceforth be con-
fidered as an exile stripped of all the ensigns of royalty; guarded
with anxiety in the one kingdom, a- d totally deserted or forgotten
in the other.

K;,kaldy put KIRKALDY and his associates remained in Drury's custody, and
:o di(ath.

were treated by him with great humanity, till the Queen of Eng-
land, whose prifoncrs they were, should determine their fate.
Morton inrifted that they fiould fiffer the puniflimcnt due to their
rebellion and obflinacy; and declared that so long as they were
allowed to live, lie did not reckon his own person or authority fc-
cure; and Elizabeth, without regarding Drury's honour, or his

promi fcs
4s

promises in her name, gave them up to the Regent's disposal. He BOOKVI.
first confined them to separate prisons; and, soon after, with Eliza- '-

I573.

beth's content, condemned Kirkaldy and his brother, to be hanged Auguil 3.
at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not expeEt to be
treated more favourably, prevented the ignominy of a public exe-
cution, by a voluntary death, and " ended his days, fays Melvil,
after the old Roman fashion ."

WHILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance on the remains

of her party in Scotland, Mary, incapable of affording them any
relief, bewailed their misfortunes in the solitude of her prison.
At the fame time her health began to be much impaired by con-
finexnent, and want of exercise. At the intreaty of the French am-
balfador, Lord Shrewsbury her keeper was permitted to carry her
to Buxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her impri-
fonment. Cecil, who lately had been created Baron of Burleigh,
and Lord High Treasurer of England, happened to be there at the
fame time. And though no minister ever entered more warmly
into the views of a sovereign, or gave stronger proofs of his fidelity
and attachment, than this great man, yet such was Elizabeth's
distrust of every person who approached the Queen of Scots, that
her suspicions extended even to him; and while Mary justly rec-
koned him her most dangerous enemy, he found some difficulty
in persuading his own miftrfes, that he was not partial to that un-
happy Queen --.

THE duke of Alva was this year recalled from the government

of the Netherlands, where his haughty and oppressive adminiflra-
tion rouzcl a fplrit, in attempting to IiLbduc which, Spain exhaustcd
its trcafiurs, ruined its armies, and loft its glory. Rcqucfcns, iwho

'* Mclv. 2,12. 1I Strypc, 2. 248, 288.

43
G 2

fuccccd(cl.

BooK VI. succeeded him, was of a milder temper, and of a less enterprising

genius. This event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual dif-
757 3'

1quietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with the Scottish Queen,
and his zeal for her interest.

1574. TifouG H the kingdom was now fettled in profound peace, many
li' elrent'os Of the evils which accompany civil war, were fiill felt. The re-
ion beconles firaints of law, which, in times of public confusion, are little re-
od i';us.

g'irded even by civilized nations, were totally despised by a fierce
people, unaccustomed to the regular administration ofjuftice. The
disorders in every corner of the kingdom were become intolerable;
and under the protection of the one, or the other faction, crimes of
every kind were committed with impunity. The Regent set him-
self to redress these, and, by his industry and vigour, order and fecu-
rity were re-eftablifhied in the kingdom. But he loft the reputation
due to this important service, by the avarice, which he discovered,
in performing it; and his own exaCions became more pernicious to
the nation, than all the irregularities which he restrained . Spies
and informers were every where employed; the remembrance of
old offences were revived; imaginary crimes were invented; petty
trespasses were aggravated ; and delinquents were forced to com-
pound for their lives, by the payment of exorbitant fines. At the
famc time, the current coin was debased 't; licences were fold for

* See Append. N. VIr.

. The corruption .f the coin, during Morton's adminiflration, was very great.

A!though the quantity of current money coined out of a pound of Bullion, was gra-
dually inclealfd by former princes, the fiandard or fincnefs fuffired little alteration,
all( the mixture of alloy was nearly the fame with what is now ulcd. But Morton
nmixcl1 a fourth part of allo), wilh cvery pound of silver, and funk, by consequence,
tle value of coin, in proportion. In tlhe ycar 1581, all the money coincd by him was
called in, and appointed to be rccoincd. The fl;linrd was rcflorcd to the fame pul-
lty ',n fornmeily. Ruddini. IPrcf. to Andcrf. Diploni. p. 74.

carryillm ;
44

carrying on prohibited branches of commerce, unusual taxes were BooKVI.
imposed on commodities; and all the refinements in oppression, -" '~

1574.

from which nations so imperfcetly polished as the Scots are usually
exempted, were put in practice. None of these were complained of
more loudly, or with greater reason, than his injustice towards the
Church. The thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy received
their fubfiilance, had always been slowly and irregularly paid to col-
ledors appointed by the General Aflembly; and during the civil
wars, no payment could be obtained in several parts of the kingdom.
Under colour of redrefling this grievance, and upon a promise of
afligning every Minitler a stipend within his own parish, the Re-
gent extorted from the Church the thirds to which they had right
by law. But the Clergy, instead of reaping any advantage from this
alteration, found that payments became more irregular and dilatory
than ever. One Minister was commonly burdened with the care of
four or five parifhles, a pitiful salary was allotted him, and the Re-
gent's insatiable avarice seized on the reft of the fund *.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this year, was a new

misfortune to the Scottish Queen. Henry III. who fuccecded him,
had not the fame attachment to her person, and his jcaloufy of the
house of Guise, and obfequioufinefs to the Queen Mother, greatly
alienated him from her interest.

TIE Ideath of the Duke of Chatclherault muri likcwife be T7.

confidercd as iOine lot's to Mary. As the parliament had firequetly ..*. ' '
declared him next heir to the Crown, this entitled himl to great
rci'fpcC among his countrymen, and enabled him, more than ally

" Crawf. lMcm. 272. Spotfw. 273. Cald. 2. 420, 427.

(,tllicr

45

BooKI VI. other person in the kingdom, to counterbalance the Regent',

5775. lpower.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews between the wardens

of the Scottish and English marches, a scuffle happened, in which
the English were worfied; a few killed on the spot; and Sir James
Foreiter, the warden, with several gentlemen who attended him,
taken prisoners. But both Elizabeth and the Regent were too fen-
fible of the advantage, which resulted from the good underfianding
that subsisted between the two kingdoms, to allow this flight acci-
dent to interrupt it.

Attempts of THE domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was in some danger
the Clergy
against the of being disturbed by another cause. Though the persons, raised
order.pal to the dignity of bishops, possessed very small revenues, and a very

-moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom the Regent and all
his measures were become extremely odious, began to be jealous
of that order. Knowing that corruptions steal into the Church,
gradually, under honourable names, and upon decent pretences,
they were afraid that, from such finall beginnings, the hierarchy
might grow, in time, to be as powerful and oppressive as ever. The
chief author of there suspicions was Mr. Andrew Melvil, a man,
distinguished by his uncommon erudition, by the severity of his
manners, and the intrepidity of his mind. But, bred up in the
rctirement of an academy, he was unacquainted with the arts of
life; and being more attentive to the ends whiclh he puruedl, than
to the means which he employed for promoting them, lie often dc-
-cated laudable dcligns, by the impetuosity and imlprudcnce with
lwhich lie carried them on. A queflion was moved by him in the
aficmbly, " lwhether the officc of hifhop, as now cxcrciled in the
kingdom, wecrc agreeable to the word of God 2" In the ccclceiaili-

r~~~I l~~~~~~~~~ cal

47

caT judicatories, continual complaints were made of the biffops, BOOK VL
for negleQt of duty, many of which, their known remissness too well
juflified. The bishop of Dunkeld, being accused of dilapidating'
his benefice, was found guilty by the AHfembly. And the Regent,
instead of checking, connived at these dispu!tes about Ecclesiastical
government, as they diverted the zeal of the Clergy from attend-
ing to his daily encroachments on the patrimony of the Church *

THE weight of the Regent's oppressive adminiitration had, hi- 1576.
therto, fallen chiefly on tholfe in the lower, and middle rank; but Heirictes

some of the

he began now to take such feps, as convinced the nobles, that their nobles,
dignity would not long exempt them from feeling the effees of his
power. An accident, which was a frequent cause of dissention
among the Scottifi nobles, occasioned a difference between the Earls
of Argyll and Athole. A vassal of the former had made some de-
predations on tihe lands of the latter. Athole took arms to punish
the offender; Argyll, to protec him; and this ignoble quarrel they
were ready to decide in the field, when the Regent, by interposing
his authority, obliged them to disband their forces. Both of them
had been guilty of irregularities, which, though common, were
contrary to the letter of the law. Of there the Regent took advan-
tage, and resolved to found on them a charge of treason. This de-
sign was revealed to the two Earls by one of Morton's retainers.
The common danger, to which they were exposed, compelled them
to forget old quarrels, and to unite in a close confedcracy, for their
mutual defence. Their jundion rendered them formidable; they
flefpifed the summons which the llegent gave them to appear before
a court of juflice; and he was obliged to dcfilt fiom any further

't Cald. Afslcmblies, 1574, &c. Jolinlft. Hiit. 15.

Iprolizcuti(on.

BooK V:I. prosecution. But the injury he intended made a deep imprefflou

-ó5 . on their minds, and drew on him severe vengeance t.
1 577. NOR was he more successful in an attempt, which he made, to

load Lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of having formed a con-
.fpiracy against his life. Though those, who were fippofed to be
his accomplices, were seized, .and tortrced, no evidence of any thing
criminal appeared; but, on the contrary, many circumstances dif-
covered his innocence, as well as the Regent's secret views, in im-
puting to him such an odious design t.

They turn THE Scottifl nobles, who were almost equal to their Monarchs
their ey)es
towards the in power, and treated by them with much diftintion, observed

these arbitrary proceedings of a Regent, with the utmost indigna-
tion. The people, who, under a form of government extremely
simple, had been little accustomed to the burden of taxes, com-
plained loudly of the Regent's rapacity. And all began to turn
their eyes towards the young King, from whom they expedced the
redress of all their grievances, and the return of a more gentle, and
more equal administration.

Il:,i',.ci- J .xMES was now in the twelfth year of his age. The Queen,
'tiOf ,nl soon after lis birth, had committed him to the care of the Earl of

Mar, and during the civil wars, he had resided securely in the cafle
of Stirling. Alexalnder Erikinc, that nobleman's brother, had the
chief dircclion ofl Is education. Under liim, the famous Buchanan
adlcd as preceptor, together with three other maflers, tle moo l emi-
!inet tlhe natil ;fordcld, for tiill ill tlioic ficnces, which were
(dicinc ncccllry lor a Prince. The young King fichwed an un-

1 Craiw. l ci. 285l .
2I5 Ibid. 28!7.

comI111mo

common passion for learning, and made great progress in it. And
the Scots fancied that they already discovered in him all tliofe vir-
tues, which the fondness or credulity of fubjeis usually ascribe to
princes, during their minority. But as James was fiill far from that
age, at which the law permitted him to assume the reins of go-
vernment, the Regent did not sufficiently attend to the sentiments
of the people, nor reflet, how naturally there prejudices in his
favour might encourage the King to anticipate that period. He
not only negleced to secure the friendship of those, who were about
the King's person, and who possessed his ear, but had even exafpe-
rated some of them, by personal injuries. Their resentment con-
curred with the ambition of others, in infusing into the King early
suspicions of Morton's power, and designs. A King, they told him,
had often reason to fear, seldom to love a Regent. Prompted by
ambition, and by interest, he would endeavour to keep the Prince
in perpetual infancy, at a distance from his subjeCts, and unacquainted
with business. A finall degree of vigour, however, was sufficient
to break the yoke. Subjeats naturally reverence their Sovereign,
and become impatient of the temporary and delegated jurifdidtion
of a Regent. Morton had governed with a rigour, unknown to
the ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The nation groaned under his
oppreflions; and would welcome the firt profped of a milder admi-
niRration. At present the King's name was scarce mentioned in
Scotland, his fiiends were without influence, and his favourites with-
out honour. But one effort would discover Morton's power to be as
feeble, as it was arbitrary. The fame attempt would put liimfclf
in porfeflion of his just authority, and refcuc the nation from into-
lerable tyranny. If he did not regard his own rights as King,
let him liflen, at least, to the cries of his people :.

\ Mlch. 249.

J-L

BooK V.

1577-

He is fufpici-
ous of the Re-
gent's pover.

49
VOL. Iro

'bi F , ['i

TIi-ESE fuggelions made a deep inpreflion on the young King,

who was trained up in an opinion that he was born to command.
His approbation of the design, however, was of small confequencc,
without the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls of Argyll and
Atholc, two of the mofl powerful of that body, were animated
with implacable resentment against the Regent. To them the Ca-
bal in Stirling-cafilc communicated the plot, which was on foot;
and they entering warmly into it, Alexander Erskine, who, since
the death of his brother, and during the minority of his nephew,
had the command of that fort, and the custody of the King's per-
son, admitted them secretly into the King's presence. They gave
him the fame account of the misery of his fubjeds, under the Re-
gent's arbitrary administration; they complained loudly of the in-
juflice, with which themselves had been treated; and besought the
King, as the only means for redressing the grievances of the nation,
to call a council of all the nobles. James consented, and letters
were issued, in his name, for that purpose; but the two Earls took
care that they should be sent only to such as were known to bear
no good-will to Morton %.

157c . Tiir. number of there was, however.. so considerable, that on
Malch 4. the day appointed, far the greater part of the nobles ailc2mbled at

Stirling; and so highly were they inccnfed against Morton, that al-
though, on receiving intelligence of Argyll and Athole's interview
with the King, he had made a feint as if he would rcfllgn the Re-
gcncy, thcy adviscd the King, without regarding this olser, to de-
prive him of llis office, and to take the adminiifration of govern-
mlent into his own hands. Lord Glamis the Chancellor, and
lIclrrcis, were appointed to signify tlis reiolulion to Morton, who

7
" Spots. 278.

was

BOOK VI.
t J

1577.

A pioL sor.ned
ag Linlt the
Regent.
5o

was at that time in Dalkcith, his usual place of residence. No- Boo VI.
thing could equal the joy, with which this unexpected resolution ' -

I577.
filled the nation, but the furprize occasioned by the seeming ala- Feiigl Ii;S

osice aind re-

crity, with which the Regent descended from so high a flation. t rs.
He nithcr wlntcd sagacity to foresee the danger of resigning, nor
inclin.,tion to keep poffeflion of an office, for the expiration of
wlhich, the law had fixed io distant a term. But all the sources,
whence the facion of which he was head, derived their flrength,
had either failed, or now supplicd his adversaries with the means
of humbling him. The commons, the city of Edinburgh, the
Clergy, were all totally alienated from him, by his multiplied op-
prefflons. Elizabeth, having lately bound herself by treaty, to fend
a considerable body of troops to the afflilance of the inhabitants of
the Netherlands, who were ftruggillig for liberty, had little leifiur
to attend to the affairs of Scotland; and as she had nothing to dread
from France, in whose councils the Princes of Lorrain had not, at
that time, much influence, she was not displeased, perhaps, at
the birth of new factions in the kingdom. Even those nobles,
who had long been joined with Morton in faCtion, or whom he
had attached to his person by benefits, Glamis, Lindsey, Ruthvcn,
Pitcairn the secretary, Murray of Tillibarden Comptroller, all de-
ferted his falling fortunes, and appeared in the council at Stirling.
So many concurring circumlfiances convinced 3Morton of his own
·wealcncfs, and determined him to give way to a torrent, which was
too impetuous to be refinled. He attended the chancellor, and Mrlcl ,z.
-Icrrcis to Edinburgh ; was prcfent whenl the King's acceptance
of the government was proclainmed; and, in the prfclince (of the
people, finurendcrcl te tthe King, all the authority to wh]ich le
had any claim in virtue of his office. Tihis crcemll)n was ac-
com panied with such chxccfl;ve joy and accl;malliolls of tlie Imul-
litudc, as added, no doubtl, to the anpgiuint whIiclh ail a:ll;itiou,

II 2 Izliiir

spirit must feel when compelled to renounce supreme power; and
convinced Morton how entirely he had loft the affetions of his
countrymen. He obtained, however, from the King, an aa con-
taining the approbation of every thing done by him in the exer-
cife of his office, and a pardon, in the most ample form, that his
fear or caution could devise, of all patl offences, crimes, and trea-
sons. The nobles, who adhered to the King, bound themselves,
under a great penalty, to procure the ratification of this ad:, in the
first parliament '.

A COUNCIL of twelve peers was appointed to assist the King i-n

the administration of affairs. And Morton, deserted by his own
party, and unable to struggle with the fation, which governed ah-
folutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and seemed to enjoy
the tranquillity, and to be occupied only in the amusements, of a
country life. His mind, however, was deeply disquieted with all
the uneasy reflealions, which accompany disappointed ambition;
and intent on schemes for recovering his former grandeur. Even in
this retreat, which the people called the Lyon's-den, his wealth and
ablilities rendered him formidable. And the new Counsellors were
so imprudent as to rouze him, by the precipitancy with which
they hastened to strip him of all remains of power. They re-
quired him to surrender the castle of Edinburgh, which was still in
his possession. Hle refused at firfl to do so, and began to prepare
for its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having taken arms,
andl rcpulfed a part of the garrison, which was sent out to guard
; convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that important
fortrcfs, without rcfifiancc. This encouraged his adversarics to
call a par.liament to meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply their de-
mands upon liin, in fuclch a nmnncr, as convinced him that no-

i SjlotF. . 78. Crawf. Mcin ,
m. CaI. 2. .522.

thingl
BooK VI.

1578.

Contir.ues to

iatch the mo-

tions of the
adverlf party.
52

thing less than Iris utter ruin would satisfy their inveterate ha-
tred.

THEIR power and popularity, however, began already to de-

cline. The Chancellor, the ablest and molt moderate man in the
party, having been killed at Stirling, in an accidental rencounter
between his followers and those of the Earl of Crawford; Atliole,
who was appointed his fuccefior in that high office, the Earls of
Eglinton, Cathnefs, and Lord Ogilvie, all the prime favourites at
court, were either avowed Papists, or fufpeced of leaning to the
opinions of that feet. In an age, when the return of Popery was
so much, and so justly dreaded, this gave universal alarm. And as
Morton had always treated the papists with rigour, this unfeafon-
able indulgence made all zealous Protestants remember that circum-
fiance in his adminifiration, with great praise

MORTON, to whom none of thcfe particulars were unknown,

thought this the proper juncture for setting to work the inftru-
ments, which he had been preparing. Having gained the con-
fidence of the Earl of Mar, and of the Countess his mother, he
insinuated to them that Alexander Erskine had formed a plot to
deprive his nephew of the government of Stirling-cal'le, and the
custody of the King's person; and cafily induced an ambitious wo-
man, and a youth of twenty, to employ force to prevent thlis ftp-
pofsd injury. The Earl repairinig, flddenly, to Stirling, alndl Icin:
admitted, as ufuial, into the caflle with his attendants, fi;cled the
gates early in thle morning, and turnLlcd out hlis uncle, lwhlo dlic;tildc
no danger from his lhands. Tle inllicrs ol tihc anliifOn lbilliltei
to) iimi as their governor, and, v:itli little da;lngr, anld 11o0 ellu', i:

Spot . 27.,

(4'

BOOKVI'

1578.

Rertmcs his
former au ho-
ri tv.

35.

T H E H I S T O'R Y

BooK VI. of blood, he became master both of the King's person, and the
'i57t3' fortrc cfs.
1570.

AN event so unexpeced occasioned great consternation. And

though M\orton's hand did not appear in the execution, he was
universally believed to be the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors saw it to be nece firy, for their own ffecty, to change
their mcafires, and inilead of pursuing hiln with such implacable
rcfentmcnt, to enter into terms of accommodation with an adver-
fary, still so capable of creating them trouble. Four were named,
on eaclh ilde, to adjust their differences. They met not far from
Dalkeith. And when they had brought matters near a conclusion,
Morton, who was too sagacious not to improve the advantage,
TMay J2. which their security and their attention to the treaty afforded him,

fct out in the night-time for Stirling, and having gained Murray of
Tillibardin, Mlar's uncle, was admitted by him into the castle;
and managing matters there with his usual dexterity, he soon had
more entirely the command of the fort, than the Earl himself. He
was likcwife admitted to a feat in the privy council, and acquired
the fame ascendant in it J.

As the time appointed for the meeting of parliament at Edin-

burgh now approached, this gave him rome anxiety. He was
af-raid ofI carrying the young King to a c: ty, vhoce inhabitants were
so much at the dc\otion of the advcrfe fi-ion. I-Ie was no less
unwilling to leave James b)chind at Stirling. In order to avoil this
dilemlma, lie iiilucd a proclamation, in the King's nameC, chlanging
the place of meeting i -om Ir'.dlinngh to Stirlill;n--calfil. This,
.Atholc abnd his party rcprcc ntcd as a flcp altog;cthcr unconlitutional.

1-t Cd.II. 2. 53(.
,ald. 2. 535.

The King, said they, is Morton's prisoner; the pretended coun-
fellors are his slaves; a parliament, to which all the nobles may re-
pair without fear, and where they may deliberate with freedom, is
absolutely necessary for fettling the nation, after disorders of such
long continuance. But in an aflembly, called contrary to all form,
held within the walls of a garrison, and overawed by armed men,
what safety could members expcc ? what liberty could prevail in
debate ? or what benefit result to the public ? The parliament met,
however, -on tle day appointed, and notvithftandiing the protefta-
tion of the Earl of Montrose and Lord Lindsay, in name of their
party, proceeded to business. The King's acceptance of the govern-
ment was confirmed; the ac granted to Morton, for his security,
ratified; some regulations, with regard to the numbers and autho-
rity of the privy council, were agreed upon; and a pension for lite
granted to the Countess of Mar, who had been so inflrumental in
bringing about. the late revolution *.

55
Boo's V1.

i578.

juiy, 2C5%-

MEANWHILE, Argyll, Athole, and their followers, took arms, .;'I n! i

upon the specious pretence of rescuing the Kilg fi-om captivity, and Ate t ke
the kingdom from oppression. James himself, impatient of the ser- him.
vitude in wlich he was held, by a man whom he had long been
taught to hate, secretly encouraged their enterprizc; thotugh, at the
fame time, he was obliged not only to disavow them in public, but
to levy forces against them, and even to declare, by proclamltion,
tiat lie was perfectly free from any confnraint, either upoa lis pcr-
son, or his will. B1otl fides qulickly took the field. Argyll and
Athole were at the head of 7000 men; tle F.arl of An!;iis, Mor-
ton's nephew, met them with an army o5000 frong; 'ithilr party, Auu .,l
however, was eager to engage. MlJorton difruftlcd the fidc liti ot

* CalJ. 2. 547. Pilr. V. Jac. VI.

{l 8.

BooKVI. his own troops. The two Earls were sensible that a tingle victory,

.,-8 however compleat, would not be decisive; and as they were in no

,condition to undertake the siege of Stirling-caftle, where the King
was kept, their strength would soon be exhausted, while Morton's
own wealth, and the patronage of the Queen of England, might
furnish him with cndlefs resources. By the mediation of Bowes,
whom Elizabeth had sent into Scotland to negociate an accommo-

Eiizabnth ne- dation between the two fations, a treaty was concluded, in confe-
accommoda- quence of which, Argyll and Athole were admitted into the King's
te"nlteveen. presence; some of their party were added to the privy council;

and a Convention of nobles called, in order to bring all remaining
.differences to an amicable iftue '.

So soon as James afimed the government into his own hands,

he dispatched the abbot of Dunfermling to inform Elizabeth of
that event; to offer to renew the alliance between the two king-
doms; and to demand poffeflion of the estate, which had lately
fallen to him, by the death of his grandmother, the Countess of
Lennox. That Lady's second son had left one daughter, Arabella
Stewart, who was born in England. And as the chief objecion
againlt the pretensions of the Scottish line to the crown of England,
was that maxim of Englifli law, which excludes aliens from any
right of inheritance within the kingdom; Elizabeth, by granting
this demand, would have established a precedent in James's favour,
that might have been esteemed decisive, with regard to a point,
which it had been her constant care to keep undecided. Without
suffering this delicate question to be tried, or allowing any newlight
to be thrown on that, which fle confidered as the great mystery
of her reign, flie commanded the rents of the estate to be fequef-

Y Crawf. Mcm. 307.

tered

tered by Lord Burleigh, mafler of the wards; and by this method
of proceeding, gave the Scottifll King early warning how necef-
fary it would be to court her favour, if ever he hoped for success
in claims of greater importance, but equally liable to be contro-
verted t.

AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty, the contending

nobles were at last brought to some agreement. But it was fol-
lowed by a tragical event. Morton, in token of reconcilement,
having invited the leaders of the opposite party to a great enter-
tainment, Athole the chancellor was, soon after, taken ill, and died
within a few days. The symptoms and violence of the disease gave
rife to firong suspicions of his being poisoned; and though the
physicians, who opened his body, differed in opinion as to the
cause of the distemper, the Chancellor's relations publickly accuscd
Morton of that odious crime. The advantage which visibly accrued
to him, by the removal of a man of great abilities, and avcrfe from
all his measures, was sufficient proof of his guilt to the people,
who are ever fond of imputing the death of eminent persons to
extraordinary causes '.

TIIE office of Chancellor was bellowed upon Argyll, whom this

preferment reconciled, in a great mcafure, to Morton's admi-
niltration. e-c had now recovered all the authority ihe poflefccd
during his Regency, and had entirely broken, or baffled, the power
and cabals of his enemies. None of the great families remained
to be the olbjcts of his jealousy, or to obftrudt his designs, but that
of Hamilton. The Earl of Arran, the eldefl brother, had never
rccovered the lhock, which he received from the ill ifucccfs of his

BooK Vr.

I1578.

1579.

April 24.

Morton's il-
lcgal proceed-
ingsS againll
the family of
I Iamilton.
f Camd. 61i.

'' Spotfwool, 306.
VoL. 11

57
I

pafllon

5U

T -IHE HISTORY
BooK VI. passion for the Queen, and had now altogether loft his reason.

-' ^' Lord John, the second brother, was in poffcffion of the family estate.
!579.

Lord Claud was Commendator of Paisley; both of them young
men, ambitious, and enterprizing. Morton dreaded their influence
in the kin-gdom; the courtiers hoped to share their spoils among
them; and as all Princes naturally view their fuicccflors with jea-
lousy and hatred, it was cafy to infuse these paflions into the mind
of the young King. A pretence was at hand to juflify the most
violent proceedings. The pardon, flipulated in the treaty of Perth,
did not ex-tnd to those, who were accessary to the murder of the
Regents Murray or Lennox. Lord John and his brother were
fufpeTted of being the authors of both these crimes, and had been
included in a general act of attainder on that account. Without
summoning them to trial, or examining a single witness to prove
the charge, this attainder was now thought sufficient to subjea
them to all the penalties which they would have incurred by being
formally convided. The Earls of Morton, Mar, and Eglinton,
together with the Lords Ruthven, Boyd, and Cathcart, received a
commii. ion to fcize their persons and estates. On a few hours
warning, a considerable body of troops was ready, and marched
towards Hamilton, in hostile array. Happily, the two brothers

(ladc their cfcape, though wth great difliculty. But their landswere
coiiilifccd ; the cafles of Hamilton and Draffan bcfiegcd; those

lhlio deeclndcd them puniflhd. The Farl of Arran, though inca-
pable, l-romn Is fit lnation, of committing any crime, was involved,
by a iliamciil] a:tlu!c of law, in the common ruin of his fimily;
and as ift Iec, t(), t could have been guilty of rebellion, confined a
cloce prifoncr. Thllcl pro(cedingls, lb contrary to the flundamlcntal
pl 'ic;plcs of jniilc, were all ratified in the itll)fq(ltclt parliament *
.

' Crawl. Mlme. 311. Spotw'. 306.

AitO UT

S9

ABOUT this time Mary sent, by Naul her secretary, a letter to BOOK VI.

her son, together with some jewels of value, and a vest embroidered -
with her own hands. But as she gave him only the title of Prince
of Scotland, the messenger was dismissed, without being admitted
into his presence'*.

TIOUGH Elizabeth had, at this time, no particular reason Ncgociations

for a marriage
to fear any attempt of the Popish Princes in Mary's favour, between Eli-

zabeth and

fle still continued to guard her with the fame anxious care. the lketof
The acquisition of Portugal on the one hand, and the defence Alenoa,
of the Netherlands on the other, fully employed the councils
and arms of Spain. France, torn in pieces by interline commo-
tions, and under a weak and capricious Prince, despised and dif-
trusted by his own fubjeCs, was in no condition to dlifulrb its
neighbours. Elizabeth had long amuscd that court by carrying
on a treaty of marriage with the Duke of Alencon, the King's
brother. But whether, at the age of forty-five, flle really in-
tended to marry a Prince of twenty? whether the pleasure of
being flattered and courted, made her liften to the addrefics of
so young a lover, whom fhle allowed to visit her at two difler-
ent times, and treated with the most diflinguifhinig crcpcd ? or
whether considerations of intcreft, predominatedl in this, as ,-cll
as in every other tranfacii on of her reign, nire proiblcms in
history which we are not concerned to rclolvc ? DL1ring1 the plo-
grcfs of this negociation, which was drawn out t,) all xtra-
ordinary length, I\Mary could cxpccl no afiliancc iroill the IFrnchll
court, and fcems to have held little coirrdlell)odcncc with it. And
thcre was no periodl ill ler re'ign, w\\hecin llizabclh cljIc\ed
llorle perfcc'l fccurit)

CriL .
IA

11 o T ONi
1 2

MORTON feIms, at this time, to have been equally secure; but

his fccurity was not so well founded. 1-1 , hid weathered out
one storm, had cruflhcd his adversaries, and wTas again in pof-
Iselion of the sole direction of affairs. But as the King was now
of an age, when the charader and-difpofitions of the mind begin
to unfold themselves, and to become visible, the finallil- attention
to these might have convinced him, that there was reason to cxpct
new and more dangerous attacks on his power. James early dif-
covered that excessive attachment to favourites, which accompanied
him through his whole life. This passion, which naturally arises
from inexperience and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his age,
far from being culpable; nor could it well be expeced that the
choice of the objects, on whom he placed his affections, Ihould be
made with great skill. The molt considerable of them, was Efme
Stewart, a native of France, and son of a second brother of the
Earl of Lennox. He was distinguished by the title of Lord
D)'Albigna, an estate in France, which descended to him from his
anccflors, on whom it had been conferred, in reward of their va-
loiur, and fcrvices to the Frenchl crown. He arrived in Scotland,
about this timc, on purpose to demand the estate and title of Len-
nox, to which he pretended a legal right. He was received at first,
by the King, with the rctlcC due to so near a relation. The
g-accFilnllcs of his perion, the elegance of his drcfs, and his court-
)ly behaviolr, made a great impreifion on James, lwho, even in
lis more mature years, w as little able to rcfif these frivolous
chrllns ; anid llis afi-ck1ion flowed with its utilal rapidity, and pro-
f'iliion. \Viftlil a fe',v days after Stcwart's appearance at court,
lie was; created Lord Abcrbrothlock, bon after Earl, and then Duke
of Lciiio).;, Goverlor of DlunIIartlon calllc, Captain of the guard,
tirfl Lord of- the bcdclhaclllc, an Lord -ligh Clhamlberlain. At
the tame tinU, anld vitlholtt any of the envy, or emulation, wlVicli
Boo30 VI.

1579.

(cIu I;i )Ut

ritl,5, ,ain an
.ic lIjll tsj cl
6o

iT usual among candidates for favour, Captain James Stewart, the BooK VI.
second ion of Lord Ochiltree, grew into great confidence. But '
notwithstanding this union, Lennox and Captain Stewart were
persons of very opposite charaaers. The former was naturally
gentle, humane, candid; but unacquainted with the state of the
country, and milled, or misinformed by those whom he trusted; not
unworthy to be the companion of the young King, in his amuse-
ments, but utterly disqualified for acting as a Miinirer, in dire&c-
ing his affairs. The latter was remarkable for all the vices, mwhich
render a man formidable to his country, and a pernicious coun-
fellor to his Prince; nor did he possess any one virtue, to coun-
terbalance these vices, unless dexterity in conducing his own dc-
signs, and an enterprizing courage, superior to the sense of danger,
may pass by that name. Unrefirained by religion, regardlcfs of
decency, and undifinayed by opposition, he aimed at objects, ifem--
ingly unattainable; but under a Prince, void of experience, and
blind to all the defects of those, who had gained his favoour, his
audacity was successful; and honours, wealth, and power, were
the reward of his crimes.

BOTH the favourites concurred in employing their whole ad- They labour

to tnleC]'millq

dress, to undermine Morton's credit, which alone obflruded their Morton's au-
full poflcffion of power. And as James had been bred up witlh an tlolil.
avcrfion for that nobleman, who endeavoured rather to mainitaill
the authority of a Tutor, than to ad: wvith the obfcquioulillcfs of a
Minifltr, they found it no difficult matter to accompif their d(c-
Iign. Morton, who could no longer lkcep the King Iliut up) wilhlil
the walls of Stil liing-calllc, having called a parlillamtent to Ict ;at
1 (dilLnbrghl, brought hlimn thithler. James made his en try illto t1lie Olobcr 17
sapital, with great foleimniily; the citizens received him witli the

loudc.;

loudest acclamations of joy, and with many expensive pageants,
according to the mode of that age. After a long period of thirty-
seven years, during which Scotland had been fubjeded to the dele-
gated power of Regents, or to the feeble government of a woman,
and had iuffered all the miseries of civil war, and felt the insolence
of foreign armies, the nation rejoiced to fee the sceptre once more
in the hands of a King. Fond even of that shadow of authority,
which a Prince of fifteen could possess, the Scots flattered them-
fclves, that union, order, and tranquillity would now be restored
to the kingdom. James opened the parliament with extraordinary
pomp, but nothing remarkable passed in it.

THESE demonfirations, however, of the people's love and attach-

imcnt to their Sovereign, encouraged the favourites to continue their
insinuations against Morton; and as the King now resided in the
palace of Haly-rud-houfe, to which all his fubjeEts had access, the
cabal againftl.the Earl grew daily fironger, and the intrigue, which
occasioned his fall, ripened gradually.

MORTON began to be fcnfible of his danger, and endeavoured to

put a flop to the career of Lcnnox's preferment, by representing
hnim as a formidable enemy to the Reformed Religion, a fccrct
agent in favour of Popery, and a known cmifli ry of the houfc of
Guile. The clergy, apt to believe every rumour of this kind,
fprcad the alarln among the people. B3ut Lcnnox, cither out of
complaisance to his mafler, or convinced by the arguments of fIome
learnedl Divincs, whom the lKi-ng appointed to inlriiuc him in the
principles of tlle Plrotetant Religion, publlickly renounced the Crl)rrs
oif lopery, in the (:Ilhurch of St. (;les, and dleclared IiimMclla mei-
ber of the Clhurch of Scotland, by signing lher Confllion of- Fitlh.

TIr is,
BOOK VI.

I579.

1580.

Mor:on en-
deavours to
prevent them.
6z

This, though it did not remove all suspicions, nor silence some
zealous preachers, abated, in a great degree, the force of the ac-
cufation '.

ON the other hand, a rumour prevailed that Morton was pre-

paring to fcizc the King's person, and to carry him into England.
Whether dcfpair of maintaining his powcr, by any other means,
had driven him to make any overture of tlat kind to the Englill
court, or whether it was a calumny, invented by his adversarics to
render him odious, cannot now be determined with certainty. As
he declared at his death, that such a design had never entered into
his thoughts, the latter seems to be most probable. It afforded a
pretence, however, for reviving the office of Lord Chamberlain,
which had been for some time disuscd. That honour was conferred
on Lennox. Alexander Erskine, Morton's capital enemy, was
his deputy; they had under them a band of Gentlemen, who were
appointed conflantly to attend the King, and to guard his person -.

MORTON was not ignorant of what his enemies intended to in-

sinuate, by such unusual precautions for the King's safety. And as
his last resource, applied to Elizabeth, whose protecion had often
flood him in fiead in his greatest difficulties. In c(lficquence of
this application, Bowes her envoy acculed Lennox of pradcices
againfl the peace of the two kingdomls, and ililCed, in her name,
that he flould inflantly be removed from the privy council. Such
an unprecedented demand was confidercd by the Counllkllors, as an
afiront to the King, andl 11n encroaclment on the ini(lpcndl)e nce of
the kIingdomn. They alLecte(d to call in qucfleion the nlvoy's powCers,
andt, upon that pretencc, refiIfed him farther audlici ce ; itd lie retir-

' Claws. Mlc1m. 319. 'Spolfw. 308.

.1 C i;wl'. AiT1n1. )Z.

BooK VI.

I580.

iiiz i)Cth in-
terpoks in his
b hai~ls.
In$

63

IOOK VI. ing in disgust, and without taking leave; Sir Alexander Home was

r sent to expoptulate with Elizabeth on the subjed. After the treat-
ment, which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth thought it below
her dignity to admit Home into her presence. Burleigh, to whom
he was commanded to impart his commission, reproached him with
his Master's ingratitude towards a benefaEtrefs, who had placed the
crown on his head, and required him to advise the King to beware
of sacrificing the friendship of so necefeary an ally, to the giddy
humours of a young man, without experience, and strongly sus-
peced of principles and attachments, incompatible with the hap-
piness of the Scottish nation.

Morton ac- TiHIS accusation of Lennox hastened, in all probability, Mor-
cufed of the
murJer of the ton's fall. The at of indemnity, which he had obtained when he
te King. resigned the Regency, was worded with such scrupulous exacnefs,

as almost screened him from any legal prosecution. The murder of
the late King was the only crime, which could not, with decency,
be inserted in a pardon, granted by his son. Here Morton flill lay
open to the penalties of the law. And Captain Stewart, who
lfunnedl no aCtion, however desperate, if it led to power, or to
Dccemb.. 30. favour, entered the council chamber, while the King and nobles

were afmcnblcd, and falling on his knees, accused Morton of being
accessary, or according to the language of the Scottifl law, art and
part, in the conspiracy against the life of his Majesty's father, and
oflercd, under the usual penalties, to verify this charge by legal evi-
dence. IMorton, who was present, heard this accusation with firm-
nlcfs; and replied with a difelainful finile, proceeding either from
colitnempt of the infamous character of his accuser, or from con-
.:iouli'ncs ol his own innocence, " that his known zeal, in punifn-
i11 tliofc whlo were fuflpclcd of that d(ctcalable crime, might well

S exempt
64

exempt himself from any suspicion of being accefllary to it, never- BooK VI.

-.- -.-

thelefs, he would cheerfully submit to a trial, either in that place, 1580.
or in any other court; and doubted not but his own innocence,
and the malice of his enemies, would then appear in the clearest
light." Stewart, who was still on his knees, begun to enquire how
he would reconcile his bellowing so many honours on Archbald
Douglas, whom he certainly knew to be one of the murtherers,
with his pretended zeal against that crime. Morton was ready to
answer. But the King commanded both of them to be removed.
The Earl was confined, first of all, to his own house, and then I58I.
committed to the castle of Edinburgh, of which Alexander Erskine January z.
was Governor; and as if it had not been a sufficient indignity to
subje&t him to the power of one of his enemies, he was, soon after,
carried to Dumbarton, of which Lennox had the command. A January 18.
warrant was, likewise, issued for apprehending Archbald Douglas;
but he, having received timely intelligence of the approaching
danger, fled into England *.

THE Earl of Angus, who imputed these violent proceedings

not to hatred against Morton alone, but to the ancient enmity
between the houses of Stewart and of Douglas, and who be-
lieved that a conspiracy was now formed for the dcflrudion
of the whole name, was ready to take arms in order to rescue
his kinfinan. But Morton absolutely sorbad any fucl attempt,
and declared that he would rather susser ten thousand deaths,
than bring an imputation on his own characer by seeming to
decline a trialt.

*Crawf. Mcm, 323. I- Johnfl. 64. Spotfw. 311.
VOL. II.

1K

ELIZA-

Boox VI. EL IZABET H did not fail to interpose, with warmth, in behalf of

158 a man, who had contributed so much to preserve her influence over
1581.

Elizabeth's Scotland. The late tranfadions in that kingdom had given her
measures in
order to save great uneasiness. The power which Lennox had acquired inde-
nllm. pendant of her was dangerous; the treatment her ambassadors had,

met with, differed greatly from the refpct, with which the Scots
were in use to receive her ministers; and the attack now made on
Morton fully convinced her, that there was an intention to sow the
feeds of discord between the two nations, and to seduce James into
a new alliance with France, or into a marriage with some Popifhb
Princess. Full of these apprchenfions, flhe ordered a considerable
body of troops to be assembled on the borders of Scotland, and difl
patched Randolph as her ambassador into that kingdom. He ad-
drcffed himself not only to James, and to his council, but to a Con-
vention of estates met at that time. He began with enumerating,
the extraordinary benefits which Elizabeth had conferred on the
Scottish nation: That without demanding a tingle foot of land for
herself, without encroaching on the lib.ertics of the kingdom in the
finalleft article, fihe had, at the expence of the blood of her sub-
jeds, and the treasures of her crown, rescued the Scots from the
dominion of France, eftabliflied among them true Religion, and
put them in poffcffion of their ancient rights : That from the begin-
ning fie had protcec(d tliofe, wlo cpoufed the King's cause, and
by her afliflancc alone, the Crown had been prefcrvcd on his head,
and all the attcmpts of the adverse f hacion baflted: That an union,
unknown to their anccflors, )but equally beneficial to both king-
doms, had fubflflicd for a long pcri(d of years, andl though so many
Popifhl Princes had combined to diflriil) this haply f)ate of things,
her care, and their conflancy, had hitherto deleated all thele cefortls
I'lat .(he had obfcrvcd, of late, an unufLual coldnicls, diltlruf, and

cflran !c-
66

estrangement in the Scottish Council, which ihe could impute to
none but Lennox, a subjeS of France, a retainer to the house of
Guise., bred up in the errors of Popery, and fiill fuflpeced of favour-
ing that superstition. Not satisfied with having mounted so fast to
such an uncommon height of power, which he exercised with all
the rashness of youth, and all the ignorance of a firanger; nor think-
ing it enough to have deprived the Earl of Morton of the authority,
due to his abilities, and experience, he had conspired the ruin of
that nobleman, who had often exposed his life in the King's cause,
who had contributed more than any other subiec to place him on
the throne, to refill the encroachments of Popery, and to preserve
the union between the two kingdoms. If any zeal for religion re-
mained among the nobles of Scotland, if they wishcd for the conti-
nuance of amity with England, if they valued the privileges of
their own order, he called upon them, in the name of his Mifirefs,
to remove such a pernicious counsellor as Lennox from the presence
of the young King, to rescue Morton out of the hands of his avowed
enemy, and secure to him the benefit of a fair and impartial trial:
And if force were necessary towards accomplishing a design so
salutary to the King and kingdom, he promised them the pro-
tertion of his Mistress in the enterprize, and whatever afliflance
they fliould demand either of men or money*

BUT these extraoirdinary remonfirances, accompanied with fucl.

an unusual appeal fromi the King to his fubjecs, were not the only
mcans emnployed by Elizabctlh, in favour of Morton, and against
Linnox. She perliladcd the Prinice of Orange to fend an agent
into Scotland, and under colour of coimplimeniting James on account

* C.,hl. 3. 6. Stiype, 2. 621.

BooKlVi.
158i.

67
K 2

of

300KVI. of the valour, which many of his fubjets had displayed in the
~r-8" ' i service of the States, to enter into a long detail of the restless en-

terprizes of the Popilh Princes againli the Protestant Religion; to
beseech him to adhere inviolably to the alliance with England,
the only barrier which secured his kingdom against their danger-
ous cabals; and above all things, to diltruft the insinuations of those,
who endeavoured to weaken or to dissolve that union between the
Britilf nations, which all the Protestants in Europe beheld with so
much pleasure .

James deter- JAMFS'S Counsellors were too intent upon the deftrueion of
mines to pro-
cced againlt their enemy to liften to these remonitrances. The officious inter-

him position of the Prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's

message, and her avowed attempt to excite subjeCts to rebel against
their Sovereign, were confidered as unexampled insults on the Ma-
jerfy and independance of a crowned head. A general and evasive
answer was given to Randolph. James prepared to assert his own
dignity with spirit. All those fufpeded of favouring Morton were
turned out of office, some of them were required to surrender
themselves prisoners; the fencible men throughout the kingdom
were commanded to take arms; and troops were levied, and polled,
on the borders. The English ambaflador, finding that neither the
public manifesto which he had delivered to the Convention, nor
his private cabals with the nobles, could excite them to arms, fled
in the night-time out of Scotland, where libels against him had
been daily Iptblilhed, and even attempts made upon his life. In
both kingdoms every tlling wore an hloftilc afpe&. But iEliza-
beth, though the wilhcd to have intimidated the Scottili King by

* Cald. 3. 9.

her
68

her preparations, had no inclination to enter into a war with him, BOOK VI.
and the troops on the borders, which had given such umbrage, 18
were soon dispersed .

THE greater solicitude Elizabeth discovered for Morton's safety,

the more eagerly did his enemies drive on their schemes for his
destruction. Captain Stewart his accuser was first appointed Tutor
to the Earl of Arran, and soon after both the title and estate of his
unhappy ward, to which he advanced some frivolous claim, were
conferred upon him. The new-made Peer was commanded to
condu&t Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh; and, by that
choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate he might expet&,
but had the cruel mortification of fceing his deadly enemy already
loaded with honours, in reward of the malice with which lie had
contributed to his ruin.

TH- E records of the court of J.7liciary at this period are loft. The He is tried

andcondem~.-

account which our historians give of Morton's trial is inaccurate ed.onc
and unfatisfadory. The whole proceedings seem to have been vio-
lent, irregular, and opprcflive. Arran, in order to extort evidence,
tortured ieveral of the Earl's domestics with unusual cruelty. Dur-
ing the trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn up in dif-
ferent parts of the city. The jury was composed of the Earl's
known enemies; and though he challenged several of them, his
objelions were over-ruled. After a short consultation, his peers
found him guilty of concealing, and of being art and part in the
conlfpiracy against the life of the late King. The firfi part of the
verdici did not furprize himn, but he twice repeated the words art

* Crawf. lMcn. 328. Strypc, 2. Append. 138.

antt

69

BOOK VI. and part with some vehemence, and added, " God kInows it is

8 " not so." The doom, which the law decrees against a Traitor,

was pronounced. The King, however, remitted the cruel and ig-
nominious part of the sentence, and appointed that he should sus-
ser death next day, by being beheaded *'
Hlis death. DURI NG that awful interval, Morton polleffed the utmost con-

pofure of mind. He fupped cheerfully; slept a part of the night,
in his usual maner; and employed the rft of his time in religious
conferences, and in adcs of devotion, with omne Milliners of the
city. The Clergymen who attended him, dealt freely with his con-
science, and pressed his crimes home upon him. VWhat he con-
sessed with regard to the crime for which he fiiffcred is remark-
able, and supplies, in some measure, the imperfection of our records.
He acknowledged, that on his return from England, after the death
of Rizio, Bothwell had informed him of the conspiracy against the
King, which the Queen, as he told him, knew of and approved;
that he follicited him to concur in the execution of it, which, at
that time, he abfolutciy declined; that, soon after, I3othwell him-
self, and Archbald Douglas, in his name, renewing their follicita-
tions to the fame purpose, lie had required a warrant, under the
Q1een's hand, authorizing the attempt, and as that had never been
produced, he had rcfulcd to be any farthcr concerned in the matter.
" But, continued he, as I neither consented to this trcafonable ad.,
' nor aflifled in the committing of it, so it was lnpoflil)e for me to
" rcveal, or to prevent it. To whom could I make the difcovcry?

T" The Queen was the author of the cnltcrriz.e. Darnly wavs ficlh
' a changelling, that no fecrct could le ftaitly communiicIated to lilm.

Spotr. 3 5. Johnlt. 65. Ci'-aW^. 1cme. 332.. Cid. 3. 45.

`I IIIuItlv

3
1)
7°

"; Huntly and Bothwell, who bore the chief sway in the kingdom, Boo K VL
" were themselves the perpetrators of the crime." These circum- -
fiances, it muff be confessed, go some length towards extenuating
Morton's guilt; and though his apology for the favour he had
shewn to Archbald Douglas, whom he knew to be one of the con-
fpirators, be far less fatisfa3Cory, no uneasy refleaions seem to have
disquieted his own mind on that account . When his keepers told
him that the guards were attending, and all things in readiness,
"' I praise my God, said he, I am ready likewise." Arran com-
manded these guards; and even in those moments, when the most
implacable hatred is apt to relent, the malice of his enemies could
not forbear this insult. On the scaffold, his behaviour was calm;
his countenance and voice unaltered; and after some time spent in,
devotion, he suffered death with the intrepidity, which became the
name of Douglas. His head was placed on the public jail of Edin-
burgh; and his body, after lying till sun-set on the scaffold, co-
vered with a beggarly cloak, was carried by common porters to the
usual burial-place of criminals. None of his friends durst accom-
pany it to the grave, or discover their gratitude and refpe&t by any
symptoms of sorrow --.

ARRAN, no less profligate in private life, than audacious in his O.iou, ccn:

dut of Arraa.T

nublic conduce, lobon after drew the attention of his countrymen,
by his infamous marriage with the Countess of March. Before he
grew into favour at court, he had been often entertained in her
husband's honfe, and without regarding the laws of hiolfitality or
of gratitude, carried on a criminal intrigue with the wife of his
benefactor, a woman young and beautiful, but, according to the

c-- Crawf. /lcm. 331. Spot\fw. 313.

7?
,l C.-as. MCIII ppelid. 3,

n ,ti U n,

description of a cotemporary Historian, "intolerable in all the im-
" perfections incident to her sex." Impatient of any restraint upon
their mutual desires, they, with equal ardor, wished to avow their
union publickly, and to legitimate, by a marriage, the offspring
of their unlawful paflion. The Countess petitioned to be divorced
from her husband, for a reason, which no modest woman will
ever plead. The Judges, over-awed by Arran, passed fcntence
without delay. And this infamous scene was concluded by a mar-
riage, solemnized with great pomp, and beheld by all ranks of men
with the utmost horror *.
.Oaober 24. A Parliament was held this year, at the opening of which some

disputes arose between Arran and the Earl now created Duke of
Lennox. Arran, haughty by nature, and pushed on by his wife's
ambition, began to. asset an equality with the Duke, under whose
protection he had hitherto been contented to place himself. After
various attempts to form a party in the council againit Lennox, he
found him fixed so firmly in the King's affecions, that it was im-
possible to shake him, and rather than lose all interest at court, from
which he was banished, he made the most humble submissions to
the favourite, and again recovered his former credit. This rupture
contributed, however, to render the Duke still more odious to the
nation. During the continuance of it, Arran affeccd to court the
Clergy, pretended an extraordinary zeal for the Protestant Religion,
and laboured to confirln the fuilpicions, which were entertained of
his rival, as an cmitary of the house of Guiic, and a favourer of
Popery. As he was supposed to be acquainted with the Duke's
moti fecrct designs, his calumnies were liftencd-to with more cre-

' Spotfwood, 315.

dit,

72
BOOK VI.

1581.
July 6.

73

dit, than was due to his character. To the fame cause, we must BooKVT.
ascribe several ats of parliament, uncommonly favourable to the
Church, particularly one, which abolished the pracice, introduced
by Morton, of appointing but one minister to several parishes.

No notice hath been taken for some years of Ecclesiastical as- F.clefiaftical

fairs. While the civil government underwent so many extraordi- afflils
nary revolutions, the Church was not free from convulsions. Two
objects, chiefly, engrossed the attention of the Clergy. The one
was the forming a system of discipline, or Ecclesiastical polity.
After long labour, and many difficulties, this was at last brought to
some degree of perfetion. The Assembly solemnly approved of
it, and appointed it to be laid before the privy-council, in order
to obtain the ratification of it in parliament. But Morton, during
his adminifiration, and those who, after his fall, governed the
King, were equally unwilling to fee it carried into execution; and
byftarting difficulties, and throwing in objeCions, prevented it from.
receiving a legal fanaion. The other point in view was the abo-
lition of the Episcopal order. The bishops were so devoted to the
King, to whom they owed their promotion, that the function
itself was by some reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being
allowed a feat in parliament, and diflinguifhed by titles of honour,
these not only occasioned many avocations from their Ipiritual em-
ployments, but soon rendered their character and manners extremely
dlifferent from those of the Clergy in that age. The nobles viewed
their power with jealousy; the populace confidered their lives as
profane; and both wiflhed their downfal with equal ardour. The
personal emulation between Melvil and A(lamifon, a man of learnl-
ing, and eminent for his popular eloquence, who was promoted,

VOL. II. L on

BOOK VI. on the death of Douglas, to be archbishop of St. Andrew's,

~" "'- mingled itself with the passions on each fide, and heightened them.

Attacks were made, in every assembly, on the order of bishops ;
their privileges. were gradually circumscribed; and at last an aa
was passed, declaring the office of bishop, as it was then exercised
-within the realm, to have neither foundation nor warrant in the
word of God; and requiring, under pain of excommunication, all
who now poffefled that office, inflantly to resign it, and to abstain
from preaching or adminiftring the sacraments, till they fliould re-
ceive permission from the Assembly. The court did not acquiesce
in this decree. A vacancy happening, soon after, in the fee of
Glasgow, Montgomery, Minifrer at Stirling, a man vain, fickle,
presumptuous, and more apt, by the blemifies in his character,
to have alienated the people from an order already beloved, than
to reconcile them to one which was the object of their hatred,
struck up an infamous bargain with Lennox, and on his recom-
mendation was chosen Archbiflop. The Prefbytcry of Stirling, of
which he was a member, the Presbytery of Glasgow, whither he
was to be translated, the General Aflembly, vied with each other
[5S·8. in prosecuting him on that account. In order to fcreel Mlontgo-

mery, James made trial both of gentle and of rigorous measures,
and botl were equally incfl'ecnal. The General Aflemblly was
jaut ready to pronounce againfl him the fCIntclcC (>f excommunica-
tion, when an eIcrald entcred and conmmanded tlicm, in the King's
name, and under pain of rebellion) to flop further proceedings.
£Evcn thlis injuncqion they dcfpiflc. And though Montgoncry, by
his tears, and ficilling penitcncc, procured a short rcli)itc, the
6tntencc was at lald illticed by their apptointienit, and publiflicd
.i all tltc ciluirclh s thi roi.,ihu.t the kiuigt.lm
74

THE firmness of the Clergy, in a collective body, was not

greater than the boldness of some individuals, particularly of the
Ministers of Edinburgh. They inveighed daily against the cor-
ruptions in the administration, and, with the freedom of speech,
admitted into the pulpit in that age, named Lennox and Arran as
the chief authors of the grievances, under which the church and
kingdom groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complained to
the King of the insolent and Seditious spirit of the Clergy. In or-
der to check the boldness of their discourses, James issued a procla-
mation, commanding Dury, one of the most popular Ministers,
not only to leave the town, but [to abtlain from preaching in any
other place. Dury complained, to the judicatories of the Church,
of this encroachment upon the immunities of his office. They
approved of the doctrine which he had delivered; and he deter-
mined to disregard the royal proclamation. But the magistrates
being determined to compel him to leave the city, according to the
King's orders, he was obliged to abandon his charge, after pro-
testing publickly, at the cross of Edinburgh, against the violence,
which was put upon him. The people accompanied him to the
gates, with tears and lamentations; and the Clergy denounced the
vengeance of heaven against the authors of this outrage '

IN this perilous situation flood the Church; the authority of

its judicatories called in question, and the liberty of the pulpit re-
strained, when a fuldden revolution in the civil government pro-
cured them unexpedled relief.

TH E two favourites, by their afcc ndanlt over the King, poffcftcc
'incontrouled power in the kingdom, and cxcrciccl it with the

0 C.l. Aflcmb. _5;m6--c82. Spo6-5 . 277, &c.

7;
BooK VI.

I5830-

K'rry( ill liii-

r ,oi,1i i
, 2

1u t nof}

Boo'K VI. utmost wantonness. James usually residcd at Dalkeith or Kinneil,

1582 dthe feats of Lennox and of Arran, and was attended by such com-

pany, and employed in such amusements, as did not fuiit his dig-
nity. The services of those, who had contributed most to place the
Crown on his head, were but little remembered. Many who had
opposed him with the greatest virulence, enjoyed the rewards and
honours, to which the others were entitled. Exalted notions of
regal prerogative, utterly inconsistent with the constitution of Scot-
land, being instilled by his favourites into the mind of the young:
Monarch, unfortunately made, at that early age, a deep impreflion
there, and became the source of almost all his subsequent errors in
the government of both kingdoms %. Courts of justice were held
in almost every county, the proprietors of land were called before
them, and upon the slightest neglec of any of the numerous forms,.
which are peculiar to feudal holdings, they were fined with un-
usual and intolerable rigour. The Lord Chamberlain revived the
obsolete jurifdicion of his office over the Burroughs, and they were
fubjeDed to exalions no less grievous. A design seemed, likewise,
to have been formed to exasperate Elizabeth, and to diflflve the
alliance with her, which all good Protcftants esteemed the chief fe-
curity of their religion in Scotland. A close corrcfpondence was set
on toot betwen the King and his mother, and considerable progress
made towards uniting their titles to the Crown, by such a treaty
of atilociation, as Maitland ihad projLeedl; which could not fail of
endlangering or dimiinhing his authority, and must have proved
fatal to t , who had acted against her with greatefl vigour --.

ALL llhcic circuintanccs. irritated the impatient spirit of the

Scottifi nloblc, who rcfolvcd to tolerate no logecr lic infolcncc of'
the t\v)o iniioni, or to (land by, while their prcfllll)tion and in-

* ( J 1. 3l . -~ d d , 1 7

I' .
;~;ill theali

-1 C` 1 (1, 3, 1 5 7·

C\ 1 .

77

experience ruined both the King and kingdom. Elizabeth, who,
during the administration of the four Regents, had the entire direc-
tion of the affairs of Scotland, felt herself deprived of all influence
in that kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and was ready to
countenance any attempt to rescue the King out of the hands of
favourites, who were leading him into measures, so repugnant to
all her views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord Ruthven,
lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tu-
tor of Glamis, the Master of Oliphant, with several Barons and
gentlemen of diftinaion, entered into a combination for that pur-
pose; and as changes in adminiitration, which among polished na-
tions are brought about slowly and silently, by artifice and intrigue,
were in that rude age effe&ced suddenly and by violence, the King's
situation, and the security of the favourites, encouraged the con-
£pirators to have. immediate recourse to force.

BooK VI.

5--8----

1582.

JA-ES, after having resided some time in Atllole, where he en- Scize the

joyed his favourite amnufenent of hunting, was now returning at Rutlv.ei
towards Edinburgh, with a small train. He was invited to Ruth-
ven-caftle, which lay in his way; and as he fufpeledl no danger,
he went thither in hopes of farther sport. The multitude of firan- August 2Z.
gers whom he found there gave him some uncafinefs; and as those
who were in the fccrct arrived every moment ririoml difl'erent parts,
the appearance of so many new faccs increaseld lis fears. lie con-
cealed his uncaflincfs, however, Viti the utlmofl care; and nCxt
morning prepared for the sicld, cxpcding to find tlicre blomc oppor-
tunity of makinl hiis efcapc. sltt j n as he as ready to depart, the
Nollcs entered lis bedl-chainbecr ill a bomd, and p ntcd a memo-
rial againfl the illcgal and olprci-ive aclions of his two favouritcsi,
wlio!l tlhey rcprclctld as Imolt dangerous enemies to the rcligion

C,'.

BOOK VI. and liberties of the nation. James, though he received this remon-

58^ . itrance with the complaisance which was necessary in his present

fituat ion, was extremely impatient to be gone; but as he approached
the door of the apartment, the Tutor of Glamis rudely tfopped
him. The King complained, expoftulated, threatened, and finding
all these without effee, burst into tears; " No matter, said Glamis
fiercely, better children weep than bearded men." These words
made a deep impreflion on the King's mind, and were never forgot-
ten. The conspirators, without regarding his tears or indignation,
difimified such of his followers as they fufpeded; allowed none but
their own party to have access to him; and though they treated him.
with great refped, guarded his person with the utmost care. This
enterprize is usually called, by our historians, The raid of Ruthv; en'.

Commit Ar- LE NN O X and Arran were aflonifhed to the last degree at an event
rjn to prison. b
ran to so unexpecQed, and so fatal to their power. The former endea-

voured, but without success, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh
to take arms, in order to rescue their Sovereign from captivity. The
latter, with his usual impetuosity, mounted on horseback the mo-
ment he heard what had befallen the King, and with a few fol-
lowers, rode towards Ruthven-caftle; and as a considerable body
of the conspirators, under the command of the Earl of Mar, lay
in his way ready to oppose him, he separated hiinfclf from his com-
panions, and with two attendants arrived at the gate of the cafilc.
At the light of a man so odious to his country, tile indignation
of the conspirators rose, and inflant death mufl have been the
puniifhment of his rafhncfs, if the fricnldflip of Gowrie, or fbnme
other caure not cxplained by our hiflorians, had not savcd a life,
so pernicious to the kingdom. IIc was confined, however, to

C' Cald. 3. 34- Spotfw. 320. Mclv. 357.

tlle

the castle of Stirling, without being admitted into the King's pre- BOOK Vr.
fence. k

I582.
THE King, though really the prisoner of his own fubjets, with Cnmmand

Lennox to

whose conduct he could not help discovering many symptoms of leave ,ile
difgufl, was obliged to publish a proclamation, signifying his appro- kidom
bation of their enterprize, declaring that he himself was at full
liberty, without any restraint or violence offered to his person; and
forbidding any attempt against those concerned in the Raid of Rutth-
ven, under pretence of rescuing him out of their hands. At the
fame time, he commanded Lennox to leave Scotland before the Augut zs.
20th of September *.

SOON after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arrived as ambassadors The Confpi-

rators cotn-

from Elizabeth. The pretext of their embalfy was to inquire after teninred by
the King's safety; to encourage and countenance the conspirators Elizabclj-
was the real motive of it. By their intercession, the Earl of Angus,
who, ever since the death of his uncle Morton, had lived in exile,
obtained leave to return. And the acceflon of a nobleman so pow-
erful and so popular strengthened the fation %-.

LENNOX, whose amiable and gentle qualities had procured him

many friends, an(d who received private afnnrances that tihc King's
favour towards him was in no degree abated, Ctemed resolvcd, at
firfl, to pay no regard to a command, cxtortcd by violence, and no
less difli grccable to James, than it was rigorous withl regard to Iim-
Iclf. But the powvcr of his enemies, who w\crc maflerIs of the Klinl's
person, whlo were fccrcl y 11ipported by .' li '.a ct, and openly ;l--
plaudcd by tlic Clclrgy, deterred him fiom all cntcl-rri7c, tLhc ucccIL

* Cald. 3. 135, 138. -' Coal. 2 '5's

8 t'

79

Booi VI. of which was dubious, and the danger certain both to himself, and

58~~ to his Sovereign. I-Ie put off the time of his departure however by

various artifices, in expecation either that James might make his
efcapc from the conspirators, or that fortune might present some
more favourable opportunity of taking arms for his relief.

'reiro,1du t ON the other hand, the conspirators were extremely solicitous
approved
bv an Aflrn. not only toflecure the approbation of their countrymen, but to obtain
blCy n'ltaon ome legal fandion of their enterprize. For this purpose they
of eratcs. publifhled a long declaration, containing the motives, which had

induced them to venture on such an irregular ftcp, and endeavoured
to heighten the public indignation against the favourites, by repre-
senting, in the strongest colours, their inexperience and insolence,
their contempt of the nobles, their violation of the privileges of
the Church, and their oppreflion of the people. They obliged the
King, who could not with safety refute any of their demands, to
grant them a remission in the most ample form; and not satisfied
Oaober 13. with that, they applied to the Assembly of the Church, and easily

procured an atL, declaring, " that they had done good and accept-
able service to God, to their Sovereign, and to their native country;"
and requiring all sincere Proteflants to concur with them in carry-
ing forward such a laudable enterprize. In order to add the greater
weight to this ac, every Minister was enjoined to read it, in his
own pulpit, and to inflict the cenfurcs of the Church on those who
set themselves in opposition to so good a cause. A Convention of
cflatcs, aflcmblcd a few days after, pafred an aa to the fame effect,
and granted full indemnity to the con!lirators for every thing they
adl dolne .

* Cald. 3. 177, 187, 200. Spotfw. 322.
:80

6

JAMES

JAMES was conduaed by them, first to Stirling, and afterwards

to the palace of Haly-rud-houfe; and though he was received every
where with the external marks of refpet due to his dignity, his
motions were carefully observed, and he was under a restraint no
less ftrit, than at the first moment when he was seized by the con-
fpirators. Lennox, after eluding many commands to depart out of
the kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his journey. He lingered,
however, for tome time in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as if
he had still intended to make one effort towards restoring the King
to liberty. But either from the gentleness of his own disposition,
averse to bloodshed and the disorders of civil war, or from orme
other cause, unknown to us, he abandoned the design, and set out
for France, by the way of England. The King iflued the order
for his departure, with no less reludance than the Duke obeyed
it; and both mourned a reparation, which neither of them had
power to prevent. Soon after his arrival in France, the fatigue
of the journey, or the anguish of his mind, threw him into a
fever. In his last moments, he discovered such a firm adherence
to the Protestant faith, as fully vindicates his memory from the
imputation of an attachment to Popery, with which he had been
uncharitably loaded in Scotland '. As he was the earliest, and
best beloved, he was, perhaps, the most deserving, though not
the most able of all James's favourites. The warmth and tender-
ness of his laftcr's aflection for him was not abated by deatl
itfclf. By many ads of kindness and generosity towards his po-
ficrity, the King not only did great honour to the memory of
Lennox, but set his own charaQcr in one of the molf favourable
points of view.

* S1)utrW00 d, 32.1.

MT

BooK VI.

I582.

Lennox's de-
parture from
Scotland..
Decem. 30.

8r
Vo I_ II.

TH E

Boo K VI. THE succesS of the conspiracy, which deprived James of liberty,

1582. made great noise over all Europe; and at last reached the ears of

Mary s anxie- Mary in the prison to which flie was confined. As her own expe-
tv about her
ion. rience had taught her what injuries a captive Prince is exposed to-

susser; and as many of those, who were now concerned in the enter-
prize against her son, were the fame persons whom Ihe confidered
as the chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natural for the
tenderncfs of a mother to apprehend that the fame calamities were
ready to fall on his head; and such a profpe& did not fail of adding
to the distress and horror of her own situation. In the anguish
of her heart, she wrote to Elizabeth, complaining in the bittercit
terms of the unprecedented rigour, with which flie herself had been
treated, and beseeching her not to abandon her son to the mercy of
her rebellious fubjeds; nor permit him to be involved in the fame
misfortunes, under which fle had so long groaned. The peculiar
vigour and acrimony of style, for which this letter is remarkable,
discover both the high spirit of the Scottiih Queen, unfubdued by
her fufierings, and the violence of her indignation at Elizabeth's
artifices and severity. But it was ill adapted to gain the end flhe
had in view, and accordingly it neither procured any mitigation
of the rigour of her own confinement, nor any interposition in fa-
vour of the King ':

I r>, -[I:'lRNIl 11. who, thlouhl he fe:rced and hated the Princes of

' GiI;

' CLGuiI'z, was oftcn oblilCIed to court their f-Lvour, illtcrpor'ed with

;rnvc l]1oU:n
'i ,c,. :;1di warmthl, in order to extricate Jlames out of the iands of a party si)

entirely d(voltcd t() the I' nlifll illltel: commanded Ml. dti lI.
Motte lcll cloll, h11; aI llll:llil h

att the court (oi I'ngln(.lld, to cpl);ir

to Ediuln)r?;li, and to contil)iultc llis ulIl)sl clliIavolrS towmards
pltcing' .[;lcs in ;t fitu.tionI, 1u re (ilint;tbl to Ii:; (lI;,IIy. A l Eli-

" C'.,,,*. ,!o " .

y;>lhtlt
82

83-

zabeth could not, with decency, refute him liberty to execute this BooK VI.
cornmifllon, she appointed Davison to attend him into Scotland as o
hier Envoy, under colour of concurring with him in the negocia-
tion, but in reality, to be a spy upon his motions, and to obltruCt
his fucceis. james, lwhofe title to the Crown had not hitherto
been recognized by any of the Princes on the continent, was cx-
tremely fond of such an honourable embafly from the French Mo-
narch ; and, on that account, as well as for the fake of the errand Jalnuilry 7.
on which he came, received Fenclon with great refpc1c. The no-
bles, in whose power the King was, did not relish this interposition
of the French court, which had long loft its ancient influence over
the affairs of Scotland. The Clergy were alarmed at the danger
to which religion would be exposed, if the Princes or Guite ihould
recover any ascendant over the public councils. And though the
King tried every method for restraining them within the bounds of
dccency, they declaimed against the court of France, against the
Princes of Guise, against the ambaflador, againfl entering into any
alliance with such notorious persecutors of the Church of God, with
.a vehenence, which no regular government would now tolerate,
but which was then extremely common. The ambassador, watched
by Davison, diilrufted by tlhe nobles, and exposed to the insults
of the Clergy, and of the people, returned into England with-
out procuring any change in the King's ftiuation, or receiving any
anf\vcr to a propos.ld wlhicll lie made, tli the goverlnment should
be crriedl oll in tlhe joint names of Jamcs and tile QOcen his
Ilotli r ::.

AMJ. v, JN 11I.L, Jallmes, tllolmzh lhe dill' lLIcel with grca1t a',; be- [,e, c .pcs

~.Ilt of tl,¢

came every day imore inecaly under his cIlcit; I iini:ies h .
C;llllC C\'C'I) ' d~l)' llcl0i.C 11;llj' tlllIlCr.llis tC)~IIltic'i: llt; ]listjll'lal10]; h ,,,d,,,,i :Se

Cullli i a. .
:' C.lJ. 3. 207. S,otSw. 324. 'cc Apputl, N° V11I.

AI 2

'cmllcrcd

BOOK VI. rendered him continually attentive to find out a proper opportunity

3 for making his escape; and to this attention he at last owed his liber-

ty, which the King of France was not able, nor the Queen of Eng-
land willing to procure for him. As the conspirators had forced Len-
nox out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a distance from court,
they grew secure; and imagining that time had reconciled the King
to them, and to his situation, they watched him with little care.
Some occasions of discord had arisen among themselves; and the
French ambassador, by fomenting these, during the time of his refi-
dence in Scotland, had weakened the union, in which alone their
safety consisted *. Colonel William Stewart, the commander of
the band of gentlemen, who, guarded the King's person, being
gained by James, had the principal merit in the feheme for reftor-
June 27. ing his master to liberty. Under pretence of paying a visit to the

Earl of March his grand uncle, James was permitted to go from
Falkland to St. Andrew's. That he might not create any suspicion,
he lodged at first, in an open defenceless house in the town, but
pretending a curiosity to fee the castle, no sooner was he entered
with some of his attendants whom he could trust, than colonel
Stewart commanded the gates to be fiiut, and excluded all the reft
of his train. Next morning the Earls of Argyll, Huntly, Craw-
ford, Montrose, Rothes, with others to whom the secret had been
communicated, entered the town with their followers; and though
Mar, with fcveral of the leaders of the faction, appeared in arms,
they found themfelvcs so far outnumbered, that it was in vain to
think of recovering poffeflion of the King's person, which had been
in their power somewhat longer than ten months. James was na-
turally of ib loft and ductlile a temper, that those who were near
his person, communly made a deep imprefflon on his heart, which

* Camd. 482.

was
84

was formed to be under the sway of favourites. As he remained BOOKVI.
implacable and unreconciled to the conipirators, during so long a 'I583
time, and at a period of life, when resentments are rather violent
than lasting, they muff either have improved the opportunities of
insinuating themselves into favour with little dexterity, or the in-
dignation, with which this first insult to his perlbn and authority
filled him, must have been very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and excessive. He resolved, Resolves,

however, to,

however, by the advice of Sir James Melvil, and his wi;fft coun- treat them
fellors, to a8t with the utmost moderation. Iaving called into 'wi llodc-
his presence, the leaders of both faaions, the neighbouring gen-
try, the deputies of the adjacent burroughs, the Miniflers and the
heads of colleges, he declared, that although he had been held
under refiraint for rome time by violence, he would not impute
that as a crime to any man, but without remembering the irregu-
larities, which had been so frequent during his minority, would
pass a general act of oblivion, and govern all his subjects with un-
diftinguifling and equal affetion. And as an evidence of his fin-
cerity, he visited the Earl of Gowrie at Ruthven cafile, and grant-
ed him a full pardon of any guilt he had contracted, by the crime
committed in that very place *.

BUT James did not adhere long to this prudent and moderate But Arran re,

plan. His former favourite, the Earl of Arran, had been per- iCe.,d'laltovecr
mitred for some time to rcfide at Kinncil, one of his country feats. h"'"
As loon as the King felt himfclf at liberty, his love for him began
to revive, and lie cxprclfi a ilrong dcfirc to fee him. The cour-
tiers violently opposcd the return of a minion, lvlhofe inlolnt: and

* Mclv. 272.

overt caring

BOOK VI. overbearing tempr they dreaded, as much as the nation detclted his

1583. crimes. James, however, continued his importunity, and promi-

sing that he fliould continue with him no longer than one day,
they were obliged to yield. This interview rekindled ancient assec-
tion; the King forgot his promise; Arran regained his ascendant
over him; and within a few days resumed the exercise of power,
with all the arrogance of an undeferving favourite, and all the rafih-
ness peculiar to himself'.

And the King THE firit effeCt of his influence was a proclamation with regard
pursues an- i
other plan. to those concerned in the Raid of luth.ven. They were required

to acknowledge their crime in the humbilet manner; and the King
promised to grant them a full pardon, provided their future conduct
were such, as did not oblige him to remember past miscarriages.
The tenor of this proclamation was extremely different from the
aCt of oblivion, which the conspirators had been encouraged to ex-
pec&. Nor did any of them reckon it safe to rely on a promise,
clogged witl such an equivocal condition, and granted by a young
Prince, under the dominion of a Minilter, void of faith, regardless
of decency, and transported, by the desire of revenge, even beyond
the usual ferocity of his temper. Many of the leaders, who had
at firfi appeared openly at court, retired to their own houses; and
forcfccing the dangerous florin which was gathering, began to
look out for a retr;at in foreign countries''.

lI;i;Zhlctlh's ELIZA\BETII, ,who had all along protctced the conlipirators, was
folicications
,, I ,.!,..'l extremely dilguftld with mc;li;irls lwhich tendedl ilo v\ilbly to their
'Z, 'll'.; l dcllr-ilLion, nlnd wrote to the Kiig a harlh anId li.auiLlitl letter, rc-
,Jgutil -. proacliuig liil in a llylC, very ulncoImmon amng l['iincc-s, \wvh

4 \I ch'. ?74.

'I Iid. 2: 8. 3 .otw. 36 Caild. 3

brachcl
86

breach of faith in recalling Arran to court, and with imprudence
in proceeding so rigorously against his best and most faithful sub-
Jcis. James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that promises ex-
torted by violence, and conditions yielded out of fear, were no
longer binding, when tlefe were removed; that it belonged to him
alone to chufe what Ministers he would employ in his service; and
that though he resolved to treat the conspirators at Ruthven wvith
the utmost clemency, it was necessary, for the support of his autho-
rity, that ilch an insult on his person fhmould not pals altogether
uncenfuredl '.

ELIZABETHI'S letter was quickly followed by Walsingham her

fccretary, whom file appointed her ambassador to James, and who
appeared in the Scottifl court, with a splendor and magnificence,
well calculated to please and dazzle a young Prince. Walfinglam
was admitted to several conferences with James himcfelf, in vwlich
lie inlifted on the fame topics contained in the letter, and the King
repeated his former aniifers.

AFTER fufferinig several indignities, fi-om the arrogance of

Arran, and his creatures, he returned to England, without con-
cliulling ,ny inew treaty with the Kingl. Valfingham was, next
to Iturlcigh, the l.Iinifier on whom the chief weight of the Elg-
ili admilllirall tiliII rc-fcd; and when a perbon of his rank, fiept io
f11r onit tof the orllinluly roald of bulefics, as to undertake a long
;i ' Irn)y, in his oldl age, and undter a declining, Ilate of' iealtit, filne
.::irr ol-f conllC(lcllVce waLs fuploled to )e the .canui, or lme inipor-
i:nIt Cv'Cil! \' 'a. CRxloce'C(ld to b) the cf'ed e ofti is mticafiiIre. IBtt as
:', ,lill: Ctl1i)ilplt o1L; cillthrc occalionlcd, or lohlloecd this embalsy,
it i' i lol);ille tlitt l',li/.;z ct li ad no Olther intention in cinploying
tl is; lu';l cious l li llilcr, tln to di
OVcl, with cxatlniclkh, the ctl'pa-

.: A 1.1v. :: 7).

city

BooK VI.

1583.

S.pt. I.
\Valtfii~n o ti in'
enibpfti inta
Scotiij.

city and disposition of the Scottish King, who was now arrived at
a time of life, when, with some degree of certainty, conjectures
might be formed concerning his character and future conduct. As
James possessed talents of that kind, which make a better figure in
conversation, than in aftion, he gained a great deal by this inter-
view with the English secretary, who, notwithstanding the cold re-
ception he met with, gave such an advantageous representation of
his abilities, as determined Elizabeth to treat him, henceforward,
with more decency and refpea ''

ELIZABETH'S eagerness to proteca the conspirators rendered

James more violent in his proceedings against them. As they had
all refuied to accept of pardon, upon the terms which he had of-
sered, they were required, by a new proclamation, to surrender
themselves prisoners. The Earl of Angus alone complied; the refl
either fled into England, or obtaiaed the King's licence to retire
Decem. 17. into foreign parts. A Convention of eflates was held, the mem-

bers of which, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's, de-
clared those concerned in the Raid of Ruthven to have been guilty
of high treason; appointed the at passed last year approving of
their conduc to be expunged out of the records; and engaged to
support the King in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmost
rigour of law.

Tn E conspirators, though far from having ldone any thing that was

uncommon in a barbarous age, among mutinous nobles, and under an
unfcttled state cl governlmnent, mufi b)e acknowledged to have been
guilty of an ac of treason against their fovcrcign; and James, who
confidcrcd their conduci in this light, lhad good rcafln to boal of his

Mclv. 293. C.ild 3. 258. jcbb, 2. 536.

cl emency,
BoOK VI.

1583.
88

clemency, when he offered to pardon them, upon their confessing BOOK VI.
their crime. But, on the other hand, it must be allowed that, 1583

i583'

after the King's voluntary promise of a general oblivion, they had
some reason to complain of breach of faith, and could not, without
the most unpardonable imprudence, have put their lives in Arran's
power.

THE interest of the Church was considerably affected by there 1584.
contrary Revolutions. While the conspirators kept possession of The Clergy

favour the
power, the Clergy not only recovered, but extended their privileges. conspirators

and irritate

As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be unlawful, they the King.
took some bold measures towards exterminating the Episcopal
order out of the Church; and it was owing more to Adamson's
dexterity in perplexing and lengthening out the process for that pur-
pose, than to their own want of zeal, that they did not deprive,
and perhaps excommunicate, all the Bishops in Scotland. When
the King recovered his liberty, things put on a very different afpecr.
The favour bellowed upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent
and sacred, and the rigorous prosecution of those nobles, who had
been the most zealous defenders of the Protestant cause, were con-
fidered as sure presages of the approaching ruin of the Church. The
Clergy could not conceal their apprchenfions, nor view this in-
pending danger in silence. Dury, who had been rclt-orcd to his
office as one of the Miniflers of Edinburgh, openly applauded the
7Raid of Riitlveu in the pulpit, at which the King was so enragoed,
that notwithflandlln some fylmptoms of his fill)mifi-on, he com-
manded him to resign his charge in the city. Mr. Andrew Mel-
vil, beinlg ftililoncd before the privy-coIlncil to anfwTr for tli
docrlinc lie hadl uttered ill a fcrnion at St. Andrew's, and accuscd
of comparing the lprtcnlt grievances of the nation with thofc Iutiler

VOL. II. N -JaCes

89

90
Boo0K VI. James III. and of intimating obliquely that they ought to be re-

S drTcfed in the fame manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave
vikh greater firmness. I-e declined thejurifdision of a civil Court,
in a cause which he maintained to be purely Ecclesiastical; the Pref-
b/tcry of which he was a member had, as he contended, the sole
right to call him to account for words spoken in the pulpit; and
neither the King nor council could judge, in the first instance, of
the doclrinc delivered by Preachers, without violating the immuni-
ties of the Church. This exemption from civil jurisdiction was a
privi!ege, which the Popifi Ecclesiastics, admirable judges of what-
ever contributed to increase the lustre or power of their body, had
long flrugglcd for, and had at last obtained. If the fame plea had.
now been admitted, the Protestant Clergywould have become inde-
pendant on the civil magifirate; and an order of men, extremely
ufefutl to focicty while they inculcate those duties which tend to
promote its happiness and tranquillity, might have become no less
pernicious by tcaching, without fear or controul, the most dange-
rous principles, or by exciting their hearers to the most desperate
alnd lawlif.; atGions. The King, jealous to excess of his prerogative,
was alb.rncd at this daring encroachment on it; and as Melvil, by
his learning and zeal, had acquired the reputation and authority of
;icad of the party, lie rcfolved to punilh him with the rigour, which
th1t: preemineilnce rendered nccctlary, and to difcouragc, by a timely
1\. crity, tih revival of ficli a dangerous claim. Melvil, however,
avoitded his rage by fly'ing into England; and the pulpits resounded
.'it!l con pllainis that the King had extinguifhled the light of learn-
i'ig il tllC kilnl,(lo, and deprived the Church of the ablefl and moIl
'Lith1 ll guardin of i1' liberties and difciplinc '1.

T! Es.E
' SP'tsm. 330. C31d, 3 . 304-·

THESE violent declamations of the Clergy, againf the micafures I3ooK1 VL

of the court, were extremely acceptable to the people. The con- r 584.
fpirators, though driven out of the kingldom, frill pofeorcd great
influence there; and as they had every thingi to fear from the rc-
fcntment of a young prince, irritated by the furious counsels of
Arran, they never ceased soliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Gowrie, tile only person among them who lad fi.1ib-
mittcd to the King, and accepted of a pardon, soon repented of a
flep which loft him the esteem of one party, without gaining the
confidence of the other: and, after sufFering many mortifications
from the King's negleQd, and the haug-htincfs of Arran, he wvas
at last commanded to leave Scotland, and to reside in France
\Vhile lie waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he wlis
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the Tutor of Gla-
amis, had concerted a scheme for furprizing the carile of Stirlig.
In his situation, little pcrfuafion was necefiary to draw him to cn-
ogage in it. Under various pretexts, he put off his voyage, and lay
readyr to- t ke armls on the day fi.-e] 1lby the confliriators, for the
execution of their enterprize. His lingering so long at Dtune-e,
without any apparent rcafon, awakened the iifupicion of the car!.t,
proved fatal to himfclf, and difalppointcd the fuiccfs of the con-
lfpiracy. Colonel Willimam Stewvart filrrotunded the Ihout ,Icrc Ilw '
lodge'd \ai h ;i a looi oF Ioldicrs,

: en d ill flite ol his r'c"liE, _too.'

]him ir.-ilOncr. T m '.'U d:p'S .at'"'r, An'll :, 7 ;lr, and Gl;ami, .i i:!
lle canlc of- Stlililn , :alil ( rcclin>; ller ilalda lrd there, pilliii> d

,t

ma ii'i.,n)o dcc!rCCl ii!, tlmt tlIcy tio), : ;rins l

r' n1 ol() tcr rcaf)l.
olil t,)

N

N ~ l;~~~~~~1.

91

his part, and fufpeaed that as he had formerly deserted, he had
now betrayed them. At the fame time, a fun of money, with which
Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being duly paid, and
theirfriends and vassals coming in slowly, they appeared irresolute
and disheartened; and as the King, who aaed with great vigour,
advanced towards them at the head of 20,000 men, they fled pre-
cipitately towards England, and with difficulty made their escape .
This rafl and feeble attempt produced such effects, as usually fol-
low disappointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the cause, for which
it was undertaken, but added fhlength and reputation to the King;
confirmed Arran's power; and enabled them to pursue their mca-
fures with more boldness, and greater luccefs. Gowrie was the first
victim of their resentment. After a very informal trial, a jury of
peers found him guilty of treason, and he was publickly beheaded
at Stirling.

To humble the Church was the King's next flep. But as it be-

came necessary, for this purpose, to call in the aid of the legislative
authority, a parliament was hastily summoned; and while so many
of the nobles were banished out of the kingdom, or forbidden to
appear in the King's presence; while Arran's haughtincfs kept some
at a distance, and intimidated others; the meeting confiPfcd only
of those, wlo were abfolutcly at the devotion of the court. In
order to conceal the laws which were framing from the knowledge
of the Clergy, the Lords of the Articles were vforn to ifcrecy;
and when some of the Minflters, who either fufl)cclcd, or were
informed of the danger, deputed one of their nunmber to dcclare
their apprehcnfions to the King, lie was ici/cd at the palace-gate,
and carried to a diflant prilon. Others attempting to enter the par-

* Ilomc's Hlifi. of House of Dougl. 379. Spots. 330.

liamcnt:

3
BOOK VI.

1I84.

May 22.
A parliament
held.

Sevcrc laws
nir. inl lthe
Crt.i.r ch.
92

lament house, were refused admittance*; and such laws were pas- BOOK VI.
ed,l as totally overturned the constitution and discipline of the I584.
Church. The refuting to acknowledge thejurifdiaion of the privy May zz.
council; the pretending an exemption from the authority of the
civil courts; the attempting to diminiifl the rights and privileges
of any of the three estates in parliament, were declared to be high
trcafbn. The holding Assemblies, whether Civil, or Ecclefiafical,
without the King's permission or appointment; the uttering, either
privately, or publickly, in sermons, or in declamations, any false
and scandalous reports againtl the King, his ancestors, or minifiers,
were pronounced capital crimes %.

WHEN these laws were publifled at the cross of Edinburgh,

according to the ancient custom, Mr. Robert Pont, Minister of St.
Cuthherts, and one of the Lords of Scflion, iblemnly protested
againfi them, in the name of his brethren, because they had been
paficd without the knowledge or consent of the Church. Ever
since the Reformation, the pulpits and ecclefiafticaljudicatorics had
both been esteemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy had been
accustomed to censure, and admonish, with unbounded liberty.
In the latter, they exercised an uncontrouled and independant ju-
rifdiction. The blow was now aimed at botl thctc privileges.
Thcfe new flatutcs were calculated to render churchmcn as incon-
fiderable, as they were indigent; and as the avarice of the nobles
had tl iipped them of the wealth, the King's ambition was about
to deprive them of the power which once belonged to their order.
No wonder the alarm was ulniverfal, and the complaints loud.
All the Minitiers of Edinburgh forsook tlihir charge, and led into
England. The mioll- eminent Clergymen, throughout thc king-

* CAlc. 3. 3.5· -1 Parl. 8. Jac. VI.

domn,

93

doum, imlitated their e;ample. Dcfolation and astonishment ap-
p'arcd in every part of the Scottish Church; the people bewailed
the loss of Paflors, whom they esteemed; and full of conflernation,
at an event so unexpectted, openly exprcfled their ra,-e against Ar-
ran, and began to fufpe&L the King himself to be an enemy to the
Rfcormlcd CRli gi ul

·* Spotfw. 333.
94

O-JO VI.

.9

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK. VII.

THE
H I

S

T O

0 E
SC O TLA N D

BO 0 K, VIL

HILE Scotland was torn by intefline factions, Eli-
zabeth was alarmed with the rumour of a project in

agitation for setting Mary at liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a
Chcnfire gentleman, was suspectcd of being deeply concerncd in the
design, and on that iufpicion he was taken into cuflody. Among
his papers were found two lifts, one of the principril harbours in
the kiingdom, with an account of their fittatioi, and of the dcptli
of water in cach; the other, of all the cmilnent lRom;n Catho-
lics in Englandl. This circunflanicc confirmedl the Iifplicion ,I .Iilll
hIim, and ibme dark and dcfpcratc colfpiracy was i fllppold juflt
ready to bIrcak out. At iirll lie boldly avowed hiis i nnocnce, anid
declared that the two l.ip)c'; were

VC orC )C by thle Quccni's Mini(lcrs,

in order to intimlidate or iiifnlarc Im ; :ind lie Cv eve(ndulCcl tdie
raclk xwithl the utinlll. sotititdc 13,Lt bLcing broullgt a lico(nd

time

Book VIL

1584.

ton's confpi-
r:acy aga:hil!'
kliz.'b;ll .h

Book VII. time to the place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he not

- I584 only acknowledged that he had held a secret correspondence with

the Queen of Scots, but discovered a design that was formed to in-
vade Fngland. 1 he Duke of Guise, he said, undertook to furnish
troops, and to conduCt the enterprize. The Pope and King of
Spain were to supply the money necessary for carrying it o;n; all
the English exiles were eager to take arms; many of the Catholics
at home would be ready to join them, at their landing; Mendoza
the Spanish ambassador, who was the life of the conspiracy, sparcd
no pains in fomenting the spirit of disaffeCtion among the English,
or in hastening the preparations on the Continent; and by his com-
mand, he had made the two lifts, the copies whereof had been
found in his poffeflion. This confession he retraced at his trial;
returned to it again after sentence was passed upon him; and re-
traCted it once more at the place of execution *.

To us in the present age, who are assisted in forming our opinion

of this matter, by the light which time and history have thrown
upon the designs and characiers of the Princes of Guise, many cir-
cumfiances in Throgmorton's confession appear to be extremely re-
mote from truth, or even fiom probability. The Duke of Guise
was, at that junturc, far from being in a situation to undertake
foreign conqucfls. Without cither powcr or oflice at court; hated
by the King; and pcrcfcutcd by) the favouritcs; he had no leisure
for any tihoglhts of (ilturli g tlle cqlict of neigllhbouring fates, and
liis vail ;and ambitious mind \was wholly occupied in laying the I n-
dation of that famous leagne, vwhichl fliok the tlirone of France.
But alout the tilme lizlabctlh detctLed Itis collliiracy, tli close i union
)etwlccn tlle house of C(uiil; and l'ilip II. was remarkatble to ;ll

* Ilolilgfl-ctl , 137o.

1E.uropc,

Europe, and as their great enterprize against Henry III. was not Book VII.
yet dif-lofed, as they endeavoured to conceal that under their I84
threatnings to invade England, Throgmorton's discovery appeared
to be cr tremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew how ardently
all the parties mentioned by him wished her downfal, thought that
she cculd not guard her kingdom with too much care. The indif- Dnrigs of
creer zeal of the English exiles increased her fears. Not satisfied ,rent agail
with incessant outcries against her severity towards the Scottish Eliz.l lbC'.
Queen, and her cruel perfecu.ion of her Catholic subjects, nor
thinking it enough that one Pope had threatened her with the fen-
tence of excommunication, and another had actually pronounced
it, they now began to disperse books and writings, in which they
endeavoured to persuade their disciples, that it would be a merito-
rious aCtion to take away her life; they openly exhorted the
maids of honour to treat her, as Judith did Holofernes, and by fich
an illustrious deed, to render their own names honourable and fa-
cred in the Church, throughout all future ages *. For all these rea-
sons, Elizabeth not only inflicted the punishment of a traitor on
Throgmorton, but commanded the Spanish ambassador inflantly to
leave England; and that the might be in no danger of being at-
tacked within the island, fle determined to use her utmost efforts,
in order to recover that influence over the Scottish councils, which
ihe had for some time entirely loft.

T iE RE were three dificrcnt methods, by which Elizabelth might She end.a-

hope to accomplifl this; either by furnifhinlig such cflfctual aid to cv"ir th r
the baninlied nobles, as would enable themll to refllne the chief i'nu"'c,,ci

Scoll. ind, by

tlircction of aftairs; or by cntering into filcll a treaty nith MlaIry, gailnig Ar-
as might intimidate her ion, w\ho b)cilg now acculloincd to govern,

` C.1md(. 197.
Vor.. 1I.

0

1'V ld

97

Book VII. would be apt to agree to any terms, rather than resign the sceptre,

-584. or admit an associate in the throne; or by gaining the Earl of

Arran, to secure the diretion of the King his master. The last
was not only the easiest, and fpeedieft, but most likely to be fuc-
cefsful. This Elizabeth resolved to pursue; but without laying the
other two altogether aside. With this view, she sent Davison,
one of her principal secretaries, a man of abilities and address, into
Scotland. A Minister so venal as Arran, hated by his own coun-
trymen, and holding his power by the most precarious of all te-
nures, the favour of a young Prince, accepted Elizabeth's offers
without hesitation, and esteemed the acquisition of her protecion.
to be the most solid foundation of his own greatness. Soon after,
AuguR 13. he consented to an interview with Lord Hunfdon the Governor of

Berwick, and being honoured with the pompous title of Lieute-
nant General for the King, he appeared at the place appointed, with
a splendid train. In Hunfdon's presence, he renewed his promises
of an inviolable and faithful attachment to the English interest, and
allured him that Jalmes should enter into no ncgociation, which
might tend to interrupt the peace between the two kingdoms;,
and as Elizabeth began to entertain the fame fears and jealousies
concerning the King's marriage, which had formerly disquieted
hcr with regard to his mother's, he undertook to prevent James.
si-on listening to any overture of that kind, till he had previously
obtained the Queen of England's consent ..

Severe pro- TI-E baniflhed Lords and their adherents loon felt the effecs of
cccdings a-

iinftaheba- Arran's fricndflnip with England. As Elizabeth had permitted
ilinlfh Lords. them to take refuge in her dominions, and fcvcral of her Ministers

were of opinion that file ought to employ her arms in defince of

'* Caldl. 3. 49I. Mel'. 315. Sec Appenil. N . IX.

thkcir
98

their cause, the fear of this was the only thing, which restrained Book VII.
James and his favourite from proceeding to such extremities against 58:
them, as might have excited the pity or indignation of the English,
and have prompted them to exert themselves with vigour in their
behalf. But every apprehension of this kind being now removed,
they ventured to call a parliament, in which an ac was passed, at- Augur 2z.
tainting Angus, Mar, Giamis, and a great number of their follow-
ers. Their eltates devolved to the Crown, and according to the
practice of the Scottish Monarchs, who were obliged to reward
the fadtion which adhered to them, by dividing with it the spoils
of the vanquished, James dealt out the greater part of there to
Arran, and his associates *.

NOR was the treatment of the Clergy less rigorous. All Minis- Againfl the

Clergy.

ters, readers, and professors in Colleges were injoined to subscribe,
within forty days, a paper testifying their approbation of the laws
concerning the Church enaced in last parliament. Many, over-
awed, or corrupted by the Court, yielded obedience; others stood
out. The ltipends of the latter were sequestered, some of the
more acive committed to prison, and numbers compelled to fly the
kingdom. Those who complied, fell under the suspicion of ating
from mercenary or ambitious motives. Those who suffered, ac-
quired high reputation, by giving such convincing evidence of their
firmness and sincerity. The judicatories of the Church were almost
entirely suppressed. In some places, icarce as many Minifrers re-
mained, as to perform the duties of religious worihip; they soon
funk in reputation among the people, and being prohibited not only
from discoursing of publick affairs, but obliged, by the jealousy of
the adminifration, to frame every fentimnnt and cxpreflion in luch

C' Cald. 3. 527.

a manner,

99

BookVII. a manner, as to give the court no offence, their ferrmons were deem-

"4y eed languid, insipid, and contemptible; and it became the general

opinion, that together with the most virtuous of the nobles, and
the most faithful of the Clergy, the power and vigour of Religion
were now banished out of the kingdom *.

MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of those fruitless

negociations with the Q.een of Scots, which it had become almost
matter of form to renew every year. They served not only to a-
muse that unhappy princess with some profpec of liberty; but fur-
nifhed an apology for eluding the follicitations of foreign powers
in her behalf; and were of use to overawe James, by shewing him.
that flhe could, at any time, set free a dangerous rival to dispute his
authority. These treaties she suffered to proceed to what length
she pleased, and never wanted a pretence for breaking theml off,
when they became no longer necessary. The treaty now on foot
was not, perhaps, more sincere than many which preceded it; the
reasons, however, which rendered it ineffectual were far from be-
ing frivolous.

New conrpi- As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders towards Scotland,
Tacy again-i:
Elzabeth. the fliip on board of which he was a paflenger, happened to be

chased by pirates, who, in that age, often infested the narrow, seas.
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some papers in his cuf-
tody, and threw them away; but by a very extraordinary accir
dent, the wind blew them back into the ihip, and they were im-
mediately taken up by some of the passengers, who carried them to
Wade, the Clerk of the privy council. He, with great indufiry
and patience, joined them together, and they were found to con-

* Cald. 3. 589.

tain
100

tain the account of a plot, said to have been formed by the King BookViI.
of Spain, and Duke of Guise, for invading England. The peo- ' '8
pie were not yet recovered from the fear and anxiety occasioned
by the conspiracy, in which Throgmorton had been engaged, and
as his discoveries appeared now to be confirmed by additional evi-
dence, not only all their former apprehensions recurred, but their
consternation became general and excessive. As all the dangers,
with which England had been threatened for some years, flowed
either immediately from Mary herself, or from those, who made
use of her name to juflify their infurreaions and conspiracies, this
gradually diminiflied the compassion due to her situation, and the
English, instead of pitying, began to fear and to hate her. Eliza-
beth, under whose wife and pacific reign the English enjoyed tran-
quillity, and had opened sources of wealth unknown to their an-
ceftors, was extremely beloved by all her people; and regard to her
safety, not less than to their own interest, animated them against
the Scottifl Qceen. In order to discourage her adherents, it Occafons an'
was thought necessary to convince them, by some public deed, of opofition to
the attachment of the English to their own Sovereign, and that Mary.
any attempt against her life would prove fatal to her rival. With
this view, an JAbciation was framed, the subscribers of which OFober s9,
bound themfelvcs by the most folcmn oaths, " to defend the
" Qeen against all her enemies foreign and domeflic; and if
"violence fliould be offered to her life, in order to favour the
" title of any pretender to the Crown, they not only engaged
"never to allow or acknowlcdge the perfbn, or peifons, by
"whom, or for whom, fuclI a detcflable adC should be commit-

ted, but vowed, in thle prefcnce of tlhe Eternal God, to pro-
" fccutc fucll pcrfon, or persons, to tlle .death, and to pulrfie

thelm, with their utimo. vcngcance, to their utter overti.row

" and

IO1

Book VII. i" and extirpation*." Persons of all ranks subscribed this com-

o-84:. bination with the greatefL eagerness and unanimity t.

Which g'eat- MARY confidered this combination, not only as an avowed de-
ly alarms her.

lign to exclude her from all right of succession, but as the certain
and immediate forerunner of her deftrudion. In order to avert
this, ihe made fich feeble efforts as were still in her power, and
lent Naue her secretary to court, with offers of more entire refig-
nation to the will of Elizabeth, in every point, which had been the
occasion of their long enmity, than all her sufferings hitherto had
been able to extort 1. But whether Mary adhered inflexibly to her
privileges, as an independant Sovereign, or yielding to the necessity
of her situation, endeavoured, by concessions, to sooth her rival,
she was equally unsuccessful. Her firmness was imputed to obfti-
nacy, or to the secret hope of foreign affifance; her concessions
were either believed to be insincere, or to flow from the fear of some
imminent danger. Her present willingness, however, to comply
with any terms was so great, that Walsingham warmly urged his
Mistress to come to a final agreement with her. But Elizabeth was
persuaded, that it was the spirit raised by the association, which
had rendered her so paflive and compliant. She always imagined
that there was something mysterious and deceitful in all Mary's ac-
tions, and fufpeaed her of carrying on a dangerous correspondence
with the English Catholics, both within and without the kingdom.
Nor were her suspicions altogether void of foundation. Mary had,
about this time, written a letter to Sir Francis Inglefield, urging
him to halten the execution of what she calls the Great plot or De-
fiznment, without hesitating on account of any danger in which it

* State Trials, i. 122.

it Camd. 499.

t CaLmd. Ibid.

mnight
I0'2

might involve her life, which she would most willingly part with, Book VII.
if, by that sacrifice, she could procure relief for so great a number 1584
of the oppressed children of the Church . Inltead, therefore, of She is treated

with greater

hearkning to the overtures which the Scottish Queen made, or rigour.
granting any mitigation of the hardships of which file complained,
Elizabeth resolved to take her out of the hands of the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet, and Sir Drue Drury,
to be her keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged his trust with great
fidelity, during fifteen, years, but, at the fame time, had treated Mary
with gentleness and refpea, and had always sweetened harsh com-
mands, by the humanity, with which he put them in execution.
The fame politeness was not to be expected from men of an inferior
rank, whose severe vigilance, perhaps, was their chief recommen-
dation to that employment, and the only merit, by which they
could pretend to gain favour or prefermentt-.

As James was no less eager, than ever, to deprive the banished: Gray, a ne,

favourite of

nobles of Elizabeth's protection, he appointed the Mailer of Gray the King's-..
his ambaflador to the court of England,. and intrusted him with
the conduct of a ncgociation for that purpose. An honour for
which he was indebted to the envy and jealousy of the Earl of
Arran. Gray poffcffed all the talents of a Courtier;. a graceful per-
son, an insinuating address, boundless ambition, and a.rcfilcfs and
intriguing spirit. During his retilenec in France, lie had been ad-
mitted into the most intimate familiarity with the Duke of Guise,,
and in order to gain his favour, had renounced the Protefant Rc-
iigion, and profclfcd the utmost zeal f(br the captive Qucen, who
carried on a fecrct corrcfpondcncc with him, from which she ex-
pedcd great advantages. On his returnl into Scotland, he paid

* Strypc, 3. 2.46.

*I' C.il. 500.

colrtr

103

Book VII. court to James with extraordinary assiduity, and his accomplfih-
--584 rments did not fail to make their usual impression on the King's heart.

Arran, who had introduced him, began quickly to dread his grow-
ing favour; and flattering himself, that absence would efface any
sentiments of tenderness from the mind of a young prince,, pointed
him out, by his malicious praises, as the most proper person in the
kingdom, for an embafly of such importance: and contributed to
raise him to that high dignity, in order to haften his fall. Eliza-
beth, who had an admirable dexterity in discovering the proper in-
firuments for carrying on her designs, endeavoured, by caresses, and
by presents, to secure Gray to her interest. The former flattered his
vanity, which was great; the latter supplied his profufcnefs, which
-was still greater. He abandoned himself without reserve to Eliza-
beth's direcions, and not only undertook to retain the King under
the influence of England, but aaed as a spy upon the Scottifl Queen,
and betrayed to her rival every secret, that he could draw from her
by his high pretensions of zeal in her service*.

Tis interest GRAY'S credit with the Englifl court was extremely galling to
wi'th the c:mtrt
of England. the banished nobles. Elizabeth no longer thought of employing

her power to rcflore them; she found it easier to govern Scotland,
by corrupting the King's favourites; and in compliance with Gray's
follicitations, file commanded the exiles to leave the north of Eng-
Dcccembcrj1. land, and to reinove into the heart of the kingdom. This ren-

dered it difficult for them to hold any correfpondcnce with their
partizans in Scotland, and alllofl impossible to return thither with-
out her percillion. Gray, by gaining a point whichl James had so
zmuch at heart, rivettcd himnfcllf more firmly than ever in his ila-

7

* Styp'1', 3. 302. AMclv. 3 6.

Vour;
o10

17- '-K

vour; and by acquiring greater repuItation, became capable of Book Vii.
serving Elizabeth with greater success"'. -

A",RAN had now poffeiecd, for some time, all the Iower, the Ic T .

riches, and tlie honours, that his immoderate ambition could dltire, .\ra' .*--,
or the fondness of a Prince, who set no limits to his liberality to- inifcncc.
wards his favourites, could bellow. The office of Lord (Clancel-
lor, the highleft and molf important in the kingdom, was confier ld
upon him, even during the life of the Earl of Argyll, ]who fuccccdctd
Athole in that dignity-}'; and the public behcld, with aftoiniiji-
ment and indignation, a man educated as a soldier of fortune, ig-
norant of law, and a contemner of juflice, appointed to prelide in
parliament, in the privy council, in the court of feCion, and in-
trustcd with the supreme difpofdil of the property of his fillow-fub-
jc s. He was, at the fame time, governor of the caflles of Stir-
ling and Edinburgh, the two principal forts in Scotland; Provost
of' the city of Edinburgh; and as if by all these accumulated digni-
ties his meritwere not fLflicicntly recompenced, he had been crcated
Lieutenant General over the whole kingdom. No person was
admitted into the King's presence without his pernifion; no ifaour
could be maintained but by his mediation. James, occupied with
youthful aminfements, devolved upon him the whole regal authority.
Such unmerited elevation increased his natlurll arrogance, and ren-
tlered it inltolerable. HIe was no longer content with the condition
of a iubj c:, but pretended to derive his pedig'ree from Minu rdo Duke
of Albalny; and boallcd, openly, that his title to tle Crown was
prcf.:rable) to hiit of lthe Kilng himellilf. iBt, tog-ether witli tlhcIc
tliollltls off 1rovalty, lie retained tihe mcalnnefs, ILiitable to his pri-
mnitivc il dligcle. Hii s venlllity as a judge was Ica;ndallotls, and was
exccclded tlly by that of lhis wife, who, in (lclialnce 1o decency,

* Ca('ld. 3. ( -1. I1 Caw. . OCic. of StiatC, App. 447.
1VO L. II.

]'

Ilmade

made hcrielf a party in almost every question which came to be de-
cided, employed her influence to corrupt, or to overawe the judges,
and almost openly dictated their decisions *. His rapaciousness as a
Minister was insatiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of so many
offices; with the estate, and honours which belonged to the family
of Hamilton; or with the greater part of Gowrie's lands, which
had fallen to his hare ; he grasped at the poffeflions of several of
the nobles. HIe required Lord Maxwell to exchange part of his
estate for the forfeited lands of Kinneil; and because he was unwil-
ling to quit an ancient inheritance for a possession so precarious, he
flirred up against him, his hereditary rival, the Laird of Johnflon,
and involved that corner of the kingdom in a civil war. He com-
mitted to prison the Earl of Athole, Lord Home, and the Master of
Caflils; the first, because he would not divorce his wife, a daughter
:,f the Earl of Gowrie, and entail his estate on him; the second, be-
cause lhe was unwilling to part with some lands, adjacent to one of
liis citatcs;. and the third, for refusing to lend him money. His
Ifies and informers filled the whole country, and intruded themselves
into every company. The nearest neighbours distrusted and feared
each other. All familiar society was at an end. Even the common
inte-rcurfcs of humanity were interrupted, no man knowing in
vlwhom to confide, or where to utter his complaints. There is not
perhaps in hillory, an example of a miniftcr so universally de-
tcflablc to a nation, or who more jufly deservcd its dctcflation--.

AiKAx s, nntwithflanding, regardless of tile sentiments, and de-
il tini; the miurmluii s of tile people, gave a loose to his natural tem-
pcr, and pr1 oceeded to ats still more violent. David Home of Ar-
r i'y, ;lan Platrick his brother, having received letters froml one of

Cs!1J. 3 331. Sdo dnxct'1 7 5t ggc5r ig Stltc, t
*J Spotfw. 337; 338.

the
Book VII.

1585.
I.5
o00

the banished Lords, about private business, were condemned and BookVII.
put to death, for holding correfiondence with rcbcls. CunningI- '
ham of Drumwhafal, and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of
honour and reputation, were accused of having conil)ircd, wvith
tlhe exiled nobles, to seize the King's person. A tingle witncls only
appeared; the evidence they produced of their innocence was 111-
answerable; their accuser himself not long after acknowledged tlat
he had been suborned by Arran; and all men believed the charge
againfil them to be groundless: they were found guilty, notwviti- Februar) ;.
fianding, and suffered the death of traitors '

ABOUT the fame time, that there gentlemen were punificd for a r.Pr\'' con-

pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's life was indangered by a real one. l. til th.
Parry, a Dotor of laws, and a Member of the Houle of Conm-
inons, a man vain and fantaflick, bi't of a resolute spirit, hal late'y
been reconciled to the Clhurch of Rome; and fraight with the
zcal of a new convert, lie offered to dernonftrate the finccrity of his
attachment to the religion which he had embraced, by killing Ili-
zabeth. Cardinal Allen had published a book, to prove the miur-
der of an excommunicated Prince to be not only lawful, but a me-
ritorious action. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the Jcfuits both
there and at Paris, the English exiles, all approved of the lc g11n.
The Pope himself exhorted him to perfevrce ; and granted himi, i-')r
hlis cncoluragnement , a ple ndulgnce, and rcllmiTioni of lis lil s.
C(ardinal (di Como wrote hli a lettcr to the illam pii-pl)ol. IEut
thlough l

lie often gott acceCs t( the QteeCCn, fear, or 1f)lne rem'nll inBrg

bfci:c {()f id',;y, refrrilalocd him f'omn perpetratinl the crime. 1I l)-
pily, his in tcention was al las disc ovcred 1by Ncvil, thli 'iv c 1'rfi;
in FIrigland, to wh(oi h! l i;ad communicated it; ndl Ii.' ,i:;'ii'

' Si'!tf',v. 33. . ,l . 3. 79,..

'' -I.i''i V

107

having voluntarily confessed his guilt, he suffered the punishment
which it deserved :.

T1I ES E repeated conspiracies against their Sovereign awakened the

indignation of the English parliament, and produced a very extra-
ordinary ftatutc, which, in the end, proved fatal to the Qecen of
Scots. 13y tis law the Association in defence of Elizabeth's life was
ratified, and it was further enacted; " That if any rebellion shall be
" excited in the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the hurt of
" her Majcfty's person, by or for any person pretending a title to
' the Crown, the Queen shall empower twenty-four persons, by a
" commission under the great feal, to examine into, and pass fen-
" tence upon such offences; and after judgment given, a procla-

mati on flall be issued, declaring the persons whom they find guilty,

" excluded from any right to the Crown; and her Majefly's sub-
' jcas may lawfully pursue every one of them to the death, with
' all their aiders and abettors: And if any design againfl the life of
"the Queen take effect, the perions by or for whom such a detest-

able aa- is executed, and their ijtces, being any wife assenting

" or privy to the fame, fliall be dilbled for ever from pretend-
s ing to the Crown, and hbe purfuLcd to death in the like man-
"ner -'." This act was plainly levelled at the Queen of Scots;
*ind1 whether we confid(lr it as a voluntary expreslion of the zeal
;ii cl (lccrn of the nation for Elizabeth's iafcty, or whether we im-
I)itc it to llit inlluence, wlichI that artfuil Princtes preicrved over
lier parli.aunnts, it is no cafly matter to reconcile it with the general
principlcs of j t'ilice, or hlinlmanitv. Mlary was thereby rendered
a; coullt;ablc Inot only ;br her ow'ln aidLions, but for thole of others;

S Te i'T i L , V 0 1. A * I ') I d b i . I 3
Book VII.

i585.

iv]]irtti z.

s f. vere 1a-
t--tc. \kb-ch
provcd t,4tdl
to .tLury.
Io8

1 Id. 11ol' 1-23.

it.

in consequence of which, she might forfeit her right of succession,
and even her life itself.

MARY justly confidered this aa, as a warning to prepare for

the worf: extremities. Elizabeth's ministers, it is probable, had
resolved, by this time, to take away her life; and suffered books
to be published, in order to persuade the nation, that this cruel and
unprecedented measure was not only necessary, but just E. Even
that short period of her days which remained, they rendered un-
comfortable, by every hardship, and indignity, which it was in
their power to inflic. Almost all her servants were dismissed; flie
was treated no longer with the refped due to a Queen; and though
the rigour of seventeen years imprisonment had broken her con-
ftitution, she was confined to two ruinous chambers, scarce habi-
table, even in the middle of summer, by reason of cold. Notwith-
standing the scantiness of her revenue, she had been accustomed to
distribute regularly some alms among the poor in the village ad-
joining to the castle. Paulet, now, refused her liberty to perform
this pious and humane office, which had afforded her great con-
:,ulation, amidil her own sufferings. The cafile, in which the rc-
fided, was converted into a common prison; and a young man, sus-
pctecd of Popery, was confined there, and trcated, under her eye,
with such rigour, that lie died of the ill usage. She often com-
plained to Elizabeth of thcl[ multiplied iljuries, and expoflulated
as became a woman, and a Queen; but as no political rcaion nowv
obliged that 'rincels to amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes,

r ft-roml granting Ony irclrci;, ihe did not leven deign to give chr

aniy anfKvcr. The Kil g of France, clofcil allied to Eli/abccll, on
t'tom 1lie cdepnded for affllance, was afraid of cfpoulfg Mary1l's

* Strype, 3. 299,

ca;Ilfc,

BookVI.

1585.

TVs rigcur

~~ nih, which Ie

IxxaS treated,
ilicreafed.

0og

Bo~k- VII.

5i 5.

eaufa, with any warmth; and all his solicitations in her behalf
were feeble, formal, and efficacious. But Caftelnau, the French
ambassador, whose compassion and zeal for the unhappy Queen
supplied the defecs in his inftrudions, remonstrated with such vi-
gour against the indignities, to which file was exposed, that, by his
importunity, he prevailed at length to have her removed to Tuth-
bury; though she was confined, the greater part of another winter,
in her present wretched habitation *.

A breach be- NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the negled of her
twccn Mary
ai.d her son. friends, made such an impression on Mary, as the ingratitude of her

son. James had hitherto treated his mother with filial respeCt,
and had even entered into negociations with her, which gave um-
brage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her interest that this good
correspondence should continue, Gray, who, on his return into
Scotland, found his favour with the King greatly increased by the
iucceis of his embassy, perfwaded him to write a harfl and unduti-
ful letter to his mother, in which he expressly refused to acknow-
ledge her to be Queen of Scotland, or to confider his affairs as
conncteld, in any wife, with hers. This cruel requital of her ma-
ternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with sorrow, and despair.
"' Was it for this, said /he in a letter to the French ambasSador,
March 24. " that I have indured so much, in order to preserve for h]im the in-

' heritance, to which I have a just right ? I am far from envying
" iis authlority in Scotland. I dcelirceio power thcre ; nor vi'lh to
· It lmy so)t in that ]ineIgdo, if it were not for the pleafiire of

once embrlacingl a foi , wvllomn I liavc hitlherto lovcd with too ten-

' der aflicdion. \Vliatcvcr lc cihcr en joy;, o)r c:pcds, lhe derived
" it foinm Inc. Fromn himi, I never received allilt;!iicc, fipply, or

* Jcbb, 2. 576--59s.

r lLflnefit
II O

benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him any longer as a BookVIIL
King; he holds that dignity by my consent; and if a speedy 8-''

"repentance does not appease myjuf ri-entment, I will load himn
" with a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown, with all my pre-
" tensions, to one, who will receive them with gratitude, and de-
" fend them with vigour *." The love which James bore to his
mother, whom he had never known, nay whom he had been early
taught to confider as the most abandoned person of her sex, cannot
be supposed ever to have been ardent; and he did not now take any
pains to regain her favour. But whetheherer indignation at his un-
dutiful behaviour, added to her bigotted attachment to Popery,
prompted Mary at any time to think seriously of disinheriting her
son; or whether these threatnings were uttered in a sudden sally
of disappointed affecion, it is now no easy matter to determine.
Some papers which are fill extant seem to- render the former not
improbable t.

CARES of another kind, and no Iefs disquieting, occupied Eliza- Dangerour

lituation of'

beth's thoughts. The calm which she had long enjoyed, seemed Elizabeth,
now to be at an end; and such storms were gathering in every quar-
ter, as filled her with just alarm. All the neighbouring nations
had undergone revolutions, extremely to her disadvantage. The
great qualities, which Henry III. had displayed in his youth, and
which raised the expecaations of his fubjets so high, vanished on
his arcending the throne; and his acquiring fipreme power seems
not only to have corrupted his heart, but to have impaired his un-
ldcrfanding. He soon loft the eftecm and afferlion of the nation;
and a life divided between the auftcritics of a tupcrftitious devotion,
and the extravagancics of the most difolutc debauchery, rendered

' Jcbb, 2. 71. Secc Appcnd. N°. X.

i r
-I. See nppencl. N%· X~I.

Book VII. him as contemptible as he was odious on accDunt of is rapacious-

ness, his profusion, and the fondness with which he doted on many
unworthy minions. On the death of his only brother, those fcn-
timents of the people burst out with violence. Henry had no chil-
dren, and though but thirtytwo years of age, the fuccefflon of thle
from the pro- Crown was already confidered as opeu. The King of Navarre,

0'`-i of ihe
la3ue;, 2 ea distant descendant of the royal family, but the undoubted heir to

the Crown, was a zealous Proteliant. The profped of an event,
so fatal to their Religion, as his ascending the throne of France,
alarmed all the Catholics in Europe, and the Duke of Guise,
countenanced by the Pope, and aided by the King of Spain, ap-
peared as the defender of the Romifil faith, and the asserter of the
Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Crown. In order to unite the
party, a bond of confederacy was formed, diftinguiflhed by the name
of the Holy League. All ranks of men joined in it with emulation.
The fpririt spread with the irresistible rapidity, which was natural to
religious passions, in that age. The deftrudion of the Reforma-
tion not only in France, but all over Europe, seemed to be the ob-
jeQ and wish of the whole party; and the Duke of Guise, the
head of this mighty and zealous body, acquired authority in the
kingdom, far superior to that, which the King himself poffefild.

from the Philip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly increased the
powler of
Philip II. naval power of Spain, and had at last reduced under his dominion all

that portion of the Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenean
mountains, and which nature seems to have dcflined to foim one
great Monarchy. William Prince of Orange, who firfl encouraged
the inhabitants of the Netherlands to afTert their liberties, and whofl
wifldor and valour formed and protce(ted the rising commonwealth,
had fallen by the hands of an afTfllin. The ftupeior genius of the
Prince of Parma liad given aln nirC tur tr o the fate of the war ill
the Low Countrics; all his cntcrpi izes, concerted with conlinmallte

fill,
I I 2

ikill, and executed with equal bravery, had been attended with BooK VII.
success, and the Dutch, reduced to the last extremity, were on 158'
the point of falling under the dominior of their ancient master.

NONE of those circumfiances, to which Elizabeth had hitherto Her wis ' :d

owed her security, existed any longer. She could derive no ad- due;'.O C
vantage from the jealousy, which had fubfilled between France and
Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke of
Guise, had an equal sway in the councils of both kingdoms. The
Hugonots were unable to contend with the power of the league;
and little could be expected from any diversion they might create.
Nor was it probable that the Netherlands could long employ the
arms, or divide the strength of Spain. In this situation of the
affairs of Europe, it became necessary for Elizabeth to form a new
plan of condu&; and her wisdom in forming it, was not greater
than the vigour with which fihe carried it on. The measures,
most suitable to her natural temper, and which she had hitherto
pursued, were cautious and safe; those she now adopted were
enterprizing and hazardous. She preferred peace, but was not
afraid of war; and was capable, when compelled by neceflity, not
only of defending herself with spirit, but of attacking her enemies
with a boldness, which averted danger from her own dominions.
She immediately furniflhcd the I-Iugonots with a considerable
iI)Iply in money. She carried on a private negociation with
IHcnry III. who, though compcllcd to join the lcaguc, liatcd
the leaders of it, and wiihed for thcir dcflrucoion. She openly
indclcrtook the protectlion of the DIutch commlonwealth, and fcnt ;:
powerfiul army to its afniflancc. She lendcavourcd to f(brm a gencral
c(nnfdcriacy of the Protcftant Princes in oli)pofition to the Popiftl
league. Shle determined to proceed w'itl the utimnol rigonlr na;linfi Ro,. t,
tle ()iice'l of Scots, whole fiufltirings aled rights aliordlel her cnc- :',,1,I,",1 t,'

VOL. 11. Q. IliC tl'c kiil.

II3
1 1

Book'VIL mies a specious pretence for invading her dominions. She resolved

S to redouble her endeavours in order to effect a closer union with

Scotland, and to extend and perpetuate her influence over the coln-
cils of that nation.

SHE found it no difficult matter to induce moit of the Scottish.

courtiers, to promote all her designs. Gray, Sir John Maitland,
who had been advanced to the office of Secretary, which his brother
formerly held, Sir Lewis Bellendeni the Justice Clerk, who had
May 29. succeeded Gray as the King's resident at London, were the persons

in whom the chiefly confided. In order to direct and quicken their
motions, flhe dispatched Sir Edward Wotton along with Bellenden
into Scotland. This man was gay, well-bred, and entertaining;
he excelled in all the exercises, for which James had a passion; and
amused the young King by relating the adventures he had met
with, and the observations he had made, during a long residence in
foreign countries; but under the veil of there superficial qualities, he
concealed a dangerous and intriguing spirit. He soon grew into high
favour with James, and while he was seemingly attentive only to
pleasure and diversions, he acquired influence over the public coun-
cils, to a degree which was indecent for a firanger to possess *.

Prnpofes n NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable to the nation,
I',tL,. than the propoial he made of a ftriC alliance between the two

kingdoms, in defence of the Reformed Religion. The rapid and
alarming progrcfs of the Popish league seemcd to call on all Protef-
tant Princes, to unite for the prcfervation of their common faith.
Ily "' James embraced the overture with warmth, and a Convention of

cflates impowcred himi to conclude slch a treaty, and engage to

* Mclv. 317.

ra tify
1I4

ratify it in parliament*. The alacrity with which James con-
curred in this meafire, must not be wholly ascribed either to his
own zeal, or to Wotton's address; it .was owing in part to Eliza-
beth's liberality. As a mark of her motherly affeation for the
young King, The fettled on him an annual pension of 5000 pounds;
the fame fum which her father had allotted her, before I he ascended
the throne. This circumstance, which ihe took care to mention,
rendered a fum, which in that age was far from being inconfider-
able, a very acceptable present to the King, whose revenues, dur-
ing a long minority, had been almost totally dissipated J'.

BUT the chief objec of Wotton's intrigues, was to ruin Arran.

While a minion so odious to the nation continued to govern the
King, his afliifance could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And
though Arran, ever since his interview with Hunfdane, had ap-
peared extremely zealous for her interest, she could place no great
confidence in a man, whose conduct was so capricious and irregular,
and who, notwithstanding his protestations to the contrary, still
continued a secret correspondence both with Mary,. and with the
Duke of Guise. The banished Lords were attached to England
from'affedion, as well as principle, and were the only persons
among the Scots, whom, in any dangerous exigency, ihe could
thoroughly trufl. Before Bellenden left London, they had been
Jfummoned thither, under colour of vindicating thcmfelves from his
accusations, but, in reality, to concert with him the most prolpcr
mncaltrcs for refloring thmc to their country. Wrotton pir-i-cd tliis
plan, and ccndeavoured to ripen it fbr execution ; and it wals grltly
facilitated by an event, neither uncommon nor coniilclralic. Sir

.R SPtOsw. 339.

Jollhn

Book VII.

1585.

Undermincs
Arran's
power.

I15
-I- Caldl. 3, gcs.

Book VII. John Forfler, and Ker of Ferniherfl, the English and Scottish war-
-'-"-" - dens of the middle marches, having met, according to the custom

of the borders, about mid-funlmer, a fray arose, and Lord Ruffel,
the Earl of Bedford's eldest son, happened to be killed. This cfuffle
was purely accidental, but Elizabeth chore to confider it as a design
formed by Ker, at the instigation of Arran, to involve the two
kingdoms in war. She insisted that both of them ihould be deli-
vered up to her; and though James eluded that demand, he was
obliged to confine Arran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen.

Affits the During his absence from court, Wotton and his associates carried on
bangfhed
anobles. their intrigues without interruption. By their advice, the banished

nobles endeavoured to accommodate their differences with Lord
John, and Lord Claud, the Duke of Chatelherault's two sons, whom
Morton's violence had driven out of the kingdom. Their com-
mon sufferings, and common interest, induced both parties to bury
Otober i6. in oblivion the ancient discord, which had subsisted between the

houses of Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabeth's permission, they
returned in a body to the borders of Scotland. Arran, who had
again recovered favour, infifed on putting the kingdom in a posture
of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and Maitland, secretly thwarted
all his measures. Some necessary orders they prevented from being
issued; others they rendered ineffectual, by the manner of exe-
cution; and all of them were obeyed slowly, and with reluc-
tance ;-.

WOTTON'S fertile brain was, at the fame time, big with ano-

ther, and more dangerous plot. He had contrived to fcize the
King, and to carry him by force into England. But the dcfign

' Spotfw. 340.

was

was happily discovered; and in order to avoid the punilhment his
treachery merited, he departed without taking leave .

MEANWrHILE the banished Lords haflened the execution of their

enterprize; and as their friends and vassals were now ready to join
them, they entered Scotland. Wherever they came, they were
welcome as the deliverers of their country, and the most fervent
prayers were addressed to Heaven for the success of their arms.
They advanced, without losing a moment, towards Stiriing at the
head of 1o,ooo men. The King, though he had assembled an
army £uperior in number, could not venture to meet them in the
field, with troops, whose loyalty was extremely dubious, and who,
at befl, were far from being hearty in the cause; nor was either
the town or castle provided for a siege. The gates, however, of
both were shut, and the nobles encamped at St. Ninian's. That
fame night they furprized the town, or more probably it was be-
trayed into their hands; and Arran, who had undertaken to defend
it, was obliged to lave himself by a precipitate flight. Next morn-
ing they invested the castle, in which there were not provisions
for twenty-four hours; and James was necessitated immediately to
hearken to terms of accommodation. They were not so elated
with success, as to urge extravagant demands, nor was the King
unwilling to make every reasonable conceflion. They obtained a
pardon in the moll ample form, of all the offences they had com-
ililtcd; the principal forts in the kingdom were, by way of fecu-
rity, put into their hands; Crawford, lMolrtroic, and Coloncl Stew-
art were rcmoved from the King's preefnce; and a parliament was
called, to cftabliih tranquillity in the nation '|".

' Mclv. 335.

Book VII.

t
.

I585.

They return
into Scotl.and.
and are recon-
cilej to the
King.

November 2.
s CAd. 3. 795.

Ti o LuG II

II7

Book VII.
L_ --

J535.

A -r.aiiment.
December jo.

TH 0 UG H a great majority in this parliament confifled of the con-

federate nobles, and their adherents, they were far from discovering
a vindictive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an ad, restoring them
to their ancient honours and estates, and ratifying the pardon grant-
ed by the King, they seemed willing to forget all pall errors in the
administration, and spared James the mortification of feeing his
Ministers branded with any public note of infamy. Arran, alone,
deprived of all his honours, firipped of his borrowed spoils, and
declared an enemy to his country by public proclamation, funk back
into obscurity, and must, henceforth, be mentioned by his primitive
title of Captain James Stewart. As he had been, during his un-
merited prosperity, the object of the hatred and indignation of his
countrymen, they beheld his fall without pity, nor did all his sus-
ferings mitigate their resentment in the least degree.

Church as- THE Clergy were the only body of men, who obtained no redress
fairs.

of their grievances by this revolution. The confederate nobles had,
all along, affeced to be confidered as guardians of the privileges
and discipline of the Church. In all their manifefloes they had
declared their resolution to restore there, and by that popular pre-
tence, had gained many friends. It was now natural to expeCt
ibme fruit of there promises, and some returns of gratitude towards
many of the mofR eminent preachers who had suffered in their cause,
and who demanded the repeal of the laws passed the preceding
year. The King, however, was rcfolute to maintain these laws
in fill authority; and as the nobles were extremely solicitous not
to dignflli him, by infifing on any diflgrecable requef-, the claims
of the Church in this, as well as in many former inflanccs, were
ltLcrillccd to tlic intereil of the laity. The Miniflcrs gave vent to
tlleir indlignation in the pulpit, and their impatience under the ldil-

I appointment

appointment broke out in some expressions, extremely difrefpea- Book VI.
ful even towards the King himself*. i586.

THE Archbishop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the effeCts of their

anger. The Provincial fynod of Fife summoned him to appear,
and to answer for his contempt of the decrees of former Assem-
blics, in presuming to exercise the function of a Bishop. And
though he refused to acknowledge the jurifdidion of the court, and
appealed from it to the King, a sentence of excommunication,
equally indecent and irregular, was pronounced against him. April z3.
Adatmfon, with no less indecency, thundered his archiepiscopal
excommunication against Melvil, and some other of his oppo-
nen ts.

SOON after, a General Assembly was held, in which the King,

with some difficulty, obtained an at, permitting the name and
office of a Bishop fiill to continue in the Church. The power of
the order, however, was considerably retrenched. The exerciCe
of discipline, and the infpedtion of the life and dotrine of the
Clergy, were committed to Prefbyteries, in which Bishops should
be allowed no other pre-eminence, but that of presiding as per-
petual moderators. They themselves were declared to be fubljet, in
the fame manner as other pastors, to the jurifdicdion of the General
Afiembly. And as the discussion of the Archbishop's appeal might
have kindled unuiual heats in the AfTcmbly, that afflair was termi-
nated by a compromise. He renounced any claim of fuprcinacy
over the Church, and promised to demean himielf fuiltably to the
charatcler of a Blif0op, as defcribd by St. Paul. The Allenmbly,
w ithlout cxamining the foundations of the fcntcncc of cxcom imuni-

* S$potswy. 343.

cation,

119;

cation, declared that it should be held of no effec, and restored him
to all the privileges which he enjoyed before it was pronounced.
Notwithstanding the extraordinary tenderness flewn for the honour
of the fynod, and the delicacy and refpeC, with which its jurifdic-
tion was treated, several members were so zealous as to protest
againfi this decision*.

THE court of Scotland was now filled with persons, so warmly

attached to Elizabeth, that the league between the two kingdoms,
which had been proposed last year, met with no interruption, but
from D'Efneval the French Envoy. James himself first offered to re-
new the negociation. Elizabeth did not susser such a favourable op-
portunity to flip, and inflantly dispatched Randolph to conclude a
treaty, which she so much desired. The danger to which the Pro-
telfant religion was exposed, by the late combination of the Popish
powers for its deftruaion, and the necessity of a firiCt confederacy
among those, who had embraced the Reformation, in order to obftruc
their pernicious designs, were mentioned as the foundation of the
league. The chief articles in it were, that both parties should bind
themselves to defend the Evangelic Religion; that the league flould
be oflenfive and defensive against all, who should endeavour to diflurb
the excrcife of.religion in either kingdom; that if one of the two
parties be invaded, the other, notwvithlanding any former alliance,
Ihould not, direcqly or indirecly, assist the invader; that if England
lhc invaded in any part remote from Scotland, James mlould afift
the Q.ueen with 2000 horlc, and 5000 ifoot; that if the cnelmy
1ia Ilcd or approaclhed within sixty miles of Scotland, the King thouldl
t;ikc the field with his wlhole forccs, in the fame manner, as he
v,)tiilLl (1o in dclefnce of his own Ling'dom. Eli/abctl, in return,

' Cald. 3. 891 . Spotfw. 346.

unilcer-
Book VII.

1586.

A lenule v ith
l nplard con-
cluded.

July 5.
120

undertook to aCt in defence of Scotland, if it flould be invaded. BookVII.
At the fame time, she assured the King that no flep flould be ,,-'
taken, which might derogate in aly degree from his pretcnfions
to the English Crown . Elizabeth expressed great fatisfaCtio
with a treaty, which rendered Scotland an useful ally, instead of
a dangerous neighbour, and afforded her a degree of fccurity on that
fide, which all her ancestors had aimed at, but none of them had
been able to obtain. Zeal for Religion, together with the bleflings
of peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a considerable
irpiod, had so far abated the violence of national antipathy, that
the King's conduct was universally acceptable to his own people -.

THE acquittal of Archbald Douglas, at this time, exposcd James

to much and deserved censure. This man was deeply engaged in
the conspiracy againit the life of the King his father. Both Mor-
ton and Binny one of his own servants, who suffered for that crime,
had accused him of being present at the murder II. He had escaped
punifiment by flying into England, and James had often required
Elizabeth to deliver up a person so unworthy of her protection. He
now obtained a licence, from the King himself, to return into Scot-
land; and after undergoing a mock trial, calculated to conceal, ra-
ther than detect his guilt, he was not only taken into favour by
the King, but sent back to the court of England, with the honour-
able charaCter of his ambassador. James was now of such an age,
that his youth and inexperience cannot be pleaded in excufc for
this indecent tranfadion. It mull be imputed to the cxceflive fa-
cility of his temper, which often led him to gratify his courtiers at
the cxpence of his own dignity and reputation 4:.

: Spotfw. 351. 1 Camld. 513. 1I Sec Appcndix, NO XII.
:1 Spotfwood, 348. C;l1l, 3. 917.
VOL. II.

121
R

Book VII. NOT long after, the inconsiderate affec&ion of the English Catho-
-'S-- ' lies towards Mary, and their implacable resentment against Eliza-
RP.i, of Ab- bcth, gave rife to a conspiracy, which proved fatal to the one Queen,
f; i., :c-ainll left an indeliblc ilain on the reputation of the other, and presented

a fpcitaclc to Europe, of vthich there had hIthcrto been no example
in the hillorv of mankind.

DoCTorn Gifford, Gilbert GifTord, and I-odgfon, priests educated

in the fcminary at Rheims, had adopted an extravagant and enthu-
Piafnic notion, that the Bull of Pius V. against Elizabeth was dictated
ilrn:mediately by the Holy Ghost. This wild opinion they inflilled
into Savage, an officer in the Spanish army, noted for his furious
zecl, and daring courage; and persuaded him that no service could
be so acceptable to Heaven, as to take away the life of an excommru-
April 26. nicated Heretic. Savage, eager to obtain the Crown of martyr-

dom, bound himself, by a solemn vow, to kill Elizabeth. Bal-
lard, a trafficking priest, had at that time come over to Paris, and
fulicited Mendoza the Spanilh ambassador there, to procure an in-
vafion of England, while the affairs of the league were so propc-
rous, and the kingdom left naked, by fending so many of the Queen's
bIci troops into the Netherlands. Paget and the English exiles de-
ionoflratcd the fruitleflnefs of such an attempt, unless Elizabeth
weire sirs cut of', or the invaders secured of a powerful concurrence
on their landing. If it could be hoped that cither of theIfc events
would happen, cflec&ual aid was promired; and in the mean time

i', , s-
> Ilallard was sent badc to renew his intrigues.

I I, communicated his dcfigns to Anthony Babington, a youn-
g iltleman in Derl)ylhirc, of a plentiful fortulne, and( m;ay anmiabl

;qallities, who having colntracted, du ring his -rcfidcnc in flrancl, a

t 1nil ianity with tle Archbilliop of Gh.lalov:', llad lbeen comlDmcli -
122

ed by him to the Queen of Scots. He concurred with Paget in
confidering the death of Elizabeth as a necessary preliminary to any
invasion. Ballard gave him hopes that an end would soon be put
to her days, and imparted to him Savage's vow, who was now in
London, waiting for an opportunity to firike the blowr. But Ba-
bington thought the attempt of too much importance, to rely on a
single hand for the execution of it, and proposed that five resolute
gentlemen ifould be joined with Savage in an enterprize, the fuc-
cess of whidc was the foundation of all their hopes. He offered
to find out persons willing to undertake the service, whose honour,
secrecy, and courage, they might safely trust. He accordingly
opened the matter to Edward Windsor, Thomas Salisbury, Charles
Tilney, Chidioc Tichbourne, Robert Gage, John Travers, Robert
Barnwell, John Charnock, Henry Dun, John Jones, and Robert
Polly, all of them, except Polly, whose burtling forward zeal intro-
duced him into their society, gentlemen of good families united to-
gether in the bonds of private friendifip, strengthened by the more
powerful tie of religious zeal. Many consultations were held; their
plan of operations was at lafl fettled ; and their different parts aflign-
ed. Babington himself was appointed to rcfcue the Q.eccn of Scots;
Salisbury, with tonme others, undertook to excite several counties
to take arms; the murder of the Qceen, the mofi dangecrous and
important icrvice of all, fell to Tichbourne and Savage, with four
afcociatcs. And so totally hIad their bigotted prjudlices cctinuiflh-
cd the principles of honour, and the fcntimenlts of hlulanity, fuiit-
able to their rank, that withlout fckruple or. comIIpun&ion, thll 1un-
tlertook an aaion, which is viewedl with horror, even wheln c:m-
mitted by the mcancfl and moll proif!tli:te of. mankindl. This
altcimpt, on the contrary, :IppeItar to (CI 1hc11 no Icl"h loouralilc t11:1In
it: was dcflpcratc, andl in order to pcrpetuantte the mCemory of it, iley

II 2 1 ::!

Blook V1I.

i 86.

Junle.

T;we Czllcni
of tIhe (0ozJ'j.

123

Book VII. had a piture drawn containing the portraits of the fix alnafins, with

qI_ '
6 that of Babington in the middle, and a motto intimating that they

were jointly embarked in some hazardous design.

Discovered by THE conspirators, as appears by this wanton and imprudent in-
Walfingllam. fance of vanity, seem to have thought a discovery scarce possible,

and neither distrusted the fidelity of their companions, nor doubted
the success of their undertaking. But while they believed that their
machinations were carried on with the most profound and impene-
trable secrecy, every ftep they took was fully known to Walfing-
ham. Polly was one of his spies, and had entered into the confpi-
racy with no other design than to betray his associates. Gilbert Gif-
ford, too, having been sent over to England to quicken the motions
of the conspirators, had been gained by Walfingharn, and gave him
sure intelligence of all their projecEs. That vigilant Minister im-
mediately imparted the discoveries which he had made to Elizabeth;
and without communicating the matter to any other of the Coun-
fellors, they agreed, in order to understand the plot more perfectly,
to wait till it was ripened into some form, and brought near the
point of execution.

The ared AT last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and criminal to expose
fcizcd and
puiilncd. her own life, and to tempt Providence any farther. Ballard, the

prime mover in the whole conspiracy, was arrested. IIis affociatcs,
disconcertcd and firuck with afionifinient, endeavoured to lave
themfclvcs by flight. But, within a few days, all of them, except
\Vindfbr, were fcizcd in different places of the kingdom, and com-
mittcd to the Towcr. Tho' they had undertaken the part, they
wanted the firm and determined spirit of aftai(fins; and influenced.
by fear or by lopc, difcovcred all they knew. The indignation of

6 the
124.

the people, and their impatience to revenge such an execrable com-
bination against the life of their Sovereign, hastened their trial, and
all of them suffered the death of traitors *.

THUS far Elizabeth's conduct may be pronounced both prudent

and laudable, nor can she be accused of violating any law of huma-
nity, or of taking any precautions beyond what were necessary for
her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with regard to which,
posterity will pass a very different judgment.

Book VII.

1586.

Sept. 20.

Mary is ac-
cufed of be-
ing an accom-
plice in the
conspiracy.

THE frantic zeal of a few rash young men accounts sufficiently

for all the wild and wicked designs which they had formed. But
this was not the light, in which Elizabeth and her Ministers chose
to place the conspiracy. They represented Babington and his aflo-
ciates to be instruments employed by the Queen of Scots, the real
though secret author of so many attempts against the life of Eli-
zabeth, and the peace of her kingdoms. They produced letters,
which they ascribed to her, in support of this charge. These, as
they gave out, had come into their hands, by the following singular,.
and myflerious method of conveyance. Gifford, on his return into
England, had been intruded by some of the exiles with letters to
Mary; but in order to make a trial of his fidelity or address, they
were only blank papers, made up in that form. These being safe-
ly deliverd by him, he was afterwards employed without farther
icruple. Walsingham having found means to gain this man, he,
by his permifflon, and the connivance of Paulet, bribed a tradcf-
man in the neighbourhood of Chartly, whither Mary had been
conveycd, who depositcd the letters in a hole in the wall of the
catlle, covered with a loofc ione. Thence they were taken by

' Cain l. 5 5. State Tri,is, vol. I. I xo,

the

12s

Book VII. the Queen, and in the fame manner, her answers returned. All

586c these were carried to Walsingham, opened by him, decyphered,

fealed again so dextroufly that the fraud could not be perceived, and
then transmitted to the persons to whom they were directed. Two
letters to Babington, with several to Mendoza, Paget, Engleficld,
and the Englith fugitives, were procured by this artifice. It was
given out that in these letters Mary approved of the conspiracy, and
even of the aiTaffination; that flie directed them to proceed with the
utmost circumfpeaion, and not to take arms till foreign auxiliaries
were ready to join them; that fie recommended the Earl of Arun-
del, his brothers, and the young Earl of Northumberland, as proper
persons to conduQt and to add reputation to their enterprize; that ihe
advised them, if poflible, to excite at the fame time some commotion
in Ireland; and above all, besought them to concert with care the
means of her escape, suggesting to them several expedients for that
pu rpofc.

The indigna- ArLL these circumftanccs were opened at the trial of the con-
·-ion ohd fpirators. And while the nation was under the influence of those
ai'l1 hr ol terrors nwhich the aflociation had raised, and the late danger had

augmented, they were believed wlithout hesitation or inquiry, and
1fplead a general alarm. Mary's zeal for her religion was well known;
and in that age, examples of the violent and sanguinary ({i rit which
it inspircd, were numerous. All the cabals againif the peace of the
kingdom for many years hadl been carried on in her name; and it
now appears evidently, fid tlic English, that the ffcty of the one
Queen is incompatib)le witlh that of the otller. \VIly then, added
they, fliontll the iras(lillity of f lglandc l)e lacriliccd for the flilke
of a ill angel ? \ ly is a life I' dear to the nation expofcld to the
-rc'lclatd allaits of an cxalpcl- tcd rival ? The cafle iilppofcd ill the

7 alociaiion,
i!6

association, has now happened, the sacred person of our Sovereign Book VII.
las been threatened, and why fliould not an injured people execute I586
that juti revenge which they had vowed ?

No sentiments could be more agreeable than these to Elizabeth Elizabc!h rc-

folvcs to pro -

and her Miniflers. They thiemfelves had at first propagated them cced to

,i: e

among the people, and they now fcrved both as an apology, and a ,,, ;.,'",:,-
motive, for their proceeding to such extremities againfi the Scot- llr.
tifh Queen, as they had long meditated. The more injuries Eli-
zabeth heaped on Mary, the more fie feared and hated that un-
happy Qieen, and came at last to be persuaded, that there could be
Uo other security for her own life but the death of her rival. Bur-
leigh and Walfilngham had promoted so zealously all her neafires
withl regard to Scottiih affairs; and hadl aced, with so little refervc,
in opposition to Mary, that they had reason to dread the molt vio-
lent effeds of her reicntmcnt, if ever she flould mount the throne
of England; and therefore they endeavoured to hinder an event so
fatal to themselves, by confirming their Miflrefs's fear and hatred of
the Scottish Queen.

ME A NW II IL F, Mary was guarded with unusual vigilance, and Hcer domnf-

great care was taken to keep her ignorant of the discovery of the .I.' l'P'e
coinfliriacy. Sir Thomas Gorges was at lft sent friom court, to ac- fcizc'd
c(qainit her both of it, and of the imputation with which lihe was
loadled as acccililry to that crime ; and lie fiirprizccd her witIt the
;i:ncct;!t, jill as fhle lhad got on hlorlcback to ride out along with
lixcr lkeepcrs. She was i-ruclc with aflolIiniilllt, and 'would haIve
rclit!rncd to hcr al ar tmcntt. B1ut lhe V was not permiitted: aldtl in lce
,tbitcncc, ll r private doll()Lt wa;' l)!oke o(pen, her cla)inet and lpapisC
;. <': sc _i.':l,, k'.! c', ,IILl I:lnt ullp to co.]rt. ies prinp:ii:l dotncllitcs

too,

127

Book VII. too, were arrested, and committed to different keepers. Naue and

'~(8 ' Curie, her two secretaries, the one a native of France, the other of
Sept. lo. Scotland, were carried prisoners to London. All the money in her

custody, amounting to little more than 2000 pounds, was secured.
And after leading her about, for some days, from one gentleman's
house to another, she was conveyed to Fotheringay, a strong castle
in Northamptonihire *.

Deliberates No farther evidence could now be expected against Mary, and
concerning
the method of nothing remained but to decide what should be her fate. With re-

ing. gard to this, Elizabeth, and those Ministers in whom fle chiefly con-

fided, seem to have taken their resolution; but there was still great
variety of sentiments among her other Counsellors. Some thought
it sufficient to dismiss all Mary's attendants, and to keep her under
such close restraint, as would cut off all possibility of corresponding
with the enemies of the kingdom; and as her conltitution, broken
by long confinement, and her spirit dejeced with so many cares,
could not long support such an additional load, the Queen and na-
tion would soon be delivered from all their fears. But though it
might be easy to secure Mary's own person, it was impossible to di-
mninil the reverence which the Roman Catholics had for her name,
or to extinguish the compassion with which they viewed her susser-
ings; while these continued, infurredions and invasions would
ncevr be wanting for her relief, and the only cffed& of any new
rigour woull be to render them more frequent and dangerous. For
this rcafon the expedient was rejeiced.

l), rmincsto A PU 1LIC and legal trial, though the most unexampled, was
try Icr pub-
,rL .y. juilcd the moil uncxceptionable ncthlod of proceeding; and it had

' Caid. 517.

at
1°8

at the fame time, a semblance ofjuftice accompanied with an air
of dignity. It was in vain to search the ancient records, for any
statute or precedent, to justify such an uncommon tfep, as the trial
of a foreign Prince, who had not entered the kingdom in arms,
but had fled thither fbr refuge. The proceedings against her were
founded on the ad of last Parliament, and by applying it in this
manner, the intention of those who had framed that severe fiatute
became more apparent .

ELIZABETH resolved that no circumstance of pomp or solemnity

should be wanting, which could render this tranfadion such as be-
came the dignity of the person to be tried. She appointed, by a
cominiflion under the great feal, forty persons, the most illufirious
in the kingdom, by their birth or offices, together with five of
the judges, to hear and decide this great cause. Many difficulties
were Ilarted by the lawyers, about the name and title by which
i/Aary should be arraigned; and while the essentials ofjuflice were
so grossly violated, the empty forms of it were the objects of their
care. They at length agreed that slle flould be ftiled, " Mary,
" daughter and heir of James V. late King of Scots, commonly
" called Queen of Scots, and Dowager of France -f."

AFTER the many indignities which fle had lately suffered, Mary

could no longer doubt but that her dellrudion was determined. She
cxpcled, every moment, to end her days by poison, or by some of
tllofe iecret means, usually employed against captive Princes. And
lcft the malice of her enemies, at the Iame time that it deprived
her of life, flould cndeavour likcwifc to blltt hler reputation, the

I- Str)'r , 3 362.
VoL. II.

Book VII.

I586.

129
'* C.1nd. .519. J01111[. Hisit. 113.

S

Xwrote

Book VII. wrote to the Duke of Guise, and vindicated herself, in the flrongeif

586.' terms, from the imputation of encouraging or of being accefrory

to the conspiracy for aflafinating Elizabeth ". In the solitude of
her prison, the firange resolution of bringing her to a public trial
had not reached her ears, nor did the idea of any thing so unpre-
cedented, and so repugnant to regal Majesty, once enter into her
thoughts.

The trial at ON the eleventh of Ocober, the commissioners appointed by
Foth y. Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next morning they delivered

a letter from her to Mary, in which, after the bitterest reproaches
and accusations, she informed her, that regard to her own safety
had, at last, rendered it necessary to make a public enquiry into
her condud, and therefore required her, as the had lived so long
under the protection of the laws of England, to submit now to the

Mary refuses trial, which they ordained to be taken of her crimes. Mary, tho'
at sirss to
plead. furprized at this message, was neither appalled at the danger, nor

unmindful of her own dignity. She protested, in the most solemn
manner, that she was innocent of the crime laid to her charge, and
had never countenanced any attempt against the life of the Qieen
of England; but, at the fame time, refused to acknowledge the
jurifdiCion of her commifioners. " I came into the kingdom,"
said she, " an independent Sovereign, to implore the Queen's as-
" filfance, not to fubje myself to her authority. Nor is my
" spirit so broken by its pall misfortunes, or so intimidatcd by
"* prcfcnt dangers, as to sloop to any thing unbecoming tlie Ma-
( jelly of a crowned lead, or that will disgrace the anccflors from

whom I am dcfccndcd, and the son to whom I Iliall leave my
t( throne. If I mull be tried, Princes alone can be my Peers.

* Jcbb, 2. 283.

"T The
i3o

sx The Queen of England's fubjeds, however noble their birth BookVII.
" may be, are of a rank inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival -58 '
" in this kingdom, I have been confined as a prisoner. Its laws
" never afforded me any protecion. Let them not now be per-
" verted in order to take away my life."

THE commiflioners employed arguments and intreaties to over-

come Mary's resolution. They even threatened to proceed ac-
cording to the forms of law, and to pass sentence against her on
account of her contumacy in refusing to plead; she persisted, how-
ever, for two days to decline their jurifdition. An argument
urged by Hatton, the Vice-Chamberlain, at lift prevailed. He
told her, that by avoiding a trial, she injured her own reputation,
and deprived herself of the only opportunity of setting her inno-
cence in a clear light; and that nothing would be more agreeable
to them, or more acceptable to the Queen their Mistress, than to
be convinced, by undoubted evidence, that she had been unjustly
loaded with foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible fllould impose on the unwary Contents

I however to

Queen, or that fie, unaffilted, at that time, by any fiiend or do Co.
counsellor, flould not be able to dctet and elude all the artifices
of Elizabeth's ablest Minirtcrs. In a situation equally melancholy,
and under circumstanccs nearly similar, her Grandson Charles I.
refulfcd, with the utmost firmncfs, to acknowledge the usurped
jurifdicdion of the High Court of Juflicc; and poflcrit) has ap-
proved his conducl-, as flitable to the dignity of a King. If Mary
'was less coiflant il her rcfolution, it mull l)c imputed l0lcly to her
anxiouls delirc of vindicating her own honour.

I31
S 4

Book VII.

1586.
Oct. 14.

AT her appearance before the judges; who were feated in the

great hall of the castle, where they received her with much cere-
mony, she took care to proteift that by condescending to hear and to
give an answer to the accusations, which should be offered againfl
her, she neither acknowledged the jurisdiction of the court, nor
admitted of the validity and justice of those ats, by which they
pretended to try her.

THE Chancellor, by a counter-proteftation, endeavoured to via

dicate the authority of the court.

The accura-
tion against
her.

THEN the Queen's Attorney and Solicitor opened the charge,

againit her, with all the circumstances of the late conspiracy.
Copies of her letters to Mendoza, Babington, Englefield and Paget
were produced. Babington's confession, those of Ballard, Savage,
and the other conspirators, together with the declarations of Naue
and Curie her Secretaries, were read, and the whole ranged in the
most specious order, which the art of the lawyers could devise,
and heightened by every colour, their eloquence could add.

MARY listencd to their harangues attentively, and without emo-

tion. But at the mention of the Earl of Arundel's name, who
was then confined in the Tower, on suspicion of being accessory to
the conspiracy, she broke out into this tender and generous excla-
mation: " Alas ! how much has the noble house of I-Howard sus-
"fcrcd for my fake !"
11cr deknce. WHEN the Qccen's council had finifiled, Mary flood up, and

with great magnanimity, and equal prcfcnce of mind, began her
defence. She bewailed the unhappincfs of her own situation, that
after a captivity of nineteen years, during which lhe had fulifcrcd

treatmeln:
132

treatment no less cruel than unmerited, she was at last loaded with
an accusation, which tended not only to rob her of her right of
succession, and to deprive her of life itself, but to transmit her
name with infamy to future ages: That without regarding the
sacred rights of sovereignty, she was now fubjeted to laws framed
against private persons; though an anointed Queen, commanded
to appear before the tribunal of fubjeats; and, like a common cri-
minal, her honour exposed to the petulant tongues of lawyers,
capable of wresting her words, and of misrepresenting her acicrns:
That, even in this dishonourable situation, ihe was denied the pri-
vileges usually granted to criminals, and obliged to undertake her
own defence, without the presence of any friend with whom to
advise, without the aid of council, and without the use of her own.
papers.

SHE then proceeded to the particular articles in the accusation.

She absolutely denied any correspondence with Babington: The
name of Ballard was not so much as known to her: Copies only
of her pretended letters to them were produced; though nothing
less than her hand-writing or subscription was sufficient to convic
her of such an odious crime: No proof could be brought that the
letters were delivered into her hands; or that any answer was re-
turned by her direction: The confeftions of wretches condemned
and executed for such a detellable action, were of little weight;
fear or hope might extort from them many things inconfiflent with
truth, nor ought the honour of a QIccn to be slained by such vile
tcllimony. The declaration of her S'crctaries was not more con-
clufivc : promifcs and thrlcats might calily overcome the rebolution
of two firangers; in order to icrecn thcnlclvcs, thecy might throw
the blame on her; but they could cliicovcr nothing to her preju-
dice, without violating, in the luirl place, their oath of fidclity; aiind:

tlicic

I33
Book VII.

1586.

their perjury, in one instance, rendered them unworthy of credit ii
another: The letters to the Spanish Ambassador, were either no-
thing more than copies, or contained only what was perfecly inno-
cent: " I have often," continued she, " made such efforts for the
" recovery of my liberty, as are natural to a human creature. And
" convinced, by the fad experience of so many years, that it was
" vain to expeCt it from the justice or generosity of the Queen of
"England, I have frequently solicited foreign Princes, and called
"on all my friends to employ their whole interest for my relief. I
' have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the English Catholics
" ome mitigation of the rigour with which they are now treated;
" and if 1 could hope, by my death, to deliver them from oppref-

sion, I am willing to die for their fake. I wish, however, to

" imitate the example of Esther, not of Judith, and would rather
" make intercession for my people, than shed the blood of the
" meanest creature in order to save them. I have often checked
"the intemperate zeal of my adherents, when either the fcverity
"of their own persecutions, or indignation at the unheard-of
"injuries which I have endured, were apt to precipitate them
" into violent councils. I have even warned the Queen of dangers

to which these harsh proceedings exposed herself. And worn

" out, as'I now am, with cares and sufferings, the profpet of a
" Crown is not so inviting, that I flould ruin my foul in order to

obtain it. I am no stranger to the feelings of humanity, nor

"unacquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor the detest-
" able crime of aflanination, as equally :epugnant to both. And,

if ever I have givIn consent by my worls, or even by my

"thoughts, to any attempt againfl the life of the Q(icen of Eng-
"land, far from dcclining the judSgmcnt of men, I lhall not even
L' pray for the imercy of God *".

* Canid. 520, ?&c.

Twvo

I34
Book VII.

1586.

135

Two different days did Mary appear before the judges, and in Book VII.
every part of her behaviour maintained the magnanimity of a ~-'

ry patzshe ehvou aitind hmganmtyoa 586.
Queen, tempered with the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

TH E commiflioners, by Elizabeth's express command, adjourned, Sentence

without pronouncing any sentence, to the Star-Chamber in Weft- '.el zer
ninfler. When aff-mbled in that place, Naue and Curie were
brought into court, and confirmed their former declaration upon
oath. And after reviewing their whole proceedings, the com-
niflioners unanmmoufly declared Mary " to be accessory to Babing-
" ton's conspiracy, and to have imagined divers matters tending
" to the hurt, death, and deftrution of Elizabeth, contrary to
" the express words of the flatute, made for the security of the
c' Qeen's life "."

IT is no easy matter to determine whether the injustice in ap- Irregulari:ies

in the trial.

pointing this trial, or the irregularity in conduting it, were great-
efi and most flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim autho-
rity over an independent Queen ? Was Mary bound to comply
with the laws of a foreign kingdom ? How could the fubjets
of another Prince become her judges ? Or if such an insult on roy-
alty were allowed, ought not the common forms of justice to
ha\ve been olfervcd ? If the testimony of Babington and his as-
fociatcs was so explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare them for a
few weeks, and by confionting thcm with Mary, overwhelm her
with the Full convliion of her crimes ? Nanu and Curie were both
alive, \wlirlcc c l didl nor they appear at Iotlcriingay, andl for what
rcaf;.)n wcre they lricluccd in tli Star-chambcr, where iC\aC Mary was
inot p cfclnt to hear what they dcpolcd ? Was this lufpicious cvi-

" Camll. 525.

dcncc

BookVII. dence enough to condemn a Queen ? Ought the meanest criminal

L to have been found guilty, upon such feeble and inconclusive proofs ?
1586.

IT was not, however, on the evidence produced at her trial, that

the sentence against Mary was founded. That served as a pretence
to justify, but was not the cause of the violent steps taken by Eliza-
beth and her Ministers towards her deftrution; and was employed
to give some appearance of justice, to what was the offspring of
jealousy and fear. And the nation, blinded with resentment against
Mary, and solicitous to secure the life of its own Sovereign from
every danger, observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and
attended to no defets in the proof, but grasped at suspicions and
probabilities, as if they had been irrefragable demonstrations.

The Parlia- THE Parliament met a few days after fentenee was pronounced
Mient confirm
the fentnce, again Mary. In that illustrious aflembly, more temper and dif-

cernment, than are to be found among the people might have been
expcted. Both Lords and Commons, however, were equally un-
der the dominion of popular prejudices and passions, and the fame
cxceffes of zeal or of fear, which prevailed in the nation, are ap-
parent in all their proceedings. They entered with impatience
upon an inquiry into the conspiracy, and the dangers which tlhrat-
ned the Queen's life, and the peace of the kingdom. All the pa-
pers, which had been produced at Fotheringay, were laid before
them. And after many violent invectives against the Qeen of
Scots, both houfcs unanimously ratified the proceedings of the
commissioners by whom she lhad been tried, and declared the fen-

.,itlemnn tence agailfi her to be jufl andl wcll-flonde.d. Not f(tificd with
ofit exccutiu thlis, they prlcntcd a joint addrcfs to t the (1iccn, bclechling her,
ci it.
g

-
-it.

as the regarded her own l.afct y the )prcicivation oi the l'rotctllnt

religiol1,
3

Yeligion, the welfare and wishes of her people, to publith the fen-
tence; and without farther delay to inflict on a rival, no less irre-
claimable than dangerous, the punishment which lhe had merited
by so many crimes. This request, dicated by fears unworthy of
that great Assembly, was enforced by reasons fiill more unworthy.
They were drawn not from justice, but from conveniency. The
most rigorous confinement, it was pretended, could not curb Mary's
intriguing spirit; her address was found, by long experience, to be
an tvermatch for the vigilance and jealousy of all her keepers: Tlce
severest penal laws could not restrain her adherents, who, while
they believed her person to be sacred, would despise any danger to
which themselves alone were exposed: Several foreign Princes were
ready to second their attempts, and waited only a proper opportu-
nity for invading the kingdom, and asserting the Scottish Queen's
title to the Crown. Her life, for these reasons, was incompatible
with Elizabeth's safety; and if the were spared out of a false cle-
mency, the Queen's person, the religion and liberties of the king-
dom, could not be one moment secure. Necessity required that she
should be sacrificed in order to preserve these; and to prove this fa-
crifice to be no less just than necessary, several examples in history
were produced, and many texts of scripture quoted, but both
the one and the other were misapplied, and distorted from their
true meaning.

Book VII.

1586.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable to Elizabeth than -S..I.lt

an address in this firain. It extricated her out of a situation, ex-
tremely embarrafling; and without depriving her of the power of
sparing, it enabled her to punish her rival with less appearance of
blame. If flhe chose the former, the whole honour would redlolld
to her own clemency. If flec determined on thec latter, whatevcr

VOL. II. T was

I37

BookVII. was rigorous might now seem to be extorted by the solicitations of

1586 Q her people, rather than to flow from her own inclination. Her

answer, however, was in a stile, which she often used, ambiguous
and evasive under the appearance of openness and candor; full of
such professions of regard for her people, as served to heighten their
loyalty; of such complaints of Mary's ingratitude, as were calcu-
lated to excite their indignation; and of such insinuations that her
own life was in danger, as could not fail to keep alive their fears.
In the end, she besought them to save her the infamy and the pain
of delivering up a Queen, her nearest kinswoman, to punifnment;
and to confider whether it might not still be possible to provide
for the public security, without forcing her to imbrue her hands in
royal blood.

THE true meaning of this reply was easily underltood. The

Lords and Commons renewed their former request, with additional
importunity, which was far from being either unexpeced, or of-
fenfive. Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit;
and having obtained such a public fanaion of her proceedings, there
was no longer any reason for protracting this scene of dissimulation;
there was even some danger that her feigned difficulties might at
last be treated as real ones; ihe therefore adjourned the parlia-
ment, and reserved in her own hands the sole disposal of her rival's

fate .

Fr;nce inter- ALL the Princes in Europe observed the proceedings against
i,, bTlf of Mary, witll afloniifment and horror; and even Henry III. notwith-
Mliary. flanding his known avcrfion to the house of Guifc, was obliged to

intcrpofic in her behalf, and to appear in defence of the common

e Camd. 526. D'Ewcs, 375.

rights
138

IS9

rights of royalty. Aubefpine his resident ambaflador, and Bcllie-
vere who was sent with an extraordinary commiision to the lame
purpose, interceded for Mary with great appearance of warmth.
They employed all the arguments which the cause naturally fLig-
gested; they pleaded from juflice, generosity, and humanity; they
intermingled reproaches and threats. But to all these Elizabeth
continued deaf and inexorable, and having received some intima-
tion of Henry's real unconcern about the fate of the Scottish Queen,
and knowing his antipathy to all the race of Guise, she trusted,
that these loud remonstrances would be followed by no violent
resentment %.

SHE paid no greater regard to the solicitations of the Scottifi

King, which, as they were urged with more sincerity, merited more
attention. Though her commissioners had been extremely careful
to sooth James, by publishing a declaration that their sentence against
Mary did, in no degree, derogate from his honour, or invalidate
any title which he formerly possessed; he beheld the indignities to
which his mother had been exposed with filial concern, and with
the sentiments which became a King. The pride of the Scottish
nation was rouzed, by the insult offered to the blood of their Mo-
narchs, and called upon him to employ the most vigorous efforts,
in order to prevent or to revenge the Queen's death.

BooL VII.

I586.
Nov. al,

James endea.
vours to save
his mother's
life.

AT first, he could scarce believe that Elizabeth would venture

upon an ation so unprecedented, which tended so visibly to
render the persons of Princes less sacred in the eyes of the people,

* Camd. 531.

T 2

and

J4o
BookVII. and which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other times,

p86 she was so remarkably jealous. But as soon as the extraordinary

steps which fl.e took discovered her intention, he dispatched Sir
William Keith to London; who, together with Douglas his am-
baffador in ordinary, remonstrated, in the firongeft terms, against
the injury done to an independent Queen, in fubjeQing her to be
tried like a private person, and by laws to which she owed no obe-
dience; and besought Elizabeth not to add to this injury, by susser-
ing a sentence unjust in itself, as well as dishonourable to the Kinlg_
as Scots, to be put in execution *..

ELIZABETIH returning no answer to these reinonifrances of his

ambassador, James wrote to her with-his own hand, complaining in
the bittelref terms of her conduct, not without threats that both his-
duty and his honour would- oblige him to renounce her friendship,
and to aLaa as became a son when called to-revenge his mother's
wrongs -. At- the fame time he afflmbled the nobles, who pro-
mifed to tatir by him in so good a cause. lie appointed .ambaffa,
dors to France, Spain, and Denmark, in- order to implore the aid
of these courts; and took-other fleps towards executing his threats
with vigour. The high fhrain of his letter enraged Elizabeth to
fich a degree, that ihc was ready to dismiss his ambafladors with-
orlt aIy reply. Bur' his preparations. alarmed and.einbarrafred .her
1Mlitifters, aJnd at their intreaty lic returned a soft and evasive an-
fwer, promiinmfiig to liflen- to. any overture -from the IKing, that
tended to his mother's safety; and to suspend the execution of the
Isentlnce, till tle arrival. of new ambafladors from Scotland 1:.
' Sc' Appcind. N . XII.. t' Birch. Mcnm. i.. a. t SPpotfw, 251. Cald. ,, 5.

ME A N-

MEANWHILE, she commanded the sentence against Mary to be BookVII.

p.ublished, and forgot not to inform the people, that this was ex- 586
torted from her by the repeated intreaties of both houses of parlia- Dcctm 6.

'1 lC fenrelic-!

ment. At the fame time, she dispatched Lord Buckhurrt and Beale a;.ntT .x!.,i
to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and *how importunately the
nation demanded the execution of it-; and, though she had not.
hitherto yielded to these solicitations, she advised her to prepare for,
an event, which might become necelary for securing the Protestant.
religion, as well as quieting the minds of the people. Mary re-
ceived the message not only without symptoms of fear, but witl
expressions of triumph. " No wonder, said .he, the Engliih
" should nowthirfl for the blood of a foreign Prince, they have
" oftened .offered violence to their own Monarchs. But after o.
" many sufferings, death comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I
' am proud to think' that my life is esteemed of importance to
" the Catholic religion, and as a martyr for it I am now willing
" to die *."

AFTER the publication of the sentence, M\ary was flripped of sl,,ic t-cj-

w'th thV' ut-

every remaining mark of royalty. The canopy of slate. in her oi; rig,,r.
apartment was pulled down; Paulet entered her chamber, and ap-
proached her person without ceremony; ndl even appeared covered
in her presence. Shocked .with thcel indignities, and olricndlc at
this gross familiarity, .to which tihe had never Icen accufloilncd,
Mary once more comnplainnedr to Elizabeth; and at the failn tli!le,
as her last requetif intrcated that.lhc Awotld permit lher fcrvants to
carry her dead body into France, to be laid among her ancltors, Dc:i. i.-
ialhallowcd ground; that bomc.of her cldomcics nighlit e prcl'-u,

.'Caid. .528. Jcbh, 29z1,

at

14

at her death, to bear witness of her innocence, and firm adherence
to the Catholic faith; that all her servants might be suffered to leave
the kingdom, and to enjoy those small legacies, which ihe lhould
bcflow on them, as testimonies of her affecion; and that, in the
mean time, her almoner, or some other Catholic Priest, might be
allowed to attend her, and to assist her in preparing for an eternal
world. She besought her in the name of Jesus, by the foul and
memory of Henry VII. their common progenitor, by their near
conlanguinity, and the royal dignity with which they were both in-
vetled, to gratify her in these particulars, and to indulge her so far
as to signify her compliance by a letter under her own hand. Whe-
ther Mary's letter was ever delivered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No
answer was returned, and no regard paid to her requests. She was
offered a Protestant Bishop or Dean to attend her. Them she re-
jeQed; and without any Clergyman to direQ her devotions, she pre-
pared, in great tranquillity, for the approach of death, which Ihe
now believed to be at no great distance *.

JA M ES, without losing a moment, sent new ambafladors to Lon-

don. These were the master of Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil. In
order to remove Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Master
would become bound that no conspiracy flould be undertaken
against her person, or the peace of the kingdom, with Mary's con-
-ent; and for the faithful performance of this, would deliver tome
of the most considerable of the Scottish nobles, as hoPfages. If this
were not thought sufficient, they promised that Mary flhould resign
all her rights and prctenfions to her son, from whom nothing inju-
rious to the Protcflant religion, or inconsistent with Elizabeth's

Carnd. 528. Jcbb, 2. 295.

fafcty,

8
J3ook VI.

i586.

1587.

J. mes renews
1 s folicita-
tlont ill her

Jantuary I.
I42

safety, could be feared. The former proposal, Elizabeth rejected Book VI.
as insecure; the latter, as dangerous. The ambassadors were then ^587.
inftruted to talk in an higher tone; and Melvil executed the corn-
mission with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray, with his usual per-
fidy, deceived his Master who trufled him with a negociation of so
much importance, and betrayed the Quecn whom he was employed
to save. He encouraged and urged Elizabeth, to execute the fen-
tence against her rival. He often repeated the old proverbial fcn--
tence, " The dead cannot bite." And whatever ihould happen,
he undertook to pacify the King's rage, or at least to prevent any
violent effeas of his resentment '.

ELIZABETrT, meanwhile, discovered all the symptoms of the Flzabstl's

most violent agitation and disquietude of mind. She ihunned so- d niniulaLion,
ciety, ihe was often found in a mehanhlolv and muting posture, and
·repeating, with much emphasis, these sentences which she borrowed
from some of the devices then in vogue; Aut Jer aut feri; zne
feriure, feri. Much, no doubt, of thi; apparent uneasiness must
be imputed to dissimulation; it was impossible, however, that a
Princess, naturally so cautious as Elizabeth, flould venture on an
action, which might expose her memory to infamy, and her lifi
and kingdom to danger, without reflecting deeply, and hesitating
long. The people waited her determination in fufience and
anxiety; and left their fear or their zeal should fublide, rumours
of danger were artfully invented, and propagated with the utmofl
induflry; A:-befpine, the French ambaftador, was acculed of haviln
fulborned an afalmin to murder the Queen. The Spaniflh llect was
said by fomc to be already arrived at Milford-haven. Others as-

L: Spotfw. 352. Murdin, 568. See Append. N° XIV.

1ilrmcd

43

finned that the Duke of Guise had landed with a firong army, in
Suflex. Now, it was reported that the Northern Counties were up
in arms; next day, that the Scots had entered England with all their
forces; and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was on foot for seizing
the Queen, and burning the city. The panic grew every day more
violent; and the people, aftonifled and enraged, called for the exe-
cution of the sentence againit Mary, as the only thing which could
reflore tranquillity to the kingdom*.

WHIIILE there sentiments prevailed among her fubjeas, Elizabeth

thought she might safely venture to itrike the blow, which she had
so long meditated. She commanded Davison, one of the fecreta-
.ries of state, to bring to.her the fatal warrant; and her behaviour,
on that occasion, plainly shewed that it is not to hlumanity, that we
must ascribe her forbearance hitherto. At the very moment she
was subscribing the writ which gave up a woman, a Queen, and her
own nearest relation, into the hands of the executioner, she was
capable of jesting. " Go, fays she to Davison, and tell Walfing-
" ham what I have now done, though I am afraid he will die for
"grief when he hears it." Her chief anxiety was how to secure the
advantages which would arise from Mary's death, without appear-
ing to have given her content to a deed so infamous. She often
hinted to Paulet and Drury, as well as some other courtiers, that
now was the time to difcovcr the sincerity of their concern for her
Gafcty; and that she expccCed their zeal would extricate her out of
ilcr prefcnt perplexity. But they were wife enough to fcem not to
undcrfland her meaning. Even after the warrant was signed, she
commanded a letter to be written to Paulct, in lcfs ambiguous

*i Camd. 533, 534.

terms;
Book V1I.

S5P7.

Warrant for
Mary's execu-
tGen signed.
February' I.
i44.

terms; complaining of his remissness in sparing so long tile life of Book VI ,.
her capital enemy, and begging him to remember at lait what was 7
incumbent on him as an affectionate subjec-, and to deliver his So-
vereign from continual fear and danger, by fhiortcning the clays of
his prisoner. Paulet, though rigorous and harsh, and often brutal
in the discharge of what lie thought his duty, as Mary's keeper,
was nevertheless a man of honour and integrity. Hc rejectcd the
proposal with disdain; and lamenting that lie Ihould ever have
been deemed capable of acting the part of an afiaffin, he declared
that the Q0een might dispose of his life at her pleasure, but lhe
would never slain his own honour, nor leave an everlasting mark of
infamy on his posterity, by lending his hand to perpetrate so foul a
crime. On the receipt of this answer, Elizabeth became extremely
peevish; and called him a dainty and precwie f/lowz, who would pro-
miie much, but perform nothing; flhe proposed to employ one Ving-
field, who had both courage and inclination to firike the blow -
But Davison remonstrating againfi this method, as no less dangerous
than dishonourable, she again declared her intention that the fen-
tence pronounced by the commiflioners ihould be executed accord-
ing to law; and as flle had already signed the warrant, she begged
that no farther application might be nade to her on that head. By
thllis the privy-counlfellors thought thcmfelves sufficiently authorized
to proceed; and prompted, as they pretended, by zeal for the
Queen's faltty, or inflti-ated, as is more probable, by the apprc-
lhcnfion of the (langer to which they would themrfelves be expofela ,
if the life of tlhe QOccn of Scots were spared, they aflilcblcd in the
Council C:hamber, and bly a letter under all thcir hands, empowered
the i.:llls of Shrcwfu-ry and Kent, togcehcr with tle I-Iighl Sheriff
of the County, to Iec the t'lctence pu)t in execution -[.

' Bliogr. Ilritan. Article Dl)vif,. l- C maid. 53.1- St'rypc, 3. 3'"', 35'4

1T

ON
Vor, , [I.

ON Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls arrived at So.

theringay, and demanding access to the Queen, read in her presence
the warrant for execution, and required her to prepare to die next
morning. Mary heard them to the end without emotion, and
crossing herself in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, " That foul, said ihe, is not worthy of the joys
of Heaven, which repines because the body must endure the firoke
of the executioner; and though I did not expea that the Queen of
England would set the first example of violating the sacred person
of a Sovereign Prince, I willingly submit to that which Providence
has decreed to be my lot." And laying her hand on a Bible, which
happened to be near her, ihe solemnly protested that she was inno-
cent of that conspiracy which Babington had carried on against Eli-
zabeth's life*. She then mentioned the requefis contained in her
letter to Elizabeth, but obtained no fatisfadory answer. She en-
treated, with particular earnestness, that now in her last moments,
her Almoner might be suffered to attend her, and that she might
enjoy the consolation of those pious institutions prescribed by her
religion. Even this favour, which is usually granted to the vilest
criminals, was absolutely denied.

HER attendants, during this conversation, were bathed in tears,

and though overawed by the pretence of the two Earls, with dif-
ficulty suppressed their anguiih; but no sooner did Kent and Shrews-
bury withdraw, than they ran to their Mistress, and burfl out into
the most passionate expressions of tenderness and sorrow. Mary,
however, not only retained perfect composure of mind, but cndea-
voured to moderate their excefive grief. And falling on her knees,
with all her domestics around her, flhe thanked Heaven that her

w Jcbb, 2. 30o,

,.filferings
Book VII.

1587.

Mary', beha-
viour at her
death.
I46

sufferings were now so near an end, and prayed that she might Book VII.
be enabled to endure what Rill remained with decency, and with S
fortitude. The greater part of the evening she employed in set-
tling her worldly affairs. She wrote her Teflament with her own
hand. Her money, her jewels, and her clothes, she difiributed
among her servants, according to their rank or merit. She wrote
a ihort letter to the King of France, and another to the Duke of
Guise, full of tender, but magnanimous sentiments, and recom-
mended her foul to their prayers, and her afflided servants to their
protection. At supper, she eat temperately, as usual, and converted
not only with ease, but with chearfulnefs; ihe drank to every one
of her servants, and asked their forgiveness, if ever she had failed
in any part of her duty towards them. At her wonted time fle
went to bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early in the morning
she retired into her closet, and employed a considerable time in
devotion. At eight o' clock the High Sheriff and his officers en-
tered her chamber, and found her fill kneeling at the altar. She
immediately started up, and with a majestic mien, and a counte-
nance undismayed, and even chearful, advanced towards the place
of execution, leaning on two of Paulet's attendants. She was
dressed in a mourning habit, but with an elegance and splendor,
which she had long laid aside, except on a few feflival days. An
Agnus Dei hung by a pomander chain at her neck; her beads at
her girdle; and in her hand flhe carried a crucifix of ivory. At the
bottom of the flairs, the two Earls, attended by several gentlemen
from the neighbouring counties, received her; and there Sir An-
drew Melvil, the master of her houflold, who had been secludcd,
for some weeks, from her prefcnce, was permitted to take his last
farcwel. At the fight of a Miflrcfs whom he tenderly loved, in
fuich a situation, he melted into tears; and as lie was bewailing icr

U 2 condition,

147

condition, and complaining of his own hard fate, in being ap-
pointed to carry the account of such a mournful event into Scotland,
Mary replied, " Weep not, good Melvil, there is at present greater
cause for rejoicing. Thou shalt, this day, fee Mary Stewart deli-
vered from all her cares, and such an end put to her tedious sus-
ferings as 11he has long expe ed. Bear witness that I die constant
in my religion; firn in my fidelity towtards Scotland; and un-
changed in my affetion to France. Commend me to my son,
Tell him I have done nothing injurious to his kingdom, to his
honour, or to his rights; and God forgive all those who have
thirRled, without cause, for my blood."

WITH much difficulty, and after many entreaties, she prevailed

on the two Earls to allow Melvil, together with three of her men
servants, and two of her maids, to attend her to the feaffold. It
was ereced in the fame hall where file had been tried, raised a little
laove the floor, and covered, as well as a chair, the cushion, and
block, with black cloth. Mary mounted the steps with alacrity,
beheld all this apparatus of death with an unaltered countenance,
and signing herself with the cross, flie fat down in the chair. Beale
read the warrant for execution with a loud voice, to which fle
lillenecl with a carelcfs air, and like one occupied in other thoughts.
Then the Dean of Peterborough began a devout discourse, suitable
to her prcfcnt condition, and offered up prayers to -Ieaven in her
,bhalFl; but flh declared that she could not in conscience hearken to
Ith one, nor join witli tIi other; and falling on her knees, re-
peate(l a Latin prayer. When the Dean had finified his devotions,
Jlc, wv lln a ntldil)lc voice, and in the l '.nglifl tongue, Ircommended
aiin! Col tlhe a;Illilcl llate of the chlurch, and prayed fbr prolpc-.

lo l
t llr Ion, alid or long lilc ;tnld peaceable reignl to Elizabeth.
lwh( declared tha;t Ile hoped for mercy only throllgh the death of:

Cheill,

ook vrr.

(-587.
148

Christ, at the foot of whose image she now willingly fhcld her
blood; and lifting up, and killing the crucifix, ile thus addrefled
it, " As thy arms, 0 Jesus, were extended on the cross; fb with the
outflretched arms of thy mercy, receive me, and forgive my fins."

SHE then prepared for the block, by taking off her veil, and up-

per garments; and one of the executioners rudely endeavouring to
afift, ihe gently checked him, and said, with a finile, that fle
had not been accustomed to undress beforefo many fpecators, nor
to be served by such valets. With calm, but undaunted fortitude,
the laid her neck on the block; and while one executioner held
her hands, the other at the second flroke, cut off her head, which
falling out of its attire, discovered her hair already grown quite grey,
with cares and sorrows. The executioner held it up fill streaming
with blood, and the Dean crying out, " So perish all Queen Eliza-
beth's enemies," the Earl of Kent alone answered Amen. The
reft of the fpetators continued silent, and drowned in tears; being
incapable, at that moment, of any other sentiments, but those of
pity or admiration '

SUCH was the tragical death of Mary ueen of Scots, after a life

of forty-four years and two months, almotf nineteen years of which
she paflcd in captivity. The political parties which were formed
in tle kingdom during her reign, have Iubfifted, under various
denominations, ever since tlat tine. The rancour, with whlich
they were at firfl animiated, hat cl deccnlded to fuccccding ages, andi
their prejudices, as wvell as their rage, have been perpetuated, and
even alugmented. Among Hillorians, who were under the domli-
.lioll of all tllcl pali d
nso, and who have cither afcribccl to lier

,vcry 'virtlutous and amiable Lquality, or have imputed to her all the

--.1 ndcn, 53!J--

,5. Jcbb, 2. 300. Strypc, 3. j33.

Ariccs.

Book VIL

Sr' r l , ,1

hIll;os.,'nt '' .
(At -:; 'h . lit.:-.

r49'

BookVII. vices of which the human heart is susceptible, we search in vain

1,587. for Mary's real character. She neither merited the exaggerated

praises of the one, nor the undiflinguifhing censure of the other.

To all the charms of beauty, and the utmost elegance of exter-

nal form, she added those accomplishments, which render their im-
preflion irresistible. Polite, affable, insinuating, sprightly, and ca-
pable offpeaking and of writing with equal ease and dignity. Sud-
den, however, and violent in all her attachments; because her heart
was warm and unfufpicious. Impatient of contradiction; because
flie had been accustomed from her infancy to be treated as a Queen.
No firanger, on some occasions, to dissimulation; which, in that
perfidious court where flhe received her education, was reckoned
among the necessary arts of government. Not insensible of flat-
tery, or unconscious of that pleasure, with which almost every
woman beholds the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities which we love, not with the talents that we admire;
the was an agreeable woman, rather than an illustrious Queen.
The vivacity of her spirit, not sufficiently tempered with found
judgment, and the warmth of her heart, which was not, at all
times, under the restraint of discretion, betrayed her both into
errors, and into crimes. To fay that ihe was always unfortunate,
will not account for that long and almost uninterrupted succession of
calamities which besel her; we must likewise add that fle was often
imprudent. IHcr passion for Darnly was rash, youthful, and ex-
ceffivc. And though the sudden transition to the oppolite extreme
was the natural effecl of her ill-requited love, and of his ingrati-
tude, insolence, and brutality; yet neither thfec, nor Bothwell's
:rthtil address, and important fcrvices, can juflify her attachment to
that nobleman. Even the manners of the age, licentious as they
[vwere, arc no apology for this unhappy paflion; nor can they induce

7 us
150

us to look on that tragical and infamous scene which followed
upon it, with less abhorrence. Humanity will draw a veil over
this part of her charater which it cannot approve, and may,
perhaps, prompt some to impute her adions to her situation, more
than to her dispositions; and to lament the unhappiness of the
former, rather than accuse the perverseness of the latter. Mary's
sufferings exceed, both in degree and in duration, those tragical
distresses which fancy has feigned to excite sorrow and commifera-
tion: and while we survey them, we are apt altogether to forget her.
frailties, we think of her faults with less indignation, and approve
of our tears, as if they were Ihed for a person who had attained
much nearer to pure virtue..

WITH regard to the Queen's person, a circumflance not to be.

omitted in writing the hiflory of a female reign, all cotemporary
authors agree in ascribing to Mary, the utmost beauty of counte-
nance, and elegance of shape, of which the human form is capable.
Her hair was black, though, according to the fashion of that age,.
she frequently wore borrowed locks, and of different colours.
Her eyes were a dark grey; her complexion was exquisitely fine;-
and her hands and arms remarkably delicate, both as to shape and
colour. Her stature was of an'height that rose to the majefiic.
She danced, file walked, and rode with equal grace. Her taste
for music was just, and /he both sung and played upon the lute
with uncommon skill. Towards the end of her life ihe began to
grow fat; and her long confinement, and the coldness of the houfcs
in which ihe had been imprisoned, brought on a rhcumatifm,
which deprived her of the use of her limbs. No man, fays Bran-
tome, ever beheld her person without admiration and love, or will
read her liflory without sorrow,

No 11 E;

Book VII.

I587.

J5I-

NONF. of her womeni were fuffcred to come near her dead body,

which was carried into a room adjoining the place of execution,
where it lay, for some days, covered with a coarse cloth torn from
a billiard table. The block, the fcafiold, the aprons of the execu-
tioners, and every thing Riained with her blood were reduced to
anhes. Not long after Elizabeth appointed her body to be buried
in the cathedral of Peterborough, with royal magnificence. But
this vulgar artifice was employed in vain; the pageantry of a pom-
pous funeral did not efface the memory of those injuries, which
laid Mary in her grave. James, soon after his acceflion to the
Englifll throne, ordered her body to be removed to Weftminfrer-
abbey, and to be deposited among the Monarchs of England.

ELIZABETH affe&ed to receive the accounts of Mary's death,

with the most violent emotions of furprize, and of concern. Sighs,
tears, lamentation and mourning, were all employed to display the
reality and greatness of her sorrow. Evident marks of dissimulation
and artifice may be traced through every period of Elizabeth's pro-
ceedings against the life of the Scottifhl Qeen. The commission
for bringing Mary to a public trial was seemingly extorted from
her, by the intreaties of her privy-couilfellors. She delayed pub-
lifhing the fcntence against her, till fle was twice solicited by both
hotnfcs of Parliament. Nor did fie sign the warrant for execution,
Wvitlout the utimon apparent reluciance. One fccne more of the
bo)ldcft and mnof follemn deceit remained to be exhibited. She
undertook to make the world believe that Mary had been put to
deatlh without her knowledge, and againfl her will. And Davi-
iun, wh]o neither fili)eLlccd her intention, nor his own danger, was
her inllrumnnt in carrying on this artifice, and fcll a vicim to it.

IT
Book VII.

1.58S7.

r: ;znbct1 as-
f,.(t I(el Aicil t
M~;I·y's dcatl:.
152

IT was his duty as Secretary of State to lay before her the war- Book VII.

rant for execution, in order to be signed; and by her command, 15' 7
he carried it to the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that
ihe had charged him not to communicate what fle had done to
any person, nor to susser the warrant to go out of his hands, with-
out her express permission; that, in contempt of this order, he
had not only revealed the matter to several of her Ministers, but
had, in concert with them, assembled her Privy Counsellors, by
whom, without her content or knowledge, the warrant was if-
sued, and the Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent impowered to put
it in execution. Though Davison denied all this, and with cir-
cunflances which bear the itrongeft marks of truth and cre-
dibility; though it can scarce be conceived that her Privy Coun-
cil, composed of the persons in whom she mofl confided, of her
Ministers and favourites, would assemble within the walls of her
palace, and venture to tranfa& a matter of so much importance,
without her privity, and contrary to her inclination; yet so far
did flie carry her dissimulation, that, with all the signs of dif-
pleasure and of rage, she banished most of her Counsellors out
of her pretence; and treated Burleigh, in particular, so harlhly,
and with such marks of disgust, that he gave up himself for loft,
and in the deepef afflicion wrote to the Queen begging leave to
resign all his places, that he might retire to his own ellate.
Davison fihe inltantly deprived of his office, and committed him
a close prisoner to the Tower. He was soon after brought to a March.
iblcmnl trial in the Star Chamber, condemned to pay a fine of
10,000 pounds, and to be imprisoned during the Queen's plea-
finrc. He languishcd, fcvcral years, in confinement, and never
rccovcred any degree of favour or of power. As her jcalouly and
icea ,. ad bereavCd the Queen of Scots of life, in order to palliate

VOL. 11. X this

I53

Book VII. this part of her conduct, Elizabeth made no scruple of sacrificing
'-'- . ..~ the reputation and happiness of one of the most virtuous and able

men in her kingdom *.

Elizabeth en- THIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better name, furniflied
deavours to
sooth James. Elizabeth, however, with an apology to the King of Scots. As

the profpet of his mother's danger had excited the King's filial
care and concern, the account of her death filled hinm with grief
and resentment. His fubjets felt the dishonour done to him and
to the nation. In order to sooth both, Elizabeth instantly dif-
patched Robert Carey, one of Lord -Iuni'dane's sons, with a letter
expressing her extreme affliction on account of that miserable ac-
cident, which, as she pretended, had happened far contrary to her
appointment, or intention. James would not permit her meflenger
to enter Scotland; and with some difficuity received a memorial he
sent from Bcrwick. It contained the tale concerning Davison, dref-
fed up with all the circumflances, which tended to exculpate Eli-
zabeth, and to throw the whole blame on his rashness or treach-
ery. Such a defence gave little fatisfacion, and was confidered as
mockery added to insult; and many of the nobles, as well as the
King, breathed nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was extremely
solicitous to pacify them, and neither wanted infhruments, nor rea-
sons to gain her encl. Leicefler wrote to the King, and Walfing-
ham to fecrctary Maitland. They rcprelfntcd tlhe certain derfluc-
tion, to which James would expose hiifelf, if, with the forces of
Scotland alone, he fliould venture to attack a kingdom, so far fu-
perior in power; that the hiflory of pafl ages, as vwell as his Mo-
ther's lad experience, might convince him that nothing could be
more dangerous or deceitful than depcndance on foreign aid; that

* Caimd. 536. Strypc, 3. 370.

the
I354

the King of France would never wish to fee the British kingdoms BookVIIL
united under one Monarch, nor contribute to invest a Prince so 157
nearly allied to the house of Guise, with such formidable power;
that Philip might be a more active ally, but would certainly prove
a more dangerous one, and under pretence of affifling him, would
assert his own right to the Englilh Crown; which he already be-
gan openly to claim; that the fame t-atute, on which the sentence
of death against his Mother had been founded, would jufify the
excluding him from the succession to the Crown; that the Eng-
lifh, naturally averse from the dominion of strangers, would not
fail, if exasperated by his hostilities, to apply it in that manner;
that Elizabeth was disposed to repair the wrongs which the mo-
ther had suffered, by her tenderness and affeEtion towards the son;
and that by engaging in a fruitlcfs war, he would deprive himself
of a noble inheritance, which, by cultivating her friendship, he must
infallibly obtain. These representations, added to the confcioufiefs
of his own weakness, to the finallncfs of his revenues, to the muti-
nous spirit of some of the nobles, to the dubious fidelity of others,
and to the influence of that facion, which was entirely at Eliza-
beth's devotion, convinced James that a war with England, how-
ever jufi, would, in the prcfcnt juncurc, be altogether impolitical.
All tlhcfe considerations induced 1him1 to ttiflc Iis rcfeintment; to ap-
pear fatislicld witih the punihlim nt infliclcd on Davison; and to pre-
lcrve all the ftmblanccs of frinlfhip will the English court '. IL
thlis manner did the cloutd which threatculd hiclh a llorm pals away.
IMary's deatli, like that of a cominoin criminal, remainedt un-
avcnged by any Prince ; and whatever infiramy Eliabctl miight iln-
cur, she was cxpoicd to no 1new danger, on that account.

* Spotfwood. Strypc, 3. 377.

X 2 \\.

BookVII. MA R Y's death, however, proved fatal to the Mailer of Gray, and

I~-5~8'- loft him the King's favour which he had for some time possessed.
i587.

Difgrate of He was become as odious to the nation, as favourites, who acquire
the M:.fter of
Gray. power without merit, and exercise it without discretion, usually are.

The treacherous part, which he had aaed during his late embassy,
was no secret, and filled Jares, who at length came to the know-
ledge of it, with astonishment. The courtiers observed the fymp-
toms of difguit arising in the King's mind. His enemies seized the
opportunity, and Sir William Steward, in revenge of the perfidy
May o1. with which Gray had betrayed his brother Captain James, publicly

accused him before a Convention of nobles, not only of having
contributed, by his advice and fuggeflions, to take away the life of
the Queen, but of holding correspondence with Popish Princes, in
order to subvert the religion ellablifhed in the kingdom. Gray, un-
supported by the King, deserted by all, and conscious of his own
guilt, made a feeble defence. He was condemned to perpetual ba-
mifhment, a punifment very unequal to his crimes. But the King
was unwilling to abandon one, whom he had once favoured so
highly to the rigour of justice; and Lord Hamilton his near rela-
tion, and the other nobles who had lately returned from exile, in
gratitude for the zeal with which he had served them, interceded
warmly in his behalf.

HAVv I NG thus accompliflhed the dcflrution of one of his enemies,

Captain James thought the junlultrc favourable for profccllting his
revenge on them all. lHe lingled out secretary Maitland, the most
eminent both for abilities and enmity to him ; and ofl-crel to !ove
that he was no less acccflory than Gray to the Q(ien's death, and
had even formed a dcfign of delivering up the King hlimlfcf into
the hands of the English. But time and abflCcc had, in a great

incailu-re,
56

measure, extinguished the King's affecion for a minion, who so
little deserved it. All the courtiers combined against him as a
common enemy. And inflead of gaining his point, he had the
mortification to fee the office of Chancellor conferred upon Mait-
land, who, together with that dignity, enjoyed all the power and
influence of a prime Minister.

In the Assembly of the Church, which met this year, the fame

hatred to the order of Bifiops, and the fame jealousy and fear of
their encroachments, appeared. But as the King was now of full
age, and a Parliament was summoned on that occasion, the Clergy
remained satisfied with appointing some of their number to repre-
sent their grievances to that court, from which great things were
expected.

PREVIOUS to this meeting of Parliament, James attempted a

a work worthy of a King. The deadly feuds which fubfifled be-
tween many of the great families, and which were tranfinitted
from one generation to another, weakened the strength of the king-
domn; contributed, more than any other circumstance, to preserve
a fierce and barbarous ifirit among the nobles; and proved the oc-
cafion of many difafiers to themselves, and to their country. As-
ter many preparatory negociations, he invited the contending par-
tics to a royal entertainment in the Palace of Holy-rood-houfe;
and partly by his authority, partly by his entreaties, obtained their-
promise to bury their dissensions in perpetual oblivion. From
thence he conductcd them, in bolcmn proccflion, through the
tirccts of Edinburgh, marching by pairs, each hand in hand with
his enemy. A collation of wine and fweet-mcats was prepared
at the public Crols, and there they drank to each other, with all
the Fligus of reciprocal forgivcncts, and of future fi-icndlhip. The

people,

Book VIL

I587.

The King at-
tempts to
unite the
nobles.

157

Book VI. people, who were present at a fpedacle so unusual, conceived the

S--8". most sanguine hopes of feeing concord and tranquillity established

in every part of the kingdom, and testified their fatisfaaion by re-
peated acclamations. Uuhappily the effeets of this reconciliation
were not correspondent either to the pious endeavours of the King,
or the fond wishes of the people.

THE first care of the Parliament was the security of the Prote-

ftant religion. All the laws passed in its favour, since the Refor-
mation, were ratified; and a new and severe one was enacted a-
gainft seminary Priests and Jesuits, whose restless industry in making
proselytes brought many of them into Scotland about this time.
Two aCts of this Parliament deserve more particular notice, orz
account of the consequences with which they were followed.

Generalan- THE one refpeded the lands of the Church. As the public re-
nexation of
Church- venues were not sufficient for defraying the King's ordinary char-
lands. ges; as the administration of government became more complicated

and more expensive; as James was naturally profuse, and a ftran-
ger to ceconomy; it was necessary, on all these accounts, to pro-
vide some fund proportioned to his exigencies. But no confidcr-
able fum could be levied on tle Commons, who did not enjoy the
benefit of an extenfivc commerce. The nobles were unaccuflomed
to bear the burden of heavy taxes. And the revenues of the Church
were the only source whence a proper supply could be drawln. Not-
withflanding all the depredations of the laity since the Reforma-
tion, and the various devices which they had cemployed to feizc
the Church-lan(ds, feme confidcrable portion of thein rcnmalned flill
unalienated, and were held cither by the Bilmops who polFclsted the
benefices, or were granted to laymen during plcl'irc. All tlhcle

hlnumlls

lands were, in this Parliament, annexed, by one general law *, to
the Crown, and the King was impowercd to apply the rents of
them to his own uie. The tithes alone were reserved for thl
maintenance of the persons who served the cure, and the principal
Manfion-houfe, with a few acres of land, by way of glebe, allot-
ted for his refidencc. By this great accefion of property, it is na-
tural to conclude, that the King mull have acquired a vast increase
of power, and the influence of the nobles have iuffred a propor-
tional diminution. The very reverse of this fecms, however, to
have been the cafe. Almofi all grants of Church-lands, prior to
this adQ, were thereby confirmed; and titles, which were formerly
reckoned precarious, derived from thence the faition of parlia-
mentary authority. James was likewise authorized, during a limited
time, to make new alienations; and fueli was the facility of his
temper, ever ready to yield to the solicitations of his servants, and
to gratify their most extravagant demands, that not only during the
time limited, but throughout his whole reign, he was continually
employed in befltowing, and his Parliament in ratifying grants of
this kind to his nobles; hence little advantage accrued to the Crown
from that which might have been so valuable an addition to its reve-
nues. The Bifliops, however, were great sufferers by the law. But
at this juncure, neither the King nor his Ministers were solicitous
about the interests of an order of men, odious to the people, and
pcrfecuted by the Clergy. Their enemies promoted the law with
the utmost zeal. The profplcd of fllaring in their spoils induced
all parties to consent to it; and after a flcp li fatal to the wealth and
powecr of tle dignified Clergy, it was no d(ificult matter to intro-
duce that change in the govcrnment of the Church which foni after
took place l-.

P 1';1 l. 1l. Jac. VI. c. 29.

159
Book VI1I.

1587.
*I- Spotr. 365.

Tii r

BookVII. THE change, which the other fiatute produced in the civil con-

i587. flitution, was no less remarkable. Under the Feudal system, every

Lesser Barons Freeholder, or vassal of the Crown, had a right to be present in Par-
admitted into
Parliament by liament. These Freeholders were, originally, few in number, but
their repre-
fentatives. possessed of great and extensive property. By degrees, these vaif

poffeflions were divided by the proprietors themselves, or parcelled
out by the Prince, or split by other accidents. The number of
Freeholders became greater, and their condition more unequal;
betides the ancient Barons, who preserved their eflates and their
power unimpaired, there arose another order, whose rights were
the fame, though their wealth and influence were far inferior.
But, in those rude ages, when the art of government was ex-
tremely imperfet, when Parliaments were seldom assembled, and
deliberated on matters little interesting to a martial people, few
of the Leer Barons took their feats, and the whole parliamentary
jurifdifion was exercised by the Greater Barons, together with
the ecclesiastical order. James I. fond of imitating the forms of
the English constitution, to which he had been long accuflomed,
and desirous of providing a counterpoise to the power of the great
nobles, procured an aCt in the year 1427, dispensing with the
personal attendance of the Lesser Barons, and impowering thoft
in each county to chufe two commissioners to represent them in
Parliament. This law, like many other regulations of that wife
Prince, produced little cfFl-. All the King's vafials continued,
as formerly, possessed of a right to be prcfent in Parliament, and,
unless in fomc extraordinary conjun:tures, none but the Greater
13arons attcnded. But by means of the Refbrmation, the confli-
tution had undergone a grcat change. The ariflocratical polwer of
the noblcs had )been much increascd, and the influence of the l.c-
clcfiaflical order, whicli the Crown ulually cmploved to checkc tllir
usurpations, and to balance their authority, hadt diiniilillhcdl in

propol-rt ion.
i6o

proportion. Many of the Abbics and Priors had been ereced into Book VII.
temporal peerages; and the Protestant Bishops, an indigent race of J 53 7
men, and odious to the nation, were far from possessing the weight
and credit, which their predecessors derived from the exorbitant
wealth, and the superstitious reverence of the people. In this
situation, the King had recourse to the expedient employed by
James J. and obtained a law reviving the fRatute of I427; and from
that time the Commons of Scotland have sent their repreientatives
to parliament. An a&r, which tended so visibly to abridge their au-
thority, did not pass without opposition from many of the nobles.
But as the King had a right to summon the lesser Barons to attend
in person, others were apprehensive of feeing the house filled with
a multitude of his dependants, and consented the more willingly
to a law, which laid them under the refiriCtion of appearing only
by their representatives.

THE year 1588 began with an universal expeEtation throughout 1588.
all Europe, that it was to be distinguished by wonderful events The approach

of the Spanilh

and revolutions. Several astrologers, according to the accounts of Armado.
cotemporary historians, had predicted this; and the situation of affairs
in the two principal kingdoms of Europe was such, tliat a sagacious
observer, without any supernatural intelligence, might have hazard-
ed the prediction, and have foreseen the approach of some grand
crisis. In France, it was evident from the astonishing progrcis of
thel league, conducl cd by a leader whose ambition was rclrhaincd ly
Ino Ci-ruplcs, ;and wholl genClis lad hithecrt() filril)inltcdl all dlillcul-
tics; as well as ifom the timid, variable, andi iml-p ilitic Co(uIi lS (,1
Ilcnry 111. that cither thint Mon/Iarli il'l libmil to al):imrln)i

11tt

tl]r cme, o)f which lie was unworthy or1 by 1'): l tlli'ml aitl (ill_
llow, cut off lhis foirm idable rival. Accw rii l3l', i:; l ):' . ill iq'

\Vo.. II. Y ,

i6i

of the year, the Duke of Guise drove his Master out of his capital
city, and forced him to conclude a peace, which left him only
the shadow of royalty; and before the year expired, he hirnfelf
-fell a vicim to Henry's fears, and to his own security. In Spain,
the operations were such as promised something still more uncom-
mon. During three years, Philip had employed all the power of
his European dominions, and exhausted the treasures of the Indies,
in vast preparations for war. A fleet, the greatest that had ever
appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from Li{bon, and a nu-
merous land army was assembled to embark on board of it. Its
destination was still unknown, though many circumstances made it
probable that the blow was aimed, in the first place, against Eng-
land. Elizabeth had long given secret aid to the revolted provinces
in the Low Countries, and now openly afforded them her protec-
tion. A numerous body of her troops was in their service; the
Earl of Leicester commanded their armies; she had great sway in
the civil government of the republic; and some of its most confi-
derable towns were in her possession. Her fleets had insulted the
coasts of Spain, intercepted the Galleons from the Weft Indies, and
threatened the colonies there. Routed by so many injuries, allured
by views of ambition, and animated by a fuperfitious zeal for pro-
pagating the Romniflh Rligion, Philip resolved not only to invade,
but to conquer England, to which his descent from the house of
Lancafler, and the donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him,, in his
own opinion, a double title.

Ei.I:.Xl-s 'r ii f.wv the danger approach, and prepared to en--

counter it with the utiofI intrepidity. The incatfiles for the
dc-con c of her kingdonm were concerted, and carried on, witl the
wvil.loll, andl vigour, which dlifinguillhd her rcign. Icr chief

care
Pook -VII.

& 583d o

011 Ill,'i

o

oc, asid U
162

care was to secure the friendship of the King of Scots. She had BookVi.
treated the Queen his Mother with a rigour unknown among
Princes; flme had often-ufed himself harilhly, and with contempt;
and though fihe had hitherto prudently suppressed his resentment of
these injuries, file did not believe it to be altogether cxtinguifihld,
and was afraid that in her present situation, it might burst out
with a fatal violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance witl
Scotland would facilitate his entcrprize, courted James with the ut-
most affiduihy. He excited him to revenge his Mother's wrongs;
he flattered him with the hopes of sharing his conquests; and offer-
ed him in marriage his daughter the Infanta Isabella. At the fame
time, Scotland fwarmned with priests his emifTaries, who seduced
some of the nobles to Popery, and corrupted others with bribes and
promises. Huntly, Errol, Crawford, were the heads of a facion
which openly espoused the interest of Spain. Lord Maxwell, ar-
riving from that court, began to assemble his followers, and to take
arms, that he might be ready to join the Spaniards. In order to
counter-balance all these, Elizabeth made the warmest profef-
sions of friendfliip to the King; and Afhby, her ambassador, enter-
tained him with magnificent hopes and promises. He aflured him
that his right of fucceflion to the Crown flould be publickly ac-
knowledged in England; that he should be created a Duke in that
kingdom; that he fliould be admitted to flme share in the govern-
ment; and receive a confidcralce pcnfion annually. James, it is
probable, was too well acquainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely
c'ntircly on thict pIomifis. U 13t lie llnderllood hlis own inlclrcf ill
the prefcnt jiultiu-r, and ptlrfulcd it wxitl muich f1clc.inef.. IIe rc-
jcel-cd an alliancc with Spain, ;as tIangCr(tis. IlI r'cifeti(l to admit
inlto his prelncc an aamballdlor I ir'(m the l'c op. [ -c l ic old (Coloinl
Scmpllp, all agent to the Pl-in rc o; P;iraIina. lie (dIolle m:liny of
the trafllckin g Pricfls ot oftlic kingdoml . IIc marclhed iddcnIly

to
y ,.,

]ook. Vit. to Dumfries, dispersed Maxwell's followers, and took him prisoner.

-X (' In a convention of the nobles he declared his resolution to adhere

inviolably to the league with England; and, without liflening to
the fuggeflions of revenge, determined to adt in concert with Eli-
·zabeth, against the common enemy of the Protestant faith. He
put the kingdom in a posture of defence, and levied troops to ob-
ftrui the landing of the Spaniards. He offered to fend an army
to Elizabeth's assistance, and told her ambassadors that he expeced
no other favour from the King of Spain, but that which Poly-
phemus had promised to Ulysses, that when he had devoured all
his companions, he would make him his last morsel .

A national THE zeal of the people, on this occasion, was not inferior to
covenant in
de'eice of that of the King; and the extraordinary danger, with which they
e'igio". rwere threatened, suggested to them an extraordinary expedient for

their security. A bond was framed for the maintenance of true
Religion, and the defence of the King's person and government,
in opposition to all enemies foreign and domestic. This contained
a confession of the Protestant faith, a particular renunciation of the
errors of Popery, and the most solemn promises, in the name, and
through the strength of God, of adhering to each other in sup-
porting the former, and contending against the latter, to the utmost
of their power 'l, The King, the Nobles, the Clergy, and the
people fublcribed it with equal alacrity. Strange or uncommon
as such a combination may now appear, many circumstances con-
tributcd, at that time, to recommend it, and to render the idea
familiar to the Scots. W\hen routcd by any extraordinary event,
,r alarmed by any public danger, the people of Ifracl were accuif
,olncd to bind themnblves, by a folcmn Covenant, to adhere to that

' Can ld. 54.4. Johnfl. 139. Spotfw. 369.
-I l)unlhp's Cull'l. of Coifc(l: Vol. ii. ic8.

1(s~~~~ R~~~~~~Ilvcligion,
' (64

Religion, which the Almighty had established among them; this BookVIL
the Scots confidered as a sacred precedent, which it became them to
imitate. In that age, no considerable enterprize was undertaken
in Scotland, without a bond of mutual defence, which all concerned
reckoned neceflaryfor their security. The form of this religious con-
federacy is plainly borrowed from those political ones, of which
so many instances have occurred; the articles, stipulations, and pe-
culiar modes of expression, are exactly the fame in both. Almost
all the considerable Popish Princes were then joined in a league for
extirpating the Reformed Religion, and nothing could be more na-
tural, or seemed more efficacious, than to enter into a counter-affo-
ciation, in order to oppose the progress of that formidable conspiracy.
To there causes, did the Covenant, which is become so famous
in history, owe its origin. It was renewed at different times du-
ring the reign of James'. It was revived with great solemnity,
though with considerable alterations, in the year 1638. It was adopt-
ed by the English, in the year 1643, and enforced by the civil and
ecelefiaftical authority of both kingdoms. The political purposes
to which it was then made fuibfervient, and the violcnt and uncon-
flitutional measures which it was then employed to promote, it is
not our province to explain. But at the jundure, in which it was
Frirl introduced, we may pronounce it to have been a prudent and
laudable device for the defence of the religion and liberties of the
nation; nor were the terms in which it was conceived,. other thanI
mnight lhave been expcIted from men alarmed fromi the impending
flilngcr of Popery, and threatcned with an invasion by the miui(
?,ig'otted, and lmol powerful Prince in Europe.

Pii r.1 P's cage rnlles to conquer England did not inl rpirc hinli citlic
'h'il the vigour or diliatch ncccllery to inifure the fiiccciC (ol' iO

*Cdll. 4. 1 9.

znighlit)y

Book VIT. -mighty an entcrprize. His fleet, which ought to have failed in Aprif,

Io-` did not enter the English channel till the middle of July. It ho-
r58S '

vered many days on the coast, in expedation of being joined by
the Prince of Parma, who was blocked up in the ports of Flan-

The Armajo ders by a Dutch squadron. Continual disasters pursued the Spa-
detated.

niards during that time; fuccfcve storms and battles, which are
well known, conspircd with their own ill condu&, to disappoint
their enterprize. And by the blessing of P rvid .c.i, which
watched with remarkable care ovcr the Protestant Religion, and
the liberties of Britain, the Engliif valour scattered and destroyed
the Armado on which they had arrogantly beflowed the name of
Invincible. After being driven out of the Engliflh seas, they were
forced to fleer their course towards Spain, round Scotland and Ire-
land. Many of them suffered shipwreck on these dangerous and
unknown coafis. Though James kept his fubjeas under arms to
watch the motions of the Spaniards, and to prevent their landing in
an hoflile manner, he received with great humanity 700 who were
forced ashore by a tempelt, and after supplying them with necef.-
flries, permitted them to return into their own country.

ON the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth sent an ambafiStdol

to congratulate with James, and to compliment him on the firm-
ncis and gencrofity, lie had discovercd during a conjuncture so dan-
gerous. Butt none of Afhby's promises were any longer remem-
bered ; that M\inifcr was even accuscd of having cxcecdcld lis
pc\vcrs, )by tlic!i too liberal olclrs; and colfcionl of lli;ov

on owllc-

lioomd, nr al a.lfi cd of bein dif owlned by his court, lie withdrew
Ifcr tly oi l of Scotlul a 1 '.

'l',;l,,. j,,_ Pl'li i.i l, convii.-cd by fatal experience of lis own ramhncf; in
"'!"'' '. " a ttcmptilng the colnqiuelof E1ngland, by anaal ari;mlcnt, equippiLed

0 Johlnlt. 13.1. Cind. 5,18.
iG6

at so great a distance, and- fubjeded, in all its operations, to the
delays, and dangers, and uncertainties, arising from seas and winds,
rcfolved to make his attack in another form, and to adopt the plan
which the Princes of Lorrain had long meditated, of invading Eng-
land through Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagined, might
be easily wafted over from the Low Countries to that kingdom, and
if they could once obtain footing, or procure aflfilance there, the
frontier of England was open and defencelcfs, and the northern
counties full of Roman Catholics, who would receive them with
open arms. Meanwhile, a descent might be threatened on the
southern coast, which would divide the Englilh army, diftrat their
councils, and throw the whole kingdom into terrible convulsions.
In order to prepare the way for the execution of this degfn, lie
remitted a considerable fumn of money to Bruce, a seminary Pries:
in Scotland, and employed him, together with Hay, Creighton, and
Tyrie, Scottish Jesuits, to gain over as many persons of diflincioni
as pofible to his interest. Zeal for Popery, and the artful infinua-
tions of these emifaries, induced several of the nobles to favour
a measure, which tended so manifestly to the deftrusion of their
country. Huntly, though the King had latciy married him to the
daughter of his favourite, the Duke of Lcnnox, continued warnly
attached to the Romifll Church. Crawford and Errol were ;ani-

mated with the zeal of new converts. They all cilna;ed in a.
coirrcfponldenc wvitli the Plrince of P'arma, and in th!cir Ic tc i: to
1tin, offered their service to the King of Spa;il, and uildcrt(ik,

with the aid of 0ooo men, to render him i- f( f

:;I .co(tllani, n;td

to bringi so many of their valfils into the ield, tl.t lic h1,;ild ic

:il)Ic to ente'r England, with a numeu1s a1r'l. lF:"ilciS ,;tc;v.art,

r;rnd tbn of Jamcs V. whomn the Kingl hald crcaC(d l.arl of l ot!I-

,v''cll, thlouglh influenced by no motive of' rli'iol, l Iolr I'f tic l
',l-icrced to the Protc'lih t faith, wa,; promptecJ ni:;' Cy I' c:.ip 'i,

I :!1 K.

B3ook V'II.

i58S.

Pophjli clc
cool;,:I C a-
.i

167'

Book VII. and the restlessness of his nature, to join in this treasonable corre-

Iji"88 fpondence.
I588.
February 17. ALLthefeletters were intercepted in England. Elizabeth, alarm-

ed at the danger which threatened her own kingdom, sent them

The King's immediately to the King, and reproaching him with his former
nlIxIms widil
regard to Po- lenity towards the Popish party, called upon him to check this for-
pery. midable conspiracy, by a proper severity. But James, though firmly

attached to the Protestant religion, though profoundly versed in the
theological controversies between the Reformers and the Church of
Rome, though he had employed himself, at that early period of
life, in writing a Commentary on the Revelations, in which he
proved the Pope to be Antichrist, had nevertheless adopted, already,
those maxims concerning the treatment of the Roman Catholics,
to which he adhered through the reft of his life. The Roman
Catholics were at that time a powerful and aaive party in Eng-
land; they were far from being an inconsiderable facion in his own
kingdom. The Pope and King of Spain were ready to take part
in all their machinations, and to second every effort of their bigo-
try. The opposition of such a body to his fucceflion to the Crown
of England, added to the averseness of the Englifl from the go-
vernment of firangcrs, might create him many difficulties. In
order to avoid thece, he thought it neccfinry to sooth, rather than
to irritate the Rloman Catholics, and to reconcile them to his fucccf-
sion, by the hclocs of gentler treatment, and fomce miti-ation of the
rig'0our ol thlofe laws, whiclh were now in force algainfl them. Tlh
atIteinlpt to gain one party by promii fes of ilndulgence and al;
ol1 clcmclncy, while he adhered witli all the o)llinacy of a (lil-
pIlltant, to the (doa'inCes and tenets of the otleri, hlas aivcln an ii;
of' nyltiery, and even of contl.radiioli, to this part ol- thc Kin,'s
cha,';dtr;-. '-The la;pinls, with the credulity of a f'cL fillrgglii;,'

to
IG8

to obtain power, believed his heart to be wholly theirs; and the Book VII.
Protetfants, with the jealousy inseparable from those who are al- ~o '

589.

ready in possession, viewed every act of lenity, as a mark of indif-
ference, or a symptom of. apoftacy. And in order to please both,
James often aimed at an excessive refinement, mingled with diffi-
mulation, in which he imagined the perfection of government, and
of king-craft, to confifl.

HIs behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to these general His excelT.ve

lenity to the

maxims. Notwithitanding the solicitations of the Queen of Eng- corrnfirarors.
land, enforced by the zealous remonstrances of his own Clergy, a
short imprisonment was the only punishment he inflicted on Hunt-
ly and his associates. But he soon had reason to repent an ac of
clemency, so inconsistent with the dignity of government. The
first use which the conspirators made of their liberty, was to assemble
their followers, and under pretence of removing Chancellor Mait-
land, an able minister, but warmly devoted to the English interest, April I.
from the King's councils and presence, they attempted to seize
James himself. This attempt being defeated partly by Maitland's
vigilance, and partly by their own ill conduct, they were forced
to retire to the North, where they openly ereCted the flandard of
Rebellion. But as the King's government was not generally un-
popular, or his minilters odious, their own vaflals joined them
slowly, and discovered no zeal in the cause. And the King, in per-
son, advancing againfi them with such forces as he could suddenly
levy, they durst not rely so much on the fidelity of their troops,
which, though fupcrior in number, followed them with reluctance,
as to hazard a battle; but fuflcring them to diifperfe, they funrrcn- Apil o.
(Icred to the King, and threw themiclves on his mercy. Hluntly,
lirrol, Crawford and Bothwcll were all brought to a public trial.
Itepcated aCts of trcafon were cafily proved againfi them. The

VoL.. IT. Z King,

i69

King, however, did not permit any sentence to be pronounced-
and after keeping them a few months in confinement, he took oc-
cafion, amidst the public festivity and rejoicings, at the approach
of his marriage, to set them at liberty *.

As James was the only descendant of the ancient Monarchs of

Scotland, in the diret line; as all hopes of uniting the crowns of the
two kingdoms would have expired with him; as the Earl of Arran,
the presumptive heir to the throne, was lunatic; the King's mar-
riage was, on all these accounts, an event which the nation wished
for with the utmost ardour. He himself was no less desirous of ac-
complifling it; and had made overtures, for that purpose, to the
eldest daughter of Frederick II. King of Denmark. But Elizabeth,
jealous of every thing, that would render the accefflon of the house
of Stewart more acceptable to the English, endeavoured to perplex
James in the fame manner ihe had done Mary, and employed as
many artifices to defeat or to retard his marriage. His Ministers,
gained by bribes and promires, seconded her intentions; and though
several different ambassadors were sent from Scotland to Denmark,
they produced powers so limited, or insistcd on conditions so ex-
travagant, that Frederick could not believe the King to be in
earnest; and fufpeating that there was tome design to deceive, or
amuse him, gave his daughter in marriage to the Duke of Brunswick.
Not discouraged by this difappointmcnt, which he imputed entirely
to the conduLc of his own ministers, James made his addresses to
the princcfs Anne, Frederick's fccond daughter. And though Eli-
zabeth cndceavourcd to divert him from this, by recommending Ca-
tharinc the King of Navarre's fiter, as a more advantageous match;
though flie prcvailed on the privy-council of Scotland to declare
ngainfl the alliance with Denmark, he pcrfiflcd in his choice. Aiin
dclipairing of overcoming the obflinacy of his own miniflcrs, inl

* Spots. 373. Cald.. 4 103.

oilly

170

'i l
Book VII.

1589.

The King's
marriage with
Anne of Den-
mark.

any other manner, he secretly encouraged the citizens of Edin-
burgh to take arms. They threatened to tear in pieces the Chan-
cellor, whom they accused as the person, whose artifices had hither-
to disappointed the wifies of the King, and the expecations of
his people. In consequence of this, the Earl Marshal was sent into
Denmark, at the head of a splendid embassy. He received ample
powers and inftrucions, drawn with the King's own hand. The
marriage articles were quickly agreed upon, and the young Queen
set fail towards Scotland. James made great preparations for her
reception, and waited her landing with all the impatience of a
lover; when the unwelcome account arrived, that a violent tempest
had arisen, which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condition
so ihattered, that there was little hope of its putting again to sea,
before the spring. This unexpeced disappointment, he felt with
the utmost sensibility. He instantly fitted out some {hips, and
without communicating his intention to any of his council, failed,
in person, attended by the Chancellor, several noblemen, and a
train of 300 persons, in quest of his bride. He arrived safely in
a small harbour, not far distant from Upflo, where the Queea then
resided. There the marriage was solemnized. And as it would
have been rash to trust those boisterous seas in the winter season,
James accepted the invitation of the court of Denmark, and repair-
ing to Copenhagen, passed several months there, amidst continual
fcafting, and amuefments, in which, both the Queen and himself
had great delight *.

Book VII.

1 589.

0a. 22.

Nov. 24.

No event in the King's life appears to be a wider deviation from

his general characacr, than this sudden sally. His son Charles I.
was capable of that cxceflive admiration of the other sex, which

* Melv. 352. Spots. 377.

171
Z 2

:uiries

BookVII. arises from great sensibility of heart, heightened by elegance of taste;

k--8n-- and the romantic air of his journey to Spain suited such a difpofi-

tion. But James was not susceptible of any refined gallantry, and
always expressed that contempt for the female character, which a
pedantic erudition, unacquainted with politeness, is apt to inspire.
He was fretted, however, at the many obstacles which had been
laid in his way. He was anxious to secure the political advan-
tages, which he expected from marriage; and fearing that a delay
might afford Elizabeth, and his own Ministers, an opportunity of
thwarting him by new intrigues, he suddenly took the resolution of
preventing them, by a voyage from which he expected to return
in a few weeks. The nation seemed to applaud his conduct, and
to be pleated with this appearance of amorous ardour, in a young
Prince. Notwithisanding his absence so long beyond the time
he expeCed, the nobles, the clergy, and the people, vied with one
another in loyalty and obedience; and no period, in the King's
reign was more remarkable for tranquillity, or more free from
any eruption of those factions, which so often disturbed. the
kingdom.
I;2

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VIII.

THE
H I S T O R

Y
SCOTLAND.

B 0 0 K VII..
O N the first of May the King and Queen arrived at Leith,

and were received by their fubjeds, with every possible ex-

pression of joy. The solemnity of the Queen's coronation was con-
duiCed with great magnificence; but so low had the order of Bi-
shops fall'en, in the opinion of the public, that none of them were
prcfent on that occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Prefbytcrian,
Minister of great reputation, set the Crown on her head, admini-
ftered the sacred unction, and performed the other cuflomary cere-
monies.

THE zeal' and success, with which many of the Clergy had

contributed towards prefcrving peace and order in the kingdom,
(luring his abfcnce, reconciled Jamcs, in a great degree, to their pcr-
(iIls, and even to the Prcfbytcrian form of govcrnmcnt. In prc-

ieince

Book VIIrL

1590.

TheKing and
Queen arrive
in Scotland:

Book VIII. -fence of an Aifembly, which met this year, he made high encomi-

590o. urns on the discipline, as well as the docrine of the church, pro-
Anguit 4. mifed to adhere inviolably to both, and permitted the Assembly to

frame such ads as gradually abolished all the remains of episcopal
jurifdition, and paved the way for a full and legal establishment of
the Presbyterian model a.
1 5 9 1. AN event happened soon after, which afforded the Clergy no small

triumph. Archbishop Adamson, their ancient enemy, having fallen
under the King's displeasure, having been deprived of the revenues
of his fee in consequence of the adt of annexation, and being op-
pressed with age, with poverty, and diseases, made the meanest sub-
mission to the clergy, and delivered to the Assembly a formal recan-
tation of all his opinions concerning Church government, which
had been matter of offence to the Presbyterians. Such a confession,
from the most learned person of the order, was confidered as a
testimony, which the force of truth had extorted from an ad-
verfary t.

Disorders in
the kingdom.

MEANWHILE, the King's excessive clemency towards offenders

multiplied crimes of all kinds; and encouraged such ads of vio-
lence, as brought his government under contempt, and proved fa-
tal to many of his fubjeds. The history of several years, about
this time, is filled with accounts of the deadly quarrels between
the great families, and of murders and assassinations perpetrated
in the moil audacious manner, and with circumflances of the ut-
most barbarity. All the defects in the feudal ariflocracy were now
felt more fcnfibly, than at any other period in the history of Scot-
land, and univcrfal licence and anarchy prevailed to a degree, icarce

CaIld. 4. 204.

I

- Spotfwootl, 385. Cald, 4. 214.

confificnt
174

consistent with the preservation of society. While the King, too Book VIII.
gentle to punish, or too feeble to ac with vigour, suffered all these I59 .
.enormities to pass with impunity.

BUT though James connived at real crimes, witchcraft, which An attemptof:

Bothwell's

is commonly an imaginary one, engrossed his attention, and those againfl the
fufpedced of it, felt the whole weight of his authority. Many King.
persons neither extremely old, nor wretchedly poor, which were
usually held to be certain indications of this crime, but maiters of
families, and matrons of a decent rank, and in the middle age of
life, were seized and tortured; and though their confeflions con-
tained the most absurd and incredible circumstances, the King's pre-
judices, those of the clergy, and of the people, conspired in be-
lieving their extravagancies without hesitation, and in punishing
their persons without mercy. Some of these unhappy sufferers
accused Bothwell of having consulted them, in order to know the
time of the King's death, and having employed their art, to
raise the florms, which had endangered the Queen's life, and had
detained James so long in Denmark. Upon this evidence, that no-
bleman was committed to prison. His turbulent and haughty spirit
could neither submit to the restraint, nor brook such an indignity.
Having gained his keepers, he made his escape, and imputing the
accusation to the artifices of his enemy, the Chancellor affemnbled
his followers, under pretence of driving him from the KIing's
councils. Being favoured by some of the King's attendants, he
was admitted, by a secret paflagc, under cloud of ni;ght, into the
court of the palace of Holy-rood-houfti. IIe advanced directly to-
wards the royal apartment, but happily, before le cntcrcd, the
alarm was taken and the doors fiut. While he attemlptd to burfl DIc(bherl27.
open fomnc of thenm, and to set fire to others, the citixclls of I'din-

l)urgth

I75

Book VIII. burgh had time to run to their arms, and he escaped with the ut-

,59I. most difficulty; owing his safety to the darkness of the night, and

the precipitancy with which he fled %,

HE retired towards the North, and the King having unadvisedly

given a commission to the Earl of Huntly, to pursue him, and his
followers, with fire and sword; he, under colour of executing that
cormiffion, gratified his private revenge, and surrounded the house
of the Earl of Murray, burnt it to the ground, and flew Murray
'rb. s. himself. The murder of a young nobleman of such promising

virtues, and the heir of the regent Murray, the darling of the
people, excited universal indignation. The citizens of Edinburgh
role in a tumultuous manner; and though they were restrained, by
the care of the magistrates, from any aCt of violence, they threw
aside all refpea for the King and his ministers, and openly insulted
and threatened both. While this mutinous spirit continued, James
thought it prudent to withdraw from the city, and fixed his refi-
dence for ornme time at Glasgow. There Huntly surrendered him-
self to justice; and, notwithstanding the atrociousness of his crime,
and the clamours of the people, the power of the Chancellor, with
whom he was now closely confederated, and the King's regard for
the memory of the Duke of Lennox, whose daughter he had mar-
ried, not only protected him from the sentence which such an odi-
ous ation merited, but exempted him even from the formality of
a public trial '.

Prcnfytcrian A STEP Of much importance was taken, Loon after, with regard
Chulch go-
Vcl,,mint Ce- to the government of the Church. The Clergy had long com-
tabliflmd by
Lkiw. 1y plained of the cncroachnments made upon their privileges and

X Mclv. 388. Spotrf 386. f1 Spots. 387.

3jllrisdilis'olsl,
a76

3

ur-ifdidion, by the acs of the parliament 1584, and though these BookViil.
laws had now loft much of their force, they resolved to peti- I9z
tion the parliament, which was approaching, to repeal them in
form. The juncture for pushing such a mcafure was well chofin.
The King had loft much of tile public favour, by his lenity to-
wards the Popifi falcion, and frill more by his remissness in pur-
suing the murderers of the Earl of Murray. The chancellor had
not only a powerful party of the courtiers combined againfl him,l
but was become odious to the people, who imputed to him every
false ftep in the King's conduct. Bothwell still lurked in the king-
dom, and being secretly supported by all the enemies of Mait-
Land's administration, was ready, every moment, to renew his au-
dacious enterprizes. James, for all these reasons, was extremely
willing to indulge the Clergy in their request, and not only con-
sented to a law, whereby the aCts 1584 were rescinded or explained,
but he carried his complaisance frill further, and permitted the par-
liamentto efiablifh the Presbyterian government, its General Assem-
blies, Irovincial synods, Prefbyteries and Kirk sessions, with all
the different branches of their discipline and jurifdidtion, in the moit
ample manner. All the zeal and authority of the Clergy, even
under the administration of Regents, from whom they might have
expected the most partial favour, could not obtain the fandlion of
law, in confirmation of their mode of Ecclclia'lcaal government.
No Prince was ever less disposcd than James to approve a sfyflcm,
vhofe republican genius iniijired a pafTion for liberty, lo repugnant
to his exalted notions of royal prerogative. Nor could any avcr-
lion be more invcterate tlian his, to the auflere and uncomplying
clinaraccr of the P'rcl)yterian Clergy in that age; whlo, mollr
eminent for zecal than for policy, often contradiCied ]lis opilinin.;
a 11(1 ccnlfuric his conduilll, wilth a freedom, equally ofTienlive to lli,.

VOL. Il. A a dop:malllii

dogmatifin as a Theologian; and to his pride as a King. His fitua-
tion however obliged him, frequently, to conceal, or to difiemble
his sentiments; and as he often disgusted his fubjeas, by indulging
the Popish faaion more than they approved, he endeavoured to
attone for this, by concessions to the Presbyterian Clergy, more
liberal than he himself would otherwise have chosen to grant .

IN this parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents were attainted.-

But he soon made a new attempt to seize the King at Falkland;
and James, betrayed by some of his courtiers, and, feebly defended
by others, who wished well to Bothwell, as the Chancellor's.
avowed enemy,. owed his safety to the fidelity and vigilance of Sir.
Robert Melvil, and to the irresolution of Bothwell's associates t.

S c A R C.E L Y was this danger over, when the nation was alarmed

with the discovery of a new and more formidable conspiracy.
George Ker, the Lord Newbottle's brother, being seized as he was
ready to set fail for Spain, many suspicious- papers were found in
his custody, and among these, several blanks signed by the Earls
of Angus, Huntly and Errol, By this extraordinary precaution,
they hoped to escape any danger of discovery. But Ker's resolution
.hrinking when torture was threatened, he confessed that he -was
employed by these noblemen, to carry on a negociation with the
King of Spain; that the blanks subscribed with their names were
to bc filled up by Crichton and Tyrie; that they were inftru&cd
to offer the faithful service of the three Earls to that Monarch;
and to solicit him to land a body of his troops, either in Galloway,
or at the mouth of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in the
firfl place, to cflablifh the Roman Catholic Religion in Scotland,

t Cald. 4.. 248, 252. SpOts('. 388.

178
BookVIII.

159z.

A new COO-
fptracy of the
Popi:ll Lord&.

-1 Mdlv. 402.

179

and then to invade England, with the whole forces of the king- BookVIIl.
dom. Sir David Graham of Fintray, and Barclay of Ladyland, 592.
whom he accused of being privy to the conspiracy, were taken into
custody, and confirmed all the circumstances of his confession i.

THE nation having been kept for some time in continual terror r59,.
and agitation by so many successive conspiracies, the discovery of Z`'al ot thl'

people.

this new danger compleated the panic. All ranks of men, as if
the enemy had already been at their gates, thought themselves
called upon to fland forth in defence of their country. The Mi-
nifters of Edinburgh, without waiting for any warrant from the
King, who happened at that time to be absent from the capital,
and without having received any legal comniiffion, assembled a
considerable number of Peers and Barons, in order to provide an
inflant remedy againit the impending danger. They seized the
Earl of Angus, and committed him to the caflle; they examined
Ker; and prepared a remonstrance to be laid before the King, con-
cerning the state of the nation; and the necessity of prosecuting
the conspirators with becoming vigour. James, though jealous And proceed-

of tih

of every encroachment on his prerogative, and offended with sub- Kfng agaijlt
jedcs, who, instead of petitioning, seemed to prescribe to him, th'm.
found it necessary, during the violence of the ferment, not only
to adopt their plan, but even to declare that no consideration flould
ever induce him to pardon those, who had been guilty of so odious
a trcafon. I-Ic summoned the Earls of Huntly and Errol to fur- Jani. s.
render themselves to juflicc. Graham of Fintray, whom his peers
pronounced to be guilty of treason, he commanded to be publickly
beheaded; and marching into the North at the head of an army,
thc two Earls, together with Angus, who had escapcd out of pri-

'!: Ryner, 16. I9qn.

A a i

fotl,

son, retired to the mountains. He placed garrisons in the castles,
which belonged to them; compelled their vassals, and the Barons,
in the adjacent counties, to subscribe a bond containing professions
of their loyalty towards him, and of their firm adherence to the
Protellant faith; and, the better to secure the tranquillity of that
part of the kingdom, constituted the Earls of Athol and Marilial,,
his Lieutenants there

H.AVING finished this expedition, James returned to Edinburgih,

where he found Lord Borrough, an extraordinary ambassador from
the court of Englanid Elizabeth, alarmed at the discovery of a
conspiracy, which flie confidered as no less formidable to her own
kingdom, than to Scotland, reproached James with his former
reminffnefs, and urged him, as he regarded the preservation of the
Protestant Religion, or the dignity of his ownCrown, to punifll
this repeated treason with rigour; and if he could not apprehend
the persons, at least to confiscate the eflates of such audacious re-
bels. She weakened, however, the force of these requests, by
interceding, at the fame time, in behalf of Bothwell, whom, ac-
cording to her usual policy in nourilhing a factious spirit among
the Scottiflh nobles, file had taken under her protection. James ab-
i(:!ittcly refused to liflcn to any intcrceflion in fa vour of one, who
had so often, and with so much outrage, insulted both his go-
cvrnmlent and his person. With regard to the popifll conspirators,
Ie declared his resolution to profecutc thlem wich vigour; but that
he mnight Ibe the better able to do io, lie dcindicied a fnmall fulm (c'
money from I. lizlibictlh Il, dwhich he, diiful, perhaps, of the
mannerin which lie might apply it, flcwed no inclination to grant.
ThIe ; Vcal, o, however, and i;niportunl of his own lujcCds obliged

io 2
BookVIII.

15q3.

t i
to (, tat thuyj

flJour.

~~ SL)Utc~Y. .3ol. Cilld1. 'I_. 2o]·

him to call a parliament, in order to pass an a& of attainder against
the three Earls. But before it met, Ker made his escape out of
prison, and on pretence that legal evidence of their guilt could not
be produced, nothing was concluded against them. The King him-
felfwas universally suspected of having contrived this artifice, on.
purpose to elude the requests of the Q.teen of England, and to
disappoint the wishes of his own people. And therefore, in order
to sooth the clergy, who exclaimed loudly against his conduct,
he gave way to the paling of an a&-, which ordained those who
obstinately condemned the censure of the Church, to be dcclared
outlaws ..

WHILE the terror excited by the Popiif conspiracy poflucfld the

nation, the court had. been divided by two rival fations, which
contended for the chief direction of affairs. At the head of one,
was the Chancellor, in whom the King reposed entire confidence.
For that very reason, perhaps, he had fallen early under the QOeen's
diipleafure. The Duke of Lennox, the Earl of Athol, Lord
Ochiltree, and all the name of Stewart espouscd her quarrel, and
widened the breach. And James, fond no less of domcelic tran-
quillity, than of public peace, advised his favourite to retire, f'r
some time, in hopes that the Q.cen's rclcintmcnt would lulidtc.
But as he flood in need, in the prelcnt julnlurc, of the anlitlanc.:
of ib able a Minifler, he hadl recalled himn to court. In orlder t
prevent him from recovering his formerr power, the Stc\wanrs !1:,l
rccourfc to an expedient no less illegal, than dCelcratc. Ili ;;'l
coimbined witlh 1othwell, whlo was of the i;lnc llalltlleC, tile/
broullgt him back fccrctly inlto Scotland ; and lciz;ing tlie gitcs of'
,he palace, introduced him i nto the royal apartmcent wsitli a )uill-

" Ca!ld. 4. 313. Spots. 393. JJi]l. 13. jic. VI. c. 16.1,

,h

.1C 1.1

Book VIII.

'593;

ftil] r izes lthlo
King.
/,S ..

Book VIlI.

1593.

rous train of armed followers. James, though deserted hy all his
courtiers, and incapable of resistance, discovered more indignation
than fear, and reproaching them for their treachery, called on the
Earl to finish his treasons, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart.
But Bothwcll fell on his knees, and implored pardon. The King
was not in a condition to refute his demands. And a few days
after he signed a capitulation with this successful traitor, to whom
lie was really a prisoner, whereby he bound himself to grant him
a remission for all past offences, and to procure the ratification of
it in parliament; and in the mean time, to dismiss the chancellor,
the master of Glamis, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, from
his councils and pretence. Bothwell, on his part, consented to
remove from court, though he left there as many of his affo-
ciates, as lie thought sufficient to prevent the return of the adverse
faa ion

Te recovers BUT it was now no easy matter to keep the King under the
' iber ty. -a e kind of bondage, to which he had been often subjed during

his minority. He discovered so much impatience to shake off his
fetters, that those who imposed, durst not continue, the refiraint.
sp:ember -. They permitted him to call a Convention of the nobles at Stirling,

and to repair thither himself. All Bothwell's enemies, and all
who were desirous of gaining the King's favour by appearing to be
so, obycved the summons. They pronounced the insult offered
to the King's person and authority to be high treaton, and declared
him absolved fromi any obligation to observe conditions, extorted
by force, and whicl violated so eflentially his royal prerogative.
James, liowcvcr, fiill proflcred him a pardon, provided he would
tiu for it as an adl of mercy, and promise to retire out of the king-
odi1o. Thcc conditions 1Bothwcll rejccted with dildain, and bc--

7 taking,
'i82

taking liimfelf once more to arms, attempted to furprize the King,
but finding him on his guard, fled to the borders *.

Book VIW1·

I5:93.
THE King's ardor against Bothwell, compared with his flow and SlFpeaed of

fa',.,'ouiirinz the

evasive proceedings against the Popish Lords, occasioned a general Popish Lords.
disgust among his fubjeats; and was imputed either to an exceflive
attachment to the persons of those conspirators, or to a fecrct par-
tiality towards their opinions; both which gave rife to no unrea-
fonable fears. The Clergy, as the immediate guardians of the
Protestant Religions thought themselves bound, in such a juncture,
to take extraordinary steps for its preservation. And the provincial
fynod of Fife happening to meet at that time, a motion was made Sept. z2;
to excommunicate all concerned in the late conspiracy, as obstinate
and irreclaimable Papiits. And though none of the conspirators
resided within the bounds of the fynod, or were subjed to its ju-
rifdidion, such was the zeal of the members, that, overlooking
this irregularity, they pronounced against them the sentence of ex-
communication, to which the ad of last parliament added new
terrors. And left this ihould be imputed to a few men, and ac-
counted the act of a small part of the Church, deputies were ap-
pointed to attend the adjacent synods, and to desire their approba-
tion and concurrence.

AN event happened, a few weeks after, which incrcafed the

peoplc's suspicions of the King. As lec was marcllhil on an ex-
pedition againfl the borderers, the three carls coming fuildcnly
into his presence, offered to furbmit thecmlelvcs to a legal trial ; atld
James, without committing them to cuflody, appointed a lay ;so
that purpose. The conspirators prepared to al)par withi a l oimi-
tdable train.of tlhir fi-iciiecs and vtfilltls. But, in tle ineCan timc.

XV .I I t 't oi
O)ct.L -

183
-11 C11d. 'I. p.O. Spetc.

BookVIII. the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons, aflemlbling at

73 I'iltEdinburgh, remonf-rated against the King's extreme indulgence

with great boldnces, and demanded of him, according to the re-
gular course ofjuflice, to commit to sure cuflody persons charged
with the highecft ads of treason, who could not be brought to a legal
trial, until they were absolved from the censures of the Church;
and to call a Convention of efates, to deliberate concerning the
method of proceeding against them. At the fame time they offered
to accompany him in arms to the place of trial, left such auda-
cious and powerful criminals mhould overawe justice, and dictate
to the judges, to whom they pretended to submit.' James, though
extremely offended both witl the irregularity of their proceedings,
and the prefiumption of their demands, found it expedient to put
off the day of trial, and to call a Convention of estates, in order to
quiet the fears and jealousies of the people. By being humoured
in this point, their suspicions began gradually to abate, and the
Chancellor managed the Convention so artfully, that he himself,
.together with a few other members, was impowered to pronounce
a final sentence upon the conspirators. After much deliberation,
Nov. 26. they ordained that the three Earls, and their associates, fihould be

exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution, on account of
their corrcfpondence with Spain; that, before the firfi day of
Fle'inrlu;y, they Ilould cither submit to the Church, and publickly
rcn-uluncc the errors of Popery, or remove out of the kingdom;
that, 1)clob;e the filft of January, they flould declare whicl of
tllcli ;il'tl rul;lix ic tly would cilbracc; that they flmuld find iurcty
1'oi tllir pacca'all (lemea.nollr, for the future; and that if they
i.iilcd t( ly i fl t llcir clhoice il tllue time, they flhould lofi the l)c-
nclit of tliis ai: of (ibo/itioIn, and remain cxpofcd to all the pains
1' l \ !

' Clld. 4. 330. Spots. 397.
,184

BY this lenity towards the conspirators, James incurred much

reproach, and gained no advantage. Devoted to the Popish super-
flition, submissive to all the dicates of their pricfis, and buoyed
up with hopes and promises of foreign aid, the three Earls refuted to
accept of the conditions, and continued their treasonable corrcfpon-
dence with the court of Spain. A Convention of eflates pronounced
themi to have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which were of-
sered; and the King required them by proclamation, to fiirrender
themselves to juflice. The presence of the Englifi ambaclador con-
tributed, perhaps, to the vigour of there proceedings. Elizabeth,
ever attentive to James's motions, and imputing his relucitance to
punish the Popish Lords to a secret approbation of their dcfigns, had
lent to Lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger to which
he exposed himself, by this false moderation; and to require him to
exercise that rigour which their crimes, as well as the poi'urc of as-
fairs, rendered neceiTary. And though the flcps now taken by the
King silenced all complaints on that head, yet Zouche, forgetful
of his charaCter as an ambassador, entered into private negociations
with such of the Scottish nobles, as disapproved of the King's inca-
fires, and held almost an open correiiondence with Botlihwell,
who, according to the usual artifice of malecontcnts, pretended much
folicitudc for reforming the disorders of the commonwealthl; and
covered his own ambition with the specious veil of zeal againfll those
Counsellors, who rcfiraincd the King from pursuing the avowed
enemies of the lroteftant faith. Zotclhe cilcoiura;lcd him, in tlIe
name of his Mifircfs, to take arms againfl his Sover eigln.

I\ E A N while, the King a nd the Clergy were filll wiC ill; mIt al

I ;Cli-

;,t 1,, -

rufl or each otlihcr. Thely were jealoue, )Irllals to 'e::Lcc. is, ii;i t io; ' ''

cl, iOns leaned too niicl to wards te l liI Llli (on

; lie '

l' (- I
tlic'n, without good rcafbn, of prompting I3otlhwcl! to rcbcll io,

VeL. II. B b :ti(d

loJ
Book VIII.

1 94t.
Ja.ua.oy 1 .

and even of supplying him with money for that purpose. Little
instigation, indeed, was wanting to rouze such a turbulent spirit
as Bothwell's, to any daring enterprize. He appeared suddenly
within a mile of Edinburgh, at the head of 4oo horse. The pre-
tences, by which he endeavoured to justify this insurrection, were
extremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to Popery, concern
for the King's honour, and for the liberties of the nation. James
w.as totally unprovided for his own defence; he had no infantry,
and was accompanied only with a few horsem.en of Lord Home's
train. In this extremity, he implored the aid of the citizens of
Edinburgh, and, in order to encourage them to aa with zeal, he
promised to proceed againfI the Popish Lords with the utmost rigour
of law. Animated by their Ministers, they ran chearfully to their
arms, and advanced with the King at their head against Bothwell;
but he, notwithitanding his success in putting to flight Lord Home,
vho, had rashly charged him with a far inferior number of cavalry,
retired to Dalkeith without daring to attack the King. His followers
abandoned him soon after, and difeouraged by so many successive
difilppointmcnts, could never afterwards be brought to venture into
the field. He betook himself to his usual lurking-places, in the
North of England; but Elizabeth, in compliance with the King's
rcmnonfirances, obliged. him to quit that retreat 1

No fooncr was the King delivered from one danger, than he was

called to attend to another. The Popifhl Lords, in consequence
of their negociations with Spain, rcceived, in the spring, a supply
of money from Philip. What bohl dcfigns this might inli-irc,
it was no cafy matter to conjclitur. F1rom men under the ldomi-
nion of bigotry, and whom indulgence could not reclaim, the

Spotfwv. 403. Cald. 4. 359.

7
Book VIII.

1594.

refli d cngers

finin the
P,)p. RLorIs.
.A ~rT 3 .
i86

most desperate aaions were to be dreaded. The assembly of the BookVIIi.
Church immediately took the .alarm; remonstrated against them 9
with more bitterness than ever; and unanimously ratified the fen-
tence of excommunication, pronounced by the fynod of Fife.
James himself, provoked by their obstinacy and ingratitude, and
afraid that his long forbearance would not only be generally dif-
pleasing to his own fubjeds, but give rife to unfavourable sus-
picions among the English, exerted himself with unusual vigour.
He called a Parliament; laid before it all the circumstances, and June s.
aggravations of the conspiracy; and though there were but few
members present, and several of these connected with tile confpi-
rators by blood or friendship, he prevailed on them, by his influ-
ence and importunity, to pronounce the most rigorous sentence
the law can inflict. They were declared to be guilty of high trea-
son, and their estates and honours forfeited. At the fame time,
flatutes, more severe than ever, were enacted against the professors
of the Popifl religion.

Hlow to put this sentence in execution, was a matter of greater pattle of

difficulty. Three powerful Barons, cantoned in a part of the Gli!"'at
country almost inaccessible, surroundcd with nunlerous varfals, and
supported by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than an o;vr-
match for a Scottilli Monarch. No intrcaty could prevail on Eli-
zabeth to advance the money, ncccfl uy for dcfiraying the cxpcnccs
of an expedition againPc tllhem. To attack tlcl ie in pIrfti, will
his own forces alone, migllt cxIpoit Il1in both to cilgracc and to
(langer. I-e hlad rccourfc lo tle only c: pedicnt which rc!nalinci(
in fuchl a situation, for aid(ing the inpo)otcll of' SOvc'Clr i-n :t;: lic-
I-ity; lie delegated liis antli()rity t

tho i '.;rl of Ar) ylI, and1 Lord

:oerbcs, thle leaders ofi two cllans at ('liltilt' \iili tlec cn!/iiral.t s;
:'.11nd gavet tlim a; conIillioli to inv\t.(iC llil lIands, and to J ti/. tlic

13 b 2 ,lilcs

I87

BookVlI. catfies which belonged to them. Bothwell, notwithstanding all

;j59··4 his high pretensions of zeal for the Protestant religion, having now

entered into a close confederacy with them, the danger became eve-
ry day more urging. Argyll, solicited by the King, and rouzed by
the Clergy, took the field at the head of 7000 men. Huntly and
Errol met him at Glenlivat, with an army far inferior in number,
but composcd chiefly of gentlemen of the low countries mounted
on lorfeback, and who brought along with them a train of field-
Orob2r 3. pieces. They encountered each other with all the fury, which

hereditary enmity and ancient rivalfhip add to undisciplined cou-
rage. But the Highlanders, difconccrted by the first discharge
of the cannon, to which they were little accuflomed, and unable
to resist the inlprcfuion of cavalry, were soon put to flight. And
lAr,'yl, a gallant young man of eightcen, was carried by his friends
out of the tlcld(, weeping vwith indignation at their disgrace, and
calling on. them to fland, and to vindicate the honour of their
name .

ON the first intelligence of this defeat, James, though obliged to

pawn his jewels in order to raifc money -1-, afrcmbled a finall body
of troops, and marched towards the north. I-e was joined by the
Irwines, Keiths, Lefleys, Forlbfes, and other clans at enmity witl
I-ITuntly and Errol, who havii,' lo(l {I vcral of their principal flI-
lowers at Clenlivat, and others refuling to bear armis againit tliL
King in pcrion, were obligu.J to retire to tli mountains. Jalmes
w:a'iicd thlicir lands ; put ga;rriions iln lonicc ois tlicir calllcs; bi.llt
othlers ; and left tl e of

Lcnn, x, a

i s I .icint ci:;t in tlat

part of tic klingdilon, with a body ol men i illicicnit to rcl i. l

i tlcml
IvonIn gathering to any lhead there, or l'Oli ilnit'llill the low ctllinl-

!': Catl. .., A gCS -1 luilCI. .c11 m. . I ,',].

tryI,
i88

try. Reduced at last to extreme difIrefs, by the rigour of the
season, and the desertion of their followers, they obtained the
King's permifion to go beyond seas, and gave security that they
should neither return without his licence, nor engage in any new
intrigues against the Proteflant religion, or the peace of the king-
dom .

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-established in the North of

Scotland, and the firmnnefs and vigour, which James had displayed
in his last proceedings against them, regained him, in a great de-
gree, the confidence of his Protestant subject. But he funk in
the fame proportion, and for the fame reason, in the esteem of the
Roman Catholics. They had asserted his mother's right to the
Crown of England with so much warmth, that they could not,
with any decency, reject his. And the indulgence, with which
he affecled to treat the professors of that religion, inspired them
with such hopes, that they viewed his accefflon to tile tlhrone as no
undesirable event. But the rigour with which the King purrued
the conspirators, and the icvere flatues againfi Popery to which
he had given his consent, convinced thecn that these hoips were
visionary; and they began to look about in qlu;i' ofr fomc new fuc-
ceffor, whotfc righlts they migh!t oppolb to ]Iis. The 4EngIith Pa-
pifis turned their eyes toward tlie Earl of E'.llcx, wlofie cncerous
mind, thouglh lirmly TcfLli ithcd in the l': t cllant faitli, abhorred
the cfvcritics inlllilcdcl in thait 2,'c, on acc()Lmt of religious opi-.
nions. TlofU o tihe isic l:c, vIlo \

cre in c:cl, formed a lildlcr

Iclieme, anl o1n more i-it;ilc ,, tIliir lit;tlti,)l. Thl'cv a\;dnced
llie claim ol the Inflnltla of ;.pailn ; an11 I11

m irllS the )'i.'l'ilt j;i/iili'd

:i book, iln whichl, by fal (loltltion;s f'.11n iILOi', l;y l.i); I()
l

'3 Spotw. . C ! CA 1. "37, s,

0

Book V II.

1594.

Popinl Lords
driven out of
the kingdom,

I 595'

The iRoiann
Catholics in--
cenfcd againli
Janes.,
5

BookVIII. genealogies, and absurd arguments, intermingled with bitter invec-

- tives against the King of Scots, he endeavoured to prove the In-

fanta's title to the English Crown to be preferable to his. And
Philip, though involved already in a war both with France and
England, and scarce able to defend the remains of the Burgundian
Provinces against the Dutch commonwealth, easily grasped at this
airy projec. The dread of a Spanish Pretender to the Crown, and
the opposition which the Papists began to form against the King's
fucceflion, contributed not a little to remove the prejudices of the
Protestants, and to prepare the way for that event.

Bothwell 3BOTHWELL, whose name has been so often mentioned, as the
forced to fly
in:o Spain. disturber of the King's tranquillity, and of the peace of the king-

dom, was now in a wretched condition. Abandoned by the Queen
of England, on account of his confederacy with the Popish Lords;
excommunicated by the Church for the fame reason; and deSerted,
in his distress, by his own followers; he was obliged to fly for safety
to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where, after renouncing
the Protestant faith, he led, many years, an obscure and indi-
gent life, remarkable only for a low and infamous debauchery.
The King, though extremely ready to sacrifice the strongest resent-
mentG to the slightest acknowledgments, could never be softened
by his fubmiifions, nor be induced to liften to any intercession in
his behalf *.

TH-is year the King lofl Chancellor Maitland, an able Miniftcr,

qn whom he had long devolved the whole weight of public affairs.
As James loved him, while alive, ie wrote, in honour of his me-
mory, a copy of vcrfcs, which, when compared with the compo-
Sitions of that age, arc far ironm being inelegant ['.

e lV inwv. Meti . Ix.

Slpol'\ootl, 110. .
IJ. 11.

SOON
190

. . .

SOON after his death, a considerable change was made in the

administration. At that time, the annual charges of gover ment
far exceeded the King's revenues. The Queen was fond of ex-
pensive amusements. James himself was a stranger -to ceconomy.
It became neceflary, for all there reasons, to levy the public re-
venues with greater order and rigour, and to husband them with
more care. This important trrui was committed to eight gentle-
men of the law ', who, from their number, were called OHavianzsi
The powers veiled in them were ample, and almost unlimited.
The King bound himself neither to add to their number, nor to
supply any vacancy that might happen, without their consent: and
knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed that no alienation
of his revenue, no grant of a penlion, or order on the treasury,
should be held valid, unless it were ratified by the subscription of
five of the commiflioners.; all their acs and decisions were declared
to be of equal force with the sentences of judges in civil courts;
and in consequence of them, and without any other warrant, any
person might be arrefled, or their goods seized.: Such extensive
jurifdition, together with the absolute disposal of the public mo-
ney, drew the whole executive part of the government into their
hands. United among themselves, they gradually undermined the
reit of the King's Ministers; and seized on every lucrative.or honour-
able office. The ancient servants of the Crown repincd, at being
obliged to quit their nations to new ncn. The favourites, and
young courtiers, murmured at feeing the King's liberality stintcd
by their prescriptions. And the Clergy exclaimed against some of
them as known apoflates to Popery, and iffpcL:ct others of ficrctly
Iavouring it. They retained their power, however, notwithlfand--

" Alekxandcr Scatonl Frefident of the Sesion, \VWl icr Stcw"art Commcnindator of

lhnlit't re Lord Privy Scal, ,David Carnegy, Johnl Linllday, Jamallic, ]phinjTsn I ho-
mal 1amiton, John Skene Cle k R egisler, and Peter Young E~ynosr'nr w

in il
0

BookVIIr.

1596.

A change in
the adminif-
tration.

19r

BookVIII. ing this general combination against them; and they owed it en-

i596. tirely to the order and ceconomy which they introduced into the

administration of the finances, by which the ncceffary expences of
government were more easily defrayed, than in any other period
of the King's reign ".

Vi le!ce of THE rumour of vail preparations, which Philip was said to be
the n: ion
ag 4llt rlch carrying on at this time, filled both England and Scotland with the
Poifh Lords, dread of a new invasion, James took proper measures for the de-

fence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy the zeal of the
Clergy, whose suspicions of the King's sincerity began to revive;
and as he had permitted the wives of the banished Peers to levy
the rents of their estates, and to live in their houses, they charged
him with rendering the ad of forfeiture ineffectual, by supporting
March 2.! the avowed enemies of the Proteflant faith. The Afiembly of the

Church took under consideration the state of the kingdom, and
having appointed a day of public failing, they solemnly renewed the
Covenant, by which the nation was bound to adhere to the Pro-
tcflant faith, and to defend it againit all aggressors. A committee,
confifling of the molt eminent clergymen, and of many Barons,
and gentlemen of dillintion, waited on the King, and laid before
him a plan for the security of the kingdom, and the preferva-
tion of religion. They urged him to appropriate the cflates of
the banificd Lord;, as a fund for the maintenance of soldiers; to
take the flrlCePr precautions for preventing the return of such tur-
bulent fubjcles into the country; and to pursue all who were iur-
pcccd of being their adherents, with the utmofl rigour.

Thl, K;n:,'s o T 1o 1 1 C(; could be more repugnant to the King's fchemcs, or

i!ih i ' m1Iore dii.igrcciablc to his inclinatiolii, thlan there propositions. Avcrl
to cS)Otll.

* Spotfwoodl, 41. r 3, 't3s'

II) ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~hrough
1.9z

through his whole life, to any course, where he expected oppofi- Book VIIT.
tion or danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with the character 596.
of moderation, and by the arts of policy, he observed with con-
cern the prejudices against him, which were growing among the
Roman Catholics, and resolved to make some attonement for that
part of his condut, which had drawn on him their indignation.
Elizabeth was now well advanced in years; her life had lately been
in danger; if any Popish competitor should arise to dispute his right
of succession, a faction, so powerful as that of the banished Lords,
might be extremely formidable; and any division among his own
fubjeds might prove fatal, at a juncture, which would require
their united and molt vigorous efforts. Inflead, therefore, of the
additional severities which the Assembly proposed, James had
thoughts of mitigating the punishment, which they already suffered.
And as they were surrounded, during their residence in foreign
parts, by Philip's emissaries; as resentment might dispose them to
liften more favourably, than ever, to their fuggeflions; as despair
might drive them to fiill more atrocious actions; he resolved to recall
them, under certain conditions, into their native country. Encou-
raged by there sentiments of the King in their favour, of which they
did not want intelligence, and wearied already of the dependant and
anxious life of exiles, they ventured to return fccretly into Scotland.
Soon after, they prefcnted a petition to the King, begging his per-
minion to reside at their own Iiouifs, and offcring, to give fccurity
for their peaceable and dutiful bclaviour. James called a Conven-
tion of eftatcs to deliberate on a matter of fuchl importance, all(n by
their advice lie granted the petition.

So soon as they were inforl-lme of this, thle lmemlers o, corn mmittee, ,:' i h
;tlll(iint(led by thclaflA tclwbibly, met at Ed]inibur. ;land it all ta I lpre- pr'ocC"ig

~~VO~L. I~1~. (;~~~~~~~~~~ ~

ct~ C ~,'i1 the Clcg
VO) L . .: c p.il)]lallCY and poophr.

I'93

194-

cipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took such resolutions as they thought
necessary for the safety of the kingdom. They wrote circular let-
ters to all the Prefbyteries in Scotland; they warned them of the
approaching danger; they exhorted them to stir up their people to the-
defence of their just rights; they commanded them to publish, in
all their pulpits, the act excommunicating the Popish Lords; and
enjoined them to lay all those who were fufpeaed of favouring Po-
pery under the fame censure, by a summary sentence, and without
observing the usual formalities of trial. And as the danger seemed
too pressing to wait for the stated meetings of the judicatories of the
Church, they made choice of the most eminent clergymen in differ-
ent corners of the kingdom, appointed them to reside constantly
at Edinburgh, and to meet every day with the Ministers of that
city, under the name of the Standing Council of the Church, and vested
in this body the supreme authority, by enjoining it, in imitation
of the ancient Roman form, to take care that the Church should
receive no detriment.

TH ESE proceedings, no less unconstitutional than nnprecedented,

were manifest encroachments on the royal prerogative, and bold
Rteps towards open rebellion. The King's condult, however, jufl
tified in some degree such excesses. His lenity towards the Papists,
so repugnant to the principles of that age; his pardoning the con-.
fpirators, notwithflanding repeated promifcs to the contrary; the
Tclpedh lie paid to Lady I-untly, who was attached to the Romiilh
religion, no lcfs than her husband ; his committing the care of his
daughter the Princess Elizabeth, to Lady cLvingflon, who wa;;
infcElcl with the fame fuplcrflition; the contempt with whicih le
talked, on all occasions, botl of the characlkr of Mniiflers, anil
,of their fuilnion; were circumfllnccs lwich might have filled

3 it il s,
Book VIII.

1596.

minds, not prone by nature to jealousy, with some suspicions; and Book VIII
might have precipitated into rash councils, those, who were far re- i596.
moved from intemperate zeal. But, however powerful the motives
might be which influenced the Clergy, or however laudable the
end they had in view, they conducted their measures with no ad-
dress, and even with little prudence. James discovered a strong
inclination to avoid a rupture with the Church, and jealous as lie
was of his prerogative, would willingly have made many concessions
for the fake of peace. By his command, some of the Privy-coun-
fellors had an interview with the more moderate among the Clergy,
and enquired whether Huntly and his associates might not, upon
making proper acknowledgments, be again received into the bosom
of the Church, and be exempted from any farther punishment, on
account of their past apoftacy and treasons. They replied, that
though the gate of mercy stood always open for those who repented
and returned, yet as these noblemen had been guilty of idolatry, a
crime deserving death both by the law of God and of man, the
civil magistrate could not legally grant them a pardon; and even
though the Church should abfolvc them, it was his duty to inflic
punifhlment upon them. This inflexibility in those, lwho were rec-
koned the most compliant of thle order, filled the King with indig-
nation, which the imprudence and obflinacy of a private Clergy--
man heightened into rage.

MR. David Black, rliniflcr at St. Andrewc's, (diloulrfin in one S.dit;ni;

of his Sermons, according to cidlioml, conc Iert

ingi tlC Piate of tlh [;l ,l;t b

nation, aflir'mcd that the King hlad peIitted tli piopills Lords to
return into Scotland, and by thIlt ai.lion, had discovered tl e tlrea-
chery of his own ;heart ; that all 1Kinl;s were tlhc t)c'il's cllirl-cn;
that Satan had lno\ the idul.idnce o' tihe court; that the Qjccn of'

(' c 2 Ilr !ald

Book VIII. England was an atheist; that the judges were miscreants and bri-

1596. bers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the Privy-counfellors

cormorants and men of no religion; and in his prayer for the Queen,
he used these words, We must pray for her for fashion fake, but

Nov. io. we have no cause, she will never do us good. James commanded
eT',oCie hiY him to be summoned before the Privy-council, to answer for such

dfnce fcditious expressions; and the clergy, instead of abandoning him

to the punishment, which such a petulant and criminal attack on
his superiors deserved, were bo imprudent as to espouse his cause,
as if it had been the common one of the whole order. The con-
troverfy concerning the immunities of the pulpit, and the rights of
the Clergy to testify against vices of every kind, which had
been agitated in 1584, was now revived. It was pretended, that
with regard to their sacred funacion, Ministers were subjed to the
Church alone; that it belonged only to their ecclesiastical superiors
to judge of the truth or falsehood of docrines, delivered in the
pulpit; that if, upon any pretence whatever, the King usurped this
jurifdicion, the Church would, from that moment, fink under
servitude to the civil magistrate; that instead of reproving vice,
with that honest boldness, which had often been of advantage to
individuals, and allutary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn to
flatter the paflions of the Prince, and to connive at the vices of
others; that the King's cagernefs to punish the indiscretion of a
Protcflant Minifler, while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of
Popifl conspirators, called on them to stand on their guard; and
that now was the time to contend for their privileges, and to pre-
vent any encroachment on those rights of which the Church had
been in pollfl'icion ever since the Rlflrmiation. Influenced by theif
conildcrations, the council of the Church cnjoined Black to decline
the juriifliLion of the Privy-council. And he, proud of such an

oppoi tunity
I96

opportunity to display his zeal, presented a paper to that purpose, Book VIII.
and with the utmost firmness refused to plead, or to answer the 1596.
queflions which were put to him. In order to add greater weight
to these proceedings, the council of the Church tranfiitted the
declinature to all the Prefbyteries throughout the kingdom, and
commanded every Minister to subscribe it, in testimony of his ap-
probation.

JAMIES defended his rights with no less vigour than they were at-

tacked. Sensible of the contempt under which his authority must
fall, if the clergy thould be permitted, publickl), and with impu-
nity, to calumniate his ministers, and even to censure himself; and
knowing, by former examples, what an equal reparation for such
offences he might expect from the judicatories of the Church, he
urged on the inquiry into Black's conduct, and ifTued a proclama--
tion, commanding the members of the council of the Ch'urch to
leave Edinburgh, and to return to their own parilies. Black, in-
stead of submitting, renewed his declinature; and the council, ill
defiance of the proclamation, declared, that as they met by the
authority of the Church, obedience to it was a duty still more fa-
cred, than that which they owed to the King himself. The IPrivy-
council, notwithflanding Black's rcfCiling to plead, procceded in the
trial; and, after a iolcmii eilluiry, pronounced hlill guilty of the
crimes of which he had been accuctl'd(; but rcl-'rr l it to the King,
to appoint whnat 1punilhicnt he flhiold tif;flicr

1\lI: .\ \ XVIlLIF. many cndlavours wIre ufc(l to bring' mattcrf to

aIccomm0odation. Al;imoft: every cly prodtlcyd

tine new fd i lllc o'

reconcilement; but throulgh the KingC's licklcnelsic, the ol)tilia;y of
the Clergy, or the iitrigues of thc corlltiers, they all I'rovcd inc-L
f'ccual. Bothl parties ap.pcaldcl to the pcoplic, aind l ) rcci.iproc:t

and

197

Book VIII.

I596.

and exaggerated accusations, endeavoured to render each other
odious. Insolence, sedition, treason, were the crimes with which
James charged the Clergy; while they made the pulpits resound
with complaints of his excessive lenity towards Papists, and of the no
less exceflive rigour, with which he opprefTed the eflablifhed Church.
Exasperated by their bold inveEtives, he, at last, sentenced Black
to retire beyound the river Spey, and to reside there during his plea-
sure; and once more commanding the members of the standing
council to depart from Edinburgh, he required all the ministers
in the kingdom to subscribe a bond, obliging themselves to submit,
in the fame manner as other fubjeds, to the jurisdiction of the civil
courts, in matters of a civil nature.

A tomnult il TIiIS decisive measure excited all the violent paflions, which
Edinburgl. possess disappointed facions; and deeds no less violent immediately

followed. These must be imputed in part to the artifices of some
courtiers, who expe&ed to reap advantage from the calamities of
their country, or who hoped to lessen the authority of the Oda-
vians, by engaging them in hoflilities with the Church. On one
hand, they informed the King that the citizens of Edinburgh
were under arms every night, and had planted a strong guard round
the houfcs of their miniflers. James, in order to put a flop to this
imaginary infillt on his government, iflued a proclamation, com-
manding twcnty-four of the principal citizens to leave the town
within fix hours. On the other hand, thely wrote to the Minifecrs,
adlviling them to look to tlcir ow\n t icty, as I-untly had been fc-
crctly admlitted to an interview wvith the King, and had been the au-
t1hor of the ftIvcrc proclallation againfl the citizens of Edi-inburgh .

'licy

i 'l hough matters were intllunliriufly n?;rlavnltcd .5' I" rillns, who wifilc, botli 1):.'-
tics to 1ulf' \ic viollt mic., f; ics; n eilicth r of tlelt ri:po )ls wci c altolcethcr d(cflittli oi

founlll.,tioll)

They doubted no more of the truth of this intelligence, than the Book VIIT.
King had done of that which he received, and fell as blindly into I596.
the snare. The letter came to their hands, just as one of their num-
ber was going to mount the pulpit. They resolved that he should Dec. 17,
acquaint the people of their danger; and he painted it, with all the
firong colours, which men naturally employ, in describing any
dreadful and intfant calamity. When the sermon was over, he de-
fired the nobles and gentlcmen to assemble in the Little Church.
The whole multitude, terrified at what they had heard, crowded
thither; they promised and vowed to stand by the Church; they
drew up a petition to the King, craving the redress of those grie-
vances, of which the Clergy complained, and beseeching him to
deliver them from all future apprehensions of danger, by removing
such of his Counsellors, as were known to be enemies of the
Proteflant religion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen, two Burgesses,
and two Ministers were appointed to present it. The King hap- The King i-.
pened to be in the great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court of Dagcr.
feflion was fitting. The manner in which the petition was de-
livered, as well as its contents, offended him. He gave an
haughty reply; the petitioners insisted with warmth; and a pro-
mifcuous multitude pressing into the room, James retired abruptly
into another apartment, and commanded the gates to be- slut be-
hind him. The deputies returned to the multitude, who were
flill aflemblcd, and to whom a Miniftcr had been reading, in their
abfcncc, the flory of Ilaman. V'lhen they reported tlat the King
had refused to liflen to their petitions, the Church was filled in a

foundation. As their lIliiftcrs wecre fuippofed to be in (dinger, some of the moro
zealous citizens had (Ictcrmin.il(l to defcntd them, by force of armns, [ircli. IMm. 2.
250. -ltntly ihad bccn privately in Elinblirgih where lie had an interview, if nIot
with the Kilng, at leafl with fomc of his inill.cr., IBirch. Ibid. 230.

&b ;o3omcnIll

I99'

Book VIIi. moment with noise, threatenings, execrations, and all the outrage

1596. and confusion of a popular tumult. Some called for their arms;

some to bring out the wicked Haman; others cried, the sword of
the Lord and of Gideon; and rushing out with the most furious
impetuosity, surrounded the Tolbooth, threatening the King him-
self, and demanding some of his Counsellors whom they named,
that they might tear them in pieces. The Magifirates of the city,
partly by authority, partly by force, endeavoured to quell the tu-
mult; the King attempted to sooth the malecontents, by promising
to receive their petitions, when presented in a reguiar manner;
the Ministers, sensible of their own rashness in kindling such a
flame, seconded both; and the rage of the populace, subsiding as
suddenly as it had risen, they all dispersed, and the King returned
to the palace; happy in having escaped from an infurretion, which
though the inflantaneous and unconcerted effec of popular fury,
had exposcd his life to imminent danger, and was confidered by
him as an unpardonable affront to his authority *.

As soon as he retired, the leaders of the malecontents aflemnbled,

in order to prepare their petition. The puniflhment of the Popifil
Lords; the removal of those Counsellors, who were fufpcded of
favouring their persons or opinions; the repeal of all the late ads
of council, fubvcrfive of the authority of the Church; together
ith an aL approving the proceedings of the Standing Council;
were the chicl of thlcir demands.' But the King's indignation was
Jlill io high, that the depulties, cliolcn for that purpose, (tduri not
vcnlurec, that nig lt, to pic 1clint rc ticfl whlich coulc not fail of kind-
lirng Iiis ra.-ec nancw, lBcfore next morning, Jamcs, withl all liis at-

~Sjiotil'. | , & C. Call. 5. 54, &c. Iliich, McIn], 2.2 35.

tcndalnts,
200

attendants, .withdrew to Linlithgow; the fetlion, and other courts
ofjuIice, were required to leave a city, where it was no longer con-
fiflent either with their safety, or their dignity to remain; and the
noblemen and barons were commanded to return to their own
houses, and not to reaflemble without the King's permiflion. The
vigour, with which the King aded, firuck a damp upon the spirits
of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible how much they would
fLFier by his absence, and the removal of the courts ofjuftice, re-
pented already of their conduc. The Ministers alone resolvcd to
maintain the contest. They endeavoured to prevent the nobles
from dispersing; they inflamed the people by violent invesives
against the King; they laboured to procure fabfcriptions to an as-
fociation for their mutual defence; and conscious what lustre and
power the julncion of some of the greater nobles would add to their
cause, the Ministers of Edinburgh wrote to Lord Hamilton, that
the people, moved by the word of God, and provoked by the in-
juries offered to the Church, had taken arms; that many of the
nobles had determined to protec the Protestant Religion, which
owed its eftablifhmcnt to the piety and valour of their anceflors; that
they wanted only a leader to unite them, and to inspire them with
vigour; that his zeal for the good cause, no less than his noble birth,
entitled him to that honour : They conjured him therefore not to
difaippoint theirhopes and witlles, nor to reftife the suffering Church
that aid, which fle ib much needed. Lord Hamilton, inllead of
complying with their desire, carried the letter direatly to the King-,
wlhom this new insult irritated to stich a degree, tlat he commanded
the magiflratcs of Edinburgh instantly to itize their Miniflers, as.
maniifclt incendiarics, and cncouraigers of rebellion. Tle m;igi-
fl.atcs, in order to regain the King's lavour, were prc1oiriIL); to

VOL. 11. 1) d 0Icy

Bo001o VIII

159ó.

He le,ivei
E linburgh.
and p oceeds
wi h severily
agai:ist the
cilizens.

2o I

Bodkc VIIT.

1597.

The King
humbles Ihe
power of the
Cl hrch.
January 3.

Ab;i(iges the
pmivilcpcs ot
the citizlens of
iEdinburgh.

obey; and the Ministers, who saw no other hope of safety, fled
towards England *.

THiIS unsuccessful infurreEtion, instead of overturning, establish-

ed the King's authority. Those concerned in it were confounded
and dispersed. And the reft of his fubjeas, in order to avoid sus-
picion, or to gain his favour, contended who should be most for-
ward to execute his vengeance, A Convention of estates being
called, pronounced the late insurrection to be high treason; ordained
every Minister to subscribe a declaration of his submission to the
King's jurisdiCtion, in all matters civil and criminal; impowered
magistrates to commit, instantly, to prison any Minister, who,
in his sermons, should utter indecent refleEtions on the King's
condu(t; prohibited any Ecclesiastical judicatory to meet, without
the King's licence; commanded that no person should be eleEted a
magistrate of Edinburgh, for the future, without the King's ap-
probation; and that, in the mean time, the present magiitrates
should either discover, and inflict condign punishment on the au-
thors of the late tumult, or the city itself should be fubjeCed to
all the penalties of that treasonable ation --.

A R M E D with the authority of these decrees, James resolved to crush
entirely the mutinous spirit of his fubjeds. As the Clergy had, hither-
to, derived their chief credit and strength from the favour and zeal of
the citizens of Edinburgh, his first care was to humble them. Though
the magiflratcs submitted to him in the imot abject terms; thouigh
they vindicated tl licnlvcs, and their fellow-citizens, from the moll
dillant intention of violating his royal pcrfon or authority; though,
afitcr the flriceftc I rutiiy, no circulmflanccs that could fix on them

SPutsw. 45r. CCald. 5. 126.

the
o02

tt Ca11(. 5. 147.

the suspicion of premeditated rebellion had been discovered; though BookVIII.
many of the nobles, and such of the Clergy as still retailed any 1597
degree of favour, interceded in their behalf; neither acknowledge-
ments, nor intercessions, were of the least avail . The King
continued inexorable, the city was declared to have forfeited its pri- February 28.
vileges as a Corporation, and to be liable to all the penalties of trea-
son. The capital of the kingdom, deprived of magistrates, de-
ferted by its miniirers, abandoned by the courts of Juflice, and pro-
fcribed by the King, remained iii desolation and despair. The
courtiers even threatened to raze the city to the foundation, and to
erect a pillar where it flood, as an everlasting mon!ument of the
King's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants. At lat, ili
compliance with Elizabeth, who interposed in their fivour, and
moved by the continual solicitations of his nobles, James absolved MlJar 2.,
the citizens from the penalties of law, but, at the fame time, he
stripped them of their mofl: important privileges; they were neither
allowed to eled their own magifirates, nor their own Ministers;
many new burdens. were imposed on them; and a great fium of
money was e.xacced by way of peace-offering t*

JAMES was, mean while, equally afildious, an(l no less fticceif- New reul.

tiuos w ithl re-

ful, in circumfcrilbing the jurildidcion of the Church. Experince gard. to cte
had discovered that to attempt this, by adcs of parliament, and fen- CuCh.
tcnccs of privy-council, was both incfFcctulal, and odious. lie had
recourse, now, to an expedient more artful, and better calculated for
obtaining his end. The lecclcfiaficfl] jitlicatocols were coluplcocd
of many members; the majority of the Clergy were extremely
indigent, and unprovided of legal flipenlds ; thie rinillcrs in tlIe

* C.ldi 5. 149 '

S'i(s". 4
S .1 ,.

20o3
Da l ?

Il. iw 11-

1 '1~~~·

neighbourhood of Edinburgh, notwithstanding the parity eflablilh-
ed by the Presbyterian government, had aTfumed a leading in the
Church, which filled their brethren with envy; every numerous body
of men is susceptible of sudden and strong impreflions, and liabfe to
be influenced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by these confide-
rations, James thought it poflible to gain the Clergy, whom he had
in vain attempted to subdue. Proper agents were set to work all
over the kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats.were employed;
the ufupations of the brethren near the capital were aggravated;
the jealousy of their power, which was growing in the distant pro-
vinces, was augmented; and two different General Assemblies were
held, in both which, notwithstanding the zeal and boldness, where-
with a fewleading Clergymen defended the privileges of the Church,
a majority declared in favour of those measures, which were agree-
able to the King. Many pradices, which had continued since the
reformation, were condemned; many points of discipline, which
had hitherto been reckoned sacred and uncontroverted, were given
up; the licence, with which ministers discoursed of political mat-
ters, was restrained; the freedom, with which they inveighed
against particular persons, censured; sentences of summary excom-
munication declared unlawful; the convoking a General Assembly,
without the King's permiflion, prohibited; and the right of no-
minating ministers, to the principal towns, vetled in the Crown.
'Ihus, the Clergy themselves fulrrendered privileges, which it
would have been dangerous to invade, and voluntarily submittcd
to a ryoke more intolcrable than any James would have ventured to
inmpofe by force; while tliofe who continued to oppose his incafures,
inflcad of their former popular topic of the King's violent en-
croachmnents on a juriidli&ion which did not belong to hIim, were

ol)!igcd
Book VIII.

1.97.
2o4

obliged to turn their outcries against the corruptions of their own BookVIII.
order'. 597

BY the authority of these assemblies, the Popifli Earls were al- Popish Lords

pardoned.

lowed to make a public recantation of their errors; were absolved
from the sentence of excommunication; and received into the
bosom of the Church. But, not many years after, they relapsed
into their former errors, were again reconciled to the church of
Rome, and by their apoftacy juflified, in some degree, the fears
and scruples of the Clergy with regard to their absolution.

THE MiniRers of Edinburgh owed to the intercession of these

assemblies, the liberty of returning to their charges in the city.
But this liberty was clogged in such a manner, as greatly abridged
their power. The city was divided into diftinEt parishes; the num-
ber of Ministers doubled; persons on whose fidelity the King could
rely were fixed in the new parishes; and these circumstances, ad-
ded to the authority of the late decrees of the Church, contributed
to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclesiastical affairs, which
James possessed during the remainder of his reign.

THE King was so intent on new-modelling the Church, that

the other tranfaaions of this period scarce deserve to be remcem-
bered. The Otavians, envied by the other courtiers, and split-
ing into faclions among theinfclvcs, rcfigncd their commiffioni; and
the adminiflration of the revenue retlu ning into its former channel,
both the king and the nation xwvre dcprivcd of the benefit of thelir
regular and frugal ccconomy.

i Spotfsv. A33. Cal. 5. 189. 233.

T ow \ I 1;) DS
6

TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament was held in order

to restore Huntly, and his aflociates, to their estates and honours,
by repealing the ad of forfeiture passed againfl them. The authority
of this supreme court was Iikewifi employed to introduce a farther
innovation into the Church; but conformable to the system which
the King had now adopted, the motion for this purpose took its rife
from tie Clergy themselves. As the ad of general annexation, and
that eftablifling the Presbyterian government, had reduced the few
Bishops, who flill survived, to poverty and contempt; as thole
who pofieffed the Abbeys, and Priories, were mere laymen, and
many of them temporal Peers, few or none of the Ecclesiastical,
order remained to vote in parliament, and by means of tlat, the
influence of the Crown was considerably diminished there, and a

proper balance to the power and number of the nobles was want-
ing. But the prejudices, the nation had conceived against the
name and charaCter of Bishops, were so violent, that James was
obliged, with the utmost care, to avoid the appearance of a dcfign
to revive that order. He prevailed therefore on the commission
appointed by last assembly to complain to the parliament, that the
Church was the only body in the kingdom deflitute of its repre-
fentatives in that supreme court, where it so nearly concerned every
order to have some, who were bound to defenl its rights; and
to crave that a competent number of the Clergy should be ad-
mitted, according to ancient cuflom, to a feat there. In compliance
with their requcft, an ad was passecd, by which those Ministers,
on whom the King should confer the vacant Bifhoprick:s and Ab-
beys, were intitled to a vote in parliament; and that the Clergy
mightconccivc no jealousy of any encroachment on thcir privilegcs,
it was remitted to the General AflFelbly, to determine what fpiri-

tual
Boo;k VII I.

I 597.

DCecnibcr 19.

Ecclerlflics
rellored to a
feat illn [
lialitint .
2oG

tual jurifdiaion or authority in the goverment of the Church these BookVII.
persons should possess . i598.

THE King, however, found it no cafy matter to obtain the con-

currence of the Ecclesiastical judicatories, in which the aa of par-
liament met with a fierce opposition. Though the Clergy per-
ceived how much lustre this new privilege would reflect upon their
order; though they were not insensible of the great accession of
personal power and dignity, which many of them would acquire,
by being admitted into the supreme council of the nation, their
abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme; and to that, they facri-
siced every consideration of interest or ambition. All the King's
professions of regard for the present constitution of the Church
did not convince them of his sincerity; all the devices that could
be invented for restraining and circumscribing the jurifdidion
of those, who were to be raised to this new honour, did not dimi-
nifh their jealousy and fear. Their own experience had taught
them, with what insinuating progress the hierarchy advances,
and though admitted at firfi with moderate authority, and under
specious pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion. "1 Varnish
' over this scheme, said one of the leading Clergymen, with what
"( colours you please; deck the intruder with the utmost art; under
C" all this difguifc, I scc the horns of his mitre." The fame sentiments
prevailed among many of his brethren, and induced them to re-
jed power, and honours, witl as much zeal, as ever those of their
ordcr courted them. Many, however, were allured by the liopcs
of pireferment; the King himFlf and his Mininciers ciplo)ye the
fame arts, which they had tried so fiiccrsftilly laifl year; and al'tcr Malrch r.
long debates, and much opposition, the Cencral iAficil)ly declared

SpiOtwW. . 50 o. 1 1. S~th jic. VI. c. 23s.

that it was lawful for Miniflers to accept of a feat in parliament;
that it would be highly beneficial to the Church, to have its re-
presentatives in that supreme court; and that fifty-one persons,
a number nearly equal to that of the Ecclcfiafics, who were an-
ciently called to parliament, ihould be chosen from among the
Clergy for that purpose. The manner of their election, toge-
ther with the powers to be vested in them, were left unde-
cided for the present, and furnished matter of future delibe-
ration .

As the profpec of succeeding to the Crown of England drew

nearer, James multiplied precautions in order to render it cer-
tain. As he was allied to many of the Princes of Germany by his
marriage, he sent ambafladors extraordinary to their several courts,
in order to explain the justness of his title to the English throne,
and to desire their afliftance, if any competitor fliould arise to dif-
pute his undoubted rights. These Princes readily acknowledged
the equity of his claim; but the aid they could afford him was
distant and feeble. At the fame time, Edward Bruce abbot of
Kinlofs, his anmbaffador at the English court, solicited Elizabeth,
with the utmost warmth, to recognize his title by some public deed,
and to deliver her own subjects from the calamities, which are
occasioned by an uncertain or disputed fucccffion. But age had
flrcngthened all the paflions, which had, hitherto, induced Eliza-
beth to keep this great qucfion obfcurc, and undecided; and a
general and evasive anfwvcr was all that James could obtain. As no
inmprcflion could be made on the QOecn, the ambafiador was corm-
manded to found the difipofition of her fuibjces, and to try whilaC
progress lie could mnake in gaining them. Bruce pofnclTcd all the

:b Sport'w 450. Caltl. 5. 278.

talcllts
Book VIII.

1598.

'599.

Jamnes endea-
vours with
success to gain
a party in
England.
2o8

2c9

talents of secrecy, judgment, and address, requisite for conduting Book VI I.
a negociation, no less delicate, than important. A Miniller of g).
this character was intitled to the confidence of the English. Many
of the highest rank unbosomed themselves to him without reserve,
and gave him repeated assurances of their resolution to assert his
master's right, in opposition to every Pretender'-. And as fcveral
pamphlets were dispersed, at this time, in England, containing ob-
jecions to his title, James employed some learned men in his king-
dom to answer these cavillers, and to explain the advantages
which would result to both kingdoms, by the union of the Crowns.
These books were eagerly read, and contributed not a little to re-
concile the English to that event. A book published this year, by
the King himself, produced an effect till more favourable. It was
intitled Bafilicon Doron, and contained precepts concerning the art
of government, addressed to Prince Henry his son. Notwithftand-
ing the great alterations and refinements in national tate since
that time, we must allow this to be no contemptible performance,
and not to be inferior to the works of most cotemporary writers,
either in purity of style, or justness of composition. Even the vain
parade of erudition with which it abounds, and which now disgusts
us, raised the admiration of that age; and as it was filled with
those general rules, which speculative authors deliver for rendering
a nation happy, and of which James could discourse with great
plausibility, though often incapable of putting them in practice;
the Englifll conceived an high opinion of his abilities, and cxpecctcd
an incrcalf of national honour and profpcrity, under a Prince to
profoundly flilled in politics, and who gave fiuch a lpcciincn both
fl his wisdom, and of his love to his pcoplc-I'.

* Johlnf. 242. *I- Canld. Spotrwood, 45,.
VOL. It.

E c

'Tll .

THE Queen of England's sentiments concerning James, were

very different from there of her fubjeds. His excessive indulgence
towards the Popish Lords; the facility with which he pardoned their
repeated treasons; his restoring Beaton, the Popish Archbishop of
Glasgow, who had fled out of Scotland at the time of the Refor-
mation, to the possession of the temporalities of that benefice; the
appointing him his Ambassador at the court of France;. the applause
he bestowed, in the Bafilicon Doron, on those who adhered to the
Queen his mother, Elizabeth confidered as so many indications of
a mind alienated from the Protestant religion; and fufpeaed that
he would soon revolt from the profeflion. of it. These suspicions
seemed to be fully confirmed by a. discovery which came from the
Mafler of Gray, who resided at that time in Italy, and who, ra-
ther than susser his intriguing spirit to be idle, demeaned himself
so far as to at as a spy for the English court. He conveyed.to Eli-
zabeth the copy of a letter, written by James to Pope Clement VIII.
in which the King, after many expressions of regard for that pontiff,.
and of gratitude for his favours, declared his firm resolution to treat
the Roman Catholics with indulgence; and, in order to render the.
intercourse between the court of Rome and Scotland more frequent
and familiar, he solicitcd the Pope to promote Drummond, Biflhop
of Vaizon, a Scotfinan, to the dignity of a Cardinal . Elizabeth,
who had received, by another channel -', some imperfecd intelli-
gence of this corrcfpondence, was filled with just furprizc, and im-
mediately dispatchcd Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more fully
into the truth of the matter, and to reproach James for an ation lo
unbecoming a Protcflant Prince. He was no less aitoniflcd at the
accusation, and with a confidence, which nothing but the conscious-
ness of innocence could infpirc, affirmed the whole to be a mere

i' ClJd. 333.

-1- tn. Mes. v0l. i. 37, 52y

calunwyl,~
Book VIII.

159).

Accures him
ofcorrefpond-
ing with the
Pope.
2 10

calumny, and the letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on pur- Book V I I.
pose to bring his sincerity in religion to be fufpedted. Elphingiton iX5..
the' Secretary of itate denied the matter with equal solemnity. It
came to be known by a very singular accident, which happened some
years after, that the information which Elizabeth had received was
well founded, though at the fame time the King's declarations of
his own innocence were perfetly confilrent with truth. Cardinal
Bellarmine, in a reply which he published to a controversial treatise,
of which the King was the author, accused him of having aban-
doned the favourable sentiments which he had once entertained of
the Roman Catholic Religion, and as a proof of this quoted his let-
ter to Clement VIII. It was impossible any longer to believe this
to be a fiction; and it was a matter too delicate to be pasted over
without ftridc inquiry. James immediately examined Elphingfton,
and his confeflion unravelled the whole mystery. He acknowledged
that he had fhuffed in this letter, among other papers which he
laid before the King to be signed, who, fufpeting no such deceit,
subscribed it together with the reft, and without knowing what it
contained; that he had no other motive, however, to this aation,
but zeal for his majesty's service; and, by flattering the Roman Ca-
tholics with hopes of indulgence under the King's government, he
imagined that he was paving the way for his more easy acceflion io
the English throne. The Privy-council of England entertained very
different sentiments of the Secretary's conduct. In their opinion,
not only the King's reputation had been exposcd to reproach, but
his life to danger, by this rani impoflure; they even impnuted the
gun-powder treaoln to the rage and difalppolltincnt of the Papills,
upon finding that the hopes which this letter inliircd ,iere frui-
trated. The Secretary was fcnt a prifoncr into Scotland, to be tried

E e 2 r

SII

for high-treafon. His peers found him guilty; but, by the Qieen's-
intercession, he obtained a pardon .

ACCORDING to the account of other historians, James himself

was no stranger to this correspondence with the Pope; and, if we
believe them, Elphingfton being intimidated by the threats of the
English council, and deceived by the artifices of the Earl of Dun-
bar, concealed some circumstances in his narrative of this tranfac-
tion, and falsified others; and, at the expence of his own fame,
and with the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a veil.over this
part of his mafler's conduct t.

BUT whether we impute the writing of this letter to the Secre-

tary's officious zeal, or to the King's command, it is certain, that,
about this time, James was at the utmost pains to gain the friendship
of the Roman Catholic Princes, as a neceflary precaution towards
facilitating his accession to the English throne. Lord Home, who
was himself a Papist, was entrusted with a secret commiflion to
the Pope J; the Archbishop of Glasgow was an active infirument
with those of his own religion 1[. The Pope expressed such fa-
vourable sentiments both of the King, and of his right to the Crown
of England, that James thought himself bound, some years after,
to acknowledge the obligation in a public manner'*''. Sir James
Lindsay made great progrcfs in gaining the Englifl Papists to ac-
knowledge his Majcfty's title. Of all these intrigues Elizabeth re-
ccived obfcuire hints, from different quarters. The more imper-
fcdly she knew, the more violently fle finfpced the King's dc-
signs, and the natural jcaloufy of her temper incrcafing with age,
flc obfcrvcd his conduct with greater solicitude than ever.

p SPots. 456, 507. J"hnlf. 4.18 1 Cald. vol. v. 322. vi. 147.
X \illw. Melm, vol. ii. 57. U Cald. vol. vi. 147. *' Ibid. vol. v. (o04.

Till,:
BookVIII.

I599.

James atgreat
pains to gain
the Roman
Catholics.
212

THE questions with regard to the eletion and power of the re-

presentatives of the church, were finally decided this year, by the
General Aflembly, which met at Montrose. That place was
chosen, as moit convenient for the ministers of the north, among
whom the King's influence chiefly lay. And although great num-
bers resorted from the northern provinces, and the King employed
his whole interest, and the authority of his own presence, to gain
a majority, the following regulations were with difficulty agreed
on. That the General Assembly shall recommend fix persons to
every vacant benefice, which gave a title to a feat in Parliament,
out of whom the King shall nominate one; that the person so elet-
ed, after obtaining his feat in Parliament, shall neither propose, nor
consent to any thing there, that may affect the interest of the Church,
without special inftrudcions to that purpose; that he shall be an-
fwerable for his conduct to every General Aflembly; and submit to
its censure, without appeal, upon pain of infamy and excommu-
nication; that he {hall discharge the duties of a Pastor in a parti-
cular congregation; that he shall not usurp any ecclesiastical jurif-
diCtion, superior to that of his other brethren; that if the Church
inflid on him the censure of deprivation, he fliall, thereby, forfeit:
his feat in Parliament; that he shall annually resign his commifflon
to the General Affcmbly, lwhich may be reilored to him, or not,
as the AsSembly, with the King's approbation, fliall judge mofl ex-
pedient for the good of the Church i-. Nothing could be more re-
pugnant to the idea of Epiicopal government, that there regulations.
It was not in confcquence of rights derived from their office, but of
powers conferred by a commiflion, that cccclciaflical pcrfons were
to be admitted to a scat in Parliament; they wcrc the rcprcclnta-
fivcs, not the filpciors of the Clcrgy. Dcflitute of all pii itual auw.

Book VIII.

i 600.

March 8.
His regoJla-
ticncs with ie-
g;l:dl to the
church.
" Spotfwood, 453, 457. Cald. vol. v. 368.

tllority,

213

BookVIiI. thority, even their civil jurifdidion was temporary. James, how-

160c. ever, flattered himself that they would soon be able to shake off

there fetters, and gradually acquire all the privileges which belong-
ed to the episcopal order. The clergy dreaded the fame thing.
And he contended for, and they opposed the nomination of these
commissioners, not so much on account of the powers then veiled
in them, as of those, to which it was believed they would soon
attain *.
Gowry'S con- DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an unusual tranquil-

lity. The clergy, after many firuggles, were brought under great
subjection; the Popish Earls were reltored to their estates and ho-
nours, by the authority of Parliament, and with the content of the
Church; the rei of the nobles were at peace among themselves,
and obedient to the royal authority; when, in the midfl of this Ds-
curity, the King's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by a con-
fpiracy altogether unexpeced, and almost inexplicable. The au-
thors of it were John Ruthven Earl of Gowrie, and his brother
Alexander, the sons of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
1584. Nature had adorned both these young men, especially the
elder brother, with many accomplishments, to which education had
added its most elegant improvements. More learned, than is usual
among persons of their rank; more religious, than is common at
their age of life; generous, brave, popular; their countrymen, far
from thinking them capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the
molt sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Notwithflanding all
thcic noble qualities, rome unknown motive engaged them in a
conliq)iracy, which, if we adhere to the account commonly received,
mufl be tranfinitted to posterity, as one of the most wicked, a,

* Spotfwood, 454.
214

well as one of the worst concerted, of which hifltory makes any B3ookVil.
mention. 6c o.

ON the fifth of August, as the King, who resided during the

hunting season in his palace of Falkland, was going out to his sport
early in the morning, he was accotled by Mr. Alexander Ruthven,
who, with an air of very great importance, told the King, that the
evening before he had met an unknown man, of a suspicious aspet,
walking alone in a by-path, near his brother's house at Pcrth; and
on searching him, had found, under his cloak, a pot filled with a
vast quantity of foreign gold; that he had immediately seized botlr
him and his treasure, and without communicating the matter to
any person, had kept him confined and bound in a solitary house;
and that he thought it his duty to impart such a singular event, first
of all to his Majesty. James immediately fufpeaed this unknown
person to be a trafficking priest; supplied with foreign coins, in or-
der to excite new commotions in the kingdom; and.refolved to im-
power the Magistrates of Perth to call the person before them, and
inquire into all the circumfrances of the flory. Ruthven violently
opposed this rcfolution, and.with many arguments urged the King
to ride dirctly to Perth, and to examine the matter witl his own
eyes. Mean while the chace began; and James, notwithflandingl
his paflion for that amusement, could not help rumlinatiing on the
flrangenefs of the tale, and on Rutlivcn's importunity. At lafl, he
called him, and promised when the sport was over, to set out foio
Perth. The chace, however, continued long; and Rutthven, who
all the vhile kept close by the King, was fill calling on him to mnke
hafce. At the death of the buck, he would not allow Jamnes toi
ilay till a frchi liorle was brought him ; and obierving the Dluke (of
Lcnnox and the Earl of Mar preparing to accompany tche King, lie
cntreatcd himi to countermand thcm. This James rcfufCtl ; a:(l

thotu~; h

215

though 'Ruthven's impatience and anxiety, as well as the apparent
perturbation in his whole behaviour, raised tome suspicions in his
mind; yet his own curiosity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on
him to set out for Perth. When within a mile of the town, Ruth-
ven rode forward to inform his brother of the King's arrival, though
;he had already dispatched two messengers for that purpose. At a
little distance from the town, the Earl, attended by several of the
citizens, met the King, who had only twenty persons in his train.
No preparations were made for the King's entertainment; the Earl
appeared pensive and embarrassed, and was at no pains to attone,
by his courtesy or hospitality, for the bad fare with which he treated
his guests. When the King's repast was over, his attendants were
led to dine in another room, and he being left almost alone, Ruth-
ven whispered him, that now was the time to go to the chamber
where the unknown person was kept. James commanded him to
bring Sir Thomas Erskine along with them; but, instead of that,
Ruthven ordered him not to follow: and conduting the King up
a stair-case, and then through several apartments, the doors of which
he locked behind him, led him at last into a small study, in which
there flood a man clad in armour, and with a sword and dagger
by his fide. The King, who expected to have found one disarmed
and bound, flarted at the fight, and inquired if this was the per-
1ton; but Ruthven snatching the dagger from the girdle of the
man in armour, and holding it to the King's breast, " Remember,
" laid he, how unjustly my father suffered by your command; you
' arc now my prifoncr; submit to mydifpofal without refinance, or
' outcry; or this dagger fiall inflantly avenge his blood." James
cxlpofiilattcel with Riithven, intrcatcd, and flattered him. The
in;ii, whom lie bfund in the fludy, flood, all the while, trclnbling
lii dil;naycd, without courage cither to aid the King, or to fc-

ir~~~ ~~~co! dl
BookVIII.

1 6oo.
-Z16

ond his aggressor. Ruthven protested that if the King raised no Book V III.
outcry, his life fliould be safe; and, moved by some unknown rea- 6oo,
son, retired in order to call his brother, leaving to the man in ar-
mour the care of the King, whom he bound by oath, not to make
any noise during his absence,

WHILE the King was in this dangerous situation, his attendants

growing impatient toknow whither he had retired, one of Gowry's
attendants entered the room hastily, and told them that the King had
just rode away towards Falkland. All of them rushed out into the
street; and the Earl, in the utmost hurry, called so; their horses.
But, by this time, his brother had returned to the King, and swear-
ing that now there was no remedy; he behoved to die; offered
to bind his hands. Unarmed as James was, he scorned to submit
to that indignity; and closing with the afaflin, a fierce firuggle
ensued. The man in armour flood as formerly, amazed and mo-
tionlefs; and the King dragging Ruthven towards a window, which
during his absence he had persuaded the person with whom he
was left, to open, cried, with a wild and affrighted voice, " Trea-
" son! Treason ! Help! I am murdered !" His attendants heard,
and knew the voice; and saw at the window, a hand which grasped
the King's neck with violence. They flew with precipitation to his
afliftance. Lennox and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the
principal flair-cafe, where they found all the doors slut, which they
battered with the utmost fury, endeavouring to lurft theli open.
13at Sir John Ramsay entering by a back-flair, which lcd to the
a;partmcnlt where tllie King was, fotund the door open ; and rushing
upon ]utllhvCn, who was fiill flruggling with the King, Ilrnck hilml
twice with his ldagger, and thrult himi towards the flair-cafc, Vwhlr
Sir Thom as LErfkine and Sir Hugh IIcrrcis met and killed liin ; lie

VoL. 11. .F f cryin',g;

217

crying with his last breath, " Alas! I am not to blame for this
" action." During this scuffle, the man, who had been concealed
ill the fludy, escaped unobserved. Together with Ramlfay, Erskine,
and Herreis, one Wilson a footman entered the room where the
King was, and before they had time to shut the door, Gowrie rushed
in with a drawn sword in each hand, followed by fevcn of his atten-
dants well armed, and with a loud voice threatened them all with in-
slant death. They immediately thrufI the King into the little fludy,
and flutting the door upon him, encountered the Earl. Notwith-
handing the inequality of nu mbers, Sir John Ramsay pierced Gowrie
through the heart, and he fell down dead without uttering aword; his
followers having received several wounds, immediately fled. Three
of the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the conflict. A dread-
ful noise continued fRill at the opposite door, where many persons
laboured in vain to force a passage; and the King being assured that
they were Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it was opened on
the inside. They ran to the King, whom they unexpectedly found
safe, with transports of congratulation; and he, falling on his knees,
with all his attendants round him, offered solemn thanks to God
for such a wonderful deliverance. The danger, however, was not
yet over. The inhabitants of the town, whoie provoi Gowrie was,
and by whom lie was extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the
two brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded the houfc, threatening
revenge, with many infilent and opprobrious speeches againlt the
Kiing. james endeavoured to pacify the ennaged multitude, by
fplcakling to thein from the window; lie admitted their magifh-atcs
into tihe hou!c; rcla'i; to tllhe the vwhole circulmfances of the
tlah ; and thecir firy fuhilding by dgrlcs, they dil]jcrsid. On l'arch]-
lg t lic E arl'. po klcts f r paper;, l hat migl lt di lcover ls is de f1giis and
accomlnliPccs, ,nothinSg w:as lobud Lbut a I all parchmCent ba;g f1 ll

(. [

218
13o okzV1lllA.

i 6oo.

of magical charaCers, and words of enchantment; and if we may
believe the account of the conspiracy published by the King, "while
" these were about him, the wound of which he died, bled not;

but as soon as they were taken away, the blood gushed out in
great abundance." After all the dangerous adventures of this busy

day, the King returned in the evening to Falkland, having conm-
mitted the dead bodies of the two brothers to the cufloJy of the
M\agistrates of Perth.

NOTWITHSTANDING the minute detail which the King gave of

all the circumntances of this conspiracy against his life, the motives
which induced the two brothers to attempt an action so detestable,
the end they had in view, and the accomplices, on whose aid they
depended, were altogether unknown. The words of Ruthven to
the King gave some grounds to think, that the desire of revenging
their father's death had instigated them to this attempt. But, what-
ever injuries their father had suffered, it is scarce probable that they
could impute them to the King, whose youth, and fubjedion, at that
time, to the violence of a faction, exempted him from being the object
ofrefentment, on account of ations which were not done by his com-
mand. James had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs which the
father had suffered, by benefits to his children ; and Gowric himself,
fcnfible of his favour, acknowledged it with the warmest cxprcf-
sions of gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, being conivited
of affifling him in llis aflault on the King's fcrvants, were executed
at Perth; but they could give no light into the motives, whicih had
promipted their mailer to an adiomn Jo) rtepugnant to therc acknow-
ledgments. Diligclt carclil twas lmadle lor the lC:'l en conec;;lcd in
tlic fluldy, and from him in;reat; (liilc'ovcris \x'rc cXpL)ClcId. Ilti
Andrew IcnIcrltio the ,Larl's ficward, ']io, 11ponl a lprollil' o)l

1 fL i' ardon,

' i9

Book VIII.

The mo:irc
of the confpi-

rators not ea-
fily explained.

BookVIIT. pardon, confessed himself to be the man, was as much a firanger to

600o. his master's designs as the reft-; and though placed in the study by

Cowrie's, command, he did not even know for what end that flation
had been assigned him. The whole transaCtion remained as impe-
netrably dark as ever; and the two brothers, it was concluded, had'
concerted.their scheme without either confident or accomplice, with
unexampled secrecy as well as wickednesss

Sprt's dif- AN accident, no less firange than the other circumstances of the
cuvtries con-
c¢rsing it. flory, and which happened'nine years after, discovered that this

opinion, however plausible, was ill founded; and that the two
brothers had not carried on their machinations all alone. One
Sprot, a notary, having whispered among several persons that he knew
tome secrets. relating to Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy-council
thought the matter worthy of their attention, and ordered him
to be seized. His confession was partly voluntary, and; partly
forced from him by torture. According to his account, Logan of
Reftalrig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, but of dissolute
morals, was privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
in his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviewa
with him,. in order to concert the plan of their operations; the
Earl had corresponded with him to the fame purpose; and one
Bour, Logan's confident, was trustcd with the fecrct, and carried
the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour were now dead.
But Sprot affirmed that he had read- letters written both by Gowrie
and Logan, on that occalion; and in confirmation of his teflimony,
levcral of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fatal to himself had
prompted Sprot to ieal from.among Bour's papers, were produced '".

Tlivcs

* Logan's letters were five in nunber. One to Btnti, anothcr to Gowrie, anil tlhrec
of them without any dirction; no r coutld Spr.9t (Iifcovcr lthc Iname of the pcrfon to

whlmIIA,
220

These were compared, by the privy-council, with papers of Lo-
gan's hand writing, and the resemblance was manifest. Persons of
undoubted credit, and well qualified to judge of the matter, exa-
mined them, and swore to their authenticity. Death itself did not
exempt Logan from prosecution, his bones were dug up, and tried
for High Treason, and by a sentence, equally odious and illegal .;

his

whom they were written. Logan gives him the appellation of Right Honourable.
It appears from this, however, and from other words in the letter, Crom. 95. that
there were several persons privy to the conspiracy. The date of the first letter is
July 8th. Mr. Ruthven had communicated the matter to Logan only five days be-
fore. Ibid. It appears from the original summons of Forfaulture against Logan's
heirs, that Bour, though he had letters addressed to him with regard to a confpi-
racy equally dangerous and important, was so illiterate that he could not read.
"Jacobus Bour, literarum prorfus ignarus, dici Georgii opera in legendis omnibus
" fcriptis ad eum mifnis, vel pertinentibus, utebatur." This is altogether Itrange;
and nothing but the capricious character of Logan can account for his chufing such
a confident.

By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of High Treason might be tried

even after death. This pracice was adopted by the Scots, without any limitation,
Parl. i540. c. 69. But the unlimited exercise of this power was soon conceived to
be dangerous; and the Crown was laid under proper restriCtions, by an aa A. D.
1542, which has never been printed. The words of it are, "' And becafe the said
Lords (i. e. the Lords of articles) think the said act (viz. in 1540) too gcncral, and
prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, therefore tfatutes and ordains that the said
aEt shall have no place in time coming, but against the heirs of them that notori-
nufly commits or shall commit Icfe najefty againif the King's pcrfbn, against the
realm for averting the fame, and against them that hiall haippcn to betray the King'i
army allenarly, and being notourly known in their time; and the heirs of there
persons to be called and judged within five years after the deccare of the said per.
sons coinmitters of the said crimes ; and the said time being bypast, the said heils
never to be pursucd for the fame." The fentcnce against Logan violated this star:re
in two particulars. He was not notourly known during his life to be an accoil-
plicc in the crilme for which he was tried ; and his heirs were called in qucflion nmore
tl;ln five years after his death. It is rcm.ulk;ablc lhat this flltLIttc iCtcs not to ha.iv

bhct n

22
Book VI I.

60o0.

BookV ill. his lands were forfeited, and his posterity declared infamous. Sprot

wo vas condemned to be hanged for misprision of treason. He ad-
hered to his confcflion to the last, and having promised, on the
fcafFtold, to give the Specators a sign in confirmation of the truth
of what he had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, after he was
.thrown off the ladder by the executioner .

BUT though it be thus unexpetedly discovered that Gowrie did

not at without aflciates, little additional light is thrown, bythis dif-
covery, on the motives and intention of his conduct. It appears
almost incredible that two young men of such diftinguithed virtue,
-fliould revolt, all at once, from their duty, and attempt a crime so
atrocious, as the murder of their Sovereign. It appears still more
improbable, that they fliould have concerted their undertaking with

so

been attended to in the parliament which forfeited Logan. Another singular cir-
cumrtance deserves notice. As it is a maxim of justice that no person can be tried
in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of their forms, and often absurd
in their devices for preserving them, they contrived that in any process against a
dead person, his corps or bones shall be presented at the bar. Examples of this
occur frequently in the Scottifl history. After the battle of Corrichie, the dead
body of the Earl of Huntly was presented in parliament, before fentenc of for-
Jfilturc was pronounced against him. For the fame reason the bodies of Gowrie
and his brother were preservcd, in order that they might be produced in parliament.
Logan's bones, in compliance with the fame rule, were dug up. Mackcnz. Crim.
Law, Book I. Tit. 6. §. 22.

* It aplears that Alchlilhlop Spotfwvood was present at the execution of Sl',lt.

Cr:.n. I15: and yet hc fcCms to have given no credit to his dl.ftovcrics. Tlich 11,1-
ncr in which lie fpcaks of him is remarkl able, '" Whllclhcr or not I lhould mcnLio(

tc t!c airaiginclent and cxecution of Gcorgc Sprot, who fuijfrcd at dtlinhtrh'l,

' I aim doubltful. His confiflion, though svolnta-y and conilint, carrying fi.ll
Lt pi, obalility. 'This man d()of, &c. It feeied to be very fililon, and a
lC Incre invention of the mianl's own brainl, for neither did lie filcw the Ilet'r, In'I'

" cld

I
2_2

so little foresight and prudence. If they intended that the deed
Ihould have remained, concealed, they could not have cholen a more
improper scene for executing it than their own house. If they
intended that Henderson should have struck the blow, they could
not have pitched on a man more destitute of the courage, that mull
direQ the hand of an assassin; nor could they expe& that he, unfb-
licited, and unacquainted with their purpose, would venture on
such a desperate action. If Ruthven meant to flab the King
with his own hand, why did he withdraw the dagger after it was
pointed at his breaf ? How could he leave the King, after such a
plain declaration of his intention ? Was it not preposterous to com-
mit him to the keeping of such a timid and false associate, as Hen-
derfon ? For what purpose did he waite time, in binding the hands
of an unarmed man, whom he might easily have dispatched with

" could any wife man think that Gowric, who went about the treason so secretly,
" would have communicated the matter to such a man as Logan was known to be."
p. 508. Spotfwood could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which Logan had
been tried, and of the proof brought of the authenticity of his letters. He hin-
fclf was probably present in parliament at the trial. The earl of Dunba-, of whom
he always speaks with the highest respect, was the person who directed the process
against- Logan. Such a peremptory declaration againif the truth of Sprot's evi-
dence, notwithflanding all thcfe circumstances, is furpriziing. Sir T7homas Iamiiil-
ton, the King's advocate at that time, and afterwards Earl of 1-Iadiiilton, Ieiprc-
I:.!s tile proof produced at Loga'iis trial as extremcly convinci:ng; andi il an ori-
irnil: lettcr of his to the King 21 it of JLute 1609, (iln 13il. Fi;cullt. Jurid. ) after .lC;1i-
t)lihnlg the nanner in which the trial had bccn coIndu.tied, he thus goes on:

' ihen the roatio tle atn of he fummilonls was-rcfcrred to ithe L(ors of' Articles' vote,
tli" foutiritl uniformly, all in one voice, the Iaid fliulmonli to be lo c' .:lry pirll
tl.: tlhey eecmced to contend who flioulil be able nioot zc.llofny to c\xirc,; ih: !i..f-
,.i:.11 of his lic;.t, not conly by the mloll pithy word:, hut b, te[ars of joy; lii\ r'c
ol th chll ltllc collflcbi] , tha tll iat whit col tlt:y Jiilrit'l ,it tlLir cLrlt)' il' U

t',u

hul.;c was now

1 .) nl:.'ifll, tlhat they bcIliv il to citcicm telic

ti: ",i;t

, \i J !i ,::.
a lly longcr ;t t!c lotldeclare- their ill'irted 'cfluttLioll of tle triutll of lltL t,,;:r ; '.'

Book VIII.

i 60o,

22

TH E H ISTORY
BookVIII. his sword? Had providence permitted them to embrue their

16oo. hands in the blood of their Sovereign, what advantage could have

accrued to them by his death ? and what claims or pretensions
could they have opposed to the rights of his children* ? Inevitable
and instant vengeance, together with perpetual infamy, were the
only consequences they could expet to follow such a crime.

ON the other hand, it is impossible to believe that the King had

formed any design against the life of the two brothers. They had
not incurred his indignation, by any crime; and were, in no de-
gree, the objects of his jealousy or hatred t; nor was he of a spirit

so

v It has been asserted, that, in consequence of the King's death, the Earl of Gow-

ric might have pretended to the Crown of England, as the son of Dorothea Stew-
art daughter of Lord Methven by Margaret of England, who, after her divorce
from the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third husband. Burnet Hist.
of his own times. But this assertion is ill founded. It appears, from undoubted evi-
dence that Lord Methven had only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its
infancy, and Dorothea Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queen Margaret,
but of Janet Stewart Lord Methven's second Wife, a daughter of John Earl of
Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though Gowrie had really been descended from the
blood royal of England, the King had at that time a son and a daughter; and befidcs
them, Lady Arabella Stewart daughter of Charles Earl of Lennox had a preferable
title to the Crown of England.

t- Sir Henry Nevile, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood, imputes the death of the

two brothers to a caule not mentioned by any of our Historians. " Out of Scot-
land we hear that there is no good agreement, but rather an open diffidence be-
twixt the King and his wife, and many arc of opinion that the difcovcry of some
affcctioi between her and the Earl of Gowrie's brother (who was killed with him)
was the truefl caure and motive of that tragedy." Winw. Mem. vol. 1. 2:4. VWhe-
ther the following pafiitges in NicholSon's letter be any confirmation, of that fprjii-
cion, i:; fillmitted to the reader. In his letter Sept. 22, 1602, he nentiuns the rc-
turn of Gowiic's two younger brothers into Scotland, and addls, -" the cominig in

of
8

so fangulnary, or so noted for rash and desperate valour, as to have
attempted to murder them in their own house, where they were fur-
rounded with many domestics, he only with a slender and unarmed
train; where they-could call to their assistance the inhabitants of a
city, at the devotion of their family, while he was at a distance
from all aid; and least of all would he have chosen for his afociates,
in such an enterprize, the Earl of Mar, and the Duke of Lennox,
the former conneced in close friendship with the house of Gowrie,
and the latter married to one of the Earl's filers.

WHICHSOEVER of these opposite fyflems we embrace; whether

wre impute the intention of murder to Gowrie, or to the King;
insuperable difficulties arise, and we are involved in darkness, myf-
tery and contradicions. Perhaps the source of the whole confpi-
racy ought to be searched for deeper, and by deriving it from a
more remote cause, we may discover it to be less criminal.

To keep the King of Scots in continual dependance, was one

great object of Elizabeth's policy. In order to this fle sometimes
toothed him; and sometimes bribed his Miniflers and favourites;
and when The failed of attaining her end by these means, she

of these two, and the Queen of Scots dealing with them, and fending away and fur-
nifhing Mrs. Bcatrix [their sifter] with such information as Sir Thomas Erskine has
given, hath bred great suspicion in the King of Scots that they come not in but upon
some dangerous plot." In another letter January i, 1603. " The day of writing
my lafi Mrs. Beatrix Ruithvcn was brought by the Lady Paifly, and Mrs. of Angus,
as one of their gentlewomen into the court in the evening, and flowed il a chamber
prepared for her by the Qlcen's direction, where the Qieen had much time and con-
ference with her. Of this the King got notice, and (hewed his dillike thereof to ihe
Quecn, gently rcproving her for it, and examining quietly of the Qecen's seC vants of
the fame, and of other matters thereunto belonging with fucl difcrciion and fccrecy
as requires tlch a matter."

VOL. II. G g rcnr,;!ra!cd

225
Book VIhH.

, 6co.

A conjefture
concerning
the intention
of the con-
fpirators.

Book VIII. encouraged the Clergy to render any administration The difirufted

1 6.o. unpopular, by decrying it, or stirred up some faction of the nobles

to oppose, and to overturn it. They, unacquainted with the arts
of undermining a Minifry by intrigues, had recourse to the ruder
pra"cice of rendering thiemfelves maflers of the King's person, that
they might thereby obtain the dires&ions of his councils. Those
noblcs, who leizcd the King at the RaidR of RltLhvelz, were infti-
gated, and supported by her. Bothwell, in all his wild attempts,
enjoyed her protection, and found a retreat in her dominions. The
connections lwhich Jams had been forming of late with the Ro-
man Catholic Princes, his fecrct negociations in England with her
fuljcels, and the maxims by which he governed his own kingdom,
all contributed to excite her jealousy. She dreaded some great
Revolution in Scotland to be approaching, and it was her interePc
to prevent it. The Earl of Gowrie was one of the most powerful
of the Scottish nobles, and descended from ancestors warmly at-
tached to the English intcrcft. He had adopted the fame fyflem,
and believed the welfare of his country to be inceparably connet-
ed with the fubfiftcnce of the alliance between the two kingdoms.
During his rcfidence at Paris, he had contracEed an intimate friend-
ihip with Sir Henry Ncvill, the Queen's ambafador there, and was
recommended l)y him to his Court, as a person of whom great ulc
might be made '. Elizabeth rccei-vcd him, as lie pafled througli
I-'ngland, \witih din-nguishcd marls of rcllpcc and favour. From
al] tllhrc circu;lllancc,, a fi!tfpicion may aricf, that the plan of the
confrpracy agaiiml ti IintL; was formnedl at that time, in concert
\'xitl t er. S tcli a Ill'icio)l prevailed il that agce, and from the
lettcrs of KI'iTo!lcn, i'.li7.aletl's agcnt in Scotlpnld, it appears
not to be dcl;itutc of IoLulndation. Aln 1l nglifl filip was obflrvcJd

;' 1.¥inw. I5, 1. 5(.

hIovcrli 2;,
o26

227

hovering, for some time, in the mouth of the Frith of Forth. BookVII.
The Earl's two younger brothers fled into England, after the ill I60o.
success of the conspiracy, and were protected by Elizabeth. And
James himself, though he prudently concealed it, took great um-
brage at her behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's intrigues
in Scotland tended to hurt the King's perion, but only to circum-
scribe his authority, and to thwart his schemes. Iis life was the
surest safeguard of her own, and restrained the Popiih pretenders
to her Crown, and their abettors, from desperate attempts, to
which their impatience and bigotry might, otherwise, have urged
them on. To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sovereign,
would, on her part, have been an ad of the utmost imprudence.
Nor does this seem to have been the intention of the two brothers.
Mr. Ruthven, first of all, endeavoured to decoy the King to Perth,
without any attendants. When there proved more numerous than
was expected, the Earl employed a stratagem in order to separate
them from the King, by pretending that he had rode away towards
Falkland, and by calling haflily for their horses, that they might
follow him. By shutting James up, mean while, in a distant corner
of the house, and by attempting to bind his hands, their design
seems to have been rather to seize than to afilfiinate him. And
though Gowrie had not collecaed his followers, so as to have been
able to detain him long a prifoncr, in that part of the kingdom,
by open force, lie Inight Iton Ihave been conveyed aboard the
English ship, Vwhich wVaited perlaps to receive him, and he might
have been landed at Fafl-Cafl.l, a lhouf of LoIanl':, in wliticlh,
according to many olicuric hints ill li:, lCttr, U;IlC rICldezvouS o*i
the conlfp i'raors was to be licld. Am.i !l t !c r.i.'.c and terror,

to himi, it Vwas cxtci i cl)' n.ii it 1(r

I li tto c( '11 li: it ]i: 1:,'
was foiL)ht. It was the Litlcril ofl ll his 1h iloo.,vi; to Ctl'i .

CI .,'; 2, ]Ih n.

him in this belief, and to magnify his danger, in order to add'toa
the importance, and merit of their own services. And thus his
fear, and their vanity, aided by the credulity and wonder, which the
contemplation- of any great and tragical event, when not fully un-
deriRood, is apt to inspire, augmrented the whole tranfad-ion. On
the other hand, the extravagance and improbability of the circunm-
stances, which were addedi detraced from the credit of those,,
which really happened; and even furnished pretences for calling-
in question the truth of the whole conspiracy.

THE account of what had happened at Perth reached Edinburgh,

next morning. The privy-council commanded the Minitfers of that
city instantly to assemble their people; and, after relating to them
the circumstances of the conspiracy formed against the King's life,,
to return public thanks to God, for the protection' which he had so,
visibly afforded him. But as the first accounts transmitted to Edin-
burgh, written in a hurry, and while the circumstances of the
conspiracy were but imperfealy known, and the pafilons which it
excited strongly felt, were indiftinac, exaggerated, and contradic-
tory, the Ministers laid hold of this; and though. they offered to
give public thanks to God for the King's safety, they refused to
enter into any detail of particulars, or to utter from the chair of
truth, what appeared to be frill dubious and uncertain.

A FEW days after, the King returned to Edinburgh;-andc though

Calloway, the Miniftlr of his own Chapel, made an harangue to
the people at the public cross, in which he recited all the circum -
flances of the conspiracy; though James himself, in their hearing,
confirmed his account; though he commanded a narrative of the
whole tranfadlioi to be publiflhtd; the Ministers of that city, as well
as many of their brethren,. still contilnued incredulous and uncon-,

3' viinccd,
BookVIIi.

r6oo.

Many difbe-
lieve the ac-
count pub-
lifhed by the
sing.

vinced. Their high eftcem of Gowrie, their jealousy of every part
of the King's conduct, added to some false and many improbable
circumstances in the narrative, not only led them to suspect the
whole, but gave their suspicions an air of credibility. But at length,
the King, partly by arguments, partly by thleats, prevailed on all of
them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that they were convinced,
of the truth of the eonfpiracy. He could be brought no further
than to declare, that he reverenced the King's account of the tranf-
acion, but could not fay that he himself was perfwaded of the truth
of it. The scruples or obstinacy of a tingle man would have been
little regarded, but as the fame spirit of incredulity began to spread
among the people, the example of one, in so high reputation for
integrity and abilities, was extremely dangerous. The King rwas
at the utmost pains to convince and to gain Bruce, but finding it
impossible to remove his doubts, he deprived him of his benefice,
and after repeated delays, and many attempts towards a reconcile-
ment, banished him the kingdom *.

TH E proceedings of parliament were not retarded by any scruples

of this fort. The dead bodies of the two brothers were produced
there, according to law; an indictment for High Treason was pre-
ferred againit them; witnesses were examined; and, by an unani-
mous sentence, their estates and honours were forfeited; the pu-.
nifhment due to traitors were inflited on their dead bodies ; and-
as if the punishment hitherto in use did not express sufficient dc-
teftation of their crimes, the parliament enacted that the surname
of Ruthven fould be abolished, and in order to prcfcrve the memory
of the King's miraculous cfcapc, and to declare the fcnfc which tlic:
nation had of the divine goodness, to all future ages, appoinitcd:

Book VIII.

1600..

Proceedil e
Ds p.airlom t'
' Spots. 461, &c. Cald. 5. 389, &c.

tiL

Book VIII. the fifth of August to be observed, annually, as a day of public
"'- - "'t-ankfgiivingo :
I Ca00. Ilblgv i

THOUGH

' A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the King published a Dif-

cotjif' of thcir vile anzd unnlatral conspiracy again/i his life. - In the year I713, George
E:arl of Croniertie publilhed " An Historical account of the conspiracy by the Earl
I of Gowrie, and Robert Logan of Reftalrig against James VI." He seems
not to have fcen the account which the King himself had given of that matter,
and borrows the whole historical part from Spotfwood, and other authors; but he
has extracled frnm the public records the depositions of the witnesses produced by
the King's Council, in order to make good the charge againRf the two brothers
and Logan their aflbciate. From these two treatises our knowledge of all the ma-
terial circumifances of the conspiracy is derived. The evidence which they con-
tain, one would expel to be authentic and decisive. An account of a fact, still
recent, publiflhed by royal authority, and the original depositions of persons exa-
nined in presence of the highest court in the nation, ought to convey a degree of
evidence fcldom attained in historical rclations, and to exclude all remaining doubt
and uncertainty. But as every thing with regard to this tranfaalion is dark and
problematical, the King's account and the depositions of the witnesses not only vary,
but contradict each other in so many circumflances, that much room is still left for
hesitation, and historical scepticism. The tellimony of Henderson is the fullest anl
nioft important, but in fevcral particulars the King's account and his are contra-
diclory. I. According to the King's account, while Mr. Ruthven was holding the
d.i"ler at his breafi, " the fellow in the study flood quaking and trembling." Disc.
I1. But lleniderfoii fays that he iinifilf wrefled the dagoer out of Rlr. Ruthven's
hand c. )ic. 53. C;om. 50. Hlenderfon likewise boascd to his wife that he had
that dayr twice fcived the Kiltig from being ftibhcd. DiTe. 5 f Ciom. 53. II. 1he
lii' g aflnlts thit llenderfion opened the vwiidow during Mr. lurhvcn's abfencc
1Di f. 2,. Iclclifditln leporfs that Che vwas ,oly altctrlptin.l to open it wviel Mr.
Rulthven ictliinid, ;1nld thlat (drlilng the fi;l:i:c blcitVeci i:.c King and lhimn, lie
opcntc1 it. lifc. 53, 51- C roi. 51, 52. 11l. If wc m.y b

I ive tlhe King, tile

fillow in the fiudly Hlood, duiing tlhe itlru'lc, blind the I-ing's bnck inadlivce anl
t.MinlIlii ', all the time1 )i.

Di 27. 27. Iht Ilundclif(Un afliinr :; thl t le snatched av;

ti.c ,.ttl: r W i witV ih ai r. iutlivcn attempted to bind tl e King; tihat ihe pirilld
b,>c.! lunviir. cl':, i;and while hie was cidlcalvoutring to flop the K1ing's 1moutlh, a;id
ti;i.t lie opened [nle ,inroI .
1 . . CioUdo. 5i. I5.. By the King's iccoti:t,

JMr.

iTHOUGH Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a idden and a great BookVilI.
alarm, it was followed by no confcquences of importance, and -o.

<,* C' ,,
I [ '-

aiF ,, I!n 1 i-

Mr. Ruthven left him in the fludy, and went away in order to meet with his brother,
and the Earl came up the flairs for the fame purpose. Dirc. 23. HenIlrfon depoles
that when Mr. Ruthven left the King, " he believes that he did not pass from the
door." Crom. 51. It is apparent both from the situation of the house, and from
other circumltances, that there could not pollibly have been any interview between
the brothers at this time. Disc. 23.

Henderson was twice examined, first at Falkland before the privy-council in Au-

gufl, and next at Edinburgh before the Parliament in November. Not to mention
fume lefTer variations between there depositions, we ihall point out two which are
remarkable. In his first deposition Mr. HenJerfon relates the mofl material circum-
stance of the whole in these words. " MIr. Ruthven pulled out the deponent's dagger
"and held the fame to his Majcfty's breasd, faying, r-;::?,;'Z,- you of ?m7y fat/l,'cr's
" murdelrr; you hallZ now die fr it, and minting to his Ftigllneflc's heart, with the
" dagger, the deponent threw the fame out of Mr. Ruthven's hand's, and fwo-e that
"as God shall judge his foul, that if Mr. Ruthven had retained the dagger in his
" hand, the space a man may go fix fleps, he would have stricken lhe King to the
" hilts with it." Disc. 52. But at his second examination he varied ifrom this in two
material circumflances. Firfi, the words which he at that time put in Mr. Ruthven's
niouth while he held the dagger at the King's breai, are, ," :ri, s;/ i,::v? b,' : .'?'
. -

S' tjlr; remIlembcr on my father's cNih)." Secondly, 'when he thrl atcned hnl v.:th
death, it was only to deter him from making any ioire. ' ':/.';' ',/.;.',, cr ly

C/if/y?

0 y !j;! /'.'/ ''./; . 2. In his filr deposition, the wvords ol; -\r. ti'O'.,

i i\'',;'n

i,c rctuincd to the chamler wlhcre e had left thc Kinn, r ' -, / ;;

' /;

' (C. d :j'l /i (/1; e.: `Iut in his fecolndt dipofitiou. B" y G(oi i;c'C i; rc !
" and ufecred to bind his AMa .jcfy's hands.' Crom. 5 ;. The .atcri. :o : , i
Ili, a;lc omitted. The fiilt deposition fccns plainly to illinate th;: it t a: ;

i.' u r ii i'

inciititon to nmIl rdr

i te icKing. The fecoiid would Ic.ld us to coci. ec tl; li. hi...l I;o

otlicr dcfign tihan to detain him as a priioner.

There arc lilcwife fomc rcmarkable contradiclions in the t a';. ni:,ic (,1 i!i" ': -

\viticnfl. c. I. In thle discourse publifhl cdl by aulitliol it)y it i i:fiia;it ,utc, ;1. t i r c

'he

t 1e h
ilil bitalts was raifbld againfi l tile King, and th11,t it reC; i:. ;, .r '

having been concerted by the two brothers, either without any as-
fociates, or with such as were unknown, and chose to remain so,
the danger was over, as soon as discovered. But not long after, a
conspiracy broke out in England against Elizabeth, which, though
the first danger was instantly dispelled, produced tragical effects,
that rendered the close of that Queen's reign dismal and unhappy.
As James was deeply interested in that event, it merits our parti-
cular notice.

THE court of England was, at this time, divided between two

powerful fa&ions, which contended for the supreme direction of
affairs. The leader of the one was Robert D'Evreux, Earl of
Effex; Sir Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Burleigh, was
at the head of the other. The former was the most accomplished,
and the most popular of all the English nobles; brave, generous,
affable; though impetuous, yet willing to liften to the councils
of those whom he loved; an avowed, but not an implacable
enemy; a friend no less constant, than warm; incapable of dif-
guising his own sentiments, or of misrepresenting those of others;
better fitted for a camp, than for a court; and of a genius that
qualified him for the firfi place in the administration, with a spirit

.them. Disc. 32. The Duke of Lennox confirms this in his deposition. Crom. 44.
An acft of privy-council summoning the Magistrates of Perth to answer for that riot is
rill extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of the Baillies of the town, deposes that he
.liilnfelf raised the people, and that they took arms in order to afliff the King. Crom.
66. 2. -lendcrfun dcporfs that he gave an evasive answer to Mr. John Monciief,
who enquired where he had been that morning, becaufr the Earl had commanded him
not to let any manl know that he had been at Falkland. Disc. 54. Moncrief depofcs
to the fame purpose. Cromn. 64. And yet George Hay, afterwards Lord Kinnoul,
arid Chanccllor of Scotland, and Peter Hay, depose that the Earl, in their piefence,
askd MI-lciidc ,son, (' Whom he found with the King at Falkland ?" Crom. 70, 71.
Vlhich qlucftionl fccms to prove that he did not aim at keeping that journey a fccrct.

wslliclt

2 3i
l3BokVII.

.6oz.

which scorned the second, as below his merit. He was soon dif- BookVIII,
tinguifhed by the QOeen, who, with a profusion uncommon to her, I6oI,
conferred on him, even in his earliefl youth, the highest honours,
and most important offices. Nor did this diminiil the eflecm and
affection of his countrymen; but, by a rare felicity, he was at once
the favourite of his Sovereign, and the darling of the people.
Cecil, on the other hand, educated in a Court, and trained under a
father, deeply ikilled in all its arts, was crafty, iilinuating, indus-
trious; and though possessed of talents, which fitted him for the
liighcft offices, he did not rely upon llis merit alone for attain-
ing them, but availed himfclf of every advantage, which his
own address, or the mistakes of others afforded him. Two fucl
men were formed to be rivals, and enemies. Efiex dcfpifed the
arts of Cecil, as low and base. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity
appeared to be prefutmption and folly. All the military men, except
Raleigh, favoured Efiex. Most of the courtiers adhered to Cecil,
whole manners more nearly resemblcd their own.

As Elizabeth advanced in years, the f'ruggle between these His corre.

factions became more violent. Eflex, in order to ftrengthcn him- ,:p,t, lcC
fIls, had early courted the friendship of the King of Scots, for Scot"fiKi"ng
whlofe riglit of fucccllion hle was a zealous advocate, and held a
clolc corrcfpondence both with him, and with his principal Minis-
tcrs. Cccil, devoted to the Q3ceen alone, roi dlaily to new ho-
lours, by the afliduity of his tcrvices,, and the patience, with
ivliicli he cxpected tile reward of them. \Vhile the Earl's high
,pirit and impctuofity fomnctimes expoflcd himi to checks from :a
Millircis, Vwllo, though partial in her afci:cion towards him, could
inlt ca.fily bear contratldicion, and conferred favours oftcni un villit g-
Iy, alide alsways slowly. I is own Ilicitatiolns, hov,

h owever, hcolcde
:i.li.io lllr y y lhis enemies, who wifilcd to 'rlmovc him at a dii-

Vo ... 11. JI It liance

°33

BookVIII. tance from court, advanced him to the command of the army em-

i S'6oV ployed in Ireland, against Tyronne, and to the office of Lord Lieu-

tenant of that kingdom, with a commission almost unlimited. His
success, in that expedition, did not equal either his own promises,
or the expectations of Elizabeth. The Queen, peevish from her
disappointment, and exasperated against Effex by the artifices of his
enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full of accusations and reproaches.
These, his impatient spirit could not bear, and, in the first tranf-
ports of his resentment, he proposed to carry over a part of his
army into England, and by driving his enemies from the Queen's
pretence, to reinstate himself in favour, and in power. But, upon
more mature thoughts, he abandoned this rash design, and setting
fail with a few officers, devoted to his person, landed in England,
and posted directly to court. Elizabeth received him, without
any symptom either of affection or of displeasure. By proper
compliances and acknowledgments, he might have regained his
former ascendant over the Queen. But he thought himself too
deeply injured to submit to these. Elizabeth, on the other hand,
determined to subdue his haughty temper; and though her severity
drew from him the most humble letters, she confined him to the
Lord Keeper's house, and appointed commissioners to try him, both
for his conduct during his government of Ireland, and for leaving
that kingdom without her permission. By their sentence, he was
fufpcnded from all his offices, except that of Mailer of the horse, and
continued a prifoncr during the Q een's pleasure. Satisfied with hav-
ing mortified his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not susser the fen-
tcnce to be recorded, and soon after allowed him to retire to his own
houfc. During these transactions, which occupied several months, 1f-
fcx iluluatcd between the allegiance he owed to his Sovercign, and
the defirc of revenge; and sometimes leaned to the one, and omeitimes
to the other. In one of the intervals when the latter prevailed, he icnt

3 a imcftcngcr
234

a messenger into Scotland to encourage the King to assert his own
right to the succession by force of arms, and to promise that, be-
fides the assistance of the Earl and all his friends in England, Lord
Mountjoy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join him with
5o00 men, from that kingdom. But James did not chufe to hazard
the losing a kingdom, which was just ready to fall into his hands,
by a premature attempt to seize it. Mountjoy, too, declined the
enterprize, and Effex adopted more dutiful schemes; all thoughts
of ambition appearing to be totally effaced out of his mind.

THIS moderation, which was merely the effeCt of disgust and

disappointment, was not of long continuance. And the Queen,
having not only refused to renew a lucrative grant, which she had
formerly beflowed, but to admit him into her presence, that new
injury drove a temper, naturally impatient, and now much fretted,
to absolute despair. His friends, instead of soothing his rage, or
restraining his impetuosity, added to both, by their imprudent and
interested zeal. After many anxious consultations, he determined
to attempt to redress his wrongs by violence. And conscious how
unpopular such an enterprize would be, if it appeared to proceed
from motives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured to give it the
semblance of public utility, by mingling the King of Scotland's in-
terest with his own. He wrote to James, that the faction which now
predominated in the English court, had resolved to support the pre-
tensions of the Infanta of Spain to the crown; that the places of
the greaterf importance in the kingdom were put into the hands of
his avowed enemies; and that unless he sent ambassadors, without
delay, to insist on the immediate declaration of his right of ficccflion,
their meafircs were so well concerted, that all his hopes would be
dtfperate. James, who knew how disagreeable such a proposal
Would be to the Queen of England, was not willing raflly to ex-

I-I h 2 pose

Book VIII.

60oi.

James's cau-
tious conduft.

The wild at-
tempts of
Eflex.

235'

Bo:) kVII;. pose himself to her displeasure. But Effex, blinded by rcfentment.,

,I6oo. 6 and impatient for revenge, abandoned himself to these passions, and

ated like a man guided by frenzy or despair. With two or three
hundred followers, incompletely armed, he attempted to assault a
throne, the belt cftablifhcd in Europe. Sallying, at their head,
out of his own house, he called on the citizens of London, if they
either valued his life, or wilhed to preserve the kingdom from the
dominion of the Spaniards, to take arms, and to follow his ftan-
dard. -Ie advanced towards the palace, with an intention to drive
Cecil and his faEcion out of the Queen's presence, and to obtain
a declaration of the Scottifi King's right of iucceflion%'. But,
though alinoft adored by the citizens, not a man would join him,
in this wild encerprize. Dispirited by their indifference, deserted.
by some of his own attendants, and almost surrounded by the
troops, which marched under different leaders into the city, he re-
treated to his own house; and without any bold effort, suitable to
his prefcnt condition, or worthy of his former reputation for cou-
rage, lie furrcndcred to his enemies.

As oon( as J:lmcs heard of Eficx's ill success, he appointed the
'arl of lMar, and the Abbot of Kinlofs, to repair as his armbaffa-
J0ors to the court of England. The former of there was the per-
lon, by whose means EfI cx had carried on his corrcfpondence with
.'ic King. I-le was a paflionatc admirer of the Earl's charaaer, and
'iifpo(ld to attempt every thing that could contribute to his safety.
B3rLIcc, united in a close fricnidfhip wiith Mar, was ready to second
him with c(j.tIl -.cahl. Nor was the purpose of the embassy Ids
-icendly to l.l'cx, than the choice of the amlbafiadors; they were
comlandecdc to follicit in the warnicft manner, for the Earl's libc,

.1 Birch. VinBa]. 2. '177.
. 36

and if they found that the King, by avowing his friends, could Book VIIT..
either promote their dcfigns, or contribute to their safety, they were 6
impowered to lay aside all disguise, and to promise that he would
put himself at their head, and claim what was due to him, by force
of arms'+ . But before the ambafTadors could reach London, Eflex
had fuiffcred the punifilment he merited by his treason. Perhaps H-is d.cthi
the fear of their interposing, in order to obtain his pardon, haclened
his death. Elizabeth continued, for some time, irresolute concern-
ing his fate, and could not bring herself to consign into the hands
of the executioner, a man, who had once poffeficd her favour io
itirely, without a painful firuggle between her refcnimnent againfl
his late mifcondut,, and her ancient aflfecion towards him. TIhe
distress to which he was now reduccd tended naturally to foficn the
former, while it revived the latter with new tenderncfs; and the in-
terccfion of one faithful fiiend, who had interest with the Queen,
might perhaps have laved his life, and have procured him a remif-
lion, which, of herself, she was afhamned to grant. But this generous
nobleman had at that time no such friend. And Elizabeth, soli-
cited inceflantly by her Minif-ers, and offended with the haughti-
ness of Effex, who, as flhe imagined, fcoined to sue for pardon, at
lafi commanded the sentence to be put in execution. No sooner
was the blovw friuck, than lie repented of her own rafhncfs, and be-
wailed his death with the deepe f iborrow. James always conidtcred
him as one, who had fallen a martyr to his service, and after Iis.
accellion to the Englifl throne, rcftored his Ibn to his honours, as
well as all his associates in the confliracy, and diflinguiflcd thelm
with his favour-['.

':' Johnfli 289. Birch. 2Meti, 2. 5o1. I C;inld. SpoLt. 46(.

I37.
T !.. 1

Book VIII. THE Scottish ambassadors, finding that they had arrived too late

i60o. to execute the chief business committed to their charge, not only

James con- concealed that part of their inftrulions, with the utmost care;
tinues his in-
trigues in but congratulated the Queen, in their MafRer's name, on her happy
England.

escape from such an audacious conspiracy. Elizabeth, though no
firanger to the King's correspondence with Effex, or to that no-
bleman's intention of asserting James's right to the Crown, was not
willing that these ihould be known to the people, and for that
reason, received the congratulations of the Scottish ambassadors
with all possible marks of credit, and good will; and in order to
sooth James, and to preserve the appearances of union between the
two courts, increased the subsidy which {he paid him annually.
The ambassadors resided for some time in England, and were em-
ployed, with great success, in renewing and extending the intrigues,
which Bruce had formerly entered into with the English nobles.
As Elizabeth advanced in years, the English turned their eyes
more and more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent each
other in courting the favour of their future Monarch. Assurances
of attachment, professions of regard, and promises of support, were
offered to James from every corner of the kingdom. Cecil him-
self perceiving what hopes Effex had founded on the friendship of
the Scottish King, and what advantages he might have derived
from it, thought it prudent to land no longer at a distance from a
Prince, who might so soon become his Master. But being sensible,
at the fame time, how dangerous such an intercourse might prove,
under a Mistress naturally jealous, and whose jealousy grew fironger
with old age; though he entered into a correspondence with him,
he carried it on with all the secrecy and caution neccftary in his
situation, and peculiar to his charat&er. And James, having gained
the man whose opposition and influence he had hitherto cliefly

dreaded,

W

dreaded, waited, in perfet security, till that event should happen,
which would open his way to the throne of England. It was,
with some difficulty, that he restrained, within proper bounds, his
adherents in that kingdom, who labouring to distinguish themselves
by that officious zeal, with which a Prince, who has a near profpedc
of mounting the throne, is always served, urged him to allow a
motion to be made in parliament for declaring his right of succession
to the Crown. James prudently discouraged that design; but it
was with no finall fatisfadion that he observed the ascendant he
was acquiring in a court, whose dictates he had been, so long, obliged
to obey; and which had either prescribed or thwarted every flep he
had taken during the whole course of his reign*.

NOTWITHSTANDING the violent fruggles of the political sac-

tions which divided the court, and the frequent revolutions which
had happened there, since the King first took the reins of govern-
ment into his own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unusual tranquillity,
being undisturbed by any foreign enemy, and free from any intestine
commotion of long continuance. During this period, James endea-
voured to civilize the Highlands and the isles, a part of his domi-
nions alrnoft totally neglected by former Monarchs, though the re-
formation of it was an objec highly worthy of their care. The
long peace with England had afforded an opportunity of iLbduing
the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of refiraining their de-
predations, often no less ruinous to their countrymen, than to their
enemies. The inhabitants of the Low Country began, gradually,
to forget the use of arms, and to become attentive to the arts of
peace. But the Highlanders, retaining their natural ficrccncfs,
averse from labour, and inured to rapine, infcftcd their more indcuf-

Book VIII.

I601.

I602.

Attempts to
civilize the
Highlanders.
* Spots. 467, 471. Birch, Mcm. 2. 514.

trioul

239

BT)ckVIII. trious neighbours, by their bontinual incursions. James being foil-

6o2. citous not only to repress their inroads, but to render them useful

fubjeas :, had at different times enacted many wife laws extremely
conducive to these ends. All landlords, or Chiefs of Clans, were
enjoined to permit no persons to reside in their estates, who could
not find sufficient surety for their good behaviour; they were re-
quired to make a lift of all suspicious persons under their jurifdic-
tion, to bind themfclves to deliver them up to justice, and to in-
demnify those, who should iuffer by their robberies; and, in order
to ascertain the faithful performance of these articles, the Chiefs
themselves were obliged to give hostages to the King, or to put
pleldges in his lhands. Three towns, which might serve as a retreat
for the industrious, and a nursery for arts and commerce, were ap-
pointed to be built in different parts of the Highlands; one in Can-
tyre, another in Lochabar, and a third in the isle of Lewis; and,
in order to draw the inhabitants thither, all the privileges of Royal
Boroulghs were to be conferred on them. Finding it, however, to
be no easy matter to inspire the inhabitants of those countries with
the love of induitry, a resolution was taken to plant among them,
colonies of people from the more industrious countries. The firfl
experiment was made in tle isle of Lewis; and as it was advan-
tageoufly situatcd for the fishing trade, a source fiom which Scot-
land ought naturally to derive great wealth, the colony transported
thither was drawn out of Fife, the inhabitants of which were well
skillcd in that branch of commerce. But before they had remained
there long enough to inanifcft the good efltctls of this inflitution, the
iflan(lers, enraged to fee tllcir country occupied by those intruders,
took a ,

as nd ilrpri ling them in tlhe night-time, murltdered
tmie of tllcn, and compelled the refl to abandon the fettlcment.

Iafil. Dot. 159.

Ti.c
24o-0

The King's attention being soon after turned to other objecs, we Book VII L
hear no more of this salutary projet. Though James did not 16o2.
pursue the design, with that Rfeady application and perseverance,
without which it is impoflible to change the manners of a whole
people, he had the glory, however, not only of having first con-
ceived the thought, but of having firfi pointed out the proper me-
thod of introducing the civil arts of life into that part of the lfland'*.

AFTER having long enjoyed a good state of health, the effect of Elizabeth's

a found constitution, and the reward of uncommon regularity and death.
temperance, Elizabeth began, this winter, to feel her vigour de-
crease, and to be sensible of the infirmities of old age. Having re-
moved on a very stormy day from Weftminfler to Richmond, whi-
ther ihe was impatient to retire, her complaints increased. She had
no formed fever; her pulse was good; but she eat little, and could 1 60o
not sleep. Her diflemper seemed to proceed from a deep melan- Janua'Y 3".
choly, which appeared both in her countenance and behaviour. She
delighted in solitude, she fat conflantly in the dark; and was often
drowned in tears.

No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known, than persons

of all ranks, and of all different secs and parties, redoubled their
applications to the King of Scots, and vied with each other, in pro-
sessions of attachment to his person, and in promiics of fiib'nifion
to his government. Even rome of her own servants, weary of the
length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient to get rid of the
burden of gratitude for pafl benefits, and expeting to fliar in
the liberality of a new Prince, began to defcrt her. And crowds
of people hurried towards Scotland, eager to prc-occupy the fil-
vour of the successor, or afraid of being too late in paying homagc
to him.

* Parl 1587, 1594, 1597. Spots. 468.

2. r
VOL. II.

1\11r AN X51 I I 1L r,
I i

MEAN WHILE, the Qteen's disease increased, and her melancholy

appeared to be fettled and incurable. Various conjeCtures were
formed concerning the causes of a disorder, from which Ihe seemed
to be exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper. Some
imputed it to her being forced, contrary to her inclination, to par-
don the Earl of Tyrone, whose rebellion had for many years created
her so much trouble. Others imagined that it arose from observing
the ingratitude of her courtiers, and the levity of her people, who
beheld her health declining with most indecent indifference, and
looked forward to the acceflion of the Scottifl King, with an impa-
tience, which they could not conceal. The moit common opinion,
at that time, and perhaps the mofi probable, was that it flowed from
grief for the Earl of Effex. She retained an extraordinary regard
for the memory of that unfortunate nobleman; and though flhe
often complained of his obstinacy, seldom mentioned his name
without tears ". An accident happened soon after her retiring to
Richmond, which revived her affection with new tenderness, and
imbittered her sorrows. The Countess of Nottingham, being on
her death-bed, desired to fee the Q(een, in order to reveal some-
thing to her, without discovering which, flhe could not die in peace.
When the Qeen came into her chamber, flhe told her, that while
Efiix lay under sentence of death, he was desirous of imploring
pardon in the manner which the Queecn herfclf had prescribcd,
by returning a ring, which during the height of his favour fle had
given him, with a promise that if, in any future difirefs, he rlent
that back to her as a token, it Ihould intitle him to her protclicen;
tlat (lady Scroop was the pcrfon he intended to employ in order to
prclc:nt it; that by a iflinake, it was put into her hands infn(lad of
Lady Scroop's; and that (he having com municated the mlatter to Ier
Xhul)band, one of Ellcx's moll imnl;c;abll enemies, lie lhad lirbidl

1:'1r

1

242
Book VIII.

t603.

,~ L)irelr. Men'. 2 . sc)e.

her either to carry the ring to the Queen, or to return it to the
Earl. The Countess, having thus diiclofed her secret, begged the
Queen's forgiveness; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the malice
of the Earl's enemies, and how unjustly she had fufpcJded him of
inflexible obstinacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but I never
can;" and left the room in great emotion -. From that moment,
her spirit funk entirely; she could scarce taste food; she refused all
the' medicines prescribed by her physicians; declaring that ihe
wished to die, and would live no longer. No intreaty could pre-
vail on her to go to bed; she fat on cushions, during ten days and
nights, pensive, and silent, holding her finger almnef continually
in her mouth, with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground. The
only thing to which she seemed to give any attention, were the
adQs of devotion, performed in her apartment, by the Archbishop
of Canterbury; and in these the joined with great appearance of
fervour. Wafted, at last, as well by anguish of mind, as by long

+- This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was firfl published by Osborne, Mem. of

Eliz. p. 23; is confirmed by the teitimony of de Maurier, MIem. 260, and by the tra-
ditional evidence of Lady Elizabeth Spelman, published by Dr. Birch, Negoc. 2c6.
Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Eflex's death as one of the caufcs of her me-
lancholy. Some original papers remain, which prove that this was commonly believed
at the time. Birch. MIem. 2. 506. Eflex, however, had been behcaded two years bc-
fore her death, and there seems to have been no other rcafon, but that which we have
assigned, why her sorrow should revive with so much violence at so great a diflancc
of time. As the death of the Countess of NottiLghaim happcned ablot .a foritniSlt be-
fore the Queen's death, the coincidence of these events, together with the other cvi-
dence mentioned, adds so much probability to the fL.ry rclated by Olbornc, as wil!
entitle it to a place in llifiory. lThe only olhjcclion to the accounlt Ve h ;,ive given ti
F.lizabeth's attachment to Efcx, arises fronm her great age. At tile age oi 6J, the a-
morous paflions are commonly abundantly cool, aind tihe vi l.'n' o(f all t':" p:ltli.,i,
except one, is rnui h abated. Put the force of tliN ohl)jctio i!; cnitii ly rIemo'vcd by I.n
Author whv!o has illuflrated i.imany pifth s in the 1nilil liflory, and alornil niic.
Cataloiguc of Royal and Noble Authors. Article L[.ll'x.

Bjok Vii. -

i Oo3
i 2

2-1.3
;', , i i I)c ll. .c

Book VIIL abftlnence, fie expired without a firuggle, on Thursday the 24th day

60o3. of March, in the 7oth. year of her age, and the 45th of her reign ..
Her charac- FOREIG NERS often accuse the Englifi of indifference and dif-

refpe't towards their Princes. But without reason; no. people are
more grateful than they to those Monarchs, who merit their grati-
tude. The names of Edward II. and Henry V.. are mentioned
by the Englifi of this age, with. the fame warmth, as they were
hy those, who sharcd in the bleflings and splendor of their reigns.
The memory of Elizabeth is Rill adored in England. And the
historians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of her people;
her sagacity in discerning their true interest; herfteadinefs in pur-
siing it; her wisdom in the choice of her ministers; the glory she
acquired by arms; the tranquillity she secured to her subjeCts; and
the increase of fame, of riches, and of commerce, which.were the
fruits of all these; justly rank her among the most illustrious Prin-
ces. Even the defeCts in her charaCter, they observe, were not
of a kind pernicious to her people. Her excessive frugality was.
not accompanied with the love of hoarding; and though it prc-
vented some great undertakings, and rendered the success of others
incomplcat, it introduced oeconomy into her administration, and
exempted the nation from many burdens, which a Monarch, more
Iprofufe, or more enterprising, imuft have imposed. Her slowness
in rewarding her fcrvants Ibmetimes discouraged usefuls merit;
but it prevented the undcferving from acquiring power and wealth,
to which they had no title. HIcr extreme jealousy of those Prin-
ces, who pretended to dispute her right to the Crown, led her to
take such precautions, as tended no less to the public fafcty, thanl
to her own ; and to court the afl'ccions of her people, as the firmn-

' Carnd. Bircl. Mcm. 2. 52.6, Birch. Negoc. 206. Strypc, 4. 373.

C 1f
24g.

aft support of her throne. Such is the piture the English draw Book VIII.
of this great Queen. '603

x6o3..

WHOEVER undertakes to write the Hiflory of Scotland finds him-

self obliged, frequently, to view her in a very different, and in a
less amiable light. Her authority in that kingdom, during the
greater part of her reign, was little inferior to that, which she pof-
fefed in her own. But this authority, acquired at first by a service
of great importance to the nation, she exercised in a manner ex-
tremely pernicious to its happiness. By her industry in fomenting
the rage of the two contending facions; by supplying the one with
partial aid;. by feeding the other with false hopes; by balancing
their power so artfully, that each of them was able to distress, and
neither of them.to subdue the other; she rendered Scotland long
the feat of discord, confusion, and bloodshed: and her craft and
intrigues, effecing what the valour of her ancestors could not ac-
complifh, reduced.that kingdom to a state of dependance on Eng-
land. The maxims of policy, often little consonant to those of
morality, may, perhaps, justify this conduct. But no apology can
he offered for her behaviour to Queen Mary; a scene of difimula-
tion without necessity; and offeverity beyond example. In almost
all her other actions, Elizabeth is the objec of our highefi admi-
ration; in this, we mufft allow that fle not only laid aside the mag-
nanimity, which became a QOeen, but the feelings natural to a
woman.

THOUGHI Elizabeth would never permit the question concerning jamcs pro-

claimed K(ing

the right of fucccelion to the Crown to be determined in Parlia- ofEnglandJ.
ment; nor declare her own fcntiments concerning a point, which
she wiflhed to remain an. impenetrable myflery; flie had, however,

6 formed .

formed no design of excluding the Scottish King from an inheri-
tance, to which his title was undoubted. A short time before her
death, she broke the silence, which she had so long preserved on that
fubjeet, and told Cecil and the Lord Admiral, " That her throne was
the throne of Kings; that she would have no mean person to ascend
it, and that her cousin the King of Scots should be her successor."
This she confirmed on her death-bed. And as soon as she breathed
her last, the Lords of the Privy-council proclaimed James King
of England. All the intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour
of the Infanta, all the cabals formed, within the kingdom, to sup-
port the titles of Lady Arabella, and the Earl of Hartford, difap-
peared in a moment; and nobles, and people, forgetting their anci-
ent hostilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the dominion of
firang-rs, testified their fatisfadion with louder acclamations, than
were usual at the accession of their native Princes. Amidst this tu-
mult of joy, a motion made by a few patriots, who proposed to
prescribe some conditions to the successor, and to exat from him
the redress of some grievances, before they called him to the
throne, was scarce heard; and Cecil, by stifling it, added to his
flock of merit with his new Matier. Sir Charles Percy, brother of
the Earl of Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset the Earl of
Worcefler's son, were dispatchcd to Scotland, with a Letter to
the King, signed by all the Peers and Privy-counfellors then in
London; informing him of the Queen's death, of his acceflion to
the throne, of their care to recognize his title, and of the universal
applaule, with which the public proclamation of it had been attend-
ed. They made the utnmofl hafle to deliver this welcome omcflage;
but were prevented by the zeal of Sir Robert Cary, Lord I-Iufdanc's
youngcfl son, who setting out a few hours after Elizabeth's dealth,
arrived at Edinburgh on Saturday night, juil as the King had gone

to
Book VIII.

603.
246

to bed. He was immediately admitted into the royal apartment, and
kneeling by the King's bed, acquainted him with the death of Eli-
zabeth, saluted him King of England, Scotland, France, and Ire-
land, and as a token of the truth of the intelligence which he brought,
presented him a ring, which his sifter Lady Scroop had taken from
the Queen's finger after her death. James heard him with a decent
composure. But as Carey was only a private meffcnger, the infor-
mation he brought was not made public, and the King kept his
apartment till the arrival of Percy and Somerfct. Then his titles
were solemnly proclaimed; and his own fubjeEls expressed no less
joy, than the English, at this increase of his dignity. As his pre-
fence was absolutely necessary in England, where the people were
extremely impatient to fee their new Sovereign, he prepared to set
out for that kingdom, without delay. He appointed his 0Qeen to
follow him within a few weeks. He committed the government

of Scotland to his Privy-council. He intrufled the care of his
children to different noblemen. On the Sunday before his .de-
parture, he repaired to the Church of St. Giles, and after hearing a
sermon, in which the preacher displayed the greatness of the divine
goodness in raising him to the throne of such a powerful kingdom
wvithout opposition or bloodshed, and exhorted him to cxprict; his
g'-:.itide, by promoting, to the utmost, the happincfs and proftc rity
of his filbejcels; the King rofc up, and addrcslingl liimfclf to the peo-
ple, nladL many pro-eflions of unalterable aflct2lion towards themn;
promilcd frequently to viit Scotland; aftltred them that his Scottlil
filhjcLs, notwitlhflbandi ng his alcllcc, fliould feel that lie was their
native Prince, no less than when lhe relidedl a.mong them ; andl might
luill tr'n tli;it his cars

c iollold be always open to their pctitions,

wllicll he vwold a:lln cr wvitli the al:acrity and love of a parenlt. I-lis
wordls were, often, i:xtc.rr!ptcd by the tears of the whole audience;

w1vo,

Book VIII.

60o3.

247

.Book VIII. who, though they exulted at the King's prosperity, were melted

1603. into sorrow by these tender declarations i-

Takes pofref- 'ON the fifth of April, he began his journey, with a splendid,
sion of the
throne. but not a numerous train; and next day he entered Berwick.

Wherever.he came, immense multitudes were assembled to welcome
him; and the principal persons, in the different counties through
which he passed, displayed all their wealth and magnificence in
entertainments prepared for him, at their houses. Elizabeth had
reigned so long in England, that most of her fubjets remembered
no other court but hers; and their notions of the manners and de-
corum suitable to a Prince were formed upon what they had ob-
served there. It was natural to apply this standard to the behaviour
and acions of their new Monarch, and to compare him, at first
fight, with the Queen, on whose throne he was to be placed.
James, whose manners were extremely different from hers, suffered
by the comparison. He had not that flowing affability, by which
Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her people; and though easy
among a few whom he loved, his indolence could not bear the
fatigue of rendering himself agreeable to a mixed multitude. He
*was no less a stranger to that dignity, with which Elizabeth tem-
pered her familiarity. And instead of that well-judged frugality,
with which she conferred titles of honour, be bellowed them with
.an undiflinguifhing profusion, that rendered them no longer marks
of diflindion, or rewards of merit. But these were the reflexions
,of the few alone; the multitude continued their acclamations;
and amiidfl these, James entered London on the 7th of May, and
Look peaceable polfcfion of the throne of England.

* Spotfwood, 476.

Ti' us

THUS were united two kingdoms, divided from the earliest ac-

counts of time, but defined, by their situation, to form one great
monarchy. And by this junation of its whole native force, Great
Britain hath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe which
England and Scotland could never have attained.

THE Scots had so long confidered their Monarchs as next heirs

to the English throne, that they had full leisure to reflect on all
the consequences of their being advanced to that dignity. But
dazzled with the glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful ene-
my, relying on the partiality of their native Prince, and in full
expectation of sharing liberally in the wealth and honours he would
now be able to bellow, they attended little to the most obvious con-
sequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his acceflion to the
throne of England, as if it had been no less beneficial to the king-
dom, than honourable to the King. They soon had reason, how-
ever, to adopt very different sentiments; and from that period, we
may date a total alteration in the political constitution of Scotland.

THE feudal Aristocracy, which had been subverted in mofl

nations of Europe by the policy of their Princes, or had
been undermined by the progress of commerce, frill fuibfifted with
full force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed gradually
to augment the power of the Scottifll nobles ; and even the Re-
formation, which in every other country where it prcvailed addedl
to the authority of the Monarch, had incrcafed their wealth and
influence. A King, poffcfccl of a finall revenue, with a prcrogative
extremely limited, and unflipportcl by a flanding-l army, could not
cxercile much authority over iuch potent fubljccs. IHe was obliged to
g wvc' n by expedients ;. and the laws derived tlleir force not from his
powvcr to execute them, but from the voluntary fubmilfion of the

VOL. II. K k nobles.

BookVIII.

Conclusion.

A view of the
Revolutions
in the confli-
tution of Scot-
land since the
accefiion of
James VI.

249

nobles. But though this produced a species of government feeble
and irregular beyond example; though Scotland, under the name,
and with all the outward ensigns of Monarchy, was really sub-
jea to an Aristocracy, the people were not altogether unhappy;
and even in this wild form of a constitution, there were principles,
which tended to their security and advantage. The King, checked
and overawed by the nobles, durst venture upon no aa of arbi-
trary power. The nobles, jealous of the King, whose claims and
pretensions were many, though his power was small, were afraid
of irritating their dependants by unreasonable exactions, and tem-
pered the rigour of ariftocratical tyranny, with a mildness and
equality to which it is naturally a stranger. And while the military
genius of the feudal government remained in vigour, the vassals
both of the Crown and of the Barons were not only free from op-
pression, but courted by their superiors, whose power and impor-
tance were founded on their attachment and love.

BUT, by his accession to the throne of England, James acquired

such an immense accession of wealth, of power, and of splendor,
that the nobles, astonished and intimidated, thought it vain to
firuggle for privileges which they were now unable to defend. Nor
was it from fear alone that they submitted to the yoke; James, par-
tial to his countrymen, and willing that they should partake in his
good fortune, loaded them with riches and honours; and the hope
of his favour concurred with the dread' of lis power, in taming
their fierce and independent spirits. The will of the Prince be..
came the supreme law in Scotland; and the nobles firove, with emu-
lation, who flould most implicitly obey commands, which they
had formerly been accuflomed to contemn. Satisfied with having
filbjeaed the nobles to the Crown, the King left them in full polt

fctliit

BookVIII.

t-- - -- -
250

feiTion of their ancient jurifdiaion over their own vaflals. The
extensive rights, vested in the feudal Chief, became in their hands
dreadful instruments of oppreflion, and the military ideas on which
these rights were founded, being gradually loft, or disregarded,
nothing remained to correc or to mitigate the rigour with which
they were exercised. The nobles, exhausting their fortunes by the
expence of frequent attendance upon the English court, and by at-
tempts to imitate the manners and luxury of their more wealthy
neighbours, multiplied exactions upon the people, who durst scarce
utter complaints which they knew would never reach the ear of
their Sovereign, nor move him to grant them any redress. And
from the union of the Crowns, to the Revolution in i688, Scot-
land was placed in a political situation of all others the most fingu-
lar, and the most unhappy; fubjeded at once to the absolute will
of a Monarch, and to the oppressive jurifdidion of an Aristocracy,
it suffered all the miseries peculiar to both there forms of govern-
ment. Its Kings were despotic; its nobles were slaves and ty-
rants; and the people groaned under the rigorous domination of
both.

DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made one effort to

shake off the yoke, and to regain their ancient independency. After
the death of James, the Scoetif.' nation was no longer viewed by
our Monarchs with any partial affection. Charles I. educated among
the English, discovered no peculiar attachment to the kingdom of
which he was a native. And the nobles, perceiving the iccptre to
be now in hands less friendly, and fvaycd by a Prince with whom
they had little connection, and over whofc councils they had little
influence, no longer fiubmitted with the fame implicit obedience.
Provokcd by some encroachmencts of the King on their order, and

K k 2 applrc,

Book VIII.

25e

apprehensive of others, the remains of their ancient spirit began to
appear. They complained, and remonstrated. And the people
being, at the fame time, violently disgusted at the innovations in
Religion, the nobles secretly heightened this disgust; and their ar-
tifices, together with the ill conduct of the court, raised such a
spirit, that the whole nation took arms against their Sovereign, with
an union and animosity of which there had formerly been no ex-
ample. Charles brought againit them the forces of England, and
notwithstanding their own union, and the zeal of the people, the
nobles mutl have funk in the itruggle. But, the disaffection which
was growing among his Englifli fubjeLcs, prevented the King from.
acing with vigour. A civil war broke out in both kingdoms,
And after many battles and revolutions which are well known,
the Scottifl nobles, who first began the war, were involved in the
fame ruin with the throne. At the Restoration, Charles II. re-
gained full poffrliion of the royal prerogative in Scotland; and the
nobles, whose estates were wafted, or their spirit broken by the
calamities to which they had been exposcd, were less able and less
willing than ever to refill the power of the Crown. During this
reign, and that of James VII. the dicates of the Monarch were
received in Scotland with mofl abject fubmiflion. The poverty to
which many of the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
slaves, and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The people, always
negleced, were now odious, and loaded with every injury, on ac-
count of their attachment to religious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by their Princes.

Ti-E Revolution introduced other maxims into the governmente

of Scotland. To incrcafe the authority of the Prilncc, or to Ic'curc
Ahc privileges of the nobles, had hithcrto been almoil the sole oL-

Y -c a
Book V1 II.

_--r-
252

jet of our laws. The rights of the people were scarce ever men- Book VIII
tioned, were disregarded, or unknown. Attention began, hence-
forward, to be paid to the welfare of the people. By the claim of
right, their liberties were secured. And the number of their re-
presentatives being increased, they gradually acquired new weight
and consideration in parliament. As they came to enjoy more fe-
curity, and greater power, their minds began to open, and to form
more extensive plans of commerce, of induitry, and of police. But
the ariftocratical spirit, which still predominated, together with
many other accidents, retarded the improvement and happiness of
the nation.

ANOTHER great event compleated what the revolution had be-

gun. The political power of the nobles, already broken by the
union of the two crowns, was almost: annihilated by the union of
the two kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as formerly, of the
supreme assembly of the nation, inflead of bearing the most confi-
derable sway there, the Scottiil nobles are admitted into the British
Parliament by their reprefcntatives only, and form but an inconfide-
rable part of one of those bodies in which the legislative authority is
vefled. They themselves are excluded abfloltcly fiom the houfc of
Commons, and even their eldell sons are not permitted to rcprcfint
their countrymen in tlat a uguf atflmbly. Nor have their feudal
privileges remained, to comripenlate bor this extinction of their
political authority. As conIrncrce advanced in its prorrc(s, and
governmentt attainedl nearer to pcrtfl iorn, tllfce were inrcnfibly1
cilcUlIlkri)cd, ani(d at l;ial, b) laws no Icfs ilulut;try to the publlic,
thalin latal to tlhe nobles, they 1have bccn almollt totally ;l)oliflcld.
As the nobles were (eprived of )power, tihe p)cojil acq(lired liberty.
Excmpted from. burdens to which they were formcrly fibjcca,

Icrecnc(l

BookVIII. screened from oppression, to which they had been long exposed9

and adopted into a conflitution, whose genius and laws were more
liberal than their own, they have extended their commerce, refined
their manners, made improvements in the elegances of life, and cul-
tivated the arts and sciences.

THIS survey of the political fiate of Scotland, in which events

and their causes have been mentioned rather than developed, en-
ables us to point out three sras, from each of which we may date
some great alteration, in one or other of the three different mem-
bers or which the supreme legislative assembly in our conflitution
is composed. At the Acceion, the Kings of Scotland, once the
most limited, became, in an instant, the most absolute Princes in
Europe, and exercised a despotic authority which their Parlia-
ments were unable to controul, or their nobles to refiit. At the
Union, the feudal aristocracy, which had subsisted so many ages,
and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and the Scottilh
nobles voluntarily surrendered rights and pre-eminences, peculiar
to their order, and reduced themselves to a condition, which is no
longer the terror and envy of other fubjeds. Since the union, the
Commons, anciently negleced by their Kings, and despised by the
nobles, have emerged into dignity; and being admitted to a parti-
cipation of all the privileges, which the Englifli had purchased at
the expence of so much blood, muff now be cfleemcd a body not
less considerable in the one kingdom, than they have long been in
the other.

Tn1- i Church felt the effe2s of the absolute power which the

ling acquired by his acccllion; and its revolutions too, are wor-
thy ol notice. James, during the latter years of his adminliflra-
tion in Scutlainl, revived the llamec and ollicc of Bishops. But they

,pollicllil
-254

pofeflTed no ecclesiastical jurifdiaion. or pre-eminence; their reve- BookVIII.
nues were inconsiderable, and they were scarce distinguished by any
thing, but by their feat in parliament, and by being the object of
the clergy's jealousy, and the people's hatred. The King, delighted
with the splendor and authority which the English Bishops enjoyed,
and eager to effet an union in ecclesiastical policy, which he had,
in vain, attempted in the civil government, resolved to bring both
Churches to an exadc conformity with each other. Three Scots-
men were consecrated Bishops at London. From them their bre-
thren were commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown.
in Scotland were imposed. And though the clergy, less obfe-
quious than the nobles, boldly opposed those innovations, James,,
long pradifed and well skilled in the arts of managing them, ob-
tained at length their compliance. * But Charles I. a superstitious
Prince, unacquainted with the genius of the Scots, imprudent and
precipitant in all the measures he pursued in that kingdom, pressing
too eagerly the reception of the Engliflh liturgy, and indiscreetly
attempting a resumption of church lands, kindled the flames of
civil war; and the people being left at liberty to indulge their own
wishes, the episcopal church was overturned, and the Presbyterian
government and discipline were re-eftablifled with new vigour.
Together with monarchy, episcopacy was restored in Scotland. A.
form of government, so odious to the people, required force to
uphold it; and though the whole rigour of authority, and all the
barbarity of persecution were employed in its support, the aversion.
of the nation was iniurmountable, and it fubfiflcd with difficulty.
At the Revolution, the inclinations of the people were thought wor-
thy the attention of the legislature, the Prcfbytcrlian govcrnment
was again eflablilhcd, and being ratified by the Union, is still mailn
tained in the Kingdom.

NOR

No R did the influence of the Accession extend to the civil and ec-

clefiaflical constitutions alone; the genius of the nation, its taste
and spirit, things of a nature fiill more delicate, were sensibly as-
feEted by that event. When learning revived in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages were in a state equally
barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour, and even of perspicuity.
No author thought of writing in languages so ill adapted to express
and embellifhl his sentiments, or of erecting a work for immorta-
lity, with fich rude and perishing materials. And as the spirit, which
prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any original effort
of the human mind, but was excited by admiration of the ancients,
their compositions were esteemed not only the standards of taste, and
of sentiment, but of file; and even the languages in which they
wrote were thought to be peculiar and almost consecrated to learn-
ing and the muses. Not only the manner of the ancients was
imitated, but their language copied; and, extravagant as the attempt
may appear to write in a dead tongue, in which men were not ac-
customed to think, and which they could not speak, or even pro-
nounce, the success of it was astonishing. As they formed their
flile upon the purest models, as they were uninfeated with those
barbarifins, which the inaccuracy of familiar conversation, the as-
fcation of courts, intercourse with strangers, and a thousand other
caulcs introduce into living languages, many moderns have attained
to a degree of elegance in their latin compositions, which the
Ronmans thlcmlflvcs tcarce poffcffcd beyond the limits of the Au-
gullan age. While this was allnof the only fpccies of compofi-
tion, and all authors, by using one common language, could be
1ronl;lht to a ncarer conmparifon, the Scottith writers werle not in-
iCrior to tliol'c of any other nation. Tlic hlappy genius of lnclIillanil,
c(ually lormcd to excel in proie and il cl--l:, more various, more ori-

ginal,
BookVIIi.

b_,-^n-__

ginal, and more elegant, than that of almost any other modern BookVIIi.
who writes in Latin, reflecs, with regard to this particular, the
grcateft lurire on his country.

BUT the labour attending the fludy of a dead tongue was irk-

some; the unequal return for theire industry which authors met
with, who could be read and admired only within the narrow circle
of the learned, was mortifying; and men, instead of wafting half
their lives in learning the language of the Romans, began to re-
fine and polish their own. The modern tongues were found to
be susceptible of beauties and graces, which, if not equal to those
of the ancient ones, were at least more attainable. And the Ita-
lians having first set the example, Latin was no longer used in the
works of taste; it was confined to books of science; and the politer
nations have banished it even from there. The Scots, we may pre-
fume, would have had no cause to regret this change in the public
taste, and would still have been able to maintain some equality with
other nations, in their pursuit of literary honour. The English
and Scottiih languages, derived from the fame sources, were, at
the end of the sixteenth century, in a state nearly similar, differ-
ing from one another fonmewhat in orthography, though not only
the words, but the idioms were much the fame. The letters of
fcveral Scottish flatcfinen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
or in purity, to those of the Englilh Miniers with whom they
corrcfpondcd. James himfclf was maftcr of a Rile far from con-
tcenptible; and by his example and encouragement, the Scottish
language, might have kept pace with the Englifl in refinement.
Scotland might have had a icrics of authors in its own, as well
as in the Latin language, to boast of; and the improvements
in tafle, in the arts, and in tlhe ficnccs, which lircad over the

VOL. II. L 1 other

BookVIIT. other polished nations of Europe, would not have been unknown
~'~^* there.

BUT, at the very time when other nations were beginning to

drop the use of Latin in works of taste, and to make trial of the
firength and compass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to
be a kingdom. The transports of joy which the Accession at first
occasioned, were soon over; and the Scots, being at once deprived
of all the objects that refine or animate a people, of the presence
of their Prince, of the concourse of nobles, of the splendor and ele-
gance of a court, an universal dejeeion of spirit seems to have
seized the nation. The Court being withdrawn, no domeflic flan-
dard of propriety and corretnefs of speech remained; the few com-
positions that Scotland produced were tried by the English standard,
and every word or phrase that varied in the least from that, was
condemned as barbarous; whereas, if the two nations had conti-
niued diftina, each might have retained idioms and forms of speech
peculiar to itself; and these, rendered fashionable by the example
of a court, and fupporred by the authority of writers of reputation,
would have been confidered in the fame light with the varieties
occasioned by the different dialects in the Greek tongue, would
have been marked as beauties, and, in many cafes, used promif-
cuoufly by the authors of both nations. But by the Acceflion, the
English naturally became the sole judges and lawgivers in language,
and rejeced as folccifis, every form of speech to which their ear
was not accustomed. Nor did the Scots, while the intercourse be-
tween the two nations was inconsiderable %, and ancient prejudices

were

* A remarkable proof of the little intercourse between the Englifi and Scots bfoire

thc union of the Crowns, is to be found in two curious papers, one publified by
IHaynes, the othcr by Strype. In the year 1567, Elizabeth commalded the Ililihol
of London to take a furvcy of all the ftrangcrs within the cities of London and WVcfl-

niin(fer.
a5$

were frill so violent as to prevent imitation, possess the means of I
refining their own tongue according to the purity of the English
flandard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into it from
every different source. The Clergy of Scotland, in that age, were
more eminent for piety than for learning; and though there did
not arise many authors among them, yet being in possession of the
privilege of discoursing publickly to the people, and their sermons
being too long, and perhaps too frequent, such hasty produaions
could not be elegant, and many slovenly and incorrect modes of
expression may be traced back to that original. The pleadings of
lawyers were equally loose and inaccurate, and that profession
having furnished more authors, and the matters of which they treat
mingling daily in common discourse and business, many of those
vicious forms of speech, which are denominated Scotticzfizns, have
been by them introduced into the language. Nor did either the
language or public taste receive any improvement in parliament,
where a more liberal and more correct eloquence might have been
expeCted. All business was tranfaaed there by the Lords of Ar-
ticles, and they were so servilely devoted to the court, that few de-
bates arose, and none were conducted with the spirit and vigour
natural to a popular assembly.

Trius, during the whole seventeenth century, the English were

gradually refining their language, and their tate; in Scotland the
former was much debased, and the latter almost entirely loft. In
the beginning of that period, both nations were emerging out of

minfncr. By his report, which is very minute, it appears that the whole number of
Scots was at that time 58. Haynes, 455. A survey of the fame kind was made by
Sir Thomas Row, Lord Mayor A. D. i568. The number of Scots had then increascd
to 88. Strype 4. Supplement No I. On the acceflion of James a considerable num-
ber of Scots, cfpccially of the higher rank, rcfortcd to England ; but it was not till the
union that the intcrcourfe between the two kingdoms became great.

L 1 2 barbarity;

ooVj
lookvlll,.

barbarity; but the ditfance between them, which was then incon-
fiderable, became, before the end of it, immense. Even after science
had once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to be finking back
into ignorance and obscurity; and active and intelligent as they na-
turally are, they continued, while other nations were eager in the
pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a itate of languor and flupe-
faction. This, however, mufr be imputed to the unhappiness of
their political situation, not to any defect of genius; for no sooner
was the one removed in any degree, than the other began to dif-
play itself. The ac abolishing the power of the Lords of Articles,
and other salutary laws pasTed at the Revolution, having introduced
freedom of debate into the Scottish Parliament, eloquence, with all
the arts that accompany or perfect it, became immediate objecs
of attention; and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone is sus-
ficient to Ihew that the Scots were still capable of generous senti-
ments, and, notwithstanding some peculiar idioms, were able to
express themselves with energy, and with elegance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the two nations, and

rendered them one people, the distinCtions which had subsisted for
many ages gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear; the fame
manners prevail in both parts of the island; the fame authors are
read and admired; the fame entertainments are frequented by the
elegant and polite; and the fame standard of taste, and of purity
in language, is eflabli'fled. And the Scots, after being placed, dur-
ing a whole century, in a situation no lei's fatal to the liberty than
to the taste and genius of the nation, were at once put in poffeflioni
of privileges more valuable than those which their ancestors had
formerly enjoyed; and every ofliruci on that had retardel c their
pursuit, or prevented their acquilition of literary fame was totally
.xueovcd.

Book VIII.
',- i~
26O

# APPENDIX.

A P P E N D I Xo

No. I. (Vol. I. p. 80o.)
X ME M O R I AL of certain points meet for the restoring the

realm of S c o T L A N D to the ancient weale.

MPRIMIS, it is to be noted, that the befl worldly felicity that Scotland can have 51b August,
is either to continue in a perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to 15 -9 Cotton.
be made one monarchy with England, as they both make but one island, di- Lib.Cal.B. 0.
vidid from the reft of the world. fol. 17. From

IF the first is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with England, then must a copy in fe

it necessarily be provided, that Scotland be not so subjet to the appointments of retary Cecil'
France, as is presently, which, being an antient enemy to England, feeketh always
to make Scotland an instrument, to exercise, thereby, their malice upon England,
and to make a foot-fiool thereof to look over England as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland hiall come into the hands of a mere Scottish man

in blood, then may there be hope of such accord, but as long as it is at the com-
mandment of the French, there is no hope to have accord long betwixt there two
realms.

THEREFORE feeing it is at the French King's commandment by reason of his

wife, it is to be confidered for the weale of Scotland, that until she have children,
and during her absence out of the realm, the next heirs to the crown, being the
house of the Hamiltons, should have regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown
be imposed nor wafted; and on the other fide, the nobility and commonalty ought
to force that the laws and the old cufomss of the realm be not altered, neither that
the country be not impoverifled by taxes, empreft, or new impofis, after the man-
ner of France; for provision wherein, both by the law of God and man, the French
king and his wife may be moved to reform their mifgovernance of the land.

AND for this purpose, it were good that the nobility and commons joined with

the next heir of the crown, to feck due reformation of such great abuses as tend to
the ruin of their country, which must be done before the French grow too strong
and infolcnt.

FIRST, That it may be provided, by consent of the three cftnaes of the land,

that the land may be free from all idolatry like as England is, for juilification where-
of, if any free general council may be had where the Pope of Rome have not the
feat of judgment, they may offlr to flew their cause to be mofl agireable to Chriil's
religion.

NEXT, to provide that Scotland might be governed, in all rules and oflices, by
the antient blood of the realm, without either captains, lieutenants, or flldici, :'

all,

N D I X.

all other Princes govern their countries, and especially that the forts might be in
the hands of mere Scottish men.

THIRDLY, That they might never be occasioned to enter into wars against Eng-
land, except England flould give the first cause to Scotland.

FOURTHLY, That no nobleman. of Scotland should receive pension of France,

except it were whilst he did felve in France, for otherwise thereby the French would
shortly corrupt many, and betray their own country.

FIFTHLY, That no office, abbey, living, or commodity, be given to any but
mere Scottiih men, by the assent of the three estates of the realm.

SIXTH, That there be a counsel in Scotland appointed in the queen's absence,
to govern the whole realm, and in those cafes not to be direcled by the French.

SEVENTHLY, That it be by the said three estates appointed how the queen's re-

venue of the realm Shall be expended, how much the queen fiall have for her portion
and estate during her absence, how much Ihall be limited to the governance and de-
fence of the realm, how much year y appointed to be Icept in treasure.

IN these and such like points, if the French king and the queen be found un-

willing, and will withstand these provisions for the weale of the land, then hath
the three estates of the realm authority, forthwith, to intimate to the said king and
queen their humble requests; and if the fame be not effeaually granted, then hum-
bly they may commit the governance thereof to the next heir of the crown, bind-
ing the fame also to observe the laws and antient rights of the realm.

FINALLY, if the queen shall be unwilling to this, as it likely Lhe will, in re-

sped of the greedy and tyranous affetion of France, then it is apparent that Al-
mighty God is pleated to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for the weale of
it, and this time muff be uscd with great circumfpeaion, to avoid the deceipts and
tromperies of the French.

AND then may the realm of Scotland confider, being once made free, what

means may be devised by God's goodness, to accord the two realms, to endure for
time to come at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whose hands the hearts of all
princes be.

No. II. (Vol. I. p. I88.)
A letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus diredted.

To my loving friend James. Be this delivered at London.

z th January T UNDERSTAND by the last letter I received from yow, that discoursing with
1559.60. 1J our countrymen upon the matter of Scotland, and comoditeys may ensew to
Colt.Lib.C.I that realm, hereafter giff ze presently assist ws with zour forces, ze find a omibre
B. ix. From of th.' contrary advise, douting that we fall not at length be found trufly fronds,
the or;ginal in nor mcan to contyncw in conltant arineyc, albeit we promise, hut only for avoyd-
his own hand ing the prcfcnt danger make zow to serve our turne, and after being delivered, becurn

enemies as of before. For profc quharcof, they alledge things have past betwixt ws
]heretofore, and a few prcfumnpiones tending to the ram end, all grounded upon mil-
trufl:; quhilks, at the firsi fichi, have some lhewe of apparence, gif nen wcy not the
circumiflatnics of the matter; but gif they will confer the tyme pall wi the pre-
sent, coniider the nature of this c:ans, and cftate of our contrey, I douht not but
jugencnt fal be able to banifil miifruft. And firlt, I wad wifli ze hfould cxamyne

the
2

the causes off the old inmitye betwixt the realms of England and Scotland, and
quhat moved our anceflours to enter into ligue with the French-; quhilks by our
Itoreys and regiftres offantiquitevs appear to be there. The princes of England,
some tyme, alledging a certain kynde of foveraintye over this realm; some tyme
upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our bordourares, and semblable oc-
cafions, mony tymes enterprifed the conquefl of ws, and fa far furth preift it by
force off armes, that we wer dryven to great extramiteys, by loss of our princes,
our noblemen, and a good part of our cuntrey, fa that experience taught ws that
our owne strength was fcarfe sufficient to withltand the force of England. The
Frenche zour auncient enemyes, confidering well how nature had fa placed ws in
a iland with zow, that na nation was able fa to annoye England as we being ene-
niyes, foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending by that meane to detourne
zour armyes from the invasion off France, and occupy z w in the defence off zour
country at hame, offering for that effect to beftowe some charges upon ws, and for
compafTing off theyr purpos, choyfed a tyme to propone the matter, quhen the
frefrhe memory of injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa dcpely prented on
our hartes, that all our myndes were occupied how to be revenged, and arme our-
selfes with the powar off a forayne prince against zour enterprises thereafter.

'THIS wes the beginning off our confederacy with France. At quhilk time, our

croniccles maks mention, that some off the wyfeft foresaw the perril, and small frute
should redound to ws thereof at lenth: zit had affecfion fa blinded jugement, that
the advise of the maift part owercame the best. The maift part of all querells be-
twixt ws since that tyme, at least quhen the provocation came on our fyde, hes
ever fallen out by theyr procurement rather than any one caus off our selfes: and
qulhcnfaever we brack the peace, it come partly by theyr intyfements, partly to es-
chew the conquest intended by that realm. But now hes God's providence fa al-
tered the cafe, zea changed it to the plat contrary, that how hes the Frenche taken
zour place, and we, off very jugemenr, becum defyrous to have zow in thevrrowme.
Our eyes are opened, we espy how uncareful they have been of our weile at all
tymes, how they made ws ever to serve theyr turne, drew us in maift dangerous
we)s for thcyr commodite, and nevertheless wad not ftyck, oft tymes, against the
natour of the ligue, to contrak peace, leaving ws in weyr. We fee that their sup-
port, off late zeres, wes not granrit for any affetlion they bare to ws, for pytie they
had off our eflatc, for recompente off the lyke fi-iendlhip fchawin to them in tyme
offtheyr affliationes, but for ambition, and infaciable cupidite to rcygne, and to mak
Scotland ane acceflory to the crown of France. This was na friendly office, but
mercenary, cra ing hvre sarre exceedling the proportion of theyr deserving; a hale
realm for ihe defence of a part. We fee theym manifcilly attempt the thingwe sis-
pcaed offzow; we stared ze rnent the conquelt off Scotland, and they are plancly
fallen to Ihat wok ; we hated zow for doubt we had ze ment evill towards ws, and
fall we love theym, quhilkg bearing the name of frends, go about to bring ws in
maift vile fcivitude ? Git by zour frendly fip)polt at this tyme, ze fall declare that
not ony fute zc not the ruyne off our courntry, but will preccrve the libertie thereof
from conquest by ftrangeari(s, flil nlot the occasion off all iiniitic with zow, and
ligue with theymn, be taken awa)y ? The causes being removed, how fall the cffecrtes
emnanle ? ' he fear of -oniq ic fs made ws to hate zow and love thecyi, the cais chaln-
ged, qhicn we f'c theym pflanely attnimpt conquefi, and zow fcllaw ws I'reidfllilp,
Aill we not hare the) m, anld fl.vour zow ? Gif we have fchawnIc Ia great conlffance,
contintuinlg fa niony zcarc in ainity with theym, off quhome we had fit in all comn-

3 mIodite,

X.

moditc, quhit fall move us to breake with zow, that off all nationes may do ws
greatest plefour?

BUT ze will fay, this mater may be reconcyled, and then frends as off before.

I think weill peace is the end of all wevr, but off this ze may be aflitred, we will
never fa far trust that reconciliation, that we wil be content to forgo the ametye
of England, nor do any thing may bring ws in suspicion with zow. Giff we
wold, at any tyme to please theym, break with zow, should we not, befydes the
loffe off eflimation and discrediting of ourfilfes, perpetually expone our common
weill to a maift manifcf danger, and becum a pray to theyr tyranny ? Q2hais aid
could we implore, bt ing destitute of zour frendflhip, giff they off new wald attempt
theyr formar entcrprifr ? Quihat nation myght help ws giff they wald, or wald giff
they might ? and it is lyke cncuch, they will not flick hereafter to tak theyr tyme
off w, quhen difplefour and grudge bes taken depe rute on baith fydes, feeing am-
bition has fa inipyrit ower theyr rcafon, that before we had ever done any thing
myght offend theymi, but by the contraly pleated theym by right and wrang,
they did not flick to attempte the subversion of our hale state. I wald ze should
not cllceme ws fa baiayne of jugement, that we cannot forefe our awne perril;
or (a' foolifche, that we will not study by all gode means to entertayne that thing
may be our fafete ; quhilk confifles all in the relaying of zour frendfllips. I pray
zow confider in lykce cafe, when, in the da'.s of zour piinces off maiut noble me-
mory king Henry the VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes wer opened off amy-
tye betwixt baith realmns; was not at all tymes the difference of religion the
onley tfay they wcr not embraced ? Did not the craft of our clergry and power
of theyr adherents subvert the devises of the better fort? But now has God oft'
his mercy removed that block furth of the way: now is not theyr praAife lyke
to tak place any mare, when we ar comme to a conformity ofFdocrine, and pro-
fes the fame religion with zow, quhilk I take to be the firayteft knot off amityc
can be deviled. Giff it may be alledged, that fonie off our countrymen, at ony
tyme, violated theyr promis? giff ze lift to way the cilcumftances, ze fall fynd
the promis is rather brought on by necefite, after a great owerthraw off our nmen,
then comnme offtfre will, and tending ever to our great incommodite and decay
off our haill state, at leift fa taken. But in this cafe, fall the preservation oft our
libertie be infeperably joined wilh the keping off promeffe, and the violation ofll
our fayth cast ws, in maift milcrable fcrvitude. Sa tiat gift neyther the fearc (e f
God, reverence of man, religion, othe, promise, nor w:aridly honeftye wes Iufhi-
cient to bynd ws, yet fL11 the zeale off our native counticy, the maintenance oflf
our owne ftatc, the safety of our wyffcs and childrene from slavery, compell ws
to kcpc promifil. I am assured, it is trewly and iinccrcly ment on our part to
continew in perpetual amctyc wilh zow; it Gall be uttered by our proceedin/s.
Gifltf ze be as desirous of it as we ar, aflirances may be drvyfcd, qularby all par-
tycs will be out of doulbtc, Thcre be gode mean s to do it, fit inptruments f;r
the purpos, tyme ltclivs wcil, t he iniliabit.tits of baith realms wifll it, God hes
wrought in thc pelple's liartes oin byllyt parties a ccrtailc still iagicement upl)i it,
never didl, at any tymc, ft Ino)l)y tliins concurrc :t. ones to knyt it liu, thle diL-
poli;ion ofl a few, quhliis ll.its are in (,utdi sh;laid, may mak up the hale. I hope
lh (11u1a hIes bcgti this wo.k, alnd nnll ytc)'ecd it (qhiic now, by tile cxp)ct.ation
ol iani) file pClc)'lt it.

I priy
4 .

I pray zow, let nor zour men dryve tyme in consultation, quhether ze fall sup-

port ws or no. Seyng the mater fpeaketh for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the
defence off our caus, giff ze have any respect for zour awne weill. Their preparatives
in France, and levying of men in Geimany, (quheyroff I am lately adverciled) ar not
altogydder ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark they ihote at; they feke our realme, but
for ane entrey to zours. Giff they lhould directly fchaw hoftilite to zow, they
knaw zo wald mak redy for theyme; therefor they do, by indirec meanes, to blind
zow, the thing, they dare not as zit planely attempte. They feme to invade us to
th' end that having assembled theyr hale forces fa nere zour bordours, they may unlok
it to attack zow: It is ane off theyr aid fetches, making a fchew to one place, to lyght
on ane other. Remember how covertly zour places about Boulougne were affaizeit,
and carryed away, ze being in peace as now. How the enterprile of Calais was fynely
diflembled, I think ze have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of the third, prevent theyr
policy by prudence. Giff ze fe not the lyke disposition presently in theym, ze fe na-
thing. It is a grosse ignorance to mifknaw, what all nations planely fpeks off. Tak
hede ze fay not hereafter, " Had I wist;" ane uncomely sentence to procede off a
wyfe man's mouth. That is onwares chanced on to zow, quthilk zow commonly
wilted, that this countrey might be divorfed from the Frenfche, and is la comme to
pals as was maift expedient for zow. For giff by your intyfement we had taken the
mater in hand, ze myght have fufpeced we would have been ontrufty frends, and
na langer continued ftedfafte, then perril had appeared. But now, quhen off our
self, we have conceyved the hatered, provoked by private injuries, and that theyr
evil dealing with ws hes deserved our inimitye, let no man doubte but they fall fynd
ws ennemyes in erneff, that fa ungently hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais
hands we look for nathing but all extremitye, giff ever they may get the upper
hand. Let not this occasion, fa happely offered, escape zow : giff ze do, neglecL-
ing the present opportunite, and hoping to have ever gode luk comme fleaping upon
zow, it is to be feared zour enemye waxe to great, and fa firang, that afterwards
quhen ze wald, ze fall not be able to put him down; and then, to zour smart, as-
ter the tyme, ze will acknowledge zour error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat
harme cometh off oversight, and trusting to zour enemyes promeffe. We offer zow
the occasion, quheyrby zour former lofles may be repayred. Quhilk gif ze let ovei
flyde, suffering ws to be owerrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall itay the Frenfchc,
that they fall not invade zow in zour own boundes, sic is their luff to leygne, thar
they can neyther be content with theyr fortune present, nor reft and be laiisficd
when they have gode luck, but will frill follow on, having in theyr awne braync
conceavcd the image of fa great a conquest, quhat think ye fh be he ieend ? Is the]
any of fa flall jugemnent, that he doth not foresee already, that theyr hail force fill
then he bent againit zow ?

It fal not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the Frenfche he presently. Theyi eflate

is not always fa calme at hame as every man thinkcth. And tiewly it wcs not thc t
great redines for weyr made theym to tak this mater on hand, at this tyme, but I;i-
ther a vayne trust in their awne policy, thinking to have found na refiltance, the r
opinion lhes deccaved tlcym, and that makes them now ania;cd. The cft.ies off
hle empire (as I hearc) has futed rcftitution off th' Imperial towns, M4ctz, Toull,
and Verdun, quhilk may grow to some befynes; and all thing is not a c.ilme witiiii
Iheyr awne countrey, the Ics fit they be presently for weyr, the mare oportule eltelne
yc tie tynic lor zow. Giff the like occasion wer offered to the Frenfche agailnfl zozv,

Vo L. II. M nl w''y.

wey, how gladly would they embrace it. Are ze not efchamed of zour sleuth, to
spare theym that hes already compassed your deftruacion, giff they wer able ? Confi-
der with your fJf quhilk is to be choyfed ? To weyr againit them out with zour
realme or within? Gift quhill ze fleape, we fal be overthrowne, then fall they not
fayle to fute zow in zour owne countrey, and use ws as a fote stole to overloke zow.
But some will fay, perhaps, they meane it not. It is foly to think they wald not
giff they wer able, quhen before hand they flick not to giff zour armes, and
ufurpe the style of zour crown. Then quhat difference there is to camp within zour
awne bounds or without, it is manifest. Giff twa armyes should camp in yowr coun-
trey, but a moneth ; albeit ye receaved na other harme, zit should zowr loffe be grea-
tar, nor all the charge ze will nede to bestow on our support will draw to, befydes
the dishonour.

LET not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for perticular refpe&ts weill

affcted to the caus, move zow to fubtrad zour helping hand, by alleging things
not apparent, for that they be possible. It is not, I grant, unpoffible that we may
receave conditiones of peace; but I fee little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer
ws fik as will remove all mistrust, and giff we wald have accepted others, the mater
had bene lang or now compounded. Let zow not be moved for that they terme ws
rebelles, and diffames our just querell with the name of conspiracy against our so-
verayne. It is hir hyencs ryght we manetayne. It is the liberty off hir realme we
study to preserve, with the hazard of our lyves. We are not (God knaweth comme
to this poynt for wantones, as men impacient of rewll, or willing to fchake off the
zoke of government, but ar drawhe to it by neceffite, to avoyde the tyranny of
ftrangeares, feaking to defraude ws off lawful government. Giff we should susser
ftrangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably in all the firenthes of our realme, fortify
the fey-portes, and maift important places, as ane entre to a plain conquest, now
in the minorite of our:foverane, beyng furth of the realme, should we not be thought
oncareful off the common weill, betrayares of our native countrey, and evill sub-
jecis to her majefe ? Quhat other opinion could fche have off ws ? Might fie not
justly hereafter call ws to accompt, as negligent ministeres? Giff itrangeares
flould be thus suffered to broke the chefe offices, beare the hail rewll, alter and
pervert our lawes and liberty at theyr plefour; myght not the people esteem our no-
blemen unworthy the place of counfalours ? We mean na wyfe to fubtrak our obe-
dience from our foverane, to defraud hir hyenes off her dew reverence, rents and re-
venues off hir crown. We feke nathing but that Scotland may remane, as of before,
a fre realme, rewlit by hir hyenes and hir ministeres borne men of the fam; and that
the fucccffion of the crown may remane with the lawful blode.

I WALD not ze fould not fa lyttill efteme the friendship of Scotland, that 7.c

juged it not worthy to be embraced. It fall be na finall commodite for zow to be
delivered off the anoyance of so neir a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye may more
trouble zow, then off any other nation albeit twyfs as puissant, not lyeng dry marchc
with zow. LBefylcs thatze fall not nede to feare the invasion of any prince lackyng
the commodite to invade zow by land, on our hand. Confider quhat fuperfltuou;
charges ze beflowe on the fortification and keping of Barwick ; quhilk ze may re-
duce to a menu ftwmc, having ws to frendes. The rcalme of Ireland being of na-
tour a gode and fertill countrey, by reason of the continewalld unquietnes and lAk
of policy, ze knaw to be rather a burthen unto zow than great advantage; and gifl
it were peaceable may be very commodious. For pacification quhayrofl, it is lI(t
uonhnownc to zow (iill:t service we ar abill to do. R efnfi not thcyr cominodliuys,

blfid:cs'

besides mony ma quhen they ar offred. Quhilks albeit I study not to amplify and
dilate, yet is na other countrey able to offer zow the lyke, and are the rather to be
embraced, for that zour aunceftors, by all meanes, maift-earneftly futed our amity,
and yet it was theyr hap to come by it. The mater hes almaift carryed me be-
yond the boundes off a lettre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zow, after I have
geven you this note. I wald wiss that ze, and they that ar learned, fould rede the
twa former orations of Demosthenes, called Olynthiacae, and confidere quhat coun-
fall that wyfe oratour gave to the Athenians, his countrymen, in a lyke cafe; quhilk
hes so great affinite with this cause of ours, that every word thercoff myght be ap-
plyed to our purpos. There may ze learne of him quhat advise is to be followed,
when your nyghbours hous is on fyre; Thus I bid zow hartely fareweill. From
Sant Andrews, the 2oth of January, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 196.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir William Cecil, from the camp

before Leith, 29th of April, 1560.

WI L L only, for this time, discharge myself of my promise to the Earl of An Original
Huntly, who so defireth to be recommended to you, as one, who with all his Paper Oflice.

heart favoureth this cause, to the uttermofl of his power. Half the words that
come out of his mouth were able to persuade an unexperienced man to speak farther
in his behalf, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your honour to judge of
him, as of a man not unknown to you, and will myself always measure my thoughts,
as he {hall deserve to be spoken of. With much difficulty, and great persuasion,
he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords to join with them in this action; what-
fomever he can invent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promised to do,
with solemn protestation, and many words; he trufteth to adjoin many to this
cause; and faith surely that no man shall lie where he taketh part. He hath this
day subscribed a bond between England and this nation; he faith, that there was
never thing that liked him better.

No. 1V. (Vol. i. p. 207.)

Randolph to Cecil, ioth August 1560. From Edinburgh.

IN C E the 29th of July, at what time I wrote last to your honour, I have An Orgil;,l
heard of nothing worth the reporting. At this prcfent it may please you to in tilhe i'.lc

know, that the most part of the nobles are here arrived, your honour shall receive Ofcc.
their names ill writing. The earl of bluntly cxcufeth himfellf by an infirmity in his
1Ig. His lieutenant for this time is the lord of Lidington, chofcn fpeakcr of the
Parliament, or harangue maker as there men term it. The firlt day of their fitting
in parliamcnt will be on Thursday next. Hitherto, as many as have been prelllit
of the lords have communed and deviled of cert:in heads then to be propounded,
as, who flhall be ecnt into France, who into England. It is much caficr to find thcem
than the other. It fcemeth a>lmlft to be rclolvc(d upon, that for Englandl the
lMaller of Maxwell, and laird of Lidingtltun. For France, Pitaro and the Jus-

/\1 in 2 tic:

tice Clerk. Also they have consulted whom they think meeteft to name for the
XXIV. of the which the XII. counsellors must be chosen. They intend, very
ihortly, to fend away Dingwall the herald into France, with the names of those they
fiall chute; and also to require the king and queen's content unto this parliament.
They have devised how to have the contrac with England confirmed by authority
of parliament; how also to have the articles of the agreement between them and
their king and queen ratificd. 'These things yet have only been had in communi-
cation. For the confirmation of the contra&t with England I have no doubt; for
that I hear many men very well like the fame, as the earl of Athol, the earl of Su-
therland, the L. Glamis, who dined yesterday with the lord James. The L. James
requested me this present day to bring the contraE unto him. I intend also, this
day, to speak unto the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for that he promired in
my hearing to subscribe, and then presently would have done it, if the contract could
lhave been had. For the more allurance against all inconvenients, I would, besides
that, that I trust it shall be ratified in parliament, that every nobleman in Scotland
ltad put his hand and fLt his feal, which may always remain as a notable monument,
tho' the act of parliament be hereafter difannulled. If it might, therefore, stand with
your advice, that the lords might be written unto, now that they are here present to
that efldte, or that I might receive from yourHon'r ome earnest charge to travel here-
in, I doubt not but it would serve to good purpose. If it might be also known with
what fubtlantial and elfedtious words or charge you desire to have it confirmed, I
think no great difficulty would be made. The Earl Marshal has oft been moved to
subscribe, he ufcth ino delays than men judged he would. His son told me yester-
day, that he would speak with me at leisure, so did also Drumlanrick; I know not to
what purpose I have caused lord James to be the earnester with the L. marlhal, for
his auaority's Lake, when of late it was in consultation by what means it might be
wrought, that the amity between these two realms might be perpetual; and among
diverle men's opinion, one said that he knew of no other, but by making them both
one, and that in hope of that mo things were done, than would otherwise have ever
been granted; the earl of Argyll advised him earnestly to flick unto that, that he
had prorilcd for it, that it should pass his power and all the crafty knaves of his
counsel, (I am bold to use unto your H. his own words) to break so godly a pur-
pose. This talk liked well the assisters, howsomever it pleated him to whom it was
ipokcn unto. The barons, who in time past have been of the parliament, had )e-
flcrday a convention among themselves in the church, in very honest and quiet fort;
they thought it good to require to be reflorcd unto their ancient liberty, to have voice
in parliament. They presentcd that day a bill unto the lords to that effccc, a copy
whereof lhall be sent as soon it can be had. It was anfwcred unto gently, anld
taken in good part. It was referred unto the lords of the articles, when they aic
chosen, to resolve thereupon.---llr follows a long paragraph concerlning the forti-
.fcations of Du>ibar, &c.- This present morning, viz. the 9th, I underltood, that
the lords intended to be at the parliament, which caused me somewhat to f:ay my
letter, to fee what I could hear or learn worth the reporting unto your Hon'. T'hi
lords, at ten of the clock, aflhmblcd themselves at the palace, where the duke lieth;
from thence they departed towards the Talbooth, as they were in dignity. Lach
one being set in his (cat, in such order as your H. lhall receive them in this scroll.
The crown, the mace, the sword, were laid in the queen's f(at. Silence being coni-
manded, the 1,. of Lidington began his oration. He cxcufed his inftlfliciency to
occupy that place. lie made a brief dilcourfc of things pa)i, and of what ncc(f-

fitv
8

fity men were forced unto for the defence of their country, what. remedy and sup-
port it pleased God to fend them in the time of their necessity, how much they were
bound heartily to acknowledge it, and to requite it. He took away the persuasion
that was in many men's minds that lay back, that misdeemed other things to be
meant than was attempted. He advised all estates to lay all particulars apart, and
to bend themselves wholly to the true service of God and of their country. He
willed them to remember in what tlate it had been of long time for lack of govern-
ment, and exercise of justice. In the end, he exhorted them to mutual amity and
hearty friendship, and to live with one another as members all of one body- He
prayed God long to maintain this peace and amity with all princes, especially be-
twixt the realms of England and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so ended. The
clerk of register immediately flood up, and asked them to what matter they would
proceed: It was thought neceflary, that the articles of the peace should be confirmed
with the common content, for that it was thought necessary to fend them away with
speed into France, and to receive the ratification of them as soon as might be.
The articles being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day was appointed to
have certain of the nobles subscribe unto them, and to put to their feals, to be sent
away by a herald, who shall also bring the ratification again with him. The ba-
rons, of whom I have above written, required an answer to their request, forne-
what was said unto the contrary. The barons alledged for them custom and autho-
rity. It was in the end resolved, that there should be chosen fix to join with the
lords of the articles, and that if they, after good advisement, should find it right and
neccffary for the commonwealth, it should be ratified at this parliament for a perpe-
tual law. The lords proceeded immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords
of the articles. The order is, that the lords spiritual chute the temporal, and the
temporal the spiritual, and the burgesses their own. There were chosen as in this
other paper I have have written. This being done, the lords departed and accom-
panied the duke, all as far as the bow, (which is the gate going out of the high
fireet) and many down into the palace where he lieth. The town all in armour,
the trumpets founding, and other mufick such as they have. Thus much I report
unto your honour of that that I did both hear and fee. Other fulemnities have not
been used saving in times long pail the lords have had parliament robes, which a;e
now with them wholly out of use.

THE names of as many earls and lords spiritual and temporal as arc assemblcd at
this parliament.

The duke of Chatclhcrault.

Earls. Lords. Lords Spiritual.
Arran. Erikinc. St. Andrcw's.
Argyll. Ruthven. Dulnkll.
Atholc. Lindfcy. Athens.
Crawford. Somervill. The Bishop of the Isles.
Cnflils. Cathcart. Abbots and Plriu:;,
M4arshall. I-Humc. know not hovw mn.iy.

lMorton. Liviiingfon.

(Ilcncai i n. Jin - niclth.
S utlici landi . l, oyd.

CuItlb-

Lords.

Ogilvy. Fleming.
Glamis.
Gray.
Ochiltree.
Gordon.
The Lords of the Articles.

Temporal.

The Duke.
Argyll. Marshall.

Athole.
Morton.
Glencairn.
Ruthven.
Erskine.
Boyd.
Lindsay.

Barons eleaed to be of the

Articles.

Maxwell.
Tillebardine.
Cunninghamhead.
Lochenvar.
Pitarrow.
Lundy.
Ten Provosts of the chief

towns, which also are of
the Articles.

So that with the Subprior of St. Andrews, the whole is 36.

IT were too long for me to rehearse particularly the disposition, and chiefly the

affeftions of these men, that are at this time chosen Lords of the Articles. May it
satisfy your Honr. for this time, to know that, by the common opinion of men,
there was not a fubftantialler or more sufficient number of all forts of men chosen
in Scotland these many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good to infuc.
This present morning, viz. the tenth, the L. of Lidington made me privy unto
your letter; he intendeth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some hard
points there are. He himself is determined not to go into France. He alledgeth
many reasons, but fpeaketh least of that, that moveth him most, which is the ex-
ample of the last, that went on a more grateful mefnage than he shall carry, and
ltood on other terms with their prince than he doth, and yet your honour knoweth
what the whole world judgeth.

Petition of the Lesser Barons to the Parliament, held Aug. I560.

Y lords, unto your lordlhips, humbly means and lihows, we the barons and
frceholders of this realm, your brethren in Christ, That whereas the caufks

of true religion, and common well of this realm, are, in this present parliament,
to be treated, ordered, and eftablifled, to the glory of God, and maintenance of
the commonwealth; and we being the grcateil number in proportion, where the faiid
causes concern, and has been, and yet arc ready to bear the greatcft palt of the
charges thereuntil, as well in peace, as in war, both with our bodies, alnd with our
goods; and secing there is no pl);c1c wlhre we may do better fcrvice now thlan in gc-
icri;Il councils and paliamicnts, in givitng our buct advice, and rcalbn) vote :nd

coiili' ll

Earls.
Cathnefs.
Rothes.
Monteith,

I X.

Spiritual.

Athens.
Isles.
Lord James.
Arbroath.
Newbottle.
Lindoris.
Cowpar.
Kinross.
Kilwinming.

Incloscd in

.Rantltolpl's
letter to Cecil.

tlih Augull,
6)0o.

counfell for the furtherance thereof, for the maintenance of virtue, and punishment
of vice, as use and custom had been of old by ancient acs of parliament observed in
this realm; and whereby we understand that we ought to be heard to reason, and
vote in all causes concerning the commonwealth, as well in countills as in parlia-
ments; otherwise we think that whatfomever ordinances and statutes be made con-
cerning us and our estate, we not being required and fuftired to reason and vote at
the making thereof, that the fame should not oblige us to stand thereto. Therefore
it will please your lordships to take consideration thereof, and of the charge born,
and to be born by us, since we are willing to serve truly to the common well of this
realm, after our estate, that ye will, in this present parliament, and all counfells,
where the common well of the realm is to be treated, take our advice, counfell and
vote, so that, without the fame, your lordships would susser nothing to be pafled
and concluded in parliament or councils aforesaid ; and that all aCts of parliament
made, in times pail, concerning us for our place and estate, and in our favour, be
at this present parliament, confirmed, approved and ratified, and aCt of parliament
thereupon. And your lordships answer humbly beseeches.

Of the success of this petition, the following account is given I5y Randolph; Lett. to

Cecil. 19 Aug. I560. The matters concluded and past by common conrent on Sa-
turday last, in such solemn fort as the first day that they afembled, are there. First,
that the barons, according to an old aCt of parliament, made in the time of James I.
in the year of God 1427, shall have free voice in parliament, this at passed with-
out any contradicdion.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 216.)
A letter of Thomas Randolph, the English resident, to the right wor-

fhipful Sir William Cecil, knt. principal secretary to the queen's ma-
jefty.

Have received your honour's letters of the first of this month, written at Ofyes o Aug. i156
in Eflex, and also a letter unto the lord James, from his kinsman St. Come out Cort. l;b.

of France, in this they agree both that the queen of Scotland is nothing changed b. tc' so. 3-.
of her purpose in home coming. I alure your honour that will be a tfout adven-
ture for a tick crafed woman, that may be doubted as well what may happen unto
her upon the seas, as also how heartily she may be received when she cometh to
land of a great number, who are utterly persuaded that file intendeth their utter
ruin, come when she will; the preparance is very finall whenfoevcr that flie arrive,
irarcely any man can be persuaded that she hath any such thought in her head. I
have shown your honour's letter unto the lord James, lord Morton, lord Ledington,
they wish as your honour doth, that she might be tlaycd yet for a space, and if it
weic not for their obedience fake, some of them care not tho' they nrever law her face.
'I'hey travel what they can to prevent the wicked devises of thcfe miniclicevous pur-
poles of her ministers, but I fear that that will always be foulnd that filij hiujiis Iccu-
li, they do what they can to fland with the religion, and to maintain amity wilh their
neighbours; they have also need to look unto themselves, for their hazard is grc:t',
nltl that they fee there is no remedy nor f;ifity for thcinfelves, but to repole
thclmlfivcs upon the queen's majiety, our lovcrcigl's favours and filpport. Friends

abl o..d

abroad they have none, nor many in whom they may trust at home. There are in
mind shortly to try what they may be aflured at of the queen's majesty, and what
they may afluredly perform of that they intend to offer for their parties. This the
queen of Scotland above all other things doubteth; this she feeketh by all means to
prevent; and hath caused St. Come, in her name, earnestly to write to charge him
that no such things be attempted before her coming home; for that it is said, that
they too already arrived here out of England for the purpose, what femblant fom-
ever the noblemen do make, that they are grieved with their queen's refusal, that
cometh far from their hearts. T'hey intend to expostulate with me hereupon. I
have my answer ready enough for them. If lhe thrust all Englishmen out of this
country, I doubt not but there will be tome of her own that will bear us some kind.
Inefs. Of me she shall be quit, to soon as it pleafeth the queen's majefly my mist
trers no longer to use my service in this place. By such talk, as I have of late had,
with the lord James, and lord of Lidington, I perceive that they are of mind that
immediately of the next convention, I ihall repair towards you with their determli-
nations and resolutions, in all purposes, wherein your honour's advice is earneftlv
rcqui-ed, and shortly looked for. Whatfomever 1 desire myself, I know my wiil
ought to be fubjcet unto the queen my sovereign's pleaSure, but to content myself,
would God I were so happy as to serve her majesty in as mean a itate as ever poor
gentleman did, to be quit of this place; not that I do in my heart wat weary of
her majefly's fervicc, but because my time and years require some place of more re-
pose and quietness than I find in this country. I doubt also my inluficiency when
other troubles in this country arise, or oughtfhall be required of me to the advance-
ment of her majesty's service, that either my will is not able to compass, or my
credit sufficient to work to that effect, as perchance shall be looked for at my hands.
As your honour hath been a means of my continuance in this room, so I trust that
I shall find that continual favour at your hands, that so soon as it ihall stand with
the queen's majesty's pleasure, I may give this place unto rome far worthier than I
am myself, and in the mean season, have my course directed by your good advice,
how I may by my contrivance do some such service, as may be agreeable to her ma-
jefty's will and pleasure.

THESE few words, I am bold to write unto your honour of myself. For the reft,

where that is wished that the lords will floutly continue yet for one month, I aflure
your honour that there is yet nothing omitted of their old and accustomed manner
of doing, and feeing that they have brought that unto this point, and should now
prevail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I FIND not that they are purpofid so to leave the matter. I doubt more her mo-

ney than I do her fair words; and yet can I not conceive what great things can be
wrought with forty thousand crowns, and trcafure of her own here I know there is
no sure or ready means to get it. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothing at this
time unwritten, that he thinketh may be able to fatisfyc your defirc, in knowledge
of the plrc(cit Itate of things here. Whatfomeevcr cometh of that, he findcth it
ever best, that the come not; but if flie do come, to let her know, at the sird,
what ilie shall find, which is due obedience, and willing service, if file cmbrace
Christ, and desire to live in peace with her ncighbours. I3y such letters as you have
last received, your honour fomcwh.it underftandeth of Mr. Knox himfclf, anid ;llo
of others, what is dctcr-niincil he himficlf to abide the utterunolt, and other never
to leave him until God have t.dkn his life, and thus together with what comfoit

6 (1ri-

I3

fomrever it will please you to give him by your letters, that the queen's majefly doth
not utterly condemn him, or at the leaif in that point, that he is so fore charged with
by his own queen, that her majesty will not allow her doing. I doubt not but it
will be a great comfort unto him, and will content many others; his daily prayer is
for the maintenance of unity with England, and that God will never susser men to
be so ungrate, as by any persuasion to run headlong unto the dettrucion of them,
that have saved their lives, and restored their country to liberty. I leave farther, at
this time, to trouble your honour, desiring God to fend such an amity between there
two realms, that God may be glorified to them of this world.-At Edenbourgh the
9th of August, I561.

No. VI. (Vol. I. p. 224.)

A Letter of Queen Elizabeth to Queen Mary.
To the right excellent, right high and mighty princesSe, our right dear and well-

beloved sifter and cousin the queen of Scotland.
0,G IGHT excellent, right high and mighty princelle, our right dear and right r6th of Aug.

w' ,well-beloved sifter and coulin, we greet you well]. The lord of St. Cosine 1561.

brought to us your letters, dated the 8th of this present at Abbeville, whereby ye Paper-Office
signify, that although by the answer brought to you by \lonfieur Doyzell, ye might from a Copy.
have h ld occasion to have enired into fume doubt of our amity, yet after certain pur-
poSes palTed betwixt you and our ambaflador, you would afiure us of your good
meaning to live with us in amity, and for your purporfe therein ye require us to give
credit to the raid St. Cofmc. We-hlave thereunto thought good to answer as follow-
eth. The fanie St. Cofme hath made like declaration unto us on your part, for your
c:cufe in not ratifying the treaty, as yourself made to our ambaflador, and we have
briefly answered to every the fame points, as he can fhlew you: and if he fa 11 nut
to do, yet least in the mean season you might be induced to think that your rcaflns
has satisfied us, fomerally we aflure you, that to our requests your answer cannot be
reputed for a fatisfastion. For we require no benefit of you, but that you will per-
form your promise whereunto you are bound by your feal and your hand, for the re-
fulal whereof we fee no reason alledged can serve. Neither covet we ;any thing but
that which is in your own power as queen of Scotland, that which yourself in words
llnd fpecch doth confers, that which your late husband's our good brother's am-
bailaclors and you concluded, that which your own nobility and people were made
privy unto, that which indeed made peace and quictnefs betwixt us, yea that, without
wlich, no perfect amity can coUtinue betwixt us, as if it be indifierently weigheld,
we dounbt not butt ye will pcrceive, allow and accoiplifli. N'cvertlhlce(s, perceiving
by the report of the hrilnger, that )ou mncanl furthwith 1upo your comilng ho1me, to
follow herein the advilc of your council in Scotland, we ale content lt fiufpielnd our
cc(nccipt of all unkindnefis, and do allure you that we be fully eCfolvcel, upon this being
perfocrmed, to unite a fuie band ofamity, and to live in nighbou rhood with you as qui-
etly, friendly, yea cas afiurcdly in the knot of l iclnillilp, ;s we be in the knot of inatll
alld bloqd. An(d icrein we be l0 carnelily dctermnli d, that lhe wo J should Ife if
tlie con!rary lhould follow, (which (God (,rlbid) the vely occasion to be in yon and not
in us ; as tle flory willCefiilb the like of the king your father, our uncle, with wllhomn

VOL. 11. N n our

our father fought to have knitt a perpetual bond by inviting to come in this realm to
York, of which matter we know there remain with us, and we think with your
sundry witnesses of our father's earnest good meaning, and of the error whereunto
divers evil councillors induced your father; or finally where it feemeth that report
hath been made unto you, that we had sent our admiral to the seas with our navy to
empeache your passage, both your servants do well understand how false that is,
knowing for a truth that we have not any more than two or three small barks upon
the seas, to apprehend certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and almost compelled,
by the earnest complaint of the ambassador of our good brother the king of Spain,
made of certain Scottifimen haunting our seas as pirates, under pretence of letters of
marque, of which matter also weearneftly require you, at your coming to your realme,
to have some good consideration, and the rather for refpet that ought to be betwixt
your realme and the countries of us, of France, of Spain, and of the house of Bur-
gundy. And so, right excellent, right high and mighty princess, we recommend us
to you with most earnest request, not to negleEt these our friendly and sisterly offers
of friendship, which, before God, we mean and intend to accomplish. Given under
our signet at Henyngham the 16th of August, in the third year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 253.)
A letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's majesty.

15th of May, A-'S late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had nothing worth the writing
1563. unto your honour.-Before his coming, we had so little to hint upon, that
Paper Office we did nothing but pass our time in feasts, banqueting, masking, and running at
from the Ori- the ring, and such like. He brought with him such a number of letters and such abun-
ginal. dance of news, that for the space of three days, we gave ourselves to nothing else but

to reading of writings, and hearing of tales many so truely reported, that they might
be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris narrationibus. Among all
his tidings, for the most assured, I fend this unto your honour as an undoubted truth,
which is, that the cardinal of Lorraine, at his being with the emperor, moved a mar-
riage between his youngest son, the duke of Aufiruche, and this queen ; wherein he
hath so far travailed, that it hath already come unto this point, that if (he find it good,
the said duke will out of hand fend hither his ambassador, and farther proceed to
the confuimmation hereof, with as convenient speed as may be; and to the intent her
mind may be the better known, la Croch is sent unto her with this mcffage from the
cardinal, who hath promired unto the emperor, to have word again before the end of
May; and for this cause la Croch is ready for his departure, and his letters writing
both day and night. This queen being before advertized of his towardncfs, by many
means, hath fought far off, to know my lord of Murray's mind herein, but would
never so plainly deal with him, that he could learn what her meaning is, or how ihe
is bent. She ufeth no man's council, but only this man's that last arrived, and as-
furedly until the L. of Lidington's return, file will do what she can to keep that
iccrct, and because resolution in his abfcnce cannot be taken, ile will, for this time,
return la Croch with rcqucft, to have longer time to devise; and after, with the
most ipeed she can, fle fully purpofcth to advertize him, I mean her uncle the cardi-

,, ,1

'I

nal, of her mind. Of this matter the L. of Lidington is made privy. I know
not whether by some intelligence that he had before his departure, or finco his arrival
in France, divers letters have passed between her grace and him, whereof as much
as it imported not greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to tome, as much
as was written in sypher, is kept unto themselves. Whether also the L. of Li-
dington hath had conference with the Spanish ambaflador in England of this
matter, or any like, I leave it unto your honour's good means, to get true know-
ledge thereof. Guesses or furmizes in so grave matters, I would be loth to write
for verities. This also your honour may take for truth, that the emperor hath
offered with his son, for this queen's dower, the county of Tyroll, which is said
to be worth 30,000 franks by year. Of this matter also, the rhingrave wrote a let-
ter unto this queen, out of France not long since. This is all that presently I can
write unto your honour hereof, as I can come by farther knowledge, your honour
{ball be informed.

I HAVE received your honour's writings by the Scottifl man, that last came into

these parts, he brought also letters unto this queen from the L. of Lidington, their
date was old, and contained only the news of France. I perceive, divers ways, that
Newhaven is forre closed, but I am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know
they will fay as much as they dare do, I will not fay as the proverb doth, ' canis
' timidus fortius latrat.' From hence I do asSure them, what means fomever they
make, or how pitiful fomever their mone be, they are like to receive but small com-
fort, for all their long allie. We fiand daily in doubt what friendship we Shall
need ourself, except we put better order unto our misruled papists, than yet we do,
or know how to bring to pass, that we may be void of their comber.

To-morrow, the I5th of this instant, the queen departeth of this town, towards

Edenborough. If my hap be good, you shall thoroughly hear some mnerry tidings
of the Bp. of St. Andrews; upon Wednesday next he flall be arreigned, and five
other priests, for their mafling at Easter last. Thus most humbly I take my
leave; at St. Andrews the xith of May, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 261.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's majesty.

AY it please your honour, the 7th of this instant, Rowlet, this queen's fe- loth ofApril,
cretary, arrived here; he reporteth very honeflly of his good ufagc, he 1c63.

brought with him many letters unto the queen that came out of France, full of la- Paper Office
mentation and sorrow. She received from the queen mother two letters, the one fromn the Ori-
contained only the rehearsal of her griefs, the other signify the tfate of France as gi"1l in his
then it was, in what fort things were accorded, and what farther was intended for on Hand.
the appec;'.ing of the discords there, not miflrufling but that if reason could not be
had at the queen of England's hands, but that the realm of France flould find her
ready and willing to support and defend the right thereof, as by friendflip and old
alliiance between the two realms fle is bound.

-low well tlhefi words do agree with her doings, your honour can well confider,
and by her writings in this fort unto this queen, (which I ifinre your honour is true)

N n 2 you

our father fought to have knitt a perpetual bond by inviting to come in this realm to
York, of which matter we know there remain with us, and we think with you,
sundry witnefles of our father's earnest good meaning, and of the error whereunto
divers evil councillors induced your father; or finally where it feemeth that report
hath been made unto you, that we had sent our admiral to the seas with our navy to
empeache your passage, both your servants do well understand how false that is,
knowing for a truth that we have not any more than two or three small barks upon
the seas, to apprehend certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and almost compelled,
by the earnest complaint of the anbaffador of our good brother the king of Spain,
made of certain Scottifhmen haunting our seas as pirates, under pretence of letters of
marque, of which matter also we earnefily require you, at your coming to your realme,
to have some good consideration, and the rather for refped that ought to be betwixt
your realme and the countries of us, of France, of Spain, and of the house of Bur-
gundy. And so, right excellent, right high and mighty princess, we recommend us
to you with most earnest request, not to negled there our friendly and sisterly offers
of friendlhip, which, before God, we mean and intend to accomplish. Given under
our signet at Henyngham the 16th of August, in the third year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 253.)
A letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's majesty.
X ;th of May, g~'S late, until the arrival of monsieur la Croch, I had nothing worth the writing

a1563.- unto your honour.-Before his coming, we had so little to hint upon, that

Paper Office we did nothing but pass our time in feasts, banqueting, masking, and running at
from the Ori- the ring, and such like. He brought with him such a number of letters and such abun-
ginal. dance of news, that for the space of three days, we gave ourselves to nothing else but

to reading of writings, and hearing of tales many so truely reported, that they might
be compared to any that ever Luciane did write de veris narrationibus. Among all
his tidings, for the most assured, I fend this unto your honour as an undoubted truth,
which is, that the cardinal of Lorraine, at his being with the emperor, moved a mar-
riage between his youngest son, the duke of Auflruche, and this queen ; wherein he
hath so far travailed, that it hath already come unto this point, that if she find it good,
the said duke will out of hand fend hither his ambassador, and farther proceed to
the consummation hereof, with as convenient speed as may be; and to the intent her
mind may be the better known, la Croch is sent unto her with this melfage from the
cardinal, who hath promised unto the emperor, to have word again before the end of
May; and for this cause la Croch is ready for his departure, and his letters writing
both day and night. This queen being before advertized of his towardnefs, by many
means, hath fought far off, to know my lord of Murray's mind herein, but would
never so plainly deal with him, that he could learn what her meaning is, or how ihe
is bent. She ufeth no man's council, but only this man's that last arrived, and as-
furedly until the L. of Lidington's return, fle will do what she can to keep that
Iccrct, and because resolution in his abfcnce cannot be taken, fli will, for this time,
return la Croch with rcqucft, to have longer time to devise; and after, with the
most specd fhc can, fie fully purpofcth to advertize him, I mean her uncle the cardi-

nal,

I5

nal, of her mind. Of this matter the L. of Lidington is made privy. I know
not whether by some intelligence that he had before his departure, or since his arrival
in France, divers letters have passed between her grace and him, whereof as much
as it imported not greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some, as much
as was written in sypher, is kept unto themselves. Whether also the L. of Li-
dington hath had conference with the Spanish ambassador in England of this
matter, or any like, I leave it unto your honour's good means, to get true know-
ledge thereof. Guesses or furmizes in so grave matters, I would be loth to write
for verities. This also your honour may take for truth, that the emperor hath
offered with his son, for this queen's dower, the county of Tyroll, which is said
to be worth 30,000 franks by year. Of this matter also, the rhingrave wrote a let-
ter unto this queen, out of France not long since. This is all that presently I can
write unto your honour hereof, as I can come by farther knowledge, your honour
shall be informed.

I HAVE received your honour's writings by the Scottish man, that last came into

there parts, he brought also letters unto this queen from the L. of Lidington, their
date was old, and contained only the news of France. I perceive, divers ways, that
Newhaven is forre closed, but I am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know
they will fay as much as they dare do, I will not fay as the proverb doth, ' canis
' timidus fortius latrat.' From hence I do assure them, what means fomever they
make, or how pitiful fomever their mone be, they are like to receive but small com-
fort, for all their long allie. We itand daily in doubt what friendship we {hall
need ourself, except we put better order unto our misruled papifis, than yet we do,
or know how to bring to pass, that we may be void of their comber.

To-morrow, the i5th of this instant, the queen departeth of this town, towards

Edenborough. If my hap be good, you shall thoroughly hear some nerry tidings
of the Bp. of St. Andrews; upon Wednesday next he flall be arreigned, and five
other priests, for their massing at Eaffer last. Thus most humbly I take my
leave; at St. Andrews the isth of May, 1563.

No. VIII. (Vol. I. p. 26I.)
Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight,

principal secretary to the queen's majesty.

AY it please your honour, the 7th of this inifant, Rowlet, this queen's fe- loth ofApril,

j/J.M cretary, arrived here; he rcporteth very honeflly of his good usage, he 1I,63.
brought with him many letters unto the queen that came out of France, full of la- Paper Office
mcntation and Ibrrow. She received fiom the queen mother two letters, the one fiorn the Ori-
contained only the rehcarfal of her griefs, the other signify the slate of France as gi1al in his
then it was, in what fort things were accorded, and what farther was intended for on Hand.
the appe':ling of the dilcords there, not miflrufling but that if reason could not be
haid at the queen of England's hands, but that the realm of France fliould find her
ready anld willing to support and defend the right thereof, as by fricndflip and old
alliiilcc bctween the two realms flhe is bound.

How well thlcl' words do agree with her doings, your honour can well confidcr,
and by hlr writings in this Ibrt unto this lqueen, (which I lfliirc your honour is true)

N n 2 you

you may assuredly know, that nothing shall be left undone of her part, that mar-
move debate or controverfie between this queen and our sovereign.

IT was much mused at by the queen herself, how this new kindness came about,

that at this time she received two long letters written all with her own hand, faying,
all the time since her return she never received half so many lines, as were in one of
the letters, which I can myself testify by the queen's own laying, and other good
allurance, where hitherto I have not been deceived. I can alto farther alfure your
honour, that this queen hath fayed that she knoweth now, that the fricndfhip of the
queen's majcity my sovereign may sand her more in stead, than that of her good
mother in Firance, and as ihc is desirous of them both, so will file not lose the one
for the other. 1 may also farther allure your honour, that whatfomever the occasion
is, this queen hath some what in her heart that will burst out in time, which will nia-
nifeft that rome unkindness hath palled between them, that will not be easy forgotten.
In talk sometimes with myself, she faith that the queen mother might have used the
matter otherwise than fie hath done, and doth much doubt what ihall be the fuccels
of her great desire to govern alone, in all things to have her will. Seeing then thac
presently they fland in such terms one with the other, I tho't it better to confirm her
in that mind, (this queen I mean) than to speak any word that might cause her to
conceive better of the other. And yet I am ailured ihe shall receive as friendly let-
ters, and as many good words from this queen, as the other did write unto her.
Whether the queen mother will speak any thing unto the L. of Lidington of th.t
purpose, file did write unto this queen of, I know not, but if she do, I think it hard
if your honour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or I perchance by some means
here. It may, perchance, be written only by that queen, to try what answer this
queen will give, or understand what mind (he beareth unto the queen's majesty our
fvcrceign. The queen knoweth now that the earl Bothewell is sent for to London.
She caused a gentleman of hers to enquire the cause; I anfwcred, that I knew none
other, but that his takers were in controversy who took him, and that it should be
judged there. I know that the thinketh much that he is not fenx into Scotland. It
is vet greatly doubted that if he were here, he would be reserved for an evil infru-
mcnt. If the lord of Lidington have not been plain with your honour herein, hc
is in the wrong to those who are his friends here, but most of all to himself. 'I'hcc
comes a vulture in this realm, if ever that man come again into credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 269.)
The oration made by William Maitland of Lethington, younger secretary

for the time, in the parliament holden by our sovereign the king's mo-
ther, queen of this realm for the time, the time of the restitution or
Umquile Matthew Earl of Lenox.

Y lords and others here convened. Albeit, be that it has plcafed her m:a-
jcfly moil graciouily to utter unto you, by her own maouth, ye may h.Ave

fuitlicieltly conceived the c;taufc of this your present aflcmbly ; yet lhaving her . t-
jelly's commandmenl t to supply my lord Chancellor's place, being prcfcntly as ye
fee dcccafed, I am; willed. to cxprces the Ilhme somewhat more at large.

NOTOUR.

NOTOUR it is, how, in her Highness's minority, a procers of forfaltour was

decreed against my lord of Lennox, for certain ofl'ences alledged committed by him;
specified in the dome and cenfeiment of Parliament given thereupon ; by reason
whereof he has this long time been exiled, and absent forth of his native country;
how grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appealed by divers his fuitcs,
sundry ways brought unto her MRajety's knowledge, not only containing most humble
and due fubmiflion, but always bearing witness of his good devotion to her majesty
his natural princess, and earnest affection he had to her Ilighnefs mos huinble
fcrvice, if it should please her Majelty of her clemency to make him able to eiijoy
the benefit of a subject; many relfpes might have moved her Highnl1' favourably
to incline to his request, as the anciency of his house, and the firiame lie beaIs,
the honour he has to appertain to her majefly by affinity, by reason of my Lady
Marg.ret her highness's aunt, and divers other his good confiodeiations, as also the
ef'Fectuous request of her good filter the Quecn's ML.jefty of England, whose earnest
commendation was not of leafl moment, besides that of her own natural, her ma-
jetLy has a certain inclination to pity the decay of noble houfcs, and as we heard, by
her own report, has a great deal more pleasure to be the inflru-lient of the uphold',
maintenance, and advancient of the antient blood, than to have matter minillrcd
of the decay or overthrow of any good race. Upon this occasion, her maje.ly the
mole tenderly looked upon his request, and her good sifter the Queen of England's
favourable letter, written for recommendation of his cause, in consideration whereof
not only has file granted unto him her letter of refitution, by way of gr.ce, but
;ilfo licerned him to pursue, by way of reduction, the remedies provided by the law
for such as think themcilves grieved by any judgment, unordeily led, and to have
the process reversed; for examination whereof, it has pleased her m.ijefty prcf. ntly
to alielib'e you the three eilatcs (f tIhi. her rcalme, by wihoL al ice, delibcration,
and deifion at her inajefty's mind, to proceed forward upon his complaints, as
the merits of the cause, laws of the realm, and practice observcd in l'udh calcs,
will bear out. The fum of all your pr: cecdings at this time, being bv that v e have
heard, thus as it were pointed out, I might heic end, if the matter we have in hand
give me not occafiun to fay a few more words, not far diiitcornt fiom the fC;re lab-
ject, wherein I would extend the circumftanccs more largely. If I f:ar-ed not to
(,icnd lier highneis, whose presence and miodeft natmie .bhiors long fpcakinii, and
adullttion, and so will compel me to lpeak such thin s, as imay i'ein to tend Lo any
good and pcirfcc point ; and Icaft it fiould be compted to me, a, thlat 1 were obli-
vious, if 1 flould omit to put you in lcmremlbriance, in what ip.i t we mIay accc;t I. is
and tile like dllmonlitr,ltions of her gcntill nature; whole graicioiis behaiviouir t ,ivw. .
all hler u;bjcltls, in eencral, may ltrvCe for a good proof of that f' licit), we nlay
look si r under her- happy governnenit, so long as it ll dll please rod to grart h-r
ui:to U;II; fir a goodl harmlony to be hadi in the commlon wvcll, the olic<,hs bctwrcI
ile iince aind tilhe bjecLs must be rccilro'(lue ;

: is by her mi.}i)y's lirudolinc

w:l

cinj v this prelnt peace with all forcign na;tionis, ;anil duiietmicis :imuni yoturfelic:;, 1I1
1iell Ilort, that I think jiti, l) it lmay bc afsiiri-ed Scotland, in o n l in'.s a tha t pre-
tiotly lives, was in greater tir.i ltlility ; lo is it thle duty ol all us her lovilg l u iljj . is
to L'akiowledeC tiMe fame as a1 llo high benftlit, proceeding fromn the -ooid givirns-
mnit11 of liher ni.ijfty, delcali inrg olurfr v csl thllankfl for the flame, ;and rt(nd-.i i t,, her
Irl:iicly fucli (Iue obedientic, as a just prince mriy lookl for at tihe al.ndls ol fa.ithllfl
anid ol.lcdiclt fubjecCss. I nlean no forccd nor 1unwilillng obedCienceC, which I klnow

lice

her nature does detest, but such as proceeds from the contemplation of her modest
kind of regiment, will for love and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good
proof have we all in general had of her majesty's benignity these three years, that
lhe has lived in the government over you, and many of you have largely tafted of
her large liberality and frank dealing; on the other part her highness has had large
appearance of your dutiful obedience, so it becomes you to continue, as we have
begun, in consideration of the many notable examples of her clemency above others
her good qualities, and to abhor and detest all false bruites and rumours, which are
the most pestilent evils that can be in any common well, and the sowers and inven-
tors thereof. Then may we be well allured to have of her an most gracious princesse,
and the most faithful and loving fubjeds; and so both the head and the members,
being encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord of the politick bodies, where-
of I made mention before, as the glory thereof shall partly appertain to her majesty,
so shall no finall praise and unspeakable commodity redound therethrough to you all
universally her fubjeds.

No. X. (Vol. I. p. 278.)
The perils and troubles that may presently ensue, and in time to come

follow, to the Queen's majesty of England, and state of this realm,
upon the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the Lord Darley.

IRS T, the minds of such as be affe&ed to the Queen of Scotts, either for her-
self, or for the opinion of her pretence to this crown, or for the desire to have

charge of the forme of religion in this realm, or for the difcontentation they have
of the Queen's majesty, or her succession, or of the fucceflion of any other betide the
Queen of Scotts, hiall be, by this marriage, ereted, comforted, and induced to
devise and labour how to bring their defi es to pass; and to make some estimate
what persons those are, to the intent the quantity of the danger mav be weighed;
the fame may be compassed in those forts either within the realm or without.

THE first are such as are specially devoted to the Queen of Scotts, or to the Lord

Darley, by bond of blood and alliance; as first all the house of Lorrain and Guise
for her part, and the Earl of Lennox and his wife, all such in Scotland as be of their
blood, and have received difpleifurcs by the Duke of Chatelherault and the Hamil-
tons. The second are all manner of persons, both in this realm and other coun-
tries, that are devoted to the authority of Rome, and miflikc of the religion novw
received; and in there two forts are the fubltance of them comprehended, that fiall
take comfort in this marriage.

NEXT therefore to be confidered what perils and troubles these kind of men fliall
intend to this realm.

FIRST, the general scope and mark of all their dcfires is, and always shall be, to

bring the Queen of Scotts to have the royal crown of this realm; and therefore,
though the devifccs may vary amongst themfelvcs for the compafling hercf, accord-
ing to the accidents of the times, and according to the impediments which they shall
find by means of the queen's majcfty's actions and governments, yet all their pur-
poses, drifts, devifcs, and prastices, flall wholly and only tend to make the queen
of Scotts queen of this realm, and to deprive our fovcrcign lady thereof; anlI in their
proceedings, there are two manners to be confidered, whereof the one is far worfc than

the
i8

the other; the one is intended by them, that either from malicious blindnecs in
religion, or for natural affection to the queen of Scotts, or the lord Darley, do per-
fuade themselves that the said queen of Scotts hath presently more right to the crown
than our sovereign lady the queen, of which fort be all their kindred on both fides,
and all such as are devoted to popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or else-
where; the other is meant by them, which with less malice, are persuaded that
the queen of Scotts hath only right to be the next heir to succeed the queen's majesty
and her issue, of which fort few are without the realm, but here within, and yet of
them, not so many as are of the contrary, and from there two forts ihall the peril
devises and practices proceed. From the first, which imagine the queen of Scotts to
have perpetually right, are to be looked for these perils. First, is it to be doubted
the devil will insec some of them to imagine the hurt of the life of our dear fove-
reign lady, by such means as the devil ihall suggest to them, although it is to be
alfuredly hoped, that almighty God will, as he hath hitherto, graciously protect and
preserve her from such dangers. Secondly, there will be attempted, by persuasions,
by bruites, by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds of good fubjeas from
the queen's majesty, and to counciliate them to the queen of Scotts, and on this be-
half the frontiers and the north will be much solicited and laboured. Thirdly, there
will be attempted causes of some tumults and rebellions, specially in the north to-
wards Scotland, so as thereupon may follow some open enterprize set by violence.
Fourthly, there will be, by the said queen's council and friends, a new league made
with France, or Spain, that shall be offensive to this realm, and a furtherance to
their title. And it is also very likely, that they will set a foot as many practices as
they can, both upon the frontiers and in Ireland, to occasion the queen's majesty to
encreafe and continue her charge thereby, to retain her from being mighty or potent,
and for the attempting of all these things, many devises will be imagined, from time
to time, and no negligence will therein appear.

FROM the second fort, which mean no other favour to the queen of Scotts, but

that she should succeed in title to the queen's majesty, is not much to be feared,
but that they will content themselves to fee not only the queen's majesty not to marry,
and so to impeach it, but to hope that the queen of Scotts shall have ifue, which
they will think to be more pleafible to all men, because thereby the crowns of Eng-
land and Scotland shall be united in one, and thereby the occasion of war flall
cease; with which persuasion many people may be seduced, and abused to incline
thenmfelves to the part of the queen of Scotts.

THE remedies against these perils.

A Duplicat.
A fuminary of the consultation and advice given by the lords and others tihJunele56;.

of the privy council. ColleCted out of the sundry and several speeches Cott.Lib.Cal.
of the said counsellors. 1. 10. so.290.

Lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroller,
Lord Trcafurer, Mr. Vice Chamberlain,
f Derby, Mr, Secretary,
Earls of Bedford, Cavc,

Leiccfecr, Peter,
Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lord Chamberlain,

Qecltions
3

Queflions propounded were these two.
I. F~ IRS T, what perils might ensue to the queen's majefly, or this realm, of the

rn marriage betwixt the Queen of Scots, and the Lord Darnly.
2. Wh.at were meet to be done, to avoid or remedy the fame.

To the First.

The perils being sundry, and very many, were reduced by some counsellors into
only one.

i. Fitft, that by this marriage, the queen of Scotts, (being not married) a great

number in this realm, not of the worst fubjecAs, might be alienated in their minds
fi-om their natural duties to her majesty, to depend upon the success of this marriage
of Scotland, as a mean to establish the fucceflion of bozh the crowns in the issue of
the fame marriage, and so favour all devises and practices, that should tend to the
advancement of the queen of Scotts.

2. Secondly, that coniidering the chief foundation of them, which furthered the

marriage of the lord Darnly, was laid upon the tiuft of such as were papifis, as the
only means left to restore the religion of Rome, it was plainly to be seen, that both
in this realm and Scotland, the papists would moit !avcur, maintain, and fortifv
this marriage of the lord Darnly, and would for furtherance of faction in religion,
devise all means and practices that could be within this realm, to di{turb the eftame
of the queen's majesty, and the peace of the realm, and consequently to atchieve
their purposes by force, rather than fail. By tome other, thefr perils having indeed
many branches, were reduced, though fomevwh tt otherwise, into two forts, and these
were in nature such as they could not be easily fevered the one from the other, but
were knit and lincked together, naturally for maintaining the one with the other.
The first of there foit of perils was, that by this marriage with the lord Darrnlv,
there was a plain intention to further the pretended title of the queen of Scotts, not
only to succeed the queen's majesty, as in her belt amity she had poflefled, but that
to occupy the queen's estate, as when she was in power, she did manifetfly declare.

TH-E second was, that hereby the Romish ieligion flhould be erected, and increaedl

daily in this realm, and there two were thus knit together, that the furtherance and
maintenance ofthe title stood, in furthering of the religion of Rome within this realm
and in like manner the furtherance the fame religion flood by the title, for other-
wile the title had no foundation.

Proves of the firit.) And to prove that the intention to advance the title to lifturh

the queen's majctly, must needs cntue, was confidered that always the intention and
will of any pclion is iofl- manilcfl, when their power is greatell, and contrary when
power is final, then the intention anll will of every perion is covered and Icls lcii.
So as whcn the queen of Scotts power was greatelt, by her marriage with the dl-
phin of France, being afterwards French king, it maniteilly appeared of what nind
she, and all her filicnds were, ulfing then maniicfly all thie meancs that coull hi i c-
vised to impealch and dirpollrfs the queen's majefly, first by writiing and publifhilll:
herself in all coluntrics queen of L'n gland ; by gralnliing charters, patecnts, andl cnim-
rnifions with that flile, and with the arnis of l.llaiiid, both thle French aund S;c.tt:i,
which chartels remail still undellcecd; allnd to proTfecite it with cfl'ctr, it is kn;)i'i
what preparationls of wax wrei nl:rtdi, and sent into Scotlandl; and whll t other (o ;)r";
we'c I Iaflli lctI in riCeiigni Countliehs yCea, in wlil at nllilinr a flhamilful peace \.i

l] Il ~(

made by the French with king Philip, to employ all the forces of France to pursue
all the matters by force, which by God's providence, and the queen's majelty con-
trary power, were repelled; and afterwards, by her husband's death, her fortune and
power being changed, the intention began to hide itself, and although by the Scot-
tifh queen's commiflarys an accord was made at Edenbrough, to reform all thofc
titles, and claims, and pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillations, the rati-
fication of that treaty hath been deferred. And so now, as soon as ihe shall feel her
power, the will set the fame again abroad, and by confidering of such errors as were
committed in the first, her friends and allies will amend the fame, and proceed sub-
ftantially to her purpose. By tome it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater
of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a subje&c of this realm, than with the
mightiet prince abroad; for by this, be being of this realm, and having for the
cause of religion, and other refpets, made a party here, ihould increase by force with
diminution of the power of the realm, in that whatsoever power he could make by
the faction of the papist, aand other discontented persons here, should be as it were
deducted out of the power of this realm; and by the marriage ot a itranger, flhe
could not be assured of any part here; so as by this marriage ihe should have a por-
tion of her own power to serve her turn, and a small portion of adversaries at
home in our own bowels, always seen more dangerous than treble the like abroad;
whereof the examples are in our own fiories many, that foreign powers never pre.
vailed in this realm, but with the help of some at home. It was also remembered,
that feeing now before this attempt of marriage, it is found, and manifestly seen,
that in every corner of the realm, the faction that most favoureth the Scottish title, is
'grown flout and bold, yea seen manifestly in this court, both in hall and chamber,
it could not be (but except good heed were speedily given to it) by this marriage,
and by the practice of the fautors thereof, the fame facion would {hortly increafc,
and grow so great and dangerous, as the redress thereof, would be almost defpe-
rate. And to this purpose it was remembered, how of late in perusing of the
substance of the justices of the peace, in all the countrys of the realm, scantly a
third was found fully assured to be trusted in the matter of religion, upon which
only firing the queen of Scots title doth hang, and iome doubt might be, that the
friends of the earl of Lennox, and his had more knowledge hereof than was thought,
and thereby made a vant now in Scotland, and their party \va (to great il lEngl.nd
as the queen's majesty durfl not attempt to contrary his miriage . And in this lort,
was the fum of the perils declared, being notwithStanding more laigely and plainly
fct out, and made so apparent by many sure arguments, as no one of the council
could deny them to be but many, and very dangerous.

Second Queifion.

THE queflion of this consultation was what were meet to be (lone to avoid tlic

perills, or clfe to divert the force thereof from hurting rile icilmo; wherein thecr
were a great number of particular dcvifcs propounded, and yet the 1moic part (
tihcm was reduced by some into three heads.

i. I 1-l ir fut thought neccfliry by all persons, as the only tlhiing of the molt mo-

mient and eflicacy, to rcemedy all theic' pcrills, and many others, a;iil fcha as witlhout
it no other remedy couldl be found fullicient, and that was to obtain that the qIucenI's
mnajfiiy would marry, and make thercin no long delay.

VOL. I. o ..

.21

S. I'TH' second was to advance, cfiablifl, and fortify indeed the profeflion of re-

ligion, both in Scotland, and in England, and to diminish, weaken, and feeble the
contrary.

3. THE third was, to proceed in sundry things, either to disappoint and break this

intended marriage, or, at the least, thereby to procure the fame not to be so hurtful
to this realm, as otherwise it will be.

THE first of there three hath no particular rights in it, but an earnest and un-

feigned desire and suite, with all humbleness, by prayer to Almighty God, and ad-
vice and council to the queen's majesty, that ihe would differ no mole time from
marriage, whereby the good fubjets of the realm might stay their hearts, to depend
upon her majesty, and the issue of her body, without which no surety can be deviscd
to ascertain any person of continuance of their families or potteries, to enjoy that
which otherwise should come to them.

SECOND, concerning the matters of religion, wherein both truth and policy were
joined together, had these particulars.

FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion in the realm have taken occa-

sion to comfort and increase their faction, both in England, Scotland, and abroad,
with a rumour and expectation that the religion hfall be flortly changed in this
realm, by means that the bihfops, by the queen's majesty's commandment, have of
late dealt flreightly with rome persons of good religion, bccaufe they had forborn to
wear certain apparel, and such like things, being more of form and accidents, than
of any substance, for that it is well known that her majesty had no meaning to com-
fort the adversaries, but only to maintain an uniformity as well in things external,
as in the fubflance, nor yet hath any intention to make any change of the religion,
as it is established by laws. It was thought by all men very necessary, for the sup-
pressing of the pride and arrogancy of the adversaries, indirectly hereby to notify, by
her special letters to the two archbishops, that her former commandment wa, only
to retain an uniformity, and not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge of her
majesty, in the change of any part of religion, but that ihe did determine firmly to
maintain the form of her religion, as it was established, and to punish such as did
therein violate her laws. And in these points, some also wished that it might please
her archbifliops, that if they ihould fee that the adversarics continued in taking occa-
sion to fortify their faction, that in that cafe they fliould use a moderation therein,
until the next parliament, at which time, bmne good, uniform, and decent order
might be devised, and eflablifhed, for such ceremonies, so as both uniformity and
gravity might be retained amongst the clergy.

TIHE second means was, that the quondam biffops, and others, which had rc-

sis(cd to acknowledge the queen's majcfly's power over them, according to the law,
and were of late diliperfed in the plague time to sundry places abroad, where it is
known they cease not to advance their failion, might be returned to the tower, or
fotie other prifln, where they might not have such liberty to 'cdluce and inveigle the

cqleen's mnljcfty's fuhjcls, as theyv daily do.
T1iE thirl means was, that where the bishops do compilain that they diare not
executc the cclciaftical laws, to the furthcralnce of religion, for fear of the prelniu-
nlirl wheiewith the judges and lawyers of the realm, beiiin; not best a;itrcll in rcli-
pion, do tlieatell thiem, ;and in many ca(Ls Ictt nit to pinch and deface themi, tllat
upon flch cafes ope'ncd, (bome convenicnt autholity might be given them, froi tic
quleen' S li .jetly, to o ltnilllu dui ini her plealiire.

'I'l .

TIHE fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicious and unlawful books in

English, brought from beyond seas, and are boldly received, read, and kept, and
especially in the north, seducing of great numbers of good fubjets, the like boldness
whereof was never suffered in any other princess's time, that some fireight order might
be given to avoid the fame, and that it might be confidered by the judges, what man-
ner of crime the fame is, to maintain such books, made directly against her majesty's
authority, and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the laws of the realm.

THE fifth was, that where a great number of monks, fryers, and such lewd per-

sons are fled out of Scotland, and do serve in England, especially in the North, as
curates of churches, and all such of them as are not found honest and conformable,
may be banished out of the realm, for that it appeareth they do sow sedition in the
realm, in many places, and now will increase their doings.

THE sixth, where sundry having ecclesiastical livings are on the other fide the sea,

and from thence maintain sedition in the realm; that livings may be better bestow-
ed, to the commodity of the realm, upon good fubjefs.

THE seventh is, that the judges of the realm, having no small authority in this

realm in governance of all property of the realm, might be sworn to the queen's
majesty, according to the laws of the realm, and so thereby they fllould for con-
science fake maintain the queen's majesty's authority.

THE particulars of the third intention, to break and avoid this marriage, or to
divert the perrils.

FIRST to break this marriage, confidering nothing can likely do it, but force,

or fear of force, it is thought by rome that these means following might occasion the
breach of the marriage.

1. 'THAT the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. THAT the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. THAT the garrison be there increased.
4. THAT all the wardens put their frontiers in order with speed, to be ready at
an hour's warning.

5. THAT tome noble person, as the duke of Norfolk, or the earl of Salop, or
such other, be sent into Yorkshire, to be lieutenant general in the North.

6. THAT preparations be made of a power, to be in readiness to fervc, either at
Berwick, or to invade Scotland.

7. T-HAT prefcntly lady Lcnnox be committed to some place, where flhe may be
kept from giving or receiving of intelligence.

9. ITH-AT the earl of Lennox and his son may be lent for, and required to be sent

home by the queen of Scots, according to the treaty; and if they shall not come,
then to denounce to the queen of Scots the breach of the treaty ; and thereupon to
enter with loflility; by which proceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame be done in
deeds and not in flhews) that the marriage will be avoided, or at the leafl that it may
be qualified from many perils ; and whatfocvcr is to be done herein, is to be exc-
cuted with fpccd, whillt fhle has a party in Scotland that favourcth not the marriage,
and before any league made by the queen of Scots with France or Spain.

SoNM. other allows well of all thecle plroceediigs, saving of proceeding to lhofility,
but all do agree in the refl, and allb to there pnrticulalilics tollowing.

10 . T]IIAT the carl's lands upon his rIcftiil, or his i(l':; Iefutfinl, fmoul be fei'zced,
and bcluowed in gift or cultody, as fliall plleal: her I.njcllIy, upon g. !d fuh b jcLs.

() o 2. 1. 'ltA.\T

r. THAT all manifest favourers of the earl, in the North, or efewhere, be in-
quired for, and that they be, by sundry means, well looked to.

12. THAT inquiry be made in the North, who have the stewardship of the queen's

majesty's lands there, and that no person, deferving.miftruft, be suffered to have go-
vernance or rule of any of her fubjeas or lands in the North, but only to retain
their fees, and more trusty person have rule of the fame peoples lands.

13. THAT all frequent passages into this.realm, to and from Scotland, be re-

frained to all Scottifi men, saving such as have safe conduct, or be especially
recommended from Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm.

14. THAT some intelligence be used with such in Scotland, as favour not the
marriage, and they comforted from time to time.

15. THAT the queen's majelty's houfhoid, chamber, and pensioners, be better

seen unto, to avoid broad and uncomely speech used by sundry against the itate of
the realmn.

I6. T-HAT the youngest son of the Earl of Lenox, Mr. Charles, be removed to.
some place, where he may be forth coming.

17. THAT confidering the faction and title of the queen of Scotts, hath now,

of long time received great favour, and continued, by the queen's majesty's favour
herein to the queen of Scotts and her ministers, and the lady Catharine, whom the
-aid queen of Scotts acconmpted as a competor unto her in pretence of title, it may
please the queen's majesty, by some exterior aEt, to (hew some remiflion of her dif-
pleasure to the lady, and to the earl of Hartford, that the queen of Scotts thereby
may find some change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceeding therein.

18. THAT whosoever shall be lieutenant in the North, Sir Ralph Sadler may ac-
company him.

19. THAT with speed the realm of Ireland may be committed to a new governor.
20. FINALLY, that these advices being confidered by her majesty, it may please

her to choose which of them she liketh, and to put them in execution in deeds, and
not to pass them over in consultations and speeches.

FOR it is to be assured, that her adversaries will use all means to put their inten-

tion in execution. Some by practice, some by force, when time shall serve, and no
time can serve so well the queen's majesty to interrupt the perils, as now at the firt,,
before the queen of Scotts purposes be fully fettled.

No X.. (Vol. I. p. 288.)
Randolph to the earl of Leicester, from Edinburgh. the 3,1ft of July

1565.

Cot. lib. Cal. "A r A Y it please your lordfliip, I have received your lordihip's letter by my fcr-
B. g. fol1. 21 l..V vant, fuflicient teflimony of your lordship's favour towards me, whereof I
An Original. think my fclf always so aflured, that what other mishap foevcr befal me, I have

enough to comfort my Ielf with ; though I have not at this time received neither
according to the need I ftiand, nor the necefity of the fcrvife that 1 am imploycd in,
I will rather pats it, as 1 may with patience, than trouble your lordship to be further
futer for me, when there is so little hope that any good will be done for me. I doubt

not

not but your lordsh'ip hath heard by such information, as I have given from hence,
what the present ifate of this country is, how this queen is now become a married
wife, and her husband, the (elf fame day of his marriage, made a king. In their de-
fires, hitherto, they have found so much to their contentment, that if the rel succeed
and prosper accordingly, they may think themselves much happier, than there is ap-
pearance that they shall be, so many discontented minds, so much mifliking of the
fbljelts to have these matters thus ordered, and in this. fort to be brought to pals ; I
never heard of any marriage, so little hope, so little comfort as men do talk, was never
seen, at any time, when men should most have shewed themselves to rejoice, if that
consideration of her own honour and well of her country had been had as apper-
tained in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear, the overthrow of religion, the
breach of amitie with the queen's majesty, and the deftrucion of as many of the
nobility as she hath mifliking of, or that he liketh to pitch a quarrle unto. To fee
all these inconveniencys approaching, there are a good number that may sooner la-
ment with themselves, and complain to their neighbours, than be able to find reme-
die to help them, Tome attempt with all the force they have, but are too weak to do
any good, what is required otherways, or what-.means there is made your lordship
knoweth ; what wll-b anre, or what will be done, therein, we are in great
doubt, and though your intent be never so good unto us, yet we do so much fear
your delay, that our ruin thall prevent your support when council is once taken.
Nothing so needful, as speedy execution. Upon the queen's majesty, we wholly de-
pend, in her majesty's hands it standeth to save our lives, or to susser us to perish;
greater honour her majefly cannot have, than in that which lyeth in her majefly's
power to do for us; the fums are not great, the numbers of men are not many that
we desire; many will dayly be found, though this will be some charge; men grow
dayly, though, at this time, I think her majesty shall loose but few; her friends here
being once taken away, where will her majesty find the like; I speak least of that
which I think is most earnefily intended by this queen, and her husband, when by.
him it was lately said, that he cared more for the papists in England, than he did for
the protestants in Scotland ; if therefore, his hops be so great in the papists of Eng-
land, what may your lordship believe that he thinketh of the protestants there; for
his birth, for his nurritour, for the honour he hath to be of kine to the queen my.
mistress, if in preferring those that'are the queen's majesties worst fubjccts to those
that are her best, he declareth what mind he beareth to the queen's majesties self,
any man may fay it is slenderly rewarded, and his duty evil forgotten; he would
now seem to be indifferent to both the religions, file to use her mass, and he to come
foietimes to the preaching; they were married with all the foleinnitics of the po-
pish time, saving that he heard not the maTs; his speech and tall argueth his mind,
and yet would he fain seem to the world that he were of Come religion; his words to
all men, against whom he concciveth any displeasure, how unmjuft foevcr it be, so
proud and fpitfull, that rather he leemeth a monarch of the world, than he that, not.
long since, we have fecn and known the lord Darnley ; helookcth now for reverence
of many, that have little will to give it him ; and some there are that do give it, that
think him little worth of it. All honor that may be atributed unto any man by a
wife, he hath it wholly and fully; all praifcs that may be spoken of him, he lackcth not
fioni herself; all dignities that he can induc him with, which are already given and
Frantcd ; no man plcafcth her that contentc th not him ; and what may I lhy more,
ilic hatth given over to himl her whole will, to be ruled and guided as hiiminl f belt lik-

cth 1,

cth ; ihe can as much prevail with him, in any thing that is against his will, as your
lordship may with me to persuade that I flould hang my self; this last dignity out of
band to have been proclaimed king, lhe would have it deferred untill it were agreed
by parliament, or he had been himself of 21 years of age, that things done in his
name mighthave the better authority. He would, in no cafe, have it deferred one
day, and either then or never; whereupon this doubt is risen amongst our men of
law whether flie being clad with a husband, and her husband not twenty one years,
any thing without parliament can be of itrength, that is done between them ; upon
Saturday at afternoon, thele matters were long in debateing. And before they were
well resolved upon, at nine hours at night, by three heralds, at found of the trumpet,
he was proclaimed king. This was the night before the marriage; this day, Mon-
day at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that were in the toun, were present at the
proclaiming of him again, where no man said so much as amen, saving his father
that ci led out aloud, God save his queen. The manner of the marriage was in this
fort, upon Sunday in the morning between five and fix, she was conveyed by divers
of her nobles to the chapell; she had upon her back the great mourning gown of
black, with the great wide mourning hood, not unlike unto that which she wore the
doulful day of the buriall of her husband; ihe was led into the chapell, by the earle
of Lenox and Athol, and there was she left untill her husband came, who alfowas
conveyed by the fame lords, the minister priests, two, do there receive them, the bands
are asked the third time, and an instrument taken by a Notour that no man said
against them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might not proceed. The words
were Ipoken, the rings which were three, the middle a rich diamond, were put upon
her finger ; they kneel together, and many prayers said over them, fle tarrieth out
the mass, and he taketh a kits, and leaveth her there, and went to her chamber, whi-
ther within a space fle followeth ; and being required, according to the solemnity, to
ca{t o>f her cares and leave aside those forrowfull garments, and give herself to a more
pleasant life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe for manner fake than grief of
heart, file fufi-'red them that stood by, every man that could approach to take out a
pin, and so being committed to her ladies, changed her garments, but went not to
bed, to signify to the world, that it was not lust that moved them to marry, but only
the ncceffity of her country, not, if God will long to leave it destitute of an heir. Sul-
picious men, or such as are given of all things to make the worfl, would that it
should be believed, that they knew each other before that they came there, I wou'd
not your lordflsip ioulld so believe it, the likelihoods are so great to the contrary,
that if it were possible to fee such an at done, I would not believe it. After the mar-
riage followeih commonly great cheer and dancing: to their dinner they were con-
veyed by the whole nobilitv; the trumpets found; a largess cried; mony thro\wn
about the houle in great abundance, to fulch as were happy to get any part; tlicy
dine both at one table, flhe upon the upper hand, there Icrve her these ea Is Athoile
Sewer, lMoltonl Carver, Craufoord cupbearer; tlicfe ICrve hiil in like offices, carls
,glihigton, Caifllls, and (lencairn ; after dinner tlhey danced awhile, and then ic-
tirel tliemnlflvcs till the hour of supper; atd asn they dined so (do they filp, ,l'li
dalicing tht Ic was, and so they go to hed ; of ;!ll tins I hlave written to your lo 1l-
ship I am 1nt ()culaltis teflis, to this, but of l the veritv your loirdilip Ilall ilot lI A
to dloubt, Ihow\ cver I caie by it; I wv;l fCt for to flaxe been at the fIupper, )Iut
like a cuT rif1 ol ulncourtly Cea le I refitled to be there; and yet that which )our i old-
,;hiip maly think might (move Inc much, to havle had the liC it of my nflifrcfi, of whioim

9(i ~~~~~~~~~~tclic

there eighteen days by just account I got not a fight, I am mv lord taken by all that
fort as a very evil person, which in my heart I dow, Ii allow, and like of myself the
better, for yet can I not find either honest or good that liketh their doins ; I !cave
at this time further to trouble your lordship, craving pard)n for my long silence, I
have more ado than I am able to difchage, I walk now more dinroad by night
than by day, and the day too little to dilcharge myself of that which I co:i:eive, or
receive in the night. As your lordflip, i am sure, is partaken ot such letters as I
write to Mlr. Secretary, so that I trust that he fhail be to this, to save me of a little
labour, to write the fame again, most humbly I take my leave at Edinburgh, the last
day of July, I565.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 29t.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir \illiam Cecil knt.

her majesty's principal secretary, and one of her highineib's privy
council.

F FT E R my hearty commendations, this day at noon, captain Brickwell came 2d of Sept.
hither, who brought with him the queen's majesty's letters containing her full I;ó. I aer

resolution, and pleasure for all things he had in charge to give information of, saving Ofice f'. o
that for the aid of the lords of the congregation, there is nothing determiiid. or at the Original.
theleaft expressed in the fame letters, and for that purpose received 1, this morning,
a letter subscribed by the duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others, craving
to be holpen with 300 harquebulyers out of this garrison, for their better defence.
And albeit, I know right well the goodness of their cause, and the queen's majesty
our sovereign's good will, and care towards them; and do also underftlnd that it
were very requisite to have them holpen, for that now their caule is to be in this man-
ner decided, and that it now standeth upon their utter overthrow and und ing, since
the queen's part is at the least 5000, and they not much above looo; betides, that
the queen hath harquebufyers, and they have none, and do yet want the power that
the earl of Arguyle should bring to them, who is not yet joined with theirs; I have
thereupon thought good to pray you to he a means to learn her majefty'b plealure in
this behalf, what, and how, I flhall answer them, or otherwise deal in this matter,
now at this their extreme neccffity. For, on the one fide, lyeth thereupon their ut-
ter ruin and overthrow, and the miferablc fubvcriion of religion there; ,and, on the
other fide, to adventure so great and weighty a matter as this is, (albeit it be but
of a few soldiers, for a fiinll time) without good warrauntc, and thereby to brini.:,
per adventirc upon our heads some wilful warrs, and in the meanl time to leave the
place unfuinifled, having in the whole but So>) without any gr;int of niw fi')ply
lor the fame ; and by that means allb, to leave the marchcs bhci the more l;liji.it to
ilv.,fion, while in tile mean fcafnln new helps are prepaning ; to this know iiot I
what to fay, or how to do. And so much more I marvel thereof, as that havin t io
niany timles xvritten touching this matter, no resolute determination conmeti. Anil Co
between the writiin, and looking for anliwcr, the occalion cainot pllai , bit mull
needs proceed and have fiiccfs. CGod turn it to his glory; but lurcly all mcns, rea-
(In1 hath grc.it canlfe to fear it. Sulch a pifll it is now come unto, as this little frip-
pI'y vwould do miuch good to advaincc God's honour, to continule her mIijcfly's great

and

and careful memory of them, and to preserve a great many noblemen and gentlemen.
If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your good will and affeaion that way,
I do nothing mifiruft, and herein shall take such good advice, as by any means I can.
I received from these lords two papers inclosed, the effet whereof shall uppear unto
you. For those matters that captain Brickwell brought, I shall answer you by my
next, and herewith fend you two letters from Mr. Randolph, both received this day.
By him you Lhall hear that the protestants are retired from Edenborough further off.
So as I hope your resolution for their aid shall come in time, if it come with speed,
for that they will not now so presently need them; and so with my hearty thanks
commit you to God. From Berwick, this 2d of Sept. 1565.

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 291.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

,?p. 1r ; T P O N the advertizements lately received from you, with such other things as
p,. Ot[iiie. ' J came allo from the lord Scrope and Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole

matter well conlidered, we have thus determined. We will, with all the speed that
we can, fend to you 30001. to be thus used. If you shall certainly understand that
the earl of Murray hath such want of money, as the imprefRing to him of xocol.
might stand him in stead for the help to defend himself, you.fhall presently let him
secretly to understand, that you will, as of yourself, let him have so much, and so
we will that you let him have, in the molt secret fort that you can, when the said
fum shall come to you, or if you can, by any good means, advance him some part
there before hand.

THE other 20001. you shall cause to be kept whole, unspent, if it be not that you

shall fee neceflary cause to imprest some part thereof to the now numbers of the
boo footmen, and ico horsemen; or to the cafling out of wages of such workmen,
as by sickness, or otherwise ought to be discharged. And where we perceive, by
your sundry letters, the earnest request of the said earl of Murray and his aflbciates,
that they might have, at the least, 300 of our soldiers, to aid them. And that you
also write, that tho' we would not command you to give them aid, yet if we would
but wink at your doing herein, and seem to blame you for attempting such things,
as you with the help of others fl(ould bring about, you doubt not but things would
do well; you shall underfland for a truth, that we have no intention, for many rc-
fpefs, to maintain any other princes fubjeAts to take armr, agailft their sovereign;
neither would we willingly do any thing to give occasion to make warrs betwixt us
and that prince, which has caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any power
to let them be aided with any oen. But now, confidering we take it, that they aro
ipunfued, notwithstanding their humble fubminifon, and offer to be ordered and tiicd
by law and juflicc, which being refused to them, they are retired to Domfrcfe, a
place near our weft marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves, and 'adding
thereunto the good intention that presently the French king prctendcth, by fending
one of his to join with some one of ours, and jointly to treat with that queen, and
to induce her to forbear this maniner of violent and rigorous proceeding against her
fiujcdt,, for which purpole, the French anmbaflhdor here with us has lately writ-
ten to that queen, whereof anllvcr is daily looked for, to the intent in the imnc

6 tiic:

time the said lords should not be oppressed and ruined, for lack of some help to de-
fend them, we are content, and do authorize, if you shall fee it necessary for their
defence, to let them (as of your own adventure, and without notifying that you
have any direcion therein from us) to have the number of 300 soldiers, to be taken
either in whole bands, or to be drawn out of all your bands, as you bhall fee cause.
And to cover the matter the better, you shall fend these numbers to Carlisle, as to
be laid there in garrison, to defend that march, now in this time that such powers
are on the other part drawing to those frontiers, and so from thence as you shall
fee cause to direc of, the fame numbiers or any of them may most covertly repair to
the said lords, when you shall exprefly advertize, that you fend them that aid only
for their defence, and not therewith to make war against the queen, or to do any
thing that may offend her person, wherein you shall so precisely deal with them, that
they may perceive your care tor be such as if it should otherwise appear, your dan-
ger should be so great, as all the friends you have could not be able to save you to-
wards us. And so we assure you our conscience moveth us to charge you, so to
proceed with them, for otherwise than to preserve them from ruin, we do not yield
to give them aid of money or men : And yet we would not that either of these were
known to be our a&, but rather to be covered with your own desire and at-
tempt.

No. XIV. (Vol. I. p. 300.)

Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb. 1565-6.

Y humble duty confidered; what to write of the present frate of the country An Originai.
I am so uncertain, by reason of the daily alterations of mens minds, that it

maketh me much flower than otherwise I would. Within these few days, there was
tome good hope, that this queen would have /hewed some favour towards the lords,
and that Robert Melvin should have returned unto them with comfort, upon some
conditions. Since that time, they are come out of France Clernau by land, and
Thorncton by sea; the one from the cardinal, the other from the bishop of Glaf-
gow. Since whose arrival neither can there be good word gotten, nor appearance
of any good intended them, except that they be able to perfwade the queen's ma-
jeRty our sovereign to make her heir apparent to the croun of England. I write of
this nothing lcfs than I know, that she hath spoken. And by all means that (he
thinkcth the best doth travaile to bring it to pass. There is a band lately devised, in
which the late pope, the emperor, the king of Spain, the duke of Savoy, with di-
vers princes of Italy, and the queen mother fufpcLted to be of the fame conll'ilcracy
to nmaintain pa;piry throughout Chriftiandom ; this band was sent out of France
hy Thliorncton, and is fub'cribcd by this queen, the copy thereof remaining with
her, and the principal to be returned very lhortlie as I hear by Mr. Stephen Willlon,

f ;it miniftcr for such a devililh devise; if the coppic hereof may be gotten, that
shall be sent as I conveniently may. Monficur Rambollet came to this torn upon
Mlonday, ihe spoke that night to the queen andl her Iuiband, but not long ; the next
;dav he had lon1g conferences with them botl, but nothing came to the knowledge
(, any hllereof they intrcated. I cannot speak with any that hath any hope that
thele will be sily good done for the lords by him, though it is said that he hath very
t c d will to do to to the uttcrnoit of his power. lie is lodged near to the court,

Vo.. 11. P p ;land

and liveth upon the queen's charges. Upon Sunday the. order is given, whereat
means made to many to be present that day at the mars. Upon Candlemass day
there carried their candles, with the queen, her husband, the earle of Lenox, and
earle Athol; divers other lords have been called together and required to be at the
mars that day, some have promised, as Cafels, Mongomerie, Seton, Cathnefs.
Others have refused, as Fleming, Levingfton, Lindsay, Huntley and Bothel; and
of them all Bothell is the ftoutelt, but worst thought of; it was moved in council
that mass should have been in St. Giles church, which I believe was rather to tempt
men's minds, than intended indeed : She was of late minded again to fend Robert
Melvin to negotiate with such as she trufteth in amongst the queen's majesty's fuh-
jecs, of whose good willis this way I trust that the bruit is greater than the truth,
but in there matters, her majeffy is too wife not in time to be ware, and provide
fore the worst; some in that country are thought to be privie unto the bands and
confedercic of which I have written, whereof I am sure there is some things, tho'
perchance of all I have not heard the truth ; in this court divers quarles, conten-
tions, and debates; nothing so nuch fought as to maintain milchief and difirder.
David yet retaineth fill his place, not without heart grief to many, that fee their
sovereign guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly refuted to do any
good to my lord of Argyll, and it is said that shall be the first voyage that filh will
make after file is delivered of her being with child ; the bruit is common that ihe iR,
but hardly believed of nany, and of this, I can affire you, that there have of late
appeared some tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 308.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr. Tho. Randolph toc

the lords of the Council of England from Barwick, 27th of March,
1566. An Original in the Cotton Library, Caligula B. io. fol. 372.

lMay it please your IlTnours,

2-th March, ERING of so maynic matters, as we do, and fyndinge such varietie in the
.5ó66. -j] reports, we have myche ado to dccerne the veritie: which malceth us the

flower and !oother to put any thing in wrytinge, to the entente we wold not thlt
your honours, and by you the queen's majcilie, our fovereigne, should not be dl-
vcrtirfd but of the vcrrl trotie as Ve can poflible. To this end we thought good
to Iend up captain Ca ewc, who was in Edinbourge at the tyme of the la;It attemp-
tatc, who spoke there with divcrfc, and after that with the queen's self and her
husband conforme to that, which we have learned by others, and know by this Ic-
porte, we fend the fame, confirmed by the parties self, that were there present and
aflilters unto these that were executors of the acre.

'i-iis we fynde fr certain, that the queen's howfband being entered into a vch-

nint fufpIiciol of David, that by hym some thynge was committed, which was
most agaynflc to the queen's honour, and not to be borne of his pertc, fyrlle colm-
municated his mynde to George Duglas, who fynding his sorrowes so great fought
all the means he coulde to put fume iCmcdie to his gricff; and communicating the
fatme Uito ny lord Ruthen by thec king' conmmanidment, no other way could he

fondt

found then that David should be taken out of the waye. Wherein he w.as o car-
neff and daylse pressld the fame, that no refte coulJ be had un!vll it was put in
execution. To this that was found good, that the lord M'lo:ton and ord Lindlaec
/hould be made previe to th' intente that theie might have their friends at handc, y'f
neade required ; which caused them to assemble so mayny, as thaie thought it fiifici-
ent against the tyme, that this determination of theirs flould be put in executione
which was determined the ixth of this inltante 3 daies afore the parliament n'hoid
begyne, at which time the fayde lordes were assured, that the cries Arg le, lolr-
raye, Rothes and their complyces flolde have been forfeited, yf the kin l

cou l not

be persuaded through this means to be their friends: who for the defy re lie hade
that this intent Ihould take effect th'onie waye, was content to yieide, itli ut all
difficultie to t'other, with this condition, that thaie should give their conlents, that
he might have the crowne matrimonial. He was lb imipaticnt to fee thele things he
saw, and were daylye brought to his cares, that he dayly preficd the siid lord R1u-
then, that there might be no longer delaye; and to the intent that- nmvlt be m.ni-
felte unto the world, that he approved the are, was content to be at the doing of
that himself.

UPON Saturdaye at night neire unto vilt of the clock the king convc)-etii himsel,

the lord Ruthen, George Duglafs, and two others, throwe his owne ch.inm'-cr bv
the privy fiayers up to the queen's chamber going to which there is a cabinet about
xli foot square; in the fame a little low reposing bed and a table, at the which
theyr were fitting at the supper the queene, the lady Argile, and David with his
capp upon his head. Into the cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthen,
who willed David to come forth, faying, that was no place for him. The queen
Lsid, that it was her will. Her howfband anfwerede, that y' was against h.-r
honour. The lord Ruthen faide, that he should lerne better his dutie, and of.r-
ing to have taken him by the arm, David took the queen by the blychtes of her
gown and put himself behind the queen who wolde gladlce have rfved him:
But the king having looted his hand, and holding her in his arms, David was
thrutf out of the cabinet throw the bed chamber into the chamber of piefciis,
whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who intending that night to have referv-
ed hym, and the next day to hang him, Co mane being about him, that bore h) ni
cvill will, one thrust him into the boddie with a dagger, and after hym a great
nany others, so that he had in his bodie above wonds. It is told for ccr-
tayne, that the kiniges own dagger was left flicking in him. WVhcather he fltuck
him or not we cannot here for certayn. He was not flayne in the queen's prcfens,
as was laid, but going down the flayres out of the chamber of prcfens.

THItRE remayned along tyme with the queen her howfliand and the lord Ruthcil.

She made, as we here, great intcrceflion, that he fliold have no harm. She blamed
greatlee her howfband that was thee actor of so foul a deed. It is said, that lie did
answer, that David had more companic of her boddie then he for the lipace of two
months ; and therefore for her honour and his own contentment he gave his con sint
that he fllould be taken away. t It is not" (laythe file) the womlan ', part to Ieck

the hIltilnld," and therefore in that the fatilt v.as his own. Ic said that wliei lie

came, file either wold not or made herself sick. " XV ll,"' faythe flic, " you hive
" takecl your lafI of me and your f.liiLell" '' hi wcite pit)y, fyth the lord Rtu-
theln, lie is your iiajllliy's lhulbanld ind 1iill yield dutic toi cic( otlier. " -Vliy
[ may 1 not," faylthe (hIe, " leave hinl as well as your wile d if her hufbhad ?"

P p 2 Other

Other have done the like. The lord Ruthen said that fle was lawfully divorced
from her hutband, and for no such cause as the king found himself greve. Be-
fydes this man was mean, balle, enemie to the nobility, shame to her, and deftruc-
tion to herself and country. " Well, faith flie, that shall be dear blude to some
" of you, yf his be fpylt." God forbid, fayth the lord Ruthen; for the more your
grace fhowe yourself offended, the world will judge the worse.

HER husband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself continually weepeth. The lord

Ruthen being ill at ease and weak calleth for a drink, and faythe, "This I must do
" with your majesties pardon," and perfuadeth her in the best fort he could, that
she would pacify heieelf. Nothing that could be said, could please her.

IN this mean time there rose a nombre in the court; to pacify which there went

down the lord Ruthen, who went ftrayt to the erles Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl
to quiet them, and to assure them for the king that nothing was intend against
them. TIheft notwithstanding taking fear, when theie heard that my lord of Mur-
ray wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Huntly and Bothwell both
get out of a window and so. depart. Atholl had leave of the king with Flyfh and
Glandores (who was lately called Deyfley the person of Owne) to go where they
wold, and bring concordie out of the court by the lord of Lidington. Theie went
that night to such places, where they thought themselves in most fauftie.

BEFORE the king least talk with the queen, in the hering of the lord Ruthen she

was contents that he shold lie with her that night. We know not how he * * him-
fils, but came not at her, and excused hymfelf to his friends, that he was so fleepie,
that he could not wake in due season.

THERE were in this companie two that came in with the king; the one An-

drcwe Car of Fawdenfide, whom the queen fayth would have ftroken her with a dag-
ger, and one Patrick Balentine, brother to the justice clerk, who also her grace
fayth, offered a dag against her belly with the cock down. We have been ear-
neitly in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the varitie; but he afolureth us of the
contrarie. There were in the queen's chamber the lord Robert, Arthur Arfkin,
one or two others. They at the first offering to make a defence, the lord Ruthen
drawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that were not drawn nor seen in her
prclens, as we are by this lord aflured.

[The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to Dunbar-Caftle, whither

resorted unto the lords Huntley and Bothwell : That the earl of Morton and lord
Ruthven find themtflves left by the king for all his fair promises, bonds and fubfcrip.
tions. That lie had protcfted before the council, that he was never consenting to
the death of David, and that it is fore against his will: That of the great sub-
" fance David had there is much spoken, some fay in gold to the value of Il"f.
' His apparel was very good, as it is said, 28 pair of velvet hole. His chamber
" well furniifcd, armour, dagger, pyltolctts, 11arquebufcs, 22 swords. Of all this
6' nothing fpoyld or lacked laving 2 or 3 dagger. He had the custody of all the
' queen's lettcrs, which all were delivered unlooked upon. We hear of a juill, that

he had hanging about his ucck of rome price, that cannot be heard of.I tc had
" up)on his back, when he was flayn a light gown of damask furred, with a fatteri

dublet, ai ! hof ofruiect vclcvt."

6

No. XVI.

No. XVI. (Vol. . p. 3 .)

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan. 16, 1565-6.
--- CANNOT tell what mifliking of late there hath been between her gracej

and her husband, he prefleth earneitly for the matrimonial crown, which

file is loth hastily to grant; but willing to keep somewhat in (rore, until she know
how well he is worth to enjoy such a sovereignty: and therefore it is thought that
the parliament for a time shall be deferred, but hereof I can write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to secretary Cecil.
PT- HE justice clerk in hard terms, more for his brother's cause than any desert, 4 Apri!, 1566.

and as far as I can hear the king of all other in worst, for neither hath the Paper-Oflice

queen good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that was against her will, from the Oi-
nor the people that he hath denied so manifest a matter, being proved to be done by ginal.
his commandment, and now himself to be the accuser and pursuer of them that did
as he willed them. This Scott, that was executed, and Murray that was yesterday
arreigned, were both accused by him. It is written to me, for certain, by one, that
upon Monday last fpok with the queen, that fle is determined that the house of
Lennox shall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl continueth sick, fore
troubled in mind; he fraith in the abby, his son has been once with him, and he
once with the queen, since {he came to the castle. The queen hath now seen all the
covenants and bands that pafled between the king and the lords, and now findeth
that his declaration, before her and council, of his innocency of the death of David,
was falte; and grievously offended that, by their means, he should seek to come to
the crown matrimonial.
Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Berwick, 25 April, 1566.

- HERE is continually very much speech of thedifcord between the queen

and her hufbajnd, so far that, that is commonly said and believed of him-

fclf, that Mr. James Thornton is gone to Rome to fuc for a divorce between them.
It is very certain that Malevafier had not spoken with him within these three days.
He is neither accompany'd nor looked upon of any nobleman: attended upon by
certain of his own fcrvants, and fix or fevcn of the guard ; at liberty to do, and go
where and what he will, there have no hope yet among thenfclves of quietness.

---DAVIDn' brother named Joseph, who came this way with Malcvafieur, un-
known to any man here, is become fccretary in his brother's place.

No. XVII,

No. XVII. (Vol.1 Ip. 319.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d AugulR, i566.

1I E queen and her husband agree after the old manner, or rather worse. She

eateth but very seldom with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him,

nor loveth any such as love him. He is so far out of her books, as at her going out
of the castle of Edinburgh, to remove abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It cannot
for modefly, nor with the honour of a quten, be reported what the said of him.
One Hlickman, an English merchant there, having a water spaniel which was very
good, gave him to Mr. James Ilcelvil, who afterwards, for the plealure which he
saw the king have in such kind of dogs, gave him to the king. The queen thereupon
fill iarvelloufly out with Melvil, and called him difiembler and flatterer, and said
ihe could not trust one, who would give any thing to such one as (he loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, August 8.

HE disagreement between the queen and her husband continueth, or rather
increafeth. Robert Melvill drawing homewards, within twelve miles of Edin-

burgh, could not tell where to find the queen; sith which time flie is come to
Edinburgh, and had not twelve horses attending on her. There was not then, nor
that I can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in her company. The
king her husband is gone to Dumfermling, and pafleth his time as well as he may;
having at his farewell, such countenance as would make a husband heavy at the
heart.

Sir John Forlier to Cecil, S Sept. from Berwick.

H E queen hath her husband in small estimation, and the earl of Lennox
came not in the queen's fight since the death of Davy.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, X ith Dec.

HE earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the ambafuadors, and all things
for the chriftcning are at his lordflhip's appointment, and the fame is fcarcc-

ly well liked of the nobility, as is said. The king and queen is prcfently at Craig-
millar, but in little greater familiarity than he was all the while past.

Advertisements out of Scotland from the earl of Bedford.

Augnit I G66. T H AT the king and the queen ngreedl well together two days, after her coming
Paper Offic, 1 fro m--, and after my lord of Mur.iy's coming to £Edinburgh, some new
from the Ori- discoid has happened. The queen hath declared to my lord of Murray that the
Sinal. kinig bears him evil will, and has said to her, that he is dctermined to kill him,

3 siid..

finding fault that (he doth bear him so much company: and in like manner, hath
willed my lord of Murray to fpiere it at the king, which he did a few nights since in
the queen's pretence, and in the hearing of diveis. The king confefted, that reports
were made to him, that my lord of Murray was not his fricnd, which made him
speak that thing he repented ; and the queen affirmed, that the king had spoken such
words unto her, and confefied before the whole house, that 'he could not be content
that either he or any other should be unfriend to my lord of Murray. My lord of
Murray enquired the fame stoutly, and used his speech very modcftly, in the mean
time the king departed very grieved; he cannot bear that the queen should use fa-
miliarity either with man or woman, and especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray,
and Marre, who keep most company with her. Ml\y lord of Murray and Bothwcll
bh!ve been at evil words for the L. of Ledington, before the queen, for he and fir
James Balfoure had new come from Ledington, with his answer upon such heads or
articles as Bothwell and he should agree iupon, which being reported to the said earl
in the queen's presence, made answer, that ere he parted with such lands as was
desircd, he should part with his life. My lord of Murray said stoutly to him, that-
twenty as honest: men as he shou!d lose their lives ere he rc?fte Ledington. The
qucen l lpace nothing, but heard both; in these terms they parted, and since, that
1 hear of, have not met. The queen after her hunting came to Edinburgh, and
carrycth the prince thence to Stirling with her. This lit Saturday was executed a
servant of the lord Ruthven's, who confeflid that he was in the cabinet, but not of
council of the fadR. The queen hath alCo opened to my lord of Murray, that
molney was sent from the pope, how much it was, and by whom, and for what
purpole it was brought.

No. XVIII. (Vol. . p. )
Part of a letter fiom Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20, 1 ,6). A copy inter-

lined by Cecil. It contains an answer to a complaining letter of MNary's
upon the imprisoning of the Bishop of Rols.

/- FTER this [i. c. Mary', landing in Scotland1 how patiently did I hear
~J"._ with many vain delays in not ratifying the tre:)iy accoided by )our own

commillioners, whereby I received no filall unkindniers, belides the m.ii fold c.iife
of s'uspicion that I might not helcafter trust to any wri!tin ls. T hen followi a laild
;n; nt. r of dea:iing with me, to cntice my subjec t and near kinlhan, the lord Dli noly,
liticr colour of private suits for lalnd, to conie lito the realm, to plrrc ad in trc;ty
no m;iarriage with him without my kiowyledgc, yea to conclude the li iiic witholit niv
;tict or liking. And how ma;ny unkind parts acconil)aI 'd thIt fa .; b' recciv;li:

C '

!riy fubjets that were hafe luinnagates and otfindcrs at hone, andl canlitiniig them
to places of credit againl with many fich likc. 1 will leave, fir that the
lenicmbrance of the fanle cannot but be noylbme to you. And yet all thefic dild
Is. it were (lupplefs an1d overcomle vith my nlatlur;l ilnclination of love toiwards you:
ri(l did afterwards gladly, as you know, chi ltcn your so)n, the chill of imy filil
kilnfilman, that had before lo unloyally ofl;lnlcdd mel, both in mnarrialc of vol, lind in
i);ltr unldutilful usages towards me his liovcrcigi. 1 low ficnt ill alfl) d cilt I by1 tIl-
i.;, to icconcile him, bciing yC ulr liifb.nl;!, to yo'u, whniC otl.cl noItli!lib l ilcii;!

| -', !'

;betwixt you, who as it seemed had more power to work their purposes, being evil to
you both, than I had to do you good, in refpeEt of the evil I had received. Well
I will overpass your hard accidents that followed for lack of following my council.
And then in your most extremity, when you was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of
your life from your notorious evil willers, how far from my mind was the remem-
brance of any former unkindness you had shewed me. Nay how void was I of
refpeEt to the designs which the world had seen attempted by you to my crown, and
the security that might have ensued to my Rate by your death, when 1 finding your
calamity to be great, that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably loft your
life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threatned obme as were irritated agaihit
you, that I only may fay it, even I was the principal cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. 1. p. 348.)
Letter Q. Elizabeth to Q. of Scots. Thus marked on the back with

Cecil's hand.-Copia Literamtm Regie MajeJiatis ad Reginam Scoto-
rum. VIII° Aprilis.
Paper Oice. T A 1 A M E, vous ayant trop moleftc par M. de Crocq, je n'eufic eu rs peu de

JLMi consideration de vous fafcher de cette lettre, si les liens de charite vers les rui-
nez, et les prieres des miserables ne m'y contraignaffent. Jc entens que un edit a et:
divulgue de par vous, madame, que ung chafcun, que veult justifier que ons eftc les
meurtriers de votre feu mari, et mon feu cousin, viennent a le faire ]e xline de cc
mois. La quelle chose, comme c'eft plus honorable et neceffaire, qui en tel cas
fe pourra faire, ne y eftant cache quelque miftere ou finefle, ainfi le pere ct amis du
nort gcntelhomme m'ont humblement requis, que je vous priaffe de prolongue le
jour, pource qu'ilz cognoiflent que les iniques fe bont combines par force de faire ce
que par droia ils ne pourront pas faire; partant, je ne puis mais finon pour l'amour
de vous meme, a qui il touche le plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de vous
exhorter Ie Icur conceder cette requefte, laquelle, si clle les feroit nic, vous tourneroit
grandement en foupcon, de plus quej'efpere ne penfcz, et que ne voudriez volontiers
ouyr. Pour l'amour de Dieu, madame, usez de telle finceritc & prudence en cc cas
qui vous touche dc si pres, que tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrcr comme in-
nocente d'ung crime si enorme, chose quc si nc fifes, fericz dignemcnt efbloye hors de
rancz de princefles, & non fans cause faitc opprobre de vulgaire, et plutot que cela
vous avienne, je vous fouhaiterois une sepulture honorable, qu'une vie macule ;
vous voiez madame, quc je vous traite comme ma fillc, ct vous promcts, quc si j'en
cuffl, ne luy fouhaitcrois miculx, quc jc vous desire, comme le Seigneur Dicu me
porte tcfmoignagc, a qui jc pric de bon cccur de vous inspirer a faire cc qui vous fcra
plus a lonncur, ct a vos amis plus de consolation, avec mes trcs cordialles recom-
mendations comme a icelle a qui fe fouhaite le plus dc bicn, qui vous pourra cn cc
nmondc avenir. Dc Weft. cc 8 jour de Janvicr ` en hafle.

e A niifatke in the date correded witl Cecil's hand VIIo0. Aprilis.

No. XX. (Vol. 1. p. 362.)

A letter fiom England concerning the Tmurdler of king Henry Darnlcy.
, AVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark, I tho't good to write a few E oc'rortrn's

words unto you. I have recd. in-.c writs fiom you; and some I have seen Archieves.

lately sent others from you, as namely to the carl of Bedford of the i6'h. of Mlay. I IundlCie L.N.
hlve participat the contents thereof to such as I thought meet, this ickle I can aflhur 25
you ; the intelligence given hither by the French was untrue, for there was not one
,ap3ilt nor protestant which did not consent that justice should be done, be the queen

imy fov"l. aid and support, against such as had comnmitted that abominable ill murder
in your country ; but to fay truth, the lack & coldness did not rile from such as
v:cre called to council, but from such as should give life and execution thereunto.
And further, I alTure you, I never knew no matter of estate proponed which had fl
many favourers of all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can fly unto you, no man
promioted the matter with greater affeiflon, than the Spanifl amballador. And sure
I am, that no man dare openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that whosoever
is guilty of this murder, handfaficd with advoutre, is unworthy to live. I fiall not
need to tell you, which be our letts and flayes from all good things here. You are
acquainted with them as well as I. Neds I muf: confels, that howsoever we omit
occafionsof benefit, honour, and surety; it behoveth your whole nobility, and namely
flich as before, and after the murder, were deemed to allow of IJodwell, to proiecute
wiLh sword and justice the punifhmelnt of thofc abominable ats, though we lend vou
but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both honourable and hone'l, be
well known to me, and sundry others here, to be justifiable in all their a.tions and
duings; yet think not the contrary but your whole nation is blemilihcd and infamit by
licfe doings which lately pafled among you. WVhat we shall do I know not, neither
do I write unto you afluredly, for we be subject unto many mutations, and yet I think
we lhall either aid you, or continue in the defence and safeguard of your prince, so
as it appear to us that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not to run the fortune
of France, which will be your own dicfru<tion, if you be unadvised. I know not
one, no not onc of any quality or estate inl this country, which docs allow (f the
(liicei your fovcreign, but would gladly the wvoild were rid of her, so a.1 the ifeil
w.re done without farther slander, that is to f.ay by oldinary jultice. 'I'lis I fend the
29J of May.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 370.)
'Prt of a letter fiomr Sir Ni,_olas 'Illrogmtorton to Cccil, ii thof uly,

1567, Iroim iB'r\icek.

*-- I',li, ¥olr IrlcTr oi tlhe

l1 (if Itl'v, I ;ci\cd the i t it Llu'icl, r

:im sdrry

[ ,'; .,
y

t,' lo i'c that thi iucnl's ll Ilil. i '

:.il. i(pfii LIIi ;:!'tirtll not t w.io tds the l1,j, l,'.... .:. c.
;;ir \.l,Cn :1i l ij doitC, it Is tIhe' \ h,'lllih m1Iu t ll.tid lutr ini Illc ill 1aJ, t1 h;l i the licu(:

¥'V L.
. 1 1(. q 'I :1r

her cousin, and will be better initruments to work some benefite and quietness to her
majesty and her realm, than the queen of Scotland which is void of good fame.
A letter fiom Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil from Faftcaftle, 2th of

July, 1567.
Paper Office. I R, as yow might perceive by my letter of the IIth July, I lodged at Fast-

^a caflie that night, accomp.anyed with the lord Hume, the lord of Ledington, and
James Melvin, where I was intreated very well, according to the state of the place,
which is fitter to lodge prisoners than folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it is
very firong. By the conference I have had with the lord of Ledington I find the
lords his aflbciates and he hath left nothing unthought of, which may be either to thir
danger, or work them fuerty, wherein they do not forget what good and harme
France may do them, and likewise they confider the fame of England ; but as farr
as I can perceive, to be plain with yow, they find more peril to grow unto them
through the queens majestys dealing, than either they do by the French, or by any
contrary faction amongcit themfelvcs, for they assure themselves the queen will leave
them in the bryers if they run her fortoun, and though they do acknowledge great
benefit as well to them, as to the realm of England by her majesty's doings at Leith,
whereof they fay mutually her majesty and both the realms have received great fruit:
yet upon other accidents which have chanced since, they have observed such things il
her majefltys doings, as have ended to the danger of such as she hath dealt withal, to
the overthrow of your own designments, and little to the fuerty of any party; and upon
there considerations and discourses at length, methinketh I find a disposition in them,
that either they mind to make their bargain with France, or else to deal neither with
France nor yow, but to do what they shall think meet for their state and fuerty, and
to use there remedys as occation fhali move them; meaning neither to irritate France
nor England, untill such time as they have made their bargain afihredly with one of
yow ; for they think it convenient to proceed with yow both for awhile pari palu,
for that was my lord of Ledington's terms. I do perccave they take the matter very
unkindly, that no better aniwer is made to the letter, which the lords did fend to her
niajefty, and likcwiic that they heir nothing from yow to their fatisfation, I have
anlwered as well as I cal, and have allcdged their own proceedings so obfcurly with
the queen, and their uncertainty hath occationed this that is yet happened, and there-
fore her majerty hath sent me to the end I may inform her throughly of the state of
the mIatters, and upon the declaration of their minds and intents to flich purposes is
thlall be hy me proposld on their majestys behalf unto them, they shall be rcalnahly
and refolutcly anuiwercd. At thefr things the lord of Ledington smilcd and shook his
head, and said it were better for us yow would let us alone, than neither to do us nor
your fclvcs good, as I fear me in the end that will prove; Sr if their be any truth 111
Ledington, La Crocq is gone to procure Ramboilet his coming hither or a man of
like qu.lity, and to deliver them of their queen for ever, who flill lead her life in France
in a abbay Icclufed, tl:e prince at the French devotion, the realm governed by a
council of their clection of the Scottif nation, the forts committed to the cultody of
fuich as fliall be chofin amonrft themfelllves, as yet I find no great likcliliondi that I
flhall lhave accees to the (queen, it is oljec-c(l they may not so diifplcafe the 1'rcnclh king,
unlcls tlhy were sure to flind the queen of nlgl.id igo f iend; anid whenl they

(I li.e

39

once by my access to the queen have offended the French, then they fay yow will
make your profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the queens liberty, which was
the first head that I proposed, they said that thereby they did perceive that the queen
wants their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it was but folly to talk of them
the liberty going before; but said they, if you will do us no good, do us no harm,
and we will provide for ourselves. In the end they said, we ihould refuse our own
commodity, before they concluded with any other, which I should hear of at my
coming to Edin ; by my next I hope to fend yow the band concluded by Hamiltons,
Argyll, Hu tly, and that faction, not so much to the prejudice of the lords of Edinr,
as that which was sent into France; thus having no more leisure but compell'd to
leap on horseback with the lords to go to Edinr, I humbly take my leave of from
Faftcaftle the 12th of July 1567.
To Sir Nicolas Throgmorton being in Scotland. By the queen the i4th

July 1567.
'f RUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though we think that the causes Paper Ofice

will often charge upon variety of accidents, yet we think, for sundry rfecfes,

not anifs, that as yow shall deal with the lords having charge of the young prince
for the committing of him into our realm, so flall you also do well, in treaty with
the queen, to offer her that where her realm appeareth to be subjec' to sundry trou-
bles from time to time, and thereby (as it is manifest) her son cannot be siee, ifflie
ihall be contented that her son may enjoy fuerty and quietness, within this our realm,
being so near as Ihe knows it is; we lhall not faill to yield her as good fuerty therein
for her child, as can be devised for any that might be our child born of our own
body, and shall be glad to ihow to her therein the trew effeet of nature ; and herein
ihe may be by yow remembred how much good may ensue to her fonr to be noutilhed
and acquainted with our country; and therefore, all things confidercd, this occation
for her child, were rather to be fought by ihr and the friends of him, than offe:ed by
us; and to this end, we mean that yow shall so deal with her, both to flay her in
deed from inclining to the French praftife, which is to us notorious to conlvey her
and the prince into France, and also to avoid any juilt of!tncc, th it the nmigli hereil:tcl
conceive, if fle flould hear that we should deal with the lords for the prince.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to qtleen Elizabeth, arthb July I -ó(, f non

Ed inbu rgh.

T may plcafc your majcfty to be advcrtifed, I did fi:nlific unto lIr. Sc-ic.:.iry I'- .,, i,
- my lotters of thc t 1 ; anld 1 2'1 of July, the dayv of iiinc c tr v into Scotil:. ,

Iili: 1,. l

;i ...

c;lifts of my Il!a), my lodging at Fal-caifit;c i pla.cc of the I,):' I-hl,,c. , \v lic I v\,ij
tmet by the said loid, ant l by tlle loin l l .iinl.t nl, :1a d w llt; t 1).t1I ,.,icl 1 1h1 it-.1ii '

r1 C

['etwixt us, whilefl I was at the s.lid 1llvic.,ilc. Siler v iii ih tn., .. oTl,luI\ c d
.itl the lords afirefalid, and with 400 huorli b1y tlcir atIl'tilitint I iv o l.;ti
roidultll I came to Edlini the i 2.'' o t l. pirc'l nt. '1 cii

:' ii;: Sul.' v l,;r dt

for (foleinne communiion in this towni, alll :ilfo :a fboleinc s.ilt In 1;; uiii .ililc, I
tould not have conference witil the lords whir i be ;alltnible:d witlhi tl i ti.\) :i 1

() (1
2 ,;.1

deflrcd, that is to fay the earls of Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of
Iidington, Sir James Balfour captain of the calkle, Mr. James vMcGill and the pre-
sident of the feflion.

NiVE'ER'-tELFSS I made means by the lord of Lidington that they would use no

protrac.e of time in mine audience, so did I likev.ife to the earle of MIorton, whom
1 n et by chance ;. I .as answercd by them both, that albeit the day vere dcftined to
liclcd excrc:les, such as were there of the council would confiut upon any rnoyin
touching my access unto them and my confeicnce with them, and fald allo that in
the afternoon either they would come to me, or I should hear from them. About 4
of the clock in the afternoon, the said 13th day, the loid of Lidington came to my
lodgings, and declalcd unto me on the belalf of the lords and others, that they re-
quir d me to have patience though they had def cerrcd my conference with them, which
was grounded principally upon the absence of the carles of .ar, and Glencairn, thi
lords Scmple, Ctighton and others of the council, laying also that they did confider
the mat'ei s whiich I v as on your behalf to trcate with thertl of, were of great
imp rtaince, as they could not satisfy nor conveniently treate witli me, nor give me
anlwcr x ithout the advice of the lords, and others their aflbciates; the lord of LidinY-
ton also laid unto me, that where he perceived, by his private conference with me n11
my journ-y hithcivwards, that I prcfscd greatly to have speedy access to the queen their
fovercign, he perceived, by the lords and others which were here, that in that malt;r
there was grcat difficulty for many lelpcals, but specially bccaufe they had refused to
the French ambafiador the like access, which being grainted unio me, might !.rcatly
olleni. the French, a m:tter which they dcfircd and intended to cfchlw ; for they did
not findI by your n'aj ;tys ic.iiilings with them hitherto, that it behoved them to ir itaiae
tl- French kingl, and.to loose his favour and good intelligence vith him : I an fw rcd
it!.t as to their rcfu'al, made unto the Ficich amnbafiador, nionficur de Ville Roey
was tifiPa ched forth of Francee before these accidents here happened, and his liecci;:
rriand nwas to impeach the quceens marri;:e with the carle of Bothel, (fur so indecl
iince my coming hithcr I learned his coni:nliioni tended to that end, and to make oi-
lEr to the queen of another marria e) and as to monflrcur de Crocq, he could have i.
order tori h of France concerning thcfe matters since they happened ; and therefore tlicy
mi. ht very well hold thecm fufp,. cd to have con frence with the queen, leafi they mini g
tic.ate of mattcrs in this tinme without in(irutclions and so rathei do harm then goo ;
1 tut yotur m::jcly being advcrtizcld of all thin s vhich had chanced, had fetnt me hi-
thcr to treat \vith them, for ihc well of the realm, for the conferiation of their Io.-
nuors and credit, and for their fucrty ; and I miiht boldly fay unto him, that your
mi:jcity had better delcrved than the French had. Ife said, for his own part, he was muc i
blti;d t llto your malicly, and had always f und great favour and courtcfy iln Icl -
l.in!, but to be plain with )o5i, Si, fa.i) lie, thCei i; not many of this aflmbln tI ;
).a'e so und t(o ; rteat obli oatioin ',t th l' icq een )'yo r lfovrcig ns hn.i'!, as at the lilc:. i
i. in s, so 1 he t l .lcAI of i l rt i a:l;,i (; lenclir n be the only erio ,l. iwhich t iok bt i
;:

tI . t) (;i1 .1 i;. n;jcll,( s Aidl at L itl, the rcit of the i l'l(.)mc, -n V.C'I n tot illetle ' ,

:l wu s',1i.!, .id lh , li queI Cnts miaeflx your lott )vl i?.'n, lby the (opinion lo r
s , .'

i

', ,!un ,1*, .

, = I; I I t v.' i I, t,.l : ;I1. :it 10i l1it by tltii' cl i.ii ti he

[l ie ll l

( . '.

of

11 I,,, . )

;1 ty i .tic ular \cl'ton ; .isll iot to talk withl yow

: s

. an ;;:1il;:ll'idot), but v ..

i

1-' . N t ,

I 'hr ti ton. my

lu ,I tu,, and fit t ai w!er in p i

. in1 r th- e i ,c.:t

' I 1\ i', loi nd 1 it col'd fl to\ lr at thI I 1t ens nij'llyes h .

' nd', h lei tehl y \< li ,-
t:i'd lu;til of their oxwn Uti nli ; bhut 1 woutl till r ot ll hoilc coulnl);y welte :1;i ,,

v.'i li .
40

willling to accomplish the queen your sovereign intents and desires as I am, for mina
own part, 1 am but one, and that of the meanest fort, and they be niany noblemen
and such as have great interest in the matter, mary yow shall be allured i will imploy
myself to imploy my credit, and all that I may do, to ifaisfie the queen your miilrefs,
as much as lyctli in me, and for your own part you have a great many friends in this
alFembly, with many other good words. But for concluion I mull take this for ai
answer to flay untill the other lords were come, and thereupon I thought meet to ad-
vertize your majesty what ath pafled, and how far forth I have proceeded ; your
expeciation being great to hear from hence.

AND now to advertize your majcfty of the state of all things, as I have learned
since my coming hither, it may please your majesty to underptand as followcth.

THE queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the caftleofLochleven, guarded.

by the lord Linfay and Lochleven the owner of the house; for the lord Ruthven is iml-
ployed in another commission, because he began to fliew great favour to the quecc
and to give her intelligence. She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys, 4 or 5 gentlewvo-
mnen, and 2 chamberers, whereof one is a French woman. The earle of Buch;n,
the earle of MIurray's brother, hath also liberty to come to her at his plafurc; til
lords aforelaid, which have her in guard, doe keep her very firaitly, a nil as far as
can perceive, their rigour proccedeth by their order from thelf men, beciufc th:lt tlic
queen will not by any means be induced to lend her authority to profccutc the mur-
der, nor will not consent by any pcifwafion to abandon the lord Bothell for her Itu'-
band, but avoweth conftant!y that she will live and die with him ; and faith that if it
wele put to her choice to ieliiq uifh her crown and kingdom, or the lord Bothell, niT
wou'ld leave her king om and dignity, to go as a simple damfell with him, and that
Thec will never consent that he lhall lare worse, or have more harm than herelf.

AND as far as I can perccive, theprincipall cause of her detcntion is, for that thlir

lords do fee the quccn being of so ferveint afiection towards the earle Bothlell as Ihe i ,
and being put at, as they lhould be compelled to be in continuail arms, and to ha\,
occasion of many battles, he being with manifest evidence notoriously detetedi to Ie
the prin ipall murderer, and the loids meanilng prosecution of jullicc againt him ac-
corditng to his mciits.

'i -HE lords mean also a divorce betvwixt the queen anl htim, as a ma ria:te not to

be furficred for tany rcfpccCts, which lepaiation cannot take place if tlie quen bel a:
libcrtv, andl have pe wcr in her hands.

'I t1EY do not alTo forget their own perill, conjoilnd witll tlie danger of Ih ' p;inct

but as far as I can perccave, they intend not cither to toulih tlc q uctn iu iiucly (1' .:i
honor, for they do licak of her with refpeLt and reverence, :ind dlo aliii ll, ;; I dJ
leI n, that the conditions aforcifid accoiipl)lifcd, they will both put 1he to libry ,
nJd restore her to he'r est:ate.

'illr.rsi lolds have fc.r thc ugardl of their town 4 50 laribunflLT s wh\ iclh be iln ''

go d older, loI t';e cnttct,:litcint of which cip tll)p.i , uliil t;::1] ii,ttl L ;; i.

';

1 nldcti, tiley i:d f1 1tilo yotur l to fid thl mi x,

xw :lt ilit si] .lla o( n ;^: :. .

l.,ti been iiciltme I ion tso !. ;t

S c ct:.!:;y by thi lo stH 1 ,i UiU.;lt ;'l ',' 2ii

i L;i_: ;L, i),;e.; It I.,
a I pe etite to ttil t er I.l'ce t iil.': t'nd rouiils ol ithe

' 'I .t'

.-I re l,.t', :I'. : i:' !'ci t!.;t Ill,' I t

] , 1l k\!,., dt '- i ; o:[ 1o sI' , , ,i0l,;

r: it'..

fictr ile Ia Ch al;ei! ri .

[l_'lie ;, a kij !, ol |,li

i" i .1 (lii l r, tndt

;: .v:' .

xt !] .::.

: -

tiil,.J tc to ihe li,(, 'L ot (.i;i'j ( . ;tln! :.,. ,

c. . 1., i V.:t11, \ , 1.i,(,5, ;C:I i dt1l ''i ..c i il.

n l l is il.'u., ci n tt;c illi , ,'.n

,v,,t~;, l e

..J .d:' ;',: t..:;;
l jt'.: i.i' . 1" .' i '

jefly; la Crocq doth carry with him such matter as shall be little to the queen's aa-
vantage; so as it is thought the French king, upon his coming to his pretence, will
rather fatisfie the lords, than pleasure the queen ; for they have their party so well
made, as the French will rather make their profit by them, than any other way.

HEREWITH I fend your majesty the last bond agreed on, and signed by the Ha-
miltons, the earl of Argyll, Huntly, and sundry others at Dumbarton.

NEVERTHELESS, since my coming to this town, the Hamiltons have sent unto

me a gentleman of their surname named Robert Hamilton with a letter from the
bishop of St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbroth, the copy whereof I fend your ma-
jcfly and mine answer unto them, referring to the bearer the declaration of fornme
things, as the:f did by him unto me.

THE earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, Cent another unto me with a letter and

credit, I have used him as I did the others, the coppy of both which letters I fend
your majesty also. The lord Harrys hath also sent unto me but not written, and 1
have returned unto him in like fort.

AGAINST the o2th day of this month there is agenerall affemblyof all the churches,

shires, and boroughs towns of this realm, namely of such as be contented to repair to
these lords to this town, where it is thought the whole state of this matter will be
handelcd, and I fear me much to the queen's disadvantage and danger; unless the
lord of Lidington and some others which be belt affected unto her do provide some re-
medy ; for I perceave the great number, and in manner all, but chiefly the common
people, which have assisted in there doings, do greatly dishonour the queen, and
mind seriously either her deprivation, or her deftrudion; I uscd the best means I can
(confidering the furie of the world here) to proroge this assembly, for that appeareth
to me to be the best remedy: I may not speak of dissolution of it, for that may not
be abiden, and I should thereby bring my seif into great hatred and peril. The chief-
elt of the lords which be here present at this time dare not flow so much lenity to the
queen as I think they could be contented, for fear of the rage of the people. The
women be most furious and impudent against the queen, and yet the men be mad
enough; so as a firaiiger over bufie may soon be made a sacrifice amongeft them.

THi-lREv was a great bruit that the -Haniltons with their adherents would put

their force into the fields against the 24th of this month, but I do not find that in-
tent so true, as the common bruit goeth.

''nE earle of Argyll is in the high lands, where there is trouble among his own
cou tlrymcn.

Tii'-F carle of Lnnox is by there lords much dcfired here, and I do believe your

nlajclLy may so ul'c him, and dircet him, as he fliall be able to promote your pur-
pole with thece men.

I'THE earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incompntible.- I do find amongst
the lHamiltons, Argyll, anrd the company two fr.allng and sundry hulmolurs.

HIAMIL'TONS do make flow of the liberty of the queen, and profccute that with

prc' c i Carnclncfs, becaul'e they would have thcle lords dclltoy her, rathcr thaln fie
fliould be recovered from them by violence ; another time the)y fIcnl to (Icfire her
lilbetyy, anl Bothwell's dclfruJlion, bccauif they would conipi)l; maI nall.ge betwixt
the queen ainil the lord of Arbinth.

'It: carle of Argyll doth afeilt her libetty, and 3Bothwcll's dc{fruICion, becaciif
hic would marry the queen to his brother. 6

ANI

ARND yet neither of them, notwithstanding their open concurance, (as appeareth

by their bond) uoth discover their minds to each other, nor mind one end ; Knox
is not here, but ill the .weft parts, he and the reft of the ministers will be here at the
great asSembly, whos anftcrity against the queen I fear as much as any man's.

BY fomne conf-rcnce which I had with some of this councill, me thinketh that

they have intelligence that there is a disposition in the queen of Scotland, to leave
this realm, and to retire herself either into England, or into France, but mofi
willingly into England, for such - and miflikings as flhe knoweth hath been, and
is neant unto her in France, leaving the regiment either to a number of persons de-
leagued, and authorized by her, or to rome one or more.

AND it may please your majeity, I think it not amiss to put yow in remembrance,

that in cafe the said queen come into England by your allowance, without the French
king's consent, she shall loose her dowery in France, and have little or nothing from
hence to entertain her; and in cafe the do go into France with the king's content-
ment, ihe may be an instrument (if she can recover favour, as time will help to can-
cell her disgrace) either by matching with rome husband of good quality, or by tome
other devise, to work new unquietncfs to her own country, and so consequently to
your majefly's.

THEREFORE it may please your majesty to confider of this matter, and to let me

know your pleasure with convenient speed, how i shall answer the fame, if it be
propoetded unto me, either by the queen, or by the councill, as a piece of the end
and composition. For I am sure, of late, she hath seemed very desirous to have
the matter biought to pals, that the might go into England, retaining her estate
and jurildislion in herflif, though fihe do not exercise it; and likewise 1 understand
that some of this council which be least affeeed to her lafety do think there is no
other way to save her. Thus Almighty God preserve your majefly in health, honor,
and all felicity; at Edin' the '4th July 1567.
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to queen Elisabeth the- I Sth of July 567, fi-om

Edinburgh.

T may please your majeftv, yow might perceave by my letters of the 16 ", how. An OrignaL
far I had proceded with tlicle lords, and what was their anfwver; since which Paper Ollicce

time I have spoken particularly with the earle Morton, the lord of Lidington, and
Sir James Balfour captain of this castle, at whose hands I cannot perceave that as yet
access to the queen to Lochleven will be granted me, flaying themfrlvcs still by the
ablence of the lords and others their anblciates, which (they fay) they look for within
two days; and for that I find, by likelihood and apparent presumptions, that mine
access to the queenC will hardly be granted, 1 have thought good not to defer this lil--
patch untill I have a resolute anmfwer in that manner.

MAY it therefor pleael your nmajcfly, to undcrfiand Robert hMelvin returned fCro

the queen in Lochleven, to this tov.in, the 6''' of July, and broughlt a letter fron lier
Wlittell of her owln lh1nd to these loids, which doth contain as I undcrhtand natter i;l
tollowcthl-A rqe(julcf unlto lthem to have conlidcr.ition of her health, and if they will
not put her to licrty, to change the place of rcftraint to the cafle of Stirling, to tii
enid thle imight lnve the comfort anld cupi;lllny of her foii, and if they will not ci.han!i

i t'.'

I X.

b.- I flom Lo'chlevcn, flec required to have some other gentlewomen about her, nam-
in 11011noe.

' o have her apothecary, to have some modest miniiiler--- To have an inbroid-
rc r to draw forth such work as lhe would be occupied about, and to have a varlet
oft he (h;lmbelr.-- ouching the povrcinment of the realm file maketh t ,'o offers,
wliich are but generally touched in her letter, the particularitys be not specified, but
refcrcd to Robert IVMelvin's credit, the one is to commit it only and wholly to the earle
(!f lurra, ; the other is to the lords whose names ensue, alrifled with ftuch others,
,s they ffall call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault, the earls of
A'lorlon, Murnay, Ni arr, and Glencairn.

SItE hath written unto them that I might have access unto her.-- She requireih

-further, that if they will not treat her and regard her as their queen, yet to ule her
as thc king their fovcrcign's dauighter, (whom many of them knew) and as their
p ince's mother.-She will by no means yield to abandon Bothell for her h'aljand,
nor rclinquiih him ; which matter will do her nmolt harm of all, and hardeneth theic
lords to great fevcrity againit her.

SHt.r yieldeth in vords to the prosecution of the murder.
I HAVE the means to let her know that your majcfty hath sent me hither for her
relic.h

I HiAVE also perfwadcd her to conform herself to renounce Bothell for her husband,

and to be contented to susser a divorce to pass betwixt them; she hath tent me word
that she will in no ways consent unto that, but rather die; grounding herself upon
this reason, taking herself to be seven weeks gone with child, by renouncing Bothell,
she should acknowledge herself to be with child of a bastard, and to have forfeited
her honour, which she will not do to die for it ; I have perfwaded her to save her
own life and her child, to choose the Icaft hard condition.

MR. Knox arrived here in this town the 6th of this month, with whom I have had
some conference, and with M'Ir. Craig also, the other minister of this town.

I HAVE pceilt aded with them to preach and perfwad lenity, I find thcm both very

auftlre, in this conference, what they shall do hereafter I know not, they are fur-
nifced with many arguments, some forth of the scripture, some forth of hillories,
some grounded (as they fay) upon the laws of this realm, some upon pracices ul l
in this realm, and some upon the conditions and oth made by their prince at her co-
ronation.

TiF. bifilop of Galloway uncle to the earle of Iuntley hath lent hither to tlhc'c

loids, that his nephew the carlc and some others of that fide, may, at Linlithlow or
at Stirling, have some communication with foine appointed on this fide, alliuin:;
them th;it there is a good dilpofition in the lords of the other party to concurre withl
thcfe, aflfiring further that tlcy will not diflint for trifllcsor unnccelfEuy thing , an1id
(.isI r pm iin to undcrfland) they can be plcafed the (lucen's rcflrailit ic C)ollnliltl',
tiltiil tlie murdecr he piuriifcd in all pcrl ns, \ whereby tlie kp;araltion of tihe qIICLI :.ul!
.3, tl ll is ilmlycd, the prcfrvation of the p:ince l, the tccurity for all mleln, ;a:il
;ro d order taken for the governance of the realm in trainqtlility.

C.Arlt AIN t Cle-k, which Ihihah so long feiivccd in I)cmialk and i(rvcd at NcwlIvl( nl,

didl the 6tlh of this mlonth (accoimp:)ilcd wiih one of his foldleis, or .,ilicr the l1l-
liicL ;is the glrcater (:inml golctl) Iill one XVilfion a (camnllan, andl fuich a ,lce :':, 1i.i.
t*rca; t cffinilatioj with ticl loll s liotl for his flill, hiis h1irdynlrf, itirnllt)y, nirl tvrl-
iin'> unclal in tilis adt io l; w '.iC culon Cilcik liath iLtire d hliim cll ; their qi nt'l ::., . 'r''

.m·
-4i

the fllip which took Blacketcr, which ship was appointed by these lords to go to the
north of Scotland to impeach the paflage of the earle Bothell, in care he went either
to the isles, or to any other place; by the death of this man this enterprize was
dashed.

TH'E bifliop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and doth desire to speak with
the lord of Lidington.

THE abbot of Killwinning hath sent for Sir James Ealfour, captain of the caflec,
to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your mn;jefy in my lalf, the Hamiltons now find no matter to

difevcr these lords and them asunder, but would concurr in all things (yea in any
extremity against the queen) so as that they might be allurcd the prince of Scotland
were crouned king, and should die without ifluc, that theearle of Lenox's fun living
should not inherit the croun of this realm, as next heir to his nephew.

AND although the lords and counclo;s fieak reverently, mildly, and charitably

of their queen, so as I cannot gather by their fpech any intention to cruelty or vio-
lence, yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen is in very great peril of her life,
t,y reafoni that the people aflenibled at this convention do mind vchemently the dc-
£truction of her.

ir is a public fpecch amongfl all the people, and amongst all estates, (favilg of

the counlelors) that their queen hath no more liberty nor privilege to commit mur-
der nor adultery, than any other private peifun, neither by God's laws, nor by the
laws of the realm.

THE earl Bothwell, and all his adherents and aflociates, be put to the horn by

the ordinary juflice of this town, named the lords of the fcflion ; and commard-
ment given to all fhirriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend him, and all other l)is
followers and receiptors--- The earl of lothell's porter, and one of his oIlier ser-
vitors of his chamber, being apprehended, have confeld such sundry circunimfltdie.,
as it appeareth evidently, that he the said earl was one of the principal cxecutors of
the murder, in his one person, accompanyed with sundry others, of wvhich Inumber
I cannot yet certainly learn tle names but of three of them, that is to sav, two of
the Orniifton's of Tivotdall, and one Flayborn of Bolton; the lords wouold be glad
that none of the murderers lhould have any favour or recilpt in En:. land, and hlfelf
their desire is, that the officers upon the border may be warned; Bothel dolil ftil
remain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Flen ing, which have been there,
have utterly abandoned him, and do repair hitherwards.- ''hec intelligence doth
grow daily betwixt thcfe lords, and thole which held of; and iotwi thfla:nding thcfe
lords have sent an hundred and fifty harqtbufhlers to Stilling, to keep the town and
pafllge fiom furprizc; and so have they done in like manner to St. Joliifton, which
be the two paflages from the north, and wcfl to this town, I do unicilftIait d the cap-
tain of Dunbar is much busied in fortifying that place, I do meivile the carriages
be not impeached otherwise than they be.

OF late this queen hath written a letter to the captain of the GidiJ c:ifile which

hath been Lfrprized l and thereby matter is difcovcic(d which miakeh little Ito ili
IqCCen's advantage.

'i'T-us, having none other matter worthy )'oir j ;jcfly's Iknonvlcld, I 1 l's c(1t

(God to prolper your mlajcety witl lon, lilf, perl'ct h1.:l]th, and lJolip9ltl l'i.icty.
At ldimbirgh the iSth of Jul)', 1567.

VOL. II. R r ],ltter

Letter of Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable the earl of

Leicester, knt. of the order, and one of the lords of her majesty's most
honourable privy Council.
z4th of July 0 Y my former dipatches sent to her majefly, and Mr. Secretary, since the z2th

1567. J of July, yourlordfhips might have perceived the state of this country, and to

Paper Office, what end these matters be like to come; so as not to trouble your lordship with
from the Ori- many words; this queen is like very shortly to be deprived of her royal estate, her
ginal. son to be crowned king, and the detained in prison within this realm, and the fame

to be governed, in the young king's name, by a councel, confiting of certain of
the nobility, and other wife men of this realm; so as it is easy to be seen that the
power and ability to do any thing to the commodity of the queen's majesty, and the
realm of England, will chiefly, and in manner wholly, reft in the hands of these
lords, and others their associates, assembled at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's ma-
jefty will still persist in her former opinion towards the queen of Scotland, (Unto
whom the shall be able to do no good) then I do plainly fee that these lords and all
their accomplices will become as good French, as the French king can wiflh, to all
intents and purposes. And as for the Hamiltons, the earls of Arguile, Huntlyc,
and that faEtion, they be already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth little
devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this is the state of things sI
come to pass of this country, that France has Scotland now as much conjoined un-
to them, to all purposes, as ever it was; and what an instrument, the young prince
will prove, to unquiet England, I report me to your lordships wisdoms, and there-
fore confidering the weight of the matter, and all the circumstances, I trust your
lordships will well bethink you in time, (for 'tis high time) how to advise her majeftv,
to leave nothing undone that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her poflcf-
sion, or at the least, to be at her devotion. And amongst other things, that I can
imagine, for the first degree, nothing is more meet to bring this to effed, than to al-
lure this company here aflembled, to bear her majesty their favour. Some talk hath
pafled between the lord of Liddington and me, in certain conferences, about this
matter. By him I find, that when her majesty flhall have won these men to her de-
votion, the principal point that will make them conformable to deliver their prince
into England, will reft upon the queen, and the realms enabling him to the fuccef-
sion of the crown of England, for fatult of issue of the queen's majesty's body, some
other things will also be required, as the charge of the said prince and his train, to
be at the charge of England. I do well perceive that there men will never be
brought to deliver their prince into England, without the former condition, so: the
fuccelfion of England; for (faith Liddington) that taking place, the prince (hall be
as dear to the people of England as to the people of Scotland ; and the one will be
as careful of his prcfervation as the other. Otherwilc, he faith, all things confider-
ed, it will be repot ted that the Scottifhlmcn have put their prince to be kept in fafcty,
as those which commit the flcep to be kept by the wolves. So as for conclusion,
your lordfliips may perceive here will be the scope of this matter. As unto the de-
livering of him lupon hotlagcs, he fayeth, let no man think, that the condition of

the
3

47

the fuccefflon not being accomplifhled, the nobility and the gentry will never consent
to leave themselves destitute of their sovereign, upon any hofiages, neither upon any
promises, nor likelihood of good to issue in time to come. It were not good for your-
selves (faith he) that the matter were so handled; for then you should adventure all
your goods in one ship, which might have a dangerous effet, confidering the unwil-
lingnefs of the queen your sovereign to content to establishing any successor to the
crown. And then, how unmete were it, that her majesty having in her possession
already all such persons as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown, to have
our prince also in her custody. For so there might follow, without good capitula-
tions, a itrange and dangerous issue, tho' the queen your mistress do think that such
imaginations could not proceed but from busy heads, as you have uttered unto us on
her behalf. What is come to pass since my last dispatch, and how far forth things
are proceeded, I refer your lordflip to be informed by my letters sent unto her ma-
jefty, at this time. And so I pray almighty God, preserve your lordship in much
honour and felicity. At Edenburgh this 24th of July, i567.

It may please your good lordship to make my lord Stuard partner of this letter.

The queen to Sir Nicholas Throgmorton.

By the queen.

R U S T Y and right well-beloved, we greet you well, for as much as we do 6th of Aug.
confider that you have now a long time remained in those parts, without ex- 567.

pedition in the charge committed unto you, we think it not meet, feeing there hath
not followed the good acceptation and fruit of our well meaning towards that state,
which good reason would have required, that you should continue there any longer,
our pleasure, therefore, is, that you shall, immediately upon the receipt hereof, fend
your servant Middlemore unto the lords and estates of that realm, that are aflembled
together, willing him to declare unto them, that it cannot but seem very strange
unto us, that you having been rent from us, of such good intent, to deal with them,
in matters tending so much to their own quiet, and to the benefit of the whole
eflate of their country, they have so far forgotten themselves, and To slightly re-
garded us and our good meaning, not only in delaying to hear you, and deferring
your access to the queen their sovereign, but also, which is strangest of all, in not
vouchsafing to make any answer unto us. And altho' there dealings be such, in-
deed, as were not to be looked for at their hands, yet do we find their usage and
proceeding towards their Sovereign and queen, to overpass all the reft, in lb strange
a degree, as we for our part, and we suppose the whole world besides, cannot but
think them to have therein gone so far beyond the duty of fuibjecas, as mult needs
remain to their perpetual tauche for ever. And therefore he fllali fay, that we have
tho't good, without consuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you to our pre-
fence, requiring them to grant you lifcencc and pafport so to do, which when you
fiall have obtained, we will that you make your rcpair hither, unto us, with as cotn-
venient speed as you may. Given, &c.

Indorfied 6th August, 1567.

R, I 2

Throg-

Throgmorton to the right honourable Sir William Cecil, knight, one of

her majesty's privy council and principal secretary, give these.

SIR,
izih Augut, H A T I have learned, since the arrival of my lord of Murray, and Mons.

15j67. Vv de Linnerd, you shall understand by my letter to her majelty, at this time.

'apcr Oilice, The French do, in their negociations, as they do in their drink, put water to their
from the O)ri- wine. As I am able to fee into their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart how
g'l"'d the queen sleep, whether fle live or die, whether she be at liberty or in prizon. The

mark they shoot at, is, to renew their old league; and can be as well contented to
take it of this little king, (howsoever his title be) and the fame by the order of
thece lords, as otherwi(e. Lyneroll came but yesterday, and me thinketh he will
not tarry long; you may guess how the French will seek to difpledfe these lords,
when they changed the coming of La Chappelle des Ourfins for this man, because
they doubted that de la Chappelle should not be grateful to them, being a papif.
Sir, to speak more plainly to you, than I will do otherwise, me thinketh the earl of

lurlray will run the course that thole men do, and be partaker of their fortune. I

hear no man speak more bitterly against the tragedy, and the players therein, than
he, so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an inkling that Ledington is to go
into France, which I do as much mislike, as any thing, for our puipoe. I can
assure you the whole protestants of France will live and die in these mens quarrels;
and, where there is bruit amongst you, that aid should be Cent to the adverle party,
and that Martigues should come hither with some force; Mons. Baudelot hath al-
lured me of his honour, that inflead of Martigues coming against them, he will
come with as good a force to succour them: And if that be lent under meaner
conducE, Robert Stuart flall come with as many to fortify them. But the con-
itable hath assured these lords, that the king meanethl no way to offend tlhelm. Sir,
I pray you find my revocation convenient, and speed you to further it, for I am
here now to no purpose, unless it be to kindle there lords more againfl us. Thus
do humbly take my leave of you, from Edcnburgh the i 2th of August, 1567.

Yours to use and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throckmorton.

R U S T Y and well-beloved we greet you well. We have, within tlhlef two
dlays, received three findry letters of yours, of the 20th, 22d, and 23(1, of

this month, having not before thufe received any seven days before ; and do finil,
by these your lettcrs, that you have very diligently and largely advcrtifIed us of .11i
the hafly andl pcrcmptory proceedings there; which as we nothing like, To we trfft
in time to fee them wax colder, and to receive some reformation. Ior we calanot
perceive, that they with whom you have dealt can answer the doubts moved by lhe
-lamnilronls, who howlfcvcr they may he carried for their private crefpelcs, yet thole
things which they move, will be allowed by all rcafbnablc pcrfoiis. lor if tlhy'

n1] :.y

may not, being noblemen of the realm, be suffered to hear the queen their sovereign
declare her mind concerning the reports which are made of her, by such as keep her
in captivity, how fliould they believe tie reports, or obey them, which do report it ?
and therefore our meaning is, you shall let the Hamiltons plainly underfrand, that
we do well allow of their proceedings, (as far forth as the fame doth concern the
queen their sovereign for her relief) and in such things as shall appear reasonable for
us therein to do, for the queen our sifter, we will be ready to perform the fame.
And where it is so required, that upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope should
deal with the lord Harris to impart their meanings to us, and ours to them, we are
well pleated therewith, and we require you to advertize the lord Scroope hereof by
your letters, and to will him to shew himself favourable to them in their actions, that
may appear plainly to tend to the relief of the queen, and maintenance of her au-
thority. And as we willed our fccretary to write unto you, that upon your mefnhge
done to the earl of MIurray, you might return, so our meaning is you shall. And
if these our letters flall meet you on the way, yet we will have you advertire both
the lord Scrope, and the Haiiltons, of our meaning.

Indorfed 29 Aug. x567.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 373.)
Sir Nicholas Throckmcrton to the archbiihop of Sr. Andrew's and the

abbot of Arbrothe.

FT E R my good commendations to your good lordfihiils, this fiall be to ad- I1 Au. 157.
vertize you, that the queen's m:ijefv my vceign haing set me hither her I atpr Oi,,.e,

ambafacldor to the queen her filter your sovereign, to communicate unto her such ti''"l a c,,,P
matter as file thought meet, confide ing the gool amity and intellicence Ictwixt ' hlc Sil Ni-
them, who being detrined in captivity (as your lordflips know) contri;ry to the diiY ''I'lS k'tt oI
of all good fuijeds, for the enlargement of whole perlon. and the refitution of her
to her dignity, her majesty gave me in charge to treat with thcfe lords afllniblct d at
Edenbulrgh, offering them all reasonable conditions and means as might be, for the
fafegunad of the young prince, the punithmcnt of the late horrible Imurli- r, the di'-
fulititns of the marriage betwixt the quen and the call of lIudwicll, and lafill fir
their own fureries. In the negotiation of which matters I haie (:is Vour lordihil)s
swel know) spent a lolng time to no ptrplofe, not being able to picv.si in :l5) tlii,;t
wvithl tho:e loids, to the qcuien ni, f ovcrcig n's flatifaLctiuo. C'(t whiclh flit ..ic jio-
ccedinlgs towards lher najeity, and undlltiful behaviour toVwaiJs their lfvcrei:n, I
l:tlve .;(, ertifed tlhe quecn's imlij(fly ; lie (not lbiltlg minded to L)car this iiJi!ni )y)
hI .tl iiveC' me in chalr; o to dlc!; irec lhelr urthel r pt)lei.lre utlrc t l icm, ill luch fIt ;as
they may well pcrcc;ve her m;ljeil!y dotih ldiillo of their lprocecillts, :Iand thcrc-
uipon hath revoked me. And furthcr halih given me in charge to commntiiicate tl:c
faLioc uito )ou' loridlhi1';, requiting vo;ll to let mlc litro,, bf'Iaec myI) !itiltilc helu l cr,
(\lchil si (all bh , GId , iil g, ;; si)on als 1 hav'e r( civc:d :ilLf'i'rori yoll) sei.rt y ut
and your, conifdcr;lt.c: will allilledly do, to fct tile queenl yourl fovlci ;n .it libelrt,
aidl t) leflore her to heI r oirnier dlil'nity or'

foicc, o(r othcrivilc ; If i tng lit l'C lt ils

lha e r irful[id ll other

l mr ediationl, to itc ( 1(d the (s11cit' ' m.:jfly niy s (Lci .,n i.,t y
ollu; Vwith your lordlfhips in this hlnowurrblc clntcrpiizc.

A, ; L

AND in cafe, through the dispersion of your associates, your lordflips can neither

communicate this matter amongst you, nor receive resolution of them all by that
time, it may please you to fend me the opinion of so many of you as may confer
together, within two or three days, so as I may have your answer here in this town
by Monday or Tuesday next at the farthest, being the 19th of this Auguit; for I in-
tend (God willing) to depart towards England, upon Wednesday following. Thus I
most humbly take my leave of your lordships at Edenburgh, the 13th of Aug. 1567.

Indorfed the x3th of Aug. I567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord Herrys.

.4Aug 1567. y7 0 U R good lordship's letter of the i3th of August I have received the r9th

P'aper Office, of the fame. For answer whereunto it may like your lordship to understand,
from a copy that I will signify unto you plainly, how far forth I am already thoroughly inftruót.
which Sir Ni- ed of the queen's majesty my sovereign's pleasure, concerning the detention of the
cholas sent to
creolary e o queen your sovereign, and concerning her relief.

To the first her majesty hath given in charge, to use all kinds of persuasion in her

name, to move these lords assembled at Edenburgh to desist from this violent and un-
dutiful behaviour, which they use toward their sovereign. And in this part, betides
the shew of many reasons, and sundry persuasions of amicable treaty with them,
her majesty hath willed me to use some plain and severe speech unto them, tending
so far forth, as if they would not be better advised, and reform there their outrage-
ous proceedings exercised against their sovereign, that then they might be aflured
her majesty neither would nor could indure such an indignity to be done to the
queen, her good cousin and neighbour.

AND notwithitanding there my proceedings with them, they have made proof to

be little moved thereby, for as yet neither will they consent to the enlargement, nei-
ther susser me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me, it is superfluous to treat
any more with them after this manner. Whereupon I have advertised the queen's
majesty my fox ereign, expecting daily her majefly's further order; and as I ihall be
advertised thereof, so will not fail to signify the fame to your good lordship; and in
the mean time will advertise her majesty also, what your lordship hath written unto
me. Thus with my due commendations to your good lordship, I commit the fame
to almighty God, refting always to do you the pleasure and service that I can law-
fully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of August, 1567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 383.)
Account of lord Herreis's Behaviour in the Parliament held December

15, 1567.
Papcr Office. H E lord Hcrrys made a notable harangue, in the name of the duke and him-

seif their friends and adherents, (the duke himself, the earl of Caffilles, and
the abbot of Kilwinning being also prcfcnt) to perfuadc the union of the whole

realm

realm in one mind. Wherein he did not spare to set forth solemnly the great praise
that part of this nobility did dcferve, which in the beginning took meanes for punish-
ment of the earl Bothwell, as also feeing the queen's inordinat affction to that wick-
ed man, and that she could not beinduced by their persuasion to leave him, that in
iequeftring her person within Lochlevin, they did the duty of noblemen. That
their honourable doings, which had not spared to hazard their lives and lands, to
avenge their native country from the slanderous reports that were spoken of it among
other nations, had well deserved that all their brethren lhould join with them in so
good a cause. That he and they, in whose names he did speak, would willingly,
and without any compulsion, enter themselves in the fame yoke, and put their lives
and lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our cause. And if the queen her-
self were in Scotland, accompanied with 20,000 men, they will be of the fame mind,
and fight in our quarrel. He hoped the remainder noblemen of their party, Hunt-
ley, Arguile, and others, which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would come
to the fame conformity, whereunto he would also earnestly move them. And if they
will remain obflinate, and refuse to qualify themselves, then will the duke, he, and
their friends, join with us to correct them, that otherwise will not reform themselves.
So plausible an oration, and more advantageous for our party, none of ourselves
could have made. He did not forget to term my lord regent, by the name of regent,
(there was no mention at all of the earl of Murray) and to call him grace at every
word, when his speeches were direched to him, accompanying all his words with low
courtesies after his manner.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 402.)
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 8th Aug. I568, front

Bolton.
- U T surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not only to favour the form, An Ori;;nal.

D but also the chief article of the religion of the gospel, namely, jultifica- P.'ier ()9ikC.

tion by faith only: and fihe heareth the faults of papeftry revealed, by picaching or
otherwise, with contented ears, and with gentle and weak replys, and he doth not
seem to like the worse of religion throw me.
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 2 l September, 1 68,

from Boiton.
- T came to this queen's cars of late that she was bruited to be lately tuIrned

to the religion of the golpcll, to the great disliking of the papists here-

abouts, which thingfile hcrlflf confcnfid unto me, and ycftcllday openly in the great
chamber, when the aflnmbly was full, and lfome papifs prcfent, file took occasion to
speak of religion, and then openly lhe profefled hcrfelf to be of the papist religion,
and took upon her to patronlize the lalme, more carncfily than flhe had done a great
while aforc, altho' her defences and argumenlts were lb weak, that the cfliet of her
fpcc Ih was only to licw her zeal; aidl :aftcrwards to me alone, when 1 mifliked to
fce her become lb confidently backward ill religion, why, said flie, would you has c

me

me to lore France and Spain, and all my friends in other places, by seeming to change
my religion, and yet 1 am not aflUred the queen my good filer will be my aflured
friend, to the satisfaction of my honour and cxpedation.

No. XXV. (Vol. T. p. 404.)

Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

rPaper Ofice. I G H T trusty and right well beloved cousin, 'we greet you well. Where
1 lmru a c.py RJ we hear fay, that certain reports arc made in sundry parts of Scotland, that
corl-rced by whatsoever flould fall out now upon the hearing of the queen of Scot's caufc, in
fcce!Ctiy Ce- any proof to convince or to acquit the fjid queen concerning the horrible murder

of her late husband our cousin, we have dctermiiied to reflore her to her kingdom
and government, we do so much mislike hereof, as we cannot indure the fan-e to
receive any credit: and therefore we have thought good to aflure you, that the
fame is untruly devired by the authors to our dishonour. For as we have been al-
ways certified from our said fifier, both by her letters and mceitges, that she is by
no means guilty or participant of that murder, which we wish to be true, so furcly
if she should be found justly to be guilty thereof as hath been reported of her,
whereof we would be very sorry, then, indeed, it should behoove us to confider
otherwise of her cause than to satisfy her desire in restitution of her to the govern-
ment of that kingdom. And so we would have you and all others think, that fhoul'l
be disposed to conceive honourably of us and our actions.

Indorfed 20 Sept. t568.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. . 409.)

Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of Otober, i56S, from York.

An Original. - Y lord's grace of Noifolk fending for me to Bolton, to attend upon
Paper Office. . m t him here Thursday last, I made my repair hither accordingly, mean-

ing to fay here until Munday next; as touching the matters of the commiflion,
that his grace and the refi have from her highness, his grace hath imparted unto nc
of all things thereunto appertaining, and what hath hitherto pafled, and altho' the
matters be too weighty for my weak capacity, to presume to utter any opinion us
mine own thereof, yet I sec that my lord Herris for his parte laboureth a reconcilia-
tion, to be had without the extremity of odious acculaticns ; my lord of Ledington
also faith to me, that he could wish these matters to bc ended in dulce maner, so
that it might be done with safety; of the reft you can conceive, by the advcrtilc-
merits and writings, sent up by our commiflioncrs.

A letter

53
A letter from the bishop of Ross to the queen of Scots, from York,

Oaober 1568.

LEIS your majefly I conferred at length with A. ane great part of a night, Cott. Lib. C-
who affurit me that he had rcafoned with B. this Saturday C. on the field, lig. C. . a

who determinate to him that it was the 1). determinit purpose not to end your Co)'
cause at this time, but to hold the fame in fufQence, and did that was in her power,
to make the E. pursue extremity, to the effea F. and his adherents might utter
all they could to your dishonour, to the efFei to cause you come in disdain with
the hail fubjeds of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to attempt any
thing to her disadvantage. And to this effet is all her intention, and when they
have produced all they can againfi )ou, D. will not appoint the matter instantly,
but transport you up in the country, and retain you there till she think time to siew
you favour, which is not likely to be hastily, because of your uncles in France, and
the fear she has of yourself to be her unfiiend. And therefore their counsel is, that
ye write an writing to the D. meaning that ye are informit that your fubjedts which
has offendit you.--- This in eflfe that your majefry hearing the effate of your as-
fairs as they proceed in York, was informed that her majesty was informed of you,
that you could not gudely remit your fubjeas in such fort as they might credit you
hereafter, which was a great cause of the flay of this controversy to be ended. And
therefore persuading her D. effc&ually not to trust any who had made such narration.
But like as ye had rendered you in her hands, as most tender to you of any living,
so prayit her to take na opinion of you, but that you wald use her counfell in all
your affairs, and wald prefer her friendflip to all others, as well uncles as others,
and assure her to keep that thing ye wald promise to your subjects by her advice.
And if D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her in that point be removing
within her realm in secret and quiet manner, where her G. pleased, until the time
her G. were fully satisfied, and all occasion of discredit removed from her. So that
in the mean time your realm were holden in quietness, and your true fubjeds reftor-
ed and maintained in their own estate, and sic other things tending to this effect.
And affirms that they believe that this may be occasion to cause her credit you that
ye offer so far; and it may come that within two or three months she may become
better-minded to your grace, for now she is not well minded, and will not shew
you any pleasure for the causes foresaid.

N. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand ; the following key is added in
another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The queen of England.
E. The queen of Scots commiffioncrs.
F. The carl of Murray.
VoI.. II.

No. XXVII,

A P P EN D I X.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 418.)

Dcliberation of Secretary Cecil's concerning Scotland, Dec. 2 r, r568.
Praer Office.. '" II E btell way for England, but i;ot the ealeft, that the queen of Scots mig'i

rcmiin depri:ed of her cxown, ;.nd the ilate continue as it is.

Tr-E second way for England profita.le, and not so hard. - T lat the queen

of Scotts might be induced, by some perifvafions, to agree that her fou might con-
tinue king, becaule he is crowned, and hcrfelf to remain also queen; and that tlih
governiment of the realm might be commii;ted to such persons as tie queen of Eng-
land should name, so as for the nomination of them it might be oidered, that a
convenient number of persons of Scotland fihould be first named to the queen of Eng-
land, indifferently for the queen of Scotts, and for her Ton, that is to fay, the one
half by the queen of Scottt3, and the other by the carle of Lennox and lady Lcn-
nox, parcnts to the child ; and out of thofc, the queen's majesty of England to
make choice for all the offices of the rcAeli, that are, by the laws of Scotland, dil-
pol'ab!e by the king or queen of the land.

THATr untill this may be done by the queen's majesty, the government remain

in the hands of the earle of Murray as it is, providing he flall not dispose of any
offices or peripetuals to continue any long. r but to thefc offered of the premises.

'I HAT a p.larliiamnent be funmmoicd in Scotland by fevcral commandments, bthi
of the queen of Scotts and of the young king.

---THAT hostages be dchiivcrcd unto England on the young king's behalf, to the

number of twelve persons of the earle of Murray's part, as the queen of Scotts fhll]
nanme; and likewile on the queen's behalf to the like number as tle earle of Murray
shall name; the fame not to be any, that have by inheritance or office cause to be in
this pailiament, to remain from the brgit.ning of the summons of that palliamcnt,
untill three months after tile parliament; which hostages shall be pledges, that t!e
fliends of either part s(hall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this parliament it bv
concluded, that the ordinance which the queen of England fihall devise for the go-
vernment of the realm (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland, nor con-
trary to the laws of Scotland for any man's inheritance, as the fame was before the
parliament at Edin'. the Decemr. 1567) fliall be eflablifhcd to be kept and obeyed,
under pain of high treason for the breakers thereof.

I'l-- HA by the fame parliament also be flablifhled all executions and juil-
rncits given against any person to the death of the late king.

'--- I- -T by the fitme parliament, a rcmilfion be mtade universally from the

queen of Scotts to any her contrarys, and also from every one fubjecl to anotier,
.;iving, that icftitution be made of lands and houses, and all other thiins heclit.blic,
tha;t lihae been, by either fide, taken from them which were the ownecs tlclcof :'t

it' ( Ulllln, itli!lr of lthe ( CCLquen of Scots to ILocI]]h 'iln.

''Ill . 'I by lile llme par li.lilell it it e decla led who 11hall he tfucccfl ors to thl cr:.'lx

in.;ct :.ts(.r the () of Scots; ;tild iher iflie; or 1 ile, that fulch r ight as the I). tI C l.i--
t, llhcr.itll h;ld, ;it the imi:i i;:,: of the (-- of Scots with the ldIl 1)1ailllcV, i'y, be
LC i'i cvid .id 1o)t picjidlizc Il.

'tll.'r (t.e ( ioft' ti ts ma)y iitave Ie:ive of the.' (ien'.; m.tijel y of inglanll, t(\ clt'

U:,tritl:; .11,:r til ( d p;i;l i';'i: i , :l th:i. f!1 fhlall not (Icpl lout out of' I ll'l: u I, ',1 1.-

,X t ! ., ; .i , i l t ' 11, Ille ,. ' i ;j 'l.

1 :\ ,1 i!.c \. 'i,
n , kin lh.11l, ibc a'.till>.l and brotlght iup in Etgla ld, till lie Vi-

c it' .. uI
' i,' .

?r is to'be confidered, that in this cause the composition between the queen and
hIer fubjets may be made with ceitain aiticles, outwardly to be seen to the world,
for her honour, as though all the parts should come of her, and yet for the fuicty
of contrarys, that certain betwixt her and the queen's majeity are to be concluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. 1. p. 421.)

The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan. 1568-9.

7 E greet you well, we mean not, at this point, be any writing, to renewi Paper Ofi:e

v/V that which it hath pleased God to make grievous to us and forryfull to yow;

l ut so bcal ing the fame as uinmeet at this point, having occasion to command yow
in our service, and yow also whileft you are to serve us. We require yow to con-
fider of this that followeth with like consideration and diligence, as hitherto yow
have accuftumate in our ferviie ; at the time of our last letters written to yow the
fourteenth of this month for removing of the queen of Scots, we had underftandin.r
cut of Scotland of certain writtings sent by her from thence into Scotland, amongst
the which one is found to contain great and manifest untruths touching us and others
also, as ihall and may plainly appear unto yow by the copy of the fame, which
likewise we fend yow, and because at the fame time we were advertised, that it should
be flortly proclaimed in Scotland, though then it was not, we thought good firit to
remove the queen, before we would dilclofe the fame, and then expert the issue there-
of; and now, this day by letters from our cousin of Hunfdon we are afcertailned,
that since that time the fame matters contained in the writing, are publilhed in di-
verse parts of Scotland, whereupon we have thought it very meet, for the discharge
of our honor, and to confound the falsehood contained in that writting. not only
to have the fame reproved by open proclamation upon our frontiers, the coppy
whereof we do herewith fend yow, but also in convenient fort to charge that queel
therewith, so as fie may be moved to declare the authors thereof, and persuaders ot
her to write in such slanderous fort such untruths of us; and in the mean season, we
have here flayed her commissioners, knowing no other whom we may more pro-
bably piefume to be parties hereunto, than they, untill the queen shall name sone
other, and acquit them ; who being generally charged, without cxpreffing to them
any particularity, do use all manner of speeches to discharge themfelcs ; wherefore
our pleasure is, that ye shall, after ye have well peruscd the coppy of this writting
sent to yow, speedily declare unto her, that we have good underltandin c givnc us
of diverse letters and writtings, sent by her into Scotland, signed by her own hiad,
amongst which, one fuchwritting is fcnt with her commailndiien t cxprefly as now it
is already piublified, as we are nuch troubled in mind that a princels as file is h.iving
a caufc in our hands so implicated with difficultics and calamitys, filould cither con-
ceave in her own mind, or allow of them that floildd dcvile liuch salTs, untrue, and
inmproble nmatters iag:dinl' us, and our honor, and tficcillv to have the a\'cnlurc t,'
hane the fnile bheing known lb untrue to be publiflild ; :n;d vonu tiill :ill) f;y1 , he-
callfce w ill not think lo ill of her, as tl.it it fiould pluccc l o heur eulf, I)ut rather
Ihle lith l c lln corilfciled tllrtcuitito, or by abulfe maIj to think foime pai t tlerof t .
he t iuc, we requile her, even as she may look for Iny .lavo'm ;il 11r la'lllds, thlt
(he will dilfbutrdcn heifelf as onuch as tluly (he nmay hereLin, anld 11rn(c IhI(.l \wliiili
have been the autihols and perfadlcs thellcof, ;nd lbo the hil Le,..k as It;at
.r:11nlds to ius as the cal t; m yIll requiire; after you have t!hus f.ir pit.ccced (, il hI.a

S f 2 iLIlle

X.

some answer of her, whether (he shall deny the writing absolutely, or name any
that have been the advisers thereof, you shall fay unto her that we have stayed her
commissioners here, until we may have some answer hereof, because we cannot but
impute to them some part of this evil dealing, untrl by her answer the authors may
be known; and as soon as you can have diret answers from her, we pray you to
return us the fame; for as the cafe standeth, we cannot but be much disquieted with-
it, having our honour so deeply touched contrary to any intention in us, and for
any thing we know in our judgment, the earl of Murray and others named in the
fame writting void of thought for the matters, to them therein imputed; you may
impart to the queen of Scots either the contents of the slanderous letter, or Ihew
her the copy to read it, and you may also impart this matter to the lord Scroop, to
join with you there as you shall think meet.
Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from Wetherby the 2.th January7

I568.

An Original -_P WVTILL fuprefs my own griefss, and pass them over with silence, for the
in the Paper present learning of your majefty-and for this queen's answer to the coppie
tC1ace. of her supposed letter tent into Scotland, I must add this unto my brother's letter,

sent unto Mr. Secretary yefternight late; in procces of time, she did not deny but
that the first lines contained in the fame copie, was agreeable to a letter that ihe
had Tent unto Scotland, which touched my lord of Murray's promise to deliver her
ion into your majesty's hands, and to avoid that the fame should not be done with-
out her consent, made her, Ihe faith, to write in that behalf; {he faith also that lhe
wrote that they flould cause a proclamation, to be made to tir her people to defend
my lord of Murray's intent and purpose, for delivering of her said son, and impunge
his rebellious government, as Ihe termed it, but (he utterly denyeth to-have written
any of the other slanderous parts of the said letter touching your majefy; she said
also, that (;e fufpe6ted that a Frenchman, now in Scotland, might be the author
,tf onme Scotch letters devised in her name, but the would. not allow me to write
:his for any part of her answer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 428.)
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable the lord of Lid.l

dington.

vonh of i.,

' 0 TJ R letter of the 3d of July, I have received the i5th of the fame. For

1;' . _ } I. anf\cr whercunto you fliall undcrflandu, that fricnds hcle to my loid recl)it
I' lom il.C O- 0anil you do wifli ftch a concurrence in all doings, as in matter and circumlltnaccs-
EI1"l. there arile no (liilcniion, or at the leafl, no more nor othlr than the diflcircnce o(

coulntries dtoth IICccLi'trily require. \WV here do think convcnient that as few dlcl[, s
be ulcd ;is maly he, for tlhe conliimmnatio n of the matter in hanuldt, which pri ilcil lly
to adva.itC', youir allowance, piofecution, 1ap1' (pcCley )prorlotion) ill ( oi;lll, i, m It
rce(iiliit, Ior you aire so wife, and well ac(ii.:liltl(d with the tiate of ithlc wvld, andt
'i111t all i(:iir Ih m o11 , :Is yno k ) owi tlh t li

t ie do allow 111 i diil !lo(w lor IC.tlon s, lonil

lot r1 ipeL of 1 l. t ilude, fomc for relpccl ot pildons, aiil I li t ca;uf' i;: to ) lotfr-
w.tnd ia. iin., n.1I likc t; lft it forwaid. LYou ;c nlot to fLck litat lfune \ ill u11 citl-

tiait: '

tions, some neutrality, some delays, and some will plainly impunge it. And yet all
and every of these forts will alter their doings, when they shall fee the regent and his
favourers accord with the befl and greatest part there, and agree with the wifelt
and strongest party here. Tho' the matter has taken its beginning here, upon deep
and weighty considerations, for the well of both. the princes and their realms, as
well presently, as in time to come, yet it is thought most expedient, that the regent
and realm of Scotland, by you, should propose the matter to the queen our so-
vereign, if you like to use convenience, good order, or be disposed to leave but a
fear, and no wound of the hurts pall. I would be glad that this my lettcr should'
come to your hands before the convention, whereat it seems your queen's restoration
and marriage to the duke of Norfolk lhall be propounded, either to wynne in them
both allowance or rejection. To which proceedings, because you pray me to write
frankly. I fay and reason thus, me thinketh you use a propofterous older, to demand
the consent of such person, in such matters, as their minds to a good end hath ra-
ther been felt or prepared, and therefore there must needs follow either a universal
refusal, or a factious division amongst you, whereby a blouftering intelligence mut.
needs come to queen Elizabeth of the intended marriage fiomn thence, which ought
to have been ftcretely and advisedly propounded unto her highness; hereby you fee
then the meaning is, by this dealing, her majcfty ihall be made inexorable and ob.
bring the matter to such passe, as this which should have wrought surety, quictnefs,
and a flay to both queens and their realms, shall augment your calamity, and
throw us your best friends into divorfe with you, and into unhappy division amongst
ourselves; for you may not conjecture that the matter is now in deliberation, but
expedeth good occasion for executing ; sure I am you do not judge so slenderly Of
the managing of this matter, as to think we have not cast the worst, or to enter
therein so far without the afliftance of the nobility, the ablest, the wifcil, and the
mightiest of this realm except queen Elizabeth; from whom it hath been concealed";
until you, as the fittell miniftc-, might propound it to her, on the behalf of the re-
gent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far maier VWoddes defamations do carry
them of queen Elizabeth's affections, and imaler secretary's, to aftil( the regent andi
to fipprefs the queen of Scots, I know not, nor it is not material; but I do alTu-
redly think, that her rnajefty will pieser her surety, the tranquillity of her reign, and
the conversation of her people, before any device, which may proceed fron vailn
diicourfe, or imperfections of passions, and inconsiderate aiTelions. Andi as lor
£Ir. Secretary, you are not to learn, that as he likcth not to go too f.ail afbrc, fu lie
covetcth not to tarry too 1ar behind, and fp ccially when the icliques he of no lCI'I.
value or power. If I could as well allure you of his imnaglalilnity, and cin-
flancy, as of hi:; prfclnt conformity, I would f.(y coniidciltliy, you may rc)polfC
vel! of hiin in i tis matter, as of the dluke of Norfo!k, the e ;l! of Anrun!deil, P'in-
b1110l , Leiccfler, I1cdfor d, Shlcv.'flulry, lll

n til rlfti of theI nobility ; t1ll wilich o!

cllbrace and prutlie the a;Lcolmill)hll l t ci t!hi ca.sl. I 1have, ;;ncorlinru to yr.o
aldv\ice, written Ilr. fll tl ) y
t lord r'gellt, with the s;i'c zr:al arid c .'i of hIS

lJ-doriltg tliat 1 owe to bli,. \xsltoi I tlov ;i;d lho rni;. \nil'. S'i;rtt:r)

y.,i afr-

i1ui'tl tiit; Iri ( ti1ll (,Iue(ii (,i S :'o;tirJ'' fi\'lolr :lid ')ld oipilionl, \'/bc 'twi;i lIh

{..'ii.eil to lb wevcll fii'fy'i

. If to'r (lc it ls, :,s I tr,:i;, ] ild-e; 'orll ero; n ir, '

I, i r,

tO i ii; r. )

ery icc'lir-) ti.it )'ou \e'l c ili (i 1j'le;ltlV ( ! '[ ;..ta'; I ),'t .

h i d ;

1 .lite

to m y I' lk .; i' te';;'tL inl !tclIX lj t, ; e

lic ::'i'y pj ivi; c

., \'lJ . d ilkci.o; r I.,, Iofi '
r

l , *I'.' =

5s'.

of him, the cefl'eu of which her majeftv's letter you flall underitand, by my lord
Leiccler's leiter unto you at this dispatch. At the court, 2oth July, 1569.

No. XXX. (Vol. T. p. 430.)

Part of a letter fiom the earl of Murray to L. B. probably Lord Burleigh..
. i ''- - B EC A U S E I fee that great advantage is taken on fmnall occasions, and that

3r ,) .' ) the mentien of the mairiage, betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother,
- . . 4 and the D. of Norfolk, hath this while pats been very frequent in both the real!is,

anid then I myself to be spoken of as a motioner, which I perceive is at the lapt
come to;hcr majesty's ears. I v.i;l, for fatisfaaion of her highness, and the dif-
cha;ge of my duty towards her majesty, manifest unto you my interest, and med-
ling in that matter, from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is prejudicial to
her highncfs, cannot but be hurtful to the king my loveieign, this his realm, and me.
WVhat conferrenccs was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that were
with me wikhin the realm of England, I am not able to declare; but I am no wife
iorgetful of any thing that paflcd betwixt him and me, either at that time, or since.
And to the end her majesty may underfanid how I have been dealt with, in this
matter, I am compelled to touch some circumstances, before there was any men-
tion of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the commissioners, I found
very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and others her highnefl's commissioners,
in the beginning of the caule, as in the making of the others to proceed sincerely,
atind o further. During which time, I entered into general speech, flicking at our
just defence in the matters that were objeEted against us, by the said queen's coim-
missioners, looking certainly for no other thing, but summary cognition in the cause
of controversy, with a fmal declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day
the lord Lithington's secretary rode with the duke to Howard, what purpose they
had I cannot fay, hut that night Lithington returning, and entring into confcrrence
with me upon the slate of our action, I was advised by him to pass to the duke, and
Icquire familiar conlcrience, by the which I might have some feeling to what iflle
our matters would tend. According to which advice, having gotten time and place
convenient in the gallery of the houfc where the duke was lodged, after renewing
of our firfl acquaintance made at Berwick, the time before the aflize of Lcith,
nnd fonc fpccchcs paficd betwixt us ; he begnn to fay to me, how he in England
hadl favour and credit, and I in Scotland had will and fiicndfhip of many, it was
to be tho,'t there could be none more fit inflrumcnt%, to travel for the continuance
of the amnity bctwixt the iea.ms, than we two. And so that dilcourfe upon the pie-
lent Il.atc (o both, and how I vwas entered in that action tendini so far to the quecl '
lilhf<nour, I was willed by him to confider how matters Ift od in this, what holmi u
I haid ieccived of the queen, andl what inconvenielnces her defimation in the Imatel
1.l(l to lier ciharge might brccd to her plflerity. Iler relpccit was not little to il'.
crown oif (l'.i gl d, theic wvas but one heir. The -llamiltois my unlfiendls 1hai till'
i.\ t elp ilct, anil Ihat I flhoidd cflelc tlhe iflue of her body would bc tle iole ia-
.filiu to
'.lne

l 1 mirincc, tli any other that could attain to that crown. Ar I1
lu it fiould be nictcll, that flic aflutmcdl her dimiflion made in Lochlcvini, an(d 'E

ti
;J3

A PP -E N'D I X.

to aoifral the letters of her hand write, that she should :o: beddef.med in England.
nI reply to that was, how the matter had pas'cd in Parliament, and the letters fLzen
to man)', fb that the abltractng of the lame could not then tlcure her to .,ny puir-
pose, and yet fliould we, in that doing, bring the ignominsy upon us. Afiirmng it
would not be fair for us that way to proceed,.fecing the qpueel's mn.3aity of England
was not made pi ivy to the matter as Ihe ought to be, to be in reipe,'t we were pur-
polely come in England for that end, and for the - of the gran:s of our cause.
T'he duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle mnatters well enough at
the court. After this, on the occalion of certain articles, that were rcquired to be
relolved on, before we entered on the very declaration of the very ground of our
action we came up to the court ; where Tome new commilfioners wcre adjoined
to the former, and the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the parliament houfie
at XVeitminffer, in pretence of which commirfioners of the said queen, and--
through the--rebuking of the queen of England's own commilioners, we uttered
the whole of the action, and produced such evidences, letters and probations, as
we had, which might move the queen's majefly to think well of our cause. Where-
upon expecting her highness declaration, and Ifeing no great likelihood of the fame
to be suddenly given, but daily motions then made to come to an accord with the i.id
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean ftcafon, flanding inl h.zIard and
danger, we were piut to the uttermost point off our wit, to imagine whereunto the
matters would tend, tho' albeit we had left nothing undone for juilifcation of our
cauics, yet appeared no end, but continual motions made to come to some accord with
the queen, and reflore her to whole or half reign. 1 had no other anfr er to give them,
but that I should neither do against confcicnce nor honour in that matter. Notwith.-
flanding fceing this my plain answer wrought no end, nor dispatch to us, and that I
was informed that the duke began to mislike of me, and to fpcak of me, as that
I had reported of the said queen irreverently, calling her -- and murderer, prn!i.!v-
J was adviled to pass to him, and give him good words and to purge myfc!it /Lt/,'u,
of the things objeiSted to nme, that I flould not open the sudden ertiy of his ce:.
grace, nor have him to our enemy- confidering his greatne's. It being there-
withal whilpered,.ald shewcd to me, that if I departed, he {sanding drifcontciitcd and
not satisfied, I might peradventure find such trouble in my way, as my throat might
be cut before I came to Berrick. And therefore ftnce it might well enough appcar
to her marriage, I should not put him in uttFe despair, that my good will could not
be had therein. So few days before my dceparting, I caie to tlhe pallc in Hdiaipton-
cult, where the duke and I met together, an(] the rc I declared unto hlim that it
\was colme to my cars, howv fomc meifi-cport Jhould be ni.de of me to hinii, as that
1 flould p)ealc irreverently and raflly of the said queen nmy fovc rcil n's ionuher, such
worlds as before ecxplnef(l, that lie might -- theireby y my aftction to be lo Proba']/
aliciate fiom her, as that I could not love her, nor be content of helr lplIfel nlent,/;//,'k.
Ihowbeit lie might pcifiuade hinifclf of the contrary, lor .: s thf once was thi perfol
in tihe 5votld that 1 loved bcft, halvig that h1i iliolt to h' bo n tar

l i tilto h r, ie tid l a,'.r,

iniIg cccived fucll advan:cemenlte t and liuicirt by her, I w.1 ii 1)t s(o i 'r:tc o;. Co tion-
i liural ever to wilh hIer body h1,11 1, (c t, ;L,. i: Ii ;l I w.. iN tlti ly rcpiorlcd (tf
use., (huvot,' c\cr the truth wvcrc in thie felt) aid , t, ie: I t'.t! on of l r

1 ',

:i).. t y fovci cigln, 1.h d i(itv'd ile to ntucr IllI) t!lh i s.1Lt', ;Ill tlat iir (o\'.'l l)rf-
Ji1' wv, ls tlie o(J allion oitli.lt wais littel d to tlicl v

cr -(.- ltLr

( l l to \

t i ,, '
(:':, it.lat to lepet t of her l ;)l.al b lh.tit. u; and if.' ;i,: l .id !.'tt- cl ki)ic ,'n r c -i. ,/.; .., ..

tie/JC1

ance,' that fie'fliould be separate from that ungodly and unlawful marriage that she
was cntred in, and then after were joined with such a godly and honourable a per-
fonagc, as were affectioned to tha true religion, and whom we might trust, I could
find in my heart to love her, and to {how her as great pleasure, favour, and good-
Will, as ever I did in my life ; and in cafe, he should be that personage, there was
lnone whom I could better like of, the queen--- in - of England being made
privy to the matter, and she allowing ti.ereof, which being done, I should labour in
I11l things that I coulJ, to her honour and pleasure, that were not prejudicial to the
kinii my fovercignl's el'ate, and prayed him not to think otherwise of me, for my
a.ffeiion was rather buried and hidden within me, awaiting until God should diret
her to know herlllf, than utterly alienated and abftra&ced from her; which he seem-
ed to accept in very good part, faying, Earl of Murray thou thinks of me that thing,
whereunto I will ma.ke none in England or Scotland privy, and thou haft Norfolk's
life in thy hands. So departing, I came to my lodging, and by the way, and all
night, I was in continual thought and agitation of mind, how to behave myself in
that weighty matter, first imagining whereunto this should tend, if it were attempt-
'cd without the queen's majesty of England's knowledge and good will, this realm
and I mylelf in particular having received such favour and comfort at her highness's
hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietness, since God pofleffed her majesty
with her crown. And on the other part, feeing the duke had disclosed him to me,
protesting, none other were or should be privy to our speech, I tho't I could not
.ind in my heart to utter any thing, that might endanger him; moved to the utter-
mioft with thele cogitations, and all desire of sleep then removed, I prayed God to
fend me some good relief and outgate, to my discharge, and fatisfacEtion of my trou-
bled mind, which 1 found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a day or two there-
after, I entered in conversation with my lord of Leicester, in his chamber at the
court, where he began to find strange with me, that in the matter I made so diffi-
cult to him, (landing so precisely on conferrence, and how when I had in my com-
municrtion with the duke, come so far- and there he made some discourse with

Prohbhly me, about that which was talk betwixt us, I perceiving that the duke had--
dJloJfed,. the matter to my lord of Leicester, and thinking me thereby discharged at the

duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame communication in every point to my
lord of Leicester, who desired me to shew the fame to the queen's majesty, which I
refu'cd to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her highness any thing, that
he as one -- by her majesty, and for many benefits received at her highnefb's
hands is obliged to wilh her well, should malce declaration of the fame to her ma-
jefly, as I undcrtland by some tpeech of her highness to me, he did. This my de-
clara(ion to the duke was the only cause, that itaid the violence and trouble prepar-
ed for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways understand. The fame declaration I
was obliged to renew since in writings of---- fnt to my servant John Wood.
'he furn whereof, I trust, he flewcd the duke, and something alfoI wrote to hini-
self, for it was tho't this should redeem some time, that the duke should not suddenly
declare himr our enemy, lor his great.nlfs was oft laid before me, and what friendship
he had ol the chidc of the nobility in lngland, so that it n-ight appear to the queen's
niajclly of l niglnllnd-fo cold towards us, anid doinlg nothing plblickly that might fcem
Ifavourable for us, we had some caUife to fufpcct that hcr highness should not be contra-
rious to the Inanl ige when it flould be proposed to her. The flarp me nflage sent by
her niajicRy with the lord Boyd, who had the like commiflion from the duke tendtinl,

8 Jo

so far to the said queen's preferment, as it were proposing one manner of conditions
from both, gave us to think that her highness had been foreseen in the duke's de-
sign, and that (he might be induced to allow thereof. But howbeit it was devised
in England, that the lord of Lethington should come as from me, and break the
matter to her highness, as her majesty in a letter declared that {he looked for his
coming, yet that devise proceeded never of me, nor the noblemen at the convention
could no wife accord to his fending, nor allow of the matter motioned, but altoge-
ther mifliked it, as bringing with the fame great inconveniencies, to the surety and
quietness of this whole isle; for our proceedings have declared our mifliking and
disallowance of the purpose from the beginning, and if we had pleated, he was
ready for the journey. And in like wife it was devised to give content, that the

--- between the said queen and Bothwell, should be suffered to proceed in this Probably

realm, as it was desired by the said lord Boyd, by reason we could not understand divorce.
what was the queen's majesty's pleasure, and allowance in that behalf---- And
whereas ye mean, that her highness was not made privy of any such intention, the
fault was not in me. The first motion being declared, as I have written, to my
lord of Leicester, and by him imparted to her majesty, so fai as I could perceive by
some speech of her highness's to me, before my departing. Thus I have plainly
declared how I have been dealt withal for this marriage, and howjuft necessity moved
me not to require directly, that which the duke appeared so- unto. And for
my threatnings, to assent to the fame, I have expressed the manner; the peribns
that laid the matter before me were of my own company. But the duke since hath
spoken, that it was his writing which saved my life at that time. In conclusion I
pray you persuade her majesty, that the let no speeches nor any other thing paflcd
and objeced to my prejudice, move her majesty to alter her favour- towards me,
or any ways to doubt of my afrured contfancy towards her highness; for in any
thing which may tend to her honour and surety, I will, while I live, bestow myself,
and all that will do for me, notwithstanding my hazard or danger, as proof ilall
declare, when her majesty finds time to employ me.

APPENDIX
VoL. II.

T t

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

A P P E N D I X

TO THE
SECOND VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. II. p. a.)
William Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leicester, March zoth,

1570, from Ledington.

H E great desolation threatened to this whole realm, he the divisions thereof An Original.
in dangerous factions, doth press me to frame my letters to your lordship,
in other fort, then were behovefull for me, if I had no other refpea, but

only to maintain my private credit; therefore I am driven to furnish them with mat-
ter, which I know not to be plausible, whereupon by misconstruing my meaning,
some there may take occasion of offence, thinking that I rather utter my own pas-
sions, than go about to inform your lordship truly of the frate; but 1 truit my plain
dealing shall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning; to make the fame sensible,
I will lay before your lordship's eyes, the plat of this country ; which firfi is divided
into two factions, the one pretending the maintenance of the king's reign, the other
alledging the queen to have been cruelly dealt withall, and unju{tly deprived of her
state; the former is composed of a good number of nobility, gentlemen, and prin-
ripal burroughs of the realme, who shall have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in hand,
the queen's majefly your sovereign's allowance and prote&ion; the other hath in
it Come most principall of the nobility, and therewithall, good numbers of the infe-
rior fort, throughout the whole realm, which also look assuredly that all kings do
allow their quarrel and will aid them accordingly. What consequence this division
will draw after it, I leave it to your lordflip's consideration; there is fallen out ano-
ther division, accedentally, by my lord regent's death, which is like to change the
state of the other two factions, to increase the one, and diminish the other, which is
grounded upon the regiment of the realm. Some number of noblemen aspire to
the government, pretending right thereto by reason of the queen's demiflion of the
croun, and. her commission granted at that time for the regiment during the king's
minority; another faction doth altogether repine against that division, thinking it nei-
ther fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the meanest fort amongst the earls, fliall
presume to challenge to themselves a rule over the whole realme, the next of the
blood, the first in rank, the greatcft alway both for the antientry of their houses,
degree, and forces, being negleckted ; this order they think preposterous, that the
meaner fort shall be placed in publick funaion to command, and the greater flall
continue as private men to obey; besides that, they think if the commission had in
the beginning been valewable, (which the most part will not grant) yet can it not
be extcnded to the present, for that the conditions thereunto annexed arc ceased,
and so the effect of the whole void; the latter part of this division hath many pre-
tences, for besides the queen's faction, which is wholly on that fide, a great number

T t 2 of

of there that have heretofore professed the ki ng's obedience, do favour the fame, and
will not yield to the government of the other, whole preferment for refpeds they
mislike, when the queen's faction fliall be increased, with a part of the king's, and
these not of Icat fubllance, and yow may judge what is like to ensue; an other inci-
dent is like to move men to enter in further discourses, it is given out here in Scot-
land, that the queen's majefly is setting forth some forces towards the border, which
Ihall enter this realm, to countenance these that aspire t ththe regiment, and fupprcfs
the contrary faction, and bruits are spread, that the fame shall be here out of hand;
there that think themselves of equal force with their contrary faction at home, or
rather an over-match to them, yet not able to encounter with the forces of another
prince, rather than yield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take advise of necessity,
and evill councillors, and seek also the maintenance of onme foreign prince, whereby
her majefly (altho' no further inconvenient were to be feared) must be driven to
exceflive charges, and it would appear there were a conspiracy of all the elements at
one time to let us together by the ears, for now when the rumour of your forces
coming towards the border is spread abroad, even at the fame time is arrived at
Dumbarton, a galzeon with a messenger sent exprefly from the king of France, to
that part of the nobility that favours the queen, to learn the slate of the country,
and what support they lack or desire, either for furtherance of her afairs, or for their
owi safety; assuredly this message will be well received, and suffered accordingly,
this is the present slate of Scotland. Now if your lordship would also know my
opinion, how to choice the belt, 'as the cafe itandeth ; I will in that also fatisfie
your lordship, I am required from them to deal plainly, and your lordship shall judge
wither I do so or not; for I think it plain dealing, when I simply utter my judge-
ment, and go not about to disguise my intents. 1 trust the queen's majesty hath a
desire to retain at her devotion the realne of Scotland, which she hath gone about
to purchase, with bestowing great charges, and the loss of some of her people;
this desire is honourable for her highness, profitable for both the countreys, and of
none to be disallowed; specially if it be (as I take it) to have the amity of the whole
realm, for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove com-
modious for her to suit the fi-iendfhip of a faction of Scotland, for in Lo doing, in
gaining the best, fihe may lose the more, and the fame would bring all her actions
with us in suspicion, if (he hfould go about to nourih factions amongit us, which
meaning I am sure never entered into her majesty's heart; then if it be the friend-
ship of the whole she doth demand, let her not for pleasure of one part, go about
to overthrow the remnant, which will not be so faifable, as some may give her to
underfiand ; but rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the whole
slate, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all by good means to an uniformity,
fb shall (he give us all occasion to think well of her doings, that she tendeth our
wealth, and provoks us univerlhlly to wifn unto her majesty a most prosperous con-
tinuance ; by the coniraly, if for the pleasure of a few, /he will fend forces to fupl
prels thcfe whom they iniflike, and so consequently offend many; men be not bo
faint-lheartcd, but they have courage to provide for their own lafty, and not only
will cmbrace the mcanls partly osiered, but will alol procure further, at the handl o
other princes. This for uiinie own part, I do abhorr, and protest I desire never to
cce forces of ill'angers to set foot withi n this land, yet I know not what point ncccf-
ity lma;y drive men into, .as if Ilen in tle middle of the Ifca were in a s/hip which
(uLldltcly filoulhI be fit oil fire, the fear of burning would make themn to leap into the

fcn,

sea, and soon after the fear of the watter would drive them to cleive again to the
fired ship, so for avoiding present evil, men will many times be inforced to have
recourse to another, no less dangerous. Trust me forces will not bring forth any
good fruit to her majesty's behove, it must be some way of treaty shall serve the
turn, wherein by my former letters your lordship doth know already what is my
judgment; you fee how plainly I do write, without consideration in what part my
letters may Be taken, yet my hope is that such as will favourably interpret them,
flhall think that I mean as well to her majesty, and that realme, as theie that will
utter other language. I wish the continuance of the amity betwixt the two con-
trys, without other refpec, and will not conceal from her majesty any thing, to my
knowledge, tendiong to the prejudice thereof; if I shall perceave her majesty taking
frank dealings in evil part, I ihall from thenceforth forbear; in the mean season I
will not cease to trowble your lordship, as I shall have occasion to write, and lo I
take my leave of your lordship.

No. II. (Vol. II. p. 8.)

A letter of queen Elisabeth to the earle of Suffeks, July 2d, 150o.

I G H T trusty and well-beloved cousin we greet you well; this day we have Caldernv.
' received your letters of 28 the last month, with all other letters sent from Mi. . iflorv

Scotland, and mentioned in your letters, whereunto answer is dcfired to be given \' z r. P:9
i:.core the tenth of this month; which is a very short time, the weightincfs of the
matters, and the distance of the places confidered; nevertheless we have, as the short-
ncfs could susser it, resolved to give this answer following, which we will, that yow,
by warrand hereof, flall cause to be given in our name to the earl of Lennox and
the reft of the noblemen conveend with him. Where it is by them, in their Ict-
ters, and writings alledg'd, that for lack of our resolute answer, concerning the eftH.-
blifhing of the regiment of the realm under their young king, great inconveni-nces
have happened, and therefore they have deferred now at their last convention to
determine of the famine, who shall have the place of governour, until the 2 1if this
month, before which time they require to have our advifc, in what person or p1rlbns
the government of that realm shall be cftablifled, we accept very thankfull the good
will and reputation they have of us, in yielding so frankly to require and follow our
advise in a matter, that touchelh the slate of their king, their selves, and realm so
near, wherein as we perceive, that by our former forbearing to intermcddtl therein,
they have taken some discomfort, as though that we would not have regard to their
itate and fucrty, (b on the other part, they of their wisdoms ought to think, that it
might be by the whole world evil inttprpreted in us to appoint them a form of
government, or a governour by name, for that howsoever we should ncan well if we
ihould do so, yet it could not be without some jealousy in the hcads ol( the eftatc,
nobility, and community of that realm, th it the government thereof fliould be by
me specially named, and ordain'd; so as finldilg dificulty on both parts, anld yct
miliking moflt that they should take any diiconlfort hy our forbeaCring to fll iv our
mlind therein, we have thought in this fort for to proceed, conldlcrilm with ounil Ilvc.
how now that realm had been a go d space of time ruled in the nalne of their ki;n,
and by rteafun of his base age, governedl heretofore hy a vci y carefIll land hollUtoiill
pcelful, lthe eaile of Alurray, Ilntill that by a miiflicvonls person, (an evil ex.uIIl)p

I 1i,'

he -tws murdered, whereby great disorder and confusion of neceflity had, and will.
more follow, if determination be not made of some other fpeciall person, or persons,
to take the charge of governour, or superior ruler fpeciall, for adminiftiation of law
and justice, we cannot but very well allow the desire of these lords to have tome
fpeciall goveriour to be chosen; and therefore being very well assured, that their
own underfianding of all others is best to confider the tfate of that realm, and to
discern the abilities and qualities of every person meet and capable for such a charge,
we ihall better fatisfie' ourselves, whom they by their common consent shall first
choose, and appoint to that purpose, then of any to be by us aforehand uncertainly
named, and that because they ihall perceave that we have care of the person of their
king, who by nearness of blood, and in refpea of his so young years, ought to be
very tender and dear to us, we shall not hide our opinion from them, but if they
shall all accord to name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox, to be go-
vernor alone, or jointly with others, (whom we hear to be in the mean time by their
common content appointed lieutenant-general) reason moveth us to think that none
can be chosen in that whole realm, that shall more desire the preservation of the
king, and be more meet to have the government for his safety, being next to him in
blood of any nobleman of that realm, or elsewhere; and yet, hereby, we do not
mean to precfrive to them this choice, except they shall of rhemfelves fully and freely
allow thereof; furthermore we would have them well assured, that whatsoever re-
ports of devires, are, or {hall be spread or invented, that we have already yielded our
mind to alter the slate of the king or government of that realm, the fame are with-
out just cause or ground by us given, for as we have already advertised them, that
although we have yielded to hear, which in honour we could not refute, what the
queen of Scots or her part shall fay and offer, not only for her own assurance, but
for the wealth of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be, that shall be
offered, we mean not to break the order of law and justice, by advancing her cause,
or prejudging her contrary, before we shall delliberately and assuredly fee, upon the
hearing of the whole, some place necessary, and just cause to do; and therefore
finding that realm ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of that realm,
and thereof invested by coronation and other folemnities used and requisite, and gene-
rally so received by the whole estates, we mean not, by yielding to hear the corm-
plaints or informations of the queen againfl her son, to do any a& whereby to make
conclusion of governments, but as we have found it, so to susser the fame to conti-
nue, yea not to susser it to be altered by any means that we may impefhe, as to our
honor it doth belong, as by your late actions hath manifefily appeared, untill by
tome jutfice, and clear cause, we shall be directly induced otherwise to declare our
opinion; and this we would have them to know to be our determination and course
that we mean to hold, whereon we trust they for their king may fee how plainly
and honourably they mean to proceed, and how little cause they have to doubt of us,
whatfoevcr to the contrary they have or shall hear; and on the other part, we pray
them of their wildors to think how unhonourable, and contrary to all human order
it were for us, when the queen of Scotland doth so many ways require to hear her
cause, and doth offer to be ordered be us in the fame, as well for matters betwixt
ourselves and her, as betwixt herself and her son and his party of that realm, again t
which offers no reason could move us to refuse to give car, that we should aforc-
hand openly and direcSly, before the caufcs be heard and confidered, as it were, give
a judgment or sentence either for oiurfclves or for them, whom she maketh to be

3 her

her contraries. Filally ye:fhall admonish them, that. they do not, by mifconceiv-
ipg our good..maeaniig toward them, or by indirect aflertions of their adversary
igrounded on..untruths, hinder or weaken their own cause, in such fort, that our
.good; meanipg.£towards them .ihall not take' such effect towards them, as they):hall
.defire,:or.themfelves have need of. All this our anrfwer ye ihall catfre be given
.them, and.let tlem.know, that for the shortness of time, this being the end ot the
. econd of:this month, we neither could make any longer declaration of our mind,
nor yet. write. any several letters, as if time mighthave Served we would have done.
2 JuLy, -1570.

No. III. (Vol. II. p. 8.)

The bilhop of Ross to secretary Liaington from Chattifwortlh.

HAVE received your letters dated the 26th of May, here at Chattifworth, the i JJuae, -3,
ioth of January, but on the receipt thereof I had written to you. at length, like

as the queen did with my lord Levingfton, by which you will be resolved of many
points contained in your said letter. I writ to you that I received your letter and
credit from Tho°. Cowy at London, and sent to Leicester .to know the queen of
England's mind, whether if you should come here or not. He sent me word, that
ihe will no ways have you come as one of the commiflioners, because (ihe is yet
offended with you; and therefore it appears good that ye come not hither, but re-
main where you are, to use your wisdom and diligence, as may best advance the
queen's affairs, for I perceive your weill and safety depends thereon, in reipeal of
the great feid and ennimity born against you by your Scots people, and the great
heirship taken of your father's landis; both were sure demonstrations of their ma-
lice. Yet I am encouraged by your stout and deliberate mind. Affjre your! !f n-.
diligence lhall be omitted to procure supports forth of all parts wshere it .my be.
had. We will not refuse the aid neither of Papist, Jew, nor Gentil, after my ad-
vice; and to this end, during this treaty, let all things be weil prepared. And fee-
ing my lord Seaton is desirous to go into Slanders, the queen thinks it very necefary
that he so do, for the duke D'Alva has gotten express coummand of the king of S,)ain.
to give support, and I am sure that there he shall have aid both of Flnduers and the
pope, for it.abides only on the coming of fomenmen of counltennlcc, to pi )l ure and
receive the fame. He mull needs tarry there, on the prcparations thereof, duing
this treaty, which will be a great furtherance to the fame here. I he (lucclil (hs
already written to the Duke D'Alva for this effect, advertizing of his coliilgg;
there is certain fums of money coming for support of the Engliflimlcn, as I wrote to
you before, from the pope. Whereupon I would he had a genclal conmmillion to
deal for them, and receive such fums as {hall begiven. The means flA1l be found
to cause you be anfuerit of the fums you writ for, to be difponit upon the furnilhing
of the cafile of Edcnburgh, so being some honest and true m;in were sent to Sl.um-
ders to receive it, as said is, which 1 would you prepared and sent. Orders fliall be
taken for the metals as you writ of. We have proponit your avyce in cntring to .
treat with the queen of England, for retiring of her forces puntyoally for lack of
aid. Your answers to the Engliflimen arc tho't vcry.good, but above all keep you
weil out of their hands, in that cafe, cftte prudentcs ficut ferpcntes. You. nlay
take experience with the hard.dealing with me, how yc would be ucfd if ye weic

here.

here, and yet I am not forth of danger, being in medio nationis pravae; alway no
fear, with God's grace, {hall make me ihrink from her majesty's service. Since the
queen of England has refused that you come here, it appears to me quod nondum eft
fedata malitia amorreorum, &c. and therefore if Athol or Cathenes might by any
means be procured to come, they were the most fit for the purpose, Rothes were
also meet, if he and I were not both of one surname; so the treaty would get the
less credit either in Scotland or here. Therefore avys, and fend the best may serve
the turn, and fail not Robert Melvil come with them, whoever comes, for fo-is the
queen's pleasure; in my last packet, with James Fogo, to you, in the beginning of
May, I rent a letter of the queen's own hand writing to him, which I trust ye
received. I am sorry ye come not for the great relief I hoped to have had by your
presence, for you could well have handled the queen of England, after her humour,
as you were wont to do. The reft I refer to your good wisdom, praying God to
fend you health. From Chattifworth the i5th of January.

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 26.)
The declaration of John Cais to the lords of Grange and Lethington

zoungare upon the 8th day of Oct. 157I.

Hereas you desire to know the queen's majesty's pleasure, what she will do
for appeasing of these controversies, and therewith has offered yourselves to

be at her commandment, touching the common tranquility of the whole isle, and
the amity of both realms; her pleasure is in this behalf, that ye should leave off the
maintenance of this civil discord, and give your obedience to the king, whom she
will maintain to the utmost of her power.

AND in this doing, flie will deal with the regent and the king's party, to receive
you into favour, upon reasonable conditions, for security of life and livings.

ALSO flre fays that the queen of Scotts, for that she has pralifed with the pope

and other princes, and also with her own subjects in England, great and dangerous
treasons against the slate of her own country, and also to the deftru&ion of her own
person, that she shall never bear authority, nor have liberty while she lives.

IF )C refuse these gentle offers, now offered unto you, she will presently aid the

king's party, with men, ammunition, and all neceflary things, to be had againlt
you.

WHEREUPON her majesty requires your answer with speed, without any delay.

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 34.)

Articles sent by Knox to the general Affimbly, Augufl 5th, 1572.

Calderwv. I I R S T, desiring a new a& to be made ratifying all things concerning the kini
M.S. Hillory. F and his obedience that were enaaced of before without any change, and that the
V. z. 356. nminifters who have contraveend the former a;ss be correc'tcd as accorldth.

TIlHAT futc be made to the Regent's grace and nobility maintaining the king's
caufc, that whatfocvcr proccedcth in this treaty of peace they bc mindful the ki k

[eI

be not prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they specially of the minilters, that have
been robbed of their pofliesions within the kirk during the time of the troubles, or
otherwise dung and injured, may be restored.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any bifhoprick or other benefice be given to

any person, contrary to the tenor of the ads made in the time of the firit regent of
good memory, and they that are given contrar the said acs, or to any unqualified
person, may be revoked and made null be an ad of secret council, and that all
biflopricks so vacand may be presented, and qualified persons nominat thereunto,
within a year after the vaking thereof, according to the order taken in Leith be the
commiflioners of the nobility and of the kirk in the month of January last, and in
special to complain upon the giving of bifloprick of Ross to the lord Methven.

THAT no petitions of benefices, great or small, be given be simple donation of

any lord regent, without consent of the possessor of the saids benefices having tittle
thereto, and the admiflion of the superintendent or commissioners of the province
where this benefice lyeth, or of the bishops lawfully eleced according to the said
order taken at Leith; and desire an ad of council to be made thereupon, until the
next parliament, wherein the famine may be specially inaaed, with inhibition to the
lords of feftion to give any letters or decreets, upon such simple gifts of benefices or
pentions not being given in manner above rehearsed, and that the kirk presently
assembled declare all such gifts null so far as lyeth in their power.

THAT the firit form of presentation to benefices, which were in the firfl and

second regent's time be not chang'd as now it is commonly; but that this clause be
contained in the presentation, that if the persons presented make not residence, or
be flandrous or found unworthy either in life or doflrine be the judgment of the
kirk, (to which alwife he lhall be subjed) or meet to be transported to another room
at the fight of the kirk, the said present ationand all that shall fall thereupon shall be
null and of no force nor effec; and this to have place also in the nomination of
the bishops.

THAT an ad be made in this assembly that all things done in prejudice of the

kirk's assumption of the third, either be papists or others, by giving of fews, life-
rents, or taks, or any otherwise difponing the said assumed thirds, be declared null
with a solemn protestation the whole kirk difafenteth thereto.

THAT an adt be made decerning and ordaining all bishops, admitted to the order

of the kirk now received, to give account of their whole rents, and intromiilions
therewith once in the year, as the kirk shall appoint, for such causes as the kirk may
cafily confider the fame to be moss expedient and neceffar.

ANENT the jurifdidion of the kirk, that the fame be determined in this assem-

bly, because this article hath been long poftpond to make fute to the regent and
council for remedy against meflengers and excommunicate persons.

LAST that orders be taken ancnt the procurers of the kirk, who procure against

niiniftcrs and ministry, and for futting of juitice of the kirk's adLions in the felion.
VoL, II.

U u

No. VI0

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 39.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrewe, Efq; upon the peace concluded the

23d Feb. 1572.

E it known to all men, by these presents, that I Henry Killigrewe, Efcl; am-
baflador for the queen's majesty of England, Forasmuch as, at the earnell mo-

tion and solicitation being made to me, on her highness's behalf, there is accord and
pacification of the publick troubles and civil war within this realm of Scotland
agreed and concluded, and the fame favourably extended towards the right honour-
able George earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and Baidzenoch, and the lord John Ha-
milton, son to the duke's Grace of Chaftellarault, and commendatour of the abby
of Abirbrothock, for the surety of the lives, livings, honours, and goods of then),
their kinfolks, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly depending on them; in
treating of the which said pacification, the murders of the late earl of Murray
uncle, and the earl of Levenax grandfather, late regent to the king's majefry of
Scotland his realm and lieges, as also an article touching the discharge for the fruc-
tis or moveable goods, which the said persons have taken fra perfonis profefling the
king's obedience, or for the damages done or committed by them, since the 15th
day of Junij, 1567, and before the penult day of July last by pafled, by reason of
the common cause or any thing depending thereupon, being thought by the king's
conmifaries matteris of such wecht and importance, as the king's present regent
could not conveniently, of himself, remit or discharge the fame. Yet in refpct of
the neceflity of the present pacification, and for the well of. the king, and common
quictnefs of this realm and lieges, it is accorded, that the matters of remiflion of
the laid murderers, and of the discharge of the said fructis, moveable goods, and
other damages, moved by the persons desiring the said remissions and dilfhaige to
the queen's majesty my sovereign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and habita-
tion to the king of Scots. And whatfocver her majesty filall advise and councel
touching the said rcmiffion and discharge, the said lord regent, for the weil of the
king and univcrfal quietness of the realm of Scotland, flall perform, observe, and
tullfil the fame. And in likewise, the said earl Huntly, and commendatour of the
Abirbrothock, being urged to have delivered pledges and hostages for nbfcrvation of
the conditions of the said accord and pacification, hath required me in place thereof,
in her nlajefty's name, by virtue of my commission, to promise for them that they
fihall truly and faithfully observe and keep the said pacification, and all articles and
conditions thereof, for their parts, and that it would please her majesty to intcrpole
hcrfclf, as surety and cautioner for them to that effcc, to the Icing's majcfly of S'ot-
land their fo.vercign and his said regent, which I have done, ard promise to do, by
virtue of his majel'y's commission, as by the honourable and plain dealing of the laiid!
carl and lord, tncir intention to peace wcll appcars, the fame being mofi agreealbl
to the miind of tile queen's majcfty my fovcrcign, which so long by her miniflcls
hath t;I:vc. lLcd for the (aid pacification, and in the cnd, at her motion and folicita-
tiotn, the flamn is, ac co dedl, knowing her ma;jcfty's godly dcfire, that the (falec lnliy
rcontilnue Iinviolatc, d that tbhe nobllemnLI and others now rcturlning to the king's
obedience shall Ihavc fliiCiicLt fitrcty for their lives, livings, honours andl goo(.:.

l '1' ht clu ec'

Therefore in her majesty's name, and by virtue of my commiflion, I promise to the
aforesaid earl Huntly and commendator of Abirbrothock, that by her majesty's good
means, the said remiflion and discharge shall be purchased and obtained to them,
their kinfolks, friends, servants, and partakers, now properly depending upon them,
(the persons specified in the first abftinance always excepted) as also that the said
pacification shall be truly observed to them, and that her majefry fiall interpose ber-
self as confervatrix thereof, and endeavour herself to cause the fame to be truly and
sincerely kept in all points and articles thereof accordingly. In witness whereof, I
have to this present fibfcribed with my hand, and fealed the fame with mine own
Ital the 13th day of Febry. Anno Domini 1572. And this to be performed by
me, betwixt the date hereof, and the parliament which shall be appointed for their
restitution, or at the furthest before the end of the said parliament. Sic fubfcribitur.
The biflhop of Glasgow's note concerning the queen of Scotland's Dowry.

H E queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for her dowry, besides other t176.
posSessions, the dukedom of Turene, which was solemnly contrated andgiven Cot. lib. Cal.

to her by the king and eflates of parliament; which dukedom she poffefned peace-B. 1iV
ably till 1576, and then, upon the pacification betwixt the king and Monfr his bro-
ther, to augment whose appenage this dutchy was given, to which the queen of
Scotland yielded upon account of princes, who were her near relations, provided
the equivalent which was promised her should be faithfully perfbrmed. So that
year, after a great many follicitations, in lieu of that dutchy, she had granted her
the county of Vermaudaife with the lands and bailiwicks, of Seuley and Vetry;
tho' 'tis known that county, and the other lands vere not of equal value with
Turene, but was promised to have an addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an
equal value. Upon this letters patent were granted, which were confirmed in the
courts of parliament, chamber of accompts, court of aids, chamber of the trea-
fury, and others necessary; upon which fie entered into poffeflion of that county,
&c. Afterwards, by a valuation of the commissioners of the chamber of accompts,
it was found, that the revenue of that county, &c. did not amount to those of Tu-
rene;by 3000 livres. But instead of making up this deficiency according tojuftice,
some of the privy council, viz. M. de Cheverny, the presidents of Bellievrc, Nico-
cholay, and St. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwithstanding of her aforesaid
lofies, did fell and alienate the lands of Senlis, and the dutchy of Eftaimpes, to Ma-
dam de Monpenfier, from whence the king received money ; of which Sale the
councellors aforesaid obliged themselves to be guarantees, which hath hindred the
aforesaid queen to have justice done her. So that Madam de Monpenficr hath been
put in possession of these lands of Senlis, contrary to all the declaration, protctla-
tion, and aflurances of the king of France to queen Mary's ambaill'dors. So that
the (queen of Scotland is difi)ollfeced of her dowry, contrary to all equity, without
any regard to her quality.

No. VII.
U U 2

No. VII. (Vol. II. p. 44.)

A letter from the Lord of Lochlevin to the regent Mortoun.

3d March, T will please your grace, I receive your grace's letter, and has confidered the
'577 J fame. The parson ot Camsey was here at me before the receipt thereof, directed
E. of Mor. fra my lord of Mar, and the master anent my last written, which was the answer
toin s Ar- of the writing that the master sent to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring me
chives to come to Sterling to confer with them. I had given my answer before the receipt
Bund. B.
No. 19. of )our grace's letter, that I behuiffit to be besyd San& Androis, at ane friends tryst,

which I might not omit; I understand by my said cousin, that the king's majesty is
to write to divers of the nobility, to come there, anent your lordship's trial, and
that he had written before his departing to my lord Monthrois. I underhfand like-
wife, he will write to your grace to come there for the fame effea, which I tho't
good to make your grace foreseen of the fame, praying your grace, for the love of
God Almighty, to look upon the best, and not to sleep in security, but to turn you
with unfeigned heart to God, and to confider with yourself, that when the king's
majesty was very young, God made him the instrument to divest his mother from
her authority, who was natural princess, for offending of his divine majesty, and
that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame is as largely in you, except that
your grace condescended not to the destruCtion of your wife. For as to harlotry
and ambition, I think your grace has as far offended God, and far more in avari-
tioufnefs, which vycis God never left unplagued, except speedy repentance, which I
pray God grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace can never have the love of
God nor man. I pray your grace flatter not yourself, for if your grace believes
that ye have the good will of them that are the king's good willers ye deceive your-
self; for surely 1 fee perfectly that your own particulars are not contented, lat by
the reft, and that most principally for your hard dealing. I pray your grace, beir
with me that I am thus hamlie, for certainly it proceeds from no grudge, but from
the very affection of my heart towards your grace, which has continued since we
were acquainted. And now I fee, because the matter htands in your grace's hand-
ling with the king's majesty, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him now, I
fee not how ye flhall meet hereafter; pray I your grace to call to God, and look on
the best, and cast from your grace both your vices, to wit, ambition and avaritioul-
ners. I am riding this day to Sanct Androis, and trufl to return on Wednesday at
the farthest. If your grace will command me in any offices that are honest, that I
may do your grace pleasure in at Sterling, advertise of your grace's mind, and filall
do to my power and knowledge, and this with my heartlie, &c. &c.

To our trufly cousin the lord Lochleven,
From the Oii- R U S T Y cousin, after our most hearty commendations, we received your let-

il 1d. F. of i ter of the 3(1 of NIarch, andl as we take your plainncrfs therein in good part,

llorton's Ar- as proceeding from a f ieinl ulnd kinilmian, in wlhofe good afflcion towards us we
chicves. und. never doubted, so ye may not think it ilrange that we plurge ourself sO far of your
~, N. 31. accusation, as in confcicnc e we find lot ouilclf to have offinded in. As touching

OlU'

otir offence to God, we intend not to excuse it, but to submit us to his mercy; for
ambition surely we think none can justly accuse us; for in our private estate we
could, and can live as well contented, as any of-our degree in Scotland, without
further aspiring. The bearing'to the charge of the government of the realm, in-
deed, mon lead us, or any other that shall occupy that place, not simply to relpec
ourself, but his majesty's rowme which we supply, and therein not transcending the
bounds of measure, as, we trust, it shall not be found we have done, it ought not
to be attributed to any ambition in us. For as soon as ever his majesty ihall think
himself ready and able for his own government, none (hall more willingly agree and,
advance the fame nor I, since I think never to set my face against him, whore honour,
safety and preservation has been so dear unto me, nor I will never believe to find
otherwise at his hand than favour, although all the unfriends I have in the earth
were about him, to persuade him to the contrary. As we write unto you, our
friendly dealing and confidence in the house of Mir is not thankfully acquit; as
we trust yourself confiders, but because the ambafldors of England, my lord of
Angus, the chancellor, treasurer, and some noblemen rides weft this day to fee the
king, we pray you heartily address yourself to be there as soon as ye can, and as ye
ihall find the likelihood of all things, let us be advertized thereof, with your own
advice, by Alexr Hay, whom we have tho't good to fend weft, feeing my lord of
Angus from Sterling rides to Douglas. And so we commit you in the protection
of God. At Holyroodhoufe, the 4th of March, 1577.

FOR the avaricioufinefs laid to our charge, indeed it lies not in us so liberally to

deal the king's geare, as to satisfy all cravers, nor never (hall any sovereign and na-
tive born prince, let be any officer, eschew the disdains of such, as thinks them
judges to their own reward ; in many causes, I doubt not to find the afliftance of my
friends; but where my aEtions shall appear unhoneft, I will not crave their assist-
ance, but let me bear my own burthen.

No. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 83.)
The copy of the king of France his diretions sent to Scotland with

Seineur de la Motte Fenelon. Translated out of the French.

I R S T, on their majestys most christian part, he shall make the most honour- Calderw.

F able salutation and visiting to the most serene king of Scotland, their good bro- M.S. Hiltory,
ther and little son, that in him is polfable. Vol. 3. . 208.-

To give him their letters that are cloCed, such and such like as they have written

to him with their hands, and to show cxprefly the perfet flicnidflip and singular
affcction, that their majestys bear to him, and to bring back the aniiwcr.

To take heed to the things which touch near the mod fcrene king, to the effct
that his person may be in no danger, but that it may be molt surely piefcrved,

AND that he be not hindred in the honest liberty that he ought to have, and that
no greater, or firaiter guards be about him than he had before.

AND fiuch like, that he he not impeached in the aulhority, thlt (God hath given

to him of king and prince Iovercign ahove his iubjcCts, to the cfel'c he may as freely
ordain and command in his aflili, ;al d in the aflifirs of his country, with his or.d.*
nary council, as he was used to do of bcfoic.

Tm A','.

THAT his noblility, barons and commonalty of his contry may have their siee

liberty to resort to his serene majefly, without lufpicion of greater guards or more
armed men about his person than the use was, that they be not affraid and hindered
to rcCorr; and further, that the fegnieur de la Motte Fenelon fall liberally and freely
speak to the said serene king and council, requiring the re-effablifhing of that that
may or hath been changed or altered.

AND that he may know if the principalls of the nobility, and other men of good

behaviour of the towns and commonality of the contry conveens, and are content
with the form of government presently with the said serene king, to the end that if
their be any miscontent he may travaile to agree them together, and that he return
not without the certainty of the famine.

AND if he may understand that there be any who have not used them so reve-

rently towards the said serene king their sovereign lord, as the duty of their obe-
dience required, that he may pray on this behalf of his majesty most christian the said
serene king his good brother, giving him councill wholly to forget the fame, and
exorting them to do their duty towards his majesty, in time coming, in all respects
with the obedience and true fubjecion they ought him.

AND if the said fegnieur De la Motte, perceves the said serene king to be in any

manner constrained of his person, authority, liberty, and disposition of his affairs,
than he uscd to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, or as the sovereignty
of a prince doth require, that he use all moyen lawful and honest to place him in
the famine, and that he imploy as much as the credit of his most christian majesty
may do toward the nobility, and fubjets of that contry, and as much as may his
name, with the name of his crown towards the Scottifl nation, the which he loves
and confides in as much as they were proper Frenchmen.

AND that he wittnefs to the said serene king, and his estates, of his consent, and

to all the nobility and principal personages of the contry, that his most christian
majeltie will continue on his part in the mofl ancient alliance and confedracy, which
he hath had with the said serene king his good brother, praying his nobility and con-
try, with his principall subjects, to persevere in the famine, in all good understand-
ing and fiiendflip with him; the which, on his part, he fllall do, obferviing the
lainie most inviolable.

FURTHIER his most christian majesty understanding that the serene king his good

brother was contented with the duke of Lenox, and his fcrvife, the said fignieur
De la lMotte had charged to pray his serene majesty that he might remaine beside
him to his contcntment, believing that he should more willing intertain the points
ol love and conlcderace, betwixt their majestys and their contrys, because he was a
good fubjcc to them both; and if he might not remain, without some alteration of
the tranquility of his eltatc, that he might retire him to his own house in the laid
contry, in furencs, or if he pleased to return to France that he might lurely-
and ii it pleases his serene majelly, to cause ccafe andl fta) the impeachments, that
are made of new upon the frontiers, to the eflcct that the natural Frenchnmen may
enter as freely into the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

AND that there may be no purpole of diffamation, not no fpcech but honourable

of the most chriftianl king, in that contry, hut such like as is liokcn nmoft honour-
ably of the fCr ne king oif cotland in France.

IIE haid another head to propone, which he concealed till ; little before his depar-

ture, to wit, that the queen, the king's mother, was content to receive her lon in
alluciation of the kintgdonm.

No. IX.

No. IX. (Vol. II. p. 98.)
Lord Hunfdane to fir Francis Walfinghain, the i4th of Augufs, 1584.

from Berwick.
S I R,

CC RDING to my former letters, touching my meeting with the earl of Caldcrw.
Arran upon Wednesday last, there came hither to me from the earle, the jus- M4. S. Hillo-

tice clerk, and fir WVilliam Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, both of the king's privie r', V\ol. 3
council, to treat with me about the order of our meeting, rctriing wholly to me to P. 3' 4
appoint the hour, and the number we should meet withal; so as we concluded the
place to be Fouldcn, the hour to be ten o'clock, and the number with ourselves to be
13 of a fide; and the refl of our troops to stand each of them a mile from the town;
the one on the one lide, the other on the other fide, so as our troops were two miles
afundcr; I was not many horsemen, hut i fulplied it with footmen, where I had loo
slot on horse, but they were very near ;oo horle wel! appointed : According to
which appointment, we met vefterday, and after ibni congratuiations, the earle fell
in the like proteliations of his good will anil readiness to tirve the queen's majeit',
before any prince in the world, next his lovereign, as he had done heretdfore by his
letters, and rather more; with such earnest vows, as unless he be worse than a dIevil,
her m:njefty may dispose of him at her pleasure; this being ended, I entered with hi,
touching the cause I had to deal with him, andl o near as I could, left nothing unie-
hearsed, that 1 had to charge the king or him with any unkind dealing toward her
majetly, according to my instructions, which without any delay he answered pre-
fently, as ye ihall perceive by the said aiifwers, sent herewith; but I replying unto
him, he amplified them with many moe circumstances, but to this effect. Then I
dealt with him toucning the point of her majefly's fatisfacion, for the uttering such
p'accices as has been lately set on foot for the disquieting of her majesty and her
estate, who thereof made sundry difcouifes, what marriages have been offered to his
majesty by fundrie princes, and hy what means the earle has fought to divert them,
and for what caufrs; the one, for that be marriage with Spain or France, he must
also alter his religion, which as he is sure the king will never doe, so will he never
fuffcr him to hc.erken unto it, so long as he halth any crcdit with him; he denys not
but the king has iecn dealt withal be pra(tices to deal againfl her majesty, which
he has so far denied1 and refused to enter into, as they have left dealing therein,
but whatsoever the king or he knowetll therein there shall be nothing hiddecn fiom
her m;:jcufy, as her nmajefty fi.all know very flortly ; furcly it fecms by his fpiccchs,
that if ihe king would havc yielded thereunto there had been no ftinll company of
French in-Scotland ere now to dicfquict her majecfy.--- This being ended, I dealt
with him earncftly for the flay of tiis parliament, which now approacheth ; or at
the leall 'tlat there may be nothing done therein, to the prcjudice of there noble-
men and others inow in Lng'and, for the forfaulting of thcir livings and goods,
hereupon he made la long di louric to me, first of th'e carl of Angus dealing about
the carl of Morton, then of his going t out, not;vitlhft;inding of fu ndric graci(llo:
offers the king had niade him, then of the rmad of Ruthven, how that plrclcitly
aftcr they hatd the king's mnjcilv in their hand:;,they inp ilolicd lini.fcll, dlclt withi
the king for putting of the duke out of the cralm, the king refilild so to do, tiny
told him plainly tlhat if lie would not hr 1uiilld
1 ave ti C .flt l oIt Cf Ar.l n'C h:eld itl ;

di.(l ,

dish; the king asked what offence the earl had made ? and they answered it must be
so, and should be so; hereupon for the safeguard of Arran's life, the king was con-
tent to fend away the duke, and yet Arran afterwards fundrie times in danger of his
life; I alledged unto him the king's letter to the queen's majesty, and his acts in
council, that they had done nothing but for his fervife, and with his good liking and
contentment, who answered me he durst do no otherwise, nor could not do any thing
but thatwhich pleased them, with such a number of other their dealings with the
king whileft he was in their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad if they
were true; I said the king might have let the queen's majesty's ambaflador have
known his mind secretly, and her majesty would have relieved him; he answered,
that the king was not ignorant that the apprehensions in that manner, proceeded
from Mr. Bow's pratice, and thereby durst not impart so much to him, and yet the
king was content, and did give remission to as many, as would acknowledge their
faults, and ask remiflion, and such as would not, he thought fit to banifi, to try
their further loyalty, in which time they conspired the king's second apprehension,
and the killing of the earle, and others, and seduced the ministers to their faction;
and yet not satisfied with there conspiracies and treasonable dealings, (as he terms
them) are entered into a third, being in England under majesty's protection, to dif-
honour her majesty as far as in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king conceive
some unkindnels in her majesty, for harbouring of them; I wrote to yow what the
conspiracy was, the taking of the king, the killing of the earle of Arran, and some
others, the taking of the castle of Edinr. and bringing home the earles, to take the
charge of the king; all which (fays he) is by Drummond confessed, and by the
provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and the constable of the castle thereupon
fled; the earl brought Drummond with him as far as Langton, where he lay to
have confessed the conspiracy before me, but having at his lighting, received a blow
on his leg with a horse, so as he could bring him no further, 1 replied that I thought
verily they would not work any such practices, in refpet of the queen's majesty,
abiding within her realme, and if there be any such practices, they have proceeded
from others, and they not privie unto them: and that if it be not apparently proved
against them, that it will be thought to be some practice to aggravate the fault, and
to make them the more odious to the king. He answered me, that it should be proved
so sufficiently, that they should not be able with truth to deny it, for their own hands
is to be fhnwed to part of it, and therefore concluded, that if her majesty ihould
so press the king for them at this time, that would rather hinder this matter of the
amity, nor further it, and that since they seek chiefly his life, he could not, in any
reason, seek to do them any good ; and besides he aflured me, that if he would, he
dare not, this last matter being fallen out as it is; and furcly if this matter had not
fallen out, I would not have doubted the restoring of the earl of Marr very shortly,
if her majesty would have employed me therein, but for the earl of Angus, I per-
ceive the king is pcrfuaded that both he, and the reft of the Douglaflls, have con-
ccived so mortlll an hatred against him and the earl of Arran, about the death of
the call of Morton, as if they were at home, tomorrow next, they would not leave
to praCtise and conlpire the death of them both, and therefore a hard matter to do
any thing for him: finally, he concluded and required me to aflfute her majefly
from the king, that there fliall nothing be hid from her, nor any thing left untlocn
that may litisfic her majefly with reason, and that the king Ihall ncver do any tlhing,
nor conlent to have any thing done in her prejudice, so long as he had any credit

'wilh

with him, or authority under him. Having this far proceeded, he desired to ihow
me his commiflion, which is under the great feal, to himself only, which is as large
as may be, and yet fundrie of the privie councel there with him, but not one in
commission, nor present, nor near us all this time; having spent almost five hours in
these matters; he presented to me the master of Gray, who delivered to me a letter
from the king in his commendation, whom I perceive the king means to fend to her
rnajefty, and therefore requires a safe conduct for his passage, which I pray yow pro-
cure, and to fend it so soon as you may. I let him understand of the lord Seaton's
negociation with the French king. He swore to me, that Seaton was but a knave,
and that it was partly against his will, that he hould be sent thither. But his com-
million and inftrution being of no great importance, he yielded the sooner; and if
Seaton has gone beyond his infiruEtions, which Arran drew himself, he will make
Seaton smart for it. Touching William Newgate, and Mark Golgan, he protested
he never heard of any such; he fays there was a little poor foul, with a black beard,
come thither a begging, who said he was an enemy to Desmond, to whom he gave
a croun, but never heard of him since, and for any Scots man going into Ireland,
he fays there is no such matter; if there be, there may by some few rafkals that he
knows not of; and touching the coming of any jesuits into Scotland, he fays it is
but the slanderous devise of the king's enemys, and such as would have the world
believe the king were ready to revolt in religion, who the world shall well fee will
continue as constant therein, as what prince soever professed it most; and the earle
himself dos protest to me, that, to his knowledge, he never saw a jesuit in his life,
and did assure me if there was any in Scotland, they should not do so much harm in
Scotland, as their minilters would do, if they preach such docarine as they did in
Scotland, and touching one Ballanden, of whom I wrote to yow, I heard from
Mr. Colvil, the earle avows conflantly that he knows not, nor hath not heard of
any such man, but he would inquire at the justice clerk, and would inform me what
he could learn of that; thus I have made yow as short a discourse as I can of so
many matters, so long discoursed upon, but these are the principal points of all
our talk, so near as 1 can remember it, and for this time I commit vow to thc Al-
mighty. At Berwick, the i4th of August, 1584.

The king is very desirous to have

my son Robert Carrie to come to him.
I pray yow know her majesty's pleasure.
Arran's Answers to the griefss or articles proponed co the lord Hunldanc,

let down in another form.

S to the frait and revere persecution of all such, as have been noted to hae
been well affected to the queen's majesty, it cannot appear they were cithlrr

for that cause punished, or hardly dealt with, since his majclty of lare has bcci l;>
careful and diligent to choice out good instruments to deal betwixt her majelly and
hin, as his majcfty has done in electing of your lordship and me ; bcfidcs that in all
their accusations, their good will and affcaion born to her majclty was, at no time,
laid to their charge, but capital actions of trcafon many way tried now be the whole
three eltates, and more than manifclf to the world.

VoL., 11. Xx

As for his majesty inhibiting, by publick proclamation, such as were banifled, not

to repair in England; the bruits and whisperings that came to his majesty's ears, of
their conspiracies and treasons, which since fyn they accomplished, so far as in them
lay, moved his majesty to inhibit them to repair to any place, to near his majesty's
realm, left they should have attempted these things, which shortly they did attempt,
being farther off, and more distant both by sea and land.

As for reception of jesuits, and others, her majesty's fugitives, and not delivering

them according to his promise, as your lordship propones, his majesty would be molt
glad that so it might fall out by your lordship's traviles, that no fugitive of either
realme should be received of either, and when so shall be, it ihall not fail on his
majesty's part, albeit in very deed this time bygone, his majesty has been constrained
to receipt his majesty's mean rebells and fugitives, contrar his good naturall, since
her majesty hath receipt, in effe&c, the whole and greatest rebells and traitors his
majefly in his own blood ever had; as for the agreement with his majesty's mother
anent their association, his majesty has commanded me, in presence of your lordlhip's
servant, to assure her majefly and your lordship, in his majesty's name, that it is alto-
gether false, and an untruth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majesty has also commanded me to assure your lordihip, that it is also false and

untrue, that his majesty has, by any means direct or indirect, sent any meflage to the
pope, or received any from him; or that his majesty has dealt with Spain or any
foreigners, to harm her majesty or her realm, which his majesty could have no
honour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I hope in God it shall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majesty's ministers, ient unto his

majesty, his majesty uscd none of them so; and if his majesty had, sufficient cause
was given by them, as some of their own writs do yet testify; as I more particularly
fliewed your lordship at Foulden, at our late meeting.

No. X. (Vol. II. p. in,.)

Letter of Q. Mary to Q. Elizabeth.

Madame ma bonne Seur,

Coit. rib M' 'Affeurant que vous avez cu communication d'une lettre de Gray que vonire
(ol. B. VIIL. V Jl homme Semer me livra hier foubz le nonm de mon filz y rccollgnoifiihnt quasi
11nl. 1i7. de mot a mot les mefines raisons que le dit Gray nm'ccrivit en chifc lctant dernlire-
Arn Or)gilal. Imen;t pres de vous dcfmontrant la ifufllance & bonne intention du pci oilbiage je vous

p'! ii) lfulemcnt fuivant cc que si dcvant je vous ay tant intlllatcmcnclt importune que
vous Inc pcrmetticz dcfclaircir libicmcnt & oivertcmcnt cc point de I 'afinciation
d' cLire noy & mion filz & me deflicr les mains pour proccder avcc iui comninc je jugerly
celic iciquis pour son bien & Ie miien. Et j'c itrclcindzp qu quo clue l'on vous die &
pL i1;: cii ril.pporter de faire mcntir cc petit brouillon qui pcrfuiade par aucuns de vos
miinifircs a cnt;cpris cette frparaition (ntre mly ct mon cnfilnt, & pour y commcncer
jc vous lupplic n-,'oEtroycr quc jc puifl pallc. a cc jullice clerk qiii vous a citc nou-
vellcment cnvoyc pour inmndicl par luy a mun filzy mno iintnttion filr chla, cc quc jc
Ine promis quuc lie me Icfilfrclc, quiantt ce ne iiroit. quc pourr d(Icontrer cii cflelt li
boninc intention jque vous in'a;vcz ai:ulrc avoir a l'accord & cnitrCtici de niatural dc-

voij
5

voir entre la mere & I'enfant qui dit en bonnes termes efire empefche pour vous me
tenant captive en un desert ce que vous ne pourrez mieux defmentir & faire paroitre
voftre bon defir a notre union que me donnant les moyens d'y proceder, & non m'en
retenir & empefcher comme aucune des vos miniftrcs pretendent a fin de laifNer tou-
jours lieu a leur mauvais & finiftres praftiques entre nous. La lettre porte que
I'affociation n'est pas passee, auffi ne luy ai-je jamais dit, bienque mon filz avoit ac-
cepte; & que nous en avions convenu ensemble, comme l'ate sign6 de fa main, &
ces lettres tant a moy, que en France en font soy, ayant donne ce meme temoignage
de fa bouche propre a plufieurs ambaffadeurs & perfonne de credit, s'excufant de nc
l'oser faire publier par craint de vous feulement, demandant forces pour vous resister
d'avant de fe declarer si ouvertement eftant journellement persuade au contraire par
vos miniftres qui luy prometoyent avecque une entreire a Yorck le faire declarer
votre heretier. Au surplus Madame quand mon enfant feroit fe malheureux que de
s'opiniaftrer en cette extreme impiet6 & ingratitude vers moy, je ne puis penser que
vous non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de la Chretiente le vouliifiez eu cela ap-
plaudir ou meintenir pour luy fayre acquerir ma malediction, ains que plutos intro-
viendrez pour luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop juste & evidant devant Dieu & les
hommes Helas & encores ne luy vouloier je'n ofter, mays donner avec droit ce qu'il
tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout commife a vous, & fidelement faites si il
vous pleft que je ne en foye pis qu'aupravant, & que le faulfete des uns ne prevale
defvant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & la plus grande affliction qui
me fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir la perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplie de me mander
en cas qu'il perfifte en cette m'efconnoiffance de son devoir, que de luy ou de moy il
vous plaiff advouer pour legittime roy ou royne d'Ecoffe, & si vous aves agreable de
pourfuivre avec moy a part la traite commence entre nous de quoy je vous requiers
fans plus attendre de response de ce mal gouverne enfant vous en requerrant avec au-
tant d' affection que je fens mon cceur oppreffe d'ennuy. Pour Dieu fouvenez vous
de la promeffe que m'avez faites de me prendre en votre protection me raportant du
tout a vous, & fur ce priant Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de touts vos cnnemys
& diffimulez amys, comme je le desire de me consoler & de me venger de ceulz qui
pourchaffent un tel malheur entre la mere & I'enfant. Je cefieray de vous troubler,
mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quelque consolation de vous & de Dieu
encore un coup je le fupplie de vous garder de tout peril. Futhbery xii Mars.

Voftre fidclement vouee fceur

& obeiffant coufine,

A la reync d'Angletcrrc MAR I E Q

madame ma bonnc fariir
& coufine.

No. XI.

J

I X.

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. I II.)
A Testament by Q Mary.
N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd. Mr.'Crawford late regius

professor of church history in the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper,
according to him, is written by Naue, Mary's secretary, the reft with the queen's
own hand. What is marked " is in the queen's hand.

Cott. Lib. Onfiderant par ma condition prefente I'eflat de vie humaine, si incertain, que
Vefpaf.L. 16. j perfonne ne s'en peuft, ou doibt affeurer, finnon foubs la grande et infinie
P. 4' 5 miifericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d' icelle contre tous les dangers et acci-

dens, qui me pourroient inopinement furvenir en cette captivite, mefmes a cause des
grandes et longues maladies, ou j'ay ete detenue jufques a present; j'ay advise tan-
dis que j'ay la commodite, ou raison en jugement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut de
mor ame, enterrement de mon corps, et disposition de mon bien, eftat, & affaires,
par ce present won testament et ordonnance de mon dernier volonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au norl du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife St. Esprit. Premierement, me recong-

noiffant indigne pechereffe avec plus d'offences envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfadion
par toutes les adverfites que j'ay fouffert; dont je la loue fa bonte. Et m'appuyant
fur la croix de mon Sauveur et Redempteur Jesus Christ. Je recommende mon ame
a la benoifte et individue Trinit6, et aux prieres de la glorieufe Vierge Marie, et de
tous les anges faints and fainctes de paradis, efperant par leur merites et interceflion,
efire ayde6 a obtenir de eftre faite participante avec eulx de felicite eternel!e. Et
pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net et entier, defpouillant des a prefient out reflhn-
timent des injures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultres offenses, qui me pourroient avoir
efie faces durant ma vie, par mes fubjets rebelles et aultres ennemis; J'en retriet la
vengeance a Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mefme affecqion, que je luy re-
quiers pardon a mes faultes, et a tous ceuls et celles que je puis avoir offense de faiqs
ou de parolles.

Je veulx et ordonne, &c. [The two fdilowing paragraphs contain dires7ions concerning
the place and circwm/lance of her burial.J

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, et conservation de l'Eglife catholique,

apoftolique et Romaine, en la quelle je veulx vivre ct mourir, si le prince d'Efcoffe
mon filz y pueft etre reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture, qu'il a prise a mon tres
grand regret en l'herefie de Calvin entres mes rebelles, je le laifle feul et unique heri-
tier de mon royaume d'Efcofl, de droit que je pretende juftemcnt en la couronnc
d'Angleterre ct pays quc en dependent, ct gcncrallcment de tous et chacun mes meu-
bles et immeubles qui rcfieront aprcs ma mort, et execution de cc present teflament.

Si non, et que mon dit filz continue a vivrc en la dite herefie, Je cede, tranfporte,

ct faieA don ' de touts ct chacuns mes droiAs, que je pretende ct puis pretendre a la
" couronnc d'Anglcterre, ct aultles droicqs, feigncuries, ou royaulnes en depen.
"' dantz, au roy catholiquc, ou aultre de fiens qu'il luy plaira, avefques advis, con-
*' fentement de fa failltcic ; tant pour Ic voyr aujourdhuy le feul fours applui de a rcli-
'' gion catholique, quc pour rcconoifiance de gratuites faveurs que inoy, ct Ics miens
' rccommalndez par moy, ont avons icccu de luy cn ma plus grandel neccffite; ct

" refguainl

cc refguard aufi an droi&c que luy mefme peut pretendre a ces ditz royaulmes et
cc pays, je le fupplie qu'en recompence il preign alliance, de la maifon de Lorraine,
C' et si il ce pleut de celle de Guise, pour memoire de ]a race de laquelle je fuis sortie
" au cofe de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que mon feul enfant, lequel
" eftant Catholique j'ay tousjours voue pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de
" 1'accepter, ou faillant une de fes niepces marie6 comme fa fille.

" Je layffe mon filz a ]a protection du roy, de prince, et dues deLorrayne et de

cc Guile, et du Mayne, aux quelz je recommende et son eftat en Efcoffe, et mon
cc droic en Angleterre, si il eft catholique, et quelle le parlie de cefte royne."

Je fautz don au " compt6 de Lenox" de comte de Lenox tenu par feu son pere,

et commande mon filtz, comme mon heretier et fucceffeur, d' obeyr en ceft en droit
a mon volonte.

Je veulx et ordonne toutes los sommes et deniers, qui fe troveront par moys deues,

tien mis cause de doif eftre faits " a Lohliven" etre promptement pay6e et acquit-
tes, et tout tort et griefs repares per lefdits executeurs defquelz J'en charge la con-
science. Oultre, &c. [Follow two or three paragraphs concerning particular legacys,
and thon is added] Fai& au. manoir de Sheffield en Angleterre le jour de- Mil cinq
cens foixant & dix sept.

After a blank page follows in the queen's hand:

" Si mon filz meurt, au. comte de Lenox, ou Claude Hamilton lequel fe mon-

"trera le plus fidelle vers moy, et plus constant en religion, au jugement de-
" Dues de Lorraine et de G.uyfe, ou je le rapport fur ce de ceulx a que j'auray don-

nay la charge de trayter avefque eux de par moy et ceulx, a condition de fe mar-
" rier ou allier en la dite mayfon ou par leur advis."

Follow near two pages of particular legacys.

" Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au droid quelle peut pretendre a ]a conte d'An-
" gous avant l'acort fait par mon commandemcnt entre ma dite tante de Lenox e.

le conmte de Morton, veu quil a es6 fait & par le feu roy mon Mary et moy, fur la

" promcff de (a fidelle assistance, si luy et moy encour ions dangier et befoing d'ayde,
6 ce qu'il rompit, s'entendant fecretement au les nos ennemis rebelles, qu' attemt-
"prient contre fa vie, ct pour cell effeS pris les armes, et ont portc les banniercs
, defploiees, contre nous. je revoquc auffi toute autre don queje luy ay fait de conte
" de Morton fur promcffes de fes bons services a advenir, et ntends que la dire
" Conte foit reunic a la couronne, si ell fe trouve y partenir, comme fes trahifons
" tant en la-morn de mon fcu Mvary, que en mon banillement, et pourfuit de la
I mienne I'ont meritC. Et deleulds a mon filz de fe jamays fcrvire de luy pour de

luy po-lr la haync qu'il :aye a fcs parents, la quelle je crains ne s'cftcntel jul-

" ques a luy, le connoitlhnit du tout alleI5lionnc aux cnnemis de nmo droitc en cc
I ro'aumie, du qucl il eft penconnaire.

1' Jc rccolmmi nde mon ncl)vcu I'irancois Stuart a mon fill, ct luy commande de-
tenir pl's id ltuy ct s'cnllervit, ct jC luy la!'yll lI bien l Co du

c3t Ic odueC )l n onie,

" en iepcl't qu'il tll dcnon fling, mon

ll llul, ct ma ctll laill' en lutclic par foi
'' pore.

" Jc declare i uic mon frere ballard Robert Abb6 de S'. Croix na'cn que par cir..
"' conven ionl kllecnay, et q]u: l nc fut jamlnityi; mon tention, cornlte il .prct pal

la li rvociatioln cqii j' y faytc d epui, Ct etc aulli faitc d'avant lLa afge de xxv alns, cc

6 " quc

C que j'aimois deliberer si il ne m'euffent prenner par,prifon de fe de defayre aulx

eftats je veulx donc que Orkenay foit reune a la couronne comme une de plus
"necefFaires pour mon filz, et fals la mayfon ne pourra etre bien tenue.

Les filles de Morra ne paivient accefli herirer, ains revient la conte a la Cou-

"c ronne, si il luy pleft luy donncr fa ou fille en marriafge, et il nome SIen
" fienne ligne."

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 121.)

A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen of Scotts.

April- ' L E A S E your majesty, I received your letter of the date the 12th of Novr.
Harl. Lib. 37. and in like manner has fecn some part of the contents of one other of the
B. 9. fol. 126. fame date, directed to Monfr. de Movifir, ambaffadorfor his majesty the most Chris-

tian king, both which are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one your
highners desires to know the true cause of my banishment, and offers unto me all
favour if I ihall be innocent of the heinous facts committed in the person of your
husband of good memory, so by the other the said ambassador is willet to declare
unto me, if your husband's murder could be laid justly against me, that you could
not follicit in my cause, neither yet for any person that was participant of that exe-
crable fact, but would seek the revenge thereof, when you should have any means
to do it; your majesty's offer, if I be innocent of that crime, is most favourable,
and your desire to know the truth of the fame is most equitable; and therefore that
I should with all my simplicity, sincerity and truth answer thereunto is most reason-
able, to the end that your princely dignity may be my help, if my innocence shall
sufficiently appear, and procure my condemnation, if I be culpable in any matter,
except in the knowledge of the evil disposed minds of the most part of your nobility
against your said husband, and not revealing of it, which I am assured was fuffici-
ently known to himself, and to all that had judgment never so little in that realm;
which also I was confirained to underfiand, as he, that was specially employed be-
twixt the earl Morton, and a good number of your nobility, that they might with
all humility intercede at your majesty's hand for his relief, in such matters as are
more specially contained in the declaration following, which I am confirained for my
own jufiification, by this letter to call to your majesty's remembrance. Notwith-
itanding that 1 am aflured to my grief, the reading thereof will not fmally offend
your princely mind. It may please your majesty to remember, that in the year of
God 1566, the said earl of Morton, with divers other nobility and gent. were de-
clared rebels to your majesty, and banished your realm for insolent murder commit-
ted in your majesty's own chamber, which they alledged was don by command of
your husband, who notwithstanding affirmed that he was compelled by them to sub-
scribe the warrant given for that cftit, howsoever the truth of that matter remains
amongst them ; it appertains not to me at this time to bc curious; true it is that I
was one of that number, that heavily offended against your majefly, and paifld in
France the time of our banifllment, at the dcfire of the refc, to humbly pray your
brother the Most Christian king, to interceed that our ofifnces might be pardoncd,
alld your majesty's clemency extended towards us, albeit divers of no fmnall reputa-
tion, in that realm, was of the opinion, that the said faLc merited neither to be requi-

frte
!2

ite for, nor yet pardoned. Always such was the careful mind of his majesty tnwards
the quietness of that realm, that the dealing in that cause was committed to Monfr.
de Movifir, who was directed at that time to go into Scotland, to congratulate the
happy birth of your ion, whom Almighty God of his goodness may long preserve ill
happy estate and perpetual felicity; the careful travel of the said de Movifir was so
effeetual, and your majesty's mind so inclined to mercy, that within flort space there-
after, I was permitted to repair in Scotland, to deal with earls Murray, Athol, Bod-
vel, Arguile, and secretary Ledington, in the name and behalf of the said earl Mlor-
ton, lords Reven, Linfay, and remanent complefis, that they might make offer in
the names of the said earl, of any matter that might satisfy your majesty's wrath,
and procure your clemency to be extended in their favours at my coming to them,
after I had opened the effect of my message, they declared that the marriage betwixt
you and your husband had been the occasion already of great evil in that realm,
and if your husband Ihould be suffered to follow the appetite and nind of such as
was about him, that kind of dealing might produce with time worse effects; for
helping of such inconvenience that might fall out by that kind of dealing, they had
thought it convenient to join thenmfelves in league and band v ith some other noble-
men, resolved to obey your majesty as their natural foivereign, and have nothing to
do with your husband's command whatsoever, if the said earl would for himself en-
ter into that band and confederacy with them, they could be content to humbly
request and travel by all means with your majefly for his pardon, but before they
could any farther proceed, they desircd to know the said carl's mind herein; when f
had answered, that he nor his friends, at my departure, could not know that any
fich like matter would be proponit, and therefore was not inftruted what to answer
therein, they desired that I should return sufficiently instructed in this matter to Ster-
ling, before the baptifn of your son, whom God might preserve; this meflhge was
faithfully delivered by me at Newcastle in England, where the said earl then remain-
ed, in prelence of his friends and company, where they all condescended to have no
farther dealing with your husband, and to enter into the said band. With this deli-
beration I returned to Sterling, where, at the request of the most Chriflian king and
the queen's majesty of England by their ambafidors present, your majesty's gra-
cious pardon was granted unto them all, under condition always that they fiould
rcmain baniflled forth of the realm, the space of two years, and farther dur-ing your

.-.jefly's plea3ure, which limitation was after mitigated at tlie humble request of
youir own nobility, so that immediately after the said earl of 1/orton repaired into
;cotlandl to (Qhittingaimc, where the earl Bodvcll and secretary Ledington come to
him ; what speech passed there amongst them, as God flmail be nmy j udge, I knew no-
tI:ing at that time, but at their departure I was requested by the laid earl PMlorton to
!ccormpany the carl Bodvcll and secretary to Edenblurgh, : and to return with fuchi
:1!vcr as tlic' fliould obtain of your majjcrty, which being givcIn to me by the laiit
perons, as God l h.l: be my judge, was no other than thcle words, " Sch.aw to the
" c;al Mlorton that the q(uein will hear nIo speech of ti:1at niirter appointed lunto
" 1in ;" whev n I crafit tha tthe anlwer milit be made mo:e enlfiblc, iccictary Le-

nill irtoi s'aid, that the c.:rl would f'urTicicnltly understand it, albeit few or none at tiiat

timle underitand what paflcld amongit then. It is known to aill men, als veil] be
..iling letters pa.st betwixt the aidl carl antd Iidington 'when they become iln divers
r..:ioins, as allfo any buck sett furth by tile miniitcr wchreill they aflirm thi.:t the
t.arl of Morton has confcllcd to them, before his death, that the carl lodlvell coIni

to

X.

to Quhittingaime to prepon the calling away off the king your husband, to the
which proposition the (aid earl of Morton affirms that he could give no answer unto
such time he might know your majesty's mind therein, which he never received. As
to the abominable murder, it is known too by the depositions of many persons that
were executed to the death for the committing thereof, that the fame was executed
by them, and at the command of such of the nobility, as had fubfcrivit band for
that effec ; by this unpleasant declaration, the most part thereof known to yourself,
and the remainder may be underflood by the aforesaid witnesses that was examined
in torture, and that are extant in the cuflody of the ordinary judges in Scotland,
my innocency so far as may concern any fa& does appear sufficiently to your ma-
jefly. And as for my dealing aforesaid, I can be no otherwise charged therein, but
as what would accuse the vcflcl that preserves the vine from harm, for the inteampe-
rancy of such as immoderately use the fame. As for the special cause of my banish-
ment, I think the fame has proceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able
to accuse the earl of Morton of so much matter as they alledge himself to have
confcffed before he died, and would not be induced, for loss of reputation, to per-
form any part thereof. If this be the occasion of my trouble, as I suppose it is,
what puniffhment I should deserve, I remit me to your majesty's better judgment,
who well knows how careful ever ilk gentleman should be of his fame, reputation,
and honour, and how far ever ilk man should abhor the name of a pultroun, and how
indecent it would have been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being so near of his
kin, notwithstanding all the injuries I was constrained to receive at his hand all the
time of his government, and for no other cause, but for shewing of particular friend-
ship to particular friends in the time of the last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I
be now to accuse him in any matter being dead, and more sorry that being on lyff,
be such kind of dealing obtained that name of Ingrate. Always for my own part I
have been banished my native country those three years and four months, living in
anxiety of mind, my holl guds in Scotland, which were not finall, intermittit and
difponit upon, and has continually since the time I was relieved out of my last trou-
bles at the desire of Monfr. de Movifir, attended to know your majesty's pleasure,
and to await upon what service it should please your majefly for to command. Upon
the 8th of April init. your good friend secretary Walfinghame has declared unto
me, that her highness tho't it expedient that I should retire myself where I pleased,
I declared unto him I had no means whereby I might perform that desire, until such
time as I (hould receive it from your majesty. Neither knew I where it would please
your highness to direct me, until such time as I should have received further informa-
tion from you. Upon this occasion, and partly by pcrmiffion, I have taken the hardrcfs
to write this present letter, whereby your majesty may understand any part of my
troubles pail, and firait present. As to my intention future, I will never deny that
I am fully resolved to spend the reft of my days in your majesty's service, and tlh
king your son's, whcrefoeverr I lhall be directed by your majesty, and for the better
performing thereof, if To flhall be her majesty's pleasure, to recommend the tryal of
my innocency, and examination of the verity of the preceding narration, to the king
your ton, with requefi that I may be pardoned for filch oflfences as concerned your
majesty's service, and var common to all men the time of his les aige and perdonil
to all, except to me, I should be the bearer thereof myself, and be dircctcd in what-
ibever service it should please your majefly for to commalnd. Most humble I bc-
fcech your majesty to confider hercof, and to be so gracious as to give order, that

I may
84

I may have means to serve your majesty according to the sincerity of my meaning,
and Io expecting your majetly's answer, after the kissing your hand with all humi-
lity, I take leave from London.

No. XIII. (Vol. IT. p. 140.)
Letter from the king of Scots to Mr. Archibald Douglas his ambassador

in England, October 1586.

E S E R V E up yourself na langer in the earnefl dealing for my mother, for ye Cott. L ib.
have done it too long; and think not that any your travellis can do goode if Cal. C. q.

hir lyre be takin, for then adeu with my dealing with thaime that are the special An Original
inftrumentis thairof: And theirfore, gif ye looke for the contineuance of my favour in the king's
towartis you, fpair na pains nor plainnes in this cace, but reade my letter wrettin to Iand.
Williame Keith, and conform yourself quhollie to the contentis thairof, and in this
requeift let me reap the fruistis of youre great credit there, ather now or never. Fair-
well. October 1586.
Letter to fir William Keith, ambassador in England, probably from fecre-

rary Maitland. Nov. 27, 1586.

Y your letters sent by this bearer, (albeit concerning no pleasant subjet) his A copy in the
majesty conceives well of your earnestness and fidelity in your negociations, as colle. of fir

also of Mr. Archibald's activity and diligence, whom you so greatly praise and recom- A. Did. Vol.
mend. I wish the issue correspond to his majesty's opinion, your care and travell, A. fol. 2z9.
and his great diligence as you write. His majesty takes this rigorous proceeding
against his mother deeply in heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both in
honour and otherwise. His highnesses actions and behaviour utter plainly not only
how far nature prevails, but alto how he apprehends of the sequel of that process,
and of what moment he eftecms it. There is an ambaffade flortly to be dire&ed,
wherein will be employed an earl and two counsellors, on whose answer will depend
the. continuance or dissolution of the amity and good intelligence betwecn the
princes of this isle. In the mean season, if farther extremity be used, and his ma-
jclly's suit and request disdained, his highncfs will think himself dilhonoured and
contemned far besides his expectation and deserts. Ye may perceive his nlajefty's
dlfpolition by his letter to you, which you flhall impart to Mr. Archibald, and both
deal according thereto. I need not to recommend to you care, concerning your
mafitr's fcrice both in weill and in honour. As you and your collcaguc Ihall behave
xourfclf in this behalf, ib for my own parr, will I interpret your as cilioii to your
inaltcr. I am glad of that I hear of y)ourdlrt, and I (do fully credit that )ou write (of
M\r. Archib.iId, whorc friends here make great account of his profllced devotion to
the (queIl, hciidcs the dily he owes to the kling's majcily her son. Farther 1
conilraincl to cremit to next occasion, having ftcar'ce time to cfribble these few llies
(which of thcmfelves may bear witnfcs of my haflc). 1Aifhing 5on a prolt ious
flue of your negociation, I comlnit y)ou, &c. 1-lalyrudhoule, Nov'. 27", 1586.

VOL. I~ ~~~I.Y

Y y
VOL. II.

THE people, and all estates here are so far moved by the rigorous proceedings

against the queen, that his majesty, and all that have credit are importuned, and may
not go abroad for exclamations against them, and imprecations against the queen of
Engiand.

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. 143.)

To the king's majesty, from Mr. Archibald Douglas.

,6 Ul. 1586. L E A S E your majesty, I received your letter of the date the.28th of Septem-
iro.n the Ori- J ber, the 5th of Odtober, which was the fame day that I directed W-. Murray
ginal in the towards your highness; by such letters as he carried, and others of several dates,
calect. of fir your majesty may perceive that I had omitted nothing so far as my travel might
B. foick..V. reach unto, anent the performing of the two chief points contained in the said letter

*' 32 befor the receipt thereof, which by these presents I must repeat for answering of the

faidis. As to the first, so far as may concern the interceeding for the queen your
majesty's mother her life, I have divers times and in every audience travelled with
this queen in that matter, specially to know what her full determination must be in
that point, and could never bring her to any further answer, but that this proceed-
ing againit her by order of justice was no less against her mind, than against the;r
will that loved her best: As towards her life she could give no answer thereunto,
untill such time as the law hath declared whether he was innocent or guilty. Here-
withall it was her pleasure thus far to inform me, that it was a number of the allo-
ciants that earnestly pressed her that the law might proceed against her, giving rea-
sons that so long as she was suffered to deal in matters, so long would never this
realm be in quiet, neither her life, neither this state in assurance, and in the end they
used this protestation that if she would not in this matter follow their advice, that
they should remain without all blame whatsoever should fall out; whereupon she
had granted them liberty to proceed, left such as had made the request, might here-
after have charged herself with inconvenience if any should happen.

AND by myself I know this her speech to be true, because both.papift and pro-

teftant has behaved them, as it hath been her pleasure to declare, but upon divers
refpeats, the one to avoid suspicion that otherwise was conceived against them, the
other upon zeal, and care that they will be known to have for preservation of their
fovcreign's life and state in this perilous time, upon consideration whereof, [ have
been constrained to enter into some dealing with both, wherewith I made her ma-
jefly acquainted; the protcftants, and such as in other matters will be known to
bear no finall favour unto your majesty's service, hath prayed that they may be
cxcufed from any dealing in the contrary of that, which by their oath they have
avowed, and by their speech to their fovcrcign requcited for, and that before my
coming in this country ; if they should now otherwise do, it would produce no bet-
tcr cfleEt hut to make them fubjcEt to the accusation of their fovcreign, when it
should plcalh her to do it, of their inconflancy, in giving counccll whereby they
might incur the danger of ill councell". and be confcquent worthy of puniflhmcnt.
Such of the papills, as I did deal with, went immediately, and told her maijcly
wh;t I had spoken to them, who albeit she undlcrfood the matter of before, iclut
tor me and declared to me my own fpccch that I had uttered to them, willing me

/-! .

for the well of my maiiter's service to abflain from dealing with such, as were not
yet sufficiently moved to think of my matter as she did. I craved leave of her m.t-
jelty, that I might inform them of your majesty's late behaviour towards her, and
the state of this realm, whereunto with some difficulty she gave her consent. At
my late departure from court, which was upon the 5th of this instant, and the day
after "that the lords of this grand jury had taken their leaves of her majefly to go
northward to Fothringham, it was her pleasure to promise to have further fpecch ill
this matter at the returning of the said lords, and to give full answer according to
your majesty's contentment to the remainder matters, that I had proponit in name of
your n:ajcfly. As to the 2,d part concerning the association, and desire that the pro-
mise made to the master of Gray concerning your majefly's title may be fulfilled; it
appeals by the said letter, that the very point, whereupon the quellion that may
bring your majeft)'s title in doubt hath not been rightly at the writing of the said
letter confidered, which I take to have proceeded for lack of reading of the alt of
parliament, wherein is fulfilled all the promise made by the queen to the said master,
and nothing may now cause any doubt to arise against your said title, except that an
opinion (hould be conceived by these lords of this parliament that are so vehement
at this time against the queen your majesty's mother, that your majetly is, or may
be proved hereafter assenting to her proceedings, and some that love your majesty's
service were of that opinion that too earnefl request might move a ground, whereupon
suspicions might grow in men so ill affeced in that matter, which I tho't might be
helped by obtaining of a declaration in parliament of your majesty's innocence at
this time, and by reason that good nature and public honesty would conitrain you to
intercede for the queen your mother, which would carry with itself, without any
further, some suspicion that might move ill affcted men to doubt. In my former
letters I humbly craved of your majefly that some learned men in the laws, might be
moved to advise with the words of the aflociation, and the mitigation contained in
the a&d of parliament, and withall to advise what suspicious effects your majelty's
request might work in these cholerick men at this time, and how their minds might
be best moved to receive reason; and upon all there considerations they might have
formed the words of a declarator of your majesty's innocence to be obtained in this
parliament, and failing thereof, the very words of a protestation for the fame effect
that might best fcrve for your majesty's service, and for my better information. Al-
beit this was my simple opinion, 1 shall be contented to follow any direcion it shall
please your majesty to give; 1 have already opened the substance hereof to the queen
of this realm, who seems not to be offended herewith, and hath granted liberty to
deal therein with fich of the parliament as may remain in any doubt of mind. This
being the fum of my proceedings in this matter, besides the remainder, contained in
other letters of several dates, I am constraincd to lay the whole open before your
majelty, and to humbly pray that full information may be font unto me what fur-
ther to do herein, in this middle time, while I shall receive more ample direction I
shall proceed and be doing according to such dizec9ion as I have already icccivcd.
And so, most gracious fovercign, wihingg unto your majefly all happy success in
your affairs, I humbly take my leave from London, this 6lth of Odct 1580. Your
majclty's Inolt humble fujljcc and obcd' servant.

A nlcmnori)
Yy 2

A r.emorial for his majeily by the Mafler of Gray.

2 J.il. i 5P6. i T will please your majcft,, I have tho't meetcr to set down all things as they
An ( i.mcil j ccur, and all advertilcments as they came to my ears, then jointly in a lettre.
it 1is oiwn) I c;,me to Vare the 24+t of Dec'. and sent to VWm. IKeith, and Ml'. Archibal:l

h.. l Doglas to advertize the queen of it, like as they did at their audience. She pru-
'. io,' [i ir niil' the qrucn your majelly's mother's life should be spared t:ll we were heard.

1i ' 27th, they came to Va:e to nme, the which day Sir Robt. came to Vare, where
thc'y ihewed us how far they had already gone in their negociation, but for that the
discourse of it is fct down in our general letter, I remit me to it, only this fir I will
teltitir un:o your majelty, that WV0. Keith hath used himfeif right honefily and.
julily till our coming, refpeeling all circumstances, and chiefly his colleague his
dealing, which indeed is not better than your majesty knows already.

'I'HF 29th day of Dec'. we came to London, where we were no ways friendly
e'ceived, nor after the honest fort ic had pl-afed your majefly use her ambafiador%,
sevcr nian sent to welcome or convey us. The fame day we underflood of Mr.
tic Bellievre his leave taking, and for that the custom permitted not we sent our
esxcls by Mr. George Young.

'l -tE itl day of Jan'll. WVm. Keith and his colleague according to the custom

sent to crave our audience. We received the answer contained in the general let-
ter, and could not have answer till the 6th day, what was done that day your ma-
jefly has it in the general, yet we was not out of expectation at that time albeit we
received hard anfwcrs.

THE 8th day we speak with the earl of Leicester, where our conferrence was, as

is set down in the general. I remarked this, that he that day said plainly the de-
taining of the queen of Scotland prisoner was for that she pretended a fuccefon to
this crown. Judge then by this, what is tho't of your majelty as ye shall hear a
little after.

THE gth day we speak with the French ambaflador, whom we find very plain in

making to us a wife discourse of all his proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we
thanked him in your majesty's name and opened such things as we had to treat with
this queen, save the last point, as more largely set down by our general.

Ir is tho't here, and some friends of your majesty's advised me, that Bellievre his

negotiation was not effectual, and that the resident was not privy to it, as indi.d I
think is true, for since Bellievre his perting, there is a talk of this Chafteauneuf his
servants taken with his whole papers and pacquets, which he was fending in Fr;ace,
for that they charge him with a conspiracy of late against the queen here her life.
It is alledged his servant has confessed the matter, but whom I shall trufl I know
not, but till I fee proof I shall account him an honest man, for indeed so he appears,
and one (without doubt) who hath been very inflant in this matter. I flew him
that the queen and earl of Leiceftcr had desired to speak with mn in private, and
craved lhis opiniln ; he gave it freely that lie thot it ime:tef, I flhew him the rcaloi}
why I communicate that to him, for that I had been iufpcclcd1 by foinc of lier ma-
jclly's friends in lFiance to have done evil oflices in her fcivice, tliht lic liould le
nly \vitncls th:lt my earnelt dealing in thi;s should he a iuflicent tefCim',)y thait ;all
was lyes, and that this knave Niau: who now liad betiayed her, had ill that conc

c\'i

A P P' E 1 D I X;

evil offices; he deCired me, secing file saw on'v wi-hh othr flk.s c.eC, that T fhno:ld
no ways impute it to her, for the e

lihe h had done to himncif by Nau: his per-
luaiion. I answered he should be my witness in that.

'I'HIE 9th day we sent to curt t) crave audience, which we gai the toth d'v ; at

the first, fhe'faid a tlhing long looked for uid be welcome when it comes, I wvouit
now lee your maflte's offers. I anfwT r d, no man makes ofters but for Come cause;
we would, and like your majesty, firtl know the caule to be extant for v,.hi-h we
oHflr, and likewi'e that it be extan; till your rnajeity h s heard us. I think it bie
extant yet, but I will not promise for an hour, but you think to flift in that lort. [
anfwecred we mind not to fhifr, but to offer from our sovereign all thiigs that with
rcafo;. may be; and in special, we offered as is set down in our general, all w.:'
refuted and tho'r nothing. She called on the three that were in the house, the earl
of Leicester, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very deFpitcfully repeated all
our offers in pretence of them all. I oi'ened the lat part, and fail, Madam for
what refpe: is it that men deal againit your person or estate for her cause? She
answered, because they think she flall succeed to me, and for that she is a papist
appearingly said I both the causes may be removed, file said she would be glad to
undeiftand it. If Madam, said I, all that she has of riht of fuccefion were in the
k-ing our sovereign's person, were not all hope of papists removed ? She answered,
I hope so. Then Madam I think the queen his mother shall willingly demit all her
rights in his person. She answered she hath no right, for she is declared unab!c.
Then I said, if she have no right, appearingly the hope ceases already, so that it is
not to be feared that any man attempt for her. The queen anfvered, but the papists
allow not our declaration ; then let it fall, fays I, in the king's person by her alEgna-
tion. The earl of Leictfter answered, She is a prisoner, how can file demit. i
answered the dcmilion is to her son, by the advice of all the friendJs (he has in
Euro,-e ; and in cafe, as God forbid, that any attempt conttit the queen here away,
who shall party with her to prove the demifion or aflignation to be incilt;cdual, h
son being opposite party, and having all the princes her friends for him, hav:ng-
bonded for the efficacy of it with his majesty of before. The queen made as fie could
not comprehend my meaning, and fir Rob'. opened the matter again, she yet made
as tho' she underflood not. So the earl of Leicester answered that our meanino
was, that the king should be put in his mother's place. Is it so, the queen anfwvcr-
cd, then I put ryfelf in a worse cafe than of before; by God's passion, that were
to cut my own throat, and for a dutchy, or an carldoIn to you'ri'lf, you or luch as
you would cause tome of your delpcirate knaves kill me. No, by God, he flhll
never be in that place. I anfwvered lie craves nothing of your mac;cty but only of
his mother. The carl of Leicefler answered tlat were to ma;c him party to the
queen my mifirefs. I said, lie will be far more par-ty, if he be in her place thro'
her death. -She would flay no longer, but said fle would not have a worse in his
mother's place. Andl liid, tell your king what good I have done for him in hold-
ing the crown oil hit, head since he was bornl, :indt that I miitnd to keep the leaue
tidtt now l;inds h.crwcil us, and if he lrc.ik it fliall be a double fault, andl with this
ntudded to have bid.it:n 11.i a itrcewi ; but v.e c *l'hcuit. AnAl 1 I(p'ak craving vj' lcr
thIllat her lil may be (fiarld for 15 day;; file refulcd. Sil Rob'. craved l or o(;ly
right days, file s.iid nut ltr an hout anild lo gcid her away. \'olr Inajeily l;e' .\v, I-,;ve,
dcli(vctcd all we hald for ossets, but ;ll is for inothing, for fin ad hemr courn l cl has ll
;. dcticminatlion that they Illiid to I.LIow'o forth and 1 Ice it comes rathecr cf It1 r

H coutrlti

council th.n heifelf, which I like the worse; for without doubt, fir, it flh.ll cut off
all friendlh;p yc had here. Altho it were that once they had meaned well to your
m.'jeilt , yct rem-mbring themlelves, that they have rnedled with your mother's blood,
good faith they cannot hope great good of yourfell, a thing in truth I am sorry for;
;further your majefly may perceive by this daft discourse of that I proponit, it thz-
had meaned well to your majesty, they had used it otherwile than they have done,
for reason has bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind something to fpcak
in this matter, because we look fhurly our letters shall be troucit by the way.

FoR that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their determination, altho'

the queen again and the earl of Leicester has desired to speak with me in particu-
lar; I mind not to lpeak, nor ihall not; but afluredly shall let all men fee that I in
particular was no ways tyed to England, but for the relfect of your majefly's service.
So albeit, at this time, I could not effectuate that I desired, yet my upright dealing
.in it shall be manifested to the world. We are, God willing, then to crave audi-
ence, where we mind to use sharply our inftruslions, which hitherto we have used
very calmly, for we can, for your honour's cause, fay no less for your majesty, than
the French ambassador has said for his master.

So I pray your majesty confider my upright dealing in your service, and not the

effcEt, for had it been double by any I might have here had credit, but being I
came only for that cause I will not my credit flall fcrve here to any further purpose.
I pray God preserve your majesty, and fend you a true and sincere friendship. From
London this I2th of Jan. 1586.

I understand the queen is to fend one of her own to your majesty.
To the right hon. my lord vice chancellor and secretary to his majesty,

from the master of Gray.

-thl Jan. T

O- Y lord, I fend you there lines with this inclosed to his majefly, whereby your

i ,9', an Ori- j.JL lord/hip shall understand how matters goes here. And before all things I
ginal in the pray your lordship move his majesty to refpedt my diligence, and not the effect in this
colle(l. of fir negotiation, for I swear if it had been for the crown of England to myself I could
A. Dick. Vol. do no more, and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for the world flall fee
A- fol. 17 that I loved England for his majefly's service only. I look shortly to find your

lordship friend as ye made promise, and by God I shall be to you if I can. W,.
Keith and I desired, if matters had gone well, to have run a course that your lord-
flip might have here been in credit and others disappointed, but now I will do for
you as for myself; which is to care for no credit here, for in conscience they mean
;iot honefily to the king our sovereign, and if they maiy, he will go the get his mo-
ther is gone or (hortly to go, therefore my lord without all kind of scruple 1 pray
you to advise him the best is not this way. They fay here, that it has been said
by one wvho heard it from you, that ye desired not the king and England to agree,
beccaulf it would rack the noblemen, and gave an example of it by king James the
fourt, I anfwcrcd in your name that I was afllred you never had fpokec it. Mr.
\Aichibald is the fpcaker of it, who I aflure your lordship has been a poison in this
nilatler, lor they lean very mickle to his opinion. He cares not, he fays, for at
.)lentlh the king will be fain to deal this way, either by fair means or neccflitv, io
that when he deals this course he is assurcd to be welcome; to set down all that i;

part

9,I

past of the like purpores,'it would consume more paper than I have here, so I defer
it to meeting. There is a new conspiracy alledged against the queen to have been
intended, for the French ambassador resident three of his men taken, but I think in
the end it shall prove nothing. IMr. Stafford, who is ambaffidor tor this queen in
France, is touched with it, his brother is taken here, always it has done this harm
in our negotiation, that all this council would not move this queen to medle with
the queen of Scotland's blood, till 'this invention was found forth. I remit all other
things to the inclosed. We minded to have sent to his majesty a discourse, which
we have set down of all our proceedings since our hither coming, but we are furelS
advertized that the bearer is to be trufFant by the way for our pacquets, so that we
dtfer it till our own coming; this I have put in a privy part betide the pacquet. We
Lhall I think take leave on Fryday the i3th day, where we mind exactly to follow
the rigour of our inftruftions, for it cannot stand with the king's honour that we
fay less then the French ambassador, which was, le roy mon maiftre ne peult moins
fair que fe refentir. So that about the 24th I think we {hall, God willing, be at
home, except that some flay come which we look not for. The queen and the earl
of Leicester has desired to speak with me. I refuled save in pretence of my col-
leagues, by reason I fee a determination which particular credit cannot help, and I
crave no credit but for that cause. It will please your lordship retire the inclosed
from his majesty and keep it. So after my service commended to yourself and bed-
fellow, I commit you to God. From London the 12th of Jan. i586.

To the king's majesty, from fir Robert Melvill.

'T may please your majesty, since the direction of our former letters, we had 20th Jan.
audience, and her majesty appeared to take our overtures in good part in presence isE6. An

of her council; albeit no offence would take place with them, having taken refolu- Origiiial in
tion to proceed with extremity, not the less it pleased her majesty to desire us to flay his o w halnd;
for two days on taking our leave, until the had advised upon our propolition; since In feco ii "
which time, her majefly is become more hard by Come letters (as we are informed) Vol. A. ibl.
has come from Scotland, making rome hope to believe that your majesty takes not tS.
this matter to heart, as we know the contrary in effect, and had of before removed
the like opinion out of her majesty's mind, which by sinister information was crc-
dited, their reports has hindred our commiflion, and abufdc this queen, fearing in
like manner we shall be stayed until answer come from Scotland by such person as
they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will be well enough known to all men
how heavily your majesty takes these proceedings to heart, the truth is, that they
have by these occasion so persuaded the queen, that it is like to hinder our ne.otia-
tion. As also Allynour Stewart is to be directed in their party, by our knowledge,
who has awantyt more of his credit, than I believe he may perform, and we willed
him to desist from this dealing, faying it does harm, and he is not meet for that purt
pose, remitting to your majcfty's. good direction to take order herein as we flall be
anlfwelable to your m;ajcfly's not to omit any point we have in charge, as the truth
is, the m.ifler of Grhlaye has behaved himifelf very rightly and dilcreetly in this
chlrge, and evil tayne with be divers in their parties who \oere of before his litiens.
WXV have been belhalding to the mcnilrals who has born us belt company, blt hlas inot
been troubled with others. WyVlzcric Kctile hath left icothing unlone tihat lie Ih;d in.

cli;r. re.

*ch-arge. As for maftcr Archibald he has promired at all times, to do his dewoyr,
wl.crcin le f.il, find tmue report made to your mnajefy, craving pardon of your ma-
jrfly that I have been so tedious, after I have killed your majesty's hand I humbly
take my leivc. Praying God to grant your majefly many good days and happy, in
whose prote&ion I commit your majesty at London, the 2cth of Jan. 1586.

S I R,

A L B E IT Master George has not been in commiflion, he is not inferior in his

frevice to any of us, as well by his g(od .dvice and diligent care he takes for the
.advancement of youi fIrvice, wherein we have not been a little furthered.

To the king's majesty, from the maoter of Gray and Sir Robert Melvill.

l Jnn. L E A S E it your majesty in the last audience we had, since our last advertize-
8 X5. An j ment by WTm. Murray, we find her majefly at the resuming our offers some-

orinail in thing mitigated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them, before we got our
tIe cl^i;ct. of leave, at our reasoning, certain of the council, namely my lord of Leicester, fir
Vir Aj. 1.- Christopher Haton, my lord Hunfdon, and my lord Hawart being present in the

,' ' chamber, gave little share of any great contentment to have her from her for-

mer resolution, now caffin in perplexity what flhe should do, always we left her in
that itate, and since have daily prefied conferrence with the whole council, which
to this hour we have not yet obtained. This day we have sent down to crave our
leave. The greatest hinder which our negotiation has found hitherto is a perfua-
'fin they have hcie that either your majefly deals fupeificially in this matter, or
that with time ye may be moved to digest it, which when with great difficulty we
had cxpugnit, we find a new that certain letters written to them of late from Scot-
land has found some place of credit with them in our contrare. So that resolving
now to clear them of that doubt by a special meflage, they have made choice of fir
Alexander Stewart to try your hignefs's meaning in it, and to persuade your majesty
to like of their proceedings, wherefrom no terror we can fay out unto him is able
to divert him, he has given out that Aie has credit with your majefiy, and that
he doubts not to help this matter at your highness's hand. If he come there that
*errand, we think your majefly will not oversee the great disgrace that his attempts
'shall give us here, if he be not tane order with before that be further heard, and if
so be that any other be direcled (as our intelligence gives us there shall) our humble
suit is to your nmajcfty, that it may please your highncfs to hear of us what we find
hete, and at \ hat point we leave this matter with her majesty, before that they find
:icLiIcicc, the caufcs whereof remitting to our private lcttcs. \Ve commit your
n.ijeify for the prcfenit to God's eternal protcflion. From London this 21ft of
J.it. 1586.

No. XV,
c?

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX.

ADDD ITIONA L
A P P E N D I X.

1 had no opportunity of feeing fiveral of the following papers, till those fJiects of the

history, to which they relat,, were printctd of. For this reason no references are
made to them there; but I have jisppied that deftc7 by marking the particular pas-
fages in the hj/lory which theyferve to illustrate.

No. XXXI. (Vol. I. p. 358. Line io.)
Account of the Sentence of divorce between the earl of Bothwell and lady

Jean Gordon his wife. From a manuscript belonging to Mr. David
Falconar, advocate. Fol. 455.
TU 7P 0 UN the 29 of Apryle 1567, before the richt hon. Mr. Robert Mait-

land dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward Henryson doctor in the laws, two of
the senators of the collece of juitice, MIr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alex-

ander Syme advocattis, commiflers of Ednr ; compeered Mr. Henry Kinroffe, pro-
curator for Jean Gourdoune counies of Bothwell, conflitute be her, for purfewing of
ane proces of divorcement, intcndit by her contra James erle Bothwel her husband
for adultry, committed be him with Befrie Craufurde, the pursuers servant for the
time; and ficklyke, for the f;.id cile, compeared Mr. Edmond Hay, who efter he
had pursued and craved the pursuer's procurator's oath de calumnia, if he had just
caus to purfcw the said acrtion, and obtained it, dcnyd the libell, and the said Mr.
Harrie took the morne, the lafl day of Apryle, to prove the fame pro pinma. 'lic
quhlilk day, havling produced Tome witnellcs, lie took thp next day, being the i of
May, to do faither diligence. Upon the quhilk i of Mady, lie produced foinc omoc
witneflcs, and rcnoliiccd farther prohatioune. After quhillk, he desired a term to Lc
allignedt to pr'rlluncc tfnlicnce. To whom the said conmmillhrs afligned Sattc rday
rieXI, ihe l of May, to pronounce ficItcnce tlierein, fccutlindinl l]linata ct probatal,
(jtqilk acccordingly W.is given that day in favor of the puIli.v'nr.

A the tie

th.1 ti ere wa; :allollcr proccs ilitcndit be the i I of' IBothwcll cc(nti:t

hii lady, for to have cti r imar alin ge dcclIrcd nuli, a'; being tcon tl:lattr c agaili thi' c.i-
nons, witlhout a difpe fl.itioni, and lie alil his ;lady being withlin (t'gre'res (c dll(rrild, \ i/.
ftldis a kin, land thal t wylf for Cxpcding of this ip (cs, thcte.1 \\ .1s a c;i( i litio'iii
*i?;iuitit to tile ; chbiflihop of St. A ndrois to cognuce arnd (deei

c itilIC il :lt] i()I. lbifl,);i

I l)lutkeld, William biflllop of Dunblanc, Mlr. Andro C;iltfuifrl channI inl ( ;i:!-
VoL., II. Z z g ,

gow, and pa. son of Egelfllamne, Mr. Alexander Creichtoun, and iMr. George Cook
cha.ncellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne Manderflonne chanon ill Dunbar and pre-
bi-ndar of -'eltoilne, or any alle ,f them. This commiflione is datit 27 Aprile

567, was prtfented to two of the raids commiflioners, viz. \Ir. Andr. Cra ;surd
and Mr. John Manderftoune on Sattcrday 3 May, by Mr. Thomas Illepburnc p.u lfo
ot Auldh.tiifocks, procuiator for the eric of Bothwell, who accepted the dieega-
tioune, and gave out their citation by precept, direcled, Decano Chriftianitates de
FIldingtone, nec non vicano feu curato ccle. parochie de Crcichtounc, feu cuicunq;
aiteri cappellano debite requiiitis, ser funmoning at the said eries iilktticc, both of
the ladys personally if lhe could be had, or otherways at the paroCche knI k of Creich-
toune the time of fervicc, or at her dwelling place before witnefies, primo, fccundo,
tc tio ct peremptorie, unico tainen contextu protuplice edico. And likewvays to be
witneiles in the said matter, Alex. biflop of Galloway, who did marry the iaid erle
and his lad), in Halercud-houfe kirk, in Feb. 1565, fir John Bannatyne of Auch-
noule justice clerk, Mr. Robert Crcichtoun of Elliot the queen's advocate, Mr. Da-
vid Chalmers provost of Creichtoun and chancellor of Ross, Michael-- abbot
of M\lelrols, and to compcar before the said judges, or any one of them in St. Geils
kirk in Edt. on MIonday the 5 of May, be thamfelves or their procurators. Upon
the said 5 day, Mir. John Manderfioun, one of the juges delegat only being pre-
Lcnt, compeared the fame procurators for both the parties that were in the former

Two words in proces, Mr. Edm-ond Hay ( articulatlie ) and some of the wit-
the parenthe- nefles summoned produced, and received for proving of the fame. The said procu-
ii illegible. rator renounced farder probatioune, and the judge afligned the morne, the 6th of

May, ad publicandum produfta, nempe depofitioncs ipforum teflium. The qullilk
day, poll publicatas dcpofitiones pradiaas, Mr. Hen. Kinrofli, procurator for the
lady, intfanter objecit objealiones juris generaliter, contra pro ducae, infuper re-
nunciavit ulteriori defenfioni ; proinde conclufa de confenfu procuratorum hinc inde
caufa, judex praedic'ts fatuit craftinum diem pro termina, ad pronunciandam fuam
fententiam dcfinituram, ex deduclis coram eo, in prefenti caufa et proceffa. Con-
form hereunto, on Wednesday the 7th of May, the said judge gave out, his fen-
tence in favour of the crle, declaring the marriage to be, and to have been null front
the beginning, in refpeSt of their contingence in blood, which hindered their lavw-
ful marriage without a dispensation obtained of befoir.

No. XXXII. (Vol. I. p. 40I.) Line X16

QOeen Mary to Queen Elizabeth.

MAt D A M,

,tit.l.ih.Cal. / IIthloull, the ncccflity of my cause (which maketh me to be importune to you)

'. * A Co)p', -', do m.tike C to ytht I a out of

that

I e way; yet such as have not lly
';.1 1 ll" p*l7 .lloun, inor ilt rc'fplcs whclcof you arc persuaded, will think that I do as my c.ifc

*! ll.lltlll !I rC uiic. ,i. t;id:n, 1 hlivc not atcufcd you, neither in words, nor in thought,

to have lifed youllrl'c evil towardls mc. And I believe, that you have no wallt ol

otodl tutde t ittding, t) kLeep you florn pcrlwafion againlft your natural good in]Ii-
Ji.tiion. Bu1t inll L thie lln tlie I can't chufe (having my clnfies) but peCICive \Cry
vil FrtLlt;ic(: i ll N .v lluttcrs, fne rniy comiing hither. I thought thalt had flil-
ltici-ntly vdlicu.olid i[Lnto.) you the difcomnilditics, whichl this delay brillgtll ullto

ig:

me. And especially that they think, in this inext month as Au.guf, to h ,ld a par-
liament aaainft me an all-my fervan-s. And in the meanl time, I anl itaicd hi.l-,
and yet will you, that I should put myl)'lf forther inio your country, (wiriiut ic--
in l you) and remove me further from mine; ani there do me this dillionotir , at the
req..cft of my rebels, as to ftnd commiflioners to hear them against me, r.s vou v.'old
do to a mere subj ct, and not hear me b mouth. Now, madam, I have proimiftd
yiu to c(ime to you, and having there made my moan and complaint of tilce re-
bels, and they coming thither, nt as pofi fT,)rs, but as fubjedcs, to antvfWr.
would have brmought you to hear my jullificati n of that which they have falflv ect
furth auainft me, and if I could not purge mylelf thercof, you might thin dilclhar;e
your hands of in) cauies, and let me go for such as I am. But to do as you fay, it
I were culpa'lc 1 would be better advis'd ; but being not so, I can't accept this dli-
honour at their hands, that being in potlfion they will come and accule me beforc
)our cornmimlioiers, whereof I can't like: And feeing you think it to be aoainlt
your honour and coilignage to do otherwie, I belcech you that you will nor be
mine enemy, untill you may fee how I can discharge mylelf every way. And to
fuffcr me to go into France, where I have a dowry to maintain me ; or at the leafl
to go into Scotland, with aflurance that if there come any ftranigcrs thither, I will
bind myself tfr their return without any prejudice to you, or if it pleis you not to
do thus, I protest that I will not impute it to falfhood, if I receive itrantgers in my
country, without making you any other discharge for it. Do with my body as you
will, the honour or blame fiall be yours. For I had rather die here, and that my
fa.ithful servants may be succoured (tho' you wou'd not To) by ftiangcrs, than ts
fiffcr them to be utterly undone, upon hope to receive, in time to come, particular
commodity. There be many thins to move me to fear that I shall have to do, in
this country with others, than with you. But forasmuch as nothing hath followed
upon my last moan, I hold my peace, happen what may happ. I have as lees to
abide r my fortune, as to seek it, and not find it. Further, it pleated you to give
licence to my fubjets to go and come. This hath been refused by my lord Scroop
and Mr. Knolls (as they ahy) by your commandment, because I would not depart
hence to your charge, untill I had anfwver of this letter, tho' I shewed them that voui
required my answer, upon the two points, contained in your letter.

THE one is to let you briefly understand, I am come to you to make my moan

to you, the which being heard, I would declare unto you mine innocency, and then
require your aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan and complaint t(
God, that I am not heard in my just quarrel, and to appeal to other princes to have
rcfpec thereunto, as my cafe requireth ; and to you, madam, first of all, when you
fliall have examined your conlciencc before him, and have him for witnes.--
And the other, which is to come urther into your country, and not to come to
)our prelence, I will eflecmr that as in; favour, but will take it for the contrary,
obeying it as a thing forced. In the mc.in time, I bclcch you, to rect in to me
my lord l-Ierries, for i c.i't be without him, having none of may counfll here, and
:1lfo to susser me, if it plc.ll you, without furlher delay, to dclpart hence wihtilhe--
soever it be out of this cotlltry. 1 :in lilre you will not de(n)y me thiis tljnple r, tqlult
for yor honour's ifkec, feeiing it dotli not plea.lc )ou to tile )'our nlaturil ;,ooldilcli
towards me otlherwlif, a:nd (ceing that (o' mine owun a;eordl I :1 ai conII hither , let
tie depart again, wilith yours. Alld if God permit my cauICb to fiCCCed well, 1

Z 2 11hll

9.5

shall be b cund to vou for it; and happening otherwise, yet I can't blame you. As
for my lond F'lemijig, ifeeing that upon my credit you have fiufftred him to go home
to h;s iho;le, I wr.lrant you he liall pais no fu.rther, but shall return when it flial!.
Pcbip cl'?.r pleale you. I tlhat you trust me, I will not (to die for it) deceive you. Bu froma

Dumbarton I an!fer nor, when my L. Fleeming fiall be in the Tower. For thes
which are within it, will not forbear to receive succour, if I don't aflure them of
yours ; no, tho' you would charg me withal, for I have left them in charge, to
have more relpec to my servants and to my estate, than to my life. Good sifter be
of another mind, win the heart, and all shall be yours, and at your commandment.
1 thought to satisfy you wholly, if I might have seen you. Alas ! do not as the
serpent, that {toppeth his hearing, for I am no inchanter, but your filler, and natural
cousin. If Caesar had not disdained to hear or read the complaint of an advertiser,
lie had not so died ; why should princes ears be stopped feeing that they are painted
o loing? IMeaning that they should hear all and be well advised, before they an-
twcr, I am not of the natule of the basilisk, and less of the chamelion, to turn
you to my likeness, and tho' I flhould be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you.
are fufficicitly armed with coni;lncy and with justice, which I require of God, who
give you grace to use it well with long and happy life. From Carlile, the 5th of
July, 1568.

No. XXXIII. (Vol. I .

p. 403. Line 12.)
A letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop, and fir F. Knollis,

September 3d, 1568.

Cott. I.ib. Ri , Y lords, pleafit your honourable lordships, I am informit by James Borth-
t a!. C. an 0- jVM/ wick, lately come from the queen's majesty your foverane, that it is fchawin
r:in;il in his to her highness, I fhuld have ridden in Crawfurdmure, fen my last cuming into this
coxn han!. realm, upon the earl of Murray's dependants. And that I fuld have caulit, or been

ofcounlali to Scottificn to have ridden in Ingland, to flay or fpulzie her majelly's
fuhjects.

M1\ lords, I thought it right needful because your lordship's is, be your foverane

commanded to attend upon the queen's majefly my mistress, lo having daily accef;b
in thir matters, to declare upon the truth; humbly desiring that your lordihip's will,
for God's caufc, cerrificate the queen your foverane the famc.

As God lives, 1 have neither consented, nor any wife had knowledge of ony

Scottifnian's ryding, in England, to do the fubjec's thereof hurt in bodies or goods,
clne the siege of Leith; and as I understand it fliall be found true, that gifony sic
);Inn hurt he done, it is by the queen my fovercign's difoi , dicnts, and that I have
.,t l(iicn nor hurt no Scottiflmnan, nor commanded any hurt to be done to themn,
t, n : y comning from the queen's majefly of England, it is well kcnd, for that never
:,(: wvill comp)!.in of omie.

1 .it'l ( loe lotnic goodl to Cl awfurdmllure nIor ever the ecrill of I\/Ilrra! lias lollr,

.,, ill hi loath fl to do them any hatrm than h( wvill. Ixcept the qeicc,';; m;i-
j= il y ) ti so vcrcirnt, coim 11 d lic ialfi' reports to he tl yit, (quelc(l thll i:; allo t l-
d'i .i 1iM11('ntit tl.iliting, her griace fiell be tl blit, and t) lie the hearIts of tluc n.c:-

01· .

here, quhcm of sic report fall be made, that baith would serve hir, and may, bet-
ter than they unworthy liais.

MY lords, I understand the queen's majesty your sovereign is not contented of

this bruit, that there (hould ony Frenchman come in this realm, with the duke of
Chattlerault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way the cou nall of their cuming, nor
has no sic certainty thereof, as I hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's ma-
icily your bvecrign. And gif I might as well fay it, as it is true indeed, her grace
ieif is all the wyitr, and the counfall that will never let her take order with my niaif-
trefs cause. lor that our foverei-.n havand her majefly's proilif;c, be writing, of
luis, friendfllip, and afliftance gif need had so requirit, entelit that realm, upoIl
the 16 day of Mlay, fen that time the queen's majetly has commanded me divcrie
times to declare she would accept her cause, and do for her, and to put her in
peaceable pofTcflion of this realme, and when I required of her majctlv, in my maif-
trefs name, that her highness wold either do for her, (as her special trust was fhl
wold) according to her former promises, or othlerwilc give her counfal wold not con-
sent, (as I {how her grace I sand diverse repugnant) then th-t flhe would permit her
to pals in France, or to some other prince to seek support, or failing hereof, (quhilk
was agains all re.afn) that flie would permit her to return in her awin countrie, in
sic fenipil manner as flie came out of ir, and said to her majesty ane of thir, of her
honour, would not be refufit, fecand that fle was comed in her realm upon her
wiitings and promises of fiic'ie.fiip. And ficklike, 1 said to her highness, gif my
maitirefs had the li Pe proii of her nobility and edlate, as (he had of her flf, I
thotild have reprovit them highly, gif thay had not condefcendit to one of thir three,
and io I fay, and ob I write, that in the warld it filall be mailt reprehend hle, gif
this promise taketh not other good eifec, nor yet it does. Notwith lntding, I g.t
glud anficr of th;r promi!is of friciniilLip made to my sovereign, and to put h-r
grace in this her a: in countrie peaceable, we have fund the contrary working by
Arr. Miiddlemorc direccit trom her highinefls to flay the armny that cuift down cir
lioufes. And alfua, in the preceding of this late pretend t parliament, promi.l
twenty days before the time to myticf to have caused it been difichargit. And vy[c
contrary to this p:omifc, have they made their pretendit manner of folrfluliur of
3t men of guid rclputation, billops, abbotis, and barronis, obedient subjects to our
iuvercign, only for her caife.
THEY have al'b difiponit, frn our sovereign's ca.fe was taken upon lhand be the

queen's majicly of that rcalin, aln l liulrdi thouml nd pounlds Scots worith of her awvin
true fuihject gceir, uindeir thi color of their la w, groundit upon tiheir fallc, treason-
able, tfowin, aulthority.

'SHE murders, tli opppr ftios, the bu niings, the ravifling of woienii, th(e dc-
tfruction of policy, both cccl ciiallical and temnipioral, in this mnean ti:le, as in my
former wiitings I l idl it wa';i l.in.itablC to only jiriftian man to hear of, cxccle
G'd i sfil'. cc, thc |I '.'lliioi of tl ci';irll of .[clfis Chris pofcflt be voutr prince,
c, iil.,,il ;aitl c.

I 1C :, be 1;,i i n i i !it, nor the auIl inalntily that h;as lfn; d b)tw ; ixt

til retali1., 111 ,i1 <'t 1:v \

iii, t lil .' , \I.ill d ubit in this aiti.c\ , and tll iir l rlocC eedinl

.
} t'ti:. mx i 1 t in i.l',l ' l'.i. ;,::', " l:[.

T'.'(.\', .\ I 1 ", ;.',i tlc (i t'.'ii's majcfly' of thl t re.-lm, u lpon lqul:ais prcmiiic an1

hiltu r

ni y i]) i .i ' t'il, a.nit ti l cre, ais 1 i):i.' fCtid, wil11 I .'ve ill tie I CrLcnchli Vtiiiri's,

;*A t l'',il 'll p ,-.t '% of tiil,:

.,s (iil l o; a;11o1,i;. tll n is ove r iI i 'ilt: Ol lI.m itl tll.-
r.e tililit, and p';.ii!y, tic td [II; to h llit 1 id tiutie cit!ilu;m ol liil:tlid a.in. Sl . ti., .,

Ili.! 1 ci It.

qukerein be a word pronmif truth was observed, promiiL, in tihe name of the eter-
nal God, and upon the high honour of that nobili and princely b'ude of the kings
of ngland, quhexcof she is delcendit, and prefintly wears the diadem, that ihe wlil
putr ins mail r:is in her awin country, and caule her as queen thereof in her autho-
rity and iticngthl to be obe)it, and to do the fame will appoint an certain day v.ith-
ii) two miunthi, at the farthell, as we underfiand this to be our weill, fua will
wv.c, or the maihl part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the Frenchmen, and their
c.il French phra!es rogidder. And therefore, and fior the true perpetual friendship
of that rceal l, will condition, and for our part, with the grace of Alniighity God,
k:ep feic heads and conditions of agreementc, as nolec adl v/iCe men can condelcen.l
u;pon, for tile weill of this haill illand. As 1 live been partlings declaring to tlie
queen your fovcreign, quhilk I fliew to your lordfiips dllfis, both in religion, in
the lpiiifhiment of the earle Bothwile, for tile qucen's last husband's slaughter, and
1;-r a mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

I)ouBTLEss, my lords, without that, we may find sic time and friendful work-

ingi, as may gif us occasion baith to forgctt iMiddlemore, and this late pretendit par-
li.nenCt, we will turn the leaf, leavin'g our sovereign agains our will to reft whele
file is, under the promise of si iendflip. As I have baith said, and will ever affirm,

:made be )our sovereign, quhilk was only cause of her graces coining in that realnmc,

and seek the help and moyen of French, or Spaniih, till cxpulfe this treasonable
and fille pictendit authority, qtihilk means to reign above us.

MY5Iv lords, I dtfire your lordfniips conridcr, that it is he, that mairt desires the

nmiity betwixt InElanld and Scotland to continue, and of a poor man belt cause has,
tha.t writs this.

1RMy brother, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in your lordfiips commun-

ing with him, it appcarit to him, your mind was we fliold susser the earl of Mur-
ray to work, altho' it were agains reason to us, and complain thereof to the queen's
majcfly, and her highness wald fee it refornmit. My lords, her majesty will be over
mcikle trounlit to reform the wranges we have fuftainit already. For I am sure,
gif reason and juRtice may have place, our maiftrefs, and we her fubjeas, have re-
ccivcd cxprefs wrang, far above two hundred thousand pounds fPerling, in the time
of this umnhappy government, secing the reformation of fa great causes, comes, now
a days, so flowlie, and the ungodly law of oblivion in fie matters so meikle pradis'd
I think, nowther for the quccn's honour, nor our weill, your lordflips would fua
m;ean, nor that it is good to us to follow it. And that ye will give your sovereign
tic advcrtifement thereof, as your good wisd(oms fliall find in this cause meet. It
will be true and fricndful working for us, indeed, and nowther French phrafcs, nor
l)a;:liing, nid nlil nin little other eli'ca, that will cause us to hold away the F'rcnch-
ien. 'lhis is plainly written, and 1 dcliie your loidfilips plain answer, for in
liutlh and plaintiilic; langlift continues gud friendlhip, quhilc in this matter I pray
C(od mnly lang continue, and have your lordnfips in his keeping. OfF Drurificis,
the 3d day of September 1 568.

Your lordfhlips at my power

to commniand lciull

II E R R 1 S.
9n

Q een Mary to Q( Elizabeth.
IMY /A DAM E ma bonne Coeur. J'av rc!'eu de vos lcttres, d'unc mefmne d.tc; -:7.'/; i6S.

1 'une, ou vous faites m'.ntion de i' xcufe de MIonfl. dc Murra pour tciir ion ' oit L h

Dietendu parlement, qui ne icmble Hien fioid, pour obtcnir plus de t Alleiance qucje . ;.- 1. I:" 0-
n'eftois pcrfuadee n'avoir par voilre promnefe, quaiit a n'ofcr donner conminiion de tiginai
vcnir fans un parlement pour leur peu de nombre de noblefe alors, je vous re!pons,
qu'ils n'ont que trois ou quatre d'avanlagc, qui rulielt aufil bien clit lcur opinion
hors de parlement, qui n'a edie tenu t.ant pour cette ce'cJ-, mais pour faire ce qu'ex-
preflCment nous avions requis ectre cnqieclhles, qui eci ]a forfaliture de mcs fiuibjcis
pour m'avoir eltds fidelles, cc que jc mi'alilrois, jurques a hicr, avoir eu en pronel e
dc vous, par la lettre ecJite a mi lord Scrup c AIaiftrc Kioleis vous induire a ire
contre culx, voire, a les enfayre relsntir; toutefois je vois que jc l'ay mal pris, j'en
fuis plus marrie, pour ce que fur voetr lettre qu'il me montrerent, ct leur parole, je
l'ay si divulguement afFuray que pour vengrance que j'en defirafle, si non metrre dif-
ference entre leur faux deportemens, et les miens fincercs. Da;:s voiire lettre auni
datce du ilom d'Aouft, vous metties ces mots. ' I thinkl yzur adveret part', upoln
" my sundry former advices, will hold no parliament, at all; and if they do, it

fliall be only in form of an aflembly, to accord whom to fend into this realm,

' and in what fort; for otherwise, if they ihall proceed in manner of a parliament,
"C with any act of judgement against any person, I shall not, in any wi.c, allow
" thereof; and if they fliall be lo overfien, then you may think the fame to be

of no other moment, than the former procedures: and by such their rafln man-

" ner of proceeding, they ilall molt prejudice thcmrelves; and be afiured to iuid
" me ready to condemn them, in their doingr." Sur quoy, j'ay contrcmanulid mes
ferviteurs, les failant retirer, fouffriant felon volire commandemint d'ctre fauilmeni
nommos traitres, par cculx, qui Ie font de vray ; ct encore d'etre provoques par
efcar:nons dies, et par prinres de mes gens et lettres, et au contraire vous etes in-
;ormee que mcs subjects one cvahis les voltres, Madame qui a fait ce rapport n'ecf pas
hornme de bien, car laird Serford et son fils font et ont eftes ces rebelles dcleuis Ic
commencement; enquircs vous, s'ils n'eitoient a Donfris aveques culx, j'avois ofiri
refpondre de fa frontiere, ce qui me silt refuse, cc qui m'endevroit aflcs dclelfarger,
neanmoins, pour vous faire prcuve de ma fidelitc, et de ]cur fallitc, s'il vous me faytc
donncr ]e nom dcs coulpablcs, et me fortifier, jc commanderay mes Cubjcets les pour-
fuivre, ou {i vous voules que cc obit les voitrcs, les miens leur averont; jc vous
prie rn'en miander voltie volontitcl a rcite ces filbjecis fidelles foront reiponlables a
tout cc que lcur sera mis iu les contre vous, ni les vtoltes, ni les rebellcs, defiiuis que
me confeillatcs Ics faire retirer. Quant aux l rancois, j'efccivis quc i'on ml'ci fiL
nulle pourfuite, car j'efpcrois tant cn vous, que jc n'en aurois bfoign',--ic ne Ctcu
si Ic did aura en mcs lettres mais, je vous jure docvant )ieu iquc jc ie r icfy clihof du
mondc de lcur venue, que cc que m'en aves man(da3', ni n'cn ;i oui de l'raice mot
du mondc, et ne Ic puis croi e pour cel t occasion, ct ii ils si ront, c'clt fiiis mon fccu
ni conlentcmcent. I'orquoy jc vous filpplie niC mi colldamiine fins im'o ire, car je
liis prcit de teliti tout ce (1lic j. ;' olliL ;l :. Mlelet Knolcis, ct vous alliir( HIe voJli:
amitc, (l'il vous plcfl ni'oli' it , s'rl ci;'ue

o ;vln l tt t tlli s ls

I cs cho! s d(u liolid(c, q]l:!il.

France fiCe vit lit poIu pielier lcur r'etoul a Ct l.c cdllition, (qu pll'li uics aIllaies Ce
icii, ell fouel l

ri ie

, ccillt

oneC :alli, 11o :i i l is

sn; nl:i:i, uIn e (C

:W(C (Iho ule

me icilile conl ule, j'ay tint LI'Clle mi; qit'oni (ie

o ol illc, ]1.t, (tille n1 e ))oi i :lnlt tvoix'
1ar parolll, toutes mcsC atlnt s vou 'i I'llt defrLuil;C';, c t I'.d ic i. it I.I)OI tie,' : p.ir Iqu(ii

8 .1

93

ii me'ft impoflible de m'affurer de vous, pour les manteries qu'on vous a fait, pour
deftruire voftre bonne volonte de moy; par quoy je defirerois bien avoir ce bien vous
fairc entendre ma finceie et bonne affiction, laquelle je ne puis si bien defcrire, que
me' enemis a tort ne ladecolore. Ma bonne foeur, gagnes moy; envoyes moyquerir,
I.'entres en jaioufie pour faulx raports de celle qui me desire que votre bonne grace
jc me rcmettray fur Mester Knoleis a qui je me fuis librement defcouverte, et apres
vous axoir baisde les mains, je prieray Dieu vous donner en fante, longue et heu-
rcuCf vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, je n'efpere partir, qu'aveques voftre
bonne grace, qum yque les menteurs mentent. Ce 26 d'Aouft.

No. XV. (Vol. II. p. 68. Line 9.)

Letter of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3, I8S-I.

S I R,

Cotr. Iib. T -IAV E received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your letter of the 25th of
=Calig. C. C. . the last directed unto his lordship, containing a report of your negotiation with

the king and his council, in your second audience, wherewith having made her
majelty acquainte(, file seered lomcwtlat to 7milike, that you fiould so long def,, t?
a'i'a/i the ci,ENargemNent of Empedoclcs But I made anfwcr in your behalf, that I
thou lit you w cie direitcd by the ad. ice of the *aid Empedocles f.-iendls, in the fol-
liciting of that cause, who knew what time was fittest for you to take to deal there-
in, with mIst effe-ct, and b.'fi fuccels, wi'h which answer, her majesty did in tle
end ret very weil 'atisfed, touching that point.

Your. puttingl of us in hope that D'Aubigny might cafily be won at her majesty's

devotion, was at firlt interprrted to have been ironic spoke by you. But fiice it
Ieenieth you insist upon it, I could wish you were otherwise persuaded of the man,
or at left kept that opinion to youriezl, for confidering the end and purpose of his
conilng ilto Scotl.ind, as may be mciny ways sufficiently proved, was only to advance
the queen's liberty, and reception into that governlment, to overthrow religion, and
to procure a foreign match withV illcnarius, wlierein the inclosed copy, which you may
nilc to good purpose there, fihill partly give you some light; there is no man here can
be pcrluaded tnat he will change his purpose, for so fmrill advantage, as he is likely
to find by it. and therefore you fliall d(i well to forbear to harp any more upon that
Itr-ion, ;is I h lve already written to you. 'TFhe prince of ()railge fendinrg, fear
will not be in time that it many do any good ; for befidcs that thele people are il
thcemilci'ec flow in tit i rc; flutiols?, therl owiln afhlils rc, lit pirecenl, to great, their
sit(e i o (oiitlifd, alnd thc rincet's ailtiior ity lo fmailll, tllat hle cannot so flon take or-
dlr in it; and yet for miinc ovwni pint, I hliie niot been negligl.nt or carclcf, iln tilm
nlatrelt, hlavyin:, mlore Ih:Illn lrci( weeks pli,, (clt one llloull It, fromI whoill ICVil-
til ; i 1 d(1, 'et hcar notling. 'I'hec ltcers, you defiie fliould be writtt n thitlcr I v
thle 1 c-O'l miniiliiiirs, I llive ivelln iotrde to r\'l. KillillgItw to pioCuei, \xli, 1
dtlIblt no'i, \vi I (1 aicllly pcrl'Cill it, sI) th.it, I 1h1,: I lh;11 Ih.hve thlei n to Ifctd you Ii)
the next. And io I conilit you to (,o.. At \\;l itClb., thli ild of Febriu) 15.

Y0our very ,ving, cotili and Cor'nt,

FR A. W\ A LS IN G I A T1.

'71;i ]' t
1/ r I s /ln ,l i::;, l, a.,l in joint' parls r's it 7'0rol,' ill tv/il,/'i s n,(l I'xi/,tli/os'l / '

, ,,I r ,.il. /l,'y l', 'i rs i.in,/,,j/oad li'11o t;2i, /

I)' / i'c','t ills t/ ' ki, 'g' $, 'i,
J)' l t1o'l, ;1,y is .iar,'I.d bitus u- !. o.

3 Feb. i5,o.
Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given, and in time to be bet-

ter manifested, being now thought meet to be in convenient: irt tulJi,
and laid against D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing the king, the nibi-
lity, and that sl-ate.
T I R S T, it hath been informed, by credible means, that D'Aubigny was privy Cot. Lib

and acquainted with la Navc the king's mother's cfcretary, coming into Scot- C: liZ. C 6.

land, and of his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the king, to think and lA (;:iginal.
efteein it an evil prefidcnt for princes, that fubjcdts might have power to deprive
their l.i vful sovereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded, by any mcan,
to defeat him, either of the present government of that realm, or yet of the pofltl-
lion of the crown and inheritance thereof, but rather to aflure the fame to hil;
and that for the accompliflment of that affirance, the kine flhould have been ad-
ified and drawn to have governed, for some filorr time, as prince, cal;ing U'Auli-'igiv
to rule .s governor of the prince, by commriffion fiom the queen his mother, nriill
the king's enemies were fupprclled ; after which time, D'AubignYy should have
power given to ellabliflh and resign that kinzdom to the king, by his mother's volun-
tary consent, whereby all such, as had before been in action against the queen or
her authority, miiht be brought to fiand in the kiing's mercy. And f.r that the
king might live in more surety, D'Aubigny should be declared both second pei son
in fucceliion of that clown, and also lieutenant gener: l of Scotland, and that )'AUt-
bigny, before his departure out of France, received conmillion fronl tlic King's
mother to thcefl'ec's remcmbrcd, or near the fame. That in this bchilf he had con-
ference with the bifiops of Glasgow, and RoTs, and viwh fir [ames Baford, with
which persons, and with the duke of Guise, he had and hath frcquent intelligence,
and by fir Jamcs Baford he was adviscd to confer with the lord Johl Hamilton
before his repair into Scotland, whereunto he agreed, and yet aftertwards he fcnt
one John Hamilton to the said lord John to cxcufe him in this part, alledging, that
lie did forbear to come to him, left thereby he fmould mair or rinder catle cffic :
to be executed by him in Scotl.inJ.

TATxr before his coming into that realm, the nobility and counity were

l \C'l

(quicted and unitcd in good concord, rwih ' rcat love betwixt the king alll nobilit ,
and aniongif the noblclie, but he ath both o drawnn thli kilg again ft llndry of tli
chiefelt ofl his nobilit, that hale been moit read)', and hase c :,,endcd theirl blood
aind pr fl(ii s to prrelrve reli:.ion, ;and dtifend the kling's pei lii, his got el nioclt
:Ind eflatc, a;ld all i hath given occ;afioll'i of grcat i'ilp-icioIis anl oflfcnce to be ci-
gcndered betwixt the Iing and lls nobilit and cp y itl h luch a;s hive LbciC
.n ailtioln ;gainlfl the Linlg's llother, ;lldl hur autholit)', \vlio Liy foicc and meanls (,!
the laiid comlnillion and itratlicc, filotild have been brought into nmorl' dat)geroi..
condition ; nd whlo allo may findi thlleiclves in no iniall perril, swhles lhe lpollsit,
the kin!'s car, abufieth lis prelence, andlc holdcth fl tl U1 Lc pri icip.lil kkcV alwd
Jirt.s ( f h

1 rea:lilc, as; he prcicntly cnjoycth.

Vel. 1 .
l

a a

T' II.' ':'

THAT he hath drawn the king, not only to forget the great benefits done to him

and his realm, by the queen's majesty of England, hut albo to requite the fame with
tfidrly signs of great uintiiankftilnefs, and wounding tieriewith the honour of her
rliClitv, :and thereby hath adventured to shake the happy amity long time continued
ber;vwixt thoe i princes.

A\ND whereas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle letters and good offers, to

have passId, and been done betwi-,t them: In which rcfpedt, the king and council
having resolvcd to vrite to her majcfty, for her highncfs' better fatisfadcion in the
Lite ilreotiation of Mlr. Alexander lHumic of Northbcrwick, had given order to the
kii 's tccrta ry to fralme that lettcr: HI-e mindigl to break the bond of amity in
,lnider, willed the ierctary to be lure that nothing flioul be inserted in that let-
e-h, ulih-c!by tle kifit frotuld crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby to cut
ci' '. lul viig coulteiucs bcetwixt them, as by the dc laration of tile (aid secretary
ir,. '; bec bcter learned, and thereupon further approved.

''!A'lT utder the hope and encouragement of D'Aubigny's protelion, Alexan-

dete Iig prcfulimcd with that boldners to make his lewd haraDgue, and by his means
hath ilitllc to escaped chaflifement an] correction, due for his offence.

'IHAT fir James Baford, condemned of the flaughtcr of the King's father, hath

been called into the realm by Lennox, without the privity of the king. A.nd
whercas the fail fir James found in a green velvet dcfk, late the earl of 1Bothweli's,
and saw, and had in his hands the principal band of the conspirators in that mur-
der, and can becf declare and witness who were authors and executors or the fame;
he i, dllawn bIy Lennox to fupprcfs the truth, and to accuse such as he hinifelf
knou eti to be innocent; and as by order of law, will be so found, if they may
have due trial, which, contrary to all juliice, is by Lennox means denied.

T'/s is i! , clnarge againji D'Auii,'y, i,,rnticned in the firegoing letter by JKt,,/inghi.z ;
:'!t ij LB'idl t/'ey mean /fir James Batur.

No. XVI. (Vol. II. p. 102. Line 18.)
The Scottifi queen's offers upon the effeLt of lier liberty propounded by

her lecretary Naw, NoventLm r 1i84.

('ott I ib. r II r lucn mny miftrcef being once well af'rcd of your majefly's anitv,,

(: .! _'V'. ' i . t'

_ J i .. declare openly tli.it s!i v.ill (as it is fincercly hecr mca nin i )

i -aritly
A -.';. rto ),iin iunto your nmaj(fi(y, and t.) tiec faIme to ) icl :Ind )be:r the chief honour and

ric['tcd, bcl)io all oiier kings andi plinccs iln Chrill[endoim.

.. .11 vlwill Iwe;.il, land lprotcLt filolmnly, ;a hlncre flc(oretlfllncf; of all vwrronts

wlieh li si mtay lCtc.il t,, have b(eni done unto her inl this rcalmn, and will never, 111
a: y I' rit ot nier ht xvl.a tlC tvr, fll:i-w oil'nctC fior tire f.1rie.

r

:. iSillt. \ill iravow a a. -i:mu i,'lct :;, as v iell in httr own pirticular n imi , a:)

;l ,i l i .r

i rt ct l t1)s riel ,1th rs du ic I t diri:'I ,

I i '

if i1 i lr v.I , your Fr , jdiy

sr jifl' , ti :r,

i 1t ilV','l tiLl
< t.'tieI ol !',, i Id.

4, A4.:.
5

4. AND consequently will renounce, as well for herself, as for her said heirs, all

rights and pretences which she may claim to the crown of England, during your
majesty's life, and other prejudice.

5. SHE will revoke all acts and shews, by her heretofore made, of pretence to

this said crown to the prejudice of your majesty, as may be the taking of the arms
and flile of queen of England, by the commandment of king Francis her late lo:d
and husband.

6. SHE will renounce the pope's bull, for so much as may be expounded to turn

in her favour, and for her behoof, touching the deprivation of your majesty, and will
declare that she will never help and serve herself with it.

7. SHE will not prosecute, during your majesty's life, by open force or other-

ways, any publick declaration of her right in the fuccefion of this realm, so as
secret assurance be given unto her, or at the leais publick promise, that no deciding,
thereof shall be made in the prejudice of her, or of the king her son, during your
majefly's life, nor after your decease, untill such time as they have been heard there-
upon, in publikc, free, and general assembly of the parliament of the said realm.

8. SHE will not practice, directly or indirectly, with any of your majesty's sub-

jecs, neither within nor out of your realm, any thing tending to war, civil or so-
reign, againfl your majesty and your estate, be it under pretext of religion, or for
civil and politick government.

9. SHE will not maintain or support any of your fubjecEs declared rebels, and
convicLed of treason againfi you.

o1. SHE will enter into the aifociation, which was flcwed her at Wingfield for

the surety of your majesty's life, so as there be mended or right expricated some
clauses, which I will {hew to your majesty, when I shall have the copy thereof, as I
have before time required.

1 . SHE will not treat with foreign kings and princes, for any war or trouble

against this ifate, and will renounce, from this time, all enterprises made or to be
made in her favour for that refpet.

12. FURTHERMORE, this realm being aflailed by any civil or foreign war, she

will take part with your majesty, and will aflift you in your defence with all her
forces and means, depending of herself, and with all her fiiends of Christendom.

13. AND to that effecc, for the mutual defence and maintenance of your majefly,

and the two realms of this isle, fle will enter with your majesty in a league dtcfci-
five as flall be more particularly advised, and will pcrfwadc as much as in her, the
king her son to do the like. The leagues with all parts abroad rem.iiiingri firm, :ind
efpccially the antient league betwccn France and Scotland, in that 'whiclh fiall ln.t
be againfl this prefcnt.

14. SHE will enter into a league ofi'cfivc, havinll good afli:ancc, or fccirt de-

claratio an; a;l acknowvledngment ol her right in the fuicciflion of this crownl, antli r -
misc, that happening ainy breach betwixt ltrance :ind thil realm, (;vi(:il lhl pe., h
God never to happen) the jift value of her dowry fall be placed fuCr her in ll .inis
of the revenue of the croviwn.

15. FoR afluirance of her promifecs and covenants, file doth osier tco abidIc lt rrftif

in this realm for a certain time, (better lof:l:gc can she ,not .ivt th.in her oxv: pI. -
fol) which, so as fle b, kept ill tile lilcity hel- hcl-or prl olp ndCd, is ii: ill .ci I')
cic.lpc fccrctly out of this coitiry,

inl t\h sickly iate

fie i ill, an itlh th- igo)d
order which your nm;jclt)y call take thel cin.

o03
A a it 2

(6. And

i6. AND in care your majesty do agree to her full and whole deliverance, to retire

herself at her will out of this realm, the said queen of Scots she will give sufficient
holtage for such time as will be advifrd.

17. IF (he abide in this realm, she will promise not to depart out of it, without

your licence, so as it be promirfd unto her that her state, in such liberty as shall be
accorded unto her, shall not be in any fort altered, untill after tryall to have at-
tempted against your life, or other trouble of your estate.

18. IF she go into Scotland, fle will promise to alter nothing there in the reli-

gion which is now used there, fie being suffered to have free exercise of hers, for
her and her houihold, as it was at her return out of France; and further, to pull
out every root of new division between the fubjeits, that none of the fubjecis of
Scotland shall be sifted for his conscience, nor constrained to go to the fcrvice of the
contrary religion.

19. SHE will grant a general abolition of all offences done against her in Scot-

land, and things (hall remain there as they are at this prefcnt, for that respect, sav-
ing that which hath been done against her honour, which she meancth to have re-
voked and annulled.

20. SHE will travel to fettle a sure and general reconciliation between the nobi-

lity of the country, and to cause to be appointed about the king her son, and in his
council, such as shall be fit for the entertainment of the peace and quiet of the
country, and the amity of the realm.

21. SHE will do her best to content your majesty, in favour of the Scots lords

banished and refuged hither, upon their due fubmifflon to their princes, and your
majesty's promise to assist the said queen and king of Scotland against them, if they
happen to fall into their former faults.

22. SHE will proceed to the marriage of the king her son, with the advice and
good council of your majesty.

23. As lie will pafb nothing without the king her son, so doth she desire th-t

he intervene conjointly with h r in this treaty, for the greater and perfccStcr aflilrance
thereof; for otherwilc any thing can hardly be cftablifhed to be found and con-
tinue.

24. THE - fid( Scotch queen trufteth, that the French king her good brdthc:,

acc<o:cing to the good afic'fion which he hath always (hewed her, and hath bccn
af:rcfl tc tilicd ie unto le mby e

\by

M P. d Mannifier for this iai.l treaty, will vc.y will-
ingl iintervene, and will Ailift her for the furcty of her pronlifes.

?5. AD ) so will the plinccs of the house of Lorrain, following the will of the
!:.id wiig:, vill hindl themf!clvcs thercunto.

26. 1'Uo other kin.s a;11i pinces of Chrinendom, flie will aflaty to obtain the

like of them, if fur itcatcr If,lcmnity and approbation of the treaty it be found to
bc znc cll '.y.

?7. Sit; d(oth dci' ilc : fpcejlV anlfwr', and fiinal conclusion of the prcliflns, to
:Li ( ndl to meet inl tim:e x i h aill incorvcniicl)ics.

:i. Ar. n) iii lhr mic:llii ti , t11h n(ioi. to ticllngtheln the said treaty, as maile by

!rt'l ol .: pi'lle ;nI d fl.il will, lte dIL I;.tili tllat dcmI i'on.ra.tiLn be mnade us fomi re-
tl.'.lmni't ol 1her (.c , tivty;v,

OC.jc tiois
104

Objecions against the Scottish queen, under secretary Walsinghame's

hand, November 1584.

H E queen of Scots is ambitious, and standeth ill affected to her majesty, and
therefore it cannot be but that her liberty should bring peril unto her ma-
jeftly.

THAT her enlargement will give comfort to papists, and other ill affected sub-
jeLCs, and greatly advance the opinion had of her title as successor.

'THATr as long as fle ihall be continued in her majesty's possession, she may

serve as it were a gage of her majesty's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the
danger ihe may be thrown into, in cafe any thing should be done in her favour,
dare not attempt any thing in the offence of her majesty.
November ? What course were fit to be taken with the queen of Scots,

1584. either to be enlarged or not.

NH E course to be taken with the said queen may be confidered of in three Cott. Lib,

T degrees; either, Cal. 8,
1. To continue her under custody in that state flei now is.
2. To rcftrain her of the present liberty she now hath.
3. OR to set her at liberty upon caution.
i. TOUCHING the first, to continue her under custody under that slate fie now

is; it is to be confidered, that the princes that favour that queen, upon the com-
plaint flie maketh of hard usage, are greatly moved with commiseration towards
her, and promise to do their endeavour for her liberty, for which purpoec, her mini-
fters follicit them daily.

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, fle acquainteth them with her

offers made to her majefly, which appeared to be no less profitable than rcafonabie
for her majefc, so as the refusal and rejecting giveth her friends and lavourcrs
cause to think her hardly dealt withal, and therefore may, with the better groul-d
and reason, attempt somewhat for the fctting of her at liberty.

IT is alif likely that the said queen, upon this rcfutfil, finding her cafe dcfprrate,

will continue her praCtice under hand, both at home and abroad, not only for her
delivery, but to attain to the prefcnt pofcflfion of this crown upon her pretended
title, as flic hath hitherto done, as appearcth, and is molt manif'efl by letters and
plots intercepted, alnd chi' fly by that late alteration of Scotland, which hath pro-
cceded alogether by her di rction, wheieby a gap is laid open for the malice ol ;ill
her m;ljcfly.s cirncmi s, si as it appcact th lt this manlier of ke(pin her, ,with fuilc
numther l l pc':!;'; ; !'. fc ii('v l hatli, and with lihcrty to wiitec asll rccci\e lctters,
(being duly coIlid t'Id) i': otli'i'Iive to the prilnce , the llid (qiic n't s flith'ld ; I.ltlit'h r
chlir,'-aelL, thaIIn prt(itlhlc to her inlljcfly ; and hlbjcet to ;ill flch pnalticcs ;: s may
per illr 's pcfi r or fl. te, withlout any pro'ifioi lor her Inijely'. ;il!)',
.end ti ': i ), e
no \\" e) to be like li of.

2.. '1' 'c'(.l i , eC, the lccind, to rcllr.ill lier in a morie Itr.li, 'ltcr dc1 rlcL of the li-
betty h1e liithl il,~hlicrto ( C'0), ct.

IT may, at first fight, be thought a remedy very apt to flop the couife of the

dangerous practices softered heretofore by her: For, true it is, that this remedy
might prove very profitable, if the realm of Scotland flood in that fort devoted to
her majesty, as few years past it did; and if the king of that realm were not likely,
as well for the release of his mother, as for the advancement of both their pretended
title, to attempt somewhat agtinft this realm and her majesty, wherein he ihould
neither lack foreign afliftance, nor a party here within this realm: But the king
and that realm fianding atffeled as they do, this restraint, instead of remedying, is
likely to bleed ther e inconveniencics following:

FIRST, it will increase the offence both in him, and in the reft of the princes her
friends that mifliked of her restraint.

SECONDLY, It will give them just cause to take some way of redress.
LAST LY, It is to be doubted, that it may provoke forne desperate ill disposed

person, all hope of her liberty removed, to attempt somewhat against her majesty's
own person, (a matter above all others to be weighed) which inconveniency being
duly confidered, it will appear manifestly, that the restraint, in a straighter degree,
is likely to prove a remedy subject to very hard events.

THE latter degree, whether 'twere fit to set the said queen at liberty, miniifireth

some caufc of doubt, touching the manner of the liberty, in what fort the fame is
to be performed, whether to be continued here within the realm, or to be rerfored
into her own country.

Bur firfr , this proposition, before the particularities be weighed, is to be confi-
dered in generality.

FOR it is very hard for a well affected fubjeat, that tendreth her majesty's surety,

and weigheth either the nature of the Scottish queen, being inclined to ambition
and revenge, or her former actions, what practices fle hath set on foot most dan-
gerous for her majesty and this realm, to allow of her liberty, being not made ac-
quainted with such causes, as time hath wrought, to make it less perilous than it
hath been, nor with such cautions as may, in some fort, be devised to prevent both
her ambition and malice; and therefore to make this apparent,

IT is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the mother, is now grown to

be in the son. He prctcndeth the fame title (he doth: Such as do affect her, both
at home and abroad, do affect him ; (and he is the more dangerous for that he is
unmarried, which may greatly advance his fortune; and that he is a man, whereby
he may enter into action in his own person) where she is reltrained, he is at liberty;
his own realm is now altogether at his devotion, and the party affete d to this crown
nbated ; to as the matter duly confidered, neither her liberty nor rcftraint doth
greatly alter the cafe for perils towards her majefly, unlcfs by such promifcs ns may
be made by way of treaty with her, the dangcr likely to grow from the king her
son be provided for.

BUT in this behalf it may be objcted, that so long as the mother remains in hcr
mi:jcefy's hands, tie king will attempt nothing for fear of his mother's peril.

To this objctlioni it may be nnfwered, firtl', That thcy hope that her m;ijcflr,

being a prince of jufiice, and inclined to mercy, will not punifil tile mother for t!lh
ionS's ofience, unless filie (hall be found, by golod prool, cullpable. Sccondl;lil',
'iThat men will not be ovcr-hafly, confidcring in what predicament the king i.,il!-
cth touching his expefat.ion of this crown, to advi(c any thilig that in time luitulc
nmy be dangerous to the giver of such council as may reach to his motherc' peril.

A rP
io6

AN'D lastly, the taking away of his mother, he being strong in the field through

both foreign afliflance, and a party here within the realm, will appear so weak a
remedy, (which may rather exasperate both him, and her party, to proceed with
more courage and heat to revenge, if any such hard measure should be offered unto
her) as they will suppose for the reason above specified, that no such extremity will
be used.

IT may also be objected, that the setting of her at liberty will greatly encourage

the papists both at home and abroad; but herein, if the provision be duly conli-
dered, that may be made by parlianrent both here and there, they fliall rather find
cause of dilcomfort any otherwise.

THESE two doubts being resolved, and the perils that was in the mother appear-

ing most manifefily to be seen in the son accompanied with more danger, with due
consideration had also of such remedies as may be provided for the preventing of the
dangers, that her liberty may minister just cause to doubt of; there will be good
caulf of hope found, that the fame will rather breed benefit than peiils.

Now it refteth, in what fort the said liberty ihall be performed ; if it flhall be

thought meet she shall be continued within the realm with (bine limitation, epcci.-
ally in that place where she now rcfideth, the country round about being so infctcd
in religion as it is, it is greatly to be doubted that will very much incre-fe the cor-
ruption, and falling away in that behalf. Besides she should have commodity, with
much more ease, and speed, to entertain practices within this realm, than by being
in her own country.

IF abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland or France, then flall her

majefly lose the gages of her tafety, then shall she be at hand to give advice in fur-
therance of such prattices, as have been laid for to stir trouble ill this rcalm, wherein
she hath been a principal party.

FL'R the firk, it is anfxvcred before, that the refict of any perils that may bef.l

unto her, will in no fort restrain her son. For the other, if it be confidered what
harm her advice will work unto herself, in refpce of the violation of the treaty, and
the provision that may be made in parliament here, it is to be thought, that she wiil
then be well adrifed, before she attempt any such matter, which IL/ filhe may do
without perill. Besides such princes, as have intcrpofed their faith iandl prolii for
hcr, cannot with hol;our alfift her, wherein lihe lFrench Kinr will not be f(ound
vcly forward, wIho, in most Iriendly fort, hath lately rcjected iall u h rcq u;l!ts
p: opoiuded either by her, or he-r fbi's inililcrs, that mi ht anv xvay offFend her
miaj 'fly. And so to conclude, itCeilj; the caulcz of hir griC f f 1;. I. l t lkc. n aw ;
tle French king gratified, who is a mediator for heur, and will inifli!;L, that, ihy
any Spt," ifh ip;raCici, filhc flioui;l be drawn to violate iher i.,il ; tli.it th,' r1ci of tlic
i'rinces (ih ll have no julit c.iile of cfl'i; lcc, libut rt.illc to think hliino iurir Ily of iier
l:oljell\', ctltfije.inl t[hc Scotti]l quc.'n'S cirrit(gc tov';lrda hc, which i hth ds: rved

;n.i, y any floch l

vull

l u ; lt iiblen:nii of So;

lI l. d (illshi1 hi rilt !o cd, i lho will lce

i oo(l ( .ly of' facii (cmlilt'l ;Ia Il;iy l lild to tlIL' totiil'ilig ofl this Icalml, i)U)ci.dly
hi;ing Ino ;o,jd a giomid of vlr;]ilt ;s the pjiliiicut i. to I.ntd tuito; the charge;
aidl l) 'rlli', which 1'r p .'ic'; li 1ht l ire

; ( bred to t his re:iln fhi ll] bc avoided ; a ;t:h

1.ilv, t (i h ope (f I the ; iflsi fii; ll Ic t;kel n a\;y, lby filch 'oodl provifio() ,, a.i in
b toll tlh ; te lrcah mi. t l e . e, vi cl'' lt :ile-t i!: th Ila tt i; lit lill iiil') 11,r majc:iy's

e'.a'l s;hln, (a n ti

f ll olhC' to) le weL ld) ll be voided, ,whClei Iy lic

Ch.,li"C ili:t 1 .iy 1 jrnr.v b ) :1 li, h v'ick,' aid t;11 i ily pr.itice, Lthey f111.ll Ice
th,.-l cai-: nw v.*) '
: 'cV. l1 tc inll 0pinit e( rl'l ion.

RZcatbns

1G7

Reafuns to induce her majefly to proceed in the treaty under Secretary

Walsingham's hand.

-ot. Lib. H A T such plots as have of late years been devised (tending to the raising of
Calig. C. 8. . trouble within this realm) have grown from the Scots queen's ministers and

favourers, not without her allowance and seeking: Or,

'TH'AT the means used by the said ministers, to induce princes to give ear to the
said plots, is principally grounded upon some commiseration had of her restraint.

THAT the stay, why the said plots have not been put in execution, hath proceed-

ed, for that the said princes have, for the mofl parr, been entertained with home
and domeftick troubles.

THAT it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms begin to be quiet, that
somewhat will be attempted in her favours by the said princes.

'HAT it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may be attempted by some of her
fautera in an extraordinary fort, to the perrill of her majesty.

THAT for the preservation thereof, it fliall be convenient for her majesty to pro-

ceed to the finiflhing of the treaty, not long fithence begun between her and the
said queen.

No. XVII. (Vol. II. p. I28. 1. 4.)

A letter from St. Amias Pawlet.

S I R,

Origin Cal. Did forbear, according to your direction signified in your letters of the 4th ol
.. 9 this present, to proceed to the execution of the contents of Mr. Waades letters

unto you, for the dispersing of this lady's unnecessary servants, and for the fearing
of her money, wherein I was bold to write unto you my simple opinion, (although
in vain as it now fallcth out) by my letters of the 7th of this instant, which I
doubt not are with you before this time; but upon the receipt of your letters of the
5th, which came not unto my hands until the 8th in tih evening, by rcalon as did
appear by indorfement, that they had been miflakcn, and were sent back to WVind-
for, after they were entered into the way towards me, I confidered that being ac-
companicd only witlh my own servants, it mi}ght be thought that they would he
intrcated to fay as I would command them, and therefore I thought good, for my
better difchaige in these money matters, to crave the assistance of M/lr. Richaxd
Banott, who Icpairing unto me the next morning, we had acccfs to this queen,
whomi we found in her bced, troubled after the old manner with a dcfluxion, which
was fallen down into the fide of her neck, and had bereft her of the ife of one ol
her hands, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion of her former pra ilcs, doubt-
ing lcft ihc would perfifl therein by corrupting underhand fomec bad members of tllii
ilate, nwas exprvfly comnanded to take her money into my hands;, and to rcli
nnf\verablc for it, when it shall be required ; advising her to deliver the said moncv
unto im with quictiicfs. After many denials, many exclamations, andl many bittic
wolds n!;ainill you, (I lay nothing of her railing agailli myself ) with flat aflirnmaitio
that h:r majclly mighlt have her body, but her heart tlie fliuuld never have, rflin L,'

o .,

to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my servants, and sent for barrs to break
open the door, whereupon she yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I found
there in the coffers mentioned in Mr. Waade's remembrance, five rolls of canvass,
containing five thousand French crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one had,
in gold, one hundred and four pounds two [hillings, and the other had three pounds
in silver, which bag of silver was left with her, affirming that she had no more mo-
ney in this house, and that she was indebted to her servants for their wages. Mr. Cule can tell
Wa2de's note maketh mention of 3 rolls left in Curle's chamber, wherein, no you the trlth
doubt, he was misreckoned, which is evident as well by the testimonies and oaths ofOftl'ism; tter
diverse persons as also by probable conjectures; to as in truth we found only two rolls,
every of which containeth one thousand crowns, which was this queen's guifte to
Curie's wife at her marriage. There is found in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a
chain worth by eflimation one hundred pounds, and in money, in one bag nine
hundred pounds, in a second bag two hundred fourscore and fix pounds eighteen
shillings. All the foresaid parcells of money are bellowed in bags, and fealed by
Mr. Richard Bagot, saving five hundred pounds of Naw's money, which I reserve
in my hands, for the use of this houlhold, and may be repayed at London, where
her najeity shall appoint out of the money, received lately by one of my ser-
vants, out of the Exchequer. I feared left the people might have disperscd this
money in all this time, or have hidden the Came in omne secret corners, for doubt
whereof, I had caused all this queen's family, from the highest to the lowest, to
be guarded in the several places where I found them, so as yffl had not found the
money, with quietners, I had been forced to have searched first all their lodgings,
and then their own persons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a singular blef-
sing, that that falleth out so well, fearing left a contrary success might have moved
obme hard conceits in her majefly.

ToUCHING the dispersing of this queen's servants, I trust I have done to much,

as may suffice to satisfy her majesty for the time, wherein I could not take any ab-
/i,lute course, until I heard again from you, partly because her mnjefty, by Mr.
Waade's letter, doth refer to your consideration to return such as (hall bedifcharged to
their several dwellings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, you have forgotten to
deliver your opinion; partly, for that as yet, I have received no anfwcr from you, of
your resolution, upon the view of the Scottifi family ltnt unto you, whar persons
you will appoint to be difminl ; only this I have clone, 1 have bestowed all such, as
are mentioned in this bill inclosed, in three or four several rooms, as the fame may
suffice to contain them, and that their meat and drink lhall be brought unto them
by my fervnnts. It may) plcafe you, to advertise me by youlr next letters, in wh'at
fort, and for what course, I /hall make their pafl)orts, as also, if they shall fay that
they are unpaid of their wages, what I fiall do therein. Yt is said that they
have been accuffomed to be paid of their wages at Chrifllas, for the whole ycar. This lady
ler majefly's charge will be fomcwhit diminiihed by the departure of this people, hath good
and my chlrge, by this occalnon, will be the more e.lly. But the pclifOls, all lave foreofmoney

nafiian, are hiclih filly and finiple fouls, as there was no great catlil to fear their at prclent in
npraices, and t pon this ground, I w:is of olptilion, in mly foller letters, tllat all the 1Frenc
this difinifl'd trniai fhouldl hlive followed their 'miftrcis, uintil th ncxt remove, and hands.
bthc e to h;ave hcen difcl-iarged upon the tfddel'n,, for doubt th.atthe liild rclieovw might
he delayed, ) f she (lid scar, or cxpect any hard mnllcfutl.

*VOL. 1J.

B b b

0'1 IERS

OTHERS shall excuse their foolish pity as they may; but for my part, I renunce

my part of the joys of heaven, yf in any thing that I have said, written, or done,
1 have had'a ny other reicpe than the furtherance of her majesty's service; and so I
shall moit earneflly pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for the not seasing of the
money by Mr. Mranners, the other commiflioners and myfeif. I trust Mr. W'aade
hath aifwered, in all humble duties, for the whole company, that no one of us did
so much as think that our commiflion reaching only to the papers, we might be
bold to touch the rroney, so as there was no fpccch of that all to my knowledge,
and as you know 1 was no coniniffiioner in this fcarch, but had my hands full at
'I'yxhall; discreet servants are not h.,flily to deal in great matters, without warrant,
and ef-pcciall where the caule is such as the delay of it carrieth no danger.

YouR advertifemen t of that happy remove hath been greatly comfortable unto

me. I will not fay, in refpea of myself, because my plivate intereit hath no mea-
furc of comparif(.n with her majefiy's fafetv, and with the quiet of this realm. God
grant a happy and fpccdy yfiue to these good and godly counsels; and so I commit
you to his merciful protection. From Chartley the loih of September 1586.

No. XV. (Vol. II. p. 149. line I7.)
Copy of a letter from the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, &c. touching

their proceedings with regard to the death of the Scottilh queen, to
her majesty's council.

T may please your hollbn' good lordihips to be advertised, that, on Saturday the
4th of this piefent, I Robert Beale came to the house of me the earl of Kent in

the county of---to whom your lordship's letter and mcffage was delivercd, and her
majetly's commiflion shewn ; whereupon I the earl forthwith sent precepts for the flay-
ing of such hues and cries as had troubled the country, requiring the officers to make
itay of all such persons, as flould bring any such warrants without names, as be-
fore had been done, and to bring them to the next justice of peace, to the intent
that upon their examination, the occasion and causes of such seditious bruites mig'hit
le bolted out and known. It was also resolved that I the said earl of Kent ihi,uil
on the Monday following, come to Lylford to Mr. Elmrs, to be the nearer and
readier to confer with my lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robcit Beale
came to Fotheringay, where after the communicating the commiflion, &c. uinto us
fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by reason that fir A. Pawlet was but late re-
covered and not able to repair to the earl of ShrewIbury, being then at Orton lix
miles of; it was thought good that we fir Druc Drury and Robert Bcale ihoull go
unto him, which we did oni-- morning ; and together with the delivery of her
majcfly's commiflion, and your lordfilip's letter, inmparted unto hiin what botih the
earl of Kent and we thought nmtct to be done in the ctilfc, praying his lordihip hi-
ther the day following, to confer with me the l;aid earl, concerning the fame; which
his lordllip piomiltd. And for thle better colouring of the matter, I the (aid call of
Sliicwlburmy liknt to hMr'. Beale, ajullice of pcat c of the counity of lluntingdon next
adjoining;, to whomri I communicated that warrant, winch Robert Beale had under
your lotllhips liands, for the ;laying of the hues and cries, Ie(luliing hill to rive
notice thereof to the town of Ictct borought, land clpccially unto the jullices ol )pacte

3 o

of Huntingdonshire, and to cause the pursuers and bringers offuch warrants to be
flayed, and brought to the next juflice of peace; and to bring us word to Fother-
ingay castle on Wednesday morning what he had done, and what he Ihould in the
mean time underfiand of the authors of such bruites. Which like order, I also fir
Amias Paw!et had taken on Monday morning in this town, and other places ad-
joining. The fame night, the sheriss of the county of Northampton upon the
receit of your lordship's letter came to Arundel, and letters were sent to me
the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewibury's intention and meeting here on
Tuesday by noon; and other letters were also sent by their lord(hips alients
to fir Edward Montague, fir Richard Knightly, ,Mr. Tho. Brudenell, &c. to
be here on Wednesday by eight of the clock in the morning, at which time
it was thought meet that the execution should be. So upon Tuesday, we the
earls came hither, where the sheriss met us; and upon conference between us it
was resolved, that the care for the fending for the surgeons, and' other necefiary
provision should be committed unto him against the time. And we forthwith re.
paired unto her, and first in the presence of herself and her folks, to the intent that
they might fee and report hereafter that she was not otheiwife proceeded with than
according to law, and the form of the statute made in the 27th year of her majesty's
reign, it was thought convenient that her majesty's commiflion should be read unto
her, and afterwards she was by sundry speeches willed to prepare herself against the
next morning. She u\ as also put in remembrance of her fault, the honourable man-
ner of proceeding with her, and the neceflity that was imposed upon her najefly to
proceed to execution, for that otht rewife it was found that they could not both Itand
together; and however, fithence the lord Buckhurft's his being here new conspiracys
were attempted, and so w.,uld be still; wherefore since she had now a good while
since warning, by the laid lord and Robert Beale, to think upon and prepare herrelf
to die, we doubted not but that ihe was, before this, fettled, and therefore would
accept this melagc in good part. And to the effeC that no christian duty might be
said to be omitted, that might be for her comfort, and tend to the salvation both of
her body and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her that if it would please
her to confer with the bishop and dean of Peterborough, fle might; which dean,
we had, for that purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of that place. Hei c-
to she replied, crofing hcrfelf in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghout, faying that she was ready to die in the catholic Roman faith, which her an-
ceflors had profeflcd, from which file would not be removed. And albeit we uscd
many pcrfuafions to the contrary, yet we prevailed no:hing ; and therefore, rwhen
she demaldecd the admittance of her priest, we utterly denied that unto her. I-lerc-
upon, she demanded to underliand what anlfwer we had touching her former petition
to her majcfly, conccrnlinig her papers of accounts, and the befl ow ig of her body.
To the firll we had noine tlther anlwcr to make, but that we thouliht if they we re
not cnlt bcfolc, the fa.ime might be in Mr. \'aadlc's cultodly, who a;is now in France,
anld feeing her pIpers could 11it any wife plc.alcre her majcflt, we doubted not but
that the Ilumc would be delivered unto such as (lie flould aploint. For, for our own
pni ts, wcv untdoilubltly tlhoulh tlit lt her niijety would not nilde any profit of her
thlins, and thtlcfole (in l our olllionll) she miiiht ft Vt down what ihe would have
done, andl tihe f.imlc eliould b iimparted unto hler majey, of whom both (lie and
()tilCs mtiglit exprCl dll coLirttc\'. Toulching her boliy, we knew l(ot her mIn:jefty's
pIaiulur, nd:l thlci elore could lcitlhr f ly that ier petition IhiuId be dIny'd , orgranlt-

1i b b ?. Cl.

ed. For the practice of Babington, she utterly denied it, and would have infer.-edifr,
that her death was for her religion; whereunto it was eftsoons by us replied, that for
nany years she was not touched fir religion, nor Ihould have been now, but that
this proceeding against her was for treason, in that fie was culpable of that horrible
conspiracy for deflroying her majeily's person; which she again denied, adding fur-
ther, that albeit she for herself forgave them that were the procurers of her death,
yet she doubted not but that God would take vengeance thereof. And being charged
with the depositions of Nau: and Curl to prove it againlt her, she replied, that she
acculed none, but that hereafter when she shall be dead, and they remain alive, it
ihall be si en how indiffierently the had been dealt with, and what measure had been
used unto her; and asked whether it had been heard before this,. that servants had
been prasiied to accuse their miiflrcfs, and hereupon also required what was become
of theni, and where they remained.

UPON our departure from her, for that it seemed by the cornmiflion, that-thecharge

of her was in the disposition of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S.
Drue Drurie to receive, for that night, the charge, which they had before, and to
cause the whole number of soldiers to watch that night, and that her folks should be
put up, and- take order that only four of them should be at the execution, remaining
aloof of and guarded with certain persons, so as they should not come near unto
her, which were Melvil her steward, the physician, surgeon, and apothecary.

WEDNESDAY morning, after that we the earls were repaired unto the cattle, and'

the Sheriff had prepared all things in the hall for the execution, he was commanded
to go into her chamber, and to bring her down to the place where were present, we
which have signed this letter, Mr. Henry Talbot, efq; fir Edward Montague, knt.
his son and heir apparent, and William Montague his brother, fir Richard Knichtly,
knt. Mr. Thomas Brudenel, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr.
ForePt, and Rayner, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterborough, and others.

AT the ftairfold, she pawsed to speak to Melvil in our hearing, which was to this

effect, " Melvil, as thou haft been an honest servant to me, so I pray thee continue
to my ton, and commend me unto him. 1 have not impugn'd his religion, nor the
religion of others, but wifl him well. And as I forgive all that have offended me
in Scotland, so I would that he should alo ; and beseech God, that he would fend
him his holy spirit, and illuminate him." Melvil's answer was, that he would so do,
and at that instant, he would beseech God to afifit him with his spirit. 'Ihen file
demanded to speak with her priest, which was denied unto her, the rather for that
she came with a fupertlitious pair of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have
her women to help her, and upon her earnest requeff, and faying that when other
gentlewomen were executed, (he had read in chronicles that they had women al-
lowed unto them, it was permitted that she flould have two named by-herfelf, which
were Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After she came to the scaffold, firit, in pretence of
them all, her majestie's commifflon was openly read ; and afterwards Mr. Dean of
Peterborough, according to a direcLion which he had received, the night before,
from us the earls, wou'd have made a godly admonition to her, to repent and dye
well in the fear of God and charity to the world. But at the firfl entry, she utterly
refused it, faying that she was a catholique, and that it were a folly to move her,
being so refolutcly minded, and that our prayers would little avail her. Whereupon,
to the intent it might appear that we, and the whole afiembly, had a chriftilnn dcfire
to have her die well, a godly prayer, concciv'd by Mr. Dean, was read and pro-

nounced

nounced by us all. " That it would please Almighty God to fend herhis holy fpi-
rit and grace, and also, if it were his will, to pa-don all her offences, and of his
mercy, to receive her into his heairvenly and everlasting kingdom, and finally to bless
her maieftv, and confound all her cnemies ;" whereof Mr. Dean, minding to repair
up shortly, can Ihew )your lordihips a copy.

THIS done, she pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this effect, " To be-

feech God to fen: her his holy spirit, and that she trusted to receive her salvation il
his blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom, besought God to for-
give her enemies, as lic forgave them ; and to turn his wrath from this land, ro
bless the queen's maj, ftie, that she mi,.ht serve him. Likewise to be merciful to her
son, to have companion of his church, and altho' the was not worthy to be heard,
yet the had a confidence ii his mercy, and prayed all the faints, to pray unto her
Saviour to receive her." A ter this (turning towards her servant0) she desired them
to pray for her, that her Saviour would receive her. Then, upon petition made by
the executioners, flie paidoned them; and said,. she was glad thli the end of all her
sorrows was so near. Thei she mifliked the whinning and weeping of her wornerr,
faying that they rather orght to thank ( od for her lefolution, and kifling them,
willed them to depart fior the fcaffbld, and farewell. And so resolutely kneel'd
down, and having a kcrchi-lt handed about her eyes, laid down her neck, whereupon
the executioner proceeded. HIer servants were incontinently removed, and order
taken that none should approach unto her corps, but that it should be embalmed
by the surgeon appointed. And further her crofle, apparell, and other things are
retained here, and not yielded unto the executioner for inconveniencies that might
follow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by such as fc:it him hither.

THIS hath been the manner of our dealiingi in this service, whereof we have

thought good to. advertise your lordthips, as particula ly as we could, for the time,
and further have thought good to signify unto your lorid(hips belid s, that for the avoid-
ing of all finifier and flandcrous reports that may be railed to the contrary, we have
caused a note thereof to be conceiv'd to the fame effect in writing, which we the
saids lords have subscribed, with the hands of such other there the knights and gen-
tlemen above named that were present at the action. And So beseeching Almighty
God long to bless her majesty with a most prosperous reign, and to confound all his,
and her enemies, we take our leaves. From Fotheringay Cattle, the 8th of Febru-
ary 1586, in haft.

Your lordships at commandment.
N. B. This, as well as fevcral other papers in this Appendix, is taken from a col-

leaion made by Mr. Crawurid of Drumfoy, hifloriographcr to QC Anne, now
in the library of the faculty of Advocates. MIr. Crawfurd's tianfcriber has
omitted to mention the book in the Cott. Lib. where it is to be found.

Numb. XIX.

No. X1X. (Vol. 1I. p. 154. line 2.)
The objections againit Mr. Davison, in the cause of the late Scottifi

queen, must concern things done either, i. Before her trial at So-
theringay. 2. During that Session. 3. After the fame.

Cot. Iib. i. 'IEFO RE her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged to have had any hand
Cal. C. I. J) at all in the cause of the said queen, or done any thing whatsoever, con-

cerning the fame direaly, or indirectly.

2. DURING that feflion, he remained at court, where the only interefel he had

therein, was as her majesty's secretary, to receive the letters from the comnliflioners,
impart them to her highness, and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the said commiflioners, it is well known to all
her council,

I. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting whatsoever, in parliament,

or council, concerning the cause of the said queen, till the fending down of her ma-
jefl-y's warrant unto the commissioners, by the loids and others of her council.

2. THAT he was no party in signing the sentence, pasl.'d against her.
3. THAT he never penned either the proclamation publilhing the tame, the war-

rant after her death, nor any other letter, or thing whatsoever concerning the fame.
And,

ITHAT the only thing, which can be specially and truly imputed to him, is the

carrying up the laid warrant unto her majcfty to be signed. She fending a great
cuunlcllor unto him, with her pleaifure to that end, and carrying it to the great feal
of England, by her own special dirction and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
I. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord treasurer, was delivered by him

unto Mr. Davif,n, with her majcfly's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when she
ihould be pleased to call for it.

2. ITHAT being in his hands, he retained it at the least five or fix vecks tn-

prelented, nor once offiriing to carry it up, till file sent a great counfcllor unto him
for the fame, and was fiarply reproved therefore by a grcat peer, in her miaj.ly's
own prelence.

3. I'- rAT having signed it, hle gave him an express commandment to carry it to

the feal, and being scalcd to fend it immediately away unto the commillioiicrs, ac-
cording to the direclion. lerfcif

l appointing the hall of Fothcringay for the pl.ce

of execution, mifliking the court yald, in divers rcfpicls, and in conclusion .blo-
lutels sorbad. him to trouble Klr any further, or let hler hear any more hereof, till it
was done. She fhr her palt, ha ving (as she laid) pci formed all that, in law or rca-
son, could b( requcired of her.

4. XVI-HIci diic Lions inotwithflalding, lie kept the warrant scal'd ai'l that nilgt,

aind the greatllt pait of the next day in his hands, brought it back with himl to the
coult, acquainted her ilajlefly withal, and findling her im.jefty resolved to proceed
thlcicini, accolding to her forincr directions, and yet defirotis to carry the mattei.r so,

;ia

as she might throw the burden from herself, he abfulutely resolved to quit his hands
thereof.

5. AND hereupon, went over unto the lord treasurer's chamber, together with

Mr. vice chanmberlain Hatton, and in his presence restored the fame into the hands
of the said lord trcafurer, of whom he had bt loe received it, who from thenceforth
kept it, till hiifelf and the reft of the council funt it away.

VWHICi, in furiitance and truth, is all the part and interest the said Davison had
in this cause, whatloever is, or may be pretended to the contrary.

ToUCHING the fending down thereof unto the commiflioners, that it was the ge-

neral a&t of her majesty's council (as is before mentioned) and not any private act
of his, may appear by

I. IHEiR own confeflion. 2. Their own letters sent down therewith to t!e com-

miflioners. 3. The teitimonies of the lords and others to whom they were dircted.
As also 4. of Mr. Beale, by whom they were (ent. 5. The tenor of her majefly's
first commillion for their calling to the itdr-ihamber for the fame, and private ap-
pearance and fubmniliion afterward instead thereof, before the lord chancellor Broom-
ley. 6. The confellion of Mr. Attorney-general, in open court confirmed. 7. By
the sentence itself upon eccord. 8. Befidcs a common act of council, containing
an anlwer to be verbally delivered to the Scottish ambaflador then remaining here,
avowing and juLtifying the fame.

Now where some suppose him to h-ave given some extraordinary furtherance there-
unto, the contrary may evidently appear by

i. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of afrociation, being earnestly
pressed the:eunto by her majesty's f1lf.

2. Hils excusing of himflf frorn being used as 2acommiffioner, in the examination
of Babington and his complices, and avoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. His being a mean to stay the commiflioners from pronouncing of the sentence
at Fotheringay, and deferring it till they should return to her majesty's pretence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks unprefcnted, without once of-
fering to carry it up, till her majcfty lent exprefly for the fame to sign.

5. His dcfcrrine to fend it away after it was seal'd unto the commiflioners, as he

was fpeciaily commanded, ftlyicng it all that night, and the grcateft part of the next:
days in his hands.

6. And filnally, his rcfl-oring thereof into the hands of the lord treafurcr, of whonm
he had before received the lame.

WHVrIH are clear andt cvldent proofs, that the said Davison did nothing in this

caufc whatfocver, contrary to the duty of the place he then held in her majefty'z.
fcrvice.

Cal. C. 9.

THIS seems to be an original. On the back is this title,
THE innoccncy of Mr. DaviCon in the caufl of the late Scottifi queen;

No. XX.

115

No. XX. [Vol . p. 238. line 29.]

Letter from 0, Sir Robert Cecil, to His MajefRy King James.

From the 0-
Froinal Bibi. OST worthy prince, the depending dangers upon your affeaionates have
Sac. Jur. been such, as hath enforced silence in him, who is faithfully devoted to your
Edin.A.i.34. person, and in due time of trial, will undergo all hazards of fortune, for the main-
Io. 4. tenance of the just regal rights, that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations,

is invested in your royal pe:fon. Fall not then, most noble and renowned prince,
from him, whose providence hath in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an
infrrument of his glory, and the good of his people. Some secrets, I find have
been revealed to your prejudice, which must proceed from some ambitious violent
spirited person near your nmijefty in council and favour; no man in particular will I
accufc, but I am sure it hath no foundation from any, with whom, for your service,
I have held correspondence; otherwile, I had, lmg since, been disabled from per-
formance of those duties, that the thoughts of my heart endeavoureth ; being only
known to this worthy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of Christendom
for his fidelity to your person and slate, and to M\r. David Fowlis your most loyal
servant, my first and faithful correspondent; and unto James Hudfone, whom I
have found in all things that concern you, most secret and aflured. It may, there-
fore, please your majesty, at the humble motion of 0, which jargon I desire to be
the indorfcment of your commands unto me, that by some token of your favour,
he may understand in what terms you regard his fidelity, secrecy and service. My
paslionate affction to your person, (not as you are a king, but as you are a good
king, and have juit title, after my sovereign, to be a great king) doth transport me
to presumption. Condemn not, most nuble prince, the motives of care and love
altho' mixed with defecs in judgment.

1. T, therefore, first beseech your majesty, that for the good of those, whom

God, by divine Providence, hath destined to your charge, that you will be pleated
to have an extraordinary care of all prafcicers, or practices, against your person ; for
it is not to be doubted, but that in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, faction,
or fear, there are many that desire to have their sovereign in minority, whereby the
sovereignty and state might be swayed by partiality of subalternate persons, rather
than by true rule of power and juflice. Preserve your person, and fear not the
practices of man upon the point of your right, which will be preserved and main-
tained against all assaults of competition whatever. Thus I leave the protecion of
your person, and royal posterity, to the Almighty God of Heaven, who blers and
preserve you and all yours, in all regal happiness to his glory.

2. NEx'r to the preservation of your peribn, is the conservation and secret keep-

ing of your councclls, which, as I have Cfid, are often betrayed and discovercd,
either out of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent faction, or bafl conception, the
which your majesty is to regard with all circumfpcclion, as a matter most dan-
gerruis to your perlin and fiate, and the only nic;ins to tlin and dc(tiroy all thof'r,
that (;and faithfully devoted to your m;ajcfy's service. Some particulars, and per-
fbiJs of this nature, I make no duubt have been dilcovercl by the cldearvours of this
loblcliann, the bearer hcrcof, of whoml your nmaijfly may be further informed.

3. 'h'e

3. THE 3d point considerable is that your majesty, 'by all means poflible, secure

yourself of the good affe&ion of the French king and States, by the negotiation of
lome faithful secret confident; the French naturally diflafting the union of the Bri-
tith islands under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt not, but you have many
allies and friends, but by reason of their remote state, they do not so much iinporte
this affair, which must be guided by a quick and sudden motion.

4. WHEN God, by whose Providence, the period of all persons and times is deter-

mined, shall call to his kingdom of glory her majesty, (although I do affluredly
hope that there will not be any question in competition, yet for that I hold it not
fitting to give any minute entrance into a cause of so high a nature), I do humbly
beseech your majesty to design a secret, faithful, and experienced confident servant
of yours, being of an approved fidelity and judgment, continually to be here refi-
dent, whose negotiation, it were convenient your majesty should fortifie, with such
secret trust and powers, as there may not need 14 days respite, to polf for authority,
in a cause, that cannot endure io hours respite, without varieties of danger. In
the which it is to be confidered, that all such as pretend least good to your efta-
blilhment, will not in publick oppung your title, but out of their cunning ambi-
tion, will seek to gain time, by alledging their pretence of common good to the
state, in propounding of good conditions for difburthening the common weale, of
divers hard laws, heavy impositions, corruptions, oppreflions, &c. which is a
main point to lead the popular, who are much disgusted with many particulars of
this nature. It were therefore convenient that these motives, out of your majesty's
providence, should be prevented by your free offer in these points following, viz.

I. THAT your majesty would be pleased to abolish purvaiors and purvaiance,

being a matter infinitely offensive to the common people, and the whole kingdom,
and not profitable to the prince.

2. THAT your majesty would be pleated to dissolve the court of wards, being

the ruin of all the noble and ancient families of this realm, by base matches, and
evil education of their children, by which no revenue of the crown will be de-
frayed.

3. THE abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally repined against by

the subje6t, in regard of their uncertainty, being many times altered from their
true meaning by variety of interpretation.

4. THAT your majesty will be pleased to admit free outport of the native com-

modities of this kingdom, now often restrained by subalternate persons for private
profit, being most prejudicial to the commerce of all merchants, and a plain deftruc-
tion to the true induflry and manufacture of all kingdoms, and against the profit
of the crown.

THESE being by your majesty's confidents in the point of time propounded, will

afltredly confirm unto your majeftie the hearts and affclRions of the whole kingdom,
and absolutely prevent all insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that, out of
pretext of common good, would seek to patronize themiclves in popular opinion
and power, and thereby to derogate from your majesty's bounty and siee favour, by
princely merit of your moderation, judgment, and jufticc.

YOUR majefly's favour, thus granted to the fubjecl, will no way impeach the

profits of the crown, but advance them. The difproportionable gain of lome chequ er
officcis, with the bale and mcrccnary profits of the idle unnccclthry clerks and

\'OL. II. C c c attcndaLnts,

II7

attendants, will only susser Come detriment; but infinite will be the good unto the
kingdom, which will confirm unto your majesty the universal love and affection of
the people, and establish your renown in the highest esteem to all polterity.

THE Lord preserve your majeftie, and make you triumphant over all your. ene-
mies.

MY care over his person, whose letters pass in this pacquet, and will die before

he leave to be yours, ihall be no.lefs than of mine own life, and in like esteem will
I'hold all your faithful confidents, notwithstanding 1 will hold myself reserved from.
being known unto any of them, in my particular devoted affections unto your.
majesty, only this extraordinary worthy man, whose associate I am in his misfor-
tune, doth know my heart, and we both will pray for you, and if we live you (hall
find us'together.

I BESEECH your majesty burn this letter, and the others; for altho' it be in an
unusual hand, yet it may be discovered.

Your majesty's most devoted

and humble fcrvant,

A CRITICAL

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A
C R I T I C A L

CONCERNING
D d S S E R T A T I O X

CONCERNING
The Murder of King SI F N R Y. and the Genuineness of

the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

T is not my intention to engage in all the controversies, to which
the murder of Kiing Henry, or the letters from Mary to Both-
well, have given rife; far less to appear as an adversary to any

particular author, who hath treated of them. To repeat, and to
expose all the ill founded assertions with regard to these points,
which have flowed from inattention, from prejudice, from partia-
lity, from malevolence, and from dishonesty, would be no less irk-
some to myself, than unacceptable to most of my readers. All I pro-
pose, is to assist others in forming some judgment concerning the
fads in dispute, by flating the proofs produced on each fide, with
as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the fame atten-
tion and impartiality, which I have endeavoured to exercise in
examining other controverted points in the Scottish history.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two different systems

have been formed. The one fupppofes Bothwell both to have con-
trived and executed this crime. The other imputes it to the Earls
of Murray, Morton, and their party.

Ccc 2

THE

THE decision of many controverted sacs in history, is a matter

rather of curiosity than of use. They stand detached; and what-
ever we determine with regard to them, the fabric of the story
remains untouched. But the fad under dispute in this place is a
fundamental and essential one, and according to the opinion which
an Historian adopts with regard to it, he mufft vary and dispose the
whole of his subsequent narration. An historical system may be
tried in two different ways, whether it be confifent with proba-
bility, and whether it be tupported by proper evidence.

THOSE who charge the King's murder upon Bothwell argue in

the following manner; and though their reasonings have been men-
tioned already in different places of the narrative, it is necessary
to repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay they, was a fud-
den and youthful passion. The beauty of his person was his chief
merit. His capricious temper soon raised in the Queen a disgust,
which broke out on different occasions. His engaging in the con-
fpiracy against Rizio, converted this disgust into an indignation,
which ihe was at no pains to conceal. This breach was perhaps,
in its own nature, irreparable; the King certainly wanted that art
-and condescension which alone could have repaired it. It widened
every day, and a deep and fettled hatred effaced all remains of
affetion. Bothwell observed this, and was prompted by ambition,
and perhaps by love, to found on it a scheme, which proved fatal
both to the Queen, and to himself. He had served Mary at diffe-
rent times with fidelity and success. He insinuated hiimfelf into her
favour by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained her heart,
In order to gratify his love, at least his ambition, it was necessary
to get rid of the King. Mary had rejeaed the proposal made to
her for obtaining a divorce. The king was equally hated by the
partizans of the house of Hamilton, a considerable party in the
kingdlom; by Murray, one of the most powerful and popular pcrfons
in his country; by Morton and his aflbciates, whom he had deceived;
aInd wlhoml Bothwell had bound to his intcrefi by a recent favour.
Among the people Darnly was fallen under extreme contempt. I-I
cxpatcd(l, for all these rcafons, that the murder of the King would
Ials v\ith(o)t any *inquiry. And to Mary's love, and to his own

. a.tl(1 rc(,.

address and good fortune, he trusted for the accomplishment of the
reft of his withes. What Bothwell expected really came to pass.
Mary, if not privy herself to the design, connived at an adion
which rid her of a man whom she had such good reason to detest.
A few months after, she married the person who was both sus-
peded and accused of committing the murder.

THOSE who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party reason in

this manner. Murray, fay they, was a man of boundless ambition.
Notwithstanding the illegitimacy of his birth, he had early formed
a design of usurping the Crown. On the Queen's return into
Scotland, he insinuated himself into her favour, and engrossed the
whole power into his own hands. He set himself against every pro-
pofal of marriage which was made to her, left his own chance of
succeeding to the Crown should be destroyed. He hated Darnly,
and was no less hated by him. In order to be revenged on him, he
entered into a sudden friendship with Bothwell, his ancient and mor-
tal enemy. He encouraged him to perpetrate the crime, by giving
him hopes of marrying the queen. All this was done with a design
to throw upon the Queen herself the imputation of being acceffbry
to the murder, and under that pretext, to destroy Bothwell, to de-
pose and imprison her, and to seize the feeptre which he had wzrefted
out of her hands.

THIE former of these systems has an air of probability, is con-

tiftent with itself, and solves appearances. In the latter, some asser-
tions are false, some links are wanting in the chain, and effects
appear, of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray, on the
Queen's return into Scotland, served her with great fidelity, and
by his prudent administration rendered her so popular, and so power-
ful, as enabled her with cafe to quasi a formidable infurredeion
raied by himself in the year I565. What motive could induce
Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, without followers,
without influence over the nobles, whom the Queen, by her ne-
gle, had reduced to the lowest slate of contempt, and who, after
a long disgrace, had regained (according to the moil faivoural-le
iilppolition) tih precarious polllflion of her favour only a icwI dt;vs
bc.lorc his death? It is ditlicult to conceive what Murr.y had to

Lrc:.'.

3

fear from the King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we suppose that the Queen had no pre-
vious attachment to Bothwell, nothing can appear more chimerical
than a scheme to persuade her to marry a man, whose wife was flill
alive, and who was not only fufpeated, but accused, of murdering
her former husband. But that such a scheme should really succeed
is still more extraordinary.-If Murray had instigated Bothwell to
commit the crime, or had himrfelf been accessory to the commission
of it, what hopes were there that Bothwell would silently bear
from a fellow criminal all the persecutions which he suffered, with-
out ever retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing the whole
scene of iniquity ? An antient and deadly feud had subsisted between
Murray and Bothwell; the QOeen with difficulty had brought them
to some terms of agreement. But is it probable that Murray would
chufe an enemy, to whom he had been so lately reconciled, for his
confident in the commission of such an atrocious crime? Or, on
the other hand, would it ever enter into the imagination of a wife
man, first to raise his rival to supreme power, in hopes that after-
wards he ihould find some opportunity of depriving him of that
power ? The most adventrous politician never hazarded such a dan-
gerous experiment. The most credulous folly never trusted such
an uncertain chance.

BUT however strong there general reasonings may be, we muff

decide according to the particular evidence produced. This we
now proceed to examine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's murder appears, i.

From the concurring testimony of all the cotemporary historians.
2. From the confcflion of those persons who suffered for assisting
at the commission of the crime, and who enter into a minute detail
of all its circumfiances. Anders . v. 6. 6. 3. From the acknow-
ledgment of Mary's own commissioners, who allow Bothwell to have
been one of those who were guilty of this crime. Good. v. 2.
213. 4. From the express tcftimony of Lefley Bishop of Ross to
the fame effea with the former. Def. of Queen Mary's Hon. And.
5. 76. Id. v. 3. p. 3 . 5. Morton, at his death, declared that

Both-

Bothwell had follicited him, at different times, to concur in the con-
fpiracy formed againfi the life of the King; and that he was in-
formed by Archibald Douglas, one of the conspirators, that Both-
well was present at the murder. Crawf. Mem. App. 4. The letter
from Douglas, to the Queen, published in the Appendix to vol. II.
No. 12. confirms Morton's testimony. 6. Lord Herreis promises,
in his own name, and in the name of the nobles who adhered to
the Queen, that they would concur in punishing Bothwell as the
murderer of the King. Append.'vol. I. No. 23.

THE most direct charge ever brought against Murray is in these

words of Bishop Lefley, " Is it unknown," addressing himself to the
Earl of Murray, " what the Lord Herreis said to your face openly
11 even at your own table, a few days after the murder was corn-
"c mited ? Did he not charge you with the foreknowledge of the
" fame murder ? Did not he, nulla circuitione uJius, flatly and
' plainly burden you, that riding in Fife, and. coming with one of
"your most assured and trusty servants the fame day whereon you.
' departed from Edinburgh, said to him, among other talk, This
" night ere morning Lord Darnly shall lose his life ?" Def. of Q.
Mary, Anders. v. 2. 75. But the assertion of a man so heated with,
faction as Lefley, unless it were supported by proper evidence, is of
little weight. The servant to whom Murray is said to have spoken'
there words, is not named; nor the manner in which this secret'
eonverfation was brought to light mentioned, Lord Herreis was.
one of the moit zealous advocates for Mary, and it is remarkable
that in all his negotiation at the court of England, he never once.
repeated this accusation of Murray. In answering the challenge
given him by Lord Lindsay, Herreis had a fair opportunity of men-
tioning Murray's knowledge of the murder; but though he openly
accuses of that crime some of those who adhered to him, he in-
duftrioufly avoids any insinuation against Murray himself. Keith,.
Pref. XII. Mary herself, in a conversation with Sir Francis Knolles,
accu-led Morton and Maitland of being privy to the murder, but'
does not mention Murray. And. 4. 55. When the Biflhop of Ross
and Lord Herreis themselves appeared before the Englifli coun--
cil, January II, I569, they declared themselves ready in obcdicncc:

to.

5

to the Queen's command, to accuse Murray and his associates of being
accessory to the murder; but " they being also required, whether
" they or any of them, as of themselves, would accuse the said
" Earl in special, or any of his adherents, or thought them guilty
"thereof;" they answered, " that they took God to witness that
" none of them did ever know any thing of the conspiracy of that
"murder, or were in council and foreknowledge thereof; neither
" who were devisers, inventors, and executors of the fame, till it

was publickly discovered long thereafter by some of the assassins

" who suffered death on that account." Good. v. 2. 308. These
words are taken out of a register kept by Ross and Herreis them-
selves, and seem to be a diret confutation of the bishop's assertion.
The bishop himself repeats the fame thing in fill stronger terms.
And. 3. 31.

THE Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Protefiation touching

the murder of the King of Scots, after mentioning the conference
at Craigmillar concerning a divorce, of which we have given an
account vol. I. 330. add " So after these premisses, the murder
6 of the king following, we judge in our consciences, and hold
"for certain and truth, that the Earl of Murray and secretary Le-
' thington were authors, inventors, counsellors, and causers of the
" fame murder, in what manner, or by whatsoever persons the
' fame was executed." Anders. v. 4. i88. But i. This is no-
thing more than the private opinion or personal affirmation of these
two noblemen. 2. The conclusion which they make has no con-
neetion with the premisses on which they found it. Because Mur-
ray proposed to obtain for the Queen a divorce from her husband
with her own content, it does not follow that therefore he com-
mitted the murder without her knowledge. 3. Huntly and Argyll
were at that time the leaders of that party opposite to Murray, and
animated with all the rage of faction. 4. Both of them were Mur-
ray's personal enemies. Huntly, on account of the treatment
which his family and clan had received from that nobleman. Argyll
was desirous of being divorced from his wife, with whom he lived
on no good terms; Knox, 3z8. and by whom he had no children.
Crawf. Pccr. 19. She was Murray's ilter, and by his intercft he

had
6

7

had obfiruded that design. Keith, 551. These circumflances would
go far towards in validating a poiitive testimony; they more than coun-
terbalance an indeterminate suspicion. 5. It is altogether uncertain
whether Hunily and Argyll ever subscribed this protestation. A copy
of such a pruteilation as the Queen thought would be of advantage
to her cause, x;as transmitted to them by her. Anders . .

4. 86.

The protcftation itself publithcd by Anderson is taken from an unfub-
fcribed copy with blanks for the date and place of subscribing. On
the back of this copy is pafled a paper, which Cecil has marked
"Answer of the Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of Hunt-
' ly and Argyll." Anders. I94, 195. But it can scarce be esteemed
a reply to the above-mentioned protestation. Murray's answer bears
date at London, January 19, 1568. The Queen's letter, in which
she iinclofed the copy of the protestation, bears date at Bowton, Jan.
5, I568. Now it is scarce to be supposed that the copy could be
lent into Scotland, be subscribed by the two Earls, and be seen and
answercd by Murray within so iliort a time. Murray's reply seems
intended only to prevent the impression which the vague and uncer-
tain accusations of his enemies might make in his absence. Cecil
had got the original of the Queen's letter into his cufLody. Anders.
v. 4. I86. This naturally leads us to conjeCture that the letter it-
self, together with the inclosed proteflation, were intercepted before
they came to the hands of I-untly and Argyll. Nor is this mere
conjeCture alone. The letter to Huntly, in which the protestation
was inclosed, is to be found; Cott. Lib. Cal. C. I. fol. 280, and is
an original subscribed by MIary, though not written with her own
hand, becaule si e seldom close to write in the English language.
The proteflation is in the fame Volume, fol. 282, and is manifefily
written by the fame person who wrote the Queen's letter. This is
a clear proof that both were intercepted. So that much has been
founded on a paper not ublsicribcd by the two Earls, and probably
never fccn by them. 1Beidces, this method whicl the Q(een took of
fending a copy, to the two Earls, of what was proper for them to
declare with regard to a conicrence held in their own prcetnce, ap-
pears bfomcwhat suspicious. It would have been more natural, and
not io liable to any mifiitclrprctation, to have delfred theln to

VoL. II. D d d write

DISS E R T A T ON O N

write the most exaC account, which they could recollet, of what
had passed in the conversation at Craigmillar.

THE Queen's commissioners at the Colferences in England accused

Murray and his aflociates of having murdered the King. Good. 2.
28 1. But these accusations are nothing more than loose and general
affirmations, without descending to such particular circunifances,
as either ascertain their truth, or discover their falsehood. The
fame accusation is repeated by the nobles afTembled at Dumbartoin
Sept. I568. Good. . 359. And the fame observation may be made
concerning it.

ALL the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to account for Mur-

ray's murdering of the King, by supposing that it was done on pur-
pose, that he might have a pretence of disturbing the Queen's adminif-
tration, and thereby rendering ineffectual her general Revocation of
Crown lands, which would have deprived him and his associates of
the best part of their efates. Lefley's Def. of Maryrs Hon. p. 73.
But whoever confiders the limited powers of a Scottish Monarch, will
fee that such a revocation could not be very formidable to the no-
bles. Every King of Scotland began his reign with such a revo-
cation; and as often as it was renewed, the power of the nobles
rendered it ineffeCtual. The best vindication of Murray and his
party from this accusation is that which they presented to the Queen
of England, and which hath never hitherto been published.
Paper office. A/fwe.rs to te objec7ions and allcrdlance of the -ueen, allecdging the

Earl of MIirrany Lord Regent, the Elarl of Morfon, lMa/rr-, (;en-
cairnt1, itneic, Ruthvecn, &c. to have been moved to armour, for that
they abhlorrel nd

a nd ijt not abide her revocation of the alienation

mlade o' her property.

I'r is anfwcre(d, that is allcdged but all appearance, and it appears

God has bereft the alledgancc of all wit and good rlemembrance
for their rcalbns following.

IMPRIMIS, as to my Lord Regent, he never had occasion to

grudge thereat, in rcfpecq the Q(een made him privy to the fame,
and took resolution with him for the execution thereof, letting his
Lordihip know she would atfurcdly in the famine except all things
flhe had given to him, and ratcfy them in the next parliament, as
fle did indeed; and for that cause wished my Lord to leave be-
'hind him Mailer John Wood, to attend upon the fame, to whom
the declared, that als well in that as in all others her grants it
should be provided, yea of free will did promise and offer before
ever he demanded, as it came to pass without any let or impedi-
ment, for all was ratified by her command, and hand write, at the
Parliament, but any difficulty.

ITEMI as to my Lord of M/orton, he could not grudge thereat

quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that ever I
knew of,

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may lay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may lay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.

ONLY my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the property quilk

alfua was gladly and liberally confirmed to him, in the said parliament
precceding a year; was never ane had any cause of mircontent of
that revocation, far leis to have put their lives and heritage to so
open and manifefi ane danger as they did for fie ane frivole cause.

GYF ever any did make evill countenance, and filow any miC-

contentment of the iaid revocation, it was my Lord of Argyll in
fpeciall, quha fipak largely in the time of Parliament theirancnts to
the Qiceen herself, and did complain of the manifect corruption of
ane ad of Parliament pail- upon her Mlajelly's return, and ifa did
lett any revocation at that time; but the armor for revenge of tlle
1Kinlg's deid was not till twa months after, att quhat time there was
,-o occaiuon given thereof, nor never a man had mind thercof;

D d ld

9
AIINvGmc

HAVING thus examined the evidence which has been produced

against the Earls of Murray and Bothwell; we ihall next proceed
to enquire whether the QOeen herself was accessory to the murder
of her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known, than strong

suspicions arose, among some of her fubijets, that Mary had given
her content to the commiflion of that crime. And. a. i 6. Ve
are informed, by her own ambassador in France, the Archbishop of
Glasgow, that the sentiments of foreigners, on this head, were no
less unfavourable to her. Keith. Pref. ix. Many of her nobles loudly
accused her of that crime, and a great part of the nation by support-
ing them, seem to have allowed the accusation to be well founded.

SOME crimes, however, are of such a nature that they scarce ad-

mit of a positive or direct proof. Deeds of darkness can seldom be
brought perfectly to light. Where persons are accused not of being
Principals, but only of being Accezlries to a crime; not of having
committed it themselves, but only of giving consent to the com-
mission of it by others; the proof becomes still more difficult : and
unless when some accomplice betrays the secret, a proof by circum-
fiances, or presumptive evidence, is all that can be attained. Even
in judicial trials, such evidence is fonetimres held to be sufficient for
condemning criminals. The degree of convicion which such evi-
dence carries along with it, is often not inferior to that which arises
from positive testimony; and a concurring series of circumstances
satisfies the underlianding no less than the express declaration of
witnesses.

EVID F.NC, of both these kinds has been produced againfl: Mary.

We fl-all firfl confider that which is foundcd upon circumfianccs
alone.

SoMr r of thcfe fi;lricious circum flances preceded the King's death;

others were f;Itc')tucnlt to it. With regard to the 'former, we may
Obl)Lcrvc tlia ttlc (Qecnr's violcint love of lDarnly was Ioon collvcrtct
itto a alaveir-ionl to himl no Icls violent; and that his own ill conldut-,

and
10

and excesses of every kind were such, that if they did not justify,
at least they account for this sudden change of her disposition to-
wards him. The rife and progress of this domestic rupture, I have
traced with great care in the history, and to the proofs of it which
may be found in papers published by other authors, I have added
those contained in App. N° XVI. and XVII. The Earls of
Murray, Morton, Bothwell, Argyll, and Huntly confidered the
scheme of procuring for the Queen a divorce from her husband,
as one of the most flattering proposals they could make to her, and
employed it as the most powerful inducement to prevail on her to
conernt to a measure, which they had much at heart, but from which
they knew her to be extremely averse. And. 4. p. 2. 188. Du
Croc the French ambassador, who was an cye-witnefs of what he
defcrihcs, not only represents her disgust at Darnly to be extreme,
but declares that there could be no hopes of a reconcilement between
them. " ' he Queen is in the hands of physicians, and I do afTure Decem. 12,
you is not at all well; and do believe the principal part of her dif- 's66.
ease to confilt in deep grief and sorrow; nor does it seem poflible
to make her forget the fame. Still flle repeats these words, couldc
i,/79 to be dead. You know very well that the injury flhe has re-
ceived is exceeding great, and her Majefly will never forget it.-
To speak my mind freely to you, I do not expec, upon Icveral ac-
counts, any good understanding between them Li. c. the King and
QuccnJ unlels God effecually put to his lhand.--His bad de- Decemb. 23.
portment is incurable, nor can there ever be any good expeaed
from him for several reasons, which I might tell you was I present
with you. I cannot pretend to foretel how all may turn, but I
will fay, that matters cannot lub)fift long as they are, without being
accompanied with sundry bad confequcnces." Keith, Pref. vii.
I-ad Henry died a natural death, at this junLcure, it mult have been
confidered as a very fortunate event to the Q_ en, and as a icafon-
able deliverance from a husband who had become altogether odious
to her. Now as IIenry was murderedc a few weeks af'terwvards,
anl as nothing had lhappened to reilnder the QUlenl's avcrfion to
him less violent, the opinionl of tllolC who collider Mary as the
authlor of an event, vwhlich was manitcll y so aglrcallc to her,
will appear perhaps to fomc of our readers to be neither untllitiiil

11t''

II

nor over-refined. If we add to this, what has been observed in the
history, that in proportion to the increase of Mary's hatred of her
husband, Bothwell made progress in her favour; and that he be-
camle the objec: not only of her confidence but of her attachment,
that opinion acquires new strength. It is easy to observe many ad-
vantages which mignht redound to Mary as well as to Bothwell from
the King's death; but excepting them, no person, and no party in
the kingdom could derive the least benefit from that event. Both-
well, accordingly, murdered the King, and it was in that age
thought no violent imputation on Mary's charaCter, to suppose that
the had consented to the deed.

THIE fleps which the Queen took after her hufbiand's death add

frength to that fuippofition. r. Melvil, who was in Edinburgh,
at the time of the King's death, aflerts, that " every body fufpeCc(d
the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durst speak freely to others
ltaid plainly that it was He." p . I55. 2. Mary having iflued a
proclamation, on the I2th of February, offering a reward to any
person, who fiould discover thole who had murdered her husband;
And. I. 36. a paper in answer to this was affixed to the gates of
the Tolbooth February i6, in which Bothwell was named as the
chief person guilty of that crime, and the Queen herself was ac-
cufed of having given her conlent to it. And. 2. I56. 3. Soon
after, February 2o, the Earl of Lcnnox, the King's father, wrote
to Mary, conjuring her, by every motive, to prolecute the mur-
derers with tle utmost rigour. He plainly declared his own sus-
picions of Bothwell, and pointed out a method of proceeding againfl
him, and 'fbr (lilcovering the other authors of the crime, no lets
obvious than c(luitalle. He adviscd her to Icize, and to commit to
tUre cuflody 13othwell iimlfclf, and thole who were already nanced
as his accoomplices; to call an Afcmnbly of the nobles; to iflfc a
proclamation, inviting Botihwll's accuLers to appear; and if, on that
cicoll lragemicnt, nIo pCeron applared to accuse them, to hold theim
as innocent, and to clifinil; them witlhout farther trial. And. i. 4).
4. Archl)ilhop Bcatoun, her ambl)aflador in France, in a letter to
Mlary, March !)tlh, employs argumelnts of tlle utmioll weight to
persuade her to profccute the murderers with the greatctl lfvcrity.

I cain
£2

" I can conclude nathing, (fays he) by quhat zour Majesty writes to'
me zourfelf, that fen it has plefit God to conserve zow to take a
rigorous vengeance thereof, that rather than it be not actually taine,
it appears to me better in this warld that ze had loft lile and all. I
ask zour Majeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I can heir nathing,
to zour prejudife, but I mian confiraindly writ the iamin, that all may ,,,n
come to zour knawlege; for the better rcmede may be put therto.
Heir it is needfull that ze forth lhawv now rather than ever of be-
fore, the greire vertue, magnanimitie, and conilance that God has
grantit zow, be quhais grace, I hope ze fall overcome :his molt
heavie envie and difilefir of the committing therof, and conserve
that reputatioun in all godliness, ze have conquill of lang, quhich
can appear n l wayis miir clearlie, than that zov do ick jultice that fh
the hAill world may declare zowr innocence, and give telli'm)ny sh/le
forever of thair treason that has committed (but fear of God or CI"-
man) so cruel and ungodlie a murther, quhairof thlre is fia vitikc luch
ill spoken, that I am confirainit to ask zow mercy, that n.it.her
can I or will I make the rehearsal thereof, which is o0zir odi.;us. l"
But alas ! Madame, all over Europe this day there is na purpose in
head fa frequent as of zour Majeftie, and of the present slate of
zour realm, quhlilk is in the molt part interpretit finiterly." Keith,
Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, as appears from Append. Vol. I. N° XIX.
urged the fame thing in itrong terms. 6. 'IThe circumfiances of the
cafe itself, no less than these solicitations and remonstrances, called
for the utmofl vigour in her proceedings. Her husband had been
murdered in a cruel manner, almost in her own presence. Her
fulbjecits were filled with the iutmoft horror at that crime. Both-
well, one of her principal favourites, hlad been publickly accuscd as
the author of it. Rlciedions, extremely dilhonouliable to herself,
had been thrown out. If indignation, and the love oli juiiice, did
not prompt her to pursue the murderers with ardour, decency, at
least, and concern for vindicating her own character, Ihould have
induced her to avoid any appearance of rcmifilels or want of
zeal.

U r inflcad of this, Mary continued to clifcover, in all her ac-
tions, the utmoil partiality towards Bothwell. i. On the itlli of

3 February

13'

February, five days after the murder, the bellowed on him the re-
version of the fiuperiority of the town of Leith, which in the year
I565 she had mortgaged to the citizens of Edinburgh. 'lhis grant
was of much importance, as it gave him not only the command
of the principal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant over
the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely desirous of keep-
ing poffeflion of it *. . Bothwell being extremely desirous to

* Copy from the o, ,inal in ibe Charter-house of the cry of Edinburgh of an Jffigna-
iiol to the revctfion of the fuiperiority of Leitb by i lcen 3ary to the Eari of Bothwell.

Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis hominibus fuis ad quosprae-

sentes, litere pervenerint falutem. Sciatis, quod nos ad memoriam reducentes mul-
tiplex bonum verum et fidele fervitium, non tantum quondam nofira chariffime
matri Marie Regine regni noftri pro tempore in noftra minoritate faclum et imnpen-
Tum, verum etiam nobifmiet il sis, tam intra partes Gallie quam intra hoc noftrurm
regnum, ad extentioiiem noftri honoris et auctoritatis in punitione furum, malefac-
torum, et tranfgreflbrum infra idem, per nostrum conhfum confanguineum et confilia-
rium Jacobum coritern Bo:huile, dominum Halis, Creighton et Liddifdale, mag-
num admirallum regni noftli, commiflionem et onerationem ad hunc effetum ha-
bentem, per quas ipfe fuum corpus et vitam in magno periculo pofuit; ac etiam, in
performatione et extentione noftri diti fervitii, fuam hereditatem, supra fummam
viginti millium mercarum hujus noflri regni, alienavit ac lafit. Et nos cogitantes
quod, ex nofira principali honore et devoria, dictum nofirum confifum confanguineum
& confiliarium cum quodam accidente et gratitudine rccompenfare et gratificare in-
cumbit quae nos commode fibi concedere poterimus, unde ipfe magis habilis omnibus
affuturis temporibus efle poterit, et ad hujufmodi performandum in omnibus caufis
feu eventibus: In recompenfationem quorum pra:miffiruni, ac pro diverfis allis nofiris
rationalibus caufis et confiderationibus nos mo entibus, Fecimus, &c. dictum Jaco-
bum comnitem Bothuile, &c. ac suos haeredes mafculos quofcunque noffros legitti-
mos, &c. ani gnatos in et ad literas reverfionis fafcas, &c. per Symonem Preston de
eodem milittm, prr pofitum, balivos, consules, et communitatem hujus noftri
burgi de Edinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fucc flbribus, &c. nobis, nofliifque heredibus,
filccefforibus, et affignatis pro rcdemptione, &c. fuperioritatis totius villn: de Leith,
&c. impignoratac per nos dietis prxepofito, &c. sub revcrfione alicnatre continentis fum-
mamn decem millium mercarum monctae pirafcriptae nuimerandam ct calculandam in
parochiali ccclefi.a dc Edinburgh, super prcmonitione quad-iginta dicrum, ut moris eit,
veluti in didlis levcrfionis litcrih, &c. de data 8vo Ocob. 1565, &c. (The reft is
form, and contains a Caufc of ablolute warrandice.) IN CUJUS REI TEST'rIMONIUrl
pracfentibus magnum figillum nofirum apponi fecimus. Apud Edinburnh, decimo
quinto die menfis Ftbruarii, ainno Domini millefimo quingentefimo fcxaefimo sexto,
ct regni noftri vicefino quinto.

The great fcal entire.

obtain

obtain the command of the castle of Edinburgh, the Queen, in
order to prevail on the Earl of Mar to surrender the government
of it, offered to commit the young prince to his cultody. Mar
conrented; and Ihe instantly appointed Bothwell governor of the
castle. And. I. Pref. 64. Keith, 379. 3. The inquiry into the
murder, previous to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been conduced
with the utmost remifnefs. Buchanan exclaims loudly against this.
And. 2. 24. Nor was it without reason that he did so, as is evi-
dent from a circumstance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelfoln,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house when his matter
was murdered, and was dug up alive out of the rubbish. Being
examined on the Monday after the King's death, " This dcponar
fchew that Bonkle had the key of the fellare, and the Queeris
fervandis the keyis of her ihalmir. Quhilk the Laird of 'Tillibar-
din hearing, said, Hald thair, here is ane ground. Efter quhilk
words fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na farther in the inquifi-
tion." And. 4. P. 2. I67. Had there been any intention to search
into the bottom of the matter, a circumstance of so much ini-
portance merited the most careful enquiry. 4. Notwithstanding
Lennox's repeated solicitations, notwithfsanding the reasonableness
of his demands, and the necessity of complying with them, in
order to encourage any accuser to appear against Bothwell, she not
only refused to commit him to custody, or even to remove him
from her presence and councils; And. I. 42, 48. but by the grants
which we have mentioned, and by other circumstances, discovered
an increase of attachment to him. 5. She could not avoid bringing
Bothwell to a publick trial; but flhe permitted him to fit as a mem-
ber in that meeting of the Privy-council, which directed his own
trial; and the trial itself was carried on with such unneceflary
precipitancy, and with so many other suspicious circumstances, as
render his acquittal rather an argument of his guilt than a proof
of his innocence. There circumstances have all been mentioned
at length, Vol. i. p. 344, &c. and therefore are not repeated in this
place. 6. Two days after the trial, Mary gave a public proof of
her regard for Bothwcll, by appointing him to carry the iceptrc
before her at the meeting of Parliament. Keith, 378. 7. In that

VOL. II. E c c parlialment,

I5

parliament, she granted him a ratification of all the vati possessions
and honours, which lhe had conferred upon him, in which was
contained an ample enumeration of all the services he had performed.
And. I. 117. 8. Though Melvil, who foresaw that her attach-
ment to Bothwell would at length induce her to marry him, warned
her of the infamy and danger which would attend that action, she
not only disregarded this salutary admonition, but discovered what
had passed between them to Bothwell, which cxpotcd Melvil
to his indignation. Melv. 156. 9. Bothwell seized Mary as she
returned from Stirling, April 24. If he had done this, without
her knowledge and consent, such an insult could not have failed to
have filled her with the most violent indignation. But according
to the account of an old M. S. " The friendly love was so
nighly contracted between this great princess and her enormous
fubjedt, that there was no end thereof (for it was constantly esteem-
ed by all men that either of them loved other carnally) so that the
suffered patiently to be led where the lover lift, and all the way
neither made obflacle, impediment, clamour, or resistance, as in
fich accidents use to be, or that she might have done by her prince-
ly authority, being accompanied with the noble Earl of Huntly,
and Secretary Maitland of Lethington." Keith, ;83. Melvil,
who was present, confirms this account, and tells us that the
officer, by whom he was seized, informed him that nothing was
done without the Queen's content. Melv. i58. io. On the I2th
of May, a few days before her marriage, Mary declared that she
was then at full liberty, and that though Bothwell had offended her
by seizing her person, fie was so much satisficd with his dutiful
behaviour since that time, and so indebted to him for past services,
that she not only forgave that offence, but resolved to promote him
to higher honours. And I. I87. I . Even after the confederate
nobles had driven Bothwell from the Queen's pretence, and though
the {aw that he was confidercd as the murderer of her former lhuti
band by so great a part of her fulbjeds, her affection did not in the
le;atf abate, and she continued to cxprefs the molt unalterable at-
tachirent to him. '" I can perceive (Iays Sir N. Throgmorton)
.liat the rigour with which the Queen is kept, procccdcth by order

froml
I1

17

from these men, because that the Queen will not, by any means,
be induced to lend her authority to prosecute the murder; nor
will not content by any persuasion to abandon the Lord Bothwell
for her husband, but avoweth contfantly that she will live and die
with him; and faith that if it were put to her choice to relinquish
her crown and kingdom, or the Lord Bothwell, the would leave
her kingdom and dignity to go a simple damsel with him, and that
fle will never consent that he shall fare worse, or have more harm
than herself. App. p. 42. See also p. 44. From this long cnu-
meration of circumstances, we may, without violence, draw the
following conclusion. Had Mary really been acceifory to the mur-
der of her huiband; had Bothwell perpetrated the crime with her
consent, or at her command; and had (ihe intended to ififle the evi-
dence against him, and to prevent the discovery of his guilt, she
could scarce have taken any other fleps than those she took, nor
could her conduct have been more repugnant to all the maxims of
prudence and of decency.

THE positive evidence produced against Mary may be classed under
two heads.

i. THE depositions of some persons who were employed in com-

mitting the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, who in the
writings of that age is called French Paris. This person, who was
Bothwell's servant, and much trusted by him, was twice examined,
and the original of one of his depositions, and a copy of the other,
are still extant. It is pretended, that both there are notorious for-
geries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and n'aivete which
it is almost impoflible to imitate; they abound with a num-
ber of minute facts and particularities, which the molt dextrous
forger could not have easily assemblcd, and connected together
with any appearance of probability; and they are filled with cir-
cuLimfanccs, which can icarcc be ifppofed to have entered the imna-
gination of any man, but one of Paris's priofeflion and charac9er.
But, at the fame time, it muLf bec aclknowlcldged that his dcpoli-
tions contain iolnc improbal)le circumnilanccs. He icclms to have
been a foolish talkative fellow ; the fear of death; the viole:ce oi

c c 2 tolrttrc;

torture; and the desire of pleasing those in whose power he was,
tempted him, perhaps, to feign some circumstances, and to exagge-
rate others. To fay that some circumstances in an affidavit are im-
probable or false, is very different from faying that the whole is
forged. I fufpec the former to be the cafe here, but I fee no ap-
pearance of the latter. Be that as it will, some of the most material
fads in Paris's affidavits reft upon his tingle testimony; and for
that reason, I have not in the history, nor ihall I in this place, lay
any fRrefs upon them.

2. THE letters said to be written by Mary to Bothwell. These

have been frequently published. The accident, by which the
Qjeen's enemies got them into their possession, is related Vol. I.
371. When the authenticity of any ancient paper is dubious or
contested, it may be ascertained either by external or internal evi-
dence. Both these have been produced in the present cafe.

I. EXTERNAL proofs of the genuineness of Mary's letters. I.

Murray and the nobles who adhere to him affirm, upon their
word and honour, that the letters were written with the Queen's
own hand, with which they were well acquainted. Good. 2.
64, 92. o. The letters were publickly produced in the parliament
of Scotland, December 1567, Good. 2. 360; and were so far
confidered as genuine, that they are mentioned in the act against
Mary, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good. 2. 66. 3.
They were shewn privately to the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of
Suflex, and Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabeth's comminfioners at York. In
the account which they give of this matter to their Mistress, they
'ctn to confider the letters as genuine, and express no suspicion
of any forgery; they particularly observe, " that the matter con-
tained in them is such, that it could hardly be invented and
dcvifcd by any other than hcrfelf; for that they 'difcouref of
foimc things, which were unknown to any other than to herfell
and Bothwell; and as it is hard to counterfeit so many, so the nlat-
tcr of thcin, and the manner how thef men came by them is fuclh,
;Is it fccmcth that God, in whose fight murder and bloodshed of the
innocent is abominable, would not permit the fhlme to be hid or

concealedl.

concealed. Good. 2. 142. They seem to have made such an
impreflion on the Duke of Norfolk, that in a subsequent letter to
Pembroke, Leicester and Cecil, he has these words, " If the mat-
ter shall be thought as deteflable and manifest to you, as for ought
we can perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. 2. 154. 4. After
the conferences at York and Westminster were finished, Elizabeth
resolved to call together the'Earls who were then at court, and to
lay before them the whole proceedings against the Scots Queen,
particularly that " the letters and writings exhibited by the Regent,
as the Q-elle of Scots letters and writings, should also be shew-
ed, and coc-) c ence [i. e. comparison] thereof made in their fight,
with the letci: of the said Queen's being extant, and heretofore
written with 11h- c('.n hand, and sent to the Q(een's Majefly;
whereby may be fearli'cr and examined what difference is betwixt
them." Good. 2. 252. They assembled, accordingly, at Hampton
Court, December 14 and 15, 1568; and " The originals of'the
letters supposed to be written with the Queen of Scots own hand,
were then also presently produced and perused; and being read, were
duly conferred and compared, for the manner of writing, and
fashion of orthography, with sundry other letters long since here-
tofore written, and lent by the said Queen of Scots to the Qleen's
Majey.--- In collation whereof no difference was found." Good.
2. 256. 5. Mary having written an apologetical letter for her con-
duct to the Countess of Lennox, July o1, 1570 *, the tranfinitted
it to her husband then in Scotland; and he returned to the Coutntels
the following answer: " Seeing you have remittit to me, to answer
the Queen the King's mother's letters ient to you, what can I fay

but

* Mary's lettcr has never been publifled, and ougit to hlive a plce here, where

cvidence on all fides is fairly produced. '" MIadam, if the w.lii; and a;il(fe icpoiis
of rebellis, eneemeis weill knawin for traitouris to zowv, anld alace to lituchc triifted
of me by zoure advice, had not Io far iturred you ag'nis niy innolcency (and I
niufl f y aganis all kyiidincs, tlhat zow have not oiclic i :s it \(ic: r o lcinln t ill
wvingl ullic, hot io hatcd me, as some wordis and opeln dci. ,

is hes tcfliicit to all the

wailde, a manyfift millylkilng in .owv alg:lnis zowr awn

bludti ) I w'ull not hlave onit-

tit tlius lang my dewtic in wrytilng to 'zow excurLing m ol thl le lllt'c\v i'Cpolilt
made of me. But hoping withl Godis grace and tyme to li;., ci) i)iinoccncy k[:lcivli
to ztow, as I tr ft it is aready t

t the il p it

l lii'it ;(f IIL i::fi O:

l p l ni;, I thlin lt

it best not to tiouble zoow for a tyimec till that sucli a 1iiitti. c i
is l .ovel i..1 iiil .S

usi

I9

but that I do not marvell to fee hir writ the best sho can for hirfelf,
to fcame to purge hir of that, quhairof many befyde me are certainly
pcrfuadit of the contrary, and I not only affurit by my awin knaw-
ledge, but by her handwrit, the confeffionis of men gone to the
death, and uther infallibil experience. It wull be lang tyme that
is hable to put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak black
quhyte, or innocency to appear quhair the contrary is fa weill knawin.
The maill indifferent, I trust, doubtis not of the equitie of zoure
and my cause, and of the just occaiioun of our miflyking. Hir
richt dewtie to zow and me, being the parteis interest, were hir trew
confeffioun and unfeyned repentance of that lamentable fact, odious
for hir to be reportit, and forrowfull for us to think of. God is just,
and will not in the end be abused; but as he has manifested the
trewth, so will he puneife the iniquity." Lennox's Orig. Regij7.
of Letters. In their publick papers, the Queen's enemies may be
fufpeded of advancing what would be most subservient to their cause;
not what was agreeable to truth, or what flowed from their own
inward conviStion. But in a private letter to his own wife, Lennox
had no occasion to diflemble; and it is plain, that he not only
thought the Queen guilty, but believed the authenticity of her let-
ters to Bothwell.

II. WI TH regard to the internal proofs of the genuineness of the

Qeeen's letters to Bothwell, we may observe, i. That whenever a

us Iayth, quhilk is the transporting zoure littil sone, and my onelie child in this
cunltrey. 'Io the quhilk albeit I be never fa willing. I wald be glaid to have zoure
advyfe theiein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. I have born him, and God knawis
with quhat daunger to him and me boith; and of zow he is defcendit. So I neanc
not to forzet my dewtie to zow, in fchewin h, rein any unkyndncfs to zow, how
ui:kyidlie that ever ze have dealt with me, bot will love zow as my awnt, and rcfpeCt
z, w as my mover in law. And gif ye ples to knaw firthcr ol my mynde in that and
all uther thinglis betwixt us, my ambafiador the Biflop of Ross fall be ready to con-
fc'r with zow. And so alter my liairtlie comimndtionis, iremitting mIe 10 my faide
amb:,fll.dor, and zour bettel conlidcraitiounl, I commi t

zow to the prutctioul of Al-

my'gh ty (Cod, (]uhom I praly to prefervc zow ;ilnd my brothcr Charles, ald caus zow
to kknIw my paiirt better nor ze do. I"rom Chatifwvorth this x of July 1570.

'o my) L. lie I.cnnox Your natural gude Nice

ci)' mooder ill law and lov)'nc doclitcr.

pa per
20

paper is forged with a particular intention, the eagerness of the
forger to establish the point in view, his solicitude to cut off all
doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appearance of uncertainty, al-
ways prompt him to use expreflions the moll explicit and full to his
purpose. The paflages foisted into ancient authors by Heretics in
different ages; the legendary miracles of the Romish faints; the
supposititious deeds in their own favour produced by monasteries;
the false characters of homage mentioned Vol. I. p. I . are so many
proofs of his assertion. No maxim seems to be more certain than
this, that a forger is often apt to prove too much, but seldom falls:
into the error of proving too little. The point which the Queen's
enemies had to establish, was '" that as the Earl ot' Bothwell was.
chief executor of the horrible and unworthy murder perpetrated, &c.
so was she of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, persuader, and
commander of the said murder to be done." Good. 2. 207. But
of this there are only imperfedc hints, obscure intimations, and
dark expressions in the letters, which however convincing evidence
they might furnish if found' in real letters, bear no refernblance to
that glare and superfluity of evidence which forgeries commonly
contain. All the advocates for Mary's innocence in her own age,
contend that there is nothing in the letters which can serve as a proof
of her guilt. Lefley, Blackwood, Turner, &c abound with pat'lges
to this purpose; nor are the sentiments of those in the present age
different. " Yet still it might have been expeCted (fays her latest
defender) that some one or other of the points or articles of the
accusation flould be made out clearly by the proof. But nothing
of that is to be seen in the present cafe. There is nothing in the
letters, that could plainly flew the writer to have been in the fore-
knowledge, counsel, or device of any murder, far less to have
pcrfuaded or commanded it; and as little is there about maintainting
or juflifying any murderers." Good. i. 76. H-ow ill advised were
'Mary'S advcrfaries to contract io much guilt, and to practite sot many
artifices in order to forge lcttcrs, lwhich are (f) ill contriv'cd for eii'i-
blilhilng the conclusion they had in vierw? IIad they bccn.fo base'
ais to have rccourtf to 1forgery, is it not natural to think that they
would have produccd )iomcthing mlore explicit and d cci iv ? 2. As
it is anl1iof impoflible to invent a long narration conili sing of many

CilCLU ni!l;a iccs

21

circumstances, and to connea it in such a manner with real fats,
that no mark of fraud shall appear; for this reason skilful forgers
avoid any long detail of circumstances, especially of foreign and
superfluous ones, well knowing that the more these are multiplied,
the more are the chances of detedion increased. Now Mary's
letters, especially the first, are filled with a multiplicity of circum-
fiances, extremely natural in a real correspondence, but altogether
foreign to the purpofe-of the Queen's enemies, and which it would
have been perfec folly to have inserted if they had been altogether
imaginary, and without foundation. 3. The truth and reality of fe-
veral circumstances in the letters, and these, too, of no very publick
nature, are confirmed by undoubted collateral evidence. Let. i.
Good. o. p. i. The Queen is said to have met one of Lennox's gen-
tlemen, and to have some conversation with him. Thomas Craw-
ford, who was the person, appeared before Elizabeth's commiflion-
ers, and confirmed, upon oath, the truth of this circumstance. He
likewise declared, that during the Queen's flay at Glasgow, the King
repeated to him, every night, whatever had patsed, through the day,
between her Majesty and him, and that the account given of these
conversations in the first letter, is nearly the fame with what the
King communicated to him. Good. 5. 245. According to the
fame letter there was much discourse between the King and Queen
concerning Mynto, Hiegait, and Walcar. Good. 3. 8, o, I I.
What this might be, was altogether unknown till a letter of Mary's
preserved in the Scottish College at Paris, and published, Keith,
Prcf. vii. discovered it to be an affair of so much importance as mc-
rited all the attention Ihe paid to it at that time. It appears by a
letter from the French ambaflador, that Mary was subjet to a vio-
lent pain in her fide. Keith, ibid. This circumflance is mentioned,
Letter I. p. 30. in a manner so natural as can scarce belong to any
but a genuine producdion. 4. If we flall fill think it probable to
fuppofl that b mnany real circumstances were artfully introduced into
the letters by the forgers, in order to give an air of authenticity to
theil p1)rduction ; it will scarce be pollible to hold the llamie opinlio,
concerning the following particular. Before the Q ccn began her
firfl letter to Potlhwll, ihe, as is lifial among tloifc who write lonlg
letters concerning a variety of libjcas, made notes or 1.lemzorandulll.

I o'

of the particulars lhe wished to emenmber; but as flhe fat up writ-
ing during a great part of the night, and after her attendants were
asleep, her paper failed her, and (he continued her letter upon the
fame sheet, on which fle had formerly made her memorandums.
This ile herself takes notice of, and makes an apology for it: " It
is late; I desire never to cease from writing unto you, yet now after
the killing of your hands, I will end my letter. Excuse ma evil
writing, and read it twice over. Excuse that thing that is Icriblit, for
I had na paper zefterday, quhen I wrait that of the memorial." Good.
2. s8. These memorandums still appear in the middle of the letter;
and what we have said seems naturally to account for the manner how
they might find their way into a real letter. It is fearce to be supposed,
however, that any forger would think of placing memorandums in the
middle of a letter, where, at first fight, they make so absurd and
so unnatural an appearance. But if any ihall ftiU carry their refine-
ment so far, as to suppose that the forgers were so artful as to throw
in this circumstance, in order to preserve the appearance of genuine-
ness, they mull at least allow that the Queen's enemies, who em-
ployed these forgers, could not be ignorant of the design and mean-
ing of there short notes and memorandums; but we find them
mistaking them so far as to imagine that they were the credit of the
bearer, i. e. points concerning which the Queen had given him
verbal inftrulions. Good. 2. i52. This they cannot possibly be;
for the Queen herself writes with so much exadnefs concerning the
different points in the memorandums, that there was no need of
giving any credit or inftrudions to the bearer concerning them.
The memorandums are indeed the contents of the letter. 5. Mary,
mentioning her conversations with the King about the affair of
Mlynto, Hiegait, &c. fays, " The morn [i. e. to-morrow] I will
ticik to him upon that point;" and then adds, " As to the reft of
Willie Hicgait's, he confcflit it; but it was the morne, [i. c. the
morning] after my cumming or he did it." Good. 2. 9. This ad-
dition, which could not have been made till after the convcrfttion
halppned, rcins either to have been ini(rt'cd by the Q.ueen into
the body of the letter, or, perhaps, the having written it on the
margin, it was taken thence into tle text. 'If' wve iilupofc tlhe
letter to be a real one, and written at dlilfcrent tiines, as it plainly

Vol. I. I. F f I bears,

bears, this circumfiance appears to be very natural; but no reason
could have induced a forger to have ventured upon such an ana-
chronifm, for which there was no neceflity. An addition, perfectly
similar to this, made to a genuine paper, may be found, Good. 2.

BUT, on the other hand, Mary herself, and the advocates for

her innocence have contended that these letters were forged by her
enemies, on purpose to blast her reputation, and to justify their own
rebellion. It is not necessary to take notice of the arguments, which
were produced, in her own age, in support of this opinion; the
observations which we have already made, contain a full reply to
them. An author, who has inquired into the affairs of that period
with great industry, and who has acquired much knowledge of
them, has lately published (as he affirms) a demonstration of the
forgery of Mary's letters. This demonstration he founds upon evi-
dence both internal and external. With regard to the former he
observes that the French copy of the Queen's letters is plainly a
translation of Buchanan's Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a
translation of the Scottish copy; and by consequence, the assertion of
the Queen's enemies, that she wrote them originally in French, is
altogether groundless, and the whole letters are gross forgeries. He
accounts for this strange succession of translations, by supposing
that when the forgery was projected, no person could be found ca-
pable of writing originally in the French language, letters which
would pass for the Queen's; for that reason they were first com-
posed in Scottish; but unluckily, the French interpreter, it would
teem, did not understand that language; and therefore Buchanan
translated them into Latin, and from his Latin they were rendered
into French. Good. I. 79, 8o.

It is scarce necesSary to observe that no proof whatever is pro-

duced of any of there suppositions. The manners of the Scots,
in that age, when almost every man of rank spent a part of his
youth in France, and the intcrcourfe between the two nations was
great, render it altogether improbable that so many complicated

operations
24

operations should be necessary, in order to procure a few letters to
be written in the French language.

BUT without insisting farther on this, we may observe that all

this author's premises may be granted, and yet his conclusion will
not follow, unless he likewise prove that the French letters, as we
now have them, are a true copy of those which were produccd by
Murray and his party in the Scottiih parliament, and at York and
Westminster. But this he has not attempted; and if we attend to
the history of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious, muif
have been unsuccessful. The letters were first publilhed at the end *
of Buchanan's Detection. The first edition of this treatise was in
Latin, in which language three of the Queen's letters were subjoin-
ed to it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. 157r. Soon after a
Scottish translation of it was published, and at the end of it were
printed likewise in Scottish, the three letters which had formerly
appeared in Latin, and five other letters in Scottish, which were
not in the Latin edition. Next appeared a French translation of the
Detetion, and of seven of the letters; this bears to have been print-
ed at Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem I572. The name of the place,
as well as of the printer, is allowed by all parties to be a manifest
imposture. Our author, from observing the day of the month, on
which the printing is said to have been finished, has asserted that
this edition was printed at London; but no stress can be laid upon
a date found in a book, where every other circumstance with regard
to the printing is allowed to be false. Blackwood, who (next to
Lefley) was the bell informed of all Mary's advocates in that age,
affirms that the French edition of the Detecion was published in
France: " I1 [Buchanan] a depuis adjouftc a ceile declamation un
petit libelle du pretcndu maniage du Duc de Norfolk, ct de la faSon
de ton proces, et la tout envoyO aux freres a la Rochellc, lefquels
voyants qu'il pouvoit Iervir a la cause, l'ont traduit en Francois, ct
iceluy fut imprimee a Edinbourg, c'eft a dire a la Rlocchllc, par
Thomas Waltcni, norm apofte ct fait a plaiiir." Martyre de Marie.
Jebb. 2. 256. The author of the Innlocenc: de Maric goes farther,
and names the French translator of the Dctcetion. " Et iceluy prc-

I f f 2 micrcnmcnt

mierement compose (comme il femble) par George Buchanan Efcof-
soys, ct depuis traduit en langue Frangoife par un Hugonot, Poi-
tcvin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, soy difant gentilhomme, et un
de plus remarquez fediteux de France." Jebb. I. 425, 443. The
concurring testimony of two cotemporary authors, whose residence
in France afforded them sufficient means of information, must out-
-weigh a flight conjeture. This French translator does not pretend
to publish the original French letters as written by the Queen her-
self; he exprefly declares that he translated them from the Latin.
Good. i. Io3. HIad our author attended to all these circumstances,
he might have saved himself the labour of so many criticisms to
prove that the present French copy of the letters is a' translation
from the Latin. The French editor himself acknowledges it, and so,
far as I know no person ever denied it.

WE may observe that the French translator was so ignorant, as.

to affirm that Mary had written these letters, partly in French,
partly in Scottish. Good. I. 103. Had this translation been pub-
lifhed at London by Cecil, or had it been made by his direction,
so gross an error would not have been admitted into it. This error,
however, was owing to an odd circumstance. In the Scottish tranf-
lation of the Detetion, two or three Sentences of the original French
were prefixed to each letter, which breaking off with an &c. the
Scottish translation of the whole followed. This method of printing
translations was not uncommon in that age. The French editor
observing this, foolishly concluded that the letters had been written
partly in French, partly in Scottish.

IF we carefully confider these few French sentences of each letter

which still remain, and apply to them that species of criticism, by
which our author has examined the whole, a clear proof will arif:c,
that there was a French copy not translated from the Latin, but which
was itfclf the original from which both the Latin and Scottish have
been translated. This minute criticifi muff necefiarily be dliiagree-
able to many readers, but luckily a few sentences only are to be ex-
amined, which will render it extremely Ihort.

IN

IN the firIt letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends with

these words, yfaiJoit bon. It is plain that this expreflion veu ce que
peut un corpsfans cceur is by no means a translation of cumn plane.
periide elrem atquce coipus Jine corde. The whole sentence has a spirit,
and elegance in the French, which neither the Latin nor Scottilh
have retained. Jufques a la dine'e is not a translation of otoo prandii
tempore; the Scottish translation quhile denner-time expresses the
sense of the French more properly; for anciently quhile signified
untill as well as during. Je n'ay pas tenli grand propos is not jufily
rendered neque contzilerimJfermonem cur n quoquam; the phrase used in
the French copy, is one peculiar to that language, and gives a more
probable account of her behaviour than the other. Yfugeant bien qu'il
n'y faioit bon, is not a translation of ut quijudicarcnt id non e ee ex ii.
The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with apprendre. It is
evident that both the Latin and Scottish translations have omitted
altogether these words, et toutefbisje ne puis apprendre. The French
sentence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with presenter. J7'are vcill/ plus
tard la haut is plainly no translation of cliutius il/ic mo(rtaJium; the
sense of the French is- better expressed by the Scottifl I have uvalkit
later there-up. Again, Pour cxctuer voJfile affaire is very different
from ad excufanducm no7fra negotia., The five remaining letters never
appeared in Latin; nor is there any proof of their being ever tranl-
lated into that language. Four of them, however, are published in.
French. This entirely overturns our author's hypothesis concern-
ing the necessity of a translation into Latin.

IN the Scottish edition of the Detection the whole onnet is printed'

in French as well as in Scottish. It is not polfible to believe that
this Scottish copy could be the original from which the French was
translated. The French confifis of verses which have both mca-
sure and rhyme, and which, in many places, arc far fromn being
inelegant. The Scottifll consists of an equal number of lines, but
without mcafure or rhyme.. Now no man could ever think of a
thing Ib absurd and impracicable, as to require one to translate a
certain given number of lines in prose, into an equal number of
vcrics, where both measure and rhyme were to be oblcrvcd. The
Scottilh, on the contrary, appears manifielly to be a. translation of

tlhe

27'

the French; the phrases, the idioms, and many of the words are
French, and not Scottish. Besides, the Scottish translator has in
several inflances mistaken the sense of the French, and in many
more exprefles the sense imperfeCtly. Had the sonnet been forged,
this could not have happened. The direcors of the fraud would
have underflood their own work. I shall satisfy myself with one
example,. in which there is a proof of both my assertions. Stanza
viii. ver. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fante et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottish but a French phrase; the

two other lines do not express the sense of the French, and the laif
is absolute nonsense.

THE eighth letter was never translated into French. It contains

much refined myflicifm about deqvices, a folly of that age, of which
Mary was very fond, as appears from several other circumstances,
particularly from a letter concerning impresas by Drummond of
Ilawtho-nden. If Mary's adversaries forged her letters, they were
certainly employed very idly when they produced this.

FRloMI there observations it seems to be evident that there was a

French copy of Mary's letters, of which the Latin and Scottish were
only translations. Nothing now remains of this copy but those
few filntcnces which are prefixed to the Scottish translation. The
French Editor laid hold of these fentcnces, and tacked his own
translation to them, which, so far as it is his work, is a servile and
a very wretched tranfation of Buchanan's Latin; whereas in those
introdudlory fentcnces, we have discovered firong marks of their
being originals, and certain proofs that they arc not translated from
the Latin.
28

Ir
3

IT is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin and Scottiflh tranf-

lations with these sentences, that the Scottish translator has more
perfectly attained the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin.
And as it appears that the letters were very early translated into
Scottish, Good. 2. 76; it is probable that Buchanan made his
translation not from the French but from this Scottish copy. \ecre
it necessary, several critical proofs of this might be produced. One
that has been already mentioned seems decisive. Diutius illic eno-
ratafirn bears not the leafl resemblance to j'aye tveilkl plus tard la
haut; but if, instead of I walkit [i. e. watched] laiter there-up, we
suppose that Buchanan read I waitit, &c. this mistake, into which
he might so easily have fallen, accounts for the error in his tranf-
lation.

THESE criticisms, however minute, appear to be. well founded.

But whatever opinion may be formed concerning them, the other
arguments with regard to the internal evidence remain in full
force.

THE external proof of the forgery of the Queen's letters, which

our author has produced, is extremely specious, but not more solid
than that which we have already examined. According to Mur-
ray's diary, Mary set out from Edinburgh to Glasgow January 21,
1567; lie arrived there on the 23d; left that place on the 27th;
the, together with the King, reached Linlithgow on the 28th; flayed
in that town only one night, and returned to Edinburgh before the
end of the month. But according to our author, the Queen did
not leave Edinburgh till Friday January 24th; as the flayed a night
at Callendar, fie could not reach Glasgow sooner than the even-
ing of Saturday the 25th, and she returned to Linlithgow on
Tuesday the 28th. By consequence, the firit letter, which supposes
the Queen to have been at lealt tour days in Glasgow, as well as
the second lIeter, which bears date at GlaSfow S(itlrl.7!y mor11101 .,
whereas flie di(l not arrive there till the evening, mufl be forgeries.
That the Q(ecn did not set out from Edinburgh foncl than the
24th of January, is evident (as he contends) ir'.)im the piublic re-
cords, which contain a 'Precept of confrilmaion of la 'ij;-rc/t by

JnlllCs,

w9

Jamens Boyd to Margaret Chalmers granted by the Queen on the
24th of January at Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of the Queen's,
dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, appointing James Inglis taylor
to the Prince her son. That the King and Queen had returned to
Linlithgow on the 28th, appears from a deed in which they appoint
Andrew Ferrier keeper of' their palace there, dated at Linlithgow
January 28. Good. I. II8.

THIS has been represented to be not only a convincing, but a

'legal proof of the forgery of the letters said to be written by Mary;
but how far it falls short of this, will appear from the following
considerations:

I. IT is evident from a declaration or confession made by the

Bishop of Ross, that before the conferences at York, which were
.opened in the beginning of Ocober I56', Mary had, by an ar-
tifice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of those letters which
her fubjeds accused her of having written to Bothwell. Brown's
trial of the Duke of Norfolk, 3I, 36. It is highly probable that
the Biffhop of Ross had seen the letters before he wrote the Defence
of Queen Mary's honour, in the year 1570. They were published
to all the world together with Buchanan's Detedion, A. D. I57I.
Now if they had contained any error so gross, and so obvious, at
that time, to discovery, as the supposing the Queen to have pafled
several days at Glasgow, while she was really at Edinburgh; had
they contained a letter dated at Glasgow Saturday morning, though
she did not arrive there till the evening, is it poflible that she her-
self, who knew her own motions, or the able and zealous advo-
cates who appeared for her in that age, should not have published
and cxpofed this contradicion, and by so doing, have blasted, at
once, the credit of such an imposture ? In disquisitions which ar:
naturally abfirufe and intricate, the ingenuity of the latest author
may clifcovcr many things, which have escaped the attention, or
basilcd the figacity of those who have formerly confidcred the Ilame
iibtljcO. But when a matter of sac lay so obvious to view, this cir-
.cumnlancc of its being unobfcrvcd by the Quccn herfell, or by any
*ox her adtncrcnts, is almost a dcmonflration that there is iome mil-

I take

take or fallacy in our author's arguments. And so far are any, either
of our historians, or of Mary's defenders, from calling in question
the common account concerning the time of the Queen's setting out
to Glasgow and her returning from it, that there is not the least
appearance of any difference among them with regard to this point.
But farther,

2. THOSE papers in the public records, on which our author refts

the proof of his assertions, concerning the Queen's motions, are not
the originals subscribed by the Queen, but copies only, or tranfla-
tions of copies of those originals. It is not necessary, nor would
it be very easy to render this intelligible to persons unacquainted
with the forms of law in Scotland; but every Scotsman conversant
in business will understand me, when I fay that the precept of con-
firmation of the life-rent to Boyd is only a Latin copy or note of a
precept, which was fealed with the Privy-Seal, on a warrant from
the signet office, proceeding on a signature which bore date at
Edinburgh the 24th of January; and that the deed in favour of
James Inglis is the copy of a letter, fealed with the Privy-Seal,
proceeding on a signature which bore date at Edinburgh January
24. From all this we may argue with some degree of reason, that
a proof founded on papers, which are so many removes distant from
the originals, cannot be but very lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were issued in the name both

of the King and Queen; by law, the King's subscription was no less
requisite to any paper than the Queen's; and therefore unless the
original fignaturcs be produced in order to afccrtain the particular
day when each of them signed, or to prove that it was signed only
by one of them, the legal proof arising from thefc papers would be,
that both the King and Q.ecn signed them at Edinburgh, on the
24 th of January.

4. Tn E dates of the warrants or precepts iflited by the fovcrcigln,
in that agc, fccm to have been il a great nmcalii'-r arbitr-rv, :1anl

VOL. II. G g ailtllxcd

3

affixed at the pleasure of the writer; and of consequence, there
dates were seldom accurate, are often false, and can never be relied
upon. This abuse became so frequent, and was found to be so per-
nicious, that an. ac of parliament, A. D. 1592, declared the affix-
ing a false date to a signature to be High Treason.

5. THERE flill remain, in the public records, a great number of

papers, which prove the neceflity of this law, as well as the weak-
ness and fallacy of our author's arguments. And though it be no
easy matter, at the distance of two centuries, to prove any particular
date to be false, yet furprizing instances of this kind lhall be pro-
duced. Nothing is more certain from history than that the King
was at Glasgow 24th January 1567; and yet the record of figna-
tures from 1565 to 1582, Fol. I6th, contains the copy of a figna-
ture to Archibald Edmonfton said to have been subscribed by our
Sovereigns, i. e. the King and Queen, at Edinburgh, January 24th
1567; so that if we were to trust implicitly the dates in the records
of that age, or to hold our author's argument to be good, it would
prove that not only the Queen, but the King too, was at Edinburgh
on the a 4th of January.

IT appears from an original Letter of the Bifflop of Ross, that on

the 25th of Odober 1566, Mary lay at the point of death; Keith,
App. 134; and yet a deed is to be found in the public records,
which bears that it was signed by the Queen that day. Privy-feal.
Lib. 35. fol. 89. Oucbterlony*,.

: N. B. In the former editions, another inflance of the fame nature with those which

go before and follow was mentioned ; but that, as has since been dicovered, was
founded on a mistake of the pcrfon employed to fcarch the records, and is therefore
omitted in this edition. The rcafoning, however, in the Diflertation flands flill in
full force, notwithstanding this omission.

BO T I WV E I, L

0BOTHWELL seized the Queen as she returned from Stirling,

April 24th, 1567, and (according to her own account) carried her
to Dunbar with all diligence. And. i. 95. But our author, rely-
ing on the dates of some papers which he found in the records,
supposes that Bothwell allowed her to flop at Edinburgh, and to
tranfaa business there. Nothing can be more improbable than
this supposition. We may therefore rank the date of the deed to
Wright Privy feal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is mentioned by
our author, Vol. I. 124. among the instances of the false dates of
papers which were issued in the ordinary course of business in that
age. Our author has mistaken the date of the other paper to For-
bes, ibid. it is signed, April l4th, not April 24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's history, it is, that

she remained at Dunbar from the time that Bothwell carried her
thither, till she returned to Edinburgh along with him in the be-
ginning of May. Our author himself allows that she resided twelve
days there, Vol. I. 367. Now though there are deeds in the records
which bear that they were signed by the Queen at Dunbar during
that time, yet there are others which bear that they were signed at
Edinburgh; e. g. there is one at Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy
feal, Lib. 36. fol. 97. There are others said to be signed at Dun-
bar on that day. Lib. 31. Chart. No. 524, 526. lb. Lib. 32.
No. I54, I57. There are some signed at Dunbar April 28th,
others at Edinburgh April 30th, Lib. 32. Chart. No. 492.
Others at Dunbar May ift. Id. ibid. No 158. These different
charters suppose the Queen to have made so many unknown, im-
probable, and inconsistent journeys, that they afford the clearest
demonstration that the dates in these records ought not to be de-
pended on.

THIS becomes more evident from the date of the charter said

to be signed April 27th, which happened that year to be a Sun-
day, which was not, at that time, a day of business in Scotland,
as appears from the books of federunt, then kept by the Lords
of feffio n.

Ggg 2

FROMs

FROM this short review of our author's proof of the forgery of

the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are far from
iamounting to demonitration.

ANOTHER argument against the genuineness of these letters is.

founded on the fsile and composition, which are said to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Queen, and unlike her real produEions. It
is plain, both from the great accuracy of composition in most of
M'lry's letters, and even from her solicitude to write them in a.
fair hand, that fie valued herself on those accomplifnments, and
was desirous of being efteelned an elegant writer. But when ihe
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marks of inaccuracy ap-
pcar. A remarkable instance of this may be found in a paper pub-
lifhed, Good. 2. 301. Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in
the utmost hurry; and yet under all the difadvantags of a tranlla-
tion, they are not destitute either of spirit or of energy. The man-
ner in which she exprefles her love to Bothwell hath been pronoun-
ced indecent and even shocking. But Mary's temper led her to
xwarm expressions of her regard; those refincments.of delicacy, which
now appear in all the commerce between the fcxes, were, in that
age, but little known, even among persons of the highest rank.
Among Lord Royfton's papers there is a series of Letters, from Mary
to the Duke of Norfolk, copied from the Harleian Library, P. 37.
B. 9. fol. 88, in which Mary declares her love to that nobleman in
language, which would now be reckoned extremely indelicate white;

TIhE sonnets, and some of Mary's letters to Bothwell were writ-

ten before the murder of her huiband; fomee of them after that
event, and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are priol'
to the death of her hufland abound with the fondest expreflions of
her love to Bothwcll, and plainly difcovcr that their familiarity had
been extremely criminal. We find in them, too, some dark ex-
prellions, which her enemies employed to prove that fle was no
firanger to the fchcnmes which were foi'ing againfl her hufliandl'
life. Of thisi kind arc the following pallages, " Alace ! I nevir dlii-
favit ony body; hot I remit me altogidder to z/our will. Sendl Ine
aldvcrticmlcnt quhlut I fall do, and qullatitcvcr thing come therlcof,

I 1 I sll

I fall obey zotw. Advise too with zourfelf, gif ze can find out
ony mair secret inventioun by medecine, for he fuld tak medecine
and the bath at Cragmillar." Good. 2. 32. " See not hir quhais
ecnzeit teiris fuld not be fa meikle prafit. and eftemit, as the trew
and faithfull travellis quhilk I fuftene for to merite hir place. For
obtaining of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I betrayis thame that
may impefche me. God forgive me." &c. ibid. 27. " I have walkit
laiter thair-up, then I wald have done, gif it had not been to draw
something out of him, quhilk this berer will fchaw zow, quhilk
is the fairest commodity that can be offerit to excuse zour affairis."
Ibid 32. From the letters posterior to the death of her hufiand,
it is evident that the scheme of Bothwell's seizing Mary by force,
and carrying her along with him, was contrived in concert with.
herfclf, and with her approbation '.

I-AV ING

* TH AT letters of so much importance as those of nAIry's to Bothwell should have

bcen entirely loft appears to many altogether unaccountable. After being produced
in England before Elizabeth's commiffiorlers, they were delivered back by them to
the Earl of M/urray. Good. 2. 235. He seems to have kept them in his pofl'ffi mn
during his life. Aiter his death, they fell into the hands of Lennox his fuccefl)r,
who restored them to the Earl of Morton. Good. 2. 9r. Though it be not necefia-
rily conneiced with any of the que-fions which gave occasion to.this Dissertation,
it may perhaps fatisfy.the curiosity of rome of my readers to inform them, tha: as-
ter a very diligent search, which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's letters
to Bothwell can. be found in any of the public libraries in Great Britain. The
only cel tain intelligence concerning them, since the time of their. being delivered to
Morton, was communicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

EXTRACT of the letters of Robert Bnwes, Efq; ambailodnr from Queen Eliza-

beth to the King of Scotland, written to Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary of
State, from the original register book of Mr. Bowcs's letters, from 15th of Augut:
1582, to 28th September 1583, in the pofliffion of Chriftopicer Hunter, M. I). of
Durham.

1582, 8th November, fiom Edinburgh.

ALBEIT I have been borne in hand, That the cofl'r wherein were the origina;ls

(f letters between the Scottifi Q(lecn and the Earl of Bothwell, had been dclivelced
to sundry hands, and thereby was at prefcnt wantiingi , andl unknown where it
refled, yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of l'lulci;rdyne's meansi, that botih the
cos}er and also the writings are come, and now renlaiin with the tlarl of (low.rie, who,
I perceive, will be hardly intreatcd to make delivery to her 1M.ijfjcti, accoirdin; to
her Majefly's deflie.

Tr.'.s

35

.HAVI NG thus stated the proof on both fides; having examined

*at so great length the different systems with regard to the faas
in controversy; it may be expeced that I should now pronounce

sentence.

This time past I have expended in Searching where the coffer and writings were,

wherein without the help of the prior I Ihould have found great difficulty; now I
will vffay Gowrie, and of my success you shall be shortly advertised.

12th of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

'BECAUSE I had both learned, that the casket and letters mentioned in my last,

before these were come to the pofeflion of the Earl of Gowrie, and also found that
no mean might prevail to win the fame out of his hands without his own content
and privity; in which behalf I had employed fit instruments, that nevertheless
profited nothing, therefore I attempted to essay himself, letting him know that the
said ca(ket and letters flould have been brought to her Majefly by the offer and good
means of good friends, promising to have delivered them to her Majesty before
they came into his hands and custody, and knowing that he did bear the like assec-
tion, and was ready to pleasure her Majesty in all things, and chiefly in this that had
.been thus far tendered to her Majesty, and which thereby should be well accepted,
and with princely thanks and gratuity be requited to his comfort and contentment;
I moved him that they might be a present to be sent to her Majesty from him, and
that I might cause the fame be conveyed to her Majesty, adding hereunto such words
.and arguments as might both stir up a hope of liberality, and also best effe6 the
purpose; at the first he was loth to agree that they were in his poffefion, but I let
him plainly know that I was certainly informed, that they were delivered to him by
,Sanders Jardin, whereupon he pressed to know who did so inform me, enquiring
whether the sons of the Earl of Morton had done it or no; I did not otherways in
plain terms deny or answer thereunto, but that he might think that he had told me,
.as the prior is ready to avouch, and well pleated that I shall give him to be the au-
thor thereof; after he had said [though] all there letters were in his keeping
(which he would neither grant nor deny) yet he might not deliver them to any per-
ion without the contents and privities, as well of the King, that had interest therein,
as also of the reft of the noblemen enterprisers of the action against the King's mo-
ther, and that would have them kept as an evidence to warrant and make good that
action. And albeit I replied, that their action in that part touching the assignation
of the crown to the King by his mother, had received such establishment, confir-
mation, and ftrcngth, by aats of Parliament and other publick authority and inftru-
ments, as neither, should that cafe be suffered to come in debate or question, nor
.such cfrolls and papers ought to be shewed for the strengthening thereof, so as there
might well be left and be rendered to the hands of her Majesty, to whom they
were destined before they fell in his keeping; yet he would not be removed or
fltislicd, concluding, after much reasonings, that the Earl of Morton, nor any other
that had the charge and keeping thereof, durit at any time make delivery; and
lbccaufe it was the iRft time that I had moved him therein, and that he would glad-
ly bo;h answer her Majcfty's good cxpectation in him, and also perform his duty
due to his fovcrcign and aflbciatcs in the action aforcfaid, therefore he would seek

7 OLt

fntence. In my opinion, there are only two conclusions, which
can be drawn from the fads which have been enumerated.

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition or love, en-
couraged by the Queen's known aversion to her husband, and pre-

fuming.

out the said caiket and letters, at his return to his house, which he thought flould
be within a short time; and upon finding of the fame and better advice, and con,-
fideration had of ihe cause, he would give further answer. This resolution I have
received as to the thing; and for the present I could not better, leaving him to give
her Majesty such teflimony of his good will towards her, by his frank dealing here-
in, as /he may have cause to confirm her highneffcs good opinion conceived al-
ready of him, and be thereby drawn to greater goodness towards him. I shall fril'
labour him both by myself, and also by all other means, but I greatly dillruft the
desired success herein.

24th''of November 1582, from Edinburgh.

Foit the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the hands of the Earl of

Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnestly therein, letting him know the purpose of
the Scottish Queen, both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels,
and also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or defaced, and that the
means which she will make in this behalf shall be so great and effecual, as there writ-
ings cannot be safely kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him that hath
the custody thereof, neither ihall he that is once known to have them be suffered
to hold them in his hands. Herewith I have at large opened the perils likely to fall
to that action, and the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is now openly
known to have the possession of these writings, and 1 have lettin him fee what surety
it (hall bring to the said cause and all the parties therein and to himself, that there
writings may be with secrecy and good order committed to the keeping of her Majesty,
that will have them ready whcnfoever any use shall be for them, and by her High-
neffes countenance defend them and the parties from such wrongful objections as
shall be laid against them, offering at length to him, that if he be not fully satis-
fled herein, or doubt that the reft of the afociates shall not like of the delivery of
them to her Majesty in this good manner, and for the interest rchearfed, that I (hall
readily, upon meeting and conference with them, procure their affeit in this part; (a
matter more cafy to offrr than to perform) and, lastly, moving him that (for the
secrecy and benefit of the cause, and that her Majesty's good opinion towards himfell
may be firmly fettlcd and confirmed by his acceptable forwardncfs herein) he would,
without ncedlefs f riiplc, frankly commit thref writings to her 'MIjefty's good cullt -
dy for the good uses received. After long debate he resolved, dand ilaid, that lie
would ulnfciguedly (hew and do to her Majcfly all the plea;iure that he night without
oflicncc to the King his Sovereign, and prejudice to the all; ciatcs in ihe a nlion, and
thereforc he would fil ft make fcai ch and view the said letter ,, and herein ta;l( c;dvce
what he might do, and how far he might satisfy ;and content her Maijefty ; piollilint,
thcreon to give more refo!utc anfw'r ; and lie concluded flatly, th it liite lie had

f oulbtl

:fuming on her attachment to himself, struck the blow without
having concerted -with her the manner or circumfiances of perpe-
trating that crime. That Mary, instead of testifying much indig-
nation at the deed, or difoovering any resentment against Both-
well, who was accused of having committed it, continued to load
.him with marks of her regard, conducted his trial in such a man-
ner as rendered it impossible to discover his guilt, and soon after,
in opposition to all the maxims of decency or of prudence, volun-
tarily agreed to a marriage with him, which every consideration
should have induced her to detest. By this verdiEt, Mary is not
pronounced guilty of having contrived the murder of her hulband,
or even of having previously given her consent to his death; but

found and seen the writings, that he might not make delivery of them without the
privity of the King. Albeit I flood long with him against his resolution in this point,
to acquaint the King with this matter before the letters were in the hands of her
Majesty, letting him fee that his doings there should admit great danger to the
cause; yet I could not remove him from it. It may be that he meaneth to put over
the matter from himself to the King, upon fight whereof I shall travail effecLually
to obtain the King's conlent, that the letters may be committed to her Majesty's keep-
ing, thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the King, in the present love and
affietion that he beareth to her Highness, than to win any thing at the hands of the
associates in the acion, whereof Come principal of them now come and remain at
the devotion of the King's Mother; in this I shall still call on Gowrie to search out
the coffer, according to his promise; and as I shall find him minded to do therein,
so shall I do my best and whole endeavour to effect the success to her Majesty's best
contentment.

2d December I582, from Edinburgh.

BECAUSE I saw good opportunity offered to renew the matter to the Earl of Gow-

rie for recovery of the letters in the coffer in his hands, therefore I put him in mind
thereof; whereupon he told me, that the Duke of Lennox had fought earnestly to
have had those letters, and that the King did not know where they were, so as they
could not be delivered to her Majesty, without the King's privity and concent,
and he pretended to be still willing to pleasure her Majelty in the fame, so far as
he may with his duty to the King and to the reft of the aflbciates in that action;
but I greatly dliftruft to cffccA this to her Majcfty's pleasure, wherein, neverthelcfs,
I lhall do my uttcinoft endeavours.

WVIIir'rIIR' James VI. who put the Earl of Gowric to deaih, A. D. I584, and

fcized all his efl*tcs, took cire to d stroy his mother's letters, for whose honour he
was aL that time cxtrcmclly zcealous; whether they have pcrifhcd by some unknown
accident; or whether they m:ly not hi ll remain unobserved among the archieves of
bnomc of our great families, it is impollible to determine.

/hlC

39

She is not acquitted of having discovered her approbation of the
deed, by her behaviour towards him who was the author of it.

THE other conclusion is that which Murray and his adherents

laboured to establish, "That as James, fumtyme Erie of Both-
wile, was the chiefe executor of the horribill and unworthy mur-
der, perpetrat in the person of umquhile King Henry of gude me-
mory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the Queenis lauchfull
husband; fawas she of the foreknowledge, confall, devise, perfwa-
dar and commandar of the said murder to be done." Good. 2,
207.

WHTCH of these conclusions is moRt agreeable to the evidence
that has been produced, I leave my readers to determine.

VOL. II.

H h L.

# INDEX.

I

N

E

X.
N. B. The numeral Letters refer to the Volumes, and. the Figures to the

Pages.

A.
A D AM S O N, archbishop of St. An-

drews, is excommunicated by the fy-
nod of iife, II. 119. He excommu-

nicated his opponents, ibid. is reflored by
the general aflembly upon conditions, 120.
His mean fubmifion to the general assem-
lly - 174
albany, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his

noules against his brother K. James III. I.
48. is made prilbner but escapes to France,
ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of
Englind, 49. procures afliflance to invade
Scotland on mean conditions, ibid. returns
to Scotland, and is leflored to favour 50.
cabals again but is forced to fly to Frame,

ibid. 51.

- Duke of, made Regent during the

minority of K. James V. 1. 31, g3. after
several uniuccef ful firuggles with the nobi-
Ilry, he is forced to retire to France, ib. 54.
Alencon, Duke of, Q. Elizabeth long amufcs

the court of France, by carrying on a treaty
of marriage with him - . 59
Allen, cardinal, published a book proving the

lawfulness of killing excommunicated
I'rinccs - - II. 107
Alva, Duke of, his intrigues in favour of Q.

Mary, 11. 23, 26, 37. is recalled from his
government of the Netherlands - 43

Ambassadors, their office - . 73, 74
Andrcwjs, S'. the archbishop of, remarkably

cured of a dangerous dilerpmer, 1. i16.
the niotives of his opposition to the Q. Re-
gent, 136. hi great influence on the bench
of Bishops and weight in Parliament, 14o.
governed the church with great moderation,
141. pe fccutrs tnc lelormers, 142. per-
sorns greal firvice to the Congregation
agaiill thie Fie, ih, 190. is imlpiloned for
celebrating Mass, 258. ruins Q. Mary's

affairs by his imprudent conduct, 388. is
taken prisoner in Dunbarton castle, and
hanged - _- 1t. 15
- the castle of, demolilhed by the

French - - I. 99

- the prior of, promotes a treaty be-
tween the Q. Regent and the Reformers,
1. 53 . is provoked to leave the court,
15;. is one of the chief promoters of the
rclbrmation, 16S. fbme account and a cha-
ra6cer of him, ibid. 169. artful endea-
vours uled to undeimine him, 169 pre-
fumption of his innocence of the designs
chaiged on him, ibid. is sent by the cun-
vention to invite the Qrueen to Scotland,
216. is received by her with confidence and
afFection, 217. restrains the turbulentfpitit
of the people againit popery, 228. is lent
to restrain the licentious practices of the
borderers, 233. executes his commiflion
with vigour and prudence, 234. a confpi-
racy ngainft him discovered, 24z. is crea-
ted Earl of Mar, 244. becomes obnoxious
to the Earl of Hunmly, ibid. See Mar and
Murray.
.Angus, Earl of, was the only man who aflerted

the independency of his country, I. 19, 20.
assumes the Regency during the minority
of K. James V. 31. 54. is unable to gain
his aifcaions, 5.1. is attainted and flies in-
to England - - 5

- Obtains leave to return into Scotland,
11. 79. lurcenders himfclf to K. James VI.
88. he, with fevcral others, fcize the caltle
of Stirling to oppose Arran, 92. they are
forced to fly into England on the approach
of the King wiih an army, 92. he is at-
tainted and his llate forfeited 99. is con-
cerned in a plot in favour of Spain, 173.
is seized and committed priloner to the call e
of Edinburgh, 1 79. cfcapes and flies to the

11 h II z moun-
D

mountains, ibid. ISo. offers to submit to a
trial, 183. sentence is pronounced against
him, 184. he refuses to submit, 185
.iJou, Duke of, a marriage proposed between

him and Q Elizabeth - II. 21
I-nne, a Prilcels of Denmark, married to K.

lames VI. Ii. 170, 17i. her arrival in
Scotland and coronation, 173. heads a
par:y that opposes the chancellor 18 1
JlrcbLjhops, Bi/hops, Deans, and Chapters revi-

ved in Scotland during the King'o minority,
1. 33, 34. this gives great offence to many
of the clergy, ibid. an at of assembly
againfl there offices, 74. Bishops made
lubjed to prefbyteries and afiemblies, 119.
a great itroke given to their authority, 159.
None of them present at the Queen's coro-
nation - - 173
,Irgyl, Earl of, is appointed to carry the crown

matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, I.
140. ules his interest with the reformers to
make a treaty with the Qucen Regent, 153.
leaves her court in refetilient of her trea-
chely, 155. refutes to accede to a treaty
with Murray the Regent, 422. is Coon as-
ter forced to submit, 423. ads as lieute-
nant to the Queen after the Regent's mur-
der, ii. 5. is prevailed on to join the
King's party, 18. quarrels with Athole, 47.
confederates with him against Morton, the
Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid. they
cenionitrate againPt him to the King, So.
they raise forces against him, 55. negoci-
ates a treaty with him by the mediation of
(. Elizabeth, ;6. is promoted to the of-
lice of c hancellor, 57. the King's autho-
tity delegated to him and Lord Sorbes
againlt tie popifl Lords, 187. his forces
are defeated in an engagement with them

188

Ariifocracy, predominant in Scotland I. 201
..,r.Iildo S[)p;iifnl, prcpartions for it, II. 161.

it i, dilcated - 166
.4-rri Earl, is appointed Regent during the

inli, ity of Q Many, 1. 83. Ihis character,
ibid. 81. conliluns to the schemes of Eng-
Il.and i\v cli dilfjults the public, 86. be-
tcoilnS lilpiciou., of the E.arl of Lenox, 87.
is (orced to rrnlounce the friendillip with
l'-.hlin11d and (Iecl.r loto 1 Ilance, 81i. and
1J pIrlecuite ithe Icfoncrts, 8(. publiclly

abjures the doctrine of the reformers, 9o.
is contemned by one half and little truited
by the other part of the nation, 91. heads
the partizans of France and defenders of
popery, ibid. attempts in vain to seize the
murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 97. is forced-
to make a truce with the conspirators, 98.
his eldest son is conditionally excluded all
right of fucceflion, too. his mean concession
to the court of France, 107. gets the title
of Chatelherault, ibid. is undermined by
the Q. Dowager, 113, 114. proposals and
arguments for his refionation, 115. he con-
sents to it, l It-. retracts by the influence of
the archbishop of Sr. Andrews, 117. is at
lalt prevailed on and gets advantageous
terms, ibid. See Chatelherault.
Arran, eldest ton of the Duke of Chatelhe-

rault, joins in an association with the refor-
mers, I. I66. narrowly escapes intended
ruin at the court of France, 167. is full of
resentment againlt the French on that ac-
count, ibid. 168. the Congregation solicit
Q. Elizabeth to marry him, zog. his great
imprudence with regard to Q.Mary, 235.
discovers a conspiracy against the Queen's
favourites, 242. loses his reason, II. 57,
58. is imprisoned by Morton 58
---- late capt. Stewart, gets that title and

estate, II. 69. is appointed to conduat
Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh, ib.
tortures several of his servants cruelly, ibid.
his infamous marriage with the countess of
March, 71, 7z. his variance with Lenox,
72. is frultrated in an attempt to rescue the
King at Ruthven, 78. is confined prisoner
to the cattle of Stirling, ibid. 79. regains
his liberty and the King's regard, 85, 86.
resumes his power and arrogance, 86. gets
the Ruthven conspirators declared guilty of
high treason, 88. is detefled as author of a
perfccution against the clergy, 94. is gain-
ed over to Q. Elizabeth's intcrelt, 97, 98.
gets fcvcral forfeited cflates, 99. his cor-
ruption and insolence, 1o5. is made chan-
cellor and has unlimited power, ibid. his
venality is imitated by his wife, ibid. his
monllrous tyranny and oppreflion, 106, 107.
his power undermined by Wotton the Eng-
lifl envoy, 1 5. is confined in the callle of
St. Andrews, but foan recovers favour, 116.

hi,

his interest finks much, 1 7. is firipped ol
his honours and spoils, and reduced to his
original flation - 1 8
,rticles Lords of, their origin and business, I.

69. by whom chosen, ,o. the subsequent
variations and political use made of this in-
ftitution -- 71,72
Arundel Earl of, is appointed a commiflioner

to the conference at Welfminfter I. 414.
.S4/y, ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to Scot-

land, If. 163. his great promises to King
James, ibid. his promises are soon forgor,
166. he is ashamed and withdraws pri-
vately fiom Scotland - ibid.
ffaDjination, the frequency of it in Scotland,
how accounted for, I. 311-313. several
instances of it in France, 313, 314. a flop
put to it there and in Scotlanl, 314. feve-
ral great men approved of it, 315. pre-
vailed greatly afterwards - I. 174

.^effmb/y of the church of Scotland, the first

but feeble and irregular, 1. 215. another
assembly, their demands from the conven-
tion, 235. two other assemblies in vain fol-
licit an augmentation of theirrevenues, 252.
they address Q. Mary in high lirains of
complaints, 294. an assembly proceeds at
Glasgow notwithflanding the King's inter-
diclion, If. 74. two aflemblies yield many
of the privileges of the church to the King,
204. declare it lawful for Ministers to fit in
Parliament, 207, 208. fee Clergy.

/Jlociation, formed in defence of Q( Elizabeth

againRt Q. Mary -If. zot
Athole Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel

with the Earl of Argyl, II. 47. joins with
him in opposing Morton the Regent, ib. dies
soon after an entertainment at Morton's, 57.
suspicions of his being poisoned ibid.
.itubig-e Lord de, second fun of the Earl of I.c-

nox, arrives in Scotland from Irance, II. 60.
becomes soon a great favourite of K. James,
ibid. high titles and polls bestowed on him,
ibid. notes againfl him, appendix 1oi. Sec
Lecox.
Alt,'iran family, their origin and power 1. 74

B.

3Abington, Anthony, fiome account of him,

I1. 1i z. t.i rile of Iis conlpiracy :ia;linl
(). liziabetlh, ibid. the n.ancii aind fcLlcin

F of operations of his afibciates, ibid.

they are betrayed, seized and executed,

124, 125
Baron, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the

commiflioners to the conference at Welt -
minlier - 1. 414
Baliol, John, his claim to the crotn of Scot-

land, I, 8. is preferred by Ed. I. to. soon
forced by him to resign - ibid.
Eallard, a trafficking priest, solicits an inxa.

sion of England from Spain, II. 12z. joins
in a conspiracy to murder Q. Elizabeth, 123.
is discovered and taken into cultody, 2z4.
and executed - - 125
Barons, their jurifdiclion very extensive, 1. i .

the difference between the greater and leflhr
whence, (6. three hundred of them remon-
firate againfl: the conduct of the Q. Dova-
ger, 130. the leficr admiied by their rc-
presentatives into Parliament, 11. 60o. pc-
tition of the lefler Barons to Parliament,
app. 10. See Nobles.
Bafilicon Doron, a book publilhed by King

James VI. strengthens his interest in Eng-
land - - II. 209
Beatoun, cardinal, made use of by K. James V.

to mortify the nobles, I. 58. his preten-
sions to the Regency on the death of that
Prince, 82. forges a tePament of the late
King, ibid. his views how disappointed,
ibid. his character, 83. opposes the Earl
of Arran Regent, 86. excites molt of the
nation against the Engliflh, 87. seizes the
young Queen and her mother, ibid. cajols
the Earl of Lenox, ibid. obliges the Re-
gent to renounce England and declare for
France, SS. and to pcrfccuts the refor-
nmer, 89. engrofies tlie chief direction of
affairs, (). Ihis double dealing with the
Iail of Lcnox resented, ibid. is murdered,
95, 96. his death fatal to the Lt'io ics,
97. a vain attempt to revenge it, ibid.
scandalous reports concrniing hiim 12
Brdfosrd, Earl of, comes as ainbaillidor from

(Q Ilizabcth to witness the bai; tiin ( f
Jainles V 1 .

I 332. his inilruitli' is, ibiI.

33. Ihis letters to Sir W. Cecil, ipp'"n-
(lix 27, io, :;I
B,ll,',ndon, Sir Lcwi<, jullice clerk, K. Jaim,'

Ielident at Iondons , II. I 1.. joins 1i pm-
msotilug () Eli'i.ell'ctll':. i:tccil is Sui.li ,

I lUt'.

ibid. is sent with her Envoy into that coun-

try i-

- ibid.
Black, Mr. David, minister at St. Andrews,

his ridiculous and seditious exprelfions in the
pulpit, II. 195, 196. being supported by
the clergy, he declincs the civil jurif-
diftion, 196. is condemned by the privy
council, 1t7. is fenteiced by the King to
reside beyond Spey 1i98
Blackader, captain, and three others executed

for the murder of Darn'v I. 570
Boethiis, Hector, his hiflory of Scotland, foine

account of 1. 4.
Bolton Cafile, Q. Mary confi:ed a prisoner

thee - - 1. 4C
Bonat, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney,

I. 129
JBrdrers, an attempt to refirain their licen-

tious practices, I. 233, 234. Q. Mary vi-
fits them, 323. a scuffle there in which the
English warden, &c. are made prisoners

II. 46
Borith-wick, Lord, aflifs the Queen Regent in

defending Leith -1. 183
Bothbwell, Eall of, intercepts a fum of mo-

ney from England to the Congregation,
I. ii3. favours the Queen Regent, but re-
fides at his own house, 183. his refcet-
ment againfl the prior of St. Andrews,
245. i! by him when Earl of Murray and
Regent summoned to a public trial, 80o.
prevents it by leaving the kingdom, ibid.
a sentence of Outlawry against him pre-
vented by the Queen, ibid. is permitted
to return, 2S9. escapes with her after the
murder of Rizio, 310. some account of
his former behaviour, 317. commences a
favourite of the QCueen, ibid, 318. flue re-
conciles him to leveral Lords, with whom
he was at variance, ibid. lie increaf s in
favour with her, 320. circumtiinces con-
curring in this, 321. he is wounded in at-
tempting to seize one of the borderers, 323.
the Queen's extraordinary regard for him
on this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents
le obtains a pardon for Morton and his as-
fociates, 334, 335. propofcs the reltora
tion of the popilh ecclesiastical jurildilion,
336. his views in this, ibid. 337. is sis-
peded the author of l)arnly's nmurder, 343.
is charged with it by I.enox, 315. hut ltll
favoured by the queen, ibid. appointed

3

governor of Edinburgh Calile, ibid. his
trial is hurried on, 346. remarkable par-
tiality in his favour, 347. Lenox accuses
him openly, 348. comes to his trial with
a great retinue, 348, 349. is acquitted by
a jury, 349. the trial universally censured,
ibid. 350. challenges any that would ac-
cufe him, 350. several ads of Parliament
passed in his favour, 35 . he procures an
ad in favour of the reformation, ibid. 352.
prevails on several of the nobles to recom-
mend him as a husband to the Q0een, 352,
353, 351. seizes the Queen on a journey
from Stirling, and carries her to Dunbar,
356. his view in this, 3;7. obtains a par-
don under the geiat feal, ibid. procures a
divorce from his wife, 358. carries the
Q2cen to the castle of Edinburgh, ibid. is
created Duke of Orkney, 359. and mar-
ried to the Q(een, ibid. is not allowed the
title of King, 3(0o. he watches the Queen
very closely, ibid. endeavours t. get the
Prince into his custody, ibid. 36t. is a-
larmed with an association of the nobles
against the Queen and him, 3(2. carries
the Queen to the caile of Borthwick, ibid.
raises forces againit the confederate Lords,
364. he marches against them, 365. pro-
poses a (ingle combat, 366. this how pre-
vented, ibid. takes his lat farewel of the
Queen, and is forced to fly, ibid. finds for
a casket of letters from Q. Mary to him,
371. they are intercepted by the Earl of
Morton, ibid. his miserable fate, 380, 381.
refleftions on his conduct, 381. copy of
his divorce from Lady Jean Gordon, appen-
dix 93

late Francis Stewart, created Earl of

Bothwell, 11. 167. is imprisoned for con-
silting witches, 175. escapes and attempts
to break into the King's presence, ibid. re-
tires to the north, 176. he and his adhe-
rents are attainted, 178. fails in an at-
tempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken un-
der protection of Q_ Elizabelt, who solicits
for him, 180. seizes tile King's pcrfon,
181, i8z. forces him to diflnifs the chan-
cellor and his other favourites, iSz. aid
to grant him a remiflion, ibid. his hold
and insolent behaviour afterwards, ihid. 1 3.
is encouraged by the Englifl ambaflador,
185. makes another attempt to come at

the

the King, 186. is repulsed and obliged to
fly to the north of England, ibid. is aban-
doned by Q. Elizabeth, and forced to fly
into Spain and Italy, 90o. remains in in-
digent obscurity, and is never after recon-
ciled to the King -- ibid.
-- Adam, bishop of Orkney, performs

the ceremony of marriage of Q. Mary to
the Earl of Bothwell - . 359

Both.wellhaugh. See Hamilton.
Boulogne, wrested by the French out of the

hands of the Englilh, 1. 1o6. they confentt
to restore it and its dependencies to the
French -0oS
Bowes, Envoy from Q Elizabeth, accuses Le-

nox of disturbing the peace, 1I. 63. is re-
fused an audience, ibid. is sent to encou-
rage the conspirators at Ruthven, 79. to
enquire about K. James's correspondence
with the pope *- 210
Bojd, Lord, his ambitious views in the time of

K. James III. frustrated - I. 30
- is prevailed on to join the King's party

against t4-Mtary, II. 18. joins the Ruth-
ven conspirators 77
Brieune, Count de, comes an ambassador from

France to witness the baptism of K. Ja. VI.

1.332
Bruce, Robert, his claim to the crown of Scot-

land, I. 8. his grandson aflerts his right
and vindicates the honour of his country,
to. he attempts to reduce the power of
the nobles - 39
- a priest, employed by the King of Spain

to seduce the Scots nobles - 11. 167
- Mr. Robert, a prefhyterian minister, per-

forms the ceremony of the coronation of
K. James's Queen - -- II. 13
- Edward, abbot of Kinlefs, acquits hini-

felfwith address and reputation as ambafla-
dor at the court of England II. 208, 209
_-- Mr. Robert, a miniflcr, his resolution
in refusing to publilh the King's account of
Gowrie's conspiracy, II. 229. is deprived
and banished on that account ibid.

Buchatan, George, his history of Scotland,

tonie account of, I. 4. remarks on his dia-
logue dc jure Rcgiis, 157. alone accufcs
Q( Mary of a criminal correfpnmdence wilth
Rizio, 305. approvedof aflllfination, 315.
his partiality in overlooking an aa of Par-

liament in favour of the reformation, 352.
attends the Regent into England when cal-
led on to accuse Qt Mary, 404. was one of
the preceptors of K. James VI. II. 48.
commended for his great genius, z56, 257

Buirleigh. See Cecil.
Burroughs, when firl represented in Parlia-

ment -- I1. 179

C.
tC I S, John, a declaration of his in name

of Q. Elizabeth to the Lords of Grainge

and Lethington, appendix 68
Caithness, Earl of, his protest at the trial of Both-

well for the murder of Darnly I. 350
Calvdin, the patron and reflorer of prelbyce-

rian church government - I. 213

Cambden, some mistakes of his 1. 333, 3,4
Canongate near Edinburgh, a Parliament held

there - -II. 16
Cardan, some account of him, 1. 116. his

remarkable cure of the bifliop of St. An-
drews - -ibid.

Carey, Sir George, sent ambafladorg from Q:

Elizabeth to encourage the conspirators at
Ruthven II. 7,
- Robert, sent by Q_ Elizabeth to footli

K. James after the death of his mother, 11.
154. is not permitted to enter Scotland,
ibid. was the firtt that brought K. James
intelligence of the death of Q, Elizabeth

246, 217
Cajet of letters from Q_ Mlary to Bothwell

seized by the Earl of Morton, I. 371. her
enemies avail themselves much of them

ibid.

Ca;ils, Earl of, joins the King's party, II. iS
Cajlelnau, the French ambaflador, is emnployed

to procure the content of his couit to her
marriage with Darnly, I. 273. he endea-
vours to make up the differences between
the Queen and him, 320. His interceflion
in behalf of Q. Mary -- II. I 1o
Catherine of Mcdicis, aftunics the government

after the death of Francis II. her lon, I. 2 i.
her hlarfi treatment of Q_ Mary, ibid. her
views in behaving more ficndly to her, 261.
bends her whole cndeavours to dellroy the
Protcllants, II. 21. her artful conduft
with that view ibid. 2Z

Cecil,

Cecil, his great capacity as a minister, I. 198.

219. is employed to negotiate a peace with
France, ibid. overreaches the French
ambassador in the treaty of Edinburgh, 219.
is appointed a commissioner to the confe-
rence at Weltminfter, 414. is sent by Q,
Elizabeth with proposals to Q. Mary, II.
9. has an interview with her which ex-
cites Q. Elizabeth's jealousy, 43. is treat.
ed harshly by Q. Elizabeth for consenting to
Q. Mary's death - 153
.---- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads

the party against Etfex, 11. 232. his cha-
raaer, 233. his great assiduity, ibid. en-
ters into a private correspondence with K.
James, 238. a letter fiom him to his Ma-
jelly, app. - . . 116
Celibacy of the popish clergy, a chief engine

of their policy I. z13, 148
Charles V. Emperor, his great power, I. 74.

and unlimited ambition, 75. is checked by
Francis I. - - ibid.

K. of France makes a league with Q.

Elizabeth - - II. 27
Chatelherault, Duke of, that title conferred on

the Earl of Arran, Regent of Scotland, I.
107. his right of succession to the crown of
Scotland maintained, 136. enters a pro-
terlation to save his right, 138. joins the
reformers in endeavouring to expel the
French army, 163, 164. joins in affgcia-
tion with them, 166. is looked on as the
head of the Congregation, 168. his pufil-
lanimity, 180. becomes obnoxious to Q
Mary, 235. His jealousy of the prior of
St. Andrews, 242. deprived of his Fiench
pension, 261. is alarmed at the Earl of
Lenox's return to Scotland, z28. an ac-
commodation brought about by the QEeen's
influence, 2'9. adheres to Murray in op-
poring the Qscen's marriage, 29o. is par.
doned on his humble application, but forced
to reside in France, 293. his pa.ttizans
gramble at Murray's being advanced to the
ReFtncy, 3384. returns from France ;nd
hc,ld; the iQeen's adherents, 422. is
made her lieutellant-gcel. lr, ibid. his re.
oblution wavering, the Regent commits him
prilboler to the callle of Edinburgh, ,2).
is fil at liberty by Kirkaldy and joins the
(.iccl's' party, 11. 1 is proclaimnied trai-

8i

tor by Lenox the new Regent, 8. is recon-
ciled to Morton the Regent, 39. articles
of a treaty between then, ibid. his death

45
Church of Scotland, revolutions in it after the

union of the crowns, II. 254, 25z. See
a.fembly, clergy.
Church Lands annexed to the crown by Par-

liament 11. 158

Clans, the institution and nature of II. 23
Clergy, popifh,theirgreatrichesandpower, 1. 57,

121. were made use of by K. James V. to sup-
press the nobles, 57, 58. made a confider-
able body in Parliament, 122. their great
influence over the laity, ibid. they engrof-
fed learning, z13. and held many of the
chief employments, ibid. their power en-
creased by celibacy, ibid. they seized the
eflates of the intestate, 124. and tried all
matrimonial and testamentary causes, ibid.
become obnoxious to the laity, Iz5. their
great corruptor, whence, ibid. there of
Scotland particularly dissolute, 126. their
weak defence of their tenets 27. try in
vain to impose false miracles, ibid. their
impolitic conduc to the reformers 143
- - reformed, try in vain to recover the

revenues of the church, I. 215, 216, 218.
procure a debolition of all reliLcs of po-
pery, ibid. a new regulation concerning
their revenues, 236-240. they are no
gainers by it, 240. their stipends what in
those days, ibid. are offended at the mo-
deration of their leaders, 259. occasions
a tumult among the people, ibid. 260.
more complaints of their poverty, 269, 33;.
are jealous of Q. Mary, ibid. the small al-
lowance appointed to support them all, 326.
their application for payment of their Ili-
pends of little Effelt, 383. frclh complaints
of the deficiency of the funds for their
maintenance, 433, 434. are put off with
fair words and promirfs, 434. archbiflops,
&c. introduced amonig them by Morton,
11. 33, 34. their grievances under his ad-
mninillration, 15. they approve of the Ruth-
vcn confpil;ators, 80 by favouring them
they provoke the King, 89. revere laws
made againlt them, 92, 93. they of Edin-
burgh fly into .nglind, 93. as do feveiil
othi-rs that were m1oll cmninent, 94,. nore

vigorous

vigorous measures against them, 99. they
obtain no redress on the re:ioration of the
exiled Lords, 118. represent their griev-
ances to Parliament, 157. a maintenance
provided for them by Parliament, 159. they
prevail to get Preflyterian government ella-
blifhed by law, 177. their zeal againlt the
Popilh Lords, 183 1, 4, 192. their rath
proceedings, 192, 194. they eret a tand-
ing Council of the Church, 194. vindicate
one of their number who declined the civil
jurifdition, 196, 197. their htanding Coun-
cil ordered to leave Edinburgh, ibid. this
occasions a violent tumult there, 198, zoo.
they use their utmost effrts to spirit the
people, zo2. are deserted and fly to Eng-
land, zoz. their power greatly reduced,
ibid. are prevailed on to give up many of
their privileges, 203, 204. are reflored to
a feat in Parliament, 206. this violently
opposed by many of them, z27. but car-
ried in their general alfembly, 208. those
entitled to this privilege are laid under
many regulations and reftrinlion, 213.
they are brought under great fubjetion,
21 4.' the revolutions among them since the
Union of the Crowns - 254, 255
Clinton, Lord, appointed a commiflioner at the

conference at Weflminfler I. 414
Cockbtur-n of Ormillon, receives a supply of

money from the English to the congregation,
I. 181. is intercepted and robbed of it, ibid.

Coin in Scotland, rome account of, 1. 177. II. 44
Comminaries appointed to try causes in place of

the Spiritual Court, I. 258. they are de-
prived of all authority - 336
Corfeffion of faith by the Reformers, consented

to by Parliament I. 205
Congregation, the Protestants distinguished by

that name, I. 149. their leaders enter into
an aflciation, 153. are involved in diffi-
culties, 179. apply to Q Elizabeth for as-
fillance, 180. money lent them by her in-
tercepted, 181. make a rafls and dcfperate
attempt on Lcith and are repulsed, ibid. 8z.
are no less unfortunate in a second fliirmifl,
182. are quite dispirited and retreat to Stir-
ling, ibid. 183. arejoined by the body of
the nobles, 183. their army dwindles away,
184. are animated by Knox, ibid. they

VoL. 11.

apply again to Q. Elizabeth, iS;. their
parties harass the Lrench, 190. are aflijed
by a fleet from England, ibid. conclude a
treaty at Berwick with the D. of Norfolk,
191. thedelign and substance of this treaty,
q12. negociate a peace with France, 198.
articles of the treaty, 199. they reap many
advantages from it, 200, 201. See Rcfor-
mation.
Covenant, National, framed in defence of the

King and Government, 1I. 164. the na-
ture and reasonableness of it, ibid. 165.
the progress of it since -- 16

Courtey of Scotland, what 1- . 136
Craig, a minitler, boldly tetifies against Q.

Mary's marriage wih Bothwell I. 359
Cra'wford, Cap;. of Jordan Hill, furprizes

Dumbarton Castle, II. 13, 14. the diffi-
culties of that enterprize - 4

--
- Earl of, one of the heads of the Spa-

nilh faction, II. 163, 167. offers his ser-
vice to the K. of Spain, x67. joins in le-
bellion against the King, 169. is forced
to submit to him, ibid. and imprilboned
a (hort time --70
Crichton, Regent during the minority of K.

James II, his barbarous policy I. 44, 4S
-- a jesuit, a plot against Q. Elizabeth

discovered by his means -- 1I. 1oo
Criminalh, a remarkable instance of the diffi-

culty of bringing them to jullice I. 17
Croc, du, the French AmbaTfador, refutes to

countenance Q Mary's marriage with Both-
well, I. 359. attempts in vain areconci-
liation between the Queen and the confe-
derate Lords, 365. mediates a truce be-
tween the King's and Qecen's party in Scot-
land - 1. 28

Crowwnmatlrimnonialof Scotland granted by Par-

liament to the Dauphin of France, I. 138.
deputies appointed to carry it, but are pre-
vented - - 140
Ciniinghlam, Robert, appears at the trial of

Bothwell in name of the Ea.rl of Lcnox,
1. 349. demands a delay, which is refuted,

ibid.
Curie, one of Q. Mary's fecrctaries, is seized

and carried prisoner to London, 1I. 127,
XzS. is produced an evidence againll her

13,

Iii
i

D.
D Arnl., Henry, Lord, proposed as a hus-

band to Q_ Mary, 1. z56. his right of

fucceflion conlidered, ibid. zf6. is per-
mitted to visit the court of Scotland, 271.
arrives there and quickly gsins the Queen's
heart, 272. his character, 274. difgutls
several of the nobles, particularly Murray,
ibid. cultivates a familiarity with David
Rizio, 275. is despised on that account,
276. grows intolerably insolent and haugh-
ty, 28z. schemes to afliflinate Murray,
284. a plot to seize and fend him to Eng-
lani prevented by the Queen, ibid. evi-
dences of this, zS5, z86. his marriage
with the Queen celebrated, 2z7. is ho-
noured with the tiqle of King of Scotland,
288. is implacable with refpecI to the ex-
iled nobles, 297. lufes the Queen's assec-
tion by his untoward behaviour, 302. de-
mands the Crown matrimonial, ibid. 303.
becomes suspicious of Rizio's ill oflices with
the Queen, 303. his resolution to be aven-
ged of him encouraged by the nobles, 305.
article, agreed on between them for that
purpole, 3o5. heads the conspirators who
perpetrate the murder, 307. confines the
Queen after it is committed, 308. prohi-
bits the meeting of the Parliament, ibid.
makes his escape with theQueen, 309, 310.
her hatred to him incrcafes, 31 . is neg-
leded by her and treated with little rcfpeft
by the nobles, 319. refolvos to leave Scot-
land, 321. his wayward and capticious
behaiiour, 322. he writes the reasons of
his conduct to the Queen, ibid. his fIrange
behaviour at the baptifin of the Prince, 332.
a falcf rcafon alleged for this confuted,
333. retires to his faSther at Glaigow, 335.
Ialls sick thele, 3-37 conjectures concern-
ing his dillcmnlcr, ibid. is negileted by
the Quecn, 3 18. file afterwardl visits alnd
exprcffec afie-cioin for him, 33). lie is
prcvalld on by her to come to l'diliurgli,
341. is lodcgd in a fcparate houfl, ibid.
he is niuldcied there, ,. 2. lhis eharaftcr,
ibid. a proclamation illued for diCcovering
tle mIurderers, 3 . a rcmifs enquiry n.ilde
into it; 34.13o0. Cilpt. Illackaddiler a.ind
Ilice oilhiels xeccted on0 that account, ;H .
til: confcfqllu of Mlotullnl thle l"gciit at hiis

death concerning the murder, II. 70. pa-
per of objections of the Couit of England
againlt his marriage with Q.: Mary, App.
a difl'tration concerning his murder, at the
end of vol. 11.
Datvid I. K. of Scotland, his profusion to the

church -- - I. Iz.

I1. troubles during his minority, I. 28
Dawvijn,, sent into Scolland by Q_ Elizabethl,

as a spy on the French ambassador, II. 81.
is sent to gain Arran's interelt to Q. Eliza-
beth, 98. this he tbon accomplishes, ibid.
brings the warrant for Qt Mary's death at
Q. Elizabeth's desire, 144, 141. is char-
ged by her with disobeying her orders, 153.
is imprilbned, tried and fined, and loses all
favour, ibid. objections againll him in the
cause of the late Scottih Queen, App. I 1.
De.e, Monsieur, is sent with a supply of forces

to alilt the French against the Englifl in
Scotland, I. 106. his success there, ibid.
Di/cipliae, in the Church, the first book of,

composed, I. 21;. why objected against in
a convention of the states, ibid. another
attempt in favour of Church discipline fruf-
trated - - I[. 73
Douglas, the power and property of that fa-

mily, I. 29. they aspire to independency,
44. Will. Earl of, murdered by K. James
II. 45. his son endeavours to resent it,
ibid. is so ced to fly into England 46

--- illiam, Q_ Mary committed a pri-
foncr to his castle of Lochleven 370
---- George, brother to the above, affilts

the Queen In making her escape 38;
--- - Archibald, one of Darnly's murder-

ers, II. 121. undergoes a mock trial for
that crime and is acquitted, ibid. is sent
Ambafhador to England, ibid. letter from
him to the (t of Scots, app. to the King.
Drvoy, Sir Wrin. enters Scotland with an army

to support the Queen's party, II. ;. they
join him and drive ofl the Queecn's, ibid.
he procures a truce bctwccen the Kingl's and
Queen's parties, :.. comce withl forcs to
allill Morton in bccegiiin the caltlc of Edin-
burgh, .Io. which is forced to furrcnder, 41
- Sir DrCe, is appoillted Ioe of (QMary's
I.ecpcrs - - II. 103
D/tii,)o, I.ord lRobeit, recommendeld by (_.

l'lizabelh :is : i hullland to Q. I\lary, I. 2zz.
why a flavourite of (Q< Iliz.al)lc's, ibid. is
highly promoted by her, ibid. 26;. his

7 situation

situation extremely delicate, 264. becomes
fu lpicious of Cecil - ibid.
Dunmbartov Castle, furprized and taken in the

King's name by the Regent II. 13, 14
Dury, a minifler of Edinburgh, banished from

his charge by K ng Ja.i el, for his free invec-
tives againit the courtiers, II. 75. after
being r-eiored he is dliven from it a second
time for approving the Raid of Ruthven 89

E.

DinJDur-gh, is taken and burnt by the Eng-
Iflh, 1. 93. a great fray thcre between

the Fiench and Scots, i to. is seized by
the Reformers, 1 5. its inhabitants are
terribly alarmed by the French, 182. a
treaty there with the French and Englilh,
199. a loan demanded of it by Q. Mary,
293. which is granted for the superiority
of Leith, 294. the treaty of, infilled on by
Q. Elizabeth, 333, 334. is poffefied by
the Queen's party, 11. 3. and fortified by
them, 16. the City and Catlce hold out
againit the King's forces, 26. is reduced
to great firaits by famine, ibid. 27. is re-
lieved by a truce, 28. the citizens take up
arms to promote the King's marriage, 171.
they rife again and intullt the King and his
ministers on the murder of the Earl of Mur-
ray, 176. aflifi the King againtl Huntly,
186. a violent tumult there on account of
the Clergy, 198-zoo. they are fevercly pu-
nifled for it by the King, 201-203. their
ministers return to their charges, 205. di-
vided into parishes and number of miniflers
increased, ibid. they decline publishing
the account of Gowric's conspiracy, 228.
all, except one who is baniflcd, are pcr-
fuaded by the King to do it 229
Edward I. of England, dellroyed the public

archives of Scotland, 1. 4. is made um-
pire between Bruce and Baliol, 7. his ait
to acquire tire superiority of Scotland, ibil.
hi, wars with tlie Scots under Rob. BrIuc

10, 39
E.g/iitio, Earl of, is pievailcd on to join tie

lKint's party 11. S.
Elixz.rl,'t, her peaceable acccflion to the Clown

of Elngland, 1. I.o. fuppolts tile criglie-
gaiion ill Scotland, 18o. is sparing in her
fuplplies, 181. ic'lolvts to fopport tihem on
a lccond application, i15-. her good con-

duc in matter; of importance, i?6. mo-
tires that determined her to a/lft tihem, ibid.
8S. iher deliberate and refolite conducl,
191. fends a lirong fleet to their afiil;ince,
ibid. concludes a treaty with them, ibid.
192. her right: to the Crown of En: land
nlferted by Francis anid Mar)y in I'lancc,
zoo. cbtains advantageous terins tor the
Scots, o01. is Iblicited by the Parliaient
of Scotland to marry the Earl of Arran,
209. this fie declines, 2 0. the fee sos ler
discontent with Q. Mars, 219, 220. her
jealousy of the fucceflion, ibid. 223. ier
exceflive vanity and jealousy of M, ry's beau-
ty, 223. her diliimulation to her, 2z.!.
refuses her a safe ;onducrt, ibid. fends to
congratulate her arrival in Scotland, z2o,
refuses a conccflion made by Q. Mary, 231.
her jealousy of her light betrayed lier into
mean actions, 232. lIer rc fl;lance to
Hen. V11. ibid. a perbonal i itcnrvi. w ith
Q. Mary proposed, zs2 . ihe alttiul' de-
clines it, z52. her views in rcgard t
Mary's marriage, 255, 256. aTiLnr s il1-
agreeable authority, 25(. nalmes o:ic io ai
Ihuband to QL Mary, z6z. the ciiilreii-
qualifications of her minillers and favourites,
ibid. difiembles with Q. Mary about her
marriage, ibid. 265. and likes ife with re-
gard to L. Darnly, 266. afironts Q. L^ary
by her inrinuation concerning Lcnox, 267.
is perplexed about the marriage of the Scot-
tirh Queen, 271. permits 1)arnly to visit
the court of Scotland, ibid. affects to de-
clare againfl QC Mary's marriage to him.
277. her realons for this conduet, 2780
her great diflimulation in that afllir, 283.
her harth and deceitful behaviour to Mur-
ray and his affociatcs who had fl-'d to her,

z92. is liruck at hearing ot the birth of

James VI 31c. conlilt to llanl godmro-
ther to him, ibid. the Parliament addlrili
her to fettle the fuccefion, 32;. thli. greatly
cmb.ilbarafls her, ibid. 32(. fih looths and
gains her Parliamecilt, 327. endearours to
accoinimoJatc lher differieccs with M'VL:y,
333. wVrites to h1Cr to deIl.l tile trial of
D).lr-lly',s mlurdercis, .S. ilterpoies ill her
behalf wheniv ai prifoicnr, 372. her allrbal-
f.ldor is rlefuted accel, to (j. Malr), ,371.
Ihe oflfers .nillllance to [lie otler lrnl bli., Ilidl.
her1 delicr;L'itioni cinccrnilri tie Clrifol.]l ot
(2. A Mlry on her .rlirval il ll .]l:ltn , ',:'

I ii 2 ~'/.i

3q93. resolves to detain her there, 394.
her motives to this condu&, ibid. 395.
fends her letters of condolance, and gives
olders to watch her conduct, 395. she
gladly accepts the office of umpire between
her and her fubjets, 396, 397. receives a
very prefling letter from Q. Mary, 399.
her precautions againfi her, 400. appoints
commissioners to hear Q, Mary and her ac-
cufers, 405. her important situation on
that occasion, ibid. her views in this as-
fair, 406, 407. receives the Regent's de-
mands, 410. removes the Conference to
Wellmirfter, 4t1. her mean artifices to
get the evidence of Q. Mary's guilt from
the Regent. 417. treats her with greater
rigour, 418. writes a harsh letter to Qx
lary, ibid. she dismisses the Regent, with-
out approving or condemning him, 419. but
secretly supports his party, 420. makes
propohals to the regent in her favour, 423,
Norfolk's projet concealed from her, 425,
427. discovers and defeats a rebellion in
Q. Mary's favour, 431, 432. resolves to
deliver her up to the regent, 434. her
great concern at his death, II. i. conti-
nues to encourage factions in Scotland, 2.
Ler political condu& with regard to Lenox,
6, 7. is excommunicated and deprived of
her kingdom, &c. by the Pope, 7. sup-
ports the King's party in Scotland, and
name Lenox to be Regent, ibid. proposes a
treat)y ns accommodation between Q: Mary
and her fubjets, 8. procures a cessation of
hofilltiet, 9. fends proposals to QMary,
ibid. her artifices in the condua of this
affair, lo, ir. appoints commiflioners to
frame a treaty, a1.. finds a pretence to ren-
der their meeting fruitless, 12 a marriage
proposed between her aind the D. of Anjou,
21. declares oponly ag.inft the Queen's
parts, 25. concludes a treaty with France,
27. her motives for iiegoiiating a peace
bc:;een the two parties il Scotland, 36, 37.
is jealous of Cecil's intclview wvih Q( Mary,
43. inegerciates a tre.ty between Morton
and his iadverll ric, 5(. lher anfver to K.
James's demannl oi a pofltnion of an cftace
in England, ; 6, 7 . a marriage between
her and the I). cif .'lcn,'n proposed, 59.
interpolc; in behalf of Ivlorton, 63. Iicl
in:c:ilules in order to (faie hi'li, 66. conn-
tcell;ccs ltho -cG&inlir.ators at ltitlhvcn, 79.

is alarmed at a conspiracy againlt her, 9g.
96. the designs of Queen Mary's adherents
againfl her, 97. endeavours to recover her
interest in Scotland and gains Arran to her
interefl, 98. amuses Q.Mary with a fruit-
less negociation, roo. a new conspiracy
againfl her, ibid. and association formed
for her defence, lo, 1oz. her suspicions
of Q. Mary, l02. her life endangered by
a conspiracy, 107. this how discovered
and prevented, ibid. occasions an extraor-
dinary flatute for her preservation, l o..
is in a dangerous situation from the progress
of the holy league, I z. endeavours to
form a confederacy of the Proteflant Princes,
ibid. and to proceed with rigour against.
Q.Mary, ibid. 114. advances her interest
in Scotland, and proposes a league with it,
1 14. fettles a pension upon K. James, i1 s;
concludes a treaty with Scotland, Izo. ac-
count of Babington's conspiracy againRf her,
122-1 zS. her diflimulation after Q. Mary's
conviction, 137, 138. her answer to K.
James's intercession for her, 141. her far-
ther diflimulation and anxiety, 143. signs
the warrant for her execution, 144. her
speech to Davison on that occasion, ibid.
affects to lament Q. Mary's death, 152.
several marks of her artifice in that affair,
ibid. 153. she endeavours to sooth K.
James, 154. provocations given by her to
Spain, 16z. prepares to meet its resent-
ment, ibid. 163. endeavours to secure
Scotland, ibid. tries to prevent K. James's
marriage, 170. solicits him to treat con-
fpira:ors against him with rigour, 180.
evades the decision of K. James's light of
fucceflion to the Crown of 'ngland, 208.
is disgusted at several of his proceedings,
210. discovers his correspondence with the,
Pope, ibid. fiefli grounds of her suspicion,
237. her conduct with regard to the Earl
of Effex, 233-237. her irresolution con-
cerning his death, 237. and great concern
after it, ibid. receives ambaflhdors from
K. James with regard, and increafcs hii sub-
fidy, 238. her las illnris, 2,11. conjec-
tures concerning thIe caufcs of her melann..
cholY, .1 2, 2,43. her death, 244. and clia-
raler, ibid. 245. declared the K. of Scots
h'cr fucceflbr, 246. son)e of her letters,
app. 13, 28, 35, 36, 39, 47, 4b, 52, ó5.

pbinflon, secretary to K. James VI. deceives
him into a correspondence with the Pope,
II. 2 i. is tried and found guilty of high
trealbn, 212. and pardoned on the Queen's
intercefion ibid.

England, the English seize and detain King

James I. of Scotland long a prisoner, I. 29.
the'nobles there humbled, 32. had early
two houses of Parliament, 68. they in-
vade Scotland, 92. their depredations there,
94, 95. a peace between England, France
and Scotland, 95. invade Scotland again,
iol. gain a great vicory, 102, 103. it
proves of little advantage to them, 1o4.
they force the Scots into a closer union with
France, lo5. conclude a peace, io8: an
English fleet arrives in Scotland to afsif the
congregation, 190. a peace concluded be-
tween them, 191. they enter Scotland and
besiege the French in Leith, r9z. are fe-
veral times repulsed, 194. causes of their
bad success, ibid. iNy. articles of a treaty
of peace, 199. they quit Scotland, 202.
refleflions on the right of succession to their
Crown, 2zz-223. the Parliament favours
QMary's right of fuccefion, 225. A league
between England and France, 1T. 27. be-
tween England and Scotland, sze.. the
national covenant adopted in England 165.

Entails, with what view introduced 1, 19.
Epi/copal government in the Church, fomne ac-

count of, I. 213. An attempt to revive it,
11. 33, 34. it is abolished by the aflem;
bly, 74. Jurifditlion-abolifhed, 174. See
Archbif ops.
Errol, Earl of, one of the heads of the Spa-

nifl facion, 11. 163. his offers of service to
the K. of Spain, 167. appears in rebellion,
169. is forced to fiubmit to the King, ibid.
imprisoned fbra so rt time, 170. Joins in
another confpircy, 171). is fimmoned by
the King to surrender, ibid. offers to ful)-
mit to a trial, 183. Seretnce pronounced
a2ainlt him. -84

Eatkine of Dun, is employed by the Quecn

Regent to deceive the PMotcltalnt, io0.
his resentmcnt of this utrage - ibid.
--- Lord, governor of Edinbbugh Calllc,
ads a ncutral paut between the Q1cen Rc-
pent and the coneiricgatlion, 1. 1i43. rcccives 1
tle Queen Rlgelt into

111 ilCie ULlfi'. 193. is
arcalte Earl of Mar, ?.. r. See Alar.

i-·- Alexander has the chief direcAions of'

the education of K. James VI. II. 48. ad-
mits some of the nobles to make complaints
to him against Morton the Regent, 5o. is-
turned out of Stirling Cafile by his nephew
the Earl of Mar -- 53
EJneval, the French Envoy, endeavours to

obflruct a treaty between England and Scot-
land - II. 120
E/ex, Earl of, set up by the English Papists

as a candidate for the Crown, II. 189.
heads a party in England, 232. his cha.
ra(cer, ibid. is greatly diflinguiflied by the
Queen, 233. favours the K. of Scots, ibid.
obtains the offices of Lord Lieutenant and
Commander in Chief in Ireland, 234. is
unsuccessful in that expedition, ibid. re-
ceives a harlh letter from the Queen, ibid.
returns to England and is confined, ibid.
is tried and censured, ibid. endeavours to
spirit up King James, 235. his rash and
frantic condut, 236. is again taken into
cuflody, ibid. his death, 237. his son and
alociates are reflored to their honours after
the acceftion of K. James - ibid.
Eturope, the late of, at the beginning of the

Sixteenth Century 1. 7
Excommunication, a terrible engine of the Popish

clergy - I. 12 z

F.

EL TO N, an Englishman, fixes the Pope's
excommunication of Q_ Elizabeth, on
the gates of the bishop of London's palace.

JI. 7

Fentlon, M. de la Motte, rent by the French

King to interpose for K. James when con-
fined by the Ruthlien conlpirators, 11. 82.
is forced to return without success ibid.
,Feual go.v~er/iment, its origin and ariflocratical
genius, 1. 12, 13. cauecs which limited
the pover of feudal Monarchs, 14. feudal
vaflhls liable to few taxes, 15. A remark-
able iiflance of the feebleness of feudal go-
erninment, 17. the most perfect idea of
the feudal fyleim, how attained, 37. slate
of it in England, 65-67. and in Scotland,

67, 68

sip, a populous and powerful c)unt!, much
devoted to the congregation, l S,). is
dellroycd antd plundered by the Fiench, ibid.

thi/

the fynod of, excomnmunicates the arch-
bishop of St. Andrews for contumacy, II.
,119. they excommunicate the Popish Lords

183
Forles, Lord, with the Eail of Argyl, is fcnt

against the Popish Lords, II. 187. are de-
f ated by them - 88
Forduin, John de, his history of Scotland when

wrote - I. 4
Fofier, Sir Joln, warden of the English bor-

der, a scuffle betwecn him and the Scots,

IL. 11t

othcrbingay Caflie, Q. Mary's imprifonmenr,
tiial and death thlce, - 11. 128-149
Frwalce, the consequences of the subversion of

the icudal government there, J. 72. a body
ot French arrive in Scotland to support the
Catholics, 99. they reduce the caltle of
St. Andrew's, ibid. another party of them
arrive theie, lo6. their tranlacRions theie,
ibid. 109. conclude apeace with England,

8oS. their politic conduc, i,-9. they

leave Scotland, ibid. their artifices in a
treaty of marriage between the Dauphin
and the QL of Scots, 135, 136. endeavours
to expel the French army out of Scotland,
163. Another party of them arrive there
and fortify Leith, 170. They exasperate
the people by their insolence, ibid. they
are sent agair.t the congregation, 189. they
dellroy and plunder Fitc, and are much ha-
raflid by parties of the congregation, t9c.
alc greatly alarmed by the arrival of the
Englifi fleet, 19o. they return to Leith
greatly harassed and exhauled, 19t. are
bcfieged there by the Englifi and the con-
gregation, 194. they gain several adv.n-
tages, ibid. 195. their motives for con-
cluding a peace, 197. negociations for that
purpose, 198. articles of the treaty, 199,
2co. they leave Scotland, 2o2. the French
adlvifc Q( Mary to moder;ate mcafurcs, 217.
their prol ofals by In anibadlhdor rrjceRc(d,
ibid. they )agicc to (Uz M.iry's marriage
swith Lold Darnly, 271. the liccntioumfnf.(
of their moral 3,1
France, King of, a copy of his di-reciops sent

to Scotlanlid, anlsp. 73
.francis I. gives a check to tlhe aibitious plo-

jeds of Charles V. 1. 7 l his fidelity to
the Scots, 9;. his death -- 9)
--- 11. comes to the crown of France,

I. 165. his charater, ibid. 2zo. is guided
by the Duke of Guise and Cardinal of
Lorrain, ibid. I66. he treats the Piote-
flints nirhl great rigour, 197. his death

a 10.

C.

IF O R D S, Doctor and Gilbert, their
i notiln concern;. g the la:vfulicfs of kil!-

ing heletical excommunicated Princes, II.
12z. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q.
Elizabcth, ibid. Gilbert being gained by
Walfingharn betrays his alTsciates, 124. is
emplo) ed to carry on a foreign correfpon-
dence with Q M1ary t z5
Clamis, Lidy, is condemned to be burnt for

witchcraft I. 58
---- Lord Chancellor, intimates the King's

order to Morton to surrender the Regency,
II. 50. is killed in a rencounter of Stirling,

53

- the tutor of, joins the conspirators of
Ruthven, If. 77. his bold speech to King
James, 78. he wi:h the other conspirators
ieize the calle of Stirling and erect their
flandard, 9r. he is attainted, and his ellate
forfeited 99
Glafgou, biflop of, a note of his concerning

the Queen of Scotland's dowry, app. 71
Glclcairn, Earl of, joins the Ruthven confpi-

rators II. 77

Gleahlivat, the battle of -- ]I. iSS
Go,-don, Sir John, a fcuffie in the streets of

Edinburgh between him and Lord Ogilvy,
I. z25. being confined for it, he makes
his escape, ibid. when ordered by the
Queen to surrender himself he takes up arms
againfl her, 24r, 246, 247. is defeated,
and together with his brother made prifo-
ncr, 2.9. lie is beheaded and his brother
pardoned ibid.

Gordon, Lord, Get at liberty -- 2)
-*- Sir Adam, exerts himself for the

Queen's interefi in the north, 11. 26. hi i
characler and good conducl as a foldicr z8
GoCuric. E:ail of, joins in a conspiracy to seize

the King at Ruthtven, 11. 77. is visited and
pardoned by the Kilng after his escape, 85.
bccotmes fuifpetcd, and is ordered for Fiance,
91. delays his voyage, and is taken into
cullody, ibid. he is tried and executed

92
Gov ri'c,

Govurie, John and Alexander, sons of the above,

their charaaer and conspiracy, II. 214.
the surprising circumstances of that remark-
able tranfaflion, 215-218. fevcral diffe-
rent conjetures concerning it, 219-22S.
their dead bodies brought into Parliament
and condemned, 2zg. their eRates and
honours forfeited, and name abolished for
ever, ibid. different accounts cf this aflair
publilied, but not fati:factory, 230o--32.
See Rtthvc;z
G:'aha/ n, Sir David, of Fintry, accuftd of a

coTlfpiracy with the popilf Lords in favour
of Spain, II. !7,. is convidied and be-
headed --ibid.
Grai, m:aler of, some account of hiil, I1. o13.

he becomes a favourite of King James VI.
ibid. is gaincd to Q: Elizabeth's interest,
104. betrays Q_ Mary, ibid. persuades
K. James to write a harlh and undutiful let-
ter to her, i o. joins with others in pro-
moting Qt Elizabeth's interest in Scotlan i,

14. his treachery ahlen sent to intercede
for Q.Mary, 143. his bafcnefs discovercd,
he is disgraced, i5o. his vain attempt
against secretary Maitland, ibid. ads in
Italy as a spy from the coult of England,
210. a memorial of his fur his I. jelly,
app. 88, 92. to tle fccrctary of iate 9o
'Diije, duke of, his vri( ent counsels with regard

to the Scots, 1. i 6. is murdeicd at the
siege of Orieans --- 25

---- is intrigues against Q. Elzabetih, 11.
06, 97. is a principal promoter of the
holy league, 112, iCl. drives the Ficnch
King out of hii capital - 161

I-I.

AD D D IG TO UN, fcized and fortified
by the lLnoplil., 1. 105. is relieved by

the French c- lco
Hlarinm;'lo, the rife of tl;lat f.inily, 1. o3. ar-

b!tlnay pro(ceeditgs of MI\ortrin the Regent
i:gainlt it, II -.7. Sec C/,ilildhrailt.
*--- of 'oLotIteljiauh, taken priloncr at

the battle of lIangiide, I..oo. is tried
anid condcmlned for rebellion, ibid. obtains
a pardon fromi Mmlray tlhe Regent by the
intcrccflion of Knox, ibid. an account of
lhis nulltleriil; i Mlri :ay, .135, '3.1(). Inakecs
h'i. cic:ipe, 36. is. recciil in tillnih ait
ll;imiltlo- - II, 1

Hamilton, Mr. Patrick, the first who suffered in

Scotland for the Protestant religion 1.141
lartford, Earl of, invades Scotland with an

Englifl army, I. 93. buins Edinburgil
and Leith, ibid. is made Duke of Somer-
set, and protector of England, lot. See
Somelfet.
Hatton, vice-chamberlain of Englanl, the ar-

gument by which he prevailed on Q_ Mary
to plead at her trial -- 1. 13:
Henry II. of France, fends forces to alEil tlhe

Scots, I. 99. a marriage proposed between
his son the Dauphin and the young queen of
Scots, lo;, io6. excites the Scots to in-
vade England, 131. his infaimous irr.pof-
tionon n Mary in the treaty of marriage,
I35. peifuades his Ion and Q. Mary to
af'ume the titles of King and Q.een of Eng-
land, 145. his death - 164
--- IllI. degenerates gtcatly on his acccf-

sion to the crown of France, II. i l. en-
ters into a private negociation with Q. Eli-
zabeth, 113. interposes feebly in behalf of
Q. M\ry :i

VIII. of England, by his fynicm o:

reformation becomes formidable both to
Papists and Protellants, I. 5C. Fropoil:;
an interview with K. James V. ibid. i;
disappointed by him anil declares ;\::
againll Scotland, 61. invades it, but is
forced to retreat, ibid. 6z. his inmpo-
tance as to the balance of power in Europe,
76. his influence in Scotland how ob-
tained, 7:L. his fchlemes with regard to it
on the death of James V. 84. were iil-
conducted by hilmfelf and odious to the
Scots, 85. attempts to ai;n the Regency
by great promilcr, SS. invades Scotland,
92. this being ill conduolcd turns to no
accrulnt, 93. receives ani leswc'is tlie
Farl of Lenox, ibid. cncou.ages the nmur-
derlrs of cardinal jCeatoun, ,i:'. his death
and chairaflcr, ibid. 9o. hIs incoiifillslit
condlut, 145. excluded the Scots line o)
his tcll.imenct - 3.
Icrrlis, I ord, joins Chateichrault in oppoiinTl

thI Regent, 1. 421. coslies to aI tre;ty
with hilni, .122. he lanld the duII e are com--
miitted pmlifolers to tile caffle of IIdionbr1li,
.1 '3., illnii iates tile Kin,'s older to A1li..
toll to resign tihe Rengelle, II. J. accunilt

C5

of his behaviour in Parliament, app. 50
a letter from him to Lord Scroop and Si
F. Knollis - 9(
Hirckford, secretary to the Dnke of Norfolk

betrays him by discovering his intrigues
wihb Q.Marv -- I. 23, 24
Hlighlalds and IJles, an attempt to civilize them

by K. fames VI. II. z39. regulations for
that purpole, 240. three towns enaued
with the privileges of royal boroughs or-
dered to be built there -ibid.
HIcdnfon, a prielt of Reims, maintained the

lawfulness of killing heretical excornmuni-
cated Princes -- 1. 2zz
tlome, Lord, font by K. James VI. with a fe-
cret embafyv to the nope - 11. 212

How.arId. See NoSfolk.
HslnJdane, Lord, governor of Berwick, his in.

terview with Arran - II. 98
.Hlntly, Earl, though a catholic, joins the refor-

mers in opposing the French army, I. 163,
16+. assist them only with fair promises,
iS3. his further concurrence with them,
195. some account of that family, 243.
his enmity against the young Queen's mi.
nifters, ibid. his resentment inflamed by an
accident, 245. appears in open rebellion
against the Queen, 247. his plot againit
her ministers disappointed, ibid. breaks
out into open rebellion, 248. is trodden to
death in a battle, 249. his family prose-
cuted with the utmost rigour, 250. several
anecdotes and conjecures concerning his
plot, ibid. 251. is attainted by Parliament,
z25. the attainder repealed and the family
retored to estate and honours -- 35
-- his attachment to Bothwcll, 347,
353. refuses to submit to the Regent, 322,
Is forced to do it, 423. ats as lieutenant
to the Queen after the Regent's murder, II.
5. is proclaimed a traitor by Lenox the
new Regent, 8. receives tome money and
promiles of afidlance from Spain, ibid.
agrees to a treaty with Morton the Regent,
139. is one of the heads of the Spanish sac-
tion, 163. engages to the Prince of Parma
to fcrve the King of Spain, 167. is impri-
soned for a (hort time, 169. crcEs a Rlan-
dard of rebellion, ibid. but forced to sub-
.rit to the King, ibid. is again imprisoned,
.I70. is soon let at liberty, ibid. receives

a commilnifi: i .cr;' :i.a i, 176. his bar-
r barous In;rd.:r .'. ; = l.,: of Murray, ibid.

is summone.l :o l: :.der to justice, 179.
flies to the m:mua.;i:;, 180. offses to sub-
mit to a thi-, i13. sentence pronounced
against him, 184. refules to submit, i8S.
makes another desperate attempt, but is for-
ced to fly - - 86

I.

AME S I. was detained long a prisoner
J in England, .I 29. troubles in Scotland

during that time, ibid. was much im-
proved by an Eng!ilh education, 40. his
policy on his return to Scotland, 41. his
character, 4z. fupprefles the power of the
nobles, ibid. they being exasperated, con-
spire againfl and murder him 43, 44.
-- 1. troubles in Scotland during his
minority, I. 30. his attempts againfi the
nobles, 44, 45. murders the Earl of
Douglas, 45. procures several good laws
to be paflcd, 46. reduces the power of the
nobles, ibid. 47. his death 47
- i- 11. the slate of S:otland during his

minority, 1. 30. his impolitic condut,
47, 48. kills one of his brothers, and is
invaded by another, 48, 49. is greatly in-
fulted by his nobles, 50o. his despicable
minions, ibid. was the first that appointed
a standing guard to his person, t5. the
nobles are provoked to take arms against
him, ibid. is killed in a battle against
them, ibid. 5z. his characer ibid.

- IV. his character, I. 52, 53. is
killed in a battle againIt the Englilh at
Flowden 53
--- ·V. his minority long and turbulent, 1. 31.

tranfaaions during that time, 53, 54. as-
fumes the government while very young,
54, 55s his character, 55. his fchcme
for humbling the nobles, 56-5q. is di-
verted from it by the clergy, 60, 61. takes
arms for the defence of his kingdom, 61.
his nobles refuting to follow him, throws
him into a deep melancholy, 6z, 63.
which is encrcafed by a furpriing defeat of
his forces, 63. his death, 64. reflcdions
on his condud, ibid. he refused an alli-
ance with Charles V. Emperor - 77

SJtwms

7,:ires V.1 his birth, I. 318. his baptism,

332. the care cf him committed to the
Earl of Mar, 345. is by him preservcd
from falling into the hands of Bothivell,
361. is cowvned, 376. the nobles op-
preiled by Morton the Regent, turn their
eyes to him for rcdrefs, 11. +4. his edu.
cation and disposition%, ibid. q9. he be-
comes suspicious of the Regcnt's power,
49. dilfovcrs early a great attachment to
lavourites, 60. adopts two of dif-erent
dilpofitions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with
great folemniky, 6z. is by his favourites
engaged in unpopular measures, 75. 76.
is seized by a parry of nobles at Ruihven,
77. and forced to receive coiplaints
againil his favourites, ibid. 78. dil-mbles
with them, and banishes Lcnox, 79. is
brought toStirling and Holyroodhoul'e, 8 .
his concern at Lcnox's death, and regard
for his memory, ibid. receives the French
ambaflador with great ref,'ec, 83. makes
his escape from the conspirators, ibid. 84.
resolves to treat them with moderation, 85.
visits Gowrie, and grants him a pardon, ibid.
renews his fondness for Arran, ibid. 86.
is by him persuaded to violent measures
againll the conspirator5, 86. his anfiver to
a haughtyletterfrom Q. Elizabeth on their
behalf, 87. is by her interposition rendered
more violent againfl them, 88. is pro-
volked by the clergy, 89. his fleps to
humble them, 92. his profusion to Arran,
99. fends a new tavourite toEngland againit
lihe banifced Lords, 103. devolves the
whole regal authority on Arran, 105.
writes an undutiful letter to his mother,
lio. is threatened to be dilinherited by
her, 1 . receives a pension from (Q Eli-
zabeth, I 15. is reconciled to ti.e exiled
Lirds, 1 7. beconies popular by conclud-
ing a treJty with England 1 ,

120, I . h's

scandalous Lhciariiiurit. ith resaid to Arch'l.
)ouonlis, ibid. his ridclenvours to fve Ihis
I ict i r's life ;ift r I cr c l(..!c i. a:ion, I - ,
1.l0. is grta'tly ilc.iutne at hI r - (i ' th, I I 1
;ertz icnrts ncl' ,l 19, tlhe I. h il

I rilnillt .' t)
S},aiit at. J:lbl8tdl, tO.:, i,,..l ItiiseaC

jim oily . li , .

11 . . i oc lc
Sl il) ;llll J'.]' j, li5.. ,I. : , tl , ;:lll l'.C

VOr L.~ Jl.· 'i ·]"""C I Jij l

vigorously to adhere to tile iithlr, '-,
takes several fleps vwitl Ithat view, ibi.
164. his (kill in the poliih cilntiovil,
I68. wrote a commentary on the Revela-
tions, ibid. his maxims with regard to po-
pery, ibid, 169. his cxccfliic lenity to
conspirators against him, 169. Iclolves to
marry thc Prince[l of Denmirli-, 70o. . l,
uecd to prevent it, ibid. the msrni.ge i.;
ccnrun-mnr:atcd in Nortwas, 17 . pal'es si -
verIa monioths in Deninalk, ibid. refitc-
tions on his conduct there, ibid. 17z. hi,
arrival in Scotland with his queen, 17;.
indulges the prcfbyterians, 174. the ill
co!Jfcquences of his lenity, ibid. 177;. hi.;
zeal against witchciaftt 175. i follicite
by Q. Elizabeth to treat the confpiratr.
againit him with rigour, ISo. is fulfpiteJ
of cconniving with them, i . is fiipriri::c
and seized by Buthwell, ibid. and bfrced
to comply with his terms, r S2. his leniiy to

othwiell abulcd, ibid. 18:. is fufpctl.d
of favouring the }'opifh Lord, 18; . is iu
new danger fiom them, IS6. delegates
his authority to Argyl and Sorbes againil:
them, 187. goes in person against their,
ibid. walics their lands, and garrisons their
caflles, ibid. his riiht of the fuccefion to
the crown of lngl:ind opposed by the p.a-
pilns, I89. his lenity to them incenses the
clergy and people. 193, 194. is much
Frovokcd by the obfitinacy of the clergy,
195. gives orders against them, IrQ7, Iy.,
is much insultcd and in great danger at
Edinburgh, g198-- oo. leaves Edinburgh
and proceeds withl lerverity againllt the cii-
zcIls , 2zo-203. acquires absolute domi-
nion io ccticleallical aflair;, 20i, 2c.
flrengthens his parliament blv itloil ni
tl:e feats of the ecc'clinalics, 2c, 207. en-
dravours wilh ll fucccf to gain a panity i
]nlglalnd, z2oi. incr;!fcs liis iepuit;ltlon liy
rublfliihilg Iis I:lailicon l)oronr, 2 9 ii
i.ccutrd Ily Q( Il',.lbclth of coirrclpolln'it
vith tie l'o'-e, 21o . this lihe deri ie , id
ihow ;ijcco(ill!eC so , ^l I 1. (illtr 1: jI, is
clr lC

' li t ! tl1,i-, -2 2.. i:, ;it f ,',' 1:.!';.1 (,

1 ': i tl i ,111.1l ':i l i cl '

, i!,~k . b)'. t :,:-

21 23llt ') .

l ;,!',.:r (,l "" r! ', ", 1Ctq l , '

2. 1.---i '3 . li.

1 It ti li l t

I> h.1; 'i ,tl; Jl
, . it,:

kx. . J: ,,

to the Eail of Es1ey, 23;. enda ambaflha-
(iois tO, fae !in,, 2; J. t.ev anli.c too
lateC,.2-. i.' r-iO csC il ,

1 andl llOLitlcs

to l, ;ii. , lincur a';ei- l.i acc!Coln, ibid.
C !. tin,;i h.;i i:trie::rs inl England , 238,

,',;.. Is; ;:c: C.; rl et!;:l. il.trcil t l ed tllci'c,

ili. .: C, l;c ideavourl 1o ciz e ihe higil-

n alni.

; 1i ]i'., 2

l 9, C .o. :! proclaim d

iug inl EinianJ atilcr ;lie dc.th of Q. I'lZ-

Ziabctli, z45, i . is }:loc.iinied like,,iie
.a Sco'.anJ, arni re)Taire s

his jcu;ncy

to l:..laniJ, -,47. enters London, and takes
pciiclion of the throne, z48. his charac-
tcr howvdifieent fiom that ol Q(Elizabeth,
ibid. a letter fiom himi to ir. Archibald
Dotglh;s, ac, , -- F5
I/.,.'; :/j ('.a!!',, i c'ure, to surrcnder to Q

iM,.r , I. z. 7. it is forced, and the gover-
nor -L.unilh. - ibid z4S
&iYt', the lierty of, ho.w rrefelved 1. 73

K.

'E 7'T 1, cir Wiilliam, fintto intercec!c
: for (). iMary when uncer ifntence, 11.
140. letter to him froin secretary Miait-
land, app. - - 85
Kent, Earl of, appointed to fee the ientence

againfi Q. Mary executed 11. 145
,cr of Frl.iiherll, ravnaes England on the

murder of Murray the Regert, I. 1,2.
his dcfign, 4. has a lcutiie with tlhe l-ng-
lilh -- --

Gco. brother to L. 'Newbottle, is dii-

covercd whien ready to fail to promote a
plot in Spain, If. i-S. his fclhci opened,
ibid. efcapcs out of plilon ISi
K/lligrcqv, lHenry, his declaration on the

peace 157. app. - 7

Kings, feudal, the mol limited of all Princes,

1. i . general causes of this, i. . their
revenues wcre but lniall, ibid. 5;. had no
lianding nrmies, 5. and jti iftli'tion li-
inited, 16. ii.cans uied to extend tile royal
;luthority, 33. thl ir jurifdiclion cnlalged,
3. thie c'rn;odiinany inilueince of [lie
icottiiih [l s in I'! ii. l'.lI, 65. the rca-
lii' of tis -- ibid. G)
Kii',/rs'' ol (rainllc, OIC o01 tlCe Iiiidlel' ieI

1lc. ioun, i', r;r;led by tilt tQ. l)o\x a '' ] i, I.
I5g?. lit

; aitta li n der nl

I vini. d

l i V

1i] ! a;l i l ',
- :. oTlls to iuiilt i !2,i\,cll iln f !iec

combat, 3(6. lis il.tcrvlew 'vli Q MTarxr-,
in name of the confederate L r:ds. ibi;
rescues M;itldnd from coi finenient, 43'-.
lahours to fulpport t.;e iing's auth:;i:y :;7
rceiore haii ony aftcr hei miurder of .i:ne.
gent, Il. 3. a ccdes to the (iquees' p1ait
ibid. 4. prcvide :t r r si:ee i!: ic ;'. :

!.'

his g irrifon anJ fcrii o

ir7g ,! u;' I

.

pioclaims Lcnox'b au'!. i: uin!^... :,,id
ufurFed, IO. attempts in ain io pr. : ;t .a
neceting of the Pamliamct't iid. Icrins :.
scheme for litprilirng thii ii 's F: rt'y, ;
is at filft fuc.efbful but aferwnard' ice ,itec
z-. comes near to an agrecnl t Wv:ih ?.ar
tl:e Regent, 31. a tleaty \itIh Mor:on,
Ireaks it cfl, 37, 3S. fires upon Edin-
burgh fiiom the callle, 38. is beie.cd I;'
the Regent afilled by Egngl;nt fiteCe,
4c. is foiced by mutir:y of the gar.lbiz;
to capitullte, 4 . iifurcn;:crs to Drury hle
English general, ibid. is by order of Q,
Elizabeth delivered up to lhe lReent, . z.
ie and his brother are executed 43
K/ioll)'s, Sii Francis, lent by Q. Elizabeth w\itil

letters of condolence to Q. Mary on her
arrivail in England, 1. 319). .li e of his ler-
ties, app. - 51 , 52. 5;)
.Kox', John, a famous reformer, lis charactcr,

i. 1I I . after being tome time abroad he i;
recalled by the pcrlccuted Protefants, t5 1,
inflames the multitude at Perth with rage
ng;in/it the papiils, ibid. his notion con-
cerning the government of women whence,

56, 157. his residence fixed in Edin-
b nrgh, l16. complains of the lukewarm-
nels of the refolrmers, 174. his opinion to
tie convention of reformers that it is lawful
to refilt and deprive tyranniical Princes, I(i.
anilmtes and revives the derponding con-
gregation, S84, 8I. c om-l.lins of the ne-
glect of the refoimers in providing maii-
tilinance for their preachers, 207. recom-
mends the Geneva model of church Po-
vclnmcnt, z13. piopolcs fupciintenlcdn:s
in the .llich, 21 ,. comlnifes the lir;t
boolk (f (ilf ipline, zl . renCornces ilicin!
ship

d iih the I'.1 ;l o(i ,lti ily foi hlis moidh-

r.1l'ii,, ;1.) ik tr ied si 'ncatii aginig a ii-
til.,1 inlO l', t h ye e ' 'qie :and iC(]iliiteil, ito

l,,,i!l j)itii, ( . I oncuir in tihi'; di. i JfI I, il)i(l.
i.OL . 1';; .'u hl!y ;to z lu;.: !y M :iitlnl}: . iI'

1"'ca;m'-' ''
X.

'preachingi fcditots dosrir:: conccirnl re-
iillance, 272. chara'icr. of the tao cifpu-
tnts, ibid. approved of fveCinl inlances cf
afialination, 3 I 5. agices to some rcgili-
tions concerrni.lg the elcftinl of Li!.oys,
11. 3-. his death and chlrafer, 3;, 36.
his eulorium by Morton the Regenl, 36.
articles cent by hiim to the general afllTnib.y,
app. - -- 6

I..

ArNG SID F, tIhe b.at'e of, I. ,?.

.l..- , Launrca, cardinal, is ftitr as Ntnc

from tlhe Pope with a pIreltnt to (.- IFry
of Scotland, I. 32S. is flopped at i';!is

3z9
Leagure, holy, a confederacv of Roman catholics

Jo called, II. 12. nwa ulive'tllli aglced to
by tlem a!) over 1IIIOc} e ibid.
Learning, the reviaiil of, promotes the rcfor-

mation -- - I. 119
Leiccricr, Earl of; appointed a cos:::ifionir to

the conference at W'cllminller J. 4t.
Lei/h, burnt by tlhe l nglifl, 1. 9;. f r-tiiicd by

the French, 1;o. befiiged b) tlhe Lnglili,
192. Q. 2\al), lands thCeI fio0m lFrance, 22.
the superiority of it gralted by her to Edin-
burgh, 294. is seized and fortified by Mlor
ton and the Regent - 11. 16
Lc'0ox, Earl of; arrives in Scotland fiom France

1. 87. is much coutced by cardinal Reatoun,
ibid. his preteniious to the fucceficsi how
-fcunded, 90. cicnts lcltoun's deccitful-
ness to him, 91. heads the refoirmirs and
the advocates for tlie Englifll alliance, ibid.
firprizes the ReIrccnt and cardinal, )9. is
outwitted by the cardinal, ibid. cnti:.ies
alone in the intlieIl ol l:h.iglndi, 9;. is
fbrced to fly to tillt cotilr , xvlice lie is rI-
v..:rded, ibid. is nn.u'icd to a nlicc of 1.
11ienr 's, iv \ lli i he bLec.l:e latiher to a

o"t:: (f ]King, ibidj. o. hi cilaImI to tihe

lucccfiion, 2, ;. is ]:1 r:iint'd i;)r a i'crct
co'nrlllonLi.dcm-e l, Ull (. Ril,;rv, . ('. i:, -

in-

it(' il ' I (' !' 'V \' lt'r to ' 'tUi/ t ri) I

'rot .d,

iinld. :!'1i n ,', c, thi[:.,., ;an1d i5 recCtij c.l
v. itih C (.,u t,:

':.

1 ', 2

'~I. h2 1js flu-

(t,t'c' ,., 1 ,' .] ,', ,.| J ihc i., s ll c'l to ll,',s

< i,,,it ::] ; l : .u i' '

th ]!',li].lnl cnit, 69.(' .

1,.: i .;.'v l.t

'1', t^\

:.'1 t,, ith '1,,t ' 1 I .'

[ n.

doll, 2.;., ::i! ,t

t'iNi, Hillih n ll11 ", :' i,. lie
iiilit <] t clI'pi'x uu.n ul h;a l, i 1),ul )"vs

mcidcrerss,3 L.!. clharges othwcll ni:hl it,
3* ;. tile piofecutionl is hmried, 3.16. Ih
ciavcs a delay, which is refu';d, 3.-. he ij
lIft lone in it, ibid. fo:iicis Q L.z;ibctl.'
intcrelt to obtain a dcla!v, ;S. iIfiis 0o it
1'v proxy at the rial, but is ocr r-ruld , 34.
bcir-'i e-p:clh''tise of c'a;r.r e ii:, to-
xw ;'d:, 1::: la:.d, 3< . I,i l

( " f,. acc(1!.s
Q. \;a.y of tiC nurder to (t Elizabeth,

-. .c .ap i ;.s at t!,e cons. r-ce a: \>'ci-

nie, i!ec au;d accu.ts ( ) i. ary of thc iiurcrr

iu'n onih, 41 .. :cturns to Scotln.! pro-

tc!,·t.d y an i': -'lii airmy, II. ( . i- clelc:cd

(I g nt[ 7, 'l. iii progrcf, ata i 'l ithe (.)reen's
I'arL..' . S. appci;s comlilliinmcr3 t) itra-:.
a trc tv v, ith those of the Qnccn, II. ifr-
pri:es JIuanl.brion c.ille, 13, 14. joins the
IEarl of i.lorton at ecith, IC. holds a Pal-
lirnicnit in tle Canongate, ibid. another at
Stirlinml, I l. ie is Inrprized and lilled

thicre i-

- :d. 2

.Lcn..x, late Aubigny, lhis clalaiflr, 11. O).

joins n ith the King's other ncew favourite to
indcjilnine foJcrion, ibid. ienounces Popc-
1y, ()2. Q Elizabeth demands lhin to b
remr cd fioin the privy council, ('. is ac-
cul-Id by her arbaft;acior, 67. Alan trits
in v;in to supplant ltim,, 72. is colimmanCded
by1 KI. Itics, at the requelt of the nobles, to
leave [he kingcdonm, 79. puts off his depar-
ture on various pretci.ccs, So, Si. rcturns
unw illingly to Flance, w here he loon dies,
S1. his nmeCmoiv indicated and much rc-
garded by the Kling, ibid. died a P'ote-
liant - - - ibid
-.- Earl of, left as the KIing's lieultenant in the

no' th iatil diiiipcrinl tle l'o i;t I.o ii ,1l. I, ;

, .

LrC'', oi t lmn, imui dcrs (d arrdinail i ;,t
l. t'i , 1.

9 '. lie' d h: i atibciites kcep p l'.li lin of
t L.l'. ; ' of . t. Anidrew':, 9' . tm.it:i ;i

sl ei

.t thle 'Re^ent, (,S. a:e (c.ii.::.i 'd l
I/icri. \ ll. - - -.. ii ;d.

-- iih ' a of Ro!, is f.'! t by the r.,:,oi .

i: '.co :lt.ni t) enl' ;:,e (1. Mtar;t iii t'h, i ntie-
11'11, J. 21ó. lhis t Le!'.,;..,,

t i.te Iit'', cJ,

il I ,- Ii .li '

I ;" :;, i.::, I 'l '.t l

'i i']

L.:i'.n r- l' l (?<. ;\'.] , !. ::, . J. i ,
: l, ll,,i

.il];t.'! ; 11: !.in ]

I :

l.'.'%$,r.), I,( j, c:lliie l ];, .

lC , I

: -.l- l

; ;r,[
th

C qlledC tl'ltl:. te, ( '. .Vl ;}i' , 1};r !}.." l. 'l.' ic-
Ji;, lln the ;,"):elill/h;, 1. ,. - .; il. llt' l'.ttil-
\ell CotllfilltO --
--, 'l .

. L 1 z . .

Lochlc-vin cafile, Q.Mary committed a prisoner

there, 1. 370. her escape from thence 385

Lord, letters to and fiom him, Ap-

pendix -- 72
Logait of Reflalrig, an alleged accomplice in

Gowry's confpiacy, 11. 2zo, zz2. is tried,
and his eclate forfeited long after his death

22z, 223
Lords, confederate, afrociate against Bothwell,

and Q Mary, 1. -;)2. raise forces againlt
them, 363. publifi the motives of their
conduct, 364. prevail on the Queen to fur-
render to them, 367. aflume the title of
Lords of the secret council and the royal
authority 370

pop:fh, confpiie againfl K. James, II.

i67. are treated by him with great lenity,
Inc. fro;ii a new confpira.y, 178. the King
pr-occd, agiinft them, I79. more of his
lenity to them, 1S3. frefl dangers fionm
tiern, IS6. they receive money from Spain,
ibid. zeal of the clergy againll them, 187.
are declared guilty of tieafon and their
cftates folfeited, ibid. defeat the King's army,
188. are dispersed on the King's approach,
ibid. go abroad and give security to keep
the peace, S9. return to Scotland, and peti-
t:on for leave to reside in their own houses,
ri) . this granted by a convention of cltates,
ib:d. recant their errors and are absolved
from excummunication, zo2. rclapfe, and
are again reconciled to the church of Rome,
ibid. are reslored to their ellatcs and ho-
nriurs - zo6
L',''ain, cardinal, gets tome of the bcfe bene-

sices in Scotland -- 1. 140

---- Princes of, their ambitious views, I.

14.t. inil gat te e Dauphin and Q. Mary
to take thl titles of King and Quccn of

inigland, 1 5. refolvc to invade F.ng-
land, 1.I. and tn check the reforma-
tion in ,,cotl:id, ibid. the cardinal's great
influlence oier Ithi yointl Kling, 10;, 1(6.
ldives tlie ()tuccn l.ecCilL of Sioll.iril to vio-
lent o:1 '..(;ir,, I - , 1 -2. tlh'iriolel ice occa-

ri. ,n .1 i' eCi' ; .il theim , l.), are

I xcc .l tci rhl iia v tl rir i tioops Ir il) SCot-
1 , !. ii.l l. " i ,' ilt the Scottlil aiu .il'-
'.:.] ',1, :

'. bIL.' '.'1 l. [ "''i.,t'. (,' (r thie

1 ,ti l, [' t

i: ; , 1 i

;:I)i o_)

it' , Z l .

ofC tt;'l

< ;
. .:_ t',.r vi x . , oa ;! .' ,].I;|I of the

Luther, a bold and principal promoter of the'

reformation, I. 119. the rapid progress of
his dotIrine - - 12

M.
/ 7 AJOR John, his hiflory of Scotland,

Some account of I. 4
Alaitland of Lethington, fccretary to Mary,

Queen Regent, leaves her service, and joins
the congregation, I. 183. his character,
184. is lent by them ambassador to Q. Eli-
zabeth, 1SS. fends them assurances of her
protection, 188. is sent by Q. Mary to the
court of England, 231. makes a conceion
to Q. Elizabeth, ibid. accompanies Qt Mary
in a progress to the north, 246. he is em-
ployed by Qt Mary to desire a peifonal in-
terview with Q. Elizabeth, 251. publickly
accuses Knox of preaching seditious doc-
trine concerning refillance, 270. intimates
to Q. Elizabeth the intention of Q. Marv to,
marry Darnly, 277. prudently conceals her
resentment fiom Q. Elizabeth, 279. pro-
poses moderate measures with regard to Q_
Mary when imprisoned, 373. attends the
Regent when called on to accuse her in Eng-
land, 404. he disapproves of this meanlire,
ibid. his intrigue with the Duke of Nor-
folk, 4oS, 409, 424. is imprisoned by the
Regent, 430. is relieved by Kirkaldy and
secured in the cafile, ibid. 431. proposes
a coalition of the two parties after the mur-
der of the Regent, II. 2, 3. accedes to the
QUeen's party, 4. is depiived of his office
of secretary, and proclaimed traitor, 8. is
attainted in a Parliament of the King's par-
ty, 16. agrees with Mar, 31. his views
in refuting a reconciliation with Morton ihe
Regent, 37, 38. rcjc'ls overtures of a treaty
wilh hilii, 37. is besieged by him in the
caltle of Edinburgh, 3S. is forced to capi-
tulate and furrcnder to the Englifl general,
41. to avoid thle Regenit's rcfenLtmcnt lie
dil;ratches hiimirlf, 43, several of his let.
te:s. atp. - 11. 63, 5

--
- ir cihi', , is tnil . fecrctary for Scot-

laiidl, 11. 1 1.. conc'.as \vitli others in pro-
itsting Q^. '.li/.:lcllih' intereri. there, ibid.
Iatleirpis ;i,,lill him by capt. J:iine:; Stew-
ilt, late A\rr:nll, iq(. tlicy' prl'ov c( i it.',
:11 lie i' ;dt1i ntile to bie clini1( telor, }I.
ain :ttcr,'lit to rtlouvc hinm fi'oul th.at offlie

fiu il. itid ,

frufrated, I(9. his death, 190. a copy of
verles in honour of him wrote by the King,

ibid.

luar, Earl of, that title conferred on the prior

of St. Andrew's, I. 244. accompanies the
Queen in a progress to the north, 246. he
and his afrociates na:rowly clcape niftTina-
tion, 247. he is created Earl us Murray,
248. See A.';rrafy.
- the title is coiit',rred on . Erf;ine, 248.

the person of the young Prince put inro i's
hands, 345. his resolution in prcierving
him from Botvhweli, 361. is chof' n Regent,
IIo. 21. labours to bring about a general
peace, 31. is thwarted by Morton and his
afrociates, ibid. 32. dies of melancholy,
ibid. his character, ibid. his merit and in-
tegrity was acknowledged by both parlies

ibid.

- the young Earl, being imposed on by
Morton, turns out his uncle f'om the caille
of Stirling, If. 53. jriins tile Rutlivcn con-
fpirators, 77. he \,i:h the others fcize
Stiriing callle, and erect their ;landard, 91.
is attainted and his ellate forfcited, 99. is
pardoned and reliored to ellate and ho-
lours -- - 117,

I 8
Milfrch.',.countefs of, her infamous marriage s\ith

the Larl of Arran II. 71, 72
l.aay of Guise, Q Dowager of Scotland, takes
a confidtrable thare in the government, I.
Io-. is much addiced to the French inter-
eli, ibid. projects a marringe of her daugh-
ter to the liauphin of Fiance, ibid. 1o6.
becomes inltrumental in promoting the re-
formation, 113. aspires to the ofiice of
Regent, ibid. promotes difiifceion to tlhe
prelcnt one, and favours the rifornier;, i 14.
visits tile court of 1France, 1 1. ecturns to
Scotland to take ponflfion of the Rcgcncy,

16. after foinc oppifition flie obtains it,
1s17. confers fevcral ofiices ol truti upon
llrangers, I 29. propofis to lly a tax upon
lauid, 13;o is s.)iccd to drop it, .;', t;ies
iql vain to excite . war wiil s i hi 1 id.
the nbb!cs viloraoutly opi,-of lir imc.,(lci
i-,z. tic.ts tl.e rclbinics xitli gric t re-
iicrl, I3 t3 oll:lili a

:I Cri cllit n It roIn lie

['.,li.il cnt i ll f.' loi lr of tile Ja piirhii , i ;.
tier atiful ill;ii;lieCiill't of th11 refi)rn'is,
ibi,d. t9, b(llo,' thie vaican l)iicfi¢.rc. oil
(lt;it,nc'ri, , l * lc. ille alt - lher colnll:L. lro
the lrclOiiCelb, I 3 . rct nuiill tci ics li!Lf

the violent meafurcs of the Princes of Lor-
rain, 147. is Ferfuaded by thein to perse-
cute the reformcr , i.8. her rani answer
to their remoinllrance, i.;9. fuiiimon their
preachers to appear hrco'e iher, ilid. breaks
a promifc nre e had narde tilicm, i 5. m.tcches
with an army a ,aini i!;iCn, 15:.. co;,cluecs
a tr(aty with the;n, r53. ili- dLe cg:in
breaks, ibid. her lrvcii;y at Pe sh, bd.
her schemes dilcoveir.d, 154. 11.: gCes to.
attack them, z;S. has again recolirle to
negociation, 15. (n:. is lla!tld

s t it;i :r

demands ard gets time to a. f.'sci ' , 1;7.
violates n.other treawy, i S. I l;r':,
and forced to ab.irdon Stiiling a;:d j.;i n-
burgh, the ret.irs ith prr:cipitation to )Du -
bar, ibid. marches to attack the reformers
at Edinburgh, 161. gaius t:ne by her arti-
fice, ibid. makes .iothe, :rcety with
them, r 'z. her artifices to uldermne the
prior of Sr. Andreivs, (g9. the absurdity
of her scheme, ib:d, 7-o, gct, a rein-.
forcement of French troops vho tol tify Leiih,
ibid. she disregards a remonlhrance of lhe
reformers, 171. is influenced by French
counsellor., and perfilaadd to violent mca-
furcs, ibid. 172. retires to Leith on the
approach of the reformers army, 17. he;'
prudent and artful conduct there, iDid. her
haugity anl! imperious anfwcr to a frceh ;e-
monllIance sion tihem, 174. is by a con-
vention of them deprived of her office of
Regent, I-6. the foundation of this fen-
tcice, ibil. 17S. fiments difiLrences am;ng
them, 179. is deierted by her principal Ie-
cretiary, 1 3. fends French troops a;i tinll
the relotrlers, 189. retires into the caflte
of l'diinbrigh on the approacih 'f tie lt. ug-
liPl, 193. her dceth and claracter, 19i,
repented of her violent ninafijrce, 197. Ili-
tcned to tlie inflr.il ,ions of a cilorillcd
preaclr'r -- -- ibid.

Il.l'ry, (). en of Fn:rlind, licer p 'rl'culting t eiin,

i. I|S. r deatC - -1- l.|li
-- (ilcen of Scr , 1r ,

l r, . i. a }r;'po.

fali t- 1 1,:i ry her io I'.d. \ 1. .

| fle 1, do..

I].:dl( d

l i Ii i, i \l1en ' VII I. . l, 'r n;ri.ir c

t.) the [].'i lh l of l'.i,, cc lpl- nj'r i l, i( n .
i trc tl' (,,r thalt p1u1ll - co]; tl, ;'? d, lI,7.

(ie i:. l t

i lc ctl.iilliilt ' 1 1r. i. lro,

ti l i '

l :, co ln i .'] *

', tlli', it,' . 1- ii l)-

I,,fi't o i [)V t),c ;;

ii :,
t t I il tri' l
I 1,j1 l, I

ri

c t reaty of ,

n h

.i. ii:i

ir,,

, .

c.
t .1''

I'.I -

-c?;l'atcd i'.i i' greal t pomp, -6. thl'y
l:.; the- title of Klin .ad Qecen of Li:g-
j.ud, 14 . fle nmakes concelions to Ihe
C.'-r :i' " a'iIt-, 19, 2C0. declares QL~.i-
: i:.cl'.. ri: ht to the croin. of England,
ibidi. fie actluires all entire ascendant over
iher litii'aid, z:o. she is ovcrwhlielld
x., itrl ' ;.t .liitlni on h is deathl, and retiies
to kit. i:iS, 2ii. ile is invited by the con.
.eliitli1 to

I return tl Scotlain. -, 216. a;l

i ';iii.r! ti' in ihe catlio!irs in Scotland p:o-
' t, o vokciit iiic' .i' cs to hicr, ibid. fie is
ietcint: nled to niolc'ation by the I''lncIh
;ind t11 iiie if iSr. Andrewsv, 21 . is pre-
va;:.ci cn to prc;rpac for hel return to S'ot-
I.lrd, 21^. til" ('ii in of the difcioid le-
twvcn hICr and (2 ilizl.:e:li, 219, 220.
I r p:et;einioiis to the ctrowVi of litnglillnd,
: . is envied on accoiiin of l' r bcanlv ,
,. C:. demanlds a life coiuducl firom Q. il'i-
: .!.th \ iiicli is rcfutet, 22z.. laites Fr;iincc
with gireat relluiancc, 225. lands at Lcitli,
ibid. is much aiiet.&ed by the change of her
lituatior, 2- '. fl eral difadvanliagcs at-
tIc.din; lier acccflion, iid.2 27. I,:ne cir-
cunilanccs to her advantage, 227, 2 S.
lcr r.ccoimpl! 'inient? of body and mind, ibid.
the fcrs'vanti of her chapel insulted, ibid.
procures the free exercise of her reli.ion, 229.
iililcs a proclamiation in favour of the Pio-
trl!ants, ibi i. 230. cmploys t!iem orly in
the anmin;ir.tion, 230. atiempts to gain
(). Eli;.Ubetth's favour, ibid. makes a con-
ccfion to her, 2:,. which is rcjected, 232.
fl, ma:l;s lier pi.'!lic entry into Edinbuigh,
ibid. an insult o!' red to her religion on
tliat occasion, 2 3. difiouiages the at-
temipts of' thli p q['is to gain licr Lavour,
,34. her ae'i'i'; s to tlh slimily of Ilamnil-

, 21 . r.kil:s a p'ro° i' into the north,

2.L,. licr illiii:lcrs n.iio. Nly elcaipe Infi!Li-
1.;;o 0i, 2 -. is IcfL'ti'd icc<fs to tilhe c.ile
us [nvt(o I F', ibid. svwhen in tile utiltiol

7t ele;lr t

n:Itl 11 i i. livic d

( by thile Ml ros and

;thicr Clue.-, i;i.!. lcer foucc', de';!t Ilunt-

lcV's rCbcl ,jilin, 2 I0. fil desires an into'l'-
viwv c ith l'.l zbe:hl, 2, i . nICeocil-
ri, s c' nc i r il in li, 'r Ill:itliliLe, 252. ib liil-
)i, :ci ' iy !.'i 1l.C I'liii.,

i 2:', -." .. hlir

ia!i c t

'i i .i . ci, ciii p" it. i il. I. fit;rL

; i c..,r the .,: ; .i\ ic bl-'n:1 viriutl o l ().
l',i .i illt , .:: (). tuo I'', :le I .cr f[;ui jcI l, tic-
UTcriIIcsts ;!.ill 1 IoCloel ;gI. lltancc, 2; .

deteramines n' t to raiy, the treL.ty of Elii'-
burgh, 2' . furtiher roecciations .fr i,:r
nl lria e, 261. dicovers the viesc or
Catharine of iMedicis, ibid. 2(z2. Lord Ro-
bert Dudley reconilmend.d to lier as a hiii-
band by Q Elizabe.hle, 2'z. f.ie is
higliy offTended at Ihi:, 26 . dine:i;b.'es
witil t Elizabeth, ib! L. 26;. entertains
thoughts of marrying Lord Darnly, : .5
ll:: rtca'ls Lencx, ,2,5. i, .::lfontci :.t a
]l:tel of Q (. I'.lizbeth's, 26-. her inld:;;e-
rence as to the reformled, and zeal for thie
cadilolic religion, 269. is ta'cn with DLar:i'v
at fir:l ight, 2-2. is greatly mnoved at Q.
Eliz:r.bth's insulting crlaftinf:l, ibid. 273.
negociates i\i,h the court of Rlomle for a dif-
penfation to marry )aLnly, 273. and the
conient of tlhe cou't of lFrane, 2- . im-
pofis on Randolplh, but applies to Q.
].lizabeth for confont to her marriage, 276,
277. which file afie:ts to rcfLc, 277. i i
lefnttmient fle propoces to fcid an angry
n ncfihe to Elizabl th, Iichi MVlailtanil pre-
vents, 270. juflifies her condut to the
].nglilh aninbLafidor, ib.d. cndcalOurs to get
Mlurray's conecnt, 2zSi. co.uats the Pope's
proteciion, and receives a fulfidy from him,
ibid. her great addrcis in gaining the con-
frnt of her fubjells, 283. prevents a plot
against Darnly, 2S4. frummons her vassals
to take arms againll Murray, 285. and
him to appear before her, 287. her mar-
riage with Darnly celebrated, ibid. Ihe
confers tie title of King of Scots upon him,
z:S. this siep censured, ibid. her resent-
niet againill the malccontent:, ibid. she
marches againil them, 289. rejects the
intc cefion of Q Elizabeth in their behalf,
290. continues her march againll the re-
Ibls, ibid. her conduicl and courage cn
thlat occasion, ibid. 29). drivcs thelin out
of Scotl.id, z29. Ier furtilr icf nlinlcit
.,nitil thell, 293. bias ltcouie t) several
deviic:i to r.iile imoney, ibid. 2(.1. her
pilrc(lji ity piomotcs ler Itl;gion, 295. her
deliberationls conccrl)iin; thle exiled lord,
295). cetcrniiel s to tri;ct tlhcim \ith leIlity,
2 ;. is distv ic] froi ll lis b' er

l r rli'ion

I.nd I rencli inlluence, iliid .

i . ltin, tllb

luiircn ii lcl alter imi ,liti tuni-c , 3 ,. lier
initnltion to cllorc popers, gii. it dil-
plled vith s )airnll y's initolcnt bel viniuI,
3oz. her familiri y wit h RI.io oil'nid, thei

.1r: ,

Kin", 303. tvindlicatie fiom any cr'minl!
corrcfponcelce with Rizio, 30o-307. ules
her u:mo!l endcavours to prevent his mur-
der, 3-S. Ihe is confined by tie confpi-
rators, ibid. (he gains the King, and es-
capes fir.i 1iitem, 309. is tccociicd.

to

thile ci!. nob'cs, 31 . her hatrld to
1a,'nlv,' inC:caf.s, 3If, 316. and .::oLir
'cr LUo:,'! l clnmnlceCJs, 317. (x'!i:'l, i fes
for.e doimeliic rudls among the n.bic.-,
-:S. i' dclirVc!'ed of her Ibn James Vl. in
thei C.ltle of Edinburgh, ;bid. invites f'-
vcral i-reign ptinces to his baptilm, ;l .
con:tintis to ticat Dlarnly wviih neghlct,
ibid. hei attachientt to Bothwvell incrcaf.,
^2o. prrc\e;ts ]Darnly's intended liihr,
12z, 3z2. \i!;s the borders, 323.. an in-
ibince of her regard for Bothwell on tlt.it
occasion, ibid . how nhe rival'd Q F.li;abc h,
324. her right of fucceflion favouied by
the Engllfi p3rliamellt, 325. he endc.a-

nours to avail lierfeif of t!at opportunity,
326, ,27. flic takei an extraordinary l!cp
in favour of popery, 32 . receives a pe-
icnlt froin the 'ope, but lHops his nuncio at
Pari", 339. cndeavours to procure a bet-
ter fubfillcnce for the reformed clergy, ibid.
33o. her aversion to the King exceliec,
becomes melancho!y, 33c. fie deciines a
divorce from himi, ibid. 331. goes t
Stirling to celebrate her son's baptifim, 332.
is greatly o',ended at the King's behaviour
on that occasion, ibid. reliorcs the popiiih
ceclclniialcal jiuildi;Uioi, 336. her negllct
of tie KLing during his sickness, 338. tih
breach between them becomes irrepalabli,
j1id. 3 39. n0e viiits him at Gl.if'oi,'
3^, 3 toe mottives of licr difiimulitiun
oni that occasion, ibid. 3.4c. prevails on
himii to come to Edinburpgi, 3.1. licr iuf!
picious bclaviour to him tllcre, ibid.
34,2. irlecs a Froclanil'tln lor difio-
v;iin) ihis m'irdcrerr, 3 13. is fitrpofecd to
ihae ben acctl(it y to it, ibid. is chiarged
'ilh it ab l'o ;I ,> v.rell ;s at home, 3'. 1.
;io)cs to vJfit ),r fm it Sitliding, 3,s6. Is

]ir' t o'1 itlt nl !,, ]i i')ti lc], who (cirzcs

Irid c..-ri,'s bnr i to l)I.jib:tl, !i'ld. ilii ii' -

ip ,fd r.'ih I, ' 't I Cn't, '55. i, c l'C id
:o !'.} 'nithi r, ";%. rid mail c. d to lI,rl-
v,.:, q; ,). I I,

Ic ]', .' olo. y [to the ct), i s

.: . l'.; uz c : !d :!I.i c.l,

i! iid. ler iJ 'l
;h;;!,-{.AiqIl,];t: ~m~rai,

li:.cs a narnii;:!o to vindicate i.cr co i!.:. .
363. is con!tducted to e c!ca:il of l,..-
xickt, ibi I. naircies v i:h i o:ihveii's ltrc,'
ag2 i.ll tl':~ c:;ii'l.cJi ;ae 1 ords, 3')ó . an i :-
tem: 't o ;.n acc.-nn'. iii tit 11 provej \ aii,
ibi. is forc.d to :;-lr2icr:; :o tile cco c-
cidat ., i; . i- ini;..lr !y the loidieis and
niol), iLi . is c::ri 'd t I:.d n b It:' g , s e'hcre
n. ar: a'.1;il- ad<;;t- . her, i:sI. 35' i.;
fcic: L ;' !

: 'L'V',1 '..i' ', ,;

o, '...

J i:. ,iLc,; i; i L 'r ofas in ,cr ic: ..I' i, z2. tl.
I ',,_;Ll.h ar.bt. lit.d.er is rcti;;'; ;trc'-'lo t:) .c

t .a

i ,:d. vaiolus lr ()po!i.l am2 inc, :le C I'u!eC-
dc;i'tc co' cerning i;cr, 373. l :'y 'bL;,c
lier to trc,.in :!; goveCiltilcnt, 374, 37.,
d:i..'/:ctt reib;!intis on this mne:fUre, ~7'.-
3-0i. is muc]l moied \' itl t',e i.c cito., ' f
t!e ' .ail cf

l Tlurr` y , 35, . .1er !;it,,

amoirg the noblcs b'Lciie dlilirii-c.t, -, .
lier retigna3tio of t.he C.losn acn:cptj t'v
the Par;,aiinicit, and I:er iiTlprilt).nc c'-
cared lvfu!!, 3S3. licr lectcrs to LB ;;lhve]!
rsad, and fnle declared acciffniry io thei
K-;ng's murder, ibid. efCI'pes ftoni L.:cl-
leiin:, 385. arivses at Iailiil,(,i, ibi . i.
,ttletded by imany nobles and a numerrcus
arint, 3S6. an afib'ciiliotn fig]cd in ic.-
ecissCce, ibid. her impi udence in h.i/. d-
ing a batli', 3S,,. ilcr artry de'etc.l b:.
tie confedcratcs. 3? . I er prccipi'ate fiit.!,:
into Galloway, 3ro. ral;iy de:iemines ti)
retire to Englland, ibid. goes tiitl:er a;:iii:t
tl'e adv.ice of ichr a:rLen,;.nis,; . ailt i
at Cr:ie, 39z. wilitce; t.) Q; Ll Y.tt!,
imlri rinig licr good oliitcs, l):;. ' cci,.';i
Ictlcrs ot conrtlll-' cc froni iler,; 1d :citl; i .:S
Iad littance :ito i.er ''c!r'ice, ^Q . tii' tc-
f;lcd ; i \.hy , ,i''. l,;().

;i..c , l t.) itLb.:'.t

licr cauli; to (). l'.itb;.tili, 3,.. t Ittnltit
decci cd.I inll r expctation fi;i(ii tiii, ,'.
aind (,ilcticd oln diICov ci,-' thie arltil:CLs (f

at fildillg hC '

, .lt a p,il. : ., i: i!. :ir;:

to an l i.l iiir' "To

'e cnndi'.t, .e~2. 1r

!,lih;ulnl.on, , u ; 'l 1

sh

]c '.d .to ;iY , n 1 ', '

C(i ll /;ii41 /t

i', ;I '

'

(, i

t

, ' ' : 111 !h r

,)JC, .. ! -

I, ::, 1 i... ,1 rS', ., !:5!,

.}r. c' . *l .i [ i,

.,

D i. , I ,'( I, ()

\\'t_ Ill]]ll)L. iT , .! I ' . : .- i ,.

, ll i' ! .() J . * l -

c, n;iI 1,' . T ' r i . ,.., : !: 1 1..' :.:, ..1 !

ll .1: Ct:I;1 ,I) '! '

, 1,
l . .l ; . . ,i' '.1 II.;

Regent, 414. is accucd likewise bv the
Eail of Lenox, 41;. her commilionc;s
refiue to anlver, and demand a perbfnal in-
terview, 416. they protcit againit future
proceedings, ibid. a i.fpicious circumfiance
againlt her, ibid. 417. her commillioners
withdraw from the meeting, q 17. her re-
io!mie anfs\er to a harfil proposal of Q Eli-
yzibtlh, 413. avoids any farther progress
in the enquiry, 419. is enraged at the pro-
ceiings, and piopofcs delpeiate mea!uiles,

zo. p re.nds Lhinicrical conjeftures with
tl:it view, ibid. 421. propoIes a divorce
flil otlivell, .2 4. is iniluenced by the
D. of Noirollk's Ichemes, ibid. exchanges
mlany letters and love-token swith him, 425.
contents to proposals from the E.nglifl no-
bles, 42-. their views in this tranfiacion,
4d':-428. a rebellion by her adherents
;ag;iinit (. Elizabeth, .431. is removed to
Cnventry, 433. Q. Elizabeth thinks of
delivering her up to the Regent, 43+. this
piojeit hlow diiappointed, ibid. 43:. accef-
lion of flveral to her party after the mur-
d-r of the Regent, II. .. they enlcav'our
to foment a war siih England, ibid. her
al.thority proclaimed at Linlithgow, 5. her
parties defeated by the new Regent, 8, 9.
She anfvers propolals by Q. Elizabeth, to.
attempts in vain to get foreign aflilahnce,
ibid. appoints commi;lioners to fiame a
treaty for her liberation, 1 . this pioving
fruitlcf, flie is more ftrict!y confined, 1t.
the invalidity of her reigr.ation declared in
a 'ail'nliiICnt held by her adherents, 17. aft
of l'ailiimeint in Fngland to cuib her and
her party, 21. lthe looks for protection
from tile King of Sp:in, 22. is denied the

ivieilr e of an an:l:if:idor at the Court of
l'inland, 2;. i; inore ciofe confined and
wa.itdliced, i! d. plccediint, s ngainit hier in
l ghuland, 28. iLIr itercil lug'eced by the
l eci.C l, -9. is hint by tlhe maflhcre at
i'.ai,, cn, 31. h(r ;,hli.ruits divided into
:.'.) s.i tii ms, ', . 1,ic I1 tlhem joils witli
IiO''(,In tlie ic. c'c t, ,':. rICicwv of the
cl';i.li .'l' . o,: tf h;tr .'l].c its an. d o pponentit,

1 :

' ' c [ li.-1 ( i, hl, ,.ti'i- , ,t'o i. car-

,it'.l . hil,':c'ii '.'cll: , .13' - i. los , i vi al of
1t0'1i t,: 1 i i i 1 iil., '[ )l. aid.1 l 'ii l, iilr

intercession for the King her son, ibid.
Thlrogrnoiton's conspiracy in her favour,
95-97. a fruiilef, negociation with Q. Eli-
iabcth, loo. is alarmed at an aflociation in
deiience of Q. Elizabeth, lo0. is committed
to more severe keepers, 103. betrayed
by Lord Gray the Scots ambafl'ador, 104. a
tlatute for the prefirvation of Q. Elizabeth,
pioves fatal to her, ioF. is more rigor-
oully treated log. her complaints to Q.
1 lizabeth disregarded, ibid. is, by the
F.euch ambaiffdor's interit, removed to
'lutilbury, to. is undutifully treated by
tie King her son, ibid. her palfionate
comuplaint to the French ambafiador on that
oKcafian, ibid. i 1. threatens to difinhe-
rit hin, i1 i. several discoveries alleged
againil her, 125, i26. he is guarded with
unusual vigilance, 127. her domestics, pa-
Sers, &c. are seized, ibid. 2S. tie is con-
veyed to Fotheringay Caltle, 128. delibe-
rations concerning the method of proceeding
againtl her, ibid, 129. is fiifpicious of poi-
if n or private murder, 129, 130. vindicates
herself to the D. of Guise, 130. the com-
miflioners for trying her arrive at L:otherin-
gay Cafile, ibid. her spirited speech when
refuting to plead, ibid. 131. is at length
prevailed on, ibid. the protefis againit the
authority of the court, 132. the accusation
againil lier, ibid. her defence, ibid.-134.
her sentence, 135. irregularities in her trial,
136, her sentence is confirmed by Par-
liament, ibid. who demand the execution
of it, ibid. 137. France interposes feebly
in her behalf, 138, 139. the sentence
againll lier publishld, 14l. lie is treated
vsith the utmoll rigour, ibid. her lalt re-
quell to Q. Elizabeth, 142. rerures the
allillancc of a Protelnant Biffaop or Dean,
ibid. artifices uscd ti inflame the people
a;:iinl hler, 14'.. her behaviour at her
cleatl, i14s(-ii, . fintimcnts of hillori:ma
conccining her, 14q<. lir cLhal.lcr, 1ic,
1; 1. lir peilfin del:lilicd, 15l. is Lu-
ried litll at 1'ct lboruiin li, and aftetrwards
ind \i\ clllninll cli-AI)ilc , i 52. letters roni
htr, A pp. I , i), J'r. hlir swill, t.App. So.
Olhj(ictioli ,52,., ilt her by \\'ullingllainn, App.
1,I. wi:it cout;lc to be takenl; wiith ier,
il,id. :i dilli.'rtation oil tiii' ;e icniiincifi of
le' IC tlier ls to B tlhwEll, lE'nid of Vol. I1.
'li,.v.:t.s//,, I.i)d, .,i live. solni ql.lin, aed pl c])i.iiCis

Jolce'. It joil tlie S il. ia]liu , 11. 1,1. 11is oul-
lowvct ditlperlcd, lie tal;ken prilotncr, ilid.

h ,,'-..,

Mevil is rent by the French King to observe

the motions of the Queen Regent and her
adversaries, I. 161. sent to make up a dif-
ference between Elizabeth and Mary, 268.
brings about an appearance of friendship
.between them, ibid. is sent to inform Q
Elizabeth of the birth of K. James VI. 319.
puts a letter into the Queen's hand against
her marriage with Bothwell, 355. is forced
to fly from court, 356. advises K. James
to moderate measures upon his escape from
the Ruthven conspirators - II. 85

, Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, his cha-

racter, II. 46. zealously opposes Epifco-
pacy, ibid. declines the civil jurifdidion in
ecclesiastical matters, go. is forced to fly
into England to avoid persecution ibid.

, Sir Robert, sent by K. James to inter-

cede with Q. Elizabeth for Q. Mary when
under sentence, II. 142. executes his com-
mifion with fidelity and zeal, 143. a memo-
rial of his to the King, App. 91
.- , Master of the household to Q.Mary,

takes his las farewel of her, II. 147. her
parting speech to him - 148
Mildnmay, Sir Wm. sent by Q Elizabeth with

proposals to Q Mary --- I. 9
Mlnolac, Bishop of Valence, employed by the

French to conclude a peace with England
and Scotland, I. 198. terms agreed to by
him - - 199-202
klointgmcery appointed Archbithop of GIdfgow,

11. 74, is refused and excommunicated by
the general Assembly for his immoral life

ibid.
Alontmorcncy, Conflable of France, endeavours

to prevent the Dauphin's marriage with Q.
Mary, 1. 133, 13.1. his prudent advice to
Ienry II. i0;. makes a flcnder appearance
in favour of (.. Mary - 11. 29
Aloron, Earl of; his iirefolute condult as to

the Reformation, 1. 183. accompanies Q.
Mary in a progrcfs to the North, 246. in-
Ili;alc, l)a;inly to be avenged of Rizio, 305,
t;lkes llie dircflion of that entcrprize, 307.
is ;idllittcd into the Quen's prcfence, wvlio
plomliibs hinm a pandon, og9. ib forced to
fly into I'n, lanil, 310. obtains his pardon
onl lotllevcll's intelrccllion, 33., 3 35. fizcs
n c;llket will letters fiom (Q Mar)' to lBoth-
well, 371. le is, by (2. li.zalchll's inter-
F'oiitIon, ill favour with the K1Ig's palty, ta-
ter the nmurder of the R.cgci, 11. . ap-

V'uL. 11.

pointed one of the commiflioners to treat
with the Queen's party, it. his demands
frustrate the meeting, 12. is entirely in-
fluenced by the Court of England, i 8. com-
mands the King's forces at Leith, 26. has
several skirmishes with the Queen's forces,
ibid. closely beleges Edinburgh, and com-
mits great cruelties, ibid. a suspension pro-
cured by the Englilh and French ambafla-
dors, 27. a coalition of parties prevented
by him, 31, 32. he is chosen Regent, ibid.
his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of
Northumberland, 33. obtains the tempora-
lities of the Archbifhoprick of St. Andrew's,
ibid. labours to procure a peace between
the two parties, 36. attempts in vain to
gain Maitland and Kirkaldy, 37, 38. makes
a treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, 39.
gets poffeflion of the Cattle of Edinburgh,
41. his severity to Kirkaldy and his bro-
ther, 43. his administration becomes odi-
ous, 44. his various methods of gratifying
his avarice, ibid. 45. connives at the dil-
putes of the clergy, 47. le irritates the
nobles, ibid. Argyll and Athol refuse to
answer his summons, ibid. makes a vain
attempt againlt Lord Claud Hamilton, 48.
discovers the designs of the nobles againlt
him, and proposes to refgn his office, 5o.
his resignation accepted by the King gives
universal joy, 51. obtains an approbation
of his conduct, and a pardon in ample foim,
52. continues to watch the motions of his
adversaries, ibid. is forced to surrender the
Calfle of Edinburgh, ibid. resumes hi. au-
tlority, 53. gains the Cattle of Stirling,
and a feat in the Privy Council, 54. pio-
cures a meeting of the Parliament it Stir-
ling, ibid. 55. his security ratified in it,
55. forces are raised for and againlt hiim,
ibid. he is reconciled to his advelllries by
the interceflion of Q_ Elizabeth, 56. is full
peclcd of foul play at an cilt ttainnlcntl
in his own louse, 57. his illegal proceed..
ings againll the family of I lamniilion, ibid.
58. tild King's new tavoulite, undermine
hill, 61. lie cndc:ouiis to preclnt them,
61. Q. Eliz;bctli ntrrptofes in lis favour,
63. is charged with being accclli.'y to tre
lite lKin's deatlh, (6. l. lie is coniiledi in
diflciclnt pritbi., 65. (lscoil:;,cs a; at-
tempt to relcuc hiin, ibid. all his filctdi
aie turned oul of oilice, (S,. hc is tried

L 1 I and

and cordemned, 69. his resolute calm be-
haviour and confetfion before and at his
death, 70, 71. his body is treated with ig-
nominy - 7
furany, Earl of, late Prior of St. Andrew's,

goes with a handful of men againtl Huntly,
i. 248. by his great skill and courage he
gains a complete victory, 249. his grant
is confirmed by Parliament, 257. cabals
againlt him by ! enox and Darnly, 274.
his aversion to Dainly and other court fa-
vouritcs, 28c. calls Bothwell to fland a
trial, ibid. his reasons for opposing Darn-
ly', marriage with the Queen, z8. he
and his aflbciates are made the dupes of QO
Eliz-be:h's policy, 283. concerts to seize
Dni)rl' ,,i i carry him to England, 284.
t(i. ivL' nid by the Qeeen, ibid. avoids
aflallMation intended him by Darnly, ibid.
evidences of these plots, 285, 28s . the
(Queen's vallds are called to arms againit
him, 286. he is summoned to appear be-
fore her, 287. id again summoned and
outlawed on his non-appearance, zS8. is
forced to fly with his afibciates into Argyl-
shire, 289. they are interceded for by Q_
Elizabeth, 290. are pursued by the Queen,
and obliged to fly into England, 291. they
meet with unexpeaed ill-treatment from Q.
Elizabeth, 290. 292. courts Rizio to in-
tercede with the (Queen for him, 297.
many of his old friends solicit for him,
ibid. the Queen's favour how intercept-
ed, 298, 299. a Parliament is called to
attaint them, 301. this how prevented,
302. he and his aflociates arrive at Edin-
burgh, 309. are graciouny received by
the Kiing and Qeecn, ibid. are alarmed at
the Queen's escape, but boon recoaciled to
her, 310. he is appointed Rcgent during
the minority of K. James VI. 379. his
harfl behaviour in a visit to the Qccen,
ibid. the success of his wife adminiltra-
tion, 3S . procuies many of the Quccn's
[arty to joil hiim, ibid. gets the pl. cs of
firengthi into his hands, 38:. his o si:c of
ReCgett confirmed by 'Prli;lm'l,t, 3,S3. his
fcvcrc ;aid haughty behalvioilr iii Tull:,. I; C-
ral, 3 i4. hlis adli'i cnts in grci conltcr-
siitlin at lie (Qeen's escape lioni Loclile-
vrn, 3 6. his prudent conduLt on that
icc.i:liln, 387. delf;ats the (2Iccin's ar;my
aIt L:l- iglide, 389. lie iinprrllies this vic-

tory, 400. his lenity to tle piifoners, ibid.
he calls a parliament, 402. is called upon
by Q_ Elizabeth to vindicate his condut,
403. he arrives at York, 405. his views
in this affair, 406. complaints of the
Quen's commiflioners againit him, 407.
he behaves with great relerve on this oc-
cafion, ibid. 408. this part of his conduct
accounted for, 408, 409 intrigues with
the l)uke of Norfolk, ibid. his demands
fiom the Englilh commiflion rs, 409, 410.
answers the complaints of the Queen's com-
missioners without touching on the murder,
410, 411. agrees to have the conference
moved to Wcllminfler, 41 1. is affestionately
received by Q. Elizabcth, which offends Q.
Mary, 41 . is prevailed on by Elizabeth
to acculc Mary of the murder, 414. pro-
duces hi, evidences, 417. is dismissed by
Q. Elizabeth without approving or con-
demning his conducf, 419. his party is
secretly supported by her, 420. returns to
Scotlard, and by his vigorous conduct breaks
the Queen's party, 421. he receives pro-
pofals both from Q. Elizabeth and Q Mary,
423. he disappoints Norfolk, 429. an ac-
count of his murder, 435, 436. his cha-
racler, 436, 437. his death much lamented
by Q. Elizabeth and the King's party, IL. z
much anarchy the consequence of it, z. part
of a letter of his, App. 58. his heir mur-
dered by the Earl of Huntly, II. 176

N.
N ue, secretary to Q Mary, is font by her

with a letter, ard pretents to her iln,

II. 59. why dismissed without feeing him,
ibid. is fLnt with offers of humble refigna-
tion to Q_ Elizabeth, ioz. is seized and
fcnt prisoner to London, 127, 128. is pro-
duced an evidence againfl her 135
Ncil dilcovers and peivents Parry's design to

murder (. Elizabeth 11. Io7, loS
Nolles, their extensive power, I. IS, 19. be-

come turbulent and formidable, zo. their
power greater in Scotland thani in any other
kinl Il m, zl. tile caufiis ol this, 22-27.
their [powel of loug clIur.tial, 32. it Ibe-
comes intolerable to the l'inicees, ibid. thcy
are humibled in France and England, ibid.
blt conlinll'c igorous inl S'otlandt, 33. dil-
cords anmoig thenm encouraged, ibid. tieir
juiifdidlion circunllcribed, 35. are greatly

inert flLd

mortified by K. James V. 56-59. are dif-
appointed in a scheme to shew their resent-
ment, 6r. refuse to attend the King into
England, 6z. they seize the revenues of
the church, 2o6. refuse to part with them
to the reformed clergy, 207, 215, 216.
diflenfions among them, 241. a convention
of them approve the Q2een's marriage to
Darnly, z8z. several of them recommend
Bothwell as a hulband to her, 3.3. a
strange combination of them on this occa-
sion, 354. a body of them associate against
her and Bothwell, 362. their different views
in this, ibid. a party of them favours the
Queen, 371. they are much dispirited by the
good conduc of Murray, 381, 382. they are
much provoked by Morton the Regent, 11.
47. think of redress from the King, 48.
infuse suspicion of the Regent's power into
him, 49. a meeting of them called by
him, 50. a party of them conspire againlt
the King's favourites, 77. they seize his
person and drive them off, 78. their ne-
glec of, and ingratitude to the clergy, I1 S.
the King attempts to reconcile their feuds
and unite them, 157. See Lords.

NArofolk, Duke of, appointed a commissioner

to hear the cause between Queen Mary and
her accusers, I. 405. forms a scheme of
mounting the throne of Scotland, 408. in-
trigues with the Regent and Maitland with
that view, ibid. 409. he represents the de-
mands of the Scots to Q. Elizabeth, 410.
his farther negociations with refpeat to Q_
Mary, 424, 425. endeavours to conceal
his designs from Q Elizabeth, 425. is im-
posed on by the artifice of the Regent, 425,
426. gets the consent of many of the Eng-
lifh nobles, 426. his projec approved at
foreign courts, 428. is discovered and de-
feated by Q. Elizabeth, 429. flies to
Norfolk, 430. he surrenders on a second
summons, and is sent prisoner to the Tower,
ibid. is set at liberty, and continues his
intrigues with Q: Mary II. 22. is betrayed
by his secretary, 23. is fcized with his de-
pendants, and accused by them, 24. is exe-
cuted, ilid.
JVorthunmbcrland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion

in favour of Q_ Mary, T. 43. hii fchclle
defeated, ,132. he is seized by the Regent,
413. is delivered up to the governor of
B1erwick, and put to dcatl at York, I1. 33.

Nottinggham, Countess of, some account of the

tranlatlion concerning the Earl of Effcx's
ring, II. 242.

0.

CT.dAVIANS, their institution and

extensive powers, II. 191. they under-

mine the King's ministers, ibid. become
odious, and a combination is formed againtt
them, ibid, 192. being split into factions,
and envied by the courtiers, they relign their
commission, 205.
Ogilvie, Lord, has a fcuflle with Sir John Gor-

don in the fIreets of Edinburgh, 1. 245.
Oliphant, Master of, joins the Ruthven confpi-

rators, II, 77.
Orange, Prince of, fends an agent into Scot-

land, It. 67. his inltrudions, ibid. is affaf-
fina'ed, 2.
D'OyJbl, commander of the French troops in

Scotland, endeavours to promote a war with
England, I. 132. his design fruRlrated, ibid.
the number of troops under his command,
154. inligates the Queen Regent to violent
meafuires against the Reformers, 55. is sent
by Q: Mary to demand a fare condu& from
Q. Elizabeth, during her voyage to Scot-
land, 224.

P.

A ISLEr, Abbot of, arrives in Scot-

land, I. 87. creates a suspicion of the

Earl of Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Re-
gent, ibid. 88. is made Archbifliop of Str
Andrews, 99.
Paris, the massacre of, II. 29, 30. rejoicings

of the popifi party on account of it, 30.
the consternation and horror of the Pro-
tellants, ibid.
Parliament, the nature of their original con-

tlitution, I. 65-67. particularly that of
Scotland, 67-81, 202. a parliament held
on an extraordinary occasion, 202. a dif-
ficulty llarted and annlvted, 203, 201...
their proceedings with regard to religion,
204. condemn the Popifli and approve the
Reformed D)oetrines, zo . several other
regulations of the fame tendency, 206.
their validity called in qucltion, 207. ex-
ceed their powers, 208. their proceeCdiiigs
laid before the King iand Queen, ibid. a

L 11 z parliament

parliament in favour of Bothwell, 3 5
pass an act in favour of the keformation,
ibid, 352. confirm the proceedings of the
confederates, 38 . parliaments held both
by the King's and Queen's partics, 11. I6,
17. another of the Queen's adherents, 18.
attaint upwards of zoo of their opponents,
ibid. a parliament at Stirling by the King's
party, 19. 'furprized by the Queen's ad-
herents, ibid. another at Stirling, 54, 55.
one at Edinburgh,-61. and on the King's
being of age, ,8. several new laws made
there, ibid. 16i. the les.er Barons admitted
into pailiainent, 160.
Parry, )Doloor, undertakes to murder Q. Eli-

zabeth, 11. 107. is encouraged by and gets
abfrllution fiom the Pope, ibid. his design
how prevented, ibid, Ic8. is executed, ibid.
Par/ons, a Jesuit, publilhes a book in favour of

the Infanta of Spain's right of fuccelifon to
the Crown of England, II. 189.
Pafquiziades and Pictures, accusing Bothwell of

)arnly's murder, I. 343, 351. a law made
again them, 351.
Pattin, William, his account of the Scottish

ancient military discipline, I. 103.
Pa;lrct, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q.

Mary's keepers, II. 103. his rigid severity
to her, 109. difcovcrs her foreign cor-
rerpondence, i 2. his rude treatemnt of
]er, 141. refuses to be concerned in pri-
vatily aflafiinating her, 145. a letter from
him, App. 108.

Pcllevi, nBiflOp of Amiens, is appointed to Tup-

port the popish intercft in Scotland, 1. 172.
drives the Queen Regent to violent measures
a;gainlt the Protestants, ibid.
]'c).r, an infurrecion of the Reformers there

ngainll the Papills, 151. its inhabitants are
leverely treated by the Queen Regent, 153.
a French garrison placed there, ibid, 154.
is besieged and taken by the Protestants, 158.
a great tumult there on account of Gow-
ric's conspiracy, 11. 318.
Pili/p II. of Spain, married to Mary Queen of

lingland, 1. 11 . reinforces his army with
her troops, 131. his g cat power, II. 112.
joins in the holy league, ibid, refolvcs to
invaldc a.nd conquer I.nglanl, 16z. his prc-
parations for it dilaiory, i66. hiis design fru-
Itrated, ibid. meditates an invasion ot Eng-
land through Scotland, 167. intrigues with
ibmen Scottifi L ord, with thalt view, ibid.
remits Inoncy to them, 186.

Pinkey, the battle of, I. t, o12.
Pius V. Pope, excommunicates Q. Elizabctlh,

deprives her of her kingdom, and absolves
her 1ubjedts, 11. 7.
Polly, one of Babington's conspirators against

Q. Elizabeth, 1I. 123. discovers the plot,
I 24.
Poltrot, a frantic zealot, aflaffinates tlhe Duke

of GLuife at the siege of Orleans, I. z25.
Pont, Mr. Robirt, a miniller, and one of the

Lords of Session, protells againf laws op-
preflive to the Church, II. 93.
Popery, where mofi flourifling, 1. 120. what

kind prevailcd in Scotland, ibid. Iz . was
partly grafted on Heathenism, 159. is
much hurt by the Congregation, 205.
their doAiines condemned by parliament,
ibid. the jurildiilion of the:r courts abo-
lifhled, o20. their worship prohibited, ibid.
attempt in vain to gain Queen Mary's fa-
voar, 234. the great iflluence of Popery,
299, 300.
Pciwcr, the balance of, the great consequence

of preserving it, II. 73.
Presbyterian church government eflablifhed in

Sc'tland, I. 212. is confirmed by King
J.imes VI. 177.
Pro/e,qanrs, in France, violently perf .cuted,

1. 167. are moderate on Q. Mary's arrival
from France, 229. are employed by her
in the adminiflration, 230. a scheme for
suppressing them all over Europe, 299. a
league formed for that purpose, II. 1 z.
See Reformation.

R.
R AM. SE T, a favourite of K. Jame; II '.

narrowly escapes the fate of his aflb-

ciates, I. 50. is appointed Captain of the
King's guard, and created Earl of Both-
well, 51. See Bothcll.
Randan, Sieur de, employed by tle French

to negociate a peace with England and
Scotland, I. 198. terms agreed on by
him, zoo, 201.
Randolph, sent to encourage the Congregation,

I. 180. (See App. 1.) congratulates Q.
Mary's arrival in Scotland, 230. urges the
ratification of the treaty or Edinburgh,
231. is imposed on by Q. Mary in the
allair of her marriage with IDarnly, (,76.
sent into Scotland on the murder of Mur.

ray,

ray, II. z. interpfcs for Morton, 65, 67.
flies from Scotland in the night. 68. i. fcint
again there, and concluJes a treaty with
England, 1'3. several of his letters, App.
7, 1t. 15, 24, 29, 30, 3j.

Ratclf. See S.,'x.
Reformation, its progrcfs in Scotland, i, 10.

account of its iifl preachers, Ill. is much
influenced by England, 112. two remark-
able irnllruments of promoting it, 113.
it makes great progress, 118. causes con-
tributing to promote ir, 119. its advan-
tages over popery, 128. is favoured by
tie Q. Regent, 133. an inllance of re-
gaid ..r it in Scotland, 134. the whole
paity not chargeable * ith Cardinal Bea-
toun's murder, 141. A prielt burnt for em-
b.acing it, 142. the reformers violently pcr-
fecuted by the Aichbiflop of Sr. Andrew's,
ibid. are protetced by the Q. Regent, ibid.
app'y in vain to the Popish clergy, 143. a
peirccution againit them pulh d on by the
.' eich interelt, 148. the preachers fum-
moned before the Regent, 149 they are
deceived and declared out-la; s by her, 1;o.
a riotous infurreqion of them at Pe th
againll the Papills, 151. prepare to defend
themselves against the Quetn, 152. con-
clude a treaty with her wh!ch she presently
break, 153. they take arms again agaillit
tile (Qeen, 155. infilt on rediefling civil as
well as religiuus grievances, 156. the in-
fluence of the reformation on liberty, ibid.
c ney besiege and take Perth, 5 8. they seize
Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. commit
greal violences on churches and monifteries,
159. their condua how accounted for,
ibid. an inflance of their moderation, 16o.
fix their rcfidence at Edinburgh, 161. the
Queen prepares to attack them, ibid.
make another treaty with her, 162. are
forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c. but al-
lowed the exercise of their religion, ibid.
demand the expulsion of the French army,
163. are aware of their danger from
France, 166. their party llrengthcned,
ibid. remonflrate againfl the French for-
tifying Leith, 171. take arms in their
own defence, 172, 173. remonllrate again
to the Regent, 174. are highly incened
at her imperious anwer, ibid. 175. by
advice of a convention, deprive the Qucen
Dowager of the ofice of Regent, 176.

I

the foun3aticns of this condcEt. ibi'. 177.
the growith of it encouraged by Parlianmll:,
383. See Congregation.

Regali/ies, the ample jurifdiflion of T. 18
Replcd'ging, the privilege of, to vwhm belong-

ng -- -- 1. 18
Reovenge, encouraged both by cullom and law

I. 34
Re.venues of the church, proceedings of Parhia.

ment concerning them - I. 206
Ri'ol/phi, an agent for the Pope at London ne-

gociares for Q. Mary, 11. 22. his arguments
with the D. qs Norfolk 23, 24
Rizio, David, some account of him and his

rife, I. 275, 276. Darnly's conr:eiion
ssith him, 276. His good offices courted
by Murray, 297. his great intcreft .nd
familiarity witi the Queen. 303. incurs
the h itre d of Dainly, ibid. and of the
friends of the exiled Lords, ibid. fcveral
concurring caules es thii, ibid. 304. a
combination formed to murder h in, o05.
he is murdered in the Queen's palace, 507,

oSa
Romans, invade Bitain, 1. 2. give the earl:elt

accounts of the Scots - ibid.
Ross, Biflop of, zealously promotes Queen-

Mary's interest at London, II. 23, 24. is
confined to the Tower, and threatened with
capital punilhment, 25. is set at liberty and
banished the kingdom, ibid. some letters
of his, App. 53, 67
Rubay, a foreigner, made keeper of the great

flal of Scotland - I. 129
Ruthven, Lord, the murder of Rizio proposed

to him by Darnly, I. 305. heads the con-
fpirrators againltl him, 308. his part in that
tranfaftion, ibid. is admitted into lie
Qucen's prcfence, who promises him a par-
don, 309. did not repent of it at his diath,

3zS
-- created E. of Gowrie, he and his

afnociates fcize the King, and rimonfirate
againlt his favourite, 11. 77, 78. drive
them from him, ibid. their coidLLft ap-
proved in an afemlbly of the tates, So.
thle King c(capes from them, 8.t. by Ar-
ran's influence violent mcafilrcs are deter-
mined againll them, 86. Q( Elizabeth in-
tercedes in their behalf, ibid. 87. are de-
clared guilty of high trealbn, MS. take re-
fuge in foreign countries, ibid. arc harfll-

ly

ly treated by Q. Elizabeth, 104. a recon-
ciliation with her brought about, i:5, 1i5.
return to Scotland, and are reconciled to
the King, 117. their moderation on being
restored to their eltates and honours, 1 8.
their neglect of their friends the Clergy

ibid.
Ruthven, that name abolilhed by Parliament,

II. 229. See Gowrie.
Ruteven raid, \'. at II. 78

S.

A D L E R, Sir Ralph, appointed a com-
nmflioner to hear the cause between Qn

Marx\ and her accusers -- I. 40
Sandilands of Calder, Lord St. John, sent to

lay the proceedings of the congregational
Parliament before the King and Queen in
France, I. zo8. is coldly received and dif-
miffed without a ratification by them, 209
Savage, a Spanilh Officer, his desperate refo-

lut! n to kill Q Elizabeth - II. 122
Scot/and, its ancient hiflory fabulous, I. x. the

origin of the Scots, z. their history why re-
markably obscure, 3. some account of the
writers of it, 4. is divided into four periods,
5. a review of the third axra, 6. some ac-
count of the controversy concerning its in-
dependency, ibid.-io. this the cause of
great animofities and much bloodshed, Ir.
the slate of Scotland when Bruce began his
reign, .2. it begins to have an influence on
the fate of distant nations, 76, 77. influence
as to the balance of power, 77. fate of
Scotland at the birth of Q Mary, 81. is
invaded by the Englilh, and several places
burnt and plundered 93. much alienated
from the English, ibid. 94. a peace con-
cluded between England, France and Scot-
land, 95. computation of damages done by
the Lnglish in Scotland, 94, 95. a new
breach with England, too. is invaded by a
great English army, 101. The Scots are
defeated with great slaughter, 102, 103.
their manner of fighting at that time, 103,
zo4. a marriage agreed of their young
Qucen and the Dauphin of France, 107.
they soon repent this fep, jo9. a fray at
Edinburgh occasions their utter aveifion to
the French, l lo. this inflamed by another
incident, 129. they decline a war with Eng-
land, 131. fend representatives to witness

Q. Mary's marriage, 134. their care as to
the marriage articles, ibid. 135. they refuse
content to the demands of the French, 136.
four of their deputies fuipeced to be poi-
soned, 137. which much increases the aver-
sion, 138. grant the crown matrimonial to
the Dauphin, ibid. they apply to the Eng-
lifh for affiltance against the French, 180,
185. an English fleet arrives for that pur-
pose, I90. conclude a peace with England,
and receive an English army, 191, 192. all
parties agree in relenting the French, 195.
a treaty between England, France, and Scot-
land, 198, 199. both English and French
armies leave Scotland, 202. they rejoice
much at the death of the young King of
France, ziz. fend to invite the Queen to
Scotland, 216. reject proposals of an am-
baffador from France, 2 17. tlate of Scotland
on Q Mary's return from France, 226. the
great zeal of the nation against Popery, 229.
the Scots brought into contempt by Q_
Mary's conduct, 361. in a miserable condi-
tion after the murder of Murray the Regent,
11. 17. state of factions at that time in it,
S1. a league concluded between Scotland
and England, 20. a view of the revolu-
tions of Scotland since the accession of
James VI. 249-260. of the policy of the
itate, 249-254. and of the church, 254,
255. of the genius and taste as to learning

256, 260
Scott of Buccleugh enters and ravages Eng-

land after the murder of Murray the Regent,
II. 1, 2 the design of this - 4
Scroop, Lord, sent to condole with, and watch

Q. Mary on her arrival in England 1. 39S
Seieon, Lords and court cf, by whom firfl ap-

pointed, I. 36. the President and one half
of their number of the Clergy 123
Seton, Lord, affifls the Queen regent in defend-

ing Leith - - 1. 183
Shrewr/Zry, Earl of, the charge of Q Mary's

perlbn committed to him, 1. 412. why re-
moved from that office, II. Ioz. is appoint-
ed to fee the sentence againll her executed,
145. letter from hitm and the ELarl of Kent
concerning her death, Appendix i to
Sinclair, Bifiop of Ross, a zealous Papill, con-

curs as President of the Seflion in acquitting
Knox of a charge of treason 1. z60
Socl;/ifet, Duke of, enters Scotland with a pow-

erful army, I. ioi. is reduced to a very cri-

tical
X.

tical jituation, ibid. defeats the Scots with
great slaughter, 1oz. this viftory why of
little advantage, o+4. cabals against him at
the court of England, force him to return,
ibid. is ruined by his enemies 108
Spain, great warlike preparations there, II.

162. See Airmado. the Infanta of, set up
as candidate for the crown of England, 189

Spanijh ambaflador is ordered to leave Eng-
land, for intriguing in favour of Q Mary,

II. 25
Sprot, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's con-

fpiracy, II. 220-22z. is executed, 222
Ste-var/, James, prior of St. Andrews, is ap-

pointed to carry the crown matrimonial
to the Dauphin of France, I. 140. See
St. I.ndrews.

-- Efme, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in
Scotland, II. 60. See Azbigny.

Capt. James, his character, II. 61.

becomes a favourite of King James, ibid.
accuses Morton of the murder of the late
King, 64. is created Earl of Arran. See
.rran.

- Col. William, commander of the

King's guard, contributes to his escape from
the Ruthven conspirators, II. 84. seizes the
Earl of Gowrie 9-
---- Francis, created Earl of Bothwell,

II. 167. joins in a treasonable correfpon-
dence with the Popish lords, i68. See
Bothuevll.

, all of that name combine in opposing
the Clianci llor -- I. ISl
Stirling seized by the Reformers, I. 1.8. a

parliament there by the King's party, II.
19. is furprized by the Qccn's adherents,
and a great fray enlucs ibid. 20
Strozzi, Leon, commands a body of French

font into Scotland, 1. 99. reduces and dc-
niolifhes the caltlc of St. Andreews, ibid.
See F-rane.
Surcccrioo, a rcmalcable statute conccrning it

I. loo
S/uprinltendcnts, proposed in the Chu chl of

Scotlan,. 1. 2 Il. their bulineis ibid.
Siiexr, Eail of, one of ihe conimiflioners to

lhe.r tlhe caluf betatcen Q. M.lary and her
accuser , I. 4( 5. .iln'T bls ; powvcr l IIarmly
on the borders. II. 3. lie and S-cr"op cneCr,
and ravage Sce tland -

5 5~

T.
.T AX upon land, first proposed in Scot-

land I. 130
Throgmorion, Sir Nicholas, sent ambaflador

extraordinary from Q Elizabeth, to oppose
Q. Mary's marriage with Darnly, I. 279.
his interceflion for the exiled lords is much
regarded, 297, 298. his enmity to Cecil,
ibid, is sent to negociate Q( MNary's libe-
ration, 372. is refuied acccfs to her by
the confederates, ibid. some letters of his,
Appendix 37, 39, 43, 46, 48, 49
---- Francis, is charged with a conlpiracy

against Q.L lizabeth, IV. 95. at firit he
denies, but afterwards confefles it, ibid. 96.
reflections on his confession, ibid. 97. is
executed 97
Tichbourne designs to aflaffinate Q. Elizabeth,

II. 12g
q'reajon, persons guilty of it, tried after their

death by the law of Scotland II. 221

U.
IL 71 0 7, a foreigner, made comptroller

of Scotland 1. IZ9
Union of Scotland and England, the advan-

tages of - II. 253, 25-

W.

W ALL C
LCE, Sir William, bravely as-

Icted theliberty of hi' country I. i
Itar/Jinham, secretary to Q. Elizabeth, leilt

amnl)bflidor to l. James 'V. 11 87. Icturrs
without fuccels, ibid. makes a favourable
report to her concerniing James, 8S. intcr-
pofles in favour of ( Mly ', 1o2. iilco-
vcrs [abinlgon's conltlli.Ac, 14. why a
(ltcrminlc and ilvck'telltc eile'nly to Q.
Nlaly, 17,. a letter Iroln him, Appen.

ltj
j/aruic/k, I'.all of, fecceds S,)mcrfet in thi

governmlent of l'.'inlalrd I. r(
I',rIm/?mij/,/r, the conferclnces conccrnin (r

lvlaly tllere - 1.
f />,imorlaiild. Earl of, artte)npts a rclrl' ioi r1I

lavour of (t Many, I. .jl. iis Il li cic
dl:lovescd and deicited. 4-, .' ).i I1
elcapes to tle Ncthellcaids ',d.

ttyhit#hoK..)
I

Wljhithorn, the prior of, imprisoned for cele-

brating Mass - -- I. 258
IJ'illox, a minister, declares for refiflance and

deprivation of tyrannical rulers, 1. 176. is
called to attend the Q Dowager on her
death-bed -- 97
,lijhart, George, his illegal execution, reveng-

ed - I. 46
Iitrchcraft, vigorously prosecuted in Scotland,

11. 175
[ftoton, dean of Canterbury, employed to

negociate a peace with France I. 198
-- Sir Edward, Cent by Queen Elizabeth

into Scotland, II. 114. his charater, ibid.
fcon gets into high favour with K. James
ibid, procures a league between the two

kingdoms, ibid. 115. undermines Arran's
power, 11 5 forms a plot on King James,
and forced to withdraw without taking
leave -- - 1I6, 117

Y.

O R K, the conferences there concerning
y Queen Mary --I. 405

Z.

0 U C HE, Lord, sent ambassador by Q.

Elizabeth, to remonfirate against King

James's lenity to the Popish lords, II. 185.
his treachery on that occasion ibid.
F I .N I S.
