H THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.
PRINCIPAL of the University of EDINBURGH, and HIsTo.

RIocRAPHER to his MAJESTY for SCOTLAND.

A NEW EDITION.

VO L. II.

LONDON:
Printed for W. STRAHAN; T. CADELL, in the

Strand; and J. BALFOUR, at Edinburgh.

MDCCLXXIV,

# BOOK I.

T HE
HIS TOR Y

OF THE
R E IG N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V;

BOOK I.
CLHARLES V. was born at Ghent on OOK t

the twenty-fourth day of February, in -

Birth of

the year one thousand five hundred. His Charlei v.

father, Philip the Handsome, Archduke of
Austria, was the son of the Emperor Maximilian,
and of Mary, the only child of Charles the Bold,
the last prince of the house of Burgundy. His
mother, Joanna, was the second daughter of
Ferdinand and Isabella, king and queen of
Castile and Aragon.

A LONG' train of fortunate events had opened ;i, dom..
the way for this young prince to the inheritance t"h evnts

VOL. II. B of ly which

he acquired
tlhln.

BooK r. of more extensive dominions, than any European

monarch, since Charlemagne, hadpoffeffed. Each
of his ancestors had acquired kingdoms or pro-
vinces, towards which their profpea of fuc-
cefflon was extremely remote. The rich pof-
sessions of Mary of Burgundy were destined for
another family, she having been contracted by
her father to the only son of Louis XI. of
France; but that capricious monarch, indul-
ging his hatred to her family, chose rather to
tfrip her of part of her territories by force, than
to secure the whole by marriage; and by this
mifconduft, fatal to his posterity, threw all the
Netherlands and Franche Comte into the hands
of a rival. Isabella, the daughter of John II,
of Castile, far from having any profpe& of that
noble inheritance which she transmitted to her
grandson, passed the early part of her life in
obscurity and indigence. But the Castilians,
exasperated against her brother Henry IV. an
ill-advifed and vicious prince, publickly charged
him with impotence, and his Queen with adul-
tery. Upon his demise, rejecting Joanna,
whom the King had uniformly, and even on
his death-bed, owned to be his lawful daughter,
and whom an assembly of the states had ac-
knowledged to be the heir of his kingdom, they
obliged her to retire into Portugal, and placed
Isabella on the throne of Castile. Ferdinand
owed the crown of Aragon to the unexpe6ted

death

death of his elder brother, and acquired the BooK I.
kingdoms of Naples and Sicily by violating the 1
faith of treaties, and disregarding the ties of
blood. To all these kingdoms, Christopher
Columbus, by an effort of genius and of intre-
pidity, the boldest and most successful that is
recorded in the annals of mankind, added a new
world, the wealth of which was one confider-
able source of the power and grandeur of the
Spanilh monarchs.

DON JOHN, the only son of Ferdinand and Philip an

Isabella, and their eldest daughter, the Queen ahnlan"hi
of Portugal, being cut off in the flower of smotr,"',it
youth, all their hopes centered in Joanna and
her posterity. But as her husband, the Arch-
duke, was a stranger to the Spaniards, it was
thought expedient to invite him into Spain, that
by residing among them, he might accustom
himself to their laws and manhers; and it was
expected that the Cortes, or assembly of states,
whose authority was then so great in Spain, that
no title to the crown was reckoned valid unless
it received their fanftion, would acknowledge
his right of fucceflion, together with that of the
Infanta, his wife. Philip and Joanna, passing
through France in their way to Spain, were t;oa4
entertained in that kingdom with the utmost
magnificence. The Archduke did homage to
Louis XII. for the earldom of Slanders, and

B a took

BOOK I. took his feat as a peer of the realm in the par-

liament of Paris. They were received in Spain
with every mark of honour that the parental
affection of Ferdinand and Isabella, or the
refpea of their fubjets, could devise; and their
title to the crown was soon after acknowledged
by the Cortes of both kingdoms.

frrdinard BUT amidst these outward appearances of fa-
piliSp' tisfation and joy, some secret uneasiness preyed
power. upon the mind of each of there princes. The

stately and reserved ceremonial of the Spanish
court, was so burdensome to Philip, a prince
young, gay, affable, fond of society and of
pleasure, that he soon began to express a desire
of returning to his native country, the manners
of which were more suited to his temper. Ser-
dinand, obfcrving the declining health of his
Queen, with whose life his right to the govern-
ment of Castile mutl cease, easily foresaw, that
a prince of Philip's disposition, and who already
discovercd an extreme impatience to reign,
would never content to his retaining any degree
of authority in that kingdom; and the profpec
of this diminution of his power, awakened the
jealousy of that ambitious monarch.

If.,bella's ISABELLA beheld, with the sentiments natural
,tIl;lri.tI to a mother, the indifference and neglec with;
LdlJgh. which the Archduke treated her daughter, who

twas

was destitute of those beauties of person, as well BOOK I.
as those accomplishments of mind, which fix l '
the affetions of an husband. Her underfland-
ing, always weak, was often disordered. She
doated on Philip with such an excess of childish
and indiscreet fondness, as excited disgust rather
than affetion. Her jealousy, for which her
hulband's behaviour gave her too much cause,
was proportioned to her love, and often broke
out in the mofl extravagant actions. Isabella,
though sensible of her defeas, could not help
pitying her condition, whi( h was soon rendered
altogether deplorable, by the Archiuklc's abrupt
resolution of setting out in the middle ot winter
for Slanders, and of leaving her in Spain. Ifa-
bella intreated him not to abandon his wife to
grief and melancholy, which might prove fatal
to her, as she was near the time of her delivery.
Joanna conjured him to put off his journey for
three days only, that the might have the plea-
sure of celebrating the fellival of Christmas in
his company. Ferdinand, after reprelenting the
imprudence of his leaving Spain, before he had
time to become acquainted with the genius, or
to gain the affetions of the people who were
one day to be his ftibjeds, besought him, at
least, not to pals through France, with which
kingdom he was then at open war. Philip,
without regarding either the dictates of hu-
manity, or the maxims of prudence, perfilted

B 3 ill

BOOK I. in his purpose, and on the twenty second of
' -w-. December set out for the Low Countries, by

the way of France .

Diforderof FROM the moment of his departure, Joanna
Joanna'de
Jninnd.a funk into a deep and fullen melancholy b, and
Frtdinhnd while she was in that situation bore Ferdinand
*fterward, her second son, for whom the power of his

brother Charles afterwards procured the king-
doms of Hungary and Bohemia, and to whom
he at last transmitted the Imperial sceptre.
Joanna was the only person in Spain who dif.
covered no joy at the birth of this prince. In-
sensible to that, as well as to every other plea-
sure, Ihe was wholly occupied with the thoughts
of returning to her husband; nor did Ihe, in
any degree, recover tranquillity of mind, until
Se4. Ihe arrived at Brussels next year'.

PHI.xP, in palling through France, had an

interview with Louis XII. and signed a treaty
with him, by which he hoped that all the dif-
ferences between France and Spain would have
been finally terminated, But Ferdinand, whose
affairs, at that time, were extremely prosperous
in Italy, where the superior genius of Ganfalvo

' Potri Martyris Anglerii Epifolar, 2S0. 253.
b Id. Epi. z 5 5.
' Mariana, lib. 27. c. I , 1. Flcchier Vie de Ximen.

hIpl'^d

P. de

de Cordova, the great captain, triumphed on BOOK I.
every occasion over the arms of France, did not
pay the least regard to what his fon-in-law had
concluded, and carried on hostilities with greater
ardour than ever.

FROM this time Philip seems not to have taken Death of

isabclli.

any part in the affairs of Spain, waiting in quiet
till the death either of Ferdinand or of Isabella
should open the way to one of their thrones.
The latter of these events was not far distant.
The untimely death of her children had made
a deep impreflion on the mind of Isabella, and
as she could derive but little consolation for the
losses which the had sustained either from her
daughter Joanna, whose infirmities daily in-
creased, or from her fon-in-law, who no longer
preserved even the appearance of a decent re-
spect towards that unhappy princess, her spirits
and health began gradually to decline, and alter
languishing some months, the died at Medina del
Campo on the twenty-fixth of November, one
thousand five hundred and four. She was no less
eminent for virtue, than for wisdom; and whe-
ther we confider her behaviour as a queen, as a
wife, or as a mother, she isjultly entitled to the
high encomiums bestowed on her by the Spanilh
hilorians d.

P. Mart. Ep. 279.

B 4 A FLW

BOOK r. X A FEW weeks before her death, she made her
er will, last will, and being sensible of Joanna's inca.
Fppeo'lind pacity to assume the reins of government into
egent of her own hands, and having no inclination to

commit them to Philip, with whose condut the
was extremely dissatisfied, Ihe appointed Ferdi-
pand regent or administrator of the affairs of
Castile until her grandson Charles should attain
the age of twenty. She bequeathed to Ferdi-
nand likewise one half of the revenues which
should arise from the Indiies together with the
grand matterfllips of the three military orders;
dignities, which rendered the person who possessed
them almoll indepcilceiicr, and which Isabella
had, for that rtaivo, an.nexed to the crown .
But before lh liigned a decd so favourable to
FcrJinand, she obliged him to swear that he
would not, by a second marriage, or by any
other means, endeavour to deprive Joanna or
her posterity of their right of luccefion to any
of his kingdoms f.

IMMEDIATELY upon the queen's death, Ser-

dinand resigned the title of king of Castile, and
commanded Joanna and Philip to be publickly
proclaimed the sovereigns of that kingdom.
But, at the lame time, he assumed the character

P. Martyr. Ep. 277. Mar. Hil. lib. 28. c. Il. Ser-
$ras Hilt. Gener.d'Efpagne, tom. viii. 263.

f Mar. Hilt. lib. 28. c. 4.

of Regent, in consequence of Isabella's testa- BOOK I.
nent, and not long after he prevailed on the Ferdinand
Cortes of Castile to acknowledge his right to lAesre
that office. This, however, he did not procure gent by the
without difficulty, nor without discovering such s155.

The Cafsi-

symptoms of alienation and disgust among the lian, dif-
Caitilians as filled him with great uneasiness. fatified.
The union of Castile and Aragon, for almost
thirty years, had not so entirely extirpated the
ancient and hereditary enmity vhich subsisted
between the natives of these kingdoms, that the
Castilian pride could fulbmit, without murmur-
ing, to the government of a king of Aragon.
Ferdinand's own character, with which the
Castilians were well acquainted, was far fiom
rendering his authority desirable. Suspicious,
discerning, severe, and parsimonious, he was
accustomed to observe the molt minute actions
of his subje&s with a jealous attention, and to
reward their highest services with little libe-
rality; and they were now deprived of Ilabella,
whose gentle qualities, and partiality to her
Castilian fubjests, often tempered his austerity,
or rendered it tolerable. The maxim, of his
government were elpecially odious to the Gran-
dees; for that artful prince, fcnfible of the dan.
gerous privileges conferred upon them by the
Feudal institutions, had endeavoured to curb
their exorbitant power g, by extending the royal

£ Marian. lib. 28, c, I z

jurifdition,

BooK I. jurifdi&ion, by protecing their injured vaflals,

by increasing the immunities of cities, and by
other measures equally prudent. From all these
causes, a formidable party among the Castilians
united against Ferdinand, and though the per-
sons who composed it, had not hitherto taken
any publick ftep in opposition to him, he plain-
ly saw that upon the least encouragement from
their new king they would proceed to the molt
violent extremities.

Philip en. THERE was no less agitation in the Nether-
dbtavou th lands upon receiving the accounts of Isabella's
government death, and of Ferdinand's having assumed the

government of Castile. Philip was not of a
temper tamely to susser himself to be supplanted
by the unnatural ambition of his father-in-law.
f Joanna's infirmities, and the non-age of Charles
rendered them incapable of government, he, as
a hulband, was the proper guardian of his wife,
and as a father, the natural tutor of his son.
Nor was it sufficient to oppose to these jufl
rights, and to the inclination of the people of
Castile, the authority of a testament, the ge-
nuinenefs of which was perhaps doubtful, and
its contents certainly iniquitous. A keener edge
was added to Philip's resentment, and new vi-
gour infused into his councils by the arrival of
Don John Manuel. He was Ferdinand's am-
baffador at the Imperial court, but upon the

first

first notice of Isabella's death repaired to Bruf- Boox I.
fels, flattering himself that under a young
and liberal prince, he might attain to power
and honours which he could never hope for
in the service of an old and frugal mailer. He
had early paid court to Philip during his refi-
dence in Spain, with such assiduity as entirely
gained his confidence; and having been trained
to business under Ferdinand, could oppose his
schemes with equal abilities, and with arts not
inferior to those for which that monarch was
diftinguilhed h.

BY his advice, ambassadors were dispatched He require

dinand

to require Ferdinand to retire into Aragon, and to regn t*
to resign the government of Castile to those per- regnQ.
sons whom Philip should entrust with it until
his arrival in that kingdom. Such of the Cafti-
lian nobles as had discovered any diffatisfadion
with Ferdinand's administration, were encou-
raged by every method to oppose it. At the
fame time a treaty was concluded with Louis
XII. by which Philip flattered himself that he
had secured the friendship and affiitance of that
monarch,

MEANWHILE, Ferdinand employed all the
arts of address and policy, in order to retain

. Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom. vi. p. 12.

the

BooK I. the power of which he had got pofleflion. By

means of Conchillos, an Aragonian gentleman,
he entered into a private negociation with
Joanna, and prevailed on that weak princess to
confirm, by her authority, his right to the re-
gency. But this intrigue did not escape the
penetrating eye of Don John Manuel; Joanna's
letter of consent was intercepted; Conchillos
was thrown into a dungeon; she herself con-
fined to an apartment in the palace, and all
her Spanish domefticks secluded from her pre.
fence ',

Ferdinand THE mortification which the difcovery'of this
abandoned
'y theCafti scheme occasioned to Ferdinand, was much in-
;a nobleu. created by his observing the progress that Philip's

emissaries made in Castile. Some of the nobles
retired to their castles; others to the towns in
which they had influence; they formed them-
selves into confederacies, and began to assemble
their vassals. Ferdinand's court was almost to-
tally deserted; not a person of diftinsion but
Ximeler, archbishop of Toledo, the duke of
Alva, and the marquis of Denia, remaining
there; while the houses of Philip's ambassadors
were daily crowded with those of the highest
rank.

P. Mart. Ep. 287. Zurita Analce vi. p. 14.

EXASPERATED

EXASPERATED at this universal defe&ion, and BOOK 1.

mortified perhaps with feeing all his schemes de- Ferdinand
feared by a younger politician, Ferdinand re- mrelvesj t
solved, in defiance of the law of nature, and of order to cI.

clude his
decency, to deprive his daughter and her pofte- daughter

from the

rity of the crown of Castile, rather than renounce throne.
the regency of that kingdom. His plan for ac-
complifhing this was no less bold, than the
intention itself was wicked. He demanded in
marriage Joanna, the supposed daughter of
Henry IV. on the belief of whose illegitimacy,
Isabella's right to the crown of Castile was
founded; and by reviving the claim of this
princess, in opposition to which he himself had
formerly led armies, and fought battles, he
hoped once more to get poffiefion of the throne
of that kingdom. But Emanuel, king of Por-
tugal, in whose dominions Joanna resided, being
married to one of Ferdinand's daughters by
Isabella, refused his content to that unnatural
match; and the unhappy princess herself, having
loft all relish for the objects of ambition, by be-
ing long immured in a convent, discovered no
less aversion to it k.

THE resources, however, of Ferdinand's am- Marres
bition, were not exhausted. Upon meeting with Firccf the

king,

k Sandov. Ilift. of Civil Wars in Castile. Lond. 1655.
p. s. Zurita Anales de Aragon, tom. vi, p. 213.

a repulse

BooK I. a repulse in Portugal, he turned towards France,
'^ ''
* and fought in marriage Germaine de Foix, a

daughter of the viscount of Narbonne, and of
Mary, the siser of Louis XII. The war which
that monarch had carried on against Ferdinand
in Naples, had been so unfortunate, that he
litlened with joy to a proposal, which furnished
him with an honourable pretence of concluding
peace: And though no prince was ever more
remarkable than Ferdinand for making all his
paflions bend to the maxims of interetl, or be-
come subservient to the purposes of ambition,
yet so vehement was his resentment against his
fon-in-law, that the desire of gratifying it ren-
dered him regardless of every other consideration.
In order to be revenged of Philip, by detaching
Louis from his interest, and in order to gain a
chance of excluding him from his hereditary
throne of Aragon, and the dominions annexed
to it, he was ready once more to divide Spain
into separate kingdoms, though the union of
these was the great glory of his reign, and had
been the chief obje&t of his ambition; he con.
sented to restore the Neapolitan nobles of the
French facion to their poffeflions and honours;
and submitted to the ridicule of marrying, in an
advanced age, a princess of eighteen '.
! P. Mart. Ep. 290. a2z. Mariana, lib. 28. c.' 6, 17.

THe

THE conclusion of this match, which deprived Boor I.

Philip of his only ally, and threatened him with - J-
the loss of so many kingdoms, gave a dreadful
alarm to him, and convinced Don John Manuel
that there was now a necefity of taking other
measures with regard to the affairs of Spain ".
He accordingly inftru6ted the Flemish ambaffa-
dors in the court of Spain, to testify the strong
desire which their mailer had of terminating all
differences between him and Ferdinand in an
amicable manner, and his willingness to content
to any conditions that would re-etlablifh the
friendship which ought to subsist between a
father and a fon-in-law. Ferdinand, though he A treat be.

tween Ser-

had made and broken more treaties than any dinandand
prince of any age, was apt to confide so far in Phalp'
the sincerity of other men, or to depend so
much upon his own address and their weakness,
as to be always extremely fond of a negociation.
He listened with eagerness to these declarations,
and soon concluded a treaty at Salamanca; in N,. 24.
which it was flipulated, that the government of
Castile should be carried on in the joint names
of Joanna, of Ferdinand, and of Philip; and
that the revenues of the crown, as well as the
right of conferring offices, should be shared be-
tween Ferdinand and Philip byan equal division".

m P. Mart. Ep. 293. a Zurita Anales de Aragon,
vl. 19. P. Mart. Ep. 293, z9p.

NOTHING,

BOOK I. NOTHING, however, was farther from Philip's

v06 thoughts than to observe this treaty. His sole

Phiip and intention in proposing it was to amuse Ferdi.
Joanna set
fail for nand, and to prevent him from taking any mea-

fures for obstructing his voyage into Spain. It
had that effet. Ferdinand, sagacious as he
was, did not for some time fufpeft his design;
and though when he perceived it, he prevailed
on the king of France not only to remonstrate
against the Archduke's journey, but to threaten
hostilities if he should undertake it; though he
solicited the duke of Gueldres to attack his son-
in-law's dominions in the Low Countries, Philip
and his consort nevertheless set fail with a nume-
rous fleet, and a good body of land forces,
they were obliged by a violent tempest to take'
shelter in England, where Henry VII. in coma
pliance with Ferdinand's solicitations, detained
them upwards of three months °; at last they
were permitted to depart, and after a more
April a2. prosperous voyage, they arrived in safety at Co-

runna in Galicia, nor durst Ferdinand attempt,
as he had once intended, to oppose their landing.
by force of arms.

The nob;. THE Castilian nobles, who had been obliged
ril decre hitherto to conceal or to dissemble their senti-
so Philip ments, now declared openly in favour of Philip.

o Ferrer. Hist. viii. zSS.

Frorn

From every corner of the kingdom, persons of BOOK I.
the highest rank, with numerous retinues of *
their vassals, repaired to their new king. The
treaty of Salamanca was universally condemned,
and all agreed to exclude from the government
of Castile a prince, who, by conienting to disjoin
Aragon and Naples from that crown, difcovcred
so little concern for its true interests. Ferdi-
nand, meanwhile, abandoned by almo't all the
Castilians, disconcerted by their revolt, and un-
certain whether he should peaceably relinquish
his power, or take arms in order to maintain it,
earnefily solicited an interview with his fon-in-
law, who by advice of Manuel studiously avoided
it. Convinced at last, by feeing the number
and zeal of Philip's adherents daily increase,
that it was vain to think of resiling such a tor-
rent, Ferdinand consented, by a treaty, to resign Ferdinand
the regency of Castile into the hands of Philip, regincy of
to retire into his hereditary dominions of Ara- Caeti:s, ""
gon, and to reft fhtisfied with the mafterflips of Aragon.
the military orders, and that share of the revenue
of the Indies, which Iiabella had bequeathed to
him. Though an interview between the princes
was no longer necessary, it was agreed to on
both fides from motives of decency. Philip re-
paired to the place appointed with a splendid
retinue of the Castilian nobles, and a confider-
able body of armed men. Ferdinand appeared

VUL. II. C without

BocK I. without any pomp, attended by a few followers,

mounted on mules, and unarmed. On that
occasion Don John Manuel had the pleasure of
displaying before the monarch whom he had
deserted, the extensive influence which he had
acquired over his new master: While Ferdinand
suffered in pretence of his former subje&s the
two most cruel mortifications which an artful and
ambitious prince can feel; being at once over-
reached in conduct, and stripped of power P.
July. NOT long after, he retired into Aragon; and

hoping that some favourable accident would
soon open the way for his return into Castile,
he took care to protest, though with great fe-
crecy, that the treaty concluded with his son-
in-law, being extorted by force, ought to be
deemed void of all obligation .
Philip and PHILIP took possession of his new authority

lnna aec- with a youthful joy. The unhappy Joanna,

knowledged
as king and from whom he derived it, remained during all
qneen by the
Cortes. there contests, under the dominion of a deep

melancholy; she was seldom allowed to appear
in publick; her father, though he had often de-
fired it, was refused access to her; and Philip's

P Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. 64. Mar. lib. 28. c. 19,

20. P. Mart. ep. 304. 30o, &c. q Zurita Anales
de Arag. vi. p. 68. Ferrer. lilt. viii. 290.

3 chief

chief object was to prevail on the Cortes to Booc I.
declare her incapable of government, that an
undivided power might be lodged in his hands,
until his son should attain to full age. But such
was the partial attachment of the Castilians to
their native princess, that though Manuel had
the address to gain some members of the Cortes
afembled at Valladolid, and others were willing
to gratify their new sovereign in his first request,
the great body of the representatives refused
their content to a declaration which they thought
so injurious to the blood of their monarchs r.
They were unanimous, however, in acknowledg-
ing Joanna and Philip, queen and king of
Castile, and their son Charles prince of Asturias.

THIS was almost the only memorable event Death of

Philip.

during Philip's administration. A fever put
an end to his life in the twenty-eighth year of Sept. 5.
his age, when he had not enjoyed the regal dig-
nity which he had been so eager to obtain full
three months '.

THn whole royal authority in Castile ought Thrdiforder

of course to have devolved upon Joanna. But mind in.
the shock occasioned by a difaiter so unexpeced crcf.
as the death of her husband, completed the dif-

' Zurita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 75.

Marian. lib. 2c. c. 23.

C 2 order

BooK T. order of her underflanding, and her incapacity
..-.. for government. During all the time of Phi-

lip's sickness, no intreaty could prevail on her,
though in the sixth month of her pregnancy, to
leave him for a moment. When he expired,
however, she did not flied one tear, or utter a
single groan. Her grief was silent and fettled.
She continued to watch the dead body with the
fame tenderness and attention as if it had been
alive', and though at last fle permitted it to
be buried, Ihe soon removed it from the tomb
to her own apartment. There it was laid upon
a bed of Rate, in a splendid dress; and having
heard from some monk a legendary tale of a
king who revived after he had been dead four-
teen years, she kept her eyes almost constantly
fixed on the body, waiting for the happy mo-
ment of its return to life. Nor was this capri-
cious affection for her dead husband less tinctured
with jealousy, than that which she had born to
him while alive. She did not permit any of
her female attendants to approach the bed on
which his corpse was laid; she would not susser
any woman who did not belong to her family
to enter the apartment; and rather than grant
that privilege to a midwife, though a very aged
one had been chosen of purpose, she bore the

' P. Mart. Ep. 316.

princess

princess Catherine without any other affiflance BOOK I.
than that of her own domestics u.

A WOMAN in such a slate of mind was little ch, ; i'ca.

]aple of go-

capable of governing a great kingdom; and vcrnrnnt.
Joanna, who made it her sole employment to
bewail the loss, and to pray for the foul of her
husband, would have thought her attention to
publick affairs an impious neglect of those duties
which she owed to him. But though she de-
clined assuming the administration herself, yet,
by a strange caprice ofjealoufy, fle refuscd to
commit it to any other perion; and no intreaty
of her subje&s could persuade her to name a
regent, or even to sign such papers as were ne-
ceffary for the execution ofjutice, and the fe-
curity of the kingdom.

THE death of Philip threw the Caifilians into Max;milian

the greatest perplexity. It was necessary to ap- tn E,.r-
point a regent, both on account of Joanna's dir.nd'om-

a4~~~~~ of"~~~~~~ s*~

~prtictrs fir

frenzy, and the infancy of her son ; and as there thc egcncy.
was not among the nobles, any person so emi-
nently diftinguiihed as to be call:d by the pub-
lick voice to that high office, all naturally
turned their eyes either towards Ferdinand, or
towards the Emperor Maximilian. The former

U Mar. Hill. lib. 29. c. 3 & 5. '. Mart. Ep. 318. 124.
338. 332.

C 3 claiIned

BOOK I. claimed that dignity as administrator for his

daughter, and by virtue of the testament of
Isabella; the latter thought himself the legal
guardian of his grandson, whom, on account of
his mother's infirmity, he already confidered as
king of Castile. Such of the nobility as had
lately been most active in compelling Ferdinand
to resign the government of the kingdom, trem-
bled at the thoughts of his being restored so
soon to his former dignity. They dreaded the
return of a monarch, not apt to forgive, and
who, to those defects with which they were al-
ready acquainted, added that resentment which
the remembrance of their behaviour, and reflec-
tion upon his own disgrace, must naturally have
excited. Though none of thcfe objections held
against Maximilian, he was a stranger to the
laws and manners of Castile; he had not either
troops or money to support his pretensions; nor
could his claim be admitted without a public
declaration of Joanna's incapacity for govern-
ment, an indignity, to which, notwithltanding
thenotoriety of her diflemper, the delicacy of
the Castilians could not bear the thoughts of
subjecting her.

DON JOHN MANUEL, however, and a few of

the nobles, who confidered themselves as most
obnoxious to Ferdinand's dilf)leafure, declared
for Maximilian, and offered to support his claim

with

with all their interest. Maximilian, always en- BooK r.
terprizing and decisive in council, though feeble
and dilatory in execution, eagerly embraced the
offer. But a ferics of ineffecual negociations
was the only consequence of this tranfaftion.
The Emperor, as usual, aflerted his rights in a
high itrain, promised a great deal, and performed
nothing x.

A PEW days before the death of Philip, Ser- Ferdinand

alifent, onl a
dinand had set out for Naples, that, by his own vit tohis

kingdomuf

presence, he might put an end, with the greater Naples.
decency, to the vice-royalty of the great captain,
whose important iervices, and cautious conduct,
did not screen him from the suspicions of his
jealous master. Though an account of his son-
in-law's death reached him at Porto-fino, in the
territories of Genoa, he was so solicitous to dif-
cover the secret intrigues which he supposed the
great captain to have been carrying on, and to
eflablifh his own authority on a firm foundation
in the Neapolitan dominions, by removing him
from the fupreine command there, that rather
than discontinue his voyage, he chose to leave
Castile in a state of anarchy, and even to rifque,
by this delay, his obtaining polfeflion of the
government of that kingdom y.

Mariana, lib 29. c. 7. 7urita Anales de Arag. vi. 93.
y Zurita Analcs de Arag. vi. p. 85.

C 4 NOTHING

Boos T. NOTHING but the great abilities and prudent

vl conduCt of his adherents, could have prevented

Acquires the bad effeEts of this absence. At the head of
of Cafile these was Ximenes, archbishop of Toledo, who,
throfghthe though he had been raised to that dignity by
inarfencof Isabella, contrary to the inclination of Ferdi.
Ximenes. nand, and though he could have no expectation

of enjoying much power under his jealous ad-
ministration, was nevertheless so disinterested, as
to prefer the welfare of his country before his
own grandeur, and to declare, that Castile could
never be so happily governed as by y prince,
whom long experience had rendered thoroughly
acquainted with its true interest. His zeal to
bring over his countrymen to this opinion, in-
duced him to lay aside somewhat of his usual
o507. austerity and haughtiness. He condescended,

on this occasion, to court the difaffded nobles,
and employed addrets, as well as arguments, to
persuade them. Ferdinand seconded his endea-
vours with great art; and by concessions to
some of the grandees, by promises to others, and
by letters full of complaisance to all, he gained

Aug. 1'. many of his most violent opponents ". Though
Ferdinand
returns t many cabals were formed, and some commo-
Syain. tions were excited, yet when Ferdinand, after

having fettled the affairs of Naples, arrived in
Castile, he entered upon the administration with-

Z Zurita Anales de Arag. vi, p. 87. 94. 109.

out
sl

out opposition. The prudence with which he BooK I.
exercised his authority in that kingdom, equalled ' '
the good fortune by which he had recovered it.
By a moderate, but steady administration, free Hiprodent
from partiality and from resentment, he en. tio,
tircly reconciled the Castilians to his person, and
secured to them, during the remainder of his
life, as much domefiick tranquillity, as was con-
silent with the genius of the feudal govern-
ment, which still subsisted among them in full
vigour'.

NoR was the preservation of tranquillity in

his hereditary kingdoms, the only obligation
which the Archduke Charles owed to the wife
regency of his grandfather; he had the satis.
fa&ion, during that period, of feeing very im-
portant acquisitions added to the dominions over
which he was to reign. On the coast of Bar-
bary, Oran, and other conquets of no small Conquel
value, were annexed to the crown of Castile by of or.
cardinal Ximenes, who, with a spirit very un-
common in a monk, led in person a numerous 1so9.
army against the Moors of that country;'and, 4
with a generosity and magnificence still more
singular, defrayed the whole expence of the ex-
pedition out of his own revenues b. In Europe,
Ferdinand, under pretences no less perilous than

* Mariana, lib. 29. c. 1o. b Mariana, lib. 29. c. 18.

unjust,

BOOK T. unjust, as well as by artifices the most shameful
' *'^ aand treacherous, expelled John d'Albret, the
Acquisition lawful sovereign, from the throne of Navarre;
of Navarre.

and seizing on that kingdom, extended the li-
mits of the Spanish monarchy from the Pyrenees
on the one hand, to the frontiers of Portugal on
the otherc.

Ferdinand IT was not, however, the desire of aggran-
jealous of
blbgrand dizing the Archduke, which influenced Ferdi-

Charles. nand in this, or in any other of his adions. He

was more apt to confider that young prince as
a rival, who might one day wrest out of his
hands the government of Castile, than as a
grandson, for whose behoof he was entrusted
with the administration. This jealousy soon
begot ave:fion, and even hatred, the symptoms
of which he was at no pains to conceal. Hence
5s09. proceeded his immoderate joy when his young

queen was delivered of a son, whose life would
have deprived Charles of the crowns of Aragon,
Naples, Sicily, and Sardinia; and upon the un-
timely death of that prince, he discovered, for
the fame reason, an excessive lolicitude to have
other children. This impatience hastened, in
all probability, the accession of Charles to the
crown of Spain. Ferdinand, in order to pro.
cure a blessing, of which, from his advanced

c Mar. lib. 30o. c. 1. 1 . z1. 24

age,

age, and the intemperance of his youth, he Boox r.
could have little prospect, had recourse to his '
physicians, and by their prescription took one «zs3.
of those potions, which are supposed to add
vigour to the conttitution, though they more
frequently prove fatal to it. This was its effet
on a frame so feeble and exhausted as that of
Ferdinand; for though he survived a violent
disorder which it at first occasioned, it brought
on such an habitual languor and dejection of
mind, as rendered him averse from any serious
attention to publick affairs, and fond of frivolous
amusements, on which he had not hitherto be-
flowed much time d. Though he now despaired
of having any son of his own, his jealousy of
the Archduke did not abate, nor could he help
viewing him with that aversion, which princes
often bear to their successors. In order to gra-
tify this unnatural paflion, he made a will, ap- 15s5.
pointing prince Ferdinand, who having been Endeavour,

to diminish

born and educated in Spain, was much beloved his power,
by the Spaniards, to be regent of all his king- f.,vot'r of
doms, until the arrival of the Archduke his Fcrd"iand
brother and by the fame deed he fettled upon
him the grand-mafterfhip of the three military
orders. The former of these grants might have

d 7urita Anales de Arag. vi. p. 347. P. Mart. Ep. 531.
Argenfola Anales d Aragon, lib. i. p. 4.

put

Boot I. put it in his power to have disputed the throne

with his brother; the latter would, in any event,
have rendered him almost independent.

FERDINAND retained to the last that jealous

love of power, which was so remarkable through
his whole life. Unwilling to resign it, even at
the approach of death, he removed continually
from place to place, in order to fly from his
diltemper, or to forget it. Though his strength
declined every day, none of his attendants durst
mention his condition; nor would he admit his
father confessor, who thought such silence cri-
minal and unchristian, into his presence. At
last the danger became so imminent, that it
could be no longer concealed. Ferdinand re-
ceived the intimation with a decent fortitude;
and touched, perhaps, with compunEtion at the
injustice which he had done his grandlon, or
influenced by the honest remonstrances of Car-
vajal, Zapata, and Vargas, his most ancient and
faithful counsellors, who represented to him, that
by investing prince Ferdinand with the regency,
he would infallibly entail a civil war on the two
brothers, and by bestowing on him the grand-
mafterlhip of the military orders, would firip
the crown of its noblest ornament and chief
strength, he consented to alter his will in both

theie

these particulars. By a new deed he left Charles BOOK I.
the sole heir of all his dominions, and allotted ,16.
to prince Ferdinand, instead of that throne of 'Plterdtat
which he thought himself almost secure, an in- w
considerable eftablithment of fifty thousand
ducats a year c. He died a few hours after sign- and dies.
ing this will, on the twenty-third day of Janu-
ary, one thousand five hundred and sixteen.

CHARLES, to whom such a noble inheritance Edacationo

descended by his death, was near the full age
of sixteen. He had hitherto resided in the Low
Countries, his paternal dominions. Margaret
of Austria, his aunt, and Margaret of York,
the filter of Edward IV. of England, and widow
of Charles the Bold, two princesses of great
virtue and abilities, had the care of forming his
early youth. Upon the death of his father, the
Flemings committed the government of the Low
Countries to his grandfather, the Emperor
Maximilian, with the name rather than the au-
thority of regent '. Maximilian made choice of
William de Croy lord of Chievres to superintend
the education of the young prince his grand-

' Mar. His. lib. 30. c. ult. Zurita Anales de Arag. vi.

401. P. Mart. Ep 565, 566. Argenfola Anales de Arag.
lib. i. p. i.

f Pontius Hcuterua Rerum Aufiriacarum, lib. xv. Lov.
1i49. lib. 7. c . p. . 155.

son.

BOK 1. son g. That nobleman possessed, in an eminent

$6-. degree, the talents which fitted him for such an

important office, and discharged the duties of
it with great fidelity. Under Chievres, Adrian
of Utrecht acted as preceptor. This prefer.
ment, which opened his way to the highest dig-
nities an Ecclesiastic can attain, he owed not to
his birth, for that was extremely mean; nor to

his

g The French historians, upon the authority of M. de

Bellay, Mem. p. 1. have unanimously asserted, that Philip,
by his las will, having appointed the King of France to
have the direction of his son's education, Louis Xll. with
a disinterestedness suitable to the confidence reposed in
him, named Chievres for that office. Even the president
Henaut has adopted this opinion. Abrege Chron. A D.
1507. Varillas, in his usual manner, pretends to have
feenPhilip's tefRament. Prat. de 1' education des Princes,
p. 16. But the Spanibh, German, and Flemilh historians
concur in contraditing this assertion of the French authors.
It appears from Heuterus, a contemporary Flemish hiRfo-
gian ofgreat authority, that Louis XII. by consenting to
the marriage of Germaine de Foix with Ferdinand, had lofl
much .of.that confidence which Philip once placed in him;
that this disgust was increased by the French King's giving
in marriage to the count of Angoulime his eldest daughter,
whom he had formerly betrothed to Charles, Heuter. Rer.
Auftr. lib. v. 151: That the French, a short time before
Philip's death, had violated the peace, which fubfilted be.
tween them and the Flemings, and Philip had complained
of this injury, and was ready to resent it. Heuter. ibid.
All these circumllances render it improbable that Philip,
who made his will a few days before he died, Heuter. p.

152,

his interest, for he was a stranger to the arts of BooK I.
a court; but to the opinion which his country-
men entertained of his learning. He was indeed
no inconsiderable proficient in those frivolous
sciences, which, during several centuries, assumed
the name of Philosophy, and had published a
commentary, which was highly esteemed, upon
The Book of Sentences, a famous treatise of Petrus
Lombardus, confidered at that time, as the

152, should commit the education of his Con to Louis XII.
In confirmation of these plausible conjectures, positive tefti-
mony can be produced. It appears from Heuterus, that
Philip, when he set out for Spain, had entrusted Chievres
both with the care of his son's education, and with the go-
vernment of his dominions in the Low Countries. Heuter.
lib. vii. p. 153. That an attempt was made, soon after
l'hilip's death, to have the Emperor Maximilian appointed
regent, during the minority of his grandson; but this be-
ing opposed, Chievres seems to have continued to discharge
both the offices which Philip had committed to him. Heut.
ibid. 153. 5. That in the beginning of the year 15o8,
the Flemings invited Maximilian to accept of the regency;
to which he consented, and appointed his daughter Mar-
garer, together with a council of Flemings, to cxcrcife the
supreme authority, when he himself Should, at any time,
be absent. He likewise named Chievres as governor, and
Adrian of Utrecht as preceptor to his son. Heut. ibid. i; .
I 7. What Heuterus relates with refpea to this matter is
confirmed by Moringus in Vita Adriani, apud Analcla
Caftp. Burmanni de Adriano, cap. io; by Barlandus Chro-
nic. Biabant. ibid. p. 2z; and by llHarus Annal. Brab.
vol. ii. 5 to, &ca

l.atndard

BooK TI standard system of metaphysical theology. Buc

5 whatever admiration these procured him in an

illiterate age, it was soon found that a man ac-
customed to the retirement of a college, unac-
quainted with the world, and without any
tinture of taste or elegance, was by no means
qualified for rendering science agreeable to a
young prince. Charles, accordingly, discovered
an early aversion to learning, and an excessive
fondness for those violent and martial exercises,
to excel in which was the chief pride, and almost
the only fiudy of persons of rank in that age.
Chievres encouraged this taste, either from a
desire of gaining his pupil by indulgence, or
from too flight an opinion of the advantages of
literary accomplishments h. He inftruEted him,
however, with great care in the arts of govern-
ment; he made him fiudy the history not only
of his own kingdoms, but of those with which
they were connected; he accustomed him, from
the time of his assuming the government of
Slanders in the year one thousand five hundred

he firR and fifteen, to attend to business; he persuaded
eoenings of
hi charac. him to peruse all papers relating to public
us* affairs; to be present at the deliberations of his

privy-counfellors, and to propose to them him-
self those matters, concerning which he required

h Jovii Vita Adriani, p. 91. Struvii Corpus, Hill.
Germ. ii. 967. P. Heuter. Rer. Auftr, lib, vii. c. 3. p. 15 7.

their

their opinioni. From such an education, Charles BooK I.
contra&ed habits of gravity and recolletion ,5,6.
which scarcely suited his time of life. The firfl
openings of his genius did not indicate that fu-
periority which its maturer age displayed k. He
did not discover in his youth that impetuosity
of spirit which commonly ushers in an active
and enterprizing manhood. Nor did his early
obsequiousness to Chievres, and his other favou.
rites, promise that capacious and decisive judg-
ment, which afterwards directed the affairs of
one half of Europe. But his fubjedts, dazzled
with the external accomplishments of a graceful
figure and manly address, and viewing his cha-
racter with that partiality which is always shown
to princes during their youth, entertained fan-
guine hopes of his adding lustre to those crowns
which descended to him by the death of Ser-
dinand.

THE kingdoms of Spain, as is evident from rs,~,cr

the view which I have given of their political Si',in't;.
conflitution, were, at that time, in a situation* rni,'lrs nd-
which required an adminiltration, no less vigo- ,oa.-
rous than prudent. The feudal inflitutions,
which had been introduced into all its different
provinces by the Goths, the Suevi, and the Van-

J Memoires de Bcllay, 8vo. Par. 1 73. p. l. P. Hlcuter.
lib.viii. c 1. p, 184. k P. Martyr, Ep. 569. 6;5.

VOL. 11. D dals,

.Boor I. dais, fubfiited in great force. The nobles, who

i 6. were powerful and warlike, had long possessed

all the exorbitant privileges, which these infti-
tutions veiled in their order. The cities in Spain
were more numerous and more considerable,
than the genius of feudal government, naturally
.an enemy to commerce, and to regular police,
seemed to admit. The personal rights, and po-
litical influence, which the inhabitants of these
cities had acquired, were extensive. The royal
prerogative, circumscribed by the privileges of
the nobility, and by the pretensions of the peo-
* pie, was confined within very narrow limits.

Under such a form of government, the prin-
ciples of discord were many; the bond of union
was extremely feeble; and Spain felt not only
all the inconveniences occasioned by the defets
in the feudal system, but was exposed to dif-
orders arising from the peculiarities in its own
confRitution.

DURING the long administration of Ferdi-

nand, no internal commotion, it is true, had
arisen in Spain. His superior abilities enabled
him to reitrain the turbulence of the nobles, and
to moderate the jealousy of the commons. By
the wifdorn of his domestic government, by the
sagacity with which he conducted his foreign
operations, and by the high opinion that his

fubjets

rubje&s entertained of both, he preserved among BooK I.
them a degree of tranquillity, greater than was 15'6.
natural to a conflitution, in which the feeds of
discord and disorder were so copiously mingled.
But, by the death of Ferdinand, these restraints
were at once withdrawn; and faaion and dif-
content, from being long repressed, were ready
to break out with fiercer animosity.

IN order to prevent those evils, Ferdinand Ferdinand

had in his last will taken a most prudent pre- ed cardinal
caution, by appointing Cardinal Ximenes, arch- R'geI.nt
bishop of Toledo, to be sole regent of Castile,
until the arrival of his grandson in Spain. The
singular charater of this man, and the extra-
ordinary qualities which marked him out for
that office, at such ajunture, merit a particular
description. He was descended of an honour- ai;,re ,;
able, not of a wealthy family; and the circum- clarae,"
fiances of his parents, as well as his own incli-
nations, having determined him to enter into
the church, he early obtained benefices of great
value, and which placed him in the way of the
highest preferment. All there, however, he re-
nounced at once; and after undergoing a very
severe noviciate, assumed the habit of St. Francis
in a monatery of Obfervantine friars, one of
the most rigid orders in the Romish Church.
There he soon became eminent for his uncom-

D 2 mon

BOOK I. mon austerity of manners, and for those excefles
Z,,, of fuperllitious devotion, which are the proper

charaAeriftics of the monaftick life. But not-
withstanding these extravagances, to which weak
and enthusiastic minds alone are usually prone,
his underltanding, naturally penetrating and de-
cifve, retained its full vigour, and acquired
him such great authority in his own order,
as raised him to be their provincial. His repu-
tation for sanctity soon procured him the office
of father confessor to queen Isabella, which he
accepted with the utmcft reluctance. He pre-
* tferved in a court the fame aufserity of man-

ners, which had distinguished him in the cloister.
He continued to make all his journies on foot;
he subsisted only upon alms; his a&s of morti-
fication were as severe as ever; and his pen-
nances as rigorous. Isabella, pleased with her
choice, conferred on him, not long after, the
Archbifhoprick of Toledo, which, next to the
Papacy, is the richest dignity in the church of
Rome. This honour he declined with a firm-
ness, which nothing but the authoritative injunc-
tion of the Pope was able to overcome. Nor
did this height of promotion change his man-
ners. Though obliged to display in public
that magnificence which became his station, he
himself retained his monaftick severity. Under
his pontifical robes he constantly wore the coarl'

2 fiock

frock of St. Francis, the rents in which he used BOOK I.
to patch with his own hands. Hle at no time '-5 6.'
used linen; but was commonly clad in hair-
cloth. He slept always in his habit, most fre-
quently on the ground, or on boards, rarely in
a bed. He did not tatte any of the delicacies
which appeared at his table, but satisfied him-
self with that simple diet which the rule of his
order prescribed '. Notwithstanding these pecu-
liarities, so opposite to the manners of the
world, he pofleffed a thorough knowledge of
its affairs; and no sooner was he called by his
station, and by the high opinion which Ferdi-
nand and Isabella entertained of him, to take
a principal share in the administration, than he
dilplayed talents for business, which rendered
the fame of his wisdom equal to that of his
fantity. Bold and original in all his plans, his
political condut flowed from his real charaaer,
and partook both of its virtues and its defects.
His extensive genius suggested to him fchemcs,
vast and magnificent. Conlcious of the inte-
grity of his intentions, he pursued these with
unremitting and undaunted firmness. Accuf-
tomed from his early youth to mortify his own
paslions, he fiewed little indulgence towards
thoie of other men. Taught by his fyfiem of

I Hiftoire de 1'adminiflration du Card. Ximen. par Mich.
Daudier, 4to. 1635.p. 13.

D 3 religion

BooK J. religion to check even his most innocent desires,

51ó~ he was the enemy of every thing to which he

could affix the name of elegance or pleasure.
Though free from any suspicion of cruelty, he
discovered in all his commerce with the world
a revere inflexibility of mind, and aufteritv of
character, peculiar to the monaftick profession,
and which can hardly be conceived in a country
where that is unknown.

Cardinal SUCH was the man to whom Ferdinand corn.
pointed e. mitted the regency of Castile, and though
gent by
chbi^e. Ximenes was then near fouricore, and perfetAly

acquainted with the labour and difficulty of the
office, his natural intrepidity of mind, and zeal
for the public good, prompted him to accept
of it without hesitation. Adrian of Utrecht,
who had been sent into Spain a few months
before the death of Ferdinand, produced full
powers from the archduke to assume the name
and authority of regent upon the demise of his
grandfather; but such was the aversion of the
Spaniards to the government of a stranger, and
so unequal the abilities of the two competitors,
that Adrian's claim would at once have been
rejected, if Ximenes himself, from complaisance
to his new master, had not consented to acknow-
ledge him as regent, and to carry on the govern-
ment in conjunction with him. By this, how-

ever,

ever, Adrian acquired a dignity merely nominal. BOOK I.
Ximenes, though he treated him with great de- ' 6'
cency, and even refpe&, retained the whole Ximenhe

obtains the
power in his own hands ". sole dircc.

tion of as.
fairs.
THE Cardinal's first care was to observe the Hi precau.

lions against
motions of the Infant Don Ferdinand, who the nfant

Don Ser.

having been flattered with so near a profpe&t of dinand.
supreme power, bore the disappointment of his
hopes with greater impatience than could have
been expeEted of a prince so young. Ximenes,
under pretence of providing more effectually
for his safety, removed him fiom Guadalupe,
the place in which he had been educated, to
Madrid, where he fixed the residence of the
court. There he was under the Cardinal's own
eye, and his conduct, with that of his domestics,
was watched with the utmoR attention ".

THE first intelligence he received from the

Low Countries, gave greater dilquiet to the
Cardinal, and convinced him how difficult a
task it would be to condu& the affairs of a
young prince, under the influence of counsellors
unacquainted with the laws and manners of
Spain. No sooner did the account of Ferdi-

"' Gometius de reb. gelt. Ximenii, p. 15o. fol. Compl.

I569. " Miniana Contin. Mariana, lib. I. c. 2.
Faudier, Hilt. de Ximenes, p. 18.

P 4 nand's

BOOK I. nand's death reach Brufiels, than Charles, by

5 the advice of his Flemish ministers, resolved to

Charmles aaffume the title of king. By the laws of Spain,
fumee the
title of the sole right to the crowns both of Castile and

a of Aragon belonged to Joanna; and though

her infirmities dilqualified her from governing,
this incapacity had not been declared by any
publick aa of the Cortes in either kingdom; so
that the Spaniards confidered this rebolution,
not only as a direct violation of their privileges,
but as an unnatural ufiurpation in a ibn on the
prerogatives of a mother, towards whom, in her
present unhappy situation, he manifested a less
delicate regard than her fubjeas had always ex-
pressed °. The Flemish court, however, having
prevailed both on the Pope and on the Emperor
to address letters to Charles as king of Castile;
the former of whom, it was pretended, had a
right, as head of the church; and the latter, as
head of the empire, to confer this title; inftruc-
tions were sent to Ximenes, to prevail on the
Spaniards to acknowledge it. Ximenes, though
he had earnefily remonstrated against the mea-
sure, as no less unpopular than unnecessary,
resolved to exert all his authority and credit in
carrying it into execution, and immediately
assembled such of the nobles as were then at
court. What Charles required was laid before

9 A. Mart. Ep. 568.

them

them; and when, instead of complying with BOOK r.
his demands, they began to murmur against a 6.
such an unprecedented encroachment on their
privileges, and to talk high of the rights of
Joanna, and their oath of allegiance to her,
Ximenes hastily interposed, and with that firm
and decisive tone which was natural to him, told Rfcognited

through the

them, that they were not called now to deli- influenceof
berate, but to obey; that their lbvereign did
not apply to them for advice, but expected sub-
miflion; and " this day, added he, Charles shall April 13.
be proclaimed king of Castile in Madrid, and
the reft of the cities will follow its example."
On the spot he gave orders for that purpose P;
and notwithfsanding the novelty of the practice,
and the secret discontents of many persons of
diftin&ion, Charles's title was univeri.lly recog-
nized. In Aragon, where the privileges of the
subject were more extensive, and the abilities as
well as authority of the archbishop of Saragossa,
whom Ferdinand had appointed regent, were
far inferior to those of Ximenes, the fame obfe-
quioufnefs to the will of Charles did not appear,
nor was he acknowledged there under any other
character but that of prince, until his arrival in
Spain q.

P Gometius, p. 1i , &c. Baudier IIiit de Ximen.
p. 121. ' P. Mart. Ep. 572.

XIMENES,

BooK I. XIMENES, though poflTefed only of delegated

ó/J power, which, from his advanced age, he could

Hi, ;:(mes not expect to enjoy long, assumed, together with
for extend-
ing tile Pre. the character of regent, all the ideas natural to

u aiv. monarch, and adopted schemes for extending

the regal authority, which he pursued with as
much intrepidity and ardour, as if he himself
had been to reap the advantages resulting from
their success. The exorbitant privileges of the
Castilian nobles circumscribed the prerogative
of the prince within very narrow limits. These
the Cardinal confidered as so many unjust ex-
tortions from the crown, and determined to re-
duce them. Dangerous as the attempt was,
there were circumstances in his situation which
promised him greater success than any king of
Castile could have expeEted. His ftrift and
prudent ceconomy of his archiepiscopal reve-
nues, furnished him with more ready money,
than the crown could at any time command;
the fantity of his manners, his charity and mu-
nificence, rendered him the idol of the people;
and the nobles themselves, not fufpeaing any
danger from him, did not observe his motions
with the fame jealous attention, as they would
have watched those of one of their monarchs.

By deprf- IMMEDIATELY upon his accefflon to the re-
ng the o. gency, several of the nobles, fancying that the

bit. reins

reins

reins of government would of consequence be BooK r.
somewhat relaxed, began to assemble their vas- H
fals, and to prosecute, by force of arms, private
quarrels and pretensions, which the authority of
Ferdinand had obliged them to dissemble, or to
relinquish. But Ximenes, who had taken into
pay a good body of troops, opposed and de-
feated all their designs with unexpected vigour
and facility; and though he did not treat the
authors of these disorders with any cruelty, he
forced them to ads of submission, extremely
mortifying to the haughty spirit of Castilian
grandees,

BUT while the Cardinal's attacks were con.- By frm;ng
fined to individuals, and every aC of rigour aboly of

trnops de-
was justified by the appearance of necelity, pendingon

the crown.

founded on the forms of justice, and tempered
with a mixture of lenity, there was scarcely room
for jealousy or complaint. It was not so with
his next measure, which, by striking at a privi-
lege essential to the nobility, gave a general
alarm to the whole order. By the feudal con-
flitution, the military power was lodged in the
hands of the nobles, and men of an iili.rior
condition were called into the field only as their
vassals, and to follow their banners. A king
with scanty revenues, and a limited prerogative,
depended on these potent barons in all his opc-

raiulis.

Bco i. rations. It was with their forces he attacked
~"t s"o his enemies, and with them he defended his

own kingdom. While at the head of troops at-
tached warmly to their own lords, and accustomed
to obey no other commands, his authority was
precidrious, an,! his efforts feeble. From this
state Ximenes resolved to deliver the crown;
and as mercenary standing armies were unknown
under the feudal government, and would have
been odious to a martial and generous people,
he issued a proclamation, commanding every
city in Caflile to enroll a certain number of its
burgesses, in order that they might be trained
to the use of arms on Sundays and holidays; he
engaged to provide officers to command them
at the publick expence; and as an encourage-
ment to the private men, promised them an ex-
emption from all taxes and impositions. The
frequent incursions of the Moors from Africa,
and the nrceffity of having some force ready to
oppole them, furnished a plausible pretence for
this innovation. The obje& really in view was
to secure the king a body of troops independent
of his barons, and which might serve to coun-
terbalance their power'. The nobles were not
ignorant of his intention, and saw how effetually
the scheme which he had adopted would ac-
complifh his end; but as a measure which had

Minian: Continuatio MarianEr, fol. Hag. 1733, p. 3.

the

the pious appearance of resisting the progress of BOOK I.
the Infidels was extremely popular, and as any 5'16.
opposition to it arising from their order alone,
would have been imputed wholly to interested
motives, they endeavoured to excite the cities
themselves to refute obedience, and to remon-
ftrate against the proclamation, as inconsistent
with their charters and privileges. In confe-
quence of their inffigations, Burgos, Valladolid,
and several other cities, rose in open mutiny.
Some of the grandees declared themselves their
protectors. Violent remonstrances were pre-
sented to the king. His Flemish counsellors
were alarmed. Ximenes alone continued firm
and undaunted; and partly by terror, partly by
intreaty; by force in some instances, and by
forbearance in others, he prevailed on all the
refractory cities to comply'. During his ad-
ministration, he continued to execute his plan
with vigour, but soon after his death it was en-
tirely dropt.

His success in this fchme for reducing the Ry recaling

the grants

exorbitant power of the nobility, encouraged himt former
to attempt a diminution of their pofltfions, ;the .bility.
which were no less exorbitant. During the con-
tests and disorders inseparable from the feudal
government, the nobles, ever attentive to their

'P. Mart. Ep. 516, &c. Gometius, p. i6", &c.

OWn

B1oo I. own interest, and taking advantage of the weak-

iT
v ness or distress of their monarchs, had seized

some parts of the royal demesnes, obtained grants
of others, and having gradually wrested almost
the whole out of the hands of the prince, had
annexed them to their own estates. The rights;
by which moit of the grandees held there lands,
were extremely defetive; it was from some fuc-
cefsful usurpation, which the crown had been
too feeble to dispute, that many derived their
only title to possession. An enquiry carried
back to the origin of there encroachments, which
were almost co-eval with the feudal system, was
impracicable; and as it would have stripped
every nobleman in Spain of great part of his
lands, it must have excited a general revolt.
Such a ltep was too bold, even for the enterpriz-
ing genius of Ximenes. He confined himself
to the reign of Ferdinand; and beginning with
the pensions granted during that time, refused
to make any farther payment, because all right
to them expired with his life. He then called
to account such as had acquired crown lands
under the administration of that monarch, and
at once resumed whatever he had alienated. The
effets of there revocations extended to mariy
persons of high rank; for though Ferdinand
was a prince of little generosity, yet he and Ifa.
- bella having been railed to the throne of Castile

by

by a powerful faction of the nobles, they were BOOK I;
obliged to reward the zeal of their adherents
with great liberality, and the royal demesnes
were their only fund for that purpose. The
addition made to the revenue of the crown by
there revocations, together with his own frugal
economy, enabled Ximenes not only to discharge
all the debts which Ferdinand had left, and to
remit considerable fums to Slanders, but to pay
the officers of his new militia, and to eflablilh
magazines more numerous, and better furnished
with artillery, arms, and warlike stores, than
Spain had ever possessed in any former age .
The prudent and disinterested application of
these iums, was a full apology to the people for
the rigour with which they were exated.

THE nobles, alarmed at there repeated at- Thenobic

tacks, began to think of precautions for the oppofehis
safety of their order. Many cabals were form-
ed, loud complaints were uttered, and def-
perate resolutions taken; but before they pro-
ceeded to extremities, they appointed some of
their number to examine the powers in confe-
quence of which the Cardinal exercised ats of
filch high authority. The admiral of Castile,
the duke de Infantado, and the condO de Bene-
vento, grandees of the first rank, were entrusted

Flcchier Vie de Ximcn. ii. 600.

witl

BooK I. with this commission. Ximenes received thcrA

5'T"' with cold civility, and in answer to their dc-

mand, produced the teflament of Ferdinand by
which he was appointed regent, together with
the ratification of that deed by Charles. To
both these they objected; and he endeavoured
to establish their validity. As the conversation
grew warm, he led them insensibly towards a
but without balcony, from which they had a view of a large

fucC. body of troops under arms, and of a formidable

train of artillery. " Behold," fays he, pointing
to these and rairing his voice, " the powers
which I have received from his Catholick ma.
jefty. With these I govern Castile; and with
these I will govern it, until the king your mafler
and mine takes poeffesion of his kingdom"." A
declaration so bold and haughty silenced them,
and aftonilhed their associates. To take arms
against a man aware of his danger, and prepared
for his defence, was what despair alone would
dictate. All thoughts of a general confederacy
against the Cardinal's administration were laid
aside and except from tome flight commotions,
excited by the private resentment of particular
noblemen, the tranquillity of Castile suffered no
interruption.
Thwarte, IT was not only from the opposition of the

'y

ch,," Spanish nobility that obstacles arose to the exe-
n.inifti..

" Flech. ii. 5 . Ferreras, Iil. viii. 4 33.

cution

cution of the Cardinal's schemes; he had a con- Boo I.
tfant itruggle to maintain with the Flemish mini- . ,u.
fters, who, presuming upon their favour with the
young king, aimed at direting the affairs of
Spain, as well as those of their own country.
Jealous of his great abilities and independent
spirit, they confidered Ximenes rather as a rival
who might circumscribe their power, than as a
minister who by his prudence and vigour was
adding to the grandeur and authority of their
mailer. Every complaint against his admini-
itration was listened to with pleasure by the cour-
tiers in the Low Countries. Unnecessary ob.
ftrudions were thrown by their fmeans in the
way of all his measures; and though they could
not either with decency or safety deprive him of
the office of regent, they endeavoured to lessen
his authority by dividing it. They soon dif-
covered that Adrian of Utrecht, already joined
with him in office, had neither genius nor spirit
sufficient to give the least check to his proceed-
ings; and therefore Charles, by their advice, Anaddi.

tional norrlo

added to the commifflion of regency La Chau, a her ofre-
Flemish gentleman, and afterwards Amerftorf, 'et$ ap
a nobleman of Holland; the former distinguish-
ed for his address, the latter for his firmness.
Ximenes, though no firanger to the malevolent
intention of the Flemish courtiers, received thele
new aflociates with all the external marks of di.l

YOL. II. E tintion

BOOK I. tinCtion due to the office with which they were
ri6. invested; but when they came to enter upon

business, he abated nothing of that air of fupe-
riprity with which he had treated Adrian, and

x;imnes re- till retained the sole diretion of affairs. The
tdl1s thll di-
rttoil of Spaniards, more averse, perhaps, than any other
.fAirs. people to the government of flr4ngecs, approved

of all his efforts to preserve his authority. Even
the nobles, influenced by this national passion,
and forgetting their jealousies and discontents,
chose rather to fee the supreme power in the
hands of one of their countrymen, whom they
feared, than in those of foreigners, whom they
hated.

i. fucccIT. XIMENES, though engaged iri such great

fbl war in c)
Navdri¢. schemes of domeftick policy, and embarrassed by

the artifices and intrigues of the Flemish mi-
nifters, had the burden of two foreign wars to
support. The one was in Navarre, invaded by
its unfortunate monarch, John d'Albret. The
death of Ferdinand, the absence of Charles, the
discord and difaffeation which reigned among
the Spanish nobles, seemed to present him with
a favourable opportunity of recovering his do-
minions, The Cardinal's vigilance, however,
defeated a measure so well concerted. As he
foresaw the danger to which that kingdom might
be exposcd, one of his irft adts of adminiftra-

tion

tion was to order thither a considerable body of BooK I.
troops. While the king was employed with ,16a
one part of his army in the siege of St. Jean
Pied en Port, Villalva, an officer of great ex-
perience and courage, attacked the other by
surprise, and cut it to pieces. The king in-
ftantly retreated with precipitation, and an end
was put to the war x. But as Navarre was filled
at that time with towns arid castles, slightly
fortified, and weakly garrisoned, which being
unable to resist an enemy, served only to furnish
him with places of retreat; Ximenes, always
bold and decifve in his measures, ordered every
one of there to be dismantled, except Pampe-
luna, the fortifications of which he proposed to
render very strong. To this uncommon pre-
caution Spain owes the poffellion of Navarre.
The French, since that period, have often en-
tered, and have as often over-run the open
country; but while they were exposed to all the
inconveniencies attending an invading army, the
Spaniards have easily drawn troops from the
neighbouring provinces to oppose them; and
the French, being destitute of strong towns to
which they could retire, have been obliged to
abandon their conquest with as much rapidity
as they gained it.

P. Mart. Ep. 570.

E . THrR

BOOK i. THE war which he carried on in Africa,
116s. against the famous adventurer Horbc Barba-

tHionp- rofla, who, from a private corsair, raised him-
sc'ales self, by his singular valour and address, to be

king of --lgiers and Tunis, was far from being
equally successful. The ill conduct of the
Spanish general, and the ralh valour of his
troops, presented Barbarofla with an easy vifory.
Many perilhed in the battle, more in the retreat,
and the remainder returned into Spain covered
with infamy. The magnanimity, however, with
which the Cardinal bore this disgrace, the only
one he experienced during his administration,
added new lustre to his charater Y. Great com-
pofure of temper under a disappointment, was
not expected from a man so remarkable for the
eagerness and impatience with which he urged
on the execution of all his schemes.

Corirptoii THIS disaster was soon forgotten; while the
of the Fie-
mif mini- conduct of the Flemish court proved the cause
ticularly of of conatant uneasiness, not only to the Cardinal,
Chvrcs. but to the whole Spanish nation. All the great

qualities of Chievres, the prime minister and
favourite of the young king, were sullied with
an ignoble and fordid avarice. The acceflion of
his master to the crown of Spain, opened a
new and copious source for the gratification of

r Gometius, lib. vi. p. 179.

this

this paiflon. During the time of Charles's refi- BooK I.
dence in Slanders, the whole tribe of pretenders ,' ;;
to offices or to favour resorted thither. They
soon discovered that, without the patronage of
Chievres, it was vain to hope for preferment;
nor did they want sagacity to find out the proper
method of securing his protection. Vait fums
of money were drawn out of Spain. Every
thing was venal, and disposed of to the highest
bidder. After the example of Chievres, the in-
ferior Flemish minilters engaged in this traffick,
which became as general and avowed, as it was
infamous '. The Spaniards were filled with
rage when they beheld offices of great import-
ance to the welfare of their country, set to
sale by itrangers, unconcerned for its honour or
its happiness. Ximenes, difintercfted in his
whole adminitfration, and a itranger, from his
native grandeur of mind, to the paflion of ava-
rice, inveighed with the utmost boidnefs against
the venality of the Flemings. He represented
to the King in strong terms, ,the murmurs and
indignation which their behaviour excited among
a free and high-fpirited people, and besought
him to set out without loss of time for Spain,
that, by his presence, he might diflipate the
clouds which were gathering all over the king-
dom '.

Miniana, Contin. 1. i. c. 2. 7 P. Mart. Ep. 576,

fl 3 CHAR[S

BOOK T. CHARLES was fully sensible that he had de-
156.- layed too long to take possession of his domi-

Cbaleabper. nions in Spain. Powerful obstacles, however,
fuaded by . . ..
70imenc to stood in his way, and detained him in the Low

. Countries. The war which the league of Cam-

bray had kindled in Italy, Rill fubfifed; though,
during its course, the armies of all the parties
engaged in it, had changed their deflination and
their objects. France was pow in alliance with
Venice, which it had at first combined to destroy.
Maximilian and Ferdinand had for some years
carried on hostilities against France, their origi-
nal ally, to the valour of whose troops the con-
federacy had been indebted for all its success.
Together with his kingdoms, Ferdinand tranf-
mitted this war to his grandson; and there was
reason to expect that Maximilian, always fond of
new enterprizes, would persuade the young
monarch to enter into it with ardour. But the
Flemings, who had long pofhelfed an extensive
commerce, which, during the league of Cam-
bray, had grown to a great height upon the
ruins of the Venetian trade, dreaded a rupture
with France and Chievres, sagacious to discer
the true interest of his country, and not warped
on this occasion by his love of wealth, warmly
declared for maintaining peace with the French
nation. Francis I. destitute of allies, and soli-
citous to secure his late conquests in Italy by a

treaty,

treaty, liltened with joy to the first overtures of BooK I.
accommodation. Chievres himself conduced , 6.
the negociation in name of Charles. Gouffier
appeared as plenipotentiary for Francis. Each
of them had presided over the education of the
prince whom he represented. They had both
adopted the fame pacific fyitem; and were
equally persuaded that the union of the two mo-
narchs was the happiest event for themselves, as
well as for their kingdoms. In such hands the
negociation did not languish. A few days after Apeacecon.

1cided with

opening their conferences at Noyon, they con- France.
eluded a treaty of confederacy and mutual de- As,.'3'
fence between the two monarchs; the chief ar-
ticles in which were, that Francis should give in
marriage to Charles his eldest daughter, the prin.
cess Louise, an infant of a year old, and as her
dowry, should make over to him all his claims
and pretensions upon the kingdom of Naples;
that in consideration of Charles's being already
in possession of Naples, he Ihould, until the ac-
complifhment of the marriage, pay an hundred
thousand crowns a year to the French king;
and the half of that furn annually, as long as
the princess had no children ; that when Charles
ihall arrive in Spain, the heirs of the king of
Navarre may repreient to him their right to
that kingd6m; and if he do not give them fa-
tisfaaion, Francis should be at liberty to afift

E 4 them

Bool r. them with all his forces b. This alliance not

,s6. o only united Charles and Francis, but obliged

Maximilian, who was unable alone to cope with
the French and Venetians, to enter into a treaty
with those powers, which put a final period to
the bloody and tedious war that the league of
Cambray had occasioned. Europe enjoyed a
few years of universal tranquillity, and was in-
debted for that blefling to two princes, whose
rivalfhip and ambition kept it in perpetual dif.
cord and agitation during the remainder of their
reigns.

The Flem. BY the treaty of Noyon, Charles secured a
ings averse
toCharles' safe passage into Spain. It was not, however,
pcin, the interest of his Flemish ministers, that he

:hould visit that kingdom soon. While he re-
fided in Slanders, the revenues of the Spanilh
crown were spent there, and they engrossed,
without any competitors, all the effee&s of their
monarch's generosity; their country became the
feat of government, and all favours were dif-
pensed by them. Of all there advantages, they
run the rifque of feeing themselves deprived,
from the moment that their sovereign entered
Spain. The Spaniards would naturally assume
the direction of their own affairs; the Low
Countries would be confidered only as a praQ

b econard Rccueil dcs Traitcz, tom. li. 69.

vinca

vince of that mighty monarchy; and they who BooK r.
now distributed the favours of the prince to V-.6.
others, must then be content to receive them:
from the hands of trangers. But what Chievres Afraid of
chiefly wished to avoid was, an interview be- Xiene.
tween the king and Ximenes. On the one
hand, the wisdom, the integrity, and the mag-
nanimity of that prelate, gave him a wonderful
ascendant over the minds of men; and it was
extremely probable, that these great qualities,
added to the reverence due to his age and office,
would command the refpe& of a young prince,
who, capable of noble and generous sentiments
himself, would, in proportion to his admiration
of the Cardinal's virtues, lessen his deference
towards persons of another charater. Or, on
the other hand, if Charles should allow his
Flemish favourites to retain all the influence
over his councils which they at present pofleffed,
it was easy to foresee that the Cardinal would
remonstrate loudly against such an indignity to
the Spanish nation, and vindicate the rights of
his country with the fame intrepidity and fuc-
cess, that he had afterted the prerogatives of
the crown. For there reasons, all his Flemish
counsellors combined to retard his departure;
and Charles, unfufpicious, from want of expe-
rience, and fond of his native country, suffered
himself to be unncceflarily detained in the Ne-

therlands

Boou I. therlands a whole year after figrring the treaty
^5,6. of Noyon.

15,7. THE repeated entreaties of Ximenes, the ad-

CharIle em-
barks for vice of his grandfather Maximilian, and the
Spain, impatient murmurs of his Spanish subje&s, pre-

vailed on him at last to embark. He was
attended not only by Chievres, his prime mini-
fler, but by a numerous and splendid train of
the Flemish nobles, fond of beholding the gran-
deur, or of fliaring in the bounty of their prince.
Pept. 3. After a dangerous voyage, he landed at Villa

Viciofa, in the province of Asturias, and was
received with such loud acclamations of joy, as
a new monarch, whole arrival was so ardently
desired, had reason to expec. The Spaniil
nobility resorted to their sovereign from all
parts of the kingdom, and displayed a magni-
ficence which the Flemings were unable to
emulate .

iM Flemi/h XIMENES, who confidered the presence of the
nidnecr, king as the greatest blessing to his dominions,
to prevent was advancing towards the coaf, as fast as the
on inter-
iew with infirm fate of his health would permit, in order

to receive him. During his regency, and not-
with sanding his extreme old age, he had abated,
in no degree, the. rigour or frequency of his

' P. Mart. Ep. 599, 6o1,
2 mortifications;

mortificatidd ; and to there he added fich:la. BooK f.
borioul afiduity in business, as would hate ,'
worn out the most youthful and vigorous con-
ftit'tion. Every day he employed several hours
in devotion; he celebrated mass in person; he
even allotted some space for study. Notwith-
standing there occupations, he regularly attended
the council; he received and read all papers
presented to him; he dicated letters and in-
ftru&ion ;'. and took under his infpe&ioai all
business, civil, ecclefiatical, or military. Every
moment of his time was filled up with some
serious employment. The only amuferent in
which he indulged himself by way of relaxation
after business, was to canvass, with a few friats
and divines, some intricate article in scholastic
theology. Wafted by such a course of life, the
infirmities of age daily grew upon him. On
his journey, a violent disorder seized him at Bbs
Equillos, attended with uncommon symptoms;
which his followers confidered as the effie of
poison d\ but could not agree whether the crime
ought to be imputed to the hatred of the
Spanish nobles, or to the malice of the Flemnifi
courtiers. This accident obliging him to flop
lhort, he wrote to Charles, and with his usual ch,,ri'.,

ingratitude

boldness advised him to dismiss all the ftragers' ,o Ximnc
in his train, whose numbers and credit gave

d Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3.

offence

Boox I. offence already to the Spaniards, and would ere

,^, long alienate the affetions of the whole people.

At the fame time, he earnestly desired to have
an interview with the king, that he might inform
him of the Rate of the nation, and the temper
of his fubjets. To prevent this, not only the
Flemings, but the Spanish grandees, employed
all their address, and induftrioufy kept Charles
at a distance from Aranda, the place to which
the Cardinal had remhoved. Through their fug-
geftions, every measure that he recommended
was rejeced; the utmost care was taken to
make him feel, and to point out to the whole
nation, that his power was on the decline; even
in things purely trivial, such a choice was always
made, as was deemed most disagreeable to him.
Ximenes did not bear this treatment .with his
usual fortitude of spirit. Conscious of his own
integrity and merit, he expeted a more grateful
return from a prince, to whom he delivered a
kingdom more floprifhing than it had been inr
any former age, together with authority more
extensive and better eftabliflied, than the most
illustrious of his ancestors had ever pofeflred.
He could not, therefore, on many occasions,
refrain from giving vent to his indignation and
complaints. He lamented the fate of his coun-
try, and foretold the calamities which it would
susser from the infolencc, the rapaciousness, and

ignorance

ignorance of strangers. While his mind was Boot I,
agitated by these passions, he received a letter 157.
from the king, in which, after a few cold and
formal exprefllons of regard, he was allowed to
retire to his diocese; that after a life of such
continued labour, he might end his days in
tranquillity. This message proved fatal to H;with
Ximenes. His haughty mind, it is probable,
would not survive disgrace; perhaps his gene-
rous heart could not bear the profpe&t of the
misfortunes ready to fall on his country. Which-
soever of these opinions we embrace, certain it
is that he expired a few hours after reading the Not. ,
letter'. The variety, the grandeur, and the
success of his schemes, during a regency of only
twenty months, leave it doubtful, whether his
sagacity in council, his prudence in condut, or
his boldness in execution, deserve the greatest
praise. His reputation is fill high in Spain,
not only for wisdom, but for fanftity; and he
is the only prime minister mentioned in history,
whom his contemporaries reverenced as a faint ,
and to whom the people under his government
ascribed the power of working miracles.

SOON after the death of Ximenes, Charles 1,w,.
made his publick entry, with great pomp, into at allado-

Marfollier, Vie deXimenes, p. 447. Gometius, lib. vii.
p. zo6, &c. Baudier HiR. de Ximen. p. 208.

f lcchier, Vie de Ximen. ii. 746.

Valladolid,

DBoos I. Valladolid, whither he had summoned the Corfes
4Sz. of CaRile. Though he assumed on all occasions

the name of king, that title had never been
acknowledged in the Cortes. The Spaniards
confidering Joanna as pofleffed of the sole right
to the crown, and no example of a son's having
enjoyed the title of king during the life of his
parents occurring in their history, the Cortes
discovered all that scrupulous refpe& for ancient
forms, and that aversion to innovation, which
are conspicuous in popular assemblies. The
presence, however, of their prince, the address,
the artifices, and the threats of his ministers,

Declare prevailed on them at last to proclaim him king,
_ Charles
kaing. in conjuntion with his mother, whose name

they appointed to be placed before that of her
ibn in all publick a&s. But, when they made
this conceflion, they declared that, if at any
future period Joanna fliould recover the exer-
cife of reason, the whole royal authority /hould
return into her hands. At the fame time; they
voted a free gift of fix hundred thousand ducats
to be paid in three years, a rum more confider-
able than had ever been granted to any former
monarch .

DiCfcntaet NOTWITIHSTANDINO this obsequiousness of
of the Casti
Iians, nd the Cortes to the will of the king, the most
the caulis

c:it. g Miniana, Contin. lib. i. c. 3. P. Mart. Ep. 6c8.

Sandov. p. 1z.

violent

violent symptoms of dissatisfac'tion with his go- BOOK I.
vernment began to break out in the kingdom. '
Chievres had acquired over the mind of the
young monarch the ascendant not only of a
tutor, but of a parent. Charles seemed to have
no sentiments but those which his minister in-
spired, and scarcely uttered a word but what he
put into his mouth. He was constantly fur-
rounded by Flemings; no person got access to
him without their permifion; nor was any ad-
mitted to audience but in their presence. As
he spoke the Spanilh language very imperfetly,
his answers were always extremely short, and
often delivered with hesitation. From all thele
circumfftances, many of the Spaniards were led
to believe that he wa a prince of a flow and
narrow genius. Some pretended to discover a
firong resemblance between him and his mother,
and began to whisper that his capacity for go.
vernment would never be far superior to hers;
and though they who had the best opportunity
of judging concerning his characer, maintained,
that notwithstanding such unpromising appear-
ances, he pofleld a large fund of knowledge
as well, as of sagacity b; yet all agreed in con-
demning his partiality towards his countrymen,
and' his attachment to his favourites as unrea-
fonable and immoderate. Unfortunately for

h Sandoval, p. 31. P. Mart. Fp. 655.

Charles,

BOOK I. Charles, there favourites were unworthy of his
«5,s. confidence. To amass wealth seems to have

been their only aim; and as they had reason to
fear, that either their master's good sense, or
the indignation of the Spaniards, might soon
abridge their power, they hastened to improve
the present opportunity, and their avarice was
the more rapacious, because they expeAed their
authority to be of no long duration. All
honours, offices, and benefices, were either en-
grossed by the Flemings, or publickly fold by
them. Chievres, his wife, and Sauvage, whom
Charles, on the death of Ximenes, had impru-
dently raised to be chancellor of Castile, vied
with each other in all the refinements of extor-
tion and venality. Not only the Spanish hifto-
rians, who, from resentment, may be fufpeted
of exaggeration, but Peter Martyr Angleria, an
Italian, who resided at that time in the court
of Spain, and who was under no temptation to
deceive the persons to whom his letters are
addressed, give a description which is almost
incredible, of the insatiable and shameless covet-
oufnefs of the Flemings. According to An-
gleria's calculation, which he asserts to be ex-
tremely moderate, they remitted into the Low
Countries, in the space of ten months, no less
a fum than a million and one hundred thousand

ducats.

ducats. The nomination of William de Croy, BooK Is
Chievres' nephew, a young man not of cano- s8.
nical age, to the Archbifhoprick of Toledo,
exasperated the Spaniards more than all these
exactions. They confidered the elevation of a
stranger to the head of their church, and to the
richest benefice in the kingdom, not only as an
injury, but as an insult to the whole nation
both clergy and laity, thp former from interest,
the latter from indignation, joined in exclaiming
againit it'.

CHARLES leaving Castile thus disgusted with charlei

his administration, set out for Saragossa, the hortes et
capital of Aragon, that he might be present in Aragon.
the Cortes of that kingdom. On his way thither,
he took leave of his brother Ferdinand, whom
he' sent into Germany on the pretence of visiting
their grandfather, Maximilian, in his old age.
To this prudent precaution, Charles owed the
preservation of his Spanish dominions. During
the violent commotions which arose there soon
after this period, the Spaniards would infallibly
have offered the crown to a prince, who was
the darling of the whole nation; nor did Ser-
dinand want ambition, or counsellors, that might
have prompted him to accept of the offer ki

I Sandoval, 28-31. P. Mart. Ep. 608, 6i1 613, 614,
622, 623, 639. Miniana, Contin. lib. i. ,. 3. p. 8.

k P. Martyr, Ep. 6X9. Ferreras, viii. 460.
yoL. II. F Til

Book I. THE Aragonefe had not hitherto acknoit-
'1717. ledged Charles as king, nor would they allow
Therago.- the Cortes to be assembled in his name, but in
nefe more
untrafable that of the Juftiza, to whom, during an inter-
then the
caRihans. regnum, this privilege belonged '. The oppo.

fition Charles had to struggle with in the Cortes
of Aragon, was more violent and obstinate than
that which he had overcome in Castile; after
long delays, however, and with much difficulty,
he persuaded the members to confer on him the
title of king, in conjunction with his mother.
At the fame time he bound himself by that so-
!ernn oath, which the Aragonefe exated of their
king, never to violate any of their rights or
liberties. When a donative was demanded, the
members were Rill more intractable; many
months elapsed before they would agree to grant
Charles two hundred thousand ducats, and that
* Afuni they appropriated so ftrifly for paying

debts of the crown, which had long Been for-
gotten, that a very small part of it came into
the King's hatids. What had happened in Caf-
tile, taught them caution, and determined them
rather to satisfy the claims of their fellow. citi-
zens, how obsolete soever, than to furnish iran-
gers the means of enriching themselves with the
spoils of their country m'

i P. Martyr, Bp. 60o. m P. Martyr, Ep.
615-634.

DumlNr

DURINo there proceedings of the Cortes, am- BooK I.

baffadors arrived at Saragolfa from Francis I. sg
and the young king of Navarre, demanding the
restitution of that kingdom in terms of the treaty
of Noyon. But neither Charles, nor the Cafti.
lian nobles whom he consulted on this occasion,
discovered any inclination to part with this ac-
quifition. A conference held soon after at
Montpelier, in order to bring this matter to an
amicable issue, was altogether fruitless; while
the French urged the injustice of the usurpation,
the Spaniards were attentive only to its im-
portance ".

FROM Aragon, Charles proceeded to Cata- Isi9.

lonia, where he wafted as much time, encoun-
tered more difficulties, and gained less money.
The Flemings were now become so odious in
every province of Spain by their exations, that
the desire of mortifying them, and of difap-
pointing their avarice, augmented the jealousy
with which a free people usually conduct their
deliberations.

THE Castilians, who had felt most sensibly Combina-

the weight and rigour of the oppressive schemes caifala
carried on by the Flemings, resolved no longer Flnih, ,
to submit with a tameness fatal to themselves, nift."

P. Martyr, Ep. 605. 633. 64o.

F 2 and

TooK T. and which rendered them the obje6ts of fcom

i39. among the reft of the Spaniards. Segovia,

Toledo, Seville, and several other cities of the
first rank, entered into a confederacy for the de-
fence of their rights and privileges; and not-
withstanding the silence of the nobility, who, on
this occasion, discovered neither the publick fpi.
rit, nor the resolution which became their order,
the confederates laid before the king a full view
of the state of the kingdom, and of the mal-
admiiniftration of his favourites. The prefer-
ment of firangers; the exportation of the cur-
rent coin, the increase of taxes, were the griev-
ances of which they chiefly complained; and of
these they demanded redress with that boldness
which is natural to a free people. These remon-
ftrances, presented at first at Saragossa, and re-
newed afterwards at Barcelona, Charles treated
with great negle&. The confederacy, however,
es there cities at this junEture, was the begin.
ning of that famous union among the corn.
mons of Castile, which not long after threw
the kingdom into such violent convulsions as
{hook the throne, and almost overturned the
constitution °.

SOON after Charles's arrival at Barcelona, he
rceived the account of an event which inte-

o P. Martyr, Ep. 630, Fcrreras, viii. 464.

reslcd

relted him much more than the murmurs of the BOOK I.
Castilians, or the scruples of the Cortes of Cata- 7'""I9
lonia. This was the death of the Emperor Deathofthe
Maximilian; an occurrence of small importance Maximi-
in itself, for he was a prince conspicuous neither 1i.ay

'

. January is.

for his virtues, nor his power, nor his abilities;
but rendered by its consequences more memo-
rable than any that had happened during feve-
ral ages. It broke that profound and universal
peace which then reigned in the Christian world;
it excited a rivalfhip between two princes, which
threw all Europe into agitation, and kindled
wars more general, and of longer duration, than
had hitherto been known in modern times.

THE revolutions occasioned by the expedition

of the French king, Charles VIII. into Italy,
had inspired the European princes with new ideas
concerning the importance of the Imperial dig-
nity. The claims of the Empire upon some of
the Italian states were numerous; itsjurifdiction
over others was extensive ; and though the for-
mer had been almost abandoned, and the latter
seldom exercised, under princes of slender abi-
lities, and of little influence, it was obvious,
that, in the hands of an Emperor possessed of
power or genius, they would be employed as
engines for stretching his dominion over the

F 3 greater

BooK I. greater part of that country. Even Maximi.

1,, t iian, feeble and unsteady as his condu& always

was, had availed himself of the infinite prcten-
sions of the Empire, and had reaped advan-
tage from every war and every negociation in
Italy during his reign. These considerations,
added to the dignity of the station, confessedly
the first among Christian princes, and to the
rights inherent in the office, which, if exerted
with vigour, were far from being inconsiderable,
rendered the Imperial crown more than ever an
object of ambition.

Maximlian NOT long before his death, Maximilian had
voredto7e. discovered great solicitude to preserve this dig-
cure the Im .
perial crw nity in the Austrian family, and to procure the
tohigrnd. king of Spain to be chosen his successor, But

he himself having never been crowned by the
Pope, a ceremony deemed essential in that age,
was confidered only as Emperor elegt. Though
hiflorians did not attend to that diftinflion, nei-
ther the Italian nor German chancery bestowed
any other title upon him than that of King of
the Romans s and no example occurring in his-
tory of any person's being chosen a successor to
a king of the Romans, the Germans, always
tenacious of their forms, and unwilling to con-
ser upon Charles an office for which their con,

RitutiQto

ti.tutionI knew no name, obstinately refused to BOOK I.
gratify Malimilian in that point P. 19.

Br his death, this difficulty was at once re- charrk ana

moved, and Charles openly asired to that dig- competitor
nity which his grandfather had attempted, withl- i them
out success, to fcure for him. At the fame
time, Francis I. a powerful rival, entered the
liss against him; and the attention of all Europe
was fixed upon this competition, no less illuflri-
ous from the high rank of the candidates, than
from the importance of the prize for which they
contended. Each of them urged his preten-
sions with sanguine expectations, and with no
unpromising profpe& of success. Charles con- Pretenfinns
fidered the'Imperial crown as belonging to him of Charle.
of right, from its'long continruance int the Au-
ftrian line; he knew that none of the German
princes possessed power or influence enough to
appear as his antagonist; he flattered himself,
that no consideration would induce the natives
of Germany to exalt any foreign prince to a
dignity, which during so many ages had been
deemed peculiar to their own nation; and least
of all, that they would confer this honour upon
Francis 1. the sovereign of a people whose genius,

P Guicciardini, lib. 13.p. 15. Hill. Gener. d'Allemagne,

par P. Barre, tom. viii. part i. p. o1087 P. Heuter. Rer.
Aultr. lib. vii. c. 17. 179. lib. viii. c. 2.p. 183.

F 4 and

Boor I. and laws, and manners, differed so widely from

i'p., those of the Germans, that it was hardly poflible

to eftablilh any cordial union between them; he
truRed not a little to the effe&t of Maximilian's
negociations, which, though they did not attain
their end, had prepared the minds of the Ger-
mans for his elevation to the Imperial throne;
but what he relied on as a chief recommenda-
tion, was the fortunate situation of his heredi-
tary dominions in Germany, which served as a
natural barrier to the Empire against the en-
croachments of the Turkish power. The con-
quests, the abilities, and the ambition of Sultan
Selim I . had spread over Europe, at that time,
a general and well tounded alarm. By his vic-
tories over the Mamalukes, and the extirpation
of that gallant body of men, he had not only
added Egypt and Syria to his empire, but had
secured to it such a degree of internal tranquil-
lity, that he was ready to turn against Christen-
dom the whole force of his arms, which nothing
hitherto had been able to refiit. The most es.
fectual expedient for flopping the progress of
this torrent, seemed to be the election of an Em-
peror, possessed of extensive territories in that
country, where its first impreflion would be felt,
and who, besides, could combat this formidable
enemy with all the forces of a powerful monar-
chy and with all the wealth furniihed by the

mines

mines of the new world, or the commerce of BooK I.
the Low Countries. These were the arguments ,5,~.
by which Charles publickly 'bppofted his claim;
and to msen of integrity arid refletion, they ap-
peared to be not only plautible, but convincing.
He did not, however, trust the success of his
cause to these alone. Great fums of money were
remitted from Spain; all the refinements and
artifice of negociation were employed; and a
considerable body of troops kept on foot by the
hfates of the Circle of Suabia, was secretly taken
into his pay. The venal were gained by pre-
sents; the objecions of the more scrupulous
were answered or eluded; some feeble princes
were threatened and over-awed 9.

ON the other hand, Francis supported his Of Francs.

claim with equal eagerness, and no less confi-
dence of its being well founded. His emifaries
contended that it was now high time to convince
the Princes of the house of Austria that the Impe-
rial crown was elecive, and not hereditary; that
other persons might aspire to an honour which
their arrogance had come to regard as the pro.
perty of their family; that it required a fove-
reign of mature judgment, and of approved abili-
ties, to hold the reins of government in a coun-

q Guic. lib. 13. 1 59 Sleidan, Hilt. of the Reformat. 14.
Struvii Corp. Hilt. German. ii. 971. Not. zo.

$ try

Book I. try where such unknown opinions concerning

5,9, religion had been published, as had thrown the

minds of men into an uncommon agitation,
which threatened the most violent effecs; that a
young prince, without experience, and who had
hitherto given no specimens of his genius for
command, was no equal match for Selim, a mo-
narch grown old in the art of war, and in the
course of vicory; whereas a king, who in his
early youth had triumphed over the valour
and discipline of the Swiss, till then reckoned
invincible, would be an antagonist not unworthy
the Conqueror of the East; that the fire and
impetuosity of the French cavalry, added to the
discipline and stability of the German infantry,
would form an army so irresistible, that, instead
of waiting the approach of the Ottoman forces,
it might carry hostilities into the heart of their
dominions; that the eleaion of Charles would
be inconsistent with a fundarpental lcpUitltion,
by which the perfqn who holds the crown of
Naples, is excluded from aspiring to the Impe.
rial dignity; that his elevation to that honour
would soon kindle a war in Italy, on account of
his pretensions to the dutchy of Milan, the effeas
of which could not fail of reaching the Empire,
and might prove fatal to it'. But while his

' Guicc. lib. 13. 160. Sleid. p. 6. Geor. Sabini de eleal.
Car. V. Hiftoria apud Scardii Script. Rer. German. vol. ii. p. 4,

ambafladorg

ambassadors enlarged upon there and other to- oor r.
picks of the fame kind, in all the courts of 5s,.
Germany, Francis, sensible of the prejudices en-
tertained against him as a foreigner, unacquaint-
ed with the German language or manners, en-
leavoured to overcome these, and to gain the
favour of the princes by immense gifts, and by
infinite promises. As the expeditious method
of transmitting money, and the decent mode of
conveying a bribe by bills of exchange was then
little known, the French ambassadors travelled
with a train of horses loaded with treasure, an
equipage not very honourable for that prince
by whqm they were employed, and infamous for
those to whom they were sent .

THE other European princes could not re- views an

main indifferent fpe&ators of a contest, the deci- othc ^ate
sion of which so nearly affected them:. Their
common interest ought naturally to have formed
a general combination, in order to disappoint
both competitors, and to prevent either of them
from obtaining such a pre eminence in power
and dignity, as might prove dangerous to the
liberties of Europe. But the ideas with refpet
to a proper distribution and balance of power
were to lately introduced into the system of Eu-
ropean policy, that they were not hitherto ob-

' Memoircs de Marech. dc Fleuranges, p. 296.

jeas

Boor I. je&s of sufficient attention. The passions of
sin. some princes, the want of foreflghe in others,

and the fear of giving offence to the candidates,
hindered such a salutary union of the powers of
Europe, and rendered them either totally negli.
gent of the publick safety, or kept them from
exerting themselves with vigour in its behalf.
Ofthe THe Swiss Cantons, though they dreaded the

elevation of either of the contending monarchs,
and though they wilhed to have seen some prince
whose dominions were less extensive, and whose
power was more moderate, feated on the Im-
perial throne, were prompted, however, by their
hatred of the French nation, to give an open pre-
ference to the pretensions of Charles, while they
used their utmost influence to frustrate those of
Francis '.

of theVe. THE Venetians easily discerned, that it was
Pt"iase the interest of their Republick to have both the

rivals set afde; but their jealousy of the house
of Austria, whose ambition and neighbourhood
had been fatal to their grandeur, would not per-
mit them to as up to their own ideas, and led
them hastily to give the fan&tion of their appro-
bation to the claim of the French king.

t Sabinus, p. 6.

IT

IT was equally the interest, and more in -the BooK I.

power of Henry VIII. of England, to prevent z,$1
either Francis or Charles from acquiring a dig- ofen"r
nity which would raise them so far above other
monarchs. But though Henry often boasted,
that he held the balance of Europe in his hand,
he had neither the fleady attention, the accurate
discernment, nor the difpafionate temper which
that delicate fun&ion required. On this occa-
sion it mortified his vanity so much, to fee him-
self excluded from that noble competition which
refleced such honour upon the two antagonists,
that he took the resolution of fending an am-
baffador into Germany, and of declaring himself
a candidate for the Imperial throne. The am-
baffador, though loaded with carefles by the
German princes and the Pope's nuncio, informed
his master, that he could hope for no success in
a claim which he had been so late in preferring.
Henry, imputing his disappointment to that
ciroumftance alone, and toothed with this often-
tatious display of his own importance, seems to
have taken no farher part in the matter, either
by contributing to thwart both his rivals, or to
promote one of them u

LEo X. a pontiff no less renowned for his of Leo X.
political abilities, than for his love of the arts,

U Memoires de Fleuranges, 314. Herbert, HiRf. of
Henry VIII.

was

Boot I. was the only prince of the age who observed the
159. motions of the two contending monarchs with

a prudent attentions or who discovered a proper
solicitude for the public safety. The Imperial
and Papal jurifdition interfered in so many
instances, the complaints of usurpation were so
numerous on both fides, and the territories of
the church owed their security so little to their
own force, and so much to the weakness of the
powers around them, that nothing was so for-
midable to the court of Rome as an Emperor
with extensive dominions, or of enterprizing
genius. Leo trembled at the profpet of be.
holding the Imperial crown placed on the head
of the king of Spain and of Naples, and the
mailer of the new world; nor was he less afraid
of feeing a king of France, who was duke of
Milan and lord of Genoa, exalted to that dig-
nity. He foretold that the election of either of
them would be fatal to the independence of the
holy fee, to the peace of Italy, and perhaps to
the liberties of Europe. But to oppoke them
with any profpe& of success, required address
and caution in proportion to the greatness of
their power, and their opportunities of taking
revenge. Leo was defecive in neither. He
secretly exhorted the German princes to place
one of their own number on the Imperial throne,
which many of them were capable of filling

3 with

with honour. He put them in mind of the BooK I.
constitution by which the Kings of Naples were LDo
for ever excluded from that dignity x. He
warrrily exhorted the French King to persist in
his claim, not from any desire that he ihould
gain his end, but as he foresaw that the Ger-
mans would be more disposed to favour the
king of Spain, he hoped that Francis himself,
when he discovered his own chance of success to
be desperate, would be simulated by resent-
ment and the spirit of rivalfhip, to concur with
all his interest in raising some third person to
the head of the Empire;. or on the other hand,
if Francis should make unexpected progress, he
did not doubt but that Charles would be in-
duced by similar motives to a& the fame part;
and thus by a prudent attention, the mutual
jealousy of the twor ivals might be so dexterously
managed, as to disappoint both. But this
fcherne, the only one which a prince in Leo's
situation could adopt, though concerted with
great wisdom, was executed with little difcre.
tion. The French ambassadors in Germany fed
their master with vain hopes; the pope's nuncio,
being gained by them, altogether forgot the
inftru&ions which he had received; and Francis
persevered so long and with such obstinacy in

t Goldalti Confiitutiones Imperiales. Francof. 1673.
vol. i. +39Y

urging

PQQo I. urging his own pretensiOns, as rendered all Leo's
-"9 meleAfures abortive .

1519.

The diet SUCH were the hopes of the candidates, and
aflembles. ' '
june 7th. thl views ,of the different princes, when the

diet was opened according to form at Frankfort.
The right of chufing an Emperor had long
been vested in seven great princes, distinguished
by the pnae of Electors, the origin of whose
office, as well as the nature and extent of their
powers, have already been explained. These
were, at that time, Albert of Brandenburgh,
archbiflop of Mentz; Herman count de Wied,
archbiffop of Cologne; Richard de Greiffen-
klau, archbihop of Treves; Lewis, king of
Bohemia; Lewis, count Palatin of the Rhine;
Frederick, duke of Saxony; and Joachim I.
viewsofthe marquis of Brandenburgh. Notwithstanding

the artful arguments produced by the ambaffa-
dors of the two kings in favour of their refpec-
live masters, and in Ipite of all their solicitations,
intrigues, and presents, the Ele&ors did not
forget that maxim on which the liberty of the
German constitution was thought to be founded.
Among the members of the Germanick body,
which is a great republick composed of itates
almost independent, the first principle of patri-
otifin is to depress and limit the power of the

Y Guicciar. lib. 13. i6i.

Emperor;

Emperor; and of this idea, so natural under BooK I.
such a form of government, a German politician 519.
seldom loses fight. No prince of considerable
power, or extensive dominions, had for some
ages been raised to the Imperial throne. To
this prudent precaution many of the great fami-
lies in Germany owed the splendour and inde-
pendence which they had acquired during that
period. To elect either of the contending mo-
narchs, would have been a gross violation of
that salutary maxim; would have given to the
Empire a master, instead of an head; and would
have reduced themselves from the rank of equals,
to the condition of subje&s.

FULL of these ideas, all the electors turned offer te

their eyes towards Frederick, duke of Saxony, mPwn'
a prince of such eminent virtue, and abilities, Frederick
as to be distinguished by the name of the Sage,
and with one voice they offered him the Im-
perial crown. He was not dazzled with that
object, which monarchs so far superior to him
in power courted with such eagerness; and after
deliberating upon the matter a ihort time, he
rejected it with a magnanimity and disinterested- who rejecl
ness, no less singular than admirable. Nothing, it'
he observed, could be more impolitick, than an
obstinate adherence to a maxim which, though
found andjuft in many cafes, was not applicable

VOL. II. G to

Boot I. to all. In times of tranquillity, said he, we
','9 wish for an Emperor who has not power to

invade our liberties; times of danger demand
one who is able to secure our safety. The
Turkilh armies, led by a gallant and victorious
monarch, are now assembling. They are ready
to pour in upon Germany with a violence un-
known in former ages. New conjuncures call
for new expedients. The Imperial sceptre must
be committed to some hand more powerful than
mine, or that of any other German prince. We
possess neither dominions, nor revenues, nor
authority which enable us to encounter such a
formidable enemy. Recourse must be had in
this exigency to one of the rival monarchs. Each
of them can bring into the field forces sufficient
for our defence. But as the king of Spain is
of German extration; as he is a member and
prince of the empire by the territories which
descend to him from his grandfather ; as his
dominions stretch along that frontier which lies
most exposed to the enemy ; his claim is pre-
ferable, in my opinion, to that of a stranger to
our language, to our blood, and to our country;
and therefore I give my vote to confer on him
the Imperial crown.

THIS opinion, dictated by such uncommon
generosity, and supported by arguments so plah-

sibk-,

fible, made a deep impression on the EleEtors. BooK I.
The king of Spain's ambassadors, sensible of 1519.
the important service which Frederick had done : nd effn
their master, sent him a considerable fum of from

Charles's

money, as the first token of that prince's grati- ambrff-
tude. But he who had greatness of mind to
refuse a crown, disdained to receive a bribe
and upon their entreating that, at least, he would
permit them to distribute part of that fum
among his courtiers, he replied, That he could
not prevent them from accepting what should
be offered, but whoever took a tingle florin
mhould be difmiffled next morning from his
service 2.

" P. Daniel, an hitlorian of considerable name, seems to

tall in question the truth of this account of Frederick's be-
haviour in refusing the imperial crown, because it is not men-
tioned by Georgius Sabinus in his Hifory of the eletioh
and coronation of Charles V. tom. iii. p. 63. But no great
flrefs ought to be laid on an omiflion in a superficial author,
whose treatise, though dignified with the name of hiltory,
contains only such an account of the ceremonial of Charles's
eletion, as is usually publilhed in Germany on like occa-
sions. Scard. Rer. Germ. Script. v. a. p. I. The testimony
of Erafinus, lib. 13. epilt. 4. and that ofSleidan, p. 18. are
express. Seckendorf in his Commentarius Hiftoricus & A-
pologeticus de Lutheranifmo, p. z12. has examined this fact
with his usual induflry, and has established its truth by the
nolt undoubted evidence. To these teflimonies which he
has colleced, I may add the decisive one of cardinal Caje.
tan, the pope's legate at Frankfort, in his letter July 5th,
1519. Epiltres au Princes, &c. recuelliec par Rufcelli tra-
duids par Bclforrel . Par. 1572. p. 60.

G 2 No

B OK I. No prince in Germany could now aspire to a

t10. dignity, which Frederick had declined for rea-

r.urherd-. sons applicable to them all. It remained to
jli~eratons
or «h clec- make a choice between the two great compe-

titors. But besides the prejudice in Charles's
favour arising from his birth, as well as the
situation of his German dominions, he owed
not a little to the abilities of the cardinal de
Gurk, and the zeal of Erard de la Mark, bithop
of Liege, two of his ambassadors, who had con-
duEted their negociations with more prudence
and address than those entrusted by the French
king. The former, who had long been the
minister and favourite of Maximilian, was well
acquainted with the art of managing the Ger-
mans; and the latter having been disappointed
of a cardinal's hat by Francis, employed all the
malicious ingenuity with which the desire of
revenge inspires an ambitious mind, in thwarting
the measures of that monarch. The Spanish
party among the Electors daily gained ground;
and even the Pope's nuncio, being convinced that
:it was vain to make any fartheroppofition, endea-
youred to acquire some merit with the future
Emperor, by offering voluntarily, in the name
of his mailer, a difpenlation to hold the Imperial
crown in conjuntion with that of Naples '.

* · Freheri Rer. German. Scriptores, vol. iii. 172. cur.
Struvii Argent. 17L7. Giaaon HiL. of Naples, a, 498.

ON

ON the twenty-eighth of June, five months BOOK I.

and ten days after the death of Maximilian, this 59
important contest, which had held all Europe
in fufpence, was decided. Six of the Elekors Theychure
had already declared for the king of Spain; and ,'"""'
the archbishop of Treves, the only firm adhe-
rent to the French interest, having at last joined
his brethren, Charles was by the unanimous
voice of the Elecoral college raised to the Im-
perial throne b.

But though the electors consented, from

various motives, to promote Charles to that
high station, they discovered at the fame time
great jealousy of his extraordinary power, and
endeavoured, with the utmost solicitude, to pro- Theyre
vide against his encroaching on the privileges PPve of"h
of the Germanick body. It had long been the power, and

take pre-

custom to demand of every new Emperor a caui.ns
confirmation of these privileges, and to require agail it.
a promise that he would never violate them in
any instance. While princes, who were formi-
dable neither from extent of territory, nor of
genius, possescd the Imperial throne, a general
and verbal engagement to this purpose was
deemed fufficicnt security. But under an Em-
peror so powerful as Charles, other precautions

b Jac. Aug. Thuan. Hill. fui temporis. Edit. Bulkley,

lib. G
c. f9.

G 3 seemed

BOOK I. seemed necessary. A Capitulation or claim of

i9. hrights was formed, in which the privileges and

immunities of the Eletors, of the princes of the
empire, of the cities, and of every other member
of the Germanick body are enumerated. This
capitulation was immediately signed by Charles's
ambassadors in the name of their master, and
he himself at his coronation confirmed it in the
most solemn manner. Since that period, the
Electors have continued to prefcr,be the fame
conditions to all his successors, and the Capi-
tulation or mutual contract between the Em-
peror and his fubjets, is confidered in Germany,
as a strong barrier against the progress of the
Imperial power, and as the great charter of their
liberties to which they often appeal c,

The elec. THE important intelligence of his election
to C'lichf, was conveyed in nine days from Frankfort to

Barcelona, where Charles was still detained by
the obRtinacy of the Catalonian Cortes, which
had not hitherto brought to an issue any of the
affairs which came before it. He received the
account with the joy natural to a young and
afpiringmind, on an accellion of power and
dignity which raised him so far above the other

c Pfeffcl Abrege de l'Hilf. de Droit Publique d'Alle-

magne, sgo. Limnei Capitulat. Imper. EpiRfres de Princes
par Rufcelli, p. 60o

princes

princes of Europe. Then it was that those vast BOOK I.
profpe&ts which allured him during his whole 1.I
administration began to open, and from this
aera we may date the formation, and are able
to trace the gradual progress of a grand system
of enterprizing ambition, which renders the
history of his reign so worthy of attention.

A TRIVIAL circumstance first discovered the Its effre

effets of this great elevation upon the mind upon him.
of Charles. In all the publick writs which he
iflied as king of Spain, he assumed the title of
Majefly, and required it from his fubjets as a
mark of their refpec. Before that time, all the
monarchs of Europe were satisfied with the ap-
pellation of Highness, or Grace; but the vanity
of other courts soon led them to imitate the ex-
ample of the Spanish, The epithet of Majesty
is no longer a mark of pre eminence. The most
inconsiderable monarchs in Europe enjoy it, and
the arrogance of the greater potentates has in-
vented no higher denomination d.

THE Spaniards were far from viewing the The Spa.
promotion of their king to the Imperial throne iade.di(r-

fatisfird

with the fame fatisfadion which he himlelf felt. with tbais
To be deprived of the presence of their fove- 'n

d Miniana: Contin. Mar. p. 13. Ferreras, viii. 47;.
Memoirea Hi,. de la Houffaie, tom. i. p. 53, &c.

G 4 reign,

BooK I. reign, and to be fubje6ed to the government

of a viceroy and his council, a species of admi-
niftration often oppressive, and always disagree-
able, were the immediate and necessary con fe-
quences of this new dignity. To fee the blood
of their countrymen shed in quarrels wherein
the nation had no concern; to behold its trea-
fures wafted in supporting the splendour of a
foreign title; to be plunged in the chaos of
Italian and German politics, were effecs of this
event almost as unavoidable. From all these
considerations, they concluded, that nothing
could have happened more pernicious to the
Spanish nation; and the fortitude and publick
spirit of their ancestors, who, in the Cortes of
Castile, prohibited Alphonzo the Wife from
leaving the kingdom, in order to receive the
Imperial crown, were often mentioned with the
highest praise, and pronounced to be extremely
worthy of imitation at this juncture .

BUT Charles, without regarding the senti-

ments or murmurs of his Spanish fubjeAs,
accepted of the Imperial dignity which the
count Palatine, at the head of a solemn embassy,
Novibt,. offered him in the name of the Eletors; and

declared his intention of setting out soon for
Germany, in order to take possession of it.
* Sandoval, i. p. 32. Miniana, Contin. . 14.

This

This was the more necessary, because, according BOOK I.
to the forms of the German .constitution, he --,
could not, before the ceremony of a publick
coronation, exercise any at of jurifdition or
authority '.

THEIR certain knowledge of this resolution Their dit-

content in.

augmented so much the disgust of the Spaniards, crcras.
that a fullen and refractory spirit prevailed
among persons of all ranks. The Pope having
granted the king the tenths of all ecclesiastical
benefices in Castile to aflift him in carrying on
war with greater vigour against the Turks, a
convocation of the clergy unanimously refused
to levy that fum, upon pretence that it ought
never to be exaced but at those times when
Christendom was atually invaded by the Infi-
dels and though Leo, in order to support his
authority, laid the kingdom under an interdict,
so little regard was paid to a censure which was
universally deemed unjust, that Charles himself
applied to have it taken off. Thus the Spanilh
clergy, besides their merit in opposing the ufur-
pations of the Pope, and disregarding the influ-
ence of the crown, gained the exemption which
they had claimed '

f Sabinus. P. Barre, viii. lo8S. g P. Martyr, Ep.
462. Fcrrcras, viii. 473.

THi

Boos I. THE commotions which arose in the kingdom
11, of Valencia, annexed to the crown of Aragon,
An iour- were more formidable, and produced more dan-
irct ion in
vaJnci*. gerous and lasting effects. A seditious monk

having by his sermons excited the citizens of
Valencia, the capital city, to take arms, and to
punish certain criminals in a tumultuary man-
ner, the people, pleated with this exercise of
power, and with such a discovery of their own
importance, not only refused to lay down their
arms, but formed themselves into troops and
companies that they might be regularly trained
to martial exercises. To obtain rome security
against the oppression of the grandees was the
motive of this association, and proved a powerful
bond of union; for as the ariftocratical privi-
leges and independence were more complete in
Valencia than in any other of the Spanilh king-
doms, the nobles, being scarcely accountable for
their conduc to any superior, treated the people
not only as vassals but as slaves. They were
alarmed, however, at the progress of this unex-
peaed infurre&ion, as it might encourage the
people to attempt ihaking off the yoke alto.
gether; but as they could not repress themn
without taking arms, it became necessary to

ro. Ihave recourse to the Emperor, and to'defire his
Itrrobrcrg, permission to attack them. At the fame time

the

the people made choice of deputies to represent Boor
their grievances, and to implore the protetion ~,o.
of their sovereign. Happily for the latter, they
arrived at court when Charles was exasperated
to an high degree against the nobility. As he
was eager to visit Germany, where his presence
became every day more necessary, and as his
Flenifh courtiers were flill more impatient to
return into their native country, that they might
carry thither the spoils which they had amassed
in Castile, it was impossible for him to hold the
Cortes of Valencia in person. He had for that
reason empowered the cardinal Adrian to repre-
sent him in that assembly, and in his name to
receive their oath of allegiance, to confirm their
privileges with the usual folemnities, and to
demand of them a free gift. But the Valencian
nobles, who confidered this measure as an in-
dignity to their country, which was no less enti.
tled, than his other kingdoms, to the honour
of their sovereign's presence, declared that by
the fundamental laws of the conflitution they
could neither acknowledge as king a person who
was absent, nor grant him any subsidy, and
to this declaration they adhered with an haughty
and inflexible obflinacy. Charles, piqued by
their behaviour, decided in favour of the people,
and rashly authorized them to continue in arms.
Their deputies returned in triumph, and were

received

BooK I. received by their fellow-citizens as the deliverers

7 of their country. The insolence of the mul-

titude increasing with their success, they ex-
pelled all the nobles out of the city, committed
the government to magistrates of their own
ele&ion, and entered into an aflbciation diftin-
guifhed by the name of Germanada or Brotber-
hood, which proved the source not only of the
wildest disorders, but of the most fatal calamities
in that kingdom h.

TheCottea MEANWHILE, the kingdom of Castile was
fmmoed agitated with no less violence. No sooner was
tli¢'ia the Emperor's intention to leave Spain made

known, than several cities of the first rank re-
solved to remonstrate against it, and to crave
redress once more of those grievarces which they
had formerly laid before him. Charles artfully
avoided admitting their deputies to audience;
and as he saw from this circumstance, how diffi-
cult it would be at this junture to restrain the
mutinous spirit of the greater cities, he fum.
moned the Cortes of Castile to meet at Corn.
poftella, a town in Galicia. His only reason for
calling that assembly, was the hope of obtaining
another donative; for as his treasury had been
exhausted in the fame proportion that the riches
of his ministers increased, he could not, without

P. Martyr. Ep. 651. Ferreras, viii. 476, 485. so

somc

fme additional aid, appear in Germany with BOOK I.
splendour suited to the Imperial dignity. To SZo
appoint a meeting of the Cortes in so remote a
province, and to demand a new subsidy before
the time for paying the former was expired,
were innovations of a most dangerous tendency;
and among people not only jealous of their liber-
ties, but accustomed to supply the wants of
their sovereigns with a very frugal hand, excited
an universal alarm. The magistrates of Toledo
remonitrated against both these measures in a
very high tone; the inhabitants of Valladolid,
who expe&ed that the Cortes should have been
held in that city, were so enraged that they took
arms in a tumultuary manner; and if Charles
with his foreign counsellors had not fortunately
made their escape during a violent tempest, they
would have massacred all the Flemings, and have
prevented him from continuing his journey to-
wards Compoftella.

EVERY city through which they passed, peti- The pro.

tioned against holding a Cortes in Galicia, a cheedi'nof
point with regard to which Charles was inflex- bJy.
ible. But though the utmoit influence had been
exerted by the ministers, in order to procure a
choice of representatives favourable to their de-
signs, such was the temper of the nation, that,
at the opening of the assembly, there appeared Aprl .

3~~a ~among

Boot I. among many of the members unusual fymptonr
ScZO °of ill-humour, which threatened a fierce oppoA

fition to all the measures of the court. No
representatives were sent by Toledo, for the lot,
according to which, by ancient custom, the
elecion was determined in that city, having
fallen upon two persons, devoted to the Flemifil
mirtifters, their fellow-citizens refused to grant.
them a commission in the usual form, and in
their flead made choice of two deputies, whom
they empowered to repair to Compoftella, and
to protest against the lawfulness of the Cortes

eh,,;r- assembled there. The representatives of Sala-

scion of manca refused to take the usual oath of fidelity,
theCafti-
ran.in- unless Charles consented to change the place

of meeting. Those of Toro, Madrid, Cor-
dova, and several other places, declared the de-
mand of another donative to be unprecedented,
unconstitutional, and unneceflary. All the arts,
however, which influence popular assemblies,
bribes, promises, threats, and even force, were
employed in order to gain members. The no.
bles, soothed by the refpe&fful afliduity with
which Chievres and the other Flemings payed
court to them, or instigated by a mean jealousy
of that spirit of independence which they saw
rising among the commons, openly favoured
the pretensions of the court, or at the utmost
did not oppose them X and at last, in contempt

not

not only of the sentiments of the nation, but BOOK I.
of the ancient forms of the conflitution, a ma-
jority voted to grant the donative for which the
Emperor had applied'. Together with this
grant, the CdQs laid before Charles a reprefen-
tation of those grievances whereof his people
craved redress; but he, having obtained from
them all that he could expe&t, paid no attention
to this ill-timed petition, which it was no longer
dangerous to disregard t.

As nothing now retarded his embarkation, he Charesip.

points re-

disclosed his intention with regard to the regency ',,,, dring
of Castile during his absence, which he had hi"sabfac,
hitherto kept secret, and nominated cardinal
Adrian to that office. The viceroyalty of Ara-
gon he conferred on Don John de Lanuza;
that of Valencia on Don Diego de Mendoza
Conde de Melito. The choice of the two latter
was universally acceptable; but the advance-
ment of Adrian, though the only Fleming who
had preserved any reputation among the Spa-
niards, animated the Castilians with new hatred
against foreigners; and even the nobles, who
had so tamely suffered other inroads upon the
conffitution, felt the indignity offered to their
own order by his promotion, and remonfirated

P. Martyr. Ep. 663. Sandoval, p. 32, &c.
a Sandoval, 8,.

53 againIt

BOOK I. against it as illegal. But Charles's desire of
'l 20 visiting Germany, as well as the impatience of

his miniflers to leave Spain, were now so much
increased, that without regarding the murmurs
of the Castilians, or even taking time to provide
any remedy against an infurrtlion in Toledo,
which at that time threatened, and afterwards
andembarks produced most formidable effe6ts, he failed from

th Low Corogna on the twenty-fecond of May; and by

setting out so abruptly in quest of a new crown,
he endangered a more important one of which
he was already in possession '.

P. Martyr. Ep. 670. Sandov. 86.

THE

# BOOK II.

ISTOR
H E

OF THE
R E IG N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES Vi

BOOK II.
M ANY concurring circumstances not only BooK In.

called Charles's thoughts towards the as- 'v-'

fairs of Germany, but rendered his presence in Chares,
that country necessary. The Electors grew im- pfeny" i
patient of so long an interregnum; his heredi- eceffary.
tary dominions were disturbed by intestine com-
motions; and the new opinions concerning re-
ligion, made such rapid progress as required the
most serious consideration. But above all, the
motions of the French king drew his attention,
and convinced him that it was neceflary to take
measures for his own defence, with no less speed
than vigour.

VOL. II, A tWHF.e

BOOK II. WHEN Charles and Francis entered the lifts
,;0. as candidates for the Imperial dignity, they con-
Rifrend d cted their rivallhip with many professions of
theri.alhip regard for each other, and with repeated decla-
Charles and rations that they would not susser any tin&ure

c 1 of enmity to mingle itself with this honourable

emulation. " We both court the fame mistress," ;
said Francis, with his usual vivacity, " each
ought to urge his suit with all the address of
which he is master; the most fortunate will pre-
vail, and the other must reft contented'." But
though two young and high-fpirited Princes,
and each of them animated with the hope
of success, might be capable of forming such
a generous resolution, it was soon found that
they promised upon a moderation too refined
and disinterested for human nature. The pre.
ference given to Charles in the fight of all .u-
rope, mortified Francis to the highest degree,
and inspired him with all the paflpong natural to
disappointed ambition. To this was owing the
personal jealousy and rivalfhip which fbfuited,
between the two monarchs during their whole
reign; and the rancour of these, augmented by
a real opposition of interest, which gave rife to
many unavoidable causes of cgifcord, involved
them in almost perpetual hostilities. Charles
had paid no regard to. the principal. article in

* Guic. lib. 13, p. 159.

thl

the treaty of Noyon, by refusing oftner than Boo Ilt.
once to do justice to John d'Albret, the exclud- "ZOo
ed monarch of Navarre, whom Francis was
bound in honour, and prompted by iitereft, to
restore to his throne. The French king had pre-
tensions to the crown of Naples, of which Ser-
dinand had deprived his predeceflor by a molt
unjustifiable breach of faith. The Emperor
might reclaim the dutchy of Milan as a fief of
the empire, which Francis nad seized, and itill
kept in poffefllion, without having received in-
veftiture. Charles confidered the dutchy of Bur-
gundy as the patrimonial domain of his ancestors,
wrested from them by the unjust policy of Louis
XI. and observed with the greatet jealousy the
ftrit connecions which Francis had formed with
the duke of Gueldres, the hereditary enemy of
his fahily.

WHEN the sources of difeold were to many Their dtit.

berations

and various, peace could be of no long con- previou to
tinuance, even between princes the most ex- mhnement
empt from ambition or emulation. But a's the tofshoUL.
shock between two such mighty antagonists
could not fail of being extremely violent, they
both discovered no small solicitude aboutg its
consequences, and rook time' riot only to c6l-
le& and to ponder their own strength, and to
compare it with that of their advcrfary, but to

H a secure

BooK0 if. secure the friendship or assistance of the other

itzc. European powers.

They ntgo- THE Pope had equal reason to dread the two
iate with
the ope. rivals, and saw that he who prevailed, would

become absolute master in Italy. If it had been
in his power to engage them in hostilities, with-
out rendering Lombardy the theatre of war, no-
thing would have been more agreeable to him
than to fee them waste each other's strength in
endless quarrels. But this was impoflible. Leo
foresaw, that, on the first rupture between the
two monarchs, the armies of France and Spain
would take the field in the Milanese; and while
the scene of their operations was so near, and
the subje&t for which they contended so interest-
ing to him, he could not long remain neuter.
He was obliged, therefore, to adapt his plan of
condu& to his political situation. He courted
and toothed the Emperor and king of France
with equal induifry and address. Though
warmly solicited by each of them to espouse his
cause, he assumed all the appearances of entire
impartiality, and attempted to conceal his real
sentiments under that profound dissimulation
which seems to have been asseted by most of
the Italian politicians in that age.

With the The views and interest of the Venetians were
VeJl&iang.

not different from those of the Pope; nor were

they

they less solicitous to prevent Italy from becom- Booc II.
ing the feat of war, and their own republick j0.
from being involved in the quarrel. But through
all Leo's artifices, and notwithstanding his high
pretensions to a perfect neutrality, it was visible
that he leaned towards the Emperor, from whom
he had both more to fear and more to hope than
from Francis; and it was equally manifest, that
if it became necessary to take a fide, the Vene-
tians would, from motives of the fame nature,
declare for the king of France. No confider-
able assistance, however, was to be expe&ed
from the Italian states, who were jealous to an
extreme degree of the Transalpine powers, and
careful to preserve the balance between them,
unless when they were seduced to violate this
favourite maxim of their policy, by the certain
profpeet of some great advantage to themselves.

BUT the chief attention both of Charles and with Hen-

of Francis, was employed in order to gain the ryIU ..
king of England, from whom each of them ex-
pected assistance more effectual, and afforded
with less political caution. Henry VIII. had
ascended the throne of that kingdom in the year
one thousand five hundred and nine, with such
circumitances of advantage, as promised a reign
of distinguished felicity and splendour. The Th great

po1'er of
union in his person of the two contending titles of that mo.

H 3 York narch.

BOOK II. York and Lancaster; the alacrity and emulation

, with which both factions obeyed his commands,

not only enabled him to exert a degree of vigour
and authority in his domestic government which
none of his predecessors could have safely affum-
ed; but permitted him to take a share in the
affairs of the continent, from which the atten-
tion of the Englilh had long been diverted by
their unhappy divisions. The immense treasures
which his father hadd amassed, rendered him the
most wealthy prince in Europe. The peace
which had fubfited under the cautious admini-
flratioq of that monarch, was offufficient length
to recruit the nation after the desolation of the
civil wars, hut not so long as to enervate its fpi-
rit and the English ashamed of having render-
ed their own country so. long a scene of discord
a.d bloodihed, were eager to display their va-
lour in some foreign war, and to revive the me-
mory of the viCtories gained by their ancestors.
inu uler: Henr.y's own temper perfetly suited the state of

his kingdom, and the disposition of his fubjets.
Ambitious, active, enterprizing and accomplish-
ed in all the martial exercises which in that age
formed a chief part in the education of persons
of noble birth, and inspired them, with an early
love of war, he longed to engage in ation,
and to signalize the beginning of his reign by
some remarkable exploit. An opportunity soon

3 presented

presented itself; and the vitory at Guinegate, BOOK II.
together with the successful sieges of Teroiienne 5
and Tournay, though of little utility to England,
refleced great lustre on its monarch, and con-
firmed the idea which foreign princes entertained
of his power and importance. So many con-
curring causes, added to the happy situation of
his own dominions, which secured them from so-
reign invasion and to the fortunate circum.
stance of his being in possession of Calais, which
served not only as a key to France, but opened
an easy pafage into the Netherlands, rendered
the King of England the natural guardian of the
liberties of Europe, and the arbiter between the
Emperor and French monarch. Henry him-
self was sensible of this singular advantage, and
convinced, that, in order to preserve the balance
even, it was his office to prevent either of the
rivals from acquiring such superiority of power
as might be fatal to the other, or formidable to
the reft of Christendom. But he was destitute
of the penetration, and still more of the temper
which such a delicate function required. Influ-
enced by caprice, by vanity, by resentment, by
affetion, he was incapable of forming any regu-
lar and extensive system of policy, or of adhering
to it with steadiness. His measures seldom re-
fulted from attention to the general welfare, or
from a deliberate regard to his own interest, but

H 4 were

BooK II. were dictated by passions which rendered him

ZOO
2 blind to both, and prevented his gaining that

ascendant in the affairs of Europe, or from
reaping such advantages to himself, as a prince
of greater art, though with inferior talents,
might have easily secured,

And of hi ALL the impolitick steps in Henry's admini-
niniftcr
cardinal fration muff not, however, be imputed to de-
Wtlvoy' fe&s in his own charater; many of them were

owing to the violent passions and insatiable am-
bition of his prime minister and favourite cardi-
nal Wolfey. This man, from one of the lowest
ranks in life, had risen to an height of power
and dignity, to which no English subject ever
arrived and governed the haughty, prefump-
tuous, and untraaable spirit of Henry with
absolute authority. Great talents, and of very
different kinds, fitted him for the two opposite
stations of minister, and of favourite. His pro-
found judgment, his unwearied industry, his
thorough acquaintance with the state of the
kingdom, his extensive knowledge of the views
and interests of foreign courts, qualified him for
that uncontrouled direCtion of affairs with which
he was intrusted. The elegance of his manners,
the gaiety of his conversation, his insinuating
address, his love of magnificence, and his pro-
fiiency ip thoie parts of literature of which

Henry

Ilenry was fond, gained him the affetion and BOOK ir.
confidence of the young monarch. Wolfey was l
far from employing this vast and almost royal
power, to promote either the true interest of the
nation, or the real grandeur of his master. Ra-
pacious at the fame time, and profuse, he was
insatiable in desiring wealth. Of boundless am-
bition, he aspired after new honours with an
eagerness unabated by his former success; and
being rendered presumptuous by his uncommon
elevation, as well as by the ascendant which he
had gained over a prince, who scarcely brooked
advice from any other person, he discovered in his
whole demeanour the most overbearing haugh-
tiness and pride. To these passions he himself
sacrificed every consideration; and whoever en-
deavoured to obtain his favour, or that of his
master, found it necessary to sooth and to gratify
them.

As all the itates of Europe fought Henry's The court
friendship at that time, all courted his minister pid to

Wolrey by

with incredible attention and obsequiousness, and Franis.
firove by presents, by promires, or by flattery
to work upon his avarice, his ambition, or his
pride b Francis had, in the year one thousand
five hundred and eighteen, employed Bonnivet,

b Fiddes's Life of Wolfey, 66. Rymer's Fcedera, xiii.
718.

admiral

Boor II. admiral of France, one of his most accompliihed

and artful courtiers, to gain the haughty prelate.
He himself beltowed on him every mark of re-
fpe& and confidence. He consulted him with
regard to his most important affairs, and re-
ceived his responses with implicit deference. By
these arts, together with the grant of a large
pension, Francis secured the Cardinal, who per-
fuaded his matter to surrender Tournay to
France, to conclude a treaty of marriage be-
tween his daughter the princess Mary and the
Dauphin, and to content to a personal interview
with the French king . From that time, the
most familiar intercourse fubfifed between the
two courts; Francis, sensible of the great value
of Wolsey's friendship, laboured to secure the
continuance of it by every pollible expression of
regard, bellowing on him in all his letters the
honourable appellations of Father, Tutor, and
Governor.

And by CHARLES observed the progress of this union
Cbhai. with the utmoftjealoufy and concern. His near

affinity to the king of England, gave him some
title to his friendship; and soon after his accef-
sion to the throne of Castile, he had attempted to
ingratiate himself with Wolfey, by fettling on
him a pension of three thousand livres. His

c Herbert's Hilt. of Henry VIII. 30. Rymer, xiii. 624.

chief

chief'folicitude at present was to prevent the in- BOOK It.
tended interview with Francis, the effets ofwhich ,
upon two young princes, whose hearts were no
less susceptible of friendlhip than their manners
were capable of inspiring it, he extremely dread-
ed. But after many delays, occasioned by diffi-
culties about the ceremonial, and by the anxi-
ous precautions of both courts for the safety of
their refpetive sovereigns, the time and place
of meeting were at last fixed. Messengers had
been sent to different courts, inviting all comers,
who were gentlemen, to enter the lifts at tilt and
tournament, against the two monarchs and their
knights. Both Francis and Henry loved the
splendour of there fpetacles too well, and were
too much delighted with the graceful figure *
which they made on such occasions, to forego
the pleasure or glory which they expeEted from
such a singular and brilliant assembly. Nor was
the Cardinal less fond of displaying his magni-
ficence in the pretence of two courts, and ofdif-
covering to the two nations the extent of his
influence over both their monarchs. Charles,
finding it impoflible to prevent the interview,
endeavoured to disappoint its effees, and to
pre-occupy the favour of the English monarch,
and his minister, by an ac of complaisance still
more flattering and more uncommon. Having
fgiled from Corunna, ashas already been related,

he

BOOK II. he fleered his course directly towards England,

5zJ and relying wholly on Henry's generosity for his
! 520.

Charles own safety, landed at Dover. This unexpected
visits Eng-
land. visit furprized the nation. Wolfey, however,
May 16 . was well acquainted with the Emperor's inten-

tion. A negociation, unknown to the historians
of that age, had been carried on between him
and the court of Spain; this visit had been con-
certed; and Charles granted the Cardinal, whom
he calls his most dear friend, an additional pen-
sion of seven thousand ducats d. Henry, who
was then at Canterbury, in his way to France,
immediately dispatched Wolfey to Dover, in
order to welcome the Emperor; and being
highly pleated with an event so soothing to his
* vanity, hastened to receive, with suitable refpet,

a guest who had placed in him such unbounded
confidence. Charles, to whom time was pre-

nfinuatsr cious, staid only four days in England: But
itimfe'lfinto during that short space, he had the address not
favour b.,th
with the only to give Henry favourable impreions of
King and
wolfey. his character and intentions, but to detach Wolfey

entirely from the interest of the French king.
All the grandeur, wealth, and power, which the
Cardinal possessed, did not satisfy his ambitious
mind, while there was one ftep higher to which
an ecclesiastic could ascend. The papal dignity
had for some time been the object of his wishes,
and Francis, as the most effetual method of

d Rymer, xiii. 714.

securing

fccuring his friendship, had promised to favour BOOK II.
his pretensions, on the first vacancy, with all 1520
his interest. But as the Emperor's influence in
the college of cardinals was greatly superior to
the French king's, Wolfey grasped eagerly at
an offer which that artful prince had made him
of exerting it vigorously in his behalf; and al-
lured by this profpe&, which under the pontifi-
cate of Leo, still in the prime of his life, was a
very distant one, he entered with warmth into
all the Emperor's schemes. No treaty, how-
ever, was concluded at that time between
the two monarchs; but Henry, in return for
the honour which Charles had done him, pro-
mifed to visit him in some place of the Low
Countries, immediately after taking leave of the
French king.

His interview with that prince was in an June 7th.

Interview

open plain between Guifnes and Ardres, where between
the two kings and their attendants, displayed HJnryi.nd
their magnificence with such emulation, and
profuse expence, as procured it the name of the
Field of the Cloth of Gold. Feats of chivalry,
parties of gallantry, together with such exercises
and pastimes as were in that age reckoned manly
or elegant, rather than serious business, occupied
both courts during eighteen days that they con-

tinued

BOOK II. tinued together'. Whatever impreflion the end
1520. gaging manners of Francis, or the liberal and

unfufpicious confidence with which he treated
Henry, made on the mind of that monarch,
wasTfoon effaced by Wolsey's artifices, or by
an interview he had with the Emperor at
July 0o. Gravelines; which was conduted by Charles

with less pomp than that near Guifnes, but with
greater attention to his political interest.

n,,ery' THIS aflliduity with which the two greatest
own ih" monarchs in Europe paid court to Henry, ap-
poltance.

* The French and English hiflorians describe the pomp

of this interview, and the various fpeaacles, with great
minuteness. One circumstance mentioned by the marechal
de Fleuranges, who was present, and which appears fingu-
lar in the present age, is commonly omitted. " After the
tournament," fays he, " the French and English wrefilers
made their appearance, and wrestled in pretence of the
Kings, and the ladies; and as there were many sout wrest-
lers there, it afforded excellent pastime; but as the King
of France had negleced to bring any wrestlers out of Bre-
tagne, the English gained the prize.- After this, the
Kings of France and England retired to a tent, where they
drank together, and the King of England seizing the King
of France by the collar, said, " My brother, I must wrtqfl
'wilb you," and endeavoured once or twice to trip up his
heels; but the King of France, who is a dextrous wrefler,
twiled him round, and threw him on the earth with pro-
digious violence. The King of England wanted to renew
the combat, but was prevented." Mentoires de Fleuranges,
a*. Paris, 1753. p. 3 9.

peared

peared to him a plain acknowledgment that he BOOK I.
held the balance in his hands, and convinced 5zo.
him of the juitnefs of the motto which he had
chosen, " That whoever he favoured would
prevail." In this opinion he was confirmed by
an offer which Charles made of submitting any
difference that might arise between him and
Francis to his sole arbitration. Nothing could
have the appearance of greater candour and
moderation, than the choice of a judge who was
reckoned the common friend of both. But as
the Emperor had now attached Wolfey entirely
to his interest, no proposal could be more infi-
dious, nor, as appeared by the sequel, more
fatal to the French kings.

CHARLES, notwithitanding his partial fond- Coronati;o

ness for the Netherlands, the place of his nati- pcror.
vity, made no long flay there; and after re-
ceiving the homage and congratulations of his
countrymen, hastened to Aix-la Chapelle, the
place appointed by the golden bull for the coro- onober z3,
nation of the Emperor. There, in pretence of
an assembly more numerous and splendid than
had appeared on any former occasion, the crown
of Charlemagne was placed on his head, with
all the pompous solemnity which the Germans
affect in their publick ceremonies, and which

f Herbert, .37.

they

BooK r. they deem essential to the dignity of their
1570, Empire .

Solymanthe ALMOST at the fame time, Solyman the Mag-
Magnificent
acends the nificent, one of the most accomplished, enter-
Othrone prizing, and victorious of the Turkish princes,

a constant and formidable rival to the Emperor,
ascended the Ottoman throne. It was the pecu-
liar glory of that period to produce the most
illustrious monarchs, who have at any one time
appeared in Europe. Leo, Charles, Francis,
Henry and Solyman were each of them possessed
of talents which would have rendered any age
wherein they happened to flourish, conspicuous.
But such a constellation of great princes Ihed
uncommon lustre on the sixteenth century. In
every contest, great power as well as great abili-
ties were set in opposition; the efforts of valour
and conduct on one fide, counterbalanced by
an equal exertion of the fame qualities on the
other, not only occasioned such a variety of
events as renders the history of that period in-
teresting, but served to check the exorbitant
progress of any of those princes, and to prevent
their attaining such pre-eminence in power as
would have been fatal to the liberty and hap-
piness of mankind.

s Hartman. Mauri Relatio Coronat. Car. V. ap. GoldalR.
Polit. Imperial. Franc. 1614. fol, p. . 64,

THS

THE first act of the Emperor's administration BOOK IL

was to appoint a Diet of the empire to be held ,20.
at Worms on the sixth of January, one thou- Dietcal:e'
sand five hundred and twenty-one. In his cir- Worms.
cular letters to the different princes, he informed
them, that he had called this assembly in order
to concert with them the most proper measures
for checking the progress of those new and
dangerous opinions, which threatened to disturb
the peace of Germany, and to overturn the
religiori of their ancestors.

CHARLES had in view the opinions which had Ri;rof the

been propagated by Luther and his disciples Roonrm
since the year one thousand five hundred and
Seventeen. As these led to that happy re-
formation in religion which rescued one part of
Europe from the papal yoke, mitigated its
rigour in the other, and produced a revolution
in the sentiments of mankind, the greatest as
well as the most beneficial that has happened
since the publication of Christianity, not only the
events which at first gave birth to such opinions,
but the causes which rendered their progress so
rapid and successful, deserve to be confidered
with minute attention.

To overturn a system of religious belief
founded on ancient and deep-rooted prejudices,

YOL. II I supported

i

rooK IL. supported by power, and defended with no less

1520. art than induitry; to establish in its room doc.

trines of the most contrary genius and tendency;
and to accomplilh all this, not by external vio-
lence or the force of arms, are operations which
historians the least prone to credulity and super.
ftition, must ascribe to that Divine Providence
which, with infinite ease, can bring about events
which to human sagacity appear impoflible. The
interposition of Heaven in favour of the Christian
religion at its first publication, was manifested
by miracles and prophecies wrought and uttered
in confirmation of it: And though none of the
reformers possessed, or pretended to posiess,
there supernatural gifts, yet that wonderful pre-
paration of circumstances which disposed the
minds of men for receiving their dotrines, that
singular combination of causes which secured
their success, and enabled men, defitute of power
and of policy, to triumph over those who em-
ployed both against [them, may be confidered
as no flight proof that the fame hand which
planted the Christian religion, prote&ed the re-
formed faith, and reared it, from beginnings
extremely feeble, to an amazing degree of
strength and maturity.

Promincon. IT was from causes, seemingly fortuitous,
gdanb ' and from a source very inconfidcrable, that all

the

the mighty effets of the Reformation flowed. Boo In.
Leo X. when raised to the papal throne, found 5.ZO
the revenues of the church exhausted by the vast
projects of his two ambitious predeceflors, Alex-
ander VI. and Julius II. His own temper,
naturally liberal and enterptizing, rendered him
incapable of that revere and patient oeconomy
which the situation of his finances required. On
the contrary, his schemes for aggrandizing the
family of Medici, his love of splendour, his
taste for pleasure, and his magnificence in re-
warding men of genius, involved him daily in
new expences; in order to provide a fund for
which, he tried every device, that the fertile
invention of priests had fallen upon, to drain the
credulous multitude. Among others, he had A tale of

indulgences

recourse to a sale of Indulgences. According to publiiled
the doctrine of the Romish church, all the good by Leo X.
works of the Saints, over and above those which
were necessary towards their own justification,
are deposited, together with the infinite merits
of Jesus Christ, in one inexhaustible treasury.
The keys of this were committed to St. Peter
and to his successors the Popes, who may open
it at pleasure, and by transferring a portion of
this superabundant merit to any particular per-
son, for a fum of money, may convey to him
either the pardon of his own fins, or a relcafe
for any one in whom he is interested, from the

I a pains

BOOK II. pains of purgatory. Such Indulgences were

- S' sirs invented in the eleventh century by Urban

II. as a recompence for those who went in person
upon the meritorious enterprize of conquering
the Holy Land. They were afterwards granted
to those who hired a soldier for that purpose; and
in process of time were bestowed on such as gave
money for accomplishing any pious work en-
joined by the pope h. Julius II. had bestowed
Indulgences on all who contributed towards
building the church of St. Peter at Rome; and
as Leo was carrying on that magnificent and ex-
pensive fabrick, his grant was founded on the
fame pretence'.

so conta. THE right of promulgating of there Indul.
ed as to give
gnerl of- gences in Germany, together with a Share in the
fence. profits arising from the sale of them, was granted

to Albert, elector of Metz and archbishop of
Magdeburg, who, as his chief agent for retail-
ing them in Saxony, employed Tetzel, a Domi-
nican friar, of licentious morals, but of an
active spirit, and remarkable for his noisy and
popular eloquence. He, affited by the monks
of his order, executed the commission with
great zeal and success, but with little discretion
or decency; and though by magnifying excef-

z Hiflory of the Council of Trent, by F. Paul, p. 4.
I Palavic. lift. Cone. Trident, p. 4.

g. _!. _.

lively the benefit of their Indulgences k, and BooK 1I.
by disposing of them at a very low price, they 5z0.
carried on for some time an extensive and lucra-
tive traffick among the credulous multitude, the
extravagance of their assertions, as well as the
irregularities in their condut, came at last to

give

* As the form of these Indulgences, and the benefits

which they were supposed to convey, are unknown in pro-
tefant countries, and little understood, atprefent, in fcve-
ral places where the Roman catholic religion is eflablilhed,
I have, for the information of my readers, translated the
form of absolution used by Tetzel. " May our Lord Jesus
ChriR have mercy upon thee, and absolve thee by the merits
of his moll holy paflion. And I by his authority, that of
his blessed apofiles Peter and Paul, and of the most holy
Pope, granted and committed to me in these parts, do ab-
solve thee, firit from all ecclesiastical censures in whatever
manner they have been incurred, and then from all thy
fins, transgressions and excesses, how enormous soever they
may be, even from such as are reserved for the cognizance
of the holy fee, and as far as the keys of the holy church
extend, I remit to you all punishment which you deserve in
Purgatory on their account, and I restore you to the holy
sacraments of the church, to the unity of the faithful, and
to that innocence and purity which you possessed at baptism,
so that when you die the gates of punishment flall be Ihut,
and the gates of the paradise of delight Ihall be opened,
and if you shall not die at present, this grace ilall remain
in full force when you are at the point of death. In.the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
GhoIL" Seckend. Comment. lib. i. p. 14.

The terms in which Tetzel and his aflbciates described

the benefits of Indulgences, and the neceflity of purchasing
them, are so extravagant, that they appear to be almoRf in-

I 3 credible.

Book II. give general offence. The princes and nobles

i52c. were irritated at feeing their vassals drained of

so much wealth, in order to replenish the trea-
fury of a profuse pontiff. Men of piety regretted
the delusion of the people, who being taught
to rely for the pardon of their fins on the In-
dulgences which they purchased, did not think
it incumbent on them either to abound in faith,
or to praftife holiness. Even the most unthink-

credible. If any man (said they) purchases letters of in-
dulgence, his foul may reft secure with refpeft to its falva-
tion. The fouls confined in purgatory, for whose redemp-
tion Indulgences are purchased, as soon as the money tinkles
in the chefl, inflantly escape from that place of torment,
and ascend into heaven. That the efficacy of Indulgences
was so great, that the most heinous fins, even if one ihould
violate (which was impofliblc) the Mother of God, would
be remitted and expiated by them, and the person be freed
both from punishment and guilt. That this was the un-
speakable gift of God, in order to reconcile men to him-
self. That the cross ere&ed by the preachers of indulgen-
ces, was as efficacious as the cross of Christ itself. Lo !
the heavens are open; if you enter not now, when will yow
enter ? For twelve-pence you may redeem the foul of your
father out of purgatory; and are you so ungrateful, that
you will not rescue your parent from torment ? If you had
but one coat, you ought to trip yourfelfinftantly, and fell it,
in order to purchase such benefits, &c. These, and many
such extravagant expreflions, are feleaed out of Luther's
works by Chemnitius in his Examen Concilii Tridentini
apud Herm. Vonder. Hardt. Hist. Liter. Reform. pars iv.
p. 6. The fame author has published several of Tetzel's
Discourses, which prove that these expressions were neither
Angular nor exaggerated. Ibid. p. 14.

ing

ing were'fhocked at the scandalous behaviour BOOK Ir.
of Tetzel and his aflociates, who often fquan- ,5 0.
dered in drunkenness, gaming, and low debau-
chery, those fums which were piously bellowed
in hopes of obtaining eternal happiness and
all began to with that some check were given
to this commerce, no leTs detrimental to society
than deftru&ive to religion.

SUCH was the favourable juncture, and so Fir appear.

ancc of Lu-
disposed were the minds of his countrymen to thar, and

his chaaac.

liften to his discourses, when Martin Luther first ic.ac
began to call in question the efficacy of Indul-
gences, and to declaim against the vicious lives
and false dotrines of the persons employed in
promulgating them. He was a native of Eifleben
in Saxony, and though born of poor parents,
had received a learned education, during the
progress of which he gave many indications of
uncommon vigour and acuteness of genius. As
his mind was naturally susceptible of serious
impreflions, and tincured with somewhat of
that religious melancholy which delights in the
solitude and devotion of a monaftick life, he
retired into a convent of Augustinian friars, and
without suffering the intreaties of his parents to
divert him from what he thought his duty to
God, he assumed the habit of that order. There
he acquired great reputation, not only for piety,

I 4 but

BooK It. but for his love of knowledge, and unwearied

1520. application to study. He had been taught the

scholastic philosophy and theology which were
then in vogue by very able masters, and wanted
not penetration to comprehend all the niceties
and diitin&ions with which they abound; but
his understanding, naturally found, and superior
to every thing frivolous, soon became disgusted
with these subtile and uninftruaive sciences,
and fought for some more solid foundation of
knowledge and of piety in the holy scriptures,
Having found a copy of the Bible, which lay
neglected in the library of his monastery, he
abandoned all other pursuits, and devoted him-
self to the itudy of it, with such eagerness and
afliduity, as aftoni(hed the monks, who were
little accustomed to derive their theological
notions from that source. The great progress
which he made in this uncommon course of
study, augmented so much the fame both of his
sanctity and of his learning, that Frederick,
Eleator of Saxony, having founded an university
at Wittemberg on the Elbe, the place of his
residence, Luther was chosen first to teach phi.
lofophy, and afterwards theology there, and
discharged both offices in such a manner, that
he was deemed the chief ornament of that
society.

3 WHIL4

WHILE Luther was at the height of his repu- Boox IL

tation and authority, Tetzel began to publilh 15z
Indulgences in the neighbourhood of Wittem- He' ppoeO^

the sale of

berg, and to ascribe to them the fame imaginary Indulgeac^
virtues, which had, in other places, imposed on
the credulity of the people. As Saxony was
not more enlightened than the other provinces
of Germany, Tetzel met with prodigious fuc-
cess there. It was with the utmost concern,
that Luther beheld the artifices of those who
fold, and the simplicity of those who bought,
Indulgences. The opinions of Thomas Aquinas
and the other fchoolmen, on which the do&trine
of Indulgences was founded, had already loft
much of their authority with him; and the
Scriptures, which he began to confider as the
great standard of theological truth, afforded no
countenance to a practice, equally subversive
of faith and of morals. His warm and impe-
tuous temper did not susser him long to con-
ceal such important discoveries, or to continue
a silent fpeEtator of the delusion of his country-
men. From the pulpit in the great church of
Wittemberg he inveighed bitterly against the
irregularities and vices of the monks who pub-
liihed Indulgences; he ventured to examine the
doctrines which they taught, and pointed out to
the people the danger of relying for salvation
upon any other means than those appointed by

God

BOOK IT. God in his word. The boldness and novelty of

s. there opinions drew great attention, and being

recommended by the authority of Luther's per.
fonal characer, and delivered with a popular
and persuasive eloquence, they made a deep im-
pression on his hearers. Encouraged by the
favourable reception of his doctrines among the
people, he wrote to Albert, elecor of Mentz
and archbishop of Magdeburg, to whose jurif-
di&ion that part of Saxony was subje&t, and
remonstrated warmly against the false opinions
as well as wicked lives of the preachers of Indul-
gences; but he found that prelate too deeply
interested in their success to correct their abuses.
His next attempt was to gain the suffrage of

Hepublifhs mnen of learning. For this purpose, he pub-
,h eths lifhed ninety-five theses, containing his senti-
tU1em. ments with regard to Indulgences. These he

proposed, not as points fully eftablilhed, or of
undoubted certainty, but as subjeCts of inquiry
and disputation; he appointed a day, on which
the learned were invited to impugn them either
in person, or by writing; to the whole he sub-
joined solemn protestations of his high refpet
for the apoftolick fee, and of his implicit sub-
miflion to its authority. No opponent appeared
at the time prefixed; the theses spread over
Germany with aftonilhing rapidity; they were
read with the greatest eagerness and all ad-

mired
2

mired the boldness of the man who had ventured BooK II
not only to call in question the plenitude of papal l' o.
power, but to attack the Dominicans, armed
with all the terrors of inquisitorial authority .

THE Friars of St. Augustine, Luther's own Supported

order, though addited with no less obsequious. bodei
ness than the other monaftick fraternities to the
papal fee, gave no check to the publication of
there uncommon opinions. Luther had by his
piety and learning acquired extraordinary au-
thority among his brethren; he professed the
highest regard for the authority of the Pope;
his profeflions were at that time sincere; and as
a secret enmity, excited by interest or emula-
tion, subsists among all the monaftick orders in
the Romish church, the Augustinians were
highly pleated with his invectives against the
Dominicans, and hoped to fee them exposed to
the hatred and scorn of the people. Nor was
his sovereign the Elector of Saxony, the wisest
prince at that time in Germany, dissatisfied with
this obftrution which Luther threw in the way
of the publication of Indulgences. He secretly
encouraged the attempt, and flattered himself

I Lutheri Opera Jene, 1612. vol. i. pracfat. 3. p. 2. 66.

Hifi. of Counc. of Trent by F. Paul, p. 4. Scckend. Coin.
Apol. p. 16.

that

BooK II. that this dispute among the Ecclesiastics them-
7'-J selves, might give some check to the exations

of the court of Rome, which the secular princes
had long, though without success, been endea-
vouring to oppose.

1Many en- MANY zealous champions immediately arose
deavour to
Ccnfutc to defend opinions on which the wealth and

power of the church were founded, against
Luther's attacks. In opposition to his theses,
Tetzel publiihed counter-thefes at Francfort on
the Oder; Eccius, a celebrated Divine of Aug-
iburg, endeavoured to refute his notions; and
Prierias, a Dominican friar, master of the sacred
palace and Inquifitor-general, wrote against him
with all the virulence of a fcholatlick disputant.
But the manner in which they conducted the
controversy, did little service to their cause,
Luther attempted to combat Indulgences by
arguments founded in reason, or derived from
scripture; they produced nothing in support of
them but the sentiments of fchoolmen, the con-
clufions of the canon law, and the decrees of
Popes m. The decision of judges so partial and
interested, did not satisfy the people, who began
to call in question the authority even of these
venerable guides, when they found them stand-

" F. Paul, p. 6. Scckcnd. p. 40. Palavlc. p. 8.

ing

ing in diret opposition to the diatates of reason, BooKc I.
and the determinations of the divine law ". * 520

MEAN-

Seckend. p. 30.
Gicciardini has asserted two things with regard to

the firfi promulgation of Indulgences; X That Leo be-
stowed a gift of the profits arising from the sale of :ndul-
gences in Saxony, and the adjacent provinces of Germany,
upon his filler Magdalen, the wife of Francefcetto Cibo,
Guic. lib. 13. 168. 2. That Arcemboldo, a Genoese ec-
clefiaftick, who had been bred a merchant, and still retained
all the arts of that profeflion, was appointed by her to col-
let the money which mhould be raised. F. Paul has fol-
lowed him in both these particulars, and adds, that the
Augustinians in Saxony had been immemorially employed
in preaching Indulgences; but that Arcemboldo and his
deputies, hoping to gain more by committing this trutl to
the Dominicans, had made their bargain with Tetzel, and
that Luther was prompted at first to oppose Tetzel and his
associates, by a desire of taking revenge for this injury of-
sered to his order. F. Paul, p. 5. Almolt all the hifto-
rians since their time, popith as well as proteflant, have,
without examination, admitted these afrertions to be true
upon their authority. But notwithstanding the concurring
teflimony of two authors so eminent both for exadin.f and
veracity, we may observe,

i. That Felix Contolori, who searched the pontifical

archives of purpose, could not find this pretended grant in
any of those registers where it mull neceflarily have been
recorded. Palav. p. 5.-2. That the profits arising from
Indulgences in Saxony and the adjacent countries, tad been
granted not to Magdalen, but to Albert archbilhop of
Mentz, who had the right of nominating those who pub-
lilhed them. Seek. p. 12. Luth. Oper. I. prxf. p. I.
Palav. p. 6.-3. That Arcemboldo never had concern in the
publication of Indulgences in Saxony; his diltrit was

Slanders

BooK II. MEANWHILE, these novelties in Luther's doc-
%~-~0 trines which interested all Germany, excited
Thecourt little attention and no alarm in the court of
of Rome at
fit difre. Rome. Leo, fond of elegant and refined plea-
garded Lu-
ther. fures, intent upon great ichemes of policy, a

Slanders and the Upper and Lower Rhine. Seck. p. 14.
Palav. p. 6.-4. That Luther and his adherents never
mention this grant of Leo's to his siser, though a circum-
fiance of which they could hardly have been ignorant, and
which they would have been careful not to suppress.-5.
T'he publication of Indulgences in Germany, was not ufu-
ally committed to the Auguflinians. The promulgation
of them at three different periods under Julius II. was
granted to the Franciscans; the Dominicans had been em-
ployed in the fame office a Ihort time before the present
period. Palav. p. 46.-6. The promulgation of those In-
dulgences, which firlt excited Luther's indignation, was
cntrufted to the archbilhop of Mentz in conjunction with
the guardian of the Franciscans; but the latter having de-
clined accepting of that trust, the sole right became veiled
in the archbishop. Palav. 6. Seck. 16, 17.-7. Luther
was not infligated by his superiors among the AuguRinians
to attack the Dominicans their rivals, or to depreciate In-
dulgences because they were promulgated by them; his
opposition to their opinions and vices proceeded from more
laudable motives. Seek. p. 15. 32. Lutheri Opera i.
p. 64. 6. 8. A diploma of Indulgences is publilhed by Herm.
Vonder Hardt, from which it appears, that the name of
the guardian of the Franciscans is retained together with
that of the archbilhop, although the former did not ad.
The limits of the country to which their commiflions ex-
tended, viz. the dioceses of Mentz, Magdeburg, Halber-
ftadt, and the territories of the marquis of Brandenburgh,
are mentioned in that diploma. Hilt. Literaria Reformat.
pars iv. p. 14.

Rranger

stranger to theological controversies, and apt to BOOK If.
despise them, regarded with the utmost indif- ij5Oe
ference the operations of an obscure Friar, who,
in the heart of Germany, carried on a fcholaftick
disputation in a barbarous flyle. Little did he
apprehend, or Luther himself dream, that the
effets of this quarrel would be so fatal to the
papal fee. Leo imputed the whole to monaftick
enmity and emulation, and seemed inclined not
to interpose in the contest, but to allow the
Augustinians and Dominicans to wrangle about
the matter with their usual animosity.

THE solicitations, however, of Luther's ad- The progrere

of Luther'Q

verfaries, exasperated to an high degree by the opinions.
boldness and severity with which he animad-
verted on their writings, together with the fur-
prizing progress which his opinions made in
different parts of Germany, rouzed at last the
attention of the court of Rome, and obliged
Leo to take measures for the security of the
church against an attack that now appeared too
serious to be despised. For this end, he fum- Hers;,:m.
moned Luther to appear at Rome, within sixty a.id to
days, before the auditor of the chamber, and R".......
the fame Prierias who had written against him,
whom he empowered to examine his doctrines,
and to decide concerning them. He wvrote, at
the fame time, to the Eletor of Saxony, be-

scc hi:,

BoOK II. feeching him not to protet a man whose here-

52'> tical and profane tenets were so shocking to

pious ears; and enjoined the Provincial of the
Augustinians to check by his authority the rash-
ness of an arrogant monk, which brought dif-
grace upon the order of St. Augufline, and gave
offence and disturbance to the whole church.

The Pope FROM the firain of there letters, as well as
,jlegwer from the nomination of a judge so prejudiced
to try im and partial as Prierias, Luther easily saw what
iacomrany.

sentence he might expec at Rome. He dif-
covered, for that reason, the utmost solicitude,
to have his cause tried in Germany, and before
a less fufpedted tribunal. The professors in the
university of Wittemberg, anxious for the safety
of a man who did so much honour to their
society, wrote to the Pope, and after employing
several pretexts to excuse Luther from appear-
ing at Rome, intreated Leo to commit the exa-
mination of his dotrines to some persons of
learning and authority in Germany. The Elec-
tor requested the fame thing of the Pope's legate
at the diet of Augsburg; and as Luther him-
seif, who, at that time, was so far from having
any intention to disclaim the papal authority,
that he did not even entertain the smallest sus-
picion concerning its divine original, had written
to Leo a most fubmiifive letter, promising an

unreserved

unreserved compliance with his will, the Pope BOOK If.
gratified them so far as to empower his legate ,=.
in Germany, cardinal Cajetan, a Dominican,
eminent for fcholaftick learning, and paflionately
devoted to the Roman fee, to hear and determine
the caufc.

LUTHER, though he had good reason to decline Luther .p.

-.~~~~~~~

. . . pears before

ajudge chosen among his avowed adversaries, did the legate.
not hesitate about appearing before Cajetan,
and having obtained the Emperor's fafe-con-
du6t, immediately repaired to Augsburg. The
Cardinal received him with decent refpe&, and
endeavoured at first to gain upon him by gentle
treatment: But thinking it beneath the dignity
of his flation to enter into any formal dispute
with a person of such inferior rank, he required
him, by virtue of the apoftolick powers with
which he was clothed, to retract the errors which
he had uttered with regard to Indulgences, and
the nature of faith; and to abstain, for the
future, from the publication of new and dan-
gerous opinions. Luther, fully persuaded of
the truth of his own tenets, and confirmed in
the belief of them by the approbation which
they had met with among persons conspicuous
both for their learning and piety, was furprized
at this abrupt mention of a recantation, before
any endeavours were used to convince him that

VOL. II. K he

BOOK Tr. he was miltaken. He had flattered himfeif,
.-o that in a conference concerning the points in

dispute, with a prelate of such diftinguiflhe.l
abilities, he would be able to remove many of
those imputations with which the ignorance or
malice of his antagonists had loaded him; but
the high tone of authority that the Cardinal
afrumed, extinguished at once all hopes of thi;
kind, and cut off every profpet of advanta-e
al:;rtr-rid from the interview. His native intrepidity c.r

avo mind, however, did not delcrt him. He de-

clared, with the utmost firrnefs, that he could
not, with a safe conscience, renounce opinions
which he believed to be true; nor should any
consideration ever induce him to do what woul.l
be so base in itself, and so offensive to Gud.
At the fame time, he continued to express no
less reverence than formerly for the authority
of the apoftolick fee "; he significd his willing.
ness to 'ulbmit the whole controversy to certain
univcrfitics which he named, and promilcd
neither to write nor to preach concerning Indul-
gences for the future, provided his adversaries
were likewise enjoined to be filcnt with rcfp)ct
to them P. All these offers Cajctan dilregardcd
or rejected, and still insistcd peremptorily on a
simple recantation, threatening him with eccle-
fiaftical censures, and forbidding him to appear

o Luth. Oocr. vol. i. p. 164. P Ibid. p. it9.

again

Rgain in his presence, unless he resolved in- BOOK 11.
Itantly to comply with what he had required. 1.
This haughty and violent manner of proceed-
ing, as well as other circumstances, gave Lu-
ther's friends such strong reasons to fufpeA, that
even the Imperial fafe-conduct would not be
able to protect him from the legate's power and
resentment, that they prevailed on him to with-
draw secretly from Auglburg, and to return to
his own country. But Defore his departure,
according to a form of which there had been
some examples, he prepared a solemn appeali Hsabppea.
from the Pope, ill informed at that time concern-
ing his cause, to the Pope, when he should re-
ceive more full information with refpet to it q.

CAJETAN, enraged at Luther's abrupt retreat, Heisrup-

and at the publication of his appeal, wrote to "e"IlelebO
the Elector of Saxony, complaining of both; of Saxon.
and requiring him, as he regarded the peace
of the church, or the authority of its head,
either to fend that seditious monk a prisoner to
Rome4 or to banish him out of his territories.
It was not from theological considerations that
Frederick had hitherto countenanced Luther;
he teems to have been much a stranger to con-
troverfies of that kind, and to have been little

' Sicid. Hill. of Reform. p. 7. Seckend. p. 45. Luth.
Opcr. i. 163.

K 2 interested

BooK IT. interested in them. His protetion flowed al-

'5zo' most entirely, as hath been already observed,

from political motives, and was afforded with
great secrecy and caution. He had neither heard
any of Luther's discourses, nor read any of his
books; and though all Germany resounded with
his fame, he had never once admitted him into
his presence . But upon this demand which
the Cardinal made, it became necessary to throw
off somewhat of his former reserve. He had
been at great expence, and had bestowed much
attention on founding a new university, an object
of considerable importance to every German
prince; and foreseeing how fatal a blow the
removal of Luther would be to its reputation',
he, under various pretexts, and with many pro-
sessions of esteem for the Cardinal, as well as
of reverence for the Pope, not only declined
complying with either of his requests, but
openly discovered great concern for Luther's
safety '.

Motives of THE inflexible rigour with which Cajetan in.
the lcgat¢'s
condut. fifled on a simple recantation, gave great offence

to Luther's followers in that age, and hath since
been censured as imprudent, by several Popish
writers. But it was impossible for the legate to

' Seckend, p. 27. Sleid. Hist. p. 12. ' Seckend.
p. 59. ' Sleid. Hilt. p. Io. Luth. Oper i. 17z.

2 as

act another part. The judges before whom BooK IT.
Luther had been required to appear at Rome, 5^'
were so eager to display their zeal against his
errors, that, without waiting for the expiration
of the sixty days allowed him in the citation,
they had already condemned him as an here-
tick u. Leo had, in several of his brieves and
letters, fligmatized him as a child of iniquity,
and a man given up to a reprobate sense. No-
thing less, therefore, than a recantation could
save the honour of the church, whose maxim it
is, never to abandon the smallest point that it
has eftablified, and which is even precluded, by
its pretensions to infallibility from having it in
its power to do so.

LUTHER'S situation, meanwhile, was such as Luther's

would have filled any other person with the most tuation.
disquieting apprehensions. He could not ex-
pe& that a prince so prudent and cautious as
Frederick, would, on his account, set at defiance
the thunders of the church, and brave the papal
power, which had crushed some of the most
powerful of the German Emperors. He knew
what veneration was paid, at that time, to eccle-
fiaftical decisions; what terror ecclefiallical cen-
fures carried along with them, and how easily
there might intimidate and Ihake a prince, who

Luth. Oper. i. 161.

K 3 was

PoOK It. was rather his protector from policy, than his

ga disciple from convicion. If he should be ob-

liged to quit Saxony, he had no profpet of any
other asylum, and must stand exposed to what-
ever punishment the rage or bigotry of his
enemies could inflit. Though sensible of his
danger, he discovered no symptoms of timidity
or remissness, but continued to vindicate his
own conduct and opinions, and to inveigh againfl
those of his adversaries with more vehemence
than everx.

ccapF¢als BUT as every flcp taken by the court of

to a general
council. Rome, particularly the irregular sentence by

which he had been so precipitately declared a
heretick, convinced Luther that Leo would soon
proceed to the mol; violent measures against
him, he had recourse to the only expedient in
his power, in order to prevent the effe& of the
papal censures. He appealed to a general coun-
cil, which he affirmed to be the representative
of the catholick church, and superior in power
to the Pope, who being a fallible man, might
err, as St. Peter, the molt perfect of his prede-
ceffors, had erredr.

A new bull IT oon appeared, that Luther had not formed
*i favour of
l4ulgienccs rash conjetures concerning the intentions of the

X Seckend. . 59. y Sleid. Hist. 2. Luth. Oper. i. 709.

Romii

Romish church. A bull, of a date prior to his Boor II.
appeal, was iflued by the Pope, in which he 'si
magnifies the virtue and efficacy of Indulgences,
in terms as extravagant as any of his prede-
ceffors had ventured to use in the darkest ages;
and without applying such palliativts, or men-
tioning such concessions, as the jun&ure seemed
to call for, he required all Christians to assent
to what he delivered as the doctrine of the
Catholic church, and fubjeted those who should
hold or teach any contrary opinion to the hea-
vieft ecclefialtical censures.

AMONG Luther's followers, this bull, which Mra,;i;-

they confidered as an unjustifiable effort of the ,,f(,vanta
Pope in order to preserve that rich branch of his to Lut"er
revenue which arose from Indulgences, pro-
duced little effe&. But, among the reft of his
countrymen, such a clear decision of the fove-
reign Pontiff against him, and enforced by such
dreadful penalties, must have been attended with
consequences very fatal to his cause; if these
had not been prevented in a great measure by
the death of the Emperor Maximilian, whom j.n .,?,
both his principles and his interest prompted to s'9'
support the authority of the holy fee. In con-
sequence of this event, the vicariat of that part
of Germany which is governed by the Saxon
laws, devolved to the Elector of Saxony ; and

K 4 under

BOOK II. under the felter of his friendly administration,
4520 Luther not only enjoyed tranquillity, but his

opinions were suffered, during the inter-regnum
which preceded Charles's elecion, to take root
in different places, and to grow up to some de-
gree of strength and firmness. At the fame
time, as the election of an Emperor was a point
more interesting to Leo than a theological con-
troverfy, which he did not understand, and of
which he could not foresee the consequences, he
was foextrtmely solicitous not to irritate a Prince
of such considerable influence in the electoral
college as Frederick, that he discovered a great
unwillingness to pronounce the sentence of ex-
communication againit Luther, which his adver-
saries continually demanded with the most cla-
morous importunity,

Sutpenfon To these political views of the Pope, as well
ofg ,ric;n as to his natural aversion from revere measures,
bthgr. .was owing the suspension of any further pro-

ceedings against Luther for eighteen months.
Perpetual negociations, however, in order to
bring the matter to some amicable issue, were
carried on during that space. The manner in
which these were conducted having given Luther
many opportunities of observing the corruption
of the court of Rome; its obstinacy in adher-
ing tqo efablicd errors; and its indifference

about

about truth, however clearly proposed, or BOOK i.
Rtrongly proved, he began to utter some doubts !` `2~
with regard to the divine original of the papal He begins

to call in

authority. A public disputation was held upon question the
this important question at Leipfick, between thaity.
Luther and Eccius, one of his most learned and
formidable antagonists; but it was as fruitless
and indecisive as such fcholaftick combats ufu-
ally prove. Both parties boasted of having ob-
tained the vicory; both were confirmed in their
own opinions; and no progress was made to-
wards deciding the point in controversy z.

NOR did this spirit of mutiny against the doc- Refoma-

tion in Swit,

trines and usurpations of the Romish church zcrland.
break out in Saxony alone; an attack no less
fierce, and occasioned by the fame causes, was
made upon them about this time in Switzer-
land. The Franciscans being entrusted with the
promulgation of Indulgences in that country,
executed their commission with the fame indifcre-
tion and rapaciousness, which had rendered the
Dominicans so odious in Germany. They pro-
ceeded, nevertheless, with uninterrupted success
till they arrived at Zurich. There Zuinglius,
a man not inferior to Luther himself in zeal
and intrepidity, ventured to oppose them i and
being animated with a republican boldness, and

Luth. Oper. i. 199.

free

BOOK II. free from those restraints which fubjeaion to
*"520 the will of a Prince imposed on the German re-

former, he advanced with more daring and rapid
steps to overturn the whole fabric of the efta-
blifhed religion'. The appearance of such a
vigorous auxiliary, and the progress which he
made, was, at first, matter of great joy to Lu-
ther. On the other hand, the decrees of the uni-
verfities of Cologne and Louvain, which pro.
nounced his opinions to be erroneous, afforded
great cause of triumph to his adversaries,

Ldther'sS BUT the undaunted spirit of Luther acquired
boiidnefi,
and pto- fresh vigour from every instance of opposition;

and pushing on his inquiries and attacks from
one doctrine to another, he began to Ihake the
firmest foundations on which the wealth or
power of the church were established. Leo
came at last to be convinced, that all hopes of
reclaiming him by forbearance were vain; feve-
ral prelates of great wisdom exclaimed no less
than Luther's personal adversaries againit the
Pope's unprecedented lenity in permitting an
incorrigible heretic, who during three years had
been endeavouring to subvert every thing ia-
cred and venerable, still to remain within the
bosom of the church; the dignity of the papal
fee rendered the most vigorous proceedings ne-

a Sleid. Hil. 2zz Seckend. 59.

ceffary;

cefary; the new Emperor, it was hoped, would BOOK II.
support its authority; nor did it seem probable 15 ,
that the Elector of Saxony would so far forget
his usual caution, as to set himself in opposition
to their united power. The college of cardinals
was often assembled, in order to prepare the
sentence with due deliberation, and the ablest
canonists were consulted how it might be ex-
pressed with unexceptionable formality. At last, Bui ofex.

counimuni-

on the fifteenth of June, one thousand five hun- cation pb-
dred and twenty, the bull, so fatal to the church Ihed ain".
of Rome, was issued. Forty-one propositions,
extracted out of Luther's works, are therein con-
demned as heretical, scandalous, and offensive
to pious ears; all persons are forbidden to read
his writings, upon pain of excommunication;
such as had any of them in their custody, are
commanded to commit them to the flames; he
himself, if he did not, within sixty days, pub-
lickly recant his errors, and burn his books, is
pronounced an obstinate heretic; is excommu-
nicated, and delivered unto Satan for the de-
ftruction of his flesh; and all secular Princes are
required, under pain of incurring the fame cen-
sure, to seize his person, that he might be pu-
nifhed as his crimes deserved b

THE publication of this bull in Germany, ex- Tihe efat

of this in
Fited various paiflons in different places. Lu- Germaiy,

b Palavic. 27. Luth. Oper. i. 423.

ther's

Booz II. ther's adversaries exulted, as if his party and

3^5^Z opinions had been crushed at once by such a de-

cifive blow. His followers, whose reverence for
the papal authority daily diminiihed, read Leo's
anathemas with more indignation than terror.
In some cities, the people violently obftru&ed
the promulgation of the bull; in others, the
persons who attempted to publish it were insulted,
and the bull itself torn in pieces, and trodden
under foot '.

and upon THIS sentence, which he had for some time
Luther.
Nov. l.l expeted, did not disconcert or intimidate Luther.

After renewing his appeal to the general coun-
cil, he published remarks upon the bull of ex-
communication; and being now persuaded that
Leo had been guilty both of impiety and injuf.
tice in his proceedings against him, he boldly
declared the Pope to be that man of fin, or
Anti-christ, whose appearance is foretold in the
New Testament; he declaimed against his ty-
ranny and usurpations with greater violence than
ever; he exhorted all Christian Princes to Ihake
off such an ignominious yoke; and boasted of
his own happiness in being marked out as the
obje& of cclefiaftical indignation, because he
had ventured to aflert the liberty ofr mankind.
Nor did he confine his exprefllons of contempt

* Scckend. p. it16.

for

for the papal power to words alone; Leo having, BOOK ir.
in execution of the bull, appointed Luther's S--.
books to be burnt at Rome, he, by way of reta-
liation, assembled all the professors and fludents
in the university of Wittemberg, and with great
pomp, in presence of a vast multitude of fpe&a-
tors, cast the volumes of the canon law, toge-
ther with the bull of excommunication, into the
flames; and his example was imitated in several
cities of Germany. The manner in which he
justified this a&ion, was still more cffenfive than
the a&tion itself. Having colle&ted from the ca-
non law some of the most extravagant propofiions
with regard to the plenitude and omnipotence
of the Pope's power, as well as the fubordina-
tion of all secular jurifdiftion to his authority,
he publiihed there with a commentary, pointing
out the impiety of such tenets, and their evident
tendency to subvert all civil government d.

SUCH was the progress which Luther had stateofthe

Reforma.

made, and such the state of his party, when tion when
Charles arrived in Germany. No secular Prince civd at."
had hitherto embraced Luther's opinions; no Gc"""ny.
change in the eftablilhed forms of worship had
been introduced; and no encroachments had
been made upon the poffeflions orjurifdition of
the clergy; neither party had yet proceeded to

d Luth. Oper. ii. 316.

aacion;

BOOK II. acion; and the controversy, though conduced
C~r--v- with great heat and palfion on both fides, was still

carried on with its proper weapons, with theses+
disputations, and replies. A deep imprefflons
however, was made upon the minds of the people;
their reverence for ancient institutions and doc-
trines was ihaken; and the materials were al-
ready scattered which kindled into the combuf-
tion that soon spread over all Germany. Stu-
dents crowded from every province of the Empire
to Wittemberg; and under Luther himself Me-
lanthon, Carloftadius, and other masters, then
reckoned eminent, imbibed opinions, which, on
their return, they propagated among their coun-
trymen, who listened to them with that fond at-
tention, which truth, when accompanied with
novelty, naturally commands '.

Reflecions DURING the course of these tranfations, the
conduteo court of Rome, though under the direction of
thecourt one of its ablest Pontiffs, neither formed its

schemes with that profound sagacity, nor exe-
cuted them with that steady perseverance, which
had long rendered it the most perfect model of
political wisdom to the reft of Europe. When
Luther began to declaim against Indulgences,
two different methods of treating him lay before
the Pope; by adopting one of which the attempt,

Scckend. 59
~~i~~~~~~~ ~~~it

it is probable, might have been crushed, and by BOOK Ir.
the other it might have been rendered innocent. -'"

v1zo.

If Luther's first departure from the docrines of
the church had instantly drawn upon him the
weight of its censures, the dread of these might
have restrained the Elector of Saxony from pro-
teEting him, might have deterred the people from
lifening to his discourses, or even might have
overawed Luther himself; and his name, like
that of many good men before his time, would
now have been known to the world only for his
honest but ill-timed effort to correEt the cor-
ruptions of the Romish church. On the other
hand, if the Pope had early testified some dif-
pleasure with the vices and excesses of the friars
who had been employed in publishing Indul-
gences; if he had forbidden the mentioning of
controverted points in discourses addressed to the
people; if he had enjoined the disputants on
both fides to be silent; if he had been careful
not to rifque the credit of the church by defin-
ing articles which had hitherto been left unde-
termined, Luther would, probably, have ftopt
1hort at his first discoveries: He would not have
been forced in felf-defence to venture upon new
ground, and the whole controversy might pofli-
bly have died away insensibly ; or being confined
entirely to the schools, might have been carried
on with as little detriment to the peace and unity

of

BOOK II. of the Romish church, as that which the Franz
'"^'. cifcans maintain with the Dominicans, concern-

ing the immaculate conception, or that between
the Jansenists and Jesuits concerning the ope.
rations of grace. But Leo, by flucuating be-
tween these opposite systems, and by embracing
them alternately, defeated the effecs of both.
By an improper exertion of authority, Luther
was exasperated, but not restrained. By a mif-
taken exercise of lenity, time was given for his
opinions to spread, but no progress made to-
wards reconciling him to the church; and even
the sentence of excommunication, which at ano-
ther jun&ure might have been decisive, was de-
layed so long, that it became at last scarcely an
objet of terror.

gndI upon
the conduct SUCH a series of errors in the measures of a
of Luther court, seldom chargeable with mistaking its own

true interest, is not more astonishing than the
wisdom which appeared in Luther's condut.
Though a perfect tranger to the maxims of
human prudence, and incapable, from the im-
petuofity of his temper, of observing them, he
was led naturally by the method in which he
made his discoveries, to carry on his operations
in a manner which contributed more to their fuc-
cess, than if every ftep he took had been pre-
fcribed by the most artful policy. At the time

when

when he set himself to oppose Tetzel, he wis BOOK II.
far from intending that reformation which he 1z
afterwards effeced; and would 'have trembled
with horror at the thoughts of what at last
he gloried in accompliilfng. The knowledge
of truth was not pouted into his mind, all at
once, by any special revelation,; he acquired it
by industry and meditation, and his progress, of
consequence, was gradual. The do&rines of
Popery are so closely conneted, that the expos,
ing of one error conducted him naturally to the
detecion of others; and all the parts of that
artificial fabrick were so linked together, that the
pulling down of one loosened the foundation
of the reft, and rendered it more easy to over-
turn them. In confuting the extravagant tenets
concerning Indulgences, he was obliged to in'
quire into the true cause of our juftificatlori and
acceptance with God. The knowledge of that,
discovered to him by degrees'the inutility of
pilgrimages 'and penances' the vanity of rely-
ing on the interceflion of faints; the impiety ds
worshipping them; the abuses of auricular cori-
feflion ; and the imaginary existence of purga-
tory. The detection of si many errors, led him
of course to confider the'charater of the clergy
who taught them , and their exorbitant wealth,
the revere injun&ion of celibacy, together with
the intolerable rigour of monaftickvows, appeared

VOL. II. L to

BOOK HI. to him the great sources of their corruption.
A-~52. From thence, it was but one ftep to call in quef.

J520.

tion the divine original of the papal power,
which authorized and supported such a system
of errors. As the unavoidable result of the
whole, he diFclaimne the infallibility of the Pope,
the decisions of fchQ.9men, or any ,ther human
authority, and appealed to the word of God as
the only standard of theological truth. To this
gradual progress Luther owed his success. His
hearers were not shocked at first by' any propo.
fition too repugnant to their ancient prejudices,
or too remote from established opinions. They
were condu&ed insensibly from one docrine to
another. Their faith and conviction were able
to keep pace with his discoveries. To the fame
cause was owing the.ipattention, and even indif-
ference, with .which Leo viewed Luther's firfi
?prpceedings. A dire& or violent attack upon
the authority of the church, would at once have
d.awn upon Luther the whole weight of its
rvengeance but as this was far from his thoughts,
as be.,continued long to profess great refpet for
the, Pope, and made repeated offers of fubmif-
sion to his decisions, there seemed to be no
reason for apprehending that he would prove
the author of any desperate revolt; and he was
suffered to proceed ftep by ftep, in undermin,
ing the constitution of the church, until the

2 ,remedy

remedy applied at latP came too late to prodice BooK II.
any effict. S.

BUT whatever advantages Luther's cause de- An inquiry

rived either from the mistakes of his adversaries, causes
or from his own good conduct, the sudden pro- thibChe to
grefs and firm establishment of his doctrines, 'the prreso

of the Re-

must not be ascribed to there alone. The fame formation.
corruptions in the church of Rome which he
condemned, had been attacked long before his
appearance. The fame opinions which he now
propagated, had been published in different
places, and were supported by the fame argu-
ments. Waldus in the twelfth century, Wick-
liss in the fourteenth, and Huss in the fifteenth,
had inveighed against the errors of Popery with
great boldness, and confuted them with more
ingenuity and learning than could have been
expeted in those illiterate ages in which they
flourished. But all there premature attempts
towards a reformation proved abortive. Such
feeble lights, incapable of dispelling the dark.
ness which then covered the church, were soon
extinguiihed; and though the doctrines of these
pious men produced some effects, and left some
traces in the countries where they taught, they
were neither extensive nor considerable. Many
powerful causes contributed to facilitate Lu-
ther's progress, which either did not exist, or

L a did

Boos tl. did not operate with full 'force in their days;

SMO. and at the critical and mature juncture when

he appeared, circumfiances of every kind con.
curred in rendering each ftep that he took fuc-
cefsful.

Th.e log THE long and scandalous schism which di-
schism in 0
the four- vided the church, during the latter part of the
teenth cen.
tury. fourteenth, and the beginning of the fifteenth

centuries, had' a great effect in diminilhing the
veneration with which the world had been ac-
customed to view the papal dignity. Two or
three contending Pontiffs roaming about Europe
at a time; fawning on the Princes whom they
wanted to gain; squeezing the countries which
acknowledged their authority; excommunica-
ting their rivals, and cursing those who adhered
to them, discredited their pretensions to infal-
libility, and exposed both their persons and their
office to contempt. The laity, to whom all
parties appealed, came to learn that some right
of private judgment belonged to them, and ac-
quired the exercise of it so far as to chufe,
among there infallible guides, whom they would
please to follow. The proceedings of the coun-
cils of Constance and Basil, spread this dif.
refpe& for the Romish fee till wider, and by
their bold exertion of authority in deposing and
ele&ing Popes, taught the world that there was

in

in the church a jurifdi:tion superior even to the BooK II.
papal power, which they had long believed to
be supreme.

THE wound given on that occasion to the Theponti-

papal authority was scarcely healed up, when Alexander
the pontificates of Alexander VI. and Julius II. JIl,, rl
both able princes, but detestable ecclefiafticks,
raised new scandal in Christendom. The pro-
fligate morals of the former in private life; the
fraud, the injuitice and cruelty of his publick
administration, place him on a level with those
tyrants, whose deeds are the greatest reproach
to human nature. The latter, though a stranger
to the odious passions which prompted his pre-
deceffor to commit so many unnatural crimes,
was under the dominion of a retlefs and ungo-
vernable ambition, which scorned all confidera-
tions of gratitude, of decency, or of justice,
when they obftru&ted the execution of his
schemes. It was hardly possible, to be firmly
persuaded that the infallible knowledge of a
religion, whose chief precepts are purity and
humility, was deposited in the breasts of the
impious Alexander, or the overbearing Julius.
The opinion of those who exalted the authority
of a council above that of the Pope, spread
wonderfully under their pontificates: And as
the Emperor and French Kings, who were alter-

L 3 nately

BOOK II. nately engaged in hostilities with those ative

i- , Pontiffs, permitted and even encouraged their

fubjeds to expose their vices with all the vio-
lence of invetive, and all the petulance of ridi-
cule, men's ears being accustomed to there, were
not shocked with the bold or ludicrous dif-
courses of Luther and his followers concerning
the papal dignity.
Thrimmo. Nor were such excefles. confined to the head

bal lives of
thelergy, of the church alone. Many of the dignified

clergy, secular as well as regular, being the
younger sons of noble families, who had afumed
the ecclesiastical character for no other reason
but that they found in the church stations of
great dignity and affluence, were accustomed
totally to negle&t the duties of their office, and
indulged themselves without reserve in all the
vices to which great wealth and idleness natu-
rally give birth. Though the inferior clergy
were prevented by their poverty from imitating
the expensive luxury of their superiors, yet gross
ignorance and low debauchery rendered them
as contemptible as the other were odious '. The

severe

t The corrupt tate of the church prior to the Reforma-

lion, is acknowledged by an author, who was bothl abund,
antly able to judge concerning thi, matter, and who was
Bot overforward to confcfi it. ", For some years (fays
lllvrwinc) before the Lutheran and Calviniftick herefies

were

revere and unnatural law of celibacy, to which BOOK If.
both were equally subjet, occasioned such irre- H O.
gularities, that in several parts of Europe the
concubinage of priests was not only permitted,
but enjoined. The employing of a remedy so
contrary to the genius of the Christian religion,
is the strongest proof that the crimes it was
intended to prevent were both numerous and
flagrant. Long before the sixteenth century,
many authors of great name and authority give
such descriptions of the difrolute morals of the
clergy, as seem almost incredible in the present
age s. The voluptuous lives of ecclefiafticks

occasioned

were published, there was not (as contemporary authors
testify) any severity in ecclefiafticaljudicatories, any difci-
pline with regard to morals, any knowledge of sacred lite-
rature, any reverence for divine things, there was not almost
any religion remaining." Bellarminus Concio. xxviii.
Oper. tom. vi. col. 296. edit. Colon. 1617. apud Gerdefii
Hill. Evan. Renovati, vol. i. p. 25.

g Centum Gravamina Nationif. German. in Fafciculo

Rer. Expetend. & Fugiendarum, per Ortuinum Gratium,
vol. i. 361. See innumerable passages to the fame pur-
pose in the appendix, or second volume, published by Edw.
Brown. See also Herm. Vonder Hardt, Hill. Lit. Reform.
pars iii. and the vail collections of Walchius in his four
volumes of Monumenta medii a:vi. Gotting. 1757.

The authors I have quoted enumerate the vices of the

clergy. When they ventured upon ations manifcilly cri-
minal, we may conclude that they would be less scrupulous
with refpet to the decorum of behaviour. Accordingly
their neglet& of the decent condut suitable to their pro-

L 4 feflion,

RooK If. occasioned great scandal, not only because their

L20 manners were inconfifent with their sacred cha.

rafter; but the laity being accustomed to fee
several of them raised from the lowefl stations
to the greatest affluence, did not shew the fame
indulgence to their excesses, as to those of per-
sons poffcffed of hereditary wealth or grandeur;
and viewing their condition with more envy,
they censured their crimes with greater severity.
Nothing, therefore, could be more acceptable
to Luther's hearers, than the violence with
which he exclaimed against the immoralities of
churchmen, and every person in his audience
could, from his own observation, confirm the
truth of his invectives

feflion, seems to have given great offence. In order to il.
lufRrate this, I Ihall transcribe one passage, because it is
taken not from any author whose professed purpose it was
to describe the improper condntt of the clergy; and who,
from prejudice or artifice, may be supposed to aggravate
the charge againf them. The Emperor Charles IV. in a
letter to the archbishop of Mentz, A, D. 1359, exhorting
him to reform the disorders of the clergy, thus expretfes
ihmfelf: " De ChriRi patrimonio, ludos, hatiludia & tor-
neamentaexercent; habitum militarem cum praetgxtis aureis
.& argenteis geflant, & calceos militares; comam & barbam
nutriunt, & nihil quod ad vitam & ordinem ecclefiafticum
fpeClat, ofRendunt. Militaribus fe duntaxat & fecularibus
afibus, vita & moribus, in fuse falutis difpendium, & ge-
nerale populi fcandalum, immifcent." Codex Diploma-
ticus Anecdotorum, per Val. Ferd. Gudcnum, 4to. vol iii.
. 4381

THz

THI scandal of there crimes was greatly in- BOOK II.

creased by the facility with which such as corn- 152.
mitted them, obtained pardon. In all the Eu- The fcili;t

with which
ropean kingdoms, the impotence of the civil these immo.

ralitits were

magiltrate, under forms of government ex- pardond.
tremely irregular and turbulent, made it necef-
fary to relax the rigour of justice, and upon
payment of a certain fine or composition pre-
fcribed by law, judges were accustomed to remit
farther punishment, even of the most atrocious
crimes. The court of Rome, always attentive
to the means of augmenting its revenues, imi-
tated this pracice, and by a prepolterous ac.
commodation of it to religious concerns, granted
its pardons to such transgressors as gave a fum
of money in order to purchase them. As the
idea of a composition for crimes was then fami-
liar, this firange traffick was so far from shock-
ing mankind, that it soon became general; and
in order to prevent any imposition in carrying
it on, the officers of the Roman chancery pub-
lifhed a book, containing the precise fum to be
exated for the pardon of every particular fin.
A deacon guilty of murder was absolved for
twenty crowns. A bishop or abbot might affaf-
finate for three hundred livres. Any ecclefiaftick
might violate his vows of chastity even with
the most aggravating circumstances, for the
third part of that fum. Even such shocking

crimes,

BOOK ir. crimes, as occur seldom in human life, and

-o. perhaps exist only in the impure imagination of

a casuist, were taxed at a very moderate rate.
When a more regular and perse& mode of dif.
pensing justice came to be introduced into civil
courts, the pra&ice of paying a composition for
crimes went gradually into disuse; and mankind
having acquired more accurate notions concern.
ing religion and morality, the conditions on
which the court of Rome beflowed its pardons
appeared impious, and were confidered as one
great source of ecclesiastical corruption h,

The exorbi- THIS degeneracy of manners among the
i'f.th clergy might have been tolerated, perhaps, with
chubh, greater indulgence, if their exorbitant riches and

power had not enabled them, at the fame time,
to oppress all other orders of men. It is the
genius of superstition, fond of whatever is pom.
pous or grand, to set no bounds to its liberality
towards persons whom it esteems sacred, and to
think its expreflions of regard defective unless
it hath raised them to the heighth of wealth
and authority. Hence flowed the extensive
revenues and jurisdiction poffifled by the church
in every country of Europe, and which were

h Fafcicul. Rer. Expet. & Fug. 1. 35*5 J. G. Schelhornii

Amanit. Literar. Francof£ 1725, voL ii. 3g69. Dition. dc
Bayle, Artic. Banck & Tuppiuu. Taxa Cancellar. Romang,
Edit. Francof. 1651. pailim.

become

become intolerable to the laity from whose un. BOOK II.
discerning bounty they were at first derived. ;

THE burden, however, of ecclesiastical op. particularly

preflion had fallen with such peculiar weight on
the Germans, as rendered them, though natu-
rally exempt from levity, and tenacious of their
ancient customs, more inclinable than any people
in Europe to liften to those who called on them
to aflert their liberty. During the long contests
between the Popes and Emperors concerning
the right of investiture, and the wars which
there occasioned, most of the considerable Ger-
man ecclefiafticks joined the papal fation; and
while engaged *in rebellion against the head of
the Empire, they seized the Imperial revenues,
and usurped the Imperial jurifdition within
their own dioceses. Upon the re-eftablihment
of tranquillity, they still retained these ufurpa-
tions, as if by the length of an unjust possession
they had acquired a legal right to them. The
Emperors, too feeble to wrest them out of their
hands, were obliged to grant the clergy fiefs of
those vast territories, and they enjoyed all the
immunities as well as honours which belonged to
feudal barons. By means of these, many bishops
and abbots in Germany were not only eccle-
fiafticks, but princes, and their characer and

manners

BooK It. manners partook more of the licence, too fre.
1520. quent among the latter, than of the fantity

which became the former .

whete the THE unsettled state of government in Ger.
clergy dfurp.
ed a great many, and the frequent wars to which that
prtof the country was exposed, contributed in another

manner towards aggrandizing ecclefiafticks.
The only property, during those times of anar.
chy, which enjoyed security from the oppreflion
of the great, or the ravages of war, was that
which belonged to the church. This was owing,
not only to the great reverence for the sacred
character prevalent in those ages, but to a super-
flitious dread of the sentence of excommuni-
cation, which the clergy were ready to denounce
against all who invaded their poffeflions. Many
observing this, made a surrender of their lands
to ecclefiafticks, and consenting to hold them in
fee of the church, obtained as its vassals a de-
gree of safety, which without this device they
were unable to procure. By such an increase
of the number of their vassals, the power of
ecclefiafticks received a real and permanent aug-
mentation; and as lands, held in fee by the
limited tenures common in those ages, often re-
turned to the persons on whom the fief depend-

F. Paul, HiAory of Ecclesias. Benefices, p. o07.

ed,

ed, considerable additions were made in this BOOK Ir.
way to the property of the clergy k.

THE solicitude of the clergy in providing for The vat

the safety of their own perrons, was still greater perron'i'f
than that which they displayed in securing their eccleiaf-
poffeflions; and their efforts to attain it were
gill more successful. As they were consecrated
to the priestly office with much outward folem-
nity; were distinguished from the reft of man-
kind by a peculiar garb and manner of life;
and arrogated to their order many privileges
which do not belong to other Christians, they
naturally became the objects of exceflive vene-
ration. As a superstitious spirit spread, they
were regarded as beings of a superior species to
the profane laity, whom it would be impious to
try by the fame laws, or to subjet to the fame
punishments. This exemption from civil jurif-
difion, granted at firit to ecclefiafticks, as a
mark of respect, they soon claimed as a point
of right. This valuable immunity of the priest-
hood is aflerted, not only in the decrees of
Popes and councils, but was confirmed in the
most ample form by many of the greatest Em-
perors '. As long as the clerical character re-

k F. Paul, Hilt. of Eccles. Benef. p. 66. Boulainvilliers,
Etat. de France, tom. i. 169. Lond. 1737.

1 Goldafti ConRfitut. Imperial. Francof. 1673. vol. ii.
92, 107.

mained,

BooK 1. mained, the perfan ofatnecdlefiati k was sacred;
' ,.S . 'and unless he were degraded from his office,

the unhallowed hand of the civil judge durst
not touch him. But as the power of degra.
dation was lodged in the fpiritualcourts, the
difficulty and expence of obtaining such a fen.
tence, too often fesured 'absolute impunity to
offenders. Many assumed the clerical charater
for no other reason, than that it might screen
them from the punishment which their a&ions
deserved ". The German nobles complained
loudly, that there anointed malefa&tors, as they
call themn, seldom suffered capitally, even for
the most atrocious crimes; and their indepen.
dence on the civil magifirate is often mentioned
in the remonstrances of the diets, as a privilege
equally pernicious to society, and to the morals
of the clergy.

Their en- WHILE the clergy alferted the privileges of
creach-

en cson their own order with so much zeal, they made
tion jfitd continual encroachments upon those of the laity.
laity. All causes relative to matrimony, to testaments,

to usury, to legitimacy of birth, as well as those
which concerned ecclesiastical revenues, were
thought to be so connected with religion, that
they could be tried only in the spiritual courts.

m Rymer'8 Facdera, vol.xiii. 532. n Centum Gra-
vam. 31.

Not

Not satisfied with this ample jurifdi&ion, which BOOK 1n.
extended!to one half of the subje&s which give iC,
rife to.litigation among men, the clergy, with
wonderful industry, and by a thousand inven-
tions, endeavoured to draw all other causes into
their own courts °. As they had engrossed the
whole learning known in the dark ages, the
spiritual judges were commonly so far superior
in knowledge and abilities to those employed in
the secular courts, that the people at first fa-
voured any stretch that was made to bring their
affairs under the cognizance of a judicature, on
the decisions of which they could rely with
more perfet confidence. Thus the interest of
the church, and the inclination of the people,
concurring to elude the jurifdiAion of the lay-
magistrate, soon reduced it almost to nothing P.
By means of this, vast power accrued to eccle-
fiafticks, and no inconsiderable addition was
made to their revenue by the sims paid in those
ages to such as administered jutice.

THE penalty by which the spiritual courts Thedread-

ful eficas

enforced their sentences, added great weight and of piritual
terror to their jurisdiction. The censure of ex- cenLure$'
communication was instituted originally for pre-
serving the purity of the church; that obstinate

° Giannone Hifl. of Naples, book xix § 3.
P Centum Gravam. § 9, 56, 64.

offenders,

Book II, offenders, whose impious tenets or profane lives

were a reproach to Christianity, might be cut
off from the society of the faithful: This, eccle.
fiafticks did not scruple to convert into anengine
for promoting their own power, and infliaed
it on the most frivolous occasions. Whoever
despised any of their decisions, even concerning
civil matters, immediately incurred this dreadful
censure, which nots only excluded them from
all the privileges of a Christian, but deprived
them of their rights as men and citizens 9; and
the dread of this rendered even the most fierce
and turbulent spirits obsequious to the authority
of the church.

The devices NOR did the clergy negle& the proper me-
of eccleiar
ticks to f- thods of preserving the wealth and power which
curpe hir they had acquired with such industry and ad-

dress. The polffefions of the church, being
consecrated to God, were declared to be unalien-
able; so that the funds of a society which was
daily gaining, and could never lose, grew to
be immense. In Germany, it was computed
that the ecclefiafticks had got into their hands
more than one half of the national property .
In other countries, the proportion varied; but
the share belonging to the church was every
where prodigious. These vast pofleflons were

1 Centum Gravam. § 34. r Centum Gravam. § 28.

not

not subjef to the burdens imposed on the lands Boos II*
of the laity. The German clergy were exempted " -o. '
by law from all taxes'; and if, on any extra-
ordinary emergence, ecclefiafticks were pleated
to grant some aid towards supplying the publick
exigencies, this was confidered as a free gift
flowing from their own generosity, which the
civil magistrate had no title to demand, far less
to exat. In consequence 6f this strange sole-
cifm in government, the laity in Germany had
the mortification to find themselves loaded with
excessive impositions, because such as possessed
the greatest property were freed from any obli-
gation to support, or to defend the state.

GRIEVOUS, however, as the exorbitant wealth The GeC

and numerous privileges of the clerical order Kma.ickle
were to the other members of the Germanick M""ny f-.
body, they would have reckoned it some miti- rer
gation of the evil, if there had been possessed
only by ecclefiafticks residing among themselves,
ho would have been less apt to make an im-
roper use of their riches, or to exercise their
tights with unbecoming rigour. But the bishops
of Rome having early put in a claim, the boldest
that ever human ambition suggested, of being
supreme and infallible heads of the Chritian
church; they, by their profound policy and

I Centum Gravam. § 28. Golk'afi Conft. Imper. ii. 79,
o8. PfeffelHift. duDroitPubl. 350, 374.
Vo.. II. M unwearied

BOOK I1. unwearied perseverance, by their address in

; 1" availing themselves of every circumstance which

occurred, by taking advantage of the fuperfli.
tion of some Princes, of the necessities of others,
and of the credulity of the people, at length
established their pretensions, in opposition both
to the interest and common sense of mankind.
Germany was the country which these eccle.
fiaftical sovereigns governed with most absolute
authority. They excommunicated and deposed
some of its most illustrious Emperors, and ex.
cited their fubjeEts, their ministers, and even
their children, to take arms againit them. AmidR
these contests, the Popes continually extended
their own immunities, spoiling the secular Prin.
ces gradually of their most valuable prero.
gatives, and the German church felt all the
rigour of that oppression which flows from sub.
jeEtion to foreign dominion, and foreign ex.
actions.

Nominated T HE right of conferring benefices, which the
by the op. Popes usurped during that period of confusion,

was an acquisition of great importance, and
exalted the ecclesiastical power upon the ruins
of the temporal. The Emperors and other
princes of Germany had long been in poffeflion
of this right, which served to increase both their
authority and their revenue. But by wresting

ii

it out of their hands, the Popes were enabled Boos IT.
to fill the Empire with their own creatures; 53'.
they accuflomed a great body of every prince's
fubjets to depend not upon him but upon the
Roman fee; they bestowed upon strangers the
richest benefices in every country, and drained
their wealth to supply the luxury of a foreign
court. Even the patience of the most super-
Ritious ages mutinied under such oppression
and so loud and frequent were the complaints
and murmurs of the Germans, that the Popes,
afraid of irritating them too far, consented, con-
trary to their usual practice, to abate somewhat
of their pretensions, and to reft satisfied with
the right of nomination to such benefices as
happened to fall vacant during fix months in
the year, leaving the disposal of the remainder
to the princes and other legal patrons '.

BUT the court of Rome easily found eXpe- The exe.

dients for

dients for eluding an agreement which put such rlhainig
restraints on its power. The praaice of refer- ofthPope,
ving certain benefices in every country to the in'cff'ca
Pope's immediate nomination, which had been
long known, and often complained of, was ex-
tended far beyond its ancient bounds. All the
benefices possessed by Cardinals, or any of the

t F. Paul, Hilt. of Eccles. Benef. 20+. Gold. Conjit,
Imper. i. 408.

M 2 numerous

BOOK lI. numerous officers in the Roman court; those
i""- held by persons who happened to die at Rome,

or within forty miles of that city on their journey
to or from it; those which became vacant by
translation, with many others, were included in
the number of reserved benefices; JuliusII. and
Leo, firetching the matter to the utmost, often
collated to benefices where the right of referva-
tion had not been declared, on pretence of hav-
ing mentally reserved this privilege to them-
selves. The right of reservation, however, even
with this extension, had certain limits, as it
could be exercised only where the benefice was
a&ually vacant; and therefore, in order to ren-
der the exertion of papal power unbounded,
expelative graces, or mandates nominating a
person to succeed to a benefice upon the first
vacancy that should happen, were brought into
use. By means of these, Germany was filled
with persons depending on the court of Rome,
from which they received such reversionary
grants; princes were defrauded, in a great de-
gree, of their prerogatives; the rights of lay-
patrons were pre-occupied, and rendered almost
entirely vain ".

u Centum Gravam. j zl. Fafcic. Rer. Expet. &c. 334.

Gold. Coni. Imper. i. 391, 404, 405. F. Paul, Hilt. of
Eccl. Benef. 167, 199.

THE

THE manner in which there extraordinary Boor II.

powers were exercised, rendered them Rill more ,;2.
odious and intolerable. The avarice and ex- venality of
tortion of the court of Rome, were become ex- Ron..
ceflive almost to a proverb. The sale of bene-
sices was so notorious, that no pains were taken
to conceal, or to difguile it. Companies of
merchants openly purchased the benefices of
different diftrits in Germany from the Pope's
miniflers, and retailed them at an advanced
price". Pious men beheld with deep regret
these fimoniacal transactions, so unworthy the
ministers of a christian church; while politi-
cians complained of the loss sustained by the
exportation of so much wealth in that irreligious
traffick.

THE fums, indeed, which the court of Rome It dtl,;a

other cnlln-

drew by its itated and legal impositions from all tries fthcir
the countries acknowledging its authority, were al
so confidcrable, that it is not strange that
Princes, as well as their subjects, murmured at
the smallest addition made to them by unnecef-
fary or illicit means. Every ecclefilaical person,
upon his admission to his benefice, paid annats,
or one year's rent of his living, to the Pope;
and as that tax was exaCted with great rigour,
its amount was prodigious. To this must be
added, the frequent demands made by the Popes

* Fficic Rer. Expet. i. 359.

M 3 of

BOOK If. of free gifts from the clergy, together with the

S'°'* extraordinary levies of tenths upon ecclefiaRical

benefices, on pretence of expeditions against the
Turks, seldom intended, or carried into execu-
tion; and from the whole, the vast proportion
of the revenues of the church, which flowed con.
tinually to Rome, may be estimated.

The un;itd Stitf were the dissolute manners, the exor.
thfCafuae, . bitant wealth, the vail power and privileges of

the clergy before the Reformation; such the op-
preilive rigour of that dominion which the Popes
had established over the christian world; and
such the sentiments concerning them that pre-
vailed in Germany at the beginning of the fix.
teenth century. Nor has this sketch been copied
from the controversial writers of that age, who,
in the heat of disputation, may be suspected of
having exaggerated the errors, or of having mif-
represented theconduca of that church which they
laboured to overturn; it is formed upon more au-
thentic evidence, upon the memorials and re-
monstrances of the Imperial diets, coolly enume-
rating the grievances under which the Empire
groaned, in order to obtain the redress of them.
Diffatisfadion must have risen to a great height
among the people, when these grave assemblies
exprefied themselves with such acrimony; and if
they demanded the abolition of those enormities
with so much vehemence, the people, we may be

a aarured,

assured, uttered their sentiments and desires in BooK II.
bolder and more virulent language.

To men thus prepared for thaking off the Men ~re-

yoke, Luther addressed himself with certainty of P"^'1Ao m"
success. As they had long felt its weight, and ther's oPi-

nions,

had born it with impatience, they listened with
joy to the firit proposal for procuring deliver.
ance. Hence proceeded the fond and eager
reception that his dotrines met with, and the
rapidity with which they spread over all the pro
vinces of Germany. Even the impetuofty ,n: k^. tle.-
fierceness of Luther's spirit, his confidtc,ce in flis.
asserting his own opinions, and the arrogance as
well as contempt wherewith he treated all who
differed from him, which, in ages of greater
moderation and refinement, have been reckoned
defecs in the character of that reformer, did not
appear exceflive to his contemporaries, whose
minds were strongly agitated by those interesting
controversies which he carried on, and who had
themselves endured the rigour of papal tyranny,
and seen the corruptions in the church against
which he exclaimed.

NOR. were they offended at that gross fcur-

rility with which his polemical writings are
filled, or at the low buffoonery which he some-
times introduces into his gravest discourses. No
dispute was managed in thole rude times with-
out a large portion of the former and the lat-

M 4 ter

3ooK II. ter was common, even on the most solemn oc-
45;o. cairons, and in treating the noft sacred fubjets.

So far were either of there from doing hurt to
his cause, that invective and ridicule had rome
effect, as well as more laudable arguments, in
exposing the errors of popery, and in determin-
ing mankind to abandon them,

The ffft BESIDE all these causes of Luther's rapid
of the n-
vcntiunof progrcfs, arising from the nature of his enter-
thepge^f prize, and the juncture at which he undertook
ft¢Ron:- it, he reaped advantage from some foreign and

adventitious circumstances, the beneficial influ-
ence of which none of his forerunners in the fame
courc had enjoyed. Among these may be rec-
koned the invention of the art of printing,
about half a century before his time. By this
fortunate discovery, the facility of acquiring and
of propagating knowledge was wonderfully in-
creased, and Luther's books, which must other-
wife have made their way (lowly and with un-
certainty into distant countries, iprcad at once
all over Europe. Nor were they read only by
the rich and the learned, who alone had access
to books before that invention; they got into
the hands of the people who, upon this appeal
to them as judges, ventured to examine and to
reject many doEtrines, which they had formerly
been required to believe, without being taught
tq ppderftand them.

THs

THE revival of learning at the fame period, BooK Ir.

was a circumstance extremely friendly to the .
Reformation. The study of the ancient Greek And of the

revival of

and Roman authors, and the discovery of that learning.
liberal and found knowledge which they con-
tain, rouzed the human mind from the profound
lethargy in which it had been funk during feve-
ral centuries. Mankind seem, at that period, to
have recovered the powers of inquiring and of
thinking, faculties of which they had long loft the
use; and fond of the acquisition, they exercised
them with great boldness upon all subjects.
They were not now afraid of entering an un-
common path, or of embracing a new opinion.
Novelty appears rather to have been a recom-
mendation of a doEtrine; and instead of being
flartled when the daring hand of Luther drew
aside, or tore the veil which covered established
errors, the genius of the age applauded and
aided the attempt. Luther, though a stranger
to elegance in taste or composition, zealously
promoted the cultivation of ancient literature;
and sensible of its being necessary in audying
the scriptures, he himself had acquired confi-
derable knowledge both in the Hebrew and
Greek tongues. Melancthon, and some other
of his disciples, were eminent proficients in the
polite arts; and as the fame barbarous monks
who opposed the introducion of learning into

Germany,

BOOK II. Germany, let themselves with equal fierceness

L O" against Luther's opinions, and declared the good

reception of the latter to he the .effct of the
progress which the former had made, the cause
of learning and of the Reformation came to be
confidered as closely conneced, and, in every
country, had the fame friends and the fame ene.
mies. This enabled the reformers to carry on
the contest at first with great superiority. Eru.
dition, industry, accuracy of sentiment, purity
of composition, even wit and raillery, were wholly
on their fide, and triumphed with ease over illi-
terate monks, whose rude arguments, expressed
in a perplexed and barbarous style, were found
insufficient for the defence of a system, the er-
rors of which, all the art and ingenuity of its
later and more learned advocates have not been
able to palliate.

Luther id. THAT bold spirit of inquiry, which the revi.
ed by per-
font who val of learning excited in Europe, was so favour.
did not wilh
his fluccs. able to the Reformation, that Luther was aided

in his progress, and mankind were prepared to
embrace his doctrines, by persons who did not
with success to his undertaking. The greater
part of the ingenious men who applied to the
itudy of ancient literature, towards the close of
the fifteenth century, ,and the beginning of the
sixteenth, though they .bd no intention, and

perhaps

perhaps no with, to overturn the caablifhed Booi if.
system of religion, had discovered the absurdity '`'
of many tenets and pra&ices authorized by the
church, and perceived the futility of rhofe argu-
ments, by which illiterate monks endeavoured
to defend them. Their contempt of these advo-
cates for the received errors, led them frequently
to expose the opinions which they supported,
and to ridicule their ignorance with great free-
dom and severity. By this, men were pre-
pared for the more serious attacks made upon
them by Luther, and their reverence both for
the doctrines and persons against whom he in-
veighed, was considerably abated. This was
particularly the cafe in Germany. When the
first attempts were made to revive a taste for
ancient learning in that country, the Ecclefiafticks
there, who were still more ignorant than their
brethren on the other fide of the Alps, set them-
selves to oppose its progress with more active
zeal and the patrons of the new studies, in re-
turn, attacked them with greater violence. In
the writings of Reichlin, Hutten, and the other
revivers of learning in Germany, the corruptions
of the church of Rome are censured with an
acrimony of style, little inferior to that of Lu-
ther himself y.

Y Gerdefius Hit. Evang. Renov. vol. i. p. 141. 157.

Seckend. lib. i. p. 103. Vonder Hardt, Hifi. Literar. Re-
form. pars ii,

FROM

BooK II. FROM the fame cause proceeded the frequent
`Ah`j ftriftures of Erasmus upon the errors of the
Paricularly church, as well as upon the ignorance and vices
. Ecafmus.

of the clergy. His reputation and authority
were so high in Europe at the beginning of the
sixteenth century, and his works were read with
such universal admiration, that the effect of there
deserves to be mentioned as one of the circum.
Itances which contributed most considerably to-
wards Luther's success. Erasmus, having been
defined for the church, and trained up in the
knowledge of Ecclesiastical literature, applied
himfclf more to theological inquiries than any
of the revivers of learning in that age. His
acute judgment and vail erudition enabled him
to discover many errors, both in the doctrine
and worship of the Romish church. Some of
these he confuted with great solidity of reason-
ing, and force of eloquence. Others he treated
as objects of ridicule, and turned against them
that irrefiltible torrent of popular and satirical
wit, of which he had the command. There was
scarcely any opinion or practice of the Romifll
church which Luther endeavoured to reform,
but what had been previously animadverted upon
by Erafinus, and had afforded him fubjeEt either of
censure or of raillery. When Luther first began
his attack upon the church, Erasmus seemed to
applaud his conduct; he courted the friendlhip
of several of his disciples and patrons, and con-

demned

demned the behaviour and spirit of his adver- BooK If.
saries . He concurred openly with him in in- " ``
veighing against the school divines, as the teach-
ers of a system equally unedifying and obscure.
He joined him in endeavouring to turn the at-
tention of men to the study of the holy scrip-
tures, as the only standard of religious truth a.

VARIOUS circumstances, however, prevented

Erasmus from holding the fame course with
Luther. The natural timidity of his temper;
his want of that force of mind which alone can
prompt a, man to assume the charater of a re-
former b; his excessive deference for persons in
high station; his dread of losing the pensions
and other emoluments which their liberality
had conferred upon him; his extreme love of'
peace, and hopes of reforming abuses gradually,

z Seckend. lib. i. p. 40. 96.
a Vonder Hardt. Hiftor. Literar. Reform. pars i. Gerdef.
Hill. Evang. Renov. i. 147.

b Erasmus himfelfis candid enough to acknowledge this:
"Luther," fays he, "has given us many a wholesome
dotrine, and many a good counsel. I with he had not de-
feated the effect of them by intolerable faults. But if he
had written every thing in the mos unexceptionable man-
ner, I had no inclination to die for the fake of truth.
Every man hath not the courage requisite to make a mar.
tyr; and I am afraid, that if I were put to the trial, I
1hould imitate St. Peter." Epift. Erafmi in Jortin'a Life of
Erafm. vol. i, p. 273.

and

BooK II. and by gentle methods ; all concurred in deter.

;.20, mining him not only to repress and to moderate

the zeal, with which he had once been animated
against the errors of the church '; but to assume
the chara&ter of a mediator between Luther
and his opponents. But though Erasmus soon
began to censure Luther as too daring and im-
petuous, and was at last prevailed upon to
write against him, he must, nevertheless, be
confidered as his forerunner and auxiliary in
this war upon the church. He first scattered
the feeds, which Luther cherished and brought
to maturity. His raillery and oblique censures
prepared the way for Luther's invectives and
more dire& attacks. In this light Erasmus ap-
peared to the zealous defenders of the Romilh
church in his own times d. In this light he
must be confidered by every person conversant
in the history of that period,

IN this long enumeration of the circumflances

which combined in favouring the progress of
Luther's opinions, or in weakening the reliftance
of his adversaries, I have avoided entering into
any discussion of the theological doctrines of
popery, and have not attempted to shew how
repugnant they are to the spirit of Chriftianiiy,

C Jortin's Life of Erafinu, vol. i. p. 258.
d Vonder Hardt. Hilt. Literar. Reform, pus i. p. 2.

and

and how destitute of any foundation in reason, BooK It.
in the word of God, or in the prafice of the 5o
primitive church, leaving there topicks entirely
to ecclesiastical historians, to phofe province
they peculiarly belong. But when we add the
effet of these religious considerations to the
influence of political causes, it is obvious that
the united operation of both on the human
mind, must have been fidden and irresistible.
Though, to Luther's contemporaries, who were
too near perhaps to the scene, or too deeply
interested in it, to trace causes with accuracy,
or to examine them with coolness, the rapidity
with which his opinions spread, appeared to be
so unaccountable, that some of them imputed
it to a certain uncommon and malignant position
of the stars, which scattered the spirit of gid-
diness and innovation over the world , it is
evident, that the success of the Reformation was
the natural efeft of many powerful causes pre-
pared by peculiar providence, and happily con-
spiring to that end. This attempt to investigate
these causes, and to throw light on an event so
singular and important, will not, perhaps, be
deemed an unnecessary digrefion.-I return _-
from it to the course of the history. s-
. .

THE Diet at Worms conducted its'id liera. Proceeding,

of the DIcc
tions with that sow formality peculiar to such at Worm.

Jovii Hiftoria, Lut. 1553. fol. p. 134. 1521.

afTemblies.

BOOK II. assemblies. Much time was spent in establish,
15z. ing some regulations with regard to the internal

police of the Empire. The jurifdition of the
Imperial chanber was confirmed, and the forms
of its proceemng rendered more fixed and
regular. A council of regency was appointed
to assist Ferdinand in the government of the
Empire during his brother's absence; which,
from the extent of the Emperor's dominions,
as well as the multiplicity of his affairs, was an
event that might be frequently expected '. The
itate of religion was then taken into confide-

Th Empe. ration. There were not wanting some plausible
rOr'$ vieWS

ithregard reasons which might have induced Charles to
toLuther. have declared himself the protector of Luther's

cause, or at least to have connived at its pro-
grefs. If he had poeffeled no other dominions
but those which belonged to him in Germany,
and no other crown betides the Imperial, he
might have been disposed perhaps to favour a
man, who asserted so boldly the privileges and
immunities for which the Empire had itruggled
so long with the Popes. But the vast and dan-
gerous schemes which Francis I. was forming
against Charles, made it necessary for him to
regulate his condut by views more extensive
than those which would have suited a German

f Pont. Henter. Rer. Auftr. lib. viii. c. ii. p. 195.
Pfeffel Abregc Cbironol. p. 598.

prince

pnrnce and it being of the utmost importance Boot I.
to secure te eope's friendship, this determined I
hilm c treat Luther with great severity, as the
most effe&ual method of soothing Leo into a
concurrence with his meaftres. His eagerness
to acconplilh this, rendered him not unwilling
to gratify the papal legates in Germany, who
insisted that, without any delay or formal deli.
beration, the diet ought to condemn a man
whom the Pope had alr*dy excommunicated
as an incorrigible heretick. Such an abrupt
manner of proceeding, however, being deemed
unprecedented and unjust by the members of
the diet, they made a point of Luther's appear- He i, ut.m

ooned to

ing in person, and declaring whether he adhered appear.
or not to those opinions, which had drawn upon
him the censures of the church . Not only
the Emperor, but all the princes through whose
territories he had to pass, granted him a fae-
condu ct agd Charles wrote to him at the fame March ;
time, requiring his immediate attendance on the
diet, and renewing his promises of protection
from any injury or violence b. L.uher did not
hesitate one moment ,about yielding obedience,
and fettout for Worms, attended by the herald
who Wad brought the Emperor'sletter and safe-
condut. While on his journey, many of his
friends, whom the fate of Huss, under similar

s P. Mart. Fp. 722. h Luth. Opr. ii. 4 11.
VOL. 1I. N circum.

BooKII. circumstances, and notwithstanding the fame
''"-. rfecurity of an Imperial fafe-condut, filled with
Hi.s n. solicitude, advised and intreated him not to rufl
daunted
spirit. wantonly into the midst of danger. But Lu-

ther, superior to such terrors, silenced them
with this reply, " I am lawfully called," said
he, " to appear in that city, and thither will I
go in the name of the Lord, though as many
devils as there are tiles on the houses, were
there combined against me'."

Hit recep. THE reception which he met with at Worms,
tion at
Wurm. was such as he might have reckoned a full

reward of all his labours, if vanity and the love
of applause had been the principles by which
he was influenced. Greater crowds assembled
to behold him, than had appeared at the Em-
peror's publick entry; his apartments were daily
filled with princes and personages of the highest
rank k, and he was treated with all the respect
paid to those who poflefs the power of directing
the understanding and sentiments of other men;
an homage, more sincere, as well as more flat.
tering, than any which pre.eminence in birth

The man or condition can command. At his appearance
ner of his
appearance, before the diet, he behaved with great decency,

and with equal firmness. He readily acknow-

Luth. Oper. ii. 412.
k Seckend. 156. Luth. Oper. ii. 414.

ledged

ledged an excess of vehemence and acrimony in Bool II;
his controversial writings, but refused to retract 52
his opinions unless he were convinced of their
falsehood; or to content to their being tried by
any other rule than the word of God. When
neither threats nor entreaties could prevail on
him to depart from this resolution, some of the
ecclefiafticks proposed to imitate the example
of the council of Constance, and by punishing
the author of this pestilent heresy, who was
now in their power, to deliver the church at
once from such an evil. But the members of
the diet refusing to expose the German integrity
to fresh reproach by a second violation of pub-
lick faith; and Charles being no less unwilling
to bring a stain upon the beginning of his admi-
niRration by such an ignominious ation, Lu-
ther was permitted to depart in safety'. A April a6.
few days after he left the city, a severe edit Edia
was published in the Emperor's name, and by a*ga"ftRhm
authority of the diet, depriving him, as an ob-
ftinate and excommunicated criminal, of all the
privileges which he enjoyed as a fubje& of the
Empire, forbidding any prince to harbour or
prote& him, and requiring all to concur in seizing
his person as soon as the term ipecified in his
fafc-condut was expired ".

i F. Paul, His. of Counc. p. 13. Seckend. 16o.
m Gold. Confl. Imperial. ii. 408.

N But

BOOK If. BUT this rigorous decree had no considerable
H-e = effte&, the execution of it being prevented
Hndi Cei, partly by the multiplicity of occupations which
and conceal-

,at Wart- the commotions in Spain, together with the

bwars in Italy and the Low Countries, created

to the Emperor; and partly by a prudent pre-
caution employed by the Elector of Saxony,
Luther's faithful patron. As Luther, on his
return from Worms, was passing near Alten-
stein in Thuringia, a number of horsemen in
malks ruihed suddenly out of a wood, where
the Ele&tor had appointed them to lie in wait
for him, and surrounding his company, carried
him, after dismissing all his attendants, to Wart-
burg, a strong castle not far distant. There
the Elector ordered him to be supplied with
every thing necessary or agreeable, but the place
of his retreat was carefully concealed, until
the fury of the present storm against him began
to abate, upon a change in the political fitua-
tion of Europe. In this solitude, where he re.
mained nine months, and which he frequently
called his Patmos, after the name of that island
to which the apostle John was banished, he
exerted his usual vigour and industry in defence
of his dotrines, or in confutation of his adver-
saries, publishing several treatises, which revived
the spirit of his followers, aftoniihed to a great

degree,

degree, and disheartened at the sudden difap- BOOK II.
pearance of their leader. s

DURING his confinement, his opinions con- Prgrefsof

tinued to gain ground, acquiring the ascendant hs. "i.
in almost every city of Saxony. At this time,
the AuguRinians of Wittemberg, with the ap-
probation of the university, and the connivance
of the Ele&or, ventured upon the first ftep
towards an alteration in the eftablilhed forms of
publick worship, by abolishing the celebration
of private mafies, and by giving the cup as well
as the bread to the laity in administering the fa-
crament of the Lord's supper.

WHATEVER consolation the courage and fuc- Decreeof

cess of his disciples, or the progress of his doc- fity ot Pa
trines in his own country, afforded Luther in his th,"mn.n
retreat, he there received information of two
events, which considerably damped his joy, as
they seemed to lay insuperable obfacles in the
way of propagating his principles in the two
most powerful kingdoms of Europe. One was,
a solemn decree, condemning his opinions, pub-
liWhed by the university of Paris, the most
ancient, and at that time the most refpetable
of the learned societies in Europe. The other
was, the answer written to his book concerning Henry vII.
the Babyloniih captivity by Henry VIII. of asi5nt

N 3 England. th'm

BooK If. England. That young monarch, having been

1521, educated under the eye of a suspicious father,

who, in order to prevent his attending to bufi-
ness, kept him occupied in the study of litera-
ture, still retained a greater love of learning,
and fironger habits of application to it, than
are common among Princes of so afive a dif-
position, and such violent paflions. Being am-
bitious of acquiring glory of every kind, as well
as zealously attached to the Romish church, and
highly exasperated against Luther, who had
treated Thomas Aquinas, his favourite author,
with great contempt, Henry did not think it
enough to exert his royal authority in opposing
the opinions of the reformer, but resolved like-
wife to combat them with scholastic weapons.
With this view he published his treatise on the
Seven Sacraments, which, though forgotten at
present, as books of controversy always are,
when the occasion' that produced them is past,
is not destitute of polemical ingenuity and acute-
ness, and was represented by the flattery of his
courtiers to be a work of such wonderful science
and learning, as exalted him no less above other
authors in merit, than he was distinguished
among them by his rank. The Pope, to whom
it was presented with the greaceft formality in
full consistory, spoke of it in such terms, as if
it had been dicated by immediate inspiration;

and

and as a testimony of the gratitude of the church BooK II.
for his extraordinary zeal, conferred on him the 1,5
title of Defender of tbh Faitb, an appellation
which Henry soon forfeited in the opinion of
those from whom he derived it, and which is
till retained by his fuccefbrs, though the avowed
enemies of those opinions, by contending for
which he merited that honourable diftintion.
Luther, who was not overawed either by the Luther'a

reply to

authority of the University, or the dignity of bth.
the Monarch, soon published his animadversions
on both in a style no less vehement and severe,
than he would have used in confuting his
meanest antagonist. This indecent boldness,
instead of shocking his contemporaries, was
confidered by them as a new proof of his un-
daunted spirit. A controversy managed by dif-
putants so illustrious, drew more general atten-
tion and such was the contagion of the spirit
of innovation, diffused through Europe in that
age, and so powerful the evidence which accom-
panied the dotrines of the reformers on their
first publication, that, in spite both of the civil
and ecclesiastical powers combined againt them,
they daily gained converts both in France and
in England.

How desirous soever the Emperor might be sateof as.
to put a stop to Luther's progress, he was often t'een

N 4 obliged, C^al'aand

BooK IT. obliged, during t/i diet at Worims to turn his

5·2l. thoughts to matters fill imorf intereftiig and

*hith d~iiaidid mte iinmediate aitentiob. A
war was ready t6 brfk out between him and
Frtracis in Navarre, in the Low Couhtries, and
in Italy and it iretdiqi-d either great address to
avrrt the danger, or timely and wife precautions
to iefift 't. Eery cdicumftane, at that junc-
ture, inclined Charles to prefer the former mea-
sure. Spain was torn with intetine commo-
tions. In Italy, he had not hitherto secured
the afliftance of any one ally. In the Low-
Countries, his subje&s trembled at the thoughts
of a rupture with France, the fatal effets of
which on their commerce they had often expe-
rienced. From theft cbnfderations, as well as
from the solicitude 6f Chievres, during his whole
adminitration, to maintain peace between the
two monarchs, proceeded the Emperor's back-
wardhefs to commence hostilities. But Francis
and his ministers did not breathe the fame
pacific spirit. He easily foresaw that concord
could not long subsist, where interest, emula-
tion, and ambition conspired to dissolve it; and
he pofleflId several advantages which flattered
him with the hopes of surprising his rival, and
of overpowering him before he could put him-
self in a posture of defence. The French
King's dominions, from their compa& situation,

from

from theit fubjetion to the royal authority, from BooK ii.
the genius of the people, fond of war, and 5- '
attached to their (overeign by every tie of duty
and affection, were More capable of a great or
sudden effort, than the larger but disunited ter-
ritories of the Emperor, in one part of which
the people were in arms agaimf his minifers,
and in all his prerogative was more snited -than
that of his rival.

THE only princes, in whose power it was to Henryivm.

have kept down, or to have extinguished this E'DPro.'
flame on its first appearance, either negleted to
exert themselves, or were active in kindling and
spreading it. Henry VIII. though he affected
to assume the name of mediator, and both par-
ties made frequent appeals to him, had laid
aside the impartiality which suited that charater.
Wolfey, by his artifices, had estranged him so
entirely from the French King, that he secretly
fomented the discord which he ought to have
composed, and waited only for some decent
pretext to join his arms to the Emperor's ".

LEO's endeavours to excite discord between Lehefi-

rtes be-

the Emperor and Francis were more avowed, tween th
and had greater influence. Not only his duty, riv'a'
as the common father of Christendom, but his

a Hrbert. Fiddea's Life ofWolity, 258.

interest

BooK II. interest as an Italian potentate, called upon the

21 PPope to a& as the guardian of the publick tran.

quillity, and to avoid any measure that might
overturn the system, which after much blood.
shed, and many negociations, was now efta.
blilhed in Italy. Accordingly Leo, who instantly
discerned the propriety of this condut, had
formed a scheme upon Charles's promotion to
the Imperial dignity, of rendering himself the
umpire between the rivals, by soothing them
alternately, while he entered into no close con.
federacy with either; and a Pontiff less am.
bitious and enterprizing, might have saved Eu.
rope from many calamities by adhering to this
plan. But this high-fpirited prelate, who was
still in the prime of life, longed passionately to
diftinguilh his pontificate by some splendid
action. He was impatient to wash away the
infamy of having loft Parma and Placentia, the
acquisition of which reflected so much lustre on
the administration of his predecefror Julius. He
beheld, with the indignation natural to Italians
in that age, the dominion which the Tranfal-
pine, or as they, in imitation of the Roman arro.
gance, denominated them, the barbarous nations,
had attained in Italy. He flattered himself,
that after afifting the one monarch to frip the
other of his poffefions in that country, he
might find means of driving out the vicor in

3 i1

his turn, and acquire the glory of restoring BoorK I-
Italy to the liberty and happiness which it en-. 1 21.
joyed before the invasion of Charles VIII. when
every state was governed by its native princes, ,
or its own laws, and unacquainted with a so-
reign yoke. Extravagant and chimerical as this
proje& may seem, it was the favourite objec
of almost every Italian eminent for genius or
enterprize during great part of the sixteenth
century. They vainly hoped, that by superior
ikill in the artifices and refinements of negocia-
tion, they ihould be able to baffle the efforts
of nations, ruder indeed than themselves, but
much more powerful and warlike. So alluring
was the profpec of this to Leo, that notwith-
tanding the gentleness of his disposition, and
his fondness for the pleasures of a refined and
uxurious cafe, he hastened to disturb the peace
f Europe, and to plunge himself in a danger-
ou war, with an impetuosity scarcely inferior
to that of the turbulent and martial Julius .

IT was in Leo's power, however, to chufe

which of the monarchs he would take for his
confederate against the other. Both of them
courted his friendship; he wavered for some
time between them, and at first concluded an
alliance with Francis. The objec of this treaty

Gpic. lib, xiv. p. 173,

was

Boo: II. was the oonqueft of Naples, which the confede.
. rates agreed to divide between them. The Pope,

it is probable, flattered himlelf, that the brisk
., and ative 'spirit of Francis, seconded by the

fame qualities in his subjects, would get the star
of te flow and wary councils of the Emperor,
and that they might over-run with ease this de.
tched portion of his dominions, ill provided
for defence, and always the prey of every in.
vader; But whether the French King, by dif.
covering too openly his suspicions of Leo's fin.
cerity, disappointed there hopes; whether the
treaty was only an artifice of the Pope's, to cover
the more serious negociations which he was car.
rying on with Charles; whether he was en.
ticed by the profpet of reaping greater advan.
tages from an union with that prince; or whe.
ther he was soothed by the zeal which Charles
had manifested for the honour of the church in

Coneludesa condemning Luther; certain it is, that he soon
c.ty with deserted his new ally, and made overtures of

friendihip, though with great secrecy, to the
Emperor p. Don John Manuel, the fame man
who had been the favourite of Philip, and whole
address had disconcerted all Ferdinand's schemes,
having been delivered, upon the death of that
monarch, from the prison to which he had been
confined, was now the Imperial ambassador at
P Guic lib. xi.p. p175. Mm. de Belly, Par. 1573 P. 4'

Rome,

Rome, and fully capable of improving this fa- Boor It.
vourable disposition in the Pope to his matter's 12'
advantage '. To him the condu& of this nego-
ciation was entirely committed; and being care.
fully concealed from Chievres, whose aversion
from a war with France would have prompted
him to retard or defeat it, an alliance between
the Pope and Emperor was quickly conclu- May .
ded'. The chief articles in this treaty, which
proved the foundation of Charles's grandeur in
Italy, were, that the Pope and Emperor should
join their forces to expel the French out of the
Milanese, the possession of which Ihould be
granted to Francis Sforza, a son of Ludovico
the Moor, who had resided at Trent since the
time his brother Maximilian had been difpof-
sessed of his dominions by the French King;
that Parma and Placentia should be restored to
the church; that the Emperor should afliit the
Pope in conquering Ferrara; that the annual
tribute paid by the kingdom of NaplIs to the
Holy See Ihould be increased; that the Emperor
should take the family of Medici under his pro-
te&ion; that he should grant to the Cardinal of
that name a pension of ten thousand ducats upon
the archbilhoprick of Toledo and fettle lands

q Jovii Vita Leonis, lib. iv. p. 89. ' Guic. 1. xiv.

181. Mem. de Belay, p. 24. Du Mont Corps Diplom.
tom. iv. suppl. p. 96*

a in

BooK II. in the kingdom of Naples to the fame .value
'C2. upon Alexander the natural son of Lorenzo de

Medici.

,eath of

ChievrSeu T tranfating an affair of such moment
thempe. without his participation, appeared to Chievres
zor'a favou-
rite and so decisive a proof of his having loft the afcen.

,iniar.

dant which he had hitherto maintained over the
mind of his pupil, that his chagrin on this ac-
count, added to the melancholy with which he
was overwhelmed on taking a view of the many
and unavoidable calamities attending a war
against France, is said to have lhortened his
days'. But though this, perhaps, may be only
the conjecture of historians, fond of attributing
every thing that befals illustrious personages to
extraordinary causes, and of ascribing even their
diseases and death to the effec of political pas.
sions, which are more apt to disturb the enjoyment
than to abridge the period of life, it is certain
that his Path at this criticaljuncture extinguished
all hopes of avoiding a rupture with France .
This event, too, delivered Charles from a mini-
fter, to whole authority he had been accutorned
from his infancy to submit with such implicit
deference, as checked and depressed his genius,
and retained him in a state of pupillage, unbe-

* Belcarii Comment. de reb. Gallic. 483.
' P. Heuter. Rcr. AuRriac. lib. viii. c. 1. p. 197.

coming

coming his years as well as his rank; but this BOOK Ir.
restraint being removed, the native powers of , -'.
his mind were permitted to unfold themselves,
and he began to display such great talents, both
in council and in execution, as exceeded the
hopes of his contemporaries", and command the
admiration of posterity.

WHILE the Pope and Emperor were pre- Commencea

paring, in consequence of their secret alliance, hofili,,of
to attack Milan, hostilities commenced in ano- in NVa"
ther quarter. The children of John d'Albret,
King of Navarre, having often demanded the
restitution of their hereditary dominions, in terms
of the treaty of Noyon, and Charles having as
often eluded their requests upon very frivolous
pretexts, Francis thought himself authorized by
that treaty to assist the exiled family. The
juncure appeared extremely favourable for such
an enterprize. Charles was at a distance from
that part of his dominions; the troops usually
stationed there, had been called away to quell
the commotions in Spain the Spanish male-
contents warmly solicited him to invade Na-
varre x, in which a considerable faction was ready
to declare for the descendants of their ancient
monarchs. But in order to avoid, as much as
pofllble, giving offence to the Emperor, or

"P. Mart. Ep. 735. x P. Mart. Ep. 721.

King

Boor ii. King ds Englnd- Francir direted forces to be
^7e7 levied, Jsd the war to be carried on, not in his

own name, but in that of Henry d'Albret. The
condu&c of there troops was committed to An.
drew de Foai, de i'Efparre, a young nobleman,
whom his .ear alliance to the unfortunate King
whose battles he was to fight, and what was fill
more powerful, the interest of his fitter, madame
de Chateaubriand, Francis's favourite mistress,
recommended to that important trust, for which

prroref, of he had neither talents nor experience. But as
the Frnch' there was mn army in the field to oppose him,

he became maifer, in a few days, of the whole
kingdom of Navarre, without meeting with any
obftlrution but from the citadel of Pampeluna.
The additional works to this fortress, begun by
Kimenes, were ftll unfinished; nor would its
Rlight refitance have defcrved notice, if Ignatio
Loyola, a Bifcayan gentleman, had not been
dangerously wounded in its defence. During
the progress of a lingering cure, Loyola hap.
pened to have no other amusement than what
he found in reading the lives of the faints:
The effe&tof-this on his mind, naturally enthu.
ltitic, ,but ambitious and daring, was to inspire
him with such a 'defre of emulating the glory
of thefefabulous worthies of the Romiih church,
as led him into the wildest and most extravagant
adventures, which terminated at last in inftitut-
ing the society of Jesuits, the most political and

best

best regulated of all the monaftick orders, and BOOK II.
from which mankind have derived more advan- I",
tages, and received greater hurt, than from any
other of these religious fraternities.

IF, upon the reduction of Pampeluna, L'Es- Theyeatec

Caltile.

parre had been satisfied with taking proper pre-
cautions for securing his conquest, the kingdom
of Navarre might still have remained annexed
to the crown of France, in reality, as well as in
title. But, puihed on by youthful ardour, and
encouraged by Francis, who was too apt to be
dazzled with success, he ventured to pass the
confines of Navarre, and to lay siege to Lo-
grogno, a small town in Castile. This rouzed
the Castilians, who had hitherto beheld the rapid
progress of his arms with great unconcern, and
he dissensions in that kingdom being almost
ompofed, both parties exerted themselves with
mulation in defence of their country; the one,
that it might efface the memory of past mifcon-
dui by its present zeal; the other, that it might
dd to the merit of having subdued the Empe-
or's rebellious fubjecs, that of repulsing his
oreign enemies. The sudden advance of their
roops, together with the gallant defence made
y the inhabitants of Logrogno, obliged the
rench general to abandon his rash enterprize.
'he Spanish army, which increased every day,
arafling him during his retreat, he, instead of
VOL. 11. 0 taking

Booi II. taking shelter under the cannon of Pampeluna,
1521, or waiting the arrival of some troops which were

They are marching to join him, attacked the Spaniards,
defeated, anddriten though far superior to him in number, with
out of Na-
larre. great impetuosity, but with so little conduct,

that his forces were totally routed, he himself,
together with his principal officers, was taken
prisoner, and Spain recovered pofleffion of Na.
varre in still shorter time than the French had
spent in the conquest of it r.

Moaiilt;es WHILE Francis endeavoured to justify his
begun in
the Low invasion of Navarre, by carrying it on in the
C..ntrieg.

name of Henry D'Albret, he had recourse to an
artifice much of the fame kind, in attacking an.
other part of the Emperor's territories. Robert
de la Mark, lord of the small but independent
territory of Bouillon, situated on the frontiers
of Luxembourg and Champagne, having aban.
doned Charles's service on account of an en.
croachment which the Aulick council had made
on his jurifdi&ion, and having thrown himself
upon France for protection, was easily persuaded,
in the heat of his resentment, to fend a herald to
Worms, and to declare war against the Emperor
in form. Such extravagant insolence in a petty
prince furprized Charles, and appeared to him
a certain proof of his having received promises
of powerful support from the French King.

v Mem. de BeUay, p. z2. P. Mart. Ep. 726.

2 The

The justness of this conclusion soon became Boorc I.
evident. Robert entered Luxembourg with ,152.
troops levied' in France, by the King's conni-
vance, though seemingly in contradiction to his
orders, and after ravaging the open country,
laid siege to Vireton. Of this Charles coma
plained loudly, as a direct violation of the peace
subsisting between the two crowns, and fum,
moned Henry VIII. in terms of the treaty con-
cluded at London in the year one thousand five
hundred and eighteen, to turn his arms against
Francis as the first aggressor. Francis pretended
that he was not answerable for Robert's condu&,
whose army fought under his own ifandards,
and in his own quarrel; and affirmed, that, con-
trary to an express prohibition, he had seduced
some subje&s of France into his service; but
Henry paid so little regard to this evasion, that
the French King, rather than irritate a prince
whom he tfill hoped to gain, commanded de la
Mark to diiband his troops ,

THE Emperor, mean while, was assembling

an army to chastise Robert's insolence. Twenty
thousand men, under the count of Nassau, in-
vaded his little territories, and in a few days
became masters of every place in them but Sedan.
After making him feel so sensibly the weight of

' Mem. de Bellay, p. 22, &c. Mem. de Fleuranges, p.
33., &c.

O a his

BOOK II. his mailer's indignation, Nassau advanced to:

z,. wards the frontiers of France; and Charles

knowing that he might presume so far on Henry's
partiality in his favour, as not to be over-awed
by the fame fears which had reitrained Francis,
ordered his general to besiege Moufon. The
cowardice of the garrison having obliged the go.
vernor to surrender almost without resistance,

s;ege of Nassau invested Mezieres, a place at that time
Mrzierea
by the im- of no considerable strength, but so advantage.
perai ls oufly situated, that by getting possession of it,

the Imperial army might have penetrated into
the heart of Champagne, in which there was
hardly any other town capable of obftruting its
progress. Happily for France, its monarch,
sensible of the importance of this fortress, and
of the danger to which it was exposed, com-
mitted the defence of it to the chevalier Bayard,
distinguished among his contemporaries by the
appellation of The Knight without fear, and with.
out reproach a. This man, whose prowess in com-
bat, whose puncilious honour and formal gal.
lantry, bear a nearer resemblance, than any thing
recorded in history, to the characer ascribed to
the heroes of chivalry, possessed all the talents
which form a great general. These he had
many occasions of exerting in the defence of
Mezieres; partly by his valour, partly by his
condu&, he protracted the siege to a great length,

* Oeuvres de Brantome, tom. vi. 1i4.

'and in the end obliged the Imperialists to raise BOOK ;T.
it, with infamy and loss b. Francis, at the head '
of a numerous army, soon retook Moufon, and raised.
entering the Low Countries, made several con-
quests of small importance. In the neighbour-
hood of Valenciennes, through an excess of cau-
tion, an error with which he cannot be often
charged, he loft an opportunity of cutting off
the whole Imperial army '; and what was still
of more consequence, he disgusted the constable
Bourbon, by giving the command of the van to
the duke D'Alencon, though this post of honour
belonged to Bourbon, as a prerogative of his
office.

DURING these operations in the field, a con- Augut.

Congress at
grefs was held at Calais under the mediation of Clais, un-

der the me.

Henry VIII. in order to bring all differences to diation of
an amicable issue; and if the intentions of the England,
mediator had corresponded in any degree to his
profeflions, it could hardly have failed of pro-
ducing some good effet. Henry committed the
sole management of the negociation, with unli-
mited powers, to Wolfey; and this choice alone
was sufficient to have rendered it abortive. That
prelate, bent on attaining the papal crown, the.
great obje& of his ambition, and ready to facri-
fice every thing in order to gain the Emperor's

b Mem. dc Bellay, p. 25, &c.
c P. Mart. Ep. 747. Mem. de Bellay, 35.

0 3 interefi,

Boor II. interest, was so little able to conceal his par.
^i5Va tiality, that, if Francis had not been well ac-

quainted with his haughty and vindi&ive tem.
per, he would have declined his mediation.
Much time was spent in inquiring who had be-
gun hostilities, which Woliey affeced to repre-
sent as the principal point; and by throwing
the blame of that on Francis, he hoped tojuftify,
by the treaty of London, any alliance into which
without my his matter Should enter with Charles. The con-

ditions on which hostilities might be terminated,
came next to be confidered; but with regard
to these, the Emperor's proposals were such as
discovered either that he was utterly averse to
peace, or that he knew Wolfey would approve
of whatever terms thould be offered in his name.
He demanded the reiticution of the dutchy of
Burgundy, a province, the possession of which
would have given him acces into the heart of
the kingdom; and required a discharge of the
homage due to the crown of France for the
counties of Slanders and Artois, which none of
his ancestors had ever refused, and which he
had bound himself by the treaty of Noyon to
renew. These terms, to which an high.fpirited
prince would scarcely have listened, after the
disasters of the most unfortunate war, Francis
rejeted with great disdain; and Charles ihew-
ing no inclination to comply with the more
equal and mQodratc propositions of the French

monarch,

monarch, that he lhould restore Navarre to its BOOK I1.
lawful prince, and withdraw his troops from 21,.
the siege of Tournay, the congress broke up
without any other efFe&, than that which attends
unsuccessful negociations, the exasperating of
the parties, whom it was intended to reconcile 4

DURING the continuance of the congress, "gi,

Wolfey, on pretence that the Emperor himself France be
would be more willing to make reasonable con- Emperor
cessions than his ministers, made an excursion vilI.
to Bruges, to meet that monarch. He was
received by Charles, who knew his vanity, with
as much refpeft and magnificence as if he had
been king of England. But instead of advan-
cing the treaty of peace by this interview,
Wolfey, in his master's name, concluded a
league with the Emperor against Francis; in
which it was stipulated, that Charles Ihould in-
vade France on the fide of Spain, and Henry
in Picardy, each with an army of forty thousand
men; and that, in order to strengthen their
union, Charles should espouse the Princess Mary,
Henry's only child, and the apparent heir of his
dominions *. Henry produced no better rea-
sons for this measure, equally unjust and impo.
litick, than the article in the treaty of London,

P. Mart. Ep. 739. Herbert.
a Rymcr, Fodcr, xiii. Herbert.

0 4 by

4.

BoOKc I. by which he pretended that he was bound to

Cit, take arms against the French King as the sirs

aggrefor; and the injury which he alleged
Francis had done him, in permitting the duke
of Albany, the head of a fation in Scotland
which opposed his intereit, to return into that
kingdom. He was influenced, however, by
other considerations. The advantages which
accrued to his fubjeats from maintaining an
exact neutrality, or the honour that resulted to
himself from adting as the arbiter between the
contending princes, appeared to his youthful
imagination so inconsiderable, when compared
with the glory which Charles and Francis reaped
from leading armies or conquering provinces,
that he determined to remain no longer in a
itate of inactivity. Having once taken this re-
solution, his inducements to prefer an alliance
with Charles were obvious. He had no claim
upon any part of that Prince's dominions, most
of which were so situated, that he could not
attack them without great difficulty and dif-
advantage; whereas several maritime provinces
of France had been long in the hands of the
English monarchs, whose pretensions, even to
the crown of that kingdom, were not as yet
altogether forgotten ; and the poffeflion of Ca-
lais not only gave him ea)y access into some of
there provinces, but in cafe of any disaster,, as-

forded

forded him a secure retreat. While Charles BOOK I,.
attacked France upon one frontier, Henry flat- L ,vJ
tered himself that he would find little resistance
on the other, and that the glory of re-annexing
to the crown of England the ancient inheritance
of its monarchs on the continent, was reserved
for his reign. Wolfey artfully encouraged these
vain hopes, which led his master into such mea-
fures as were most subservient to his own secret
schemes; and the Englilh, whose hereditary
animosity against the French was apt to rekindle
on every occasion, did not disapprove of the
martial spirit of their sovereign.

MEANWHILE the league between the Pope Hof;litin

and Emperor produced great effects in Italy, inltay.
and rendered Lombardy the chief theatre of
war. There was, at that time, such contrariety
between the character of the French and Ita-
lians, that the latter submitted to the govern-
ment of the former with greater impatience,
than they expressed under the dominion of other
foreigners. The phlegm of the Germans and
gravity of the Spaniards, suited their jealous
temper and ceremonious manners better than
the French gaiety, too prone to gallantry, and
too little attentive to decorum. Lewis XII.
however, by the equity and gentleness of his
administration, and by granting the Milanese

more

Boos H. more extensive privileges than thole they had

"z~. enjoyed under their native princes, had over-

come, in a great rneafure, their prejudices, and
reconciled them to the French government.
Francis, on recovering that dutchy, did not
imitate the example of his predecessor. Though
too generous himself to oppress his people, his
boundless confidence in his favourites, and his
negligence in examining into the conduct of
those whom he entrusted with power, embol-
dened them to venture upon many a&s of

The Mil-. oppression. The government of Milan was
Pused with committed by him to Odet de Foix, Mare.
the French
govern. chal de Lautrec, another brother of Madame

de Chateau.Briand, an officer of great expe-
rience and reputation, but haughty, imperious,
rapacious, and incapable either of listening to
advice, or of bearing contradicion. His info-
lence and exactions totally alienated the assec.
tions of the Milanese from France, drove many
of the considerable citizens into banilhment,
and forced others to retire for their own safety.
Among the las was Jerome MoronS, vices
chancellor of Milan, a man whose genius for
intrigue and enterprize distinguished him in an
age and country, where violent fations, as well
as frequent revolutions, affording great scope
for such talents, produced or called them forth
in great abundance. He repaired to Francis

Sforza,

Sforza, whose brother Maximilian he had be- BooK II.
trayed; and fufpe&ing the Pope's intention of ,52,
attacking the Milanese, although his treaty with
the Emperor was not yet made publick, he
proposed to Leo, in name of Sforza, a scheme
for furprizing several places in that dutchy by
means of the exiles, who, from hatred to the
French, and from attachment to their former
matiers, were ready for any desperate enter-
prize. Leo not only encouraged the attempt,
but advanced a considerable fum towards the
execution of it; and when through unforeseen
accidents it failed of success in every part, he
allowed the exiles, who had assembled in a body,
to retire to Reggio, which belonged at that time
to the church. The Marechal de Foix, who
commanded at Milan in absence of his brother
Lautrec, who was then in France, tempted with June 24.
the hopes of catching at once as in a snare, all
the avowed enemies of his mailer's government
in that country, ventured to march into the
ecclesiastical territories, and to invest keggio.
But the vigilance and good condut of Guic-
ciardini the historian, governor of that place,
obliged the French general to abandon the en-
terprize with disgrace , Leo, on receiving this The Pope
intelligence, with which he was highly pleated, ag;ain
as it furnilhed him a decent pretext for a rup- F"""''

f Quic, lib. xiv, 183. Mem. do Bellay, p. 38, $cc.

ture

BooK II. ture with France, immediately assembled the
l5e, consistory of Cardinals. After complaining bit-

terly of the hostile intentions of the French
King, and magnifying the Emperor's zeal for
the church, of which he had given a recent
proof by his proceedings against Luther, he
declared that he was constrained in felf-defence,
and as the only expedient for the security of
the ecclesiastical state, to join his arms to those
of that prince. For this purpose, he now pre-
tended to conclude a treaty with Don John
Manuel, although it had really been2 signed
ofme months before this time; and he pub-
lickly excommunicated De Foix, as an impious
invader of St. Peter's patrimony.
War t the LEO had already begun preparations for war

by taking into pay a considerable body of
Swiss; but the Imperial troops advanced so
lowly from Naples and Germany, that it was
the middle of autumn before the army took the
field under the command of Prosper Colonna,
the mollt eminent of the Italian generals, whole
extreme caution, the effect of long experience
in the art of war, were opposed with great pro-
priety to the impetuosity of the French. In
the mean time, De Foix dispatched courier
after courier to inform the King of the danger
which was approaching. Francis, whose forces

3 were

were either employed in the Low Countries, or BooK II.
assembling on the frontiers of Spain, and who !
did not expect so sudden an attack in that
quarter, sent ambassadors to his allies the Swiss,
to procure from them the immediate levy of an
additional body of troops; and commanded
Lautrec to repair forthwith to his government.
That general, who was well acquainted with
the great neglet of ceconomy in the adminiftra-
tion of the King's finances, 'and who knew how
much the troops in the Milanese had already
suffered from the want of their pay, refused to
set out, unless the fum of three hundred thou-
sand crowns was immediately put into his hands.
But the King, Louile of Savoy, his mother,
and Semblancay, the superintendent of finances,
having promised, even with an oath, that on
his arrival at Milan he should find remittances
for the fum which he demanded; upon the
faith of this, he departed. Unhappily for
France, Louise, a woman deceitful, vindictive,
rapacious, and capable of sacrificing any thing
to the gratification of her paflions, but who had
acquired an absolute ascendant over her son by
her maternal tenderness, her care of his edu-
cation, and her great abilities, was resolved not
to perform this promise, Lautrec having in.
curred her displeasure by his haughtiness in
neglecting to pay court to her, and by the free-

dom

BooK Ji. dom with which he had talked concerning somd
jsi' of her adventures in gallantry, the, in order to

deprive him of the honour which he might have
gained by a successful defence of the Milanese,
seized the three hundred thousand crowns def-
tined for that service, and detained them for her
own use.

Progref o LAUTREC, notwithstanding this cruel difap.
the Impe-
,iaUfe. pointment, found means to assemble a confi-

derable army, though far inferior in number to
that of the confederates. He adopted the plan
of defence most suitable to his situation, avoid-
ing ta pitched battle with the greatest care,
while he harlafed the enemy continually with
his light troops, beat up their quarters, inter.
cepted their convoys, and covered or relieved
every place which they attempted to attack. By
this prudent conduc, he not only retarded their
progress, but would have soon wearied out the
Pope, who had hitherto defrayed almost the
whole expence of the war, as the Emperor,
whole revenues in Spain were dissipated during
the commotions in that country, and who was
obliged to support a numerous army in the
Netherlands, could not make any considerable
remittances into Italy. But an unforeseen acci-
dent disconcerted all his measures, and occa-
sioned a fatal reverse in the French affairs. A

body

body of twelve thousand Swiss served in Lau- Boot if.
trec's army under the banners of the republick, I,
with which France was in alliance. By a law,
no less political than humane, established among
the cantons, their troops were not hired out by
publick authority to both the contending par-
ties in any war. This law, the love of gain
had sometimes eluded, and private persons had
been allowed to enlist in what service they
pleated, though not under the publick banners,
but under those of their officers. The Cardinal
of Sion, who still preserved his interest among
his countrymen, and his enmity to France, ha-
ving prevailed on them to permit a levy of this
kind, twelve thousand Swiss joined the army of
the confederates. The cantons, when they saw
so many of their countrymen marching under
hostile standards, and ready to destroy each other,
became so sensible of the infamy to which they
would be exposed, as well as the loss they might
susser, that they dispatched couriers, command-
ing their people to leave both armies, and to
return forthwith into their own country. The
Cardinal of Sion, however, had the address, by
corrupting the messengers appointed to carry
this order, to prevent it from being delivered
to the Swiss in the service of the confederates;
but being intimated in due form to those in
the French army, they, fatigued with the length
of the campaign, and murmuring for want of

pay,

BooK U. pay, instantly yielded obedience, in spite of

Lautrec's remonstrances and intreaties.
.I 521.

AFTER the desertion of a body which formed

the strength of his army, Lautrec durfi no
longer face the confederates. He retired to.
wards Milan, encamped on the banks of the
Adda, and placed his chief hopes of safety in
preventing the enemy from passing the river;

Belme f an expedient for defending a country so preca.
ilan. rious, that there are few examples of its being

employed with success against any general of
experience or abilities. Accordingly Colonna,
notwithstanding Lautrec's vigilance and activity,
passed the Adda' with little loss, and obliged
him to Ihut himself up within the walls of
Milan, which the confederates were preparing
to besiege when an unknown person, who never
afterwards appeared either to boast of this ser-
vice, or to claim a reward for it, came from the
city and acquainted Morone, that if the army
would advance that night, the Ghibelline or
Imperial fation would put them in poffeflion
of one of the gates. Colonna, though no friend
to rash enterprizes, allowed the marquis de
Pescara to advance with the Spanih infantry,
and he himself followed with the reft of his
troops. About the beginningof night, Pescara
arriving at the Roman gate in the suburbs,

furprized

furprized the soldiers whom he found there; BooK II.
those posted in the fortifications adjoining to l152.
it, immediately fled; the marquis, seizing the
works which they abandoned, and pushing for-
ward inceflancly, though with no less caution
than vigour, became master of the city with
little bloodshed, and almost without refitance;
the vi&tors being as much astonished as the van-
quifhed at the facility and success of the attempt.
Lautrec retired precipitately towards the Vene-
tian territories with the remains of his shattered
army; the cities of the Milanese, following the
fate of the capital, surrendered to the confede-
rates; Parma and Placentia were united to the
ecclesiastical Rfate, and of all their conquerts in
Lombardy, only the town of Cremona, the
castle of Milan, and a few inconsiderable forts
remained in the hands of the French '.

LEO received the accounts of this rapid fuc- Death ot

cession of prosperous events with such transports cL X
of joy, as brought on (if we may believe the
French historians) a night fever, which being
neglected, occasioned his death on the second
of December, while he was fill of a vigorous
age, and at the height of his glory. By this

s Guic. 1. xiv. 19o, &c. Mem. de Bellay, 42, &c. Ga-

leacii Capella de reb. gest. pro reftitut. Fran. Sfortia
Comment. ap, Scardium, vol. ii. J80, &c.

VOL, II. P Unexpeacd

BooK I1. unexpeced accident, the spirit of the confede.
,5Z,. racy was broken, and its operations suspended.

The Cardinals of Sion and Medici left the
army that they might be present in the con.
dave; the Swiss were recalled by their fupe.
riors; some other mercenaries disbanded for
want of pay; and only the Spaniards, and a
few Germans in the Emperor's service, remained
to defend the Milanese. But Lautrec, destitute
both of men and of money, was unable to im.
prove this favourable opportunity in the manner
which he would have wilhed. The vigilance
of Morone, and the good condu& of Colonna,
disappointed his feeble attempts on the Mila.
151. nefe. Guicciardini, by his address and valour,

repulsed a bolder and more dangerous attack
which he made on Parma h.

Adrisvn GREAT discord prevailed in the conclave,
pope. which followed upon Leo's death, and all

the arts natural to men grown old in in-
trigue, when contending for a prize so valu-
able, were pratifed. Wolsey's name, notwith-
standing all the Emperor's magnificent promires
to favour his pretensions, of which that prelate
did not fail to remind him, was hardly men-
tioned in the conclave. Julio Cardinal de Me-
dici, Leo's nephew, who was more eminent than

Guic. 1. xiv. 214.

any

any other member of the sacred college for his Booc i.
abilities, his wealth, and his experience in trani- 1 h22
a&ing great affairs, had already secured fifteen
voices, a number sufficient, according to the
forms of the conclave, to exclude any other
candidate, though not to carry his own election.
All the old cardinals combined against him,
without being united in favour of any other
person. While these fations were endeavour-
ing to gain, to corrupt, or to weary out each
other, Medici and his adherents voted one
morning at the scrutiny, which according to
form was made every day, for Cardinal Adrian
of Utrecht, who at that time governed Spain
in the Emperor's name. This they did merely
to protrat time. But the adverse party in-
flantly closing with them, to their own amaze-
ment and that of all Europe, a stranger to Italy,
unknown to the persons who gave their suffrages
in his favour, and unacquainted with the man-
ners of the people, or the interest of the tate,
the government of which they conferred upon
him, was unanimoufy raised to the papal throne, January 9.
at a juncture so delicate and critical, as would
have demanded all the sagacity and experience
of one of the most able prelates in the sacred
college. The Cardinals themselves, unable to
give a reason for this firange choice, on account
of which, as they marched in proceflion from

Pa the

;,O0K IT. the conclave, they were loaded with insults and

curses by the Roman people, ascribed it to an
immediate impulse of the Holy Ghost. It may
be imputed with greater certainty to the influ.
ence of Don John Manuel, the Imperial am.
baffador, who by his address and intrigues faci.
litated the eletion of a person devoted to his
master's service, from gratitude, from interelt,
and from inclination'.

wa re. BESIDE the influence which Charles acquired
ncwed in ' · V o
the Mill by Adrian's promotion, it threw great lustre on

. his administration. To bellow on his preceptor

such a noble recompence, and to place on the
papal throne a creature whom he had raised,
were aCs of uncommon magnificence and power.
Francis observed, with the sensibility of a rival,
the pre-eminence which he was gaining, and
resolved to exert himself with fre'h vigour, in
order to wrest from him his late conquefis in
Italy. The Swiss, that they might make some
reparation to the French King, for having with-
drawn their troops from his army so unfeafon-
ably, as to occasion the loss of the Milanese,
permitted him to levy ten thousand men in the
republick. Together with this reinforcement,

i Herm. Moringi Vita Hadriani ap. Cafp. Barman. in

Analce. de Hadr. p. 52. Conclave Hadr. Ibid. p.
4-1,' &c.

Lautrec

Lautrec received from the King a small fum of BooK It.
money, which enabled him once more to take z
the field, and after seizing by furprize, or force,
several places in the Milanese, to advance within
a few miles of the capital. The confederate
army was in no condition to obstruct his pro-
grefs; for though the inhabitants of Milan, by
the artifices of Morone, and by the popular de-
clamations of a monk whom he employed, were
inflamed with such enthufialtick zeal against the
French government, that they consented to
raise extraordinary contributions, Colonna must
soon have abandoned the advantageous camp
which he had chosen at Bicocca, and have dif-
miffed his troops for want of pay, if the Swiss
in the French service had not once more extri-
cated him out of his difficulties.

THE insolence or caprice of that people Tle rrnci,

were often no less fatal to their friends, than the atti ,,f
their valour and discipline were formidable to Bicucca.
their enemies. Having now served some months
without pay, of which they complained loudly,
a fum destined for their use was sent from France
under a convoy of horse; but Morone, whose
vigilant eye nothing escaped, posted a body of
troops in their way, so that the party which es-
corted the money durst not advance. On receiv-
ing intelligence of this, the Swiss loft all patience,

P 3 and

BooK II. and officers as well as soldiers crowding around

Lautrec, threatened with one voice instantly to
retire, if he did not either advance the pay
which was due, or promise to lead them next
morning to battle. In vain did Lautrec remon.
ftrate against there demands, representing to
them the impossibility of the former, and the
rashness of the latter, which mufl be attended
with certain destruction, as the enemy occupied
a camp naturally of great strength, and which
by art they had rendered almost inacceflible.
The Swiss, deaf to reason, and persuaded that
their valour was capable of surmounting every
obstacle, renewed their demand with greater
fierceness, offering themselves to form the van.
guard, and to begin the attack. Lautrec,
unable to overcome their obstinacy, complied
with their request, hoping, perhaps, that some
of those unforeseen accidents which so often
determine the fate of battles, might crown this
ralh enterprize with undeserved success; and
convinced that the effets of a defeat could not
be more fatal than those which would certainly
follow upon the retreat of a body which com-
MAy. posed one half of his army. Next morning the

Swiss were early in the field, and marched with
the greatest intrepidity against an enemy deeply
intrenched on every fide, surrounded with artil-
Jery, and prepared to receive them. As they

advanced,

advanced, they sustained a furious cannonade BooK IT.
with great firmness, and without waiting for z
their own artillery, ruffied impetuously upon
the intrenchments. But after incredible efforts
of valour, which were seconded with great spirit
by the French, having loft their bravest officers
and best soldiers, and finding that they could
make no impression on the enemy's works, they
founded a retreat; leaving the field of battle,
however, like men repulsed, but not vanquished,
in close array, and without receiving any mo-
leftation from the enemy.

NEXT day, such as survived set out for their Driven lt

of the Mi.

own country ; and Lautrec, despairing of being Ianefe.
able to make any farther resistance, retired into
France, after throwing garrisons into Cremona,
and a few other places; all which, except the
citadel of Cremona, Colonna soon obliged to
surrender.

GENOA, however, and its territories, remain- Lo eCeno«.

ing subjet to France, still gave Francis confi-
derable footing in Italy, and made it easy for
him to execute any scheme for the recovery of
the Milanese. But Colonna, rendered enter-
prizing by continual success, and excited by the
solicitations of the fation of the Adorni, the
hereditary enemies of the Fregofi, who under

P 4 the

BooK If. the protetion of France poffcffed the chief
'"'"' authority, in Genoa, determined'to attempt the

redution of that Rfate; and accomplished it
with amazing facility. He became master of
Genoa by an accident as unexpected as that
which had given him possession of Milan; and
almost without opposition or bloodihed; the
power of the Adorni and the authority of the
Emperor were eftablilhed in Genoa k,

HlenryVIII. SUCH a cruel fuccefflon of misfortunes asseted
declare.r ar
again.t Francis with deep concern, which was not a
France.
May 29. little augmented by the unexpeced arrival of

an English herald, who, in the name of his
sovereign, declared war in form against France.
This flep was taken in confiquence of the treaty
which Wolfey had concluded with the Emperor
at Brpges, and which had hitherto been kept
secret. Francis, though he had reason to be
furprized with this denunciation, after having
been at such pains to tooth Henry and to gain
his minister, received the herald with great
compofire and dignity'; and without abandon-
ing any of the schemes which he was forming
pgainft the Emperor, began vigorous prepara-
tions for refiting this new enemy, His trea.
fury, however, being exhausted by the efforts

F Jovii Vita Ferdin, Davali, p. 344. Guic. 1. xiv. 233.
! Journal de Louise de Savoic, p. 99 .

which

which he had already made, as well as by the Boon II.
fums he expended on his pleasures, he had re- Sz.
course to extraordinary expedients'for supplying
it. Several new offices were created, and ex-
posed to sale; the royal demesnes were alien-
ated; unusual taxes were imposed; and the
tomb of St. Martin was stripped of a rail of
naffive silver, with which Louis XI. in one of
his fits of devotion, had encircled it. By means
of there expedients he was enabled to levy a
considerable army, and to put the frontier towns
in a good pofure of defence.

THE Emperor, meanwhile, was no less foil- Charles

citous to draw as much advantage as pofible Lnd.
from the accession of such a powerful ally; and
the prosperous situation of his affairs, at this
time, permitting him to set out for Spain, where
his pretence was extremely necessary, he visited
the court of England in his way to that coun-
try. He proposed by this interview not only
to strengthen the bonds of friendship which
united him with Henry, and to excite him to
push the war against France with vigour, but
hoped to remove any disgust or resentment that
Wolfey might have conceived on account of the
cruel disappointment which he had met with in
the late. conclave. His success exceeded his
.most sanguine expectations; and by his artful

address,

BooKII. address, during a relidence of fix weeks in

. England, he gained not only the King and the

minister, but the nation itself. Henry, whose
vanity was sensibly flattered by such a visit, as
well as by the studied refpet with which the
Emperor treated him on every occasion, entered
warmly into all his schemes. The Cardinal,
foreseeing from Adrian's age and infirmities, a
sudden vacancy in the papal fee, dissembled or
forgot his resentment; and as Charles, besides
augmenting the pensions which he had already
fettled on him, renewed his promise of favour.
ing his pretensions to the papacy, with all his in.
terest, he endeavoured to merit the former, and
to secure the accomplishment of the latter, by
fresh services. The nation, sharing in the glory
of its monarch, and pleated with the confidence
which the Emperor placed in the English, by
creating the earl of Surrey his high-admiral,
discovered no less inclination to commence hofti-
lities than Henry himself.

The Engli; IN order to give Charles, before he left Eng-
rInce, land, a proof of this general ardour, Surrey

failed with such forces as were ready, and ra.
vaged the coasts Qs Normandy. He then made
a dercent onBrftaght; where he plundered'and
burnt Mdrlaix, 'ad'fdome other places of less
consequence. After there flight excursions, at-

tended

tended with greater diflonour than damage to BOOK II.
France, he repaired to Calais, and took the corn- 5-z2
mand of the principal army, confiting of sixteen
thousand men; with which, having joined the
Flemiih troops under the count de Buren, he
advanced into Picardy. The army which Fran-
cis had assembled, was far inferior in number
to these united bodies. But during the long withlitte
wars between the two nations, the French had
discovered the proper method of defending their
country against the English. They had been
taught by their misfortunes to avoid a pitched
battle with the utmost care, and to endeavour,
by throwing garrisons into every place capable
of refitance, by watching all the enemy's mo-
tions, by intercepting their convoys, attacking
their advanced posts, and harassing them con-
tinually with their numerous cavalry, to ruin
them with the length of the war, or to beat
them by piece-meal. This plan the duke of
Vendome, the French general in Picardy, pur-
sued with no less prudence than success; and
not only prevented Surrey from taking any town
of importance, but obliged him to retire with
his army greatly reduced by fatigue, by want
of provisions, and by the loss which it had sus-
tained in several unsuccessful fkirmilhes.

THus

BOOK If. THus ended the second campaign in a war

1522. the mos general that hitherto had been kindled

in Europe; and though Francis, by his mother's
ill-timed resentment, by the disgusting insolence
of his general, and the caprice of the mercenary
troops which he employed, had loft his con-
quests in Italy, yet all the powers combined
against him had not been able to make any
imprefflon on his hereditary dominions; and
wherever they either intended or attempted an
attack, he was well prepared to receive them.

Solyman's WHILE the Christian princes were thus waft-
tonqucft of
Rhodec. ing each other's strength, Solyman the Magni-

ficent entered Hungary with a numerous army,
and inverting Belgrade, which was deemed the
chief barrier of that kingdom against the
Turkish arms, soon forced it to surrender. En-
couraged by this ftccefs, he turned his viato-
rious arms against the ifand of Rhodes, the
feat, at that time, of the knights of St. John
of Jerusalem. This small state he attacked
with such a numerous army, as the lords of
Asia have been accustomed in every age to
bring into the field. Two hundred thousand
men, and a fleet of four hundred fail appeared
against a town defended by a garrison consisting
of five thousand soldiers, and fix hundred
knights, under the command of Villiers de

Lisle

L'isle Adam, the grand master, whose wisdom BooK IL
and valour rendered him worthy of that Ration k ~
at such a dangerous juncure. No sooner did
he begin to fufpecA the dcftihiation ofSolyman's
vas armaments, than he dispatched mneffengers
to all the Christian courts, imploring their aid
Mgainft the common enemy. But though every

nnce in that age acknowledged Rhodes to be

the great bulwark of Chriflendom in the east,
.and trusted to the gallantry of its knights as
the best security against the progress of the
'Ottoman arms; though Adrian, with a zeal
which became the head and father of the church,
exhorted'the contending powers, to forget their
private quarrels, and by uniting their arms, to
prevent the Infidels from destroying a society
which did honour to the Christian name; yet so
violent and implacable was the animosity of
both parties, that, regardless of the danger to
which they exposed all Europe, and unmoved
by the intreaties of the grand master, or the
admonitions of the Pope, they suffered Soly-
man to carry on his operations against Rhodes
without disturbance. The grand master, after
incredible efforts of courage, of patience, and
of military conduct during a siege of fix months;
after sustaining many assaults, and disputing
every post with amazing obitinacy, was obliged
at last to yield to numbers, and having ob-

a tained

BooK II. tained an honourable capitulation from the
It, sSultan, who admired' and refpe&ed his virtue,

he surrendered the town, which was reduced to
a heap of rubbish, and destitute of every re-
source a. Charles and Francis, ashamed of ha-
ving occasioned such a loss to Chriffendom by
their ambitious contests, endeavoured to throw
the blame of it on each other, while all Eurojt,
with greater justice, imputed it equally to both.
The Emperor, by way of reparation, granted
the knights of St. John the small island of
Malta, in which they fixed their residence, re-
taining, though with less power and splendour,
their ancient spirit, and implacable enmity to
the Infidels.

= Fontanus de Bello Rhodio ap. Scard. Script. Rer.

German. Vol. ii. p. 88. P. Barre. Hilt. d'Allem. tom.
vii. 57.

# BOOK III.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE
R E I G N

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK III.
C HARLES, having had the fatisfa&ion BOOK II.

*of feeing hostilities begun between France , --a

and England, took leave of Henry, and arrived cilv war
in Spain on the seventeenth of June. He found
that country just beginning to recover order and
strength after the miseries of a civil war to which
it had been exposed during his absence; an ac-
count of the rife and progress of which, as it was
but little connected with the other events which
happened in Europe, hath been reserved to this
place.

No

BooK III. - No sooner was it known that the Cortes ar.
'L,- fembled in Galicia had voted the Emperor a
jnfurlreion fregift, without obtaining the redress of any

one grievance, than it excited universal indig-
Iauy, 1so.' nation. The citizens of Toledo, who confdered

themselves, on account of the great privileges
which they enjoyed, as guardians of the liberties
of the Cafsilian 'commons, finding that no re-
gard was paid to the remonstrances of their de-
puties against that unconstitutional grant, took
arms with tumultuary violence, and seizing the
gates of the city which were fortified, attacked
the al-cazar, or castle, which they soon obliged
the governor to surrender. Emboldened by this
success, they deprived of all authority every per-
son whom they fufpeaed of any attachment to
the caurts .elablilhed a popular form of govern-
meat, compeoed of deputies from the several
parishes in the city, and levied troops in their
own defence. The chief leader of the people
in thefc.infurretions was don John de Padilla,
the eldest son of the commendador of Castile, a
young nobleman of a generous temper, of un-
daunted courage, and possesed of the talents as
well as of the ambition which, in times of civil
discord, raise men to power and eminence'.

* Sandov. p. 77,

THE

THE resentment of the citizens of Segovia BooK litl

produced effets still more fatal. Tordefillas, .2'4o
one of their representatives in the late Cortes, of seowet
had voted for the donative; and being a bold
and haughty man, ventured, upon his return, to
call together his fellow citizens in the great
church, that he might give them, according to
custom, an account of his condu& in that as-
fembly. But the multitude, unable to bear his
insolence, in attempting to justify what they
thought inexcusable, burst open the gates of the
church with the utmost fury, and seizing the
unhappy Tordefillas, dragged him through the
streets, with a thousand curses and intults, to-
wards the place of public execution. In vain
did the dean and canons come forth in proceflion
with the holy sacrament, in order to appease their
rage. In vain did the monks of those mona-
Reries by which they passed, conjure them oil
their knees to spare his life, or at leadi to allow
him time to confess, and to receive abfolutior
of his fins. Without listening to the ditates
either of hupanity or religion, they cried outs
" That the hangman alone could absolve such
a traitor to his country;" they hurried him
along with greater violence; and perceiving that
he had expired under their hands, they hung
him up with his head downwards on the comr

VOL. II Q, mori

RooK ill. mon gibbet b. The fame spirit seized the inha.

',.^ bitants of Burgos, Zamora, and several other

cities; and though their representatives, taking
warning from the fate of Tordefillas, had been
so wife as to save themselves by a timely flight,
they were burnt in effigy, their houses razed to
the ground. and their effeets consumed with fire;
and such was the horror which the people had
conceived against them as betrayers of the pub-
lick liberty, that not one in those licentious mul-
titudes would touch any thing, however va-
luable, which had belonged to themc.

MrafCres of ADRIAN, at that time regent of Spain, had
Ad-ian, in
order to pu. scarcely fixed the feat of his government at Valla.
nifh them.
June 5, dolid, when he was alarmed with an account of
1520' these infurre&ions. He immediately assembled

the council to deliberate concerning the proper
method of fupprefling them. The counsellors
differed in opinion; some infilting that it was
necessary to check this audacious spirit in its in.
fancy by a severe execution ofjuftice; others
advising to treat with lenity a people who had
some reason to be incensed, and not to drive them
beyond all the bounds of duty by an ill-timed
rigour. The sentiments of the former being
warmly supported by the archbishop of Granada,

b P. Martyr. Ep. 671.

Sandov. 103. P. Mart. Ep. 674.

president

president of the council, a person of great au- BooK III.
thority, but cholerick and impetuous, were ap- 1522.
proved of by Adrian, whose zeal to support his
maRfer's authority hurried him into a measure,
to which, from his natural caution and timidity,
he would otherwise have been averse. He com-
manded Ronquillo, one of the King's judges,
to repair instantly to Segovia, which had set the
first example of mutiny, and to proceed againit
the delinquents according to law; and left the
people should be so outrageous as to resist his
authority, a considerable body of troops was
appointed to attend him. The Segovians, fore. His troops
feeing what they might expec from a judge so segovia,
well known for his austere and unforgiving tem-
per, took arms with one content, and having
mustered twelve thousand men, shut their gates
against him. Ronquillo, enraged at this insult,
denounced them rebels and outlaws; and his
troops seizing all the avenues to the town,
hoped that it would soon be obliged to surrender
for want of provisions. The inhabitants, how-
ever, defended themselves with vigour, and hav-
ing received a considerable reinforcement from
Toledo, under the command of Padilla, attacked
Ronquillo, and forced him to retire, with the
loss of his baggage and military chest a.

d Sandov. 1 2. P. Mart. Ep. 679. Miniana, Contin.
p. 1S.

QIua XUPON

BOOK IIT. UPON this Adrian ordered Antoniode Fonseca,

l 2' whom the emperor had appointed commander

and at Me. in chief of the forces in Castile, to assemble an
dina del
cAnpo. army, and to besiege Segovia in form. But the

inhabitants of Medina del Campo, where Cardi.
nal Ximenes had eftablilhed a vast magazine of
military stores, would not susser him to draw
from it a train of battering cannon, or to destroy
their countrymen with those arms which had
been prepared against the enemies of the king.
dom. Ponfeca, who could not execute his orders
without artillery, determined to seize the maga.
zine by force, and the citizens standing on their
Aug t,. defence, he assaulted the town with great brif.

ness: But his troops were so warmly received,
that despairing of carrying the place, he set fire
to some of the houses, in hopes that the citizens
would abandon the walls, in order to save their
families and effects. Instead ofthat, the expedient
to which he had recourse served only to increase
their fury, and he was repulsed with great in.
famy, while the flames spreading from street to
street, reduced to ashes almost the whole town,
one of the most considerable at that time in
Spain, and the great mart for the manufactures
of Segovia, and several other cities. As the
warehouses were then filled with goods for the
approaching fair, the loss was immense, and wa
felt universally. This, added to the impreffior

whici

which such a cruel ation made on a people long BOOK Ilt.
unaccustomed to the horrors of civil war, en- I. 2
raged the Castilians almost to madness. Fonseca
became the obje& of general indignation, and
was branded with the name of incendiary, and
enemy to his country. Even the citizens of
Valladolid, whom the presence of the cardinal
had hitherto restrained, declared that they could
no longer remain inactive fpe&ators of the susser-
ings of their countrymen. Taking arms with
no less fury than the other cities, they burnt
Fonseca's house to the ground, eleced new ma-
giftrates, raised soldiers, appointed officers to
command them, and guarded their walls with
as much diligence as if an enemy had been
ready to attack them.

THE Cardinal, though virtuous and difinte- Adrian dir.

refted, and capable of governing the kingdom troops.
with honour in times of tranquillity, possessed
neither the courage nor sagacity necessary at such
a dangerous jun&ure. Finding himself unable
to check these outrages committed under his
own eye, he attempted to appease the people,
by protesting that Fonseca had exceeded his
orders, and had by his rash condut offended
him, as much as he had injured them. This
condescension, the effee& of irresolution and ti-
midity, rendered the malecontents bolder and

Q. 3 more

BOOK Ill. more insolent; and the Cardinal having soon

L,,3" after recalled Fonseca, and dismissed his troops,

which he could no longer afford to pay, as the
treasury, drained by the rapaciousness of the
Flemish ministers, had received no supply from
the great cities, which were all in arms, the
people were left at full liberty to aft without
controul, and scarcely any shadow of power re.
mained in his hands.

The view NOR were the proceedings of the commons
nfidonof th the effets merely of popular and tumultuary
c',lise of rage; they aimed at obtaining redress of their

political grievances, and an establishment of
publick liberty on a secure basis, objeEts worthy
of all the zeal which they discovered in con-
tending for them. The feudal government in
Spain was at that time in a state more favour-
able to liberty than in any other of the great
European kingdoms. This was owing chiefly
to the number of great cities in that country,
a circumstance I have already taken notice of,
and which contributes more than any other to
mitigate the rigour of the feudal institutions, and
to introduce a more liberal and equal form of
government. The inhabitants of every city
formed a great corporation, with valuable immu-
nities and privileges; they were delivered from
a state of fubjetion and vassalage they were

2 admitted

admitted to a considerable ihare in the legifla- BOOK IIT.
ture; they acquired the arts of industry, with- ,.
out which cities cannot subsist; they accumu-
lated wealth, by engaging in commerce; and
being free and independent themselves, were the
guardians of the publick freedom and indepen-
Jence. The genius of the internal government
established in cities, which even in countries
where defpotick powerprevails most, is democra-
tical and republican, rendered the idea of liberty
familiar and dear to them. Their representatives
in the Cortes were accustomed, with equal spirit,
to check the encroachments of the King, and the
oppression of the nobles. They endeavoured to
extend the privileges of their own order; they
laboured to shake off the remaining incum.
brances with which the feudal tyranny had bur-
dened them; and conscious of being one of the
most considerable orders in the state, were am-
bitious of becoming the most powerful.

THE present juncture appeared favourable for Thir con.

pulhing any new claim. Their sovereign was fth.nL. of
absent from his dominions; by the ill-conduct the Holy
of his ministers he had loft the esteem and assec-
tion of his subjects; the people exasperated by
many injuries had taken arms, though without
concert, almost. by general consent; they were
animated with rage capable of carrying them to

Q, 4 the

Boos 1. the moit violent extremes; the royal treasury

was exhausted ; the kingdom destitute of troops;
and the government committed to a stranger, of
great virtue indeed, but of abilities unequal to
such a trust. The first care of Padilla, and the
other popular leaders who observed and deter.
mined to improve these circumstances, was to
establish some form of union or association among
the malecontents, that they might at with
greater regularity, and pursue one common end;
and as the different cities had been prompted
to take arms by the fame motives, and were
accustomed to confider themselves as a diftind
body from the reft of the subje&s, they did not
find this difficult. A general convention was
appointed to be held at Avila. Deputies ap.
peared there in name of almost all the cities en-
titled to have representatives in the Cortes. They
all bound themselves by solemn oath, to live and
die in the service of the King, and in defence of
the privileges of their order; and assuming the
name of the holy Junta or aifociation, proceeded
tp deliberate concerning the state of the nation,
and the proper method of redrefling its griev-

vlr diCf ances. The first that naturally presented itself,
^an'i au-. was the nomination of a foreigner to be regent;
i°o@ty. this they declared with one voice to be a vio-

lation of the fundamental laws of the kingdom,
and resolved to fend a deputation of their mem-
bers to Adrian, requiring him in their name to

lay

lay aside all theenfigns of his office, and to ab- BooR Il.
Rain for the future from the exercise of a jurif- 15Z2.
dition which they had pronounced illegal .

WHILE theywerepreparing toexecutethis bold Get pof-

felflon of

resolution, Padilla accomplished an enterprize of Qeen
the greatest advantage to the cause. After reliev- Joaa.
ing Segovia, he marched suddenly to Tordefillas, Aug. 2.
the place where the unhappy Queen Joanna
had resided since the death of her husband, and
being favoured by the inhabitants, was admitted
into the town, and became mailer of her person,
for the security of which Adrian had negle&ed
to take proper precautions f. Padilla waited
immediately upon the Queen, and accosting her
with that profound refpe&, which ihe exa&ed
from the few persons whom ihe deigned to ad-
mit into her presence, acquainted her at large
with the miserable condition of her Castilian
ftbjefts under the government of her son, who
being destitute of experience himself, permitted
his foreign ministers to treat them with such
rigour, as had obliged them to take arms in de-
fence of the liberties. of their country. The
Queen, as if Ihe had been awakened out of a
lethargy, expressed great astonishment at what
he said, and told him, that as The had never
heard, till that moment, of the death of her

P. Mart.Ep. 691. f Vita dell' Imper. Carl. V.
dall Als. U!loa. Ven. 1509. p. 67. Miniana, Contin. p. 17.

father,

BooK III. father, or known the sufferings of her people,

S1ZZ. no blame could be imputed to her, but that now

ihe would take care to provide a sufficient re-
medy; and in the mean time, added she, let it
be your concern to do what is neceflary for the
publick welfare. Padilla, too eager in forming a
conclusion agreeable to his wishes, mistook this
lucid interval of reason fora perse& return of that
faculty; and acquainting the Junta with what
had happened, advised them to remove to Tor-
defillas, and to hold their meetings in that place.
This was instantly done; but though Joanna
received very gracioufy an address of the Junta,
beseeching her to take upon her the government
of the kingdom, and in token of her compli-
ance, admitted all the deputies to kifs her hand;
though the was present at a tournament held on
that occasion, and seemed highly satisfied with
both there ceremonies, which were conducted
with great magnificence in order to please her,
She soon relapsed into her former melancholy
and sullenness, and could- never be brought, by
any arguments or intreaties, to sign any one paper
necessary towards the dispatch of bufinefi .

Carryon go THE Junta concealing as much as pollible
,nment in this las circumstance, carried on all their deli-
be' name,

s Sandov. 164. P. Mart. Ep. 685, 686.

berations

berations in her name; and as the Castilians, Book IIr.
who idolized the memory of Isabella, retained -
a wonderful attachment to her daughter, no
sooner was it known that the had consented to
assume the reins of government, than the people
exprefled the most universal and immoderate
joy; and believing her recovery to be compleat,
ascribed it to a miraculous interposition of heaven,
in order to rescue their country from the oppref-
son of foreigners. The Junta, conscious of the ant prie
reputation and power which they had acquired Adli'i of
by teeming to at under the royal authority, were
no longer satisfied with requiring Adrian to resign
the office of regent; they detached Padilla to
Valladolid with a considerable body of troops,
ordering him to seize such members of the coun-
cil as were still in that city, to condu& them to
Tordelillas, and to bring away the teals of the
kingdom, the publick archives, and treasury
books. Padilla, who was received by the citi-
zens as the deliverer of tiis country, executed
his commiflion with great exatnefs; permitting
Adrian, however, still to reside in Valladolid,
though only as a private person, and without
any Ihadow of power h.

TH., Emperor, to whom frequent accounts of The mpc.

these tranfations were transmitted while he was roral"med.
fill in Slanders, was'fenfible of his own impru-

b Sandof. 174. P. Matt. Ep. 791.

dence

BooK III. dence and that of his ministers, in having de.

',
- 1 spifed too long the murmurs and remonstrances

of the Castilians. He beheld, with deep con-
cern, a kingdom, the most valuable of any he
possessed, and in which lay the strength and
sinews of his power, just ready to disown his
authority, and on the point of being plunged in
all the miseries of civil war. But though his
pretence might have averted this calamity, he
could not, at that time, visit Spain without en.
dangering the Imperial crown, and allowing the
French King full leisure to execute his ambi.

'"me'm tious schemes. The only point now to be deli.

fures with
iefpeato berated upon, was whether he ihould attempt
the male-
cntets.l to gain the malecontents by indulgence and con-

celflons, or prepare diretly to suppress them by
force; and he resolved to make trial of the for-
mer, while, at the fame time, if that ihould fail
of success, he prepared for the latter, For this
purpose, he issued circular letters to all the
cities of Castile, exhorting them in most gentle
terms, and with assurances of full pardon, to
lay down their arms; he promised such cities
as had continued faithful, not to exa& from them
the subsidy granted in the late Cortes, and of-
sered the fame favour to such as returned to
their duty; he engaged that no office should be
conferred for the future upon any but native
Castilians. On the other hand, he wrote to the
nobles, exciting them to appear with vigour in

defence

defence of their own rights, and those of the BooK Ilr.
crown, against the exorbitant claims of the corn- s;.
mons he appointed the high admiral, Don
Fadrique Enriquez, and the high constable of
Castile, Don Inigo de Velafco, two noblemen of
great abilities as well as influence, regents of the
kingdom in conjunction with Adrian; and he
gave them full power and inftrutions, if the
obstinacy of the malecontents lhould render it
necessary, to vindicate the royal authority by
force of arms'.

THESE concessions, which, at the time of his The lar

leaving Spain, would have fully satisfied the r,,aof
people, came now too late to produce any effect. th crni
The Junta, relying on the unanimity with which their gricv
the nation Submitted to their authority, elated
with the success which hitherto had accompanied
all their undertakings, and feeing no military
force colleced to defeat or obftru& their de-
signs, aimed at a more thorough reformation of
political abuses. They had been employed for
some time in preparing a remonflrance, contain-
ing a large enumeration not only of the griev.
ances, of which they craved redress, but of such
new regulations as they thought necessary for
the security of their liberties. This remon.
ftrance, which is divided into many articles re-

l P. Heuter. Rer. Autr. lib. viii. c. 6. p. 188.

lating

BooK III. lating to all the different members of which the

constitution was composed, as well as to the
various departments in' the administration of
government, furnifles us with more authentick
evidence concerning the intentions of the Junta,
than can be drawn from the testimony of the
later Spanish historians, who lived in times when
it became fashionable and even necessary to
represent the conduct of the thalecontents in the
worst light, and as flowing from the worst mo-
tives. After a long preamble concerning the
various calamities under which the nation groan.
ed, and the errors and corruption in govern.
ment to which these were to be imputed, they
take notice of the exemplary patience wherewith
the people had endured them, until felf-pre.
servation, and the duty which they owed to
their country, had obliged them to assemble, in
order to provide in a legal manner for their own
safety, and that of the constitution: For this
purpotl, they demanded that the King would
be pleased to return to his Spanith dominions,
and reside there, as all their former monarchs
had done; that he would not marry but with
consent of the Cortes; that if he Ihould be ob-
liged at any time to leave the kingdom, it shall
not be lawful to appoint any foreigner to be
regent; that the present nomination of Cardinal
Adrian to that office shall instantly be declared

void,

void; that he would not, at his return, bring BooK IIL
along with him any Flemings or other flrangers; 522.
that no foreign troops Ihall, on any pretence
whatever, be introduced into the kingdom;
that none but natives hall be capable of hold-
ing any office or benefice either in church or
state; that no foreigner shall be naturalized;
that free quarters ihall not be granted to fol-
diers, nor to the members of the King's house-
hold, for any longer time than fix days, and that
only when the court is in a progress; that all the
taxes Ihall be reduced to the fame state they
were in at the death of Queen Isabella; that
all alienations of the royal demesnes or revenues
since that Queen's death shall be resumed; that
all new offices created since that period Shall be
abolished; that the subsidy granted by the late
Cortes in Galicia shall not be exa&ed; that in
all future Cortes each city shall fend one repre-
fentative of the clergy, one of the gentry, and
one of the commons, each to be ele&ed by his
own order; that the crown ihall not influence
or direc any city with regard to the choice of
its representatives; that no member of the
Cortes Ihall receive an office or pension from
the King, either for himself or for any of his
family, under pain of death, and confiscation of
his goods; that each city or community shall
pay a competent salary to its representatives for

his

BOOK III. his maintenance during his attendance on the

*.M.- Cortes , that the Cortes ihall assemble once in

three years at least, whether summoned by the
King or not, and {hall then enquire into the
observation of the articles now agreed upon,
and deliberate concerning publick affairs; that
the rewards which have been given or promised
to any of the members of the Cortes in Galicia,
{hall be revoked; that no gold, silver, or
jewels, ihall, upon pain of death, be sent out
of the kingdom ; that judges ihall have fixed
salaries assigned them, and Ihall not receive any
share of the fines and forfeitures of persons
condemned by them; that no grant of the
goods of persons accused shall be valid, if given
before sentence was pronounced against them;
that all privileges which the nobles have at any
time obtained, to the prejudice of the commons,
shall be revoked; that the government of cities
or towns {hall not be put into the hands of no.
blemen; that the pofeflions of the nobility
shall be subje&t to all publick taxes in the fame
manner as those of the commons; that an en.
quiry be made into the conduc of such as have
been entrusted with the management of the
royal patrimony since the acceflion of Ferdi.
nand and if the King do not within thirty
days appoint persons properly qualified for that
service, it shall be lawful for the Cortes to
nominate them; that Indulgences shall not be

preached

preached or dispersed in the kingdom until the BooK IIl.
cause of publishing them be examined and ap- 5,,,
proved of by the Cortes that all the money
arising from the sale of Indulgences, .hall be
faithfully employed in carrying on war against
the Infidels; that such prelates as do not reside
in their dioceses fix months in the year, lhall
forfeit their revenues during the time they are
absent; that the ecclesiastical judges and their
officers shall not exar greater fees than those
which are paid in the secular courts; that the
present archbishop of Toledo being a foreigner,
be compelled to resign that dignity, which hall
be conferred upon a Castilian; that the King
lhall ratify and hold as good service done to
him and to the kingdom, all the proceedings of
the Junta, and pardon any irregularities which
the cities may have committed from an excess
of zeal in a good cause: That he hall promire
and swear in the most solemn manner to observe
all these articles, and on no occasion attempt
either to elude, or to repeal them; and that he
lhall never solicit the Pope or any other prelate
to grant him a dispensation or absolution from
this oath and promise k.

SUCH were the chief articles presented by flerpitic
the Junta to their fovcreign. As the feudal in- ,which ir

bzeatbtd.

k Sandov.to6, P. Mart. Ep. 686.
VOL. II. R aitutions

Boocl r. fltutitions in the several kingdoms of Europe
i32o^ were originally the fame, the genius of those

governments which arose from them bore a
strong resemblance to each other, and the regu.
lations which the Castilians attempted to efta.
blifh on this occasion, differ little from those
which other nations have laboured to procure in
their struggles with their monarchs for liberty.
The grievances complained of, and the reme.
dies proposed by the English commons in their
contests with the princes of the house of Stuart,
particularly resemble those upon which the
Junta now insisted. But the principles of liberty
seem to have been better understood at this
period, by the Castilians, than by any other
people in Europe; they had acquired more
liberal ideas with refpet to their own rights and
privileges; they had formed more bold and
generous sentiments concerning government;
and discovered an extent of political knowledge
to which the English themselves did not attain
until more than a century afterwards.

IT is not improbable, however, that the spirit

of reformation among the Castilians, hitherto
unrestrained by authority, and emboldened by
success, became too impetuous, and prompted
the Junta to propose innovations which, by
alarming the other members of the constitution,

proved

proved fatal to their cause. The nobles, who, BOOK HIr.
instead of obftru6ing, had favoured or con- l
Dived at their proceedings, while they confined
their demands of redress to such grievances as
had been occasioned by the King's want of
experience, and by the imprudence and rapa-
cioufnefs of his lteign ministers, were filled Irltate th
with indignation when they began to touch the
privileges of their order, and plainly saw that
the measures of the commons tended no less to
break the power of the aristocracy, than to
limit the prerogatives of the crown. The resent-
ment which they had conceived on account of
Adrian's promotion to the regency, abated cons
fiderably upon the Emperor's railing the con-
fiable and admiral to joint power with him in
that office; and as their pride and dignity were
less hurt by suffering the prince to possess an
extensive prerogative, than by admitting the
high pretensions of the people, they determined
to give their sovereign the afliftance which he
had demanded of them, and began to assemble
their vassals for that purpose.

THE Junta, meanwhile, expected with im. Thedep,.

patience the Emperor's answer to their remon- .te tf di^
ftrance, which they had appointed some d their noot pree

theirtemr n.

number to present. The members entrusted france.
with this commission set out immediately for Oobcr ao.

R a Germany,

BooK III. Germany, but having received at different places

Z2,, certain intelligence from court, that they could

not venture to appear there without endanger.
ing their lives, they ftopt lhort in their journey,
and acquainted the Junta of the information
which had been given them '. This excited
such violent parions as trAfported the whole
party beyond all bounds of prudence, or of
moderation. That a Castilian King should deny
his fubjeas access into his presence, or refuse to
liften to their humble petitions, was represented
as an aft of tyranny so unprecedented and in-
tolerable, that nothing now remained but with
arms in their hands to drive away that ravenous
band of foreigners which encompassed the throne,
who after having devoured the wealth of the
kingdom, found ir necessary to prevent the cries
of an injured people from reaching the ears of
their sovereign. Many insisted warmly on ap-
proving a motion which had formerly been
made, for depriving Charles, during the life

Violent pro. of his mother, of the regal titles and authority,
jde jnt. which had been too rashly conferred upon him

from a false supposition of her total inability for
government. Some proposed to provide a pro-
per person to aflift her in the administration of
public affairs, by marrying the Queen to the
Prince of Calabria, the heir of the Aragonefe

Sandov. 143.

Kings

Kings of Naples, who had been detained in BOOK 11l.
prion since the time that :Ferdinand had dif- i2'
possessed his ancestors of their crown. All
agreed that, as the hopes of obtaining redress
and security merely by presenting their requests
to their sovereign, Jiad kept them too lcng in a
fate of ination, and prevented them from
taking advantage of the unanimity with which
the nation declared in their favour, it was now
necessary to collect their whole force, and to
exert themselves with vigour, in opposing this
fatal combination of the King and nobles against
their liberties =.

THEY soon took .the field with twenty thou- Take the

sand men. Violent disputes arose concerning d
the command of this army. Padilla, the dar-
ling of the people and soldiers, was the only
person whom they thought worthy of this ho-
nour. But Don Pedro de Giron, the eldest son
of the Conde de Uruena, a young nobleman
of the first order, having lately joined the com-
mons out of private resentment against the Em-
peror, the refpet due to his birth, together
with a secret desire of disappointing Padilla, of
whose popularity many members of the Junta
had become jealous, procured him thn office Novemce
of general; though he soon gave them a fatal :3.

" P. Mart. Ep. 68R,

R 3 proof

BooK hir. proof that he possessed neither the experience,
t5.Z. the abilities, nor the tReadinefs which that im.

portant fation required.
'q regents THE regents, meanwhile, appointed Riofeco as

nobi the place of rendezvous for their troops, which,

though far inferior to those of the commons in
number, excelled them greatly in discipline and
in valour. They had drawn a considerable
body of regular and veteran infantry out of
Navarre. Their cavalry, which formed the
chief strength of their army, consisted mostly of
gentlemen accufiomed to the military life, and
animated with the martial spirit peculiar to their
order in that age. The infantry of the Junta
was formed entirely of citizens and mechanicks,
little acquainted with the use of arms. The
small body of cavalry which they had been able
to raise, Was composed of persons of ignoble
birth, and perfec strangers to the service into
which they enered. The-character of the gene-
rals differed no less than that of their troops.
The royalists were commanded by the Conde
de Haro, the constable's eldest son, an officer
of great experience, and of distinguished
abilitisc

Imprudence GIRON marched with his army diretly to
and ill fuc.
Cer. ofthe Riofeco, and seizing the villages and palses
general of aro
the Junta.o asoUd

around it, hoped that the royalists would be BaoK II.
Obliged either to surrender for want of prQvi. zZ.
flons, or to fight with disadvantage before. ll1
their troops were assembled. But he had not
the abilities, nor his troops the patience and:
discipline necessary for the execution of such a.
scheme. The Conde de Haro found little difli-
culty in conduting a considerable reinforce-
ment through all his posts into the town; and
Giron despairing of being able to reduce it,
advanced suddenly to Villa-panda, a place be-
longing to the Constable, in which the enemy
had their chief magazine of provisions. By
this ill-judged motion, he left Tordefillas open
to the royalists, whom the Conde de Haro led
thither in the night, with the utmost secrecy Decembers.
and dispatch; and attacking the town, in which
Giron had..left no other garrison than a regi.
ment of piefts raised by the bishop of Zamora,
he, by break of day, forced his way into it after
a desperate resistance, became master of the
Queen's person, took prisoners many members
of the Junta, and recovered the great feal, with
the other ensigns of government.

BY this fatal blow, the Junta loft all the re-

putation and authority which they derived from.
seeming to a&.by the Queen's commands ; such
of the nobles as had hitherto been wavering or
undetermined in their choice, now joined the

R 4 regents

ooK Ill. regents with all their forces; and an universal
,a;. cqnfternation seized the partizans of the con.

mons. This was much increased by the fufpi.
cions they began to entertain of Giron, whom
they loudly accused of having betrayed Torde-
fillas to the enemy; and though that charge
seems to have been destitute of foundation, the
success of the royalists being owing to Giron's
ill-conduct rather than to his treachery, he so
entirely loft 'credit with his party, that he
resigned his commiiflon, and retired to one of
his castles "

The Jint. SUCH members of the Junta as had escaped
adhere to
,heitrfem. the enemy's hands at Tordefillas, fled to Valla-

dolid; and as it would have required long time
to supply the places of those who were pri.
loners by a new election, they made choice
among themselves of a small number of persons,
to whom they committed the supreme direction
of affairs. Their army, which grew stronger
every day by the arrival of troops from different
parts of the kingdom, marched likewise to Val.
ladolid; and Padilla being appointed com-
mander in chief, the spirits of the soldiery re-
vived, and the whole party forgetting the late
misforttne, continued to express the fame ardent
seal for the liberties of their country, and the

M ^Uclltneoqs Trasa by Dr. Mi;h. Qeddes, vol. i. 278.

fame

fame implacable animosity against their oppref- BooK III.
fors. .

WHAT they food most in need of, was mo- Theirex-

ney to pay their troops. A great par; of the ,pdinsi
current coin had been carried out of the king- moe7.
dom by the Flemings; the flated taxes levied
in times of peace were inconsiderable; com-
merce of every kind being interrupted by the
war, the fum which they yielded decreased daily ;
and the Junta were afraid of disgusting the
people by burdening them with new impositions,
to which, in that age, they were little accuf-
tomed. But from this difficulty they were ex-
tricated by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's
wife, a woman of noble birth, of great abilities,
of boundless ambition, and animated with the
most ardent zeal in support of the cause of the
Junta. She, with a boldness superior to those
superstitious fears which often influence her sex,.
proposed to seize all the rich and magnificent
ornaments in the cathedral of Toledo; but left.
that action, by its appearance of impiety, might
offend the people, hce and her retinue marched
to the church in solemn procession, in mourn-
ing habits, with tears in their eyes, beating
their breasts, and falling on their knees, im.,
plored the pardon of the faints whole shrines
She was about to violate. By this artifice, which

fcrned

B16oK Il. screened her from the imputation of faerilege,

,''' and persuaded the people that necessity and

zeal for a good cause had constrained her, though
with reluaance, to venture upon this action,
she procured a considerable supply of money for
the Junta°. The regents, no left at a loss
how to maintain their troops, the revenues of
the crown having either been diflipated by the
Flemings, or seized by the commons, were ob.
liged to take the Queen's jewels, together with
the plate belonging to the nobility, and apply
them to that purpose; and when these failed,
they obtained a small fum by way of loan from
the King of Portugal '.

Lofet;ime ; THE nobility discovered great unwillingnefi
ith the" to proceed to extremities with the Junta. They
obility. were animated with no lefi hatred than the com.

rnons against the Flemings; they approved
much of several artices in the remonstrance;
they thought the junture favourable, not only
for redrefling past grievances, but for rendering
the constitution more perfct and secure by new
regulations; they were afraid, that while the two
orders of which the legislature was compoied,
wafted each other's strength by mutual hostilities,
the crown would rife to power on the ruin or

* Sandov. 3o8. Did. do Bayle, Art. Padilla.
P. Mart. Ep. 718.

2 weakncfs

weaknec s of both, and encroach no left on the BOOK Ilr.
independence of the nobles, than on the privi- 1sz2.
leges of the commons. To this disposition were
owing the frequent overtures of peace which the
regents made to the Junta, and the continual
negociations they carried on during the progress
of their military operations. Nor were the terms
which they offered unreasonable; for on con-
dition that the Junta would pass from a few
articles most subversive of the royal authority,
or inconsistent with the rights of the nobility,
they engaged to procure the Emperor's consent
to their other demands, which, if he, through
the influence of evil counsellors, ihould refute,
several of the nobles promised to join with them
in order to extort it . Such divisions, however,
prevailed among the members of the Junta, as
prevented their deliberating calmly, or judging
with prudence. Several of the cities which had
entered into the confederacy, were filled with
that mean jealousy and distrust of each other,
which rivalfhip in commerce or in grandeur is
apt to inspire; the constable, by his influence
and promises, had prevailed on the inhabitants
of Burgos to abandon the Junta, and other
noblemen had fiaken the fidelity of some of the
leler cities; no person had arisen among the
commons of such superior abilities or elevation
' P. Mart. Ep. 695, 713, Gcddca'a Tralt, i. 261.

of

BooK nTr. of mindi as to require the direcion of their

1522. affairs; Padilla, their general, was a man of

popular.qualities, - but: difrufted for-that reason
by those of highest rank who adhered to the
Junta; the condut of Giron led the people to
view with suspicion every person of noble birth
who joined their party; so that the strongest
marks of irresolution, mutual difiruft, and me-
diocrity of genius, appeared in all their pro-
ceedings at this time. After many consultations
held concerning the terms proposed by the re-
gents, they suffered themselves to be so carried
away by refcntment against the nobility, that
rejeting all thoughts of accommodation, they
threatened to strip them of the crown-lands,
which they or their ancestors had usurped, and
to re-annex these to the royal domain. Upon
this preposterous scheme, which would at once
have annihilated all the liberties for which they
had been struggling, by-rendering the Kings of
Cafile absolute and independent on their sub.
jets, they were so intent, that they now ex-
claimed with less vehemence against the exac-
tions of the foreign ministers, than against the
immense power and wealth of the nobles, and
seemed to hope that they might make peace
with Charles, by offering to enrich him with
their spoils.

TUE

THE success which Padilla had met with in BooK III.

fveral fiall encounters, and in reducing tome 2S,^
inconsiderable towns, helped to precipitate the Elatedwith

their rucccfa
members of the Junta into this measure, filling in rome

foall ten.

them with such confidence in the valour of their cou te,.
troops, that they hoped for an easy victory over
the royalifis. Padilla, that his army might not
remain inactive, while flushed with good for.
tune, laid siege to Torrelobaton, a place of
greater strength and importance than any that
he had hitherto attacked, and which was de-
fended by a sufficient garrison; and though the
besieged made a desperate resistance, and the ad-
miral attempted to relieve them, he took the M.rch ,
town by storm, and gave it up to be plundered Is''
by his soldiers. If he had marched instantly with
his victorious army to Tordefillas, the head-quar.
ters of the royalists, he could hardly have failed
of making an effetual imprefion on their troops,
furprized at the briskness of his operations, and
far from being of sufficient firength to give him
battle. But the fickleness and imprudence of the Imprudence

or their con.

Junta prevented his taking this ftep. Incapa- dut,
ble, like all popular associations, either of carry.
ing'on war, or of making peace, they listened
again to overtures of accommodation, and even
agreed to a short suspension of arms. This ne.
gociation terminated in nothing; but while it
was carrying on, many of Padilla's soldiers, un-

acquainted

BcoK IJI. acquainted with the restraints of discipline, went

tLs. off with the booty which they had got at Torre.

lobaton; and others, wearied out by the unusual
length of the campaign, deserted '. The confta.
ble too had leisure to aflemble his forces at Bur.
gos, and .t prepare every thing for marching;
and as soon as the truce expired, he effected a
juncion with the Conde de Haro, in spite of all
Padilla's efforts to prevent it. They advanced
immediately towards Torrelobaton, and Padilla
finding the number of his troops so diminished
that he.durft not riflk a battle, attempted to re.
treat to Toro, which if he could have accom-
plifhed, the invasion of Navarre at that junture
by the French, and the neceflity which the regents
must have been under of detaching men to that
kingdom, might have saved him from danger.
But Haro, sensible how fatal would be the confe-

The nobiles quences of suffering him to escape, marched with
attack tle
anrmy ote such rapidity at the head of his cavalry, that he
JAprl3, came up with him near Villalar, and without

waiting for his infantry, advanced to the attack.
Padilla's army, fatigued and disheartened by their
precipitant retreat, which they could not diftin-
guifh from a flight, happened at that time to be
pafling over a ploughed field, on which such a
violent rain had fallen, that the soldiers funk al-
mot to the knees at every ltep, and remained

' Sandov. 336.

exposed

exposed to the fire of some field pieces which Boor IIL.
the royaliAs had brought along with them. All `~SZ
these circumstances so disconcerted and intimi-
dated raw soldiers, thatwithout facing the enemy,
or making any refitance, they fled in the utmost and defeat
confusion. Padilla exerted himself with extra-
ordinary courage and ativity in order to rally
them, though in vain; fear rendering them deaf
both to his threats and intreaties: Upon
which, finding matters irretrievable, and refolv-
ing not to survive the disgrace of that day, and
the ruin of his party, he ruled into the thickest
of the enemy; but being wounded and dif-
mounted, he was taken prisoner. His princi-
pal officers ihared the fame fate; the common
soldiers were allowed to depart unhurt, the no-
bles being too generous to kill men who threw
down their arms .

THE resentment of his enemies did not susser

Padilla to linger long in expe&ation of what
should befal him. Next day he was condemned
to lose his head, though without any regular
trial, the notoriety of the crime being supposed
sufficient to supersede the formality of a legal

* Sandov. 34S, &c. P. Mart. Ep. 720. Minlana. Contin.

p. 26. Epitome do la vida y Hechoa del Emper. Carlos V.
por D. Juan. Anton. do Vera y Zuniga. 4to. Madr. 1627.
P. 9.

process.

BoonK II. process. He was led infantly to execution, to.

CI,. gether with Don John Bravo, and Don Francis

Padiia, Maldonada, the former commander of the Sego.
their gene.
ia, put to vians, and the latter of the troops of Salamanca.

Padilla viewed the approach of death with calm
but undaunted fortitude; and when Bravo, his
fellow-fufferer, exprefled some indignation at
hearing himself proclaimed a traitor, he checked
him, by observing, " That yesterday was the
time to have displayed the spirit of gentlemen,
this day to die with the meekness ofChriftians."
Being permitted to write to his wife and to the
community of Toledo, the place of his nativity,
he addressed the former with a manly and vir.
tuous tenderness, and the latter with the exul-
tation natural to one who confidered himself as
a martyr for the liberties of his country '. After

,~~~* -~ this,

* The frain of these letters is so eloqueht and high.fpi.

rited, that I have translated them for the entertainment of
my readers.

Ik Ltnr es Do 7ebth Padilla to ubi, Wist.

8B NOa ^ ,

" IP your grief did not afflia me more than my own

death, I Should deem myfelfperfectly happy. For the end
of life being certain to all men, the Almighty confers a
mark of diltinguilhing favour upon that person, for whom
he appoints a death such a mine, which, though lamented
by many, is nevertheless acceptable unto him. It would
require more time than I now have, to write any thing that

could

this, he submitted quietly to his fate. Most of BooK II.
the Spanifi historians, accustomed to ideas of 1522.
government, and of regal power, very different
from those upon which he afted, have been so
eager to testify their disapprobation of the cause
in which he was engaged, that they have neg-
leted, or have been afraid to do justice to his
virtues; and by blackening his memory, have
endeavoured to deprive him of that pity, which
is seldom denied to illustrious sufferers.

THE

could afford you consolation. That my enemies will not
grant me, nor do I wish to dilay the reception of that crown
which I hope to enjoy. You may bewail your own lots,
but not my death, which, being to honourable, ought not
to be lamented by any. My foul, for nothing else is left
to me, I bequeath to you. You will receive it, as the
thing in this world which you valued molt. I do not write
to my father Nero Lopez, because I dare not; for though
I have bhewn myself to be his son in daring to lose my life,
I have not been the heir of his good fortune. I will not
attempt to fay any thing more, that I may not tire the
executioner, who waits for me, and that I may not excite
a suspicion, that, in order to prolong my life, I lengthen
out my letter. My servant Sofia, an eye-witnefi, and to
whom I have communicated my moat secret thoughts, will
inform you of what I cannot now write; and thus I relt,
expeaing the inltrument of your grief, and of my deliver- *
ance."

Hi litttir t i City of telW/o.

" To thee, the crown of Spain, and light of the whole
world, free froip the time of the mighty Goths; to thee,
who by shedding the blood of firangers, as well as thy own

VOL. II. f blood,,

j

Bo tO ft;. tusl viicry at Villalar proved is decisive as

i te. it was complkt. Valladolid, the most zealous
Runof t e f
allf the affociatd cities, opened its gates imn-

mediarely to the conquerors, and being treated
with great clemency by the regents, Medina del
Campo, Segovia, and many other towns followed
its example. This sudden dissolution of a con-
federacy, formed not upon flight disgusts, or
upon trifling motives, into which the whole
body of the people had entered, and,which had
been allowed time to acquire some degree of

blood, had recovered liberty for thyself, and thy neighbour.
ing cities; Thy legitimate son Juan de Padilla gives infor.
mation, how by the blood of his body, thy ancient vitories
are to be refrefIied. If fate hath not permitted my aaions
to be placed among your fuccefiful and celebrated exploits,
the fault hath been in my ill fortune, not in my good will.
This I request of thee as of a mother, to accept, since God
hath given me nothing more to lose for thy fake, than that
which I am now to relinquish. I am more Solicitous about
thy good opinion than about my own life. The (hiftings
of fortune, which never Rands &ill, are many. But this I
fee with infinite consolation, that I, the leaf of thy chil.
dren, fuiFer death for thee; ahd that thou haft nursed at
thy beasts such as may take vengeance for my wrongs.
'Many tongues will relate the manner of my death, of which
I am fill ignorant, thotigh I know it to be near. My end
will testify what was my desire. My foul I recommend to
thee as to the patroness of Christianity. Of my body I fay
nothing, for it is not mine. I can write nothing more, for
at this very moment I feel the knife at my throat with
greater dread of thy displeasure, than apprehension of my
own pain." Sandov. Hit. vol. i. p, 479,

order

brder and consistence by establishing a tegular Boor If.1
plan of government, is the strongest proof of -.5S
the inability of its leaders, or of some secret
discord reigning among its members. Though
part of the army by which they had been sub.
dued, was obliged, a few days after the battle,
to march towards Navarre, in order to check
the progress of the French in that kingdom, no-
thing could prevail on the dejeted commons of
Castile to take arms again, and to embrace such
a favourable opportunity of acquiring those
rights and privileges for which they had ap-
peared so zealous. The city of Toledo alone, P.dilbi'
animated by Donna Maria Pacheco, Padilla's Toledo with,
widow, who, instead of bewailing her husband pgr fepiit
with a womanish sorrow, prepared to revenge his
death, and to prosecute that cause in defence of
which he had suffered, muf be excepted. Re-
fpe& for her sex, or admiration of her courage
and abilities, as well as sympathy with her mif,
fortunes, and veneration for the memory of her
huiband, secured her the fame ascendant over
the people which he had pofleffed. The pru.
dence and vigour with which she a6ted, justified
that confidence they placed in her. She wrote
to the French general in Navarre, encouraging
him to invade Castile by the offer of powerful
aflciance. She endeavoured by her letters and
cmifaries to revive the spirit and hopes of other

S a cities,

BooK IIl. cities. She!raifed soldiers, and exactd a great
ISz~. fum from the clergy belonging to the cathedral,

to defray the expence of keeping them on foot".
She employed every artifice that could interest
or inflame the populace. For this purpose she
ordered crucifixes to be used by her troops in-
flead of colours, as if they had been at war
with infidels, and enemies of religion; the
marched through the streets of Toledo with her
son, a young child, clad in deep mourning feated
on a mule, having a standard carried before
him, representing the manner of his father's exe-
cution '. By all these means The kept the minds
of the people in such perpetual agitation as
prevented their paflions from subsiding, and ren-
dered them insensible of the dangers to which
they were exposed, by standing alone in oppo.
fition to the royal authority. While the ariny
was employed in Navarre, the Regents were
unable to attempt the reduction of Toledo by
force; and all their endeavours either to dimi-
nilh Donna Maria's credit with the people, or
to gain her by large promises and the folici-
tations of her brother the Marquis de Mondeiar,
proved ineffetual. Upon the expulsion of the
French out of Navarre, part of the army re-
turned into Castile, and invested Toledo. Even
this made no impreflion on the intrepid and
obstinate courage of Donna Maria. She de-

"P. Mart. Ep. 727. S Sandov. 375.d

fended

fended the town with vigour, her troops beat Book Irr.
the Royalists in several sallies, and no progress =iz.
was made towards reducing the place, until the
clergy, whom she had highly offended by invad-
ing their property, ceased to support her. As
soon as they received information of the death
of William de Croy archbishop of Toledo,
whose possession of that fee was their chief griev-
ance, and that the Emperor had named a Cafti-
lian to succeed him, they openly turned against
her, and persuaded the people that she had ac-
quired such influence over them by the force
of enchantments, that she was affifed by a fa-
miliar demon which attended her in the form
of a Negro-maid, and that by its suggestions
she regulated every part of her condu&y. The
credulous multitude, whom their impatience of a
long blockade, and despair of obtaining fuc-
cours either from the cities formerly in confe-
deracy with them, or from the French, rendered
desirous of peace, took arms against her, and
driving her out of the city, surrendered it to Oaober 6.
the Royalifs. She retired to the citadel, which
she defended with amazing fortitude four months
longer; and when reduced to the: las extremi-
ties, she made her escape in disguise, and fled to Fch. o,
Portugal, where {he had many relations'. 1s**.
V P. Mart. Ep. 727.

Sandov. 37. P. Mart. Ep. 754. Ferrer. viii. 563.

S 3 UPON

BooxK IL UPON her flight, the citadel surrendered.

1.z2. Tranquillity was re-established in Castile; and

FatalFi, this bold attempt of the commons, like all un,
of thi. civil
ar. successful infurredions, contributed to confirm

and extend the power of the crown, which it
was intended to moderate and abridge. The
Cortes fill continued to make a part of the Caf.
tilian constitution, and were summoned to meet
whenever the King stood in need of money;
but instead of adhering to their ancient and cau.
tious form of examining and redressing publick
grievances, before they proceeded to grant any
supply, the more courtly custom of voting a
donative in the first place was introduced, and
the Sovereign having obtained all that he wanted,
pever allowed them to enter into any inquiry,
qr to attempt any reformation injurious to his
authority. The privileges which the cities had
enjoyed were gradually circumscribed or abo-
lilhed ; their commerce began from this period
to decline; and becoming less wealthy and lets
populous, they loft that power and influence
which they had acquired in the Cortes,

The pa. WHILE Castile was exposed to the calamities
rft of the of civil war, the kingdom of Valencia was torn
tion in Va- by intefline commotions fill more violent. The

niw association which had been formed in the city of

Valencia in the year one thousand five hun-
dred and twenty, and which was distinguished

by

by the name of the Germanada, continued to BOOK ]II.
fulift after the Emperor's departure from Spain. ,
The members of it, upon pretext of'defending
the coasts againf the descents of the Corsairs of
Barbary, and under fan&ion of that permission,
which Charles had rashly granted them, refused
to lay down their arms. But as the grievances,
which the Valencians aimed at redrefaing, pro-
ceeded from the arrogance and exacions of the
nobility, rather than from any unwarrantable
exercise of the royal prerogative, their resent-
ment turned chiefly against the former. As
soon as they were allowed the use of arms, and
became conscious of their own strength, they
grew impatient to take vengeance of their op-
pressors. They drove the nobles out of most
of the cities, plundered their houses, waftec
their lands, and afiaulted their cafles. They
then proceeded to ele& thirteen persons, one
from each company of tradesmen established in
Valencia, and committed the administration of
government to them, under pretext that they
would reform the laws, establish one uniform
mode of dispensing jutlice without partiality,
or regard to the diftindtion of ranks, and thus
retore men to some degree of their original
equality.

THE nobles were obliged to take arms in self-
defencc. Hostilities began, and were carried

S 4 on

Boos III. on with all the rancour, with which resentment

ISzz. at oppreflion inspired the one party, and the

idea of insulted dignity animated the other. As
no person of honourable birth, or of liberal
education joined the Germanada, the councils
as well as troops of the confederacy were con.
ducted by low mechanicks, who acquired the
confidence of an enraged multitude chiefly by
the fierceness of their zeal, and the extravagance
of their proceedings. Among such men, the
laws introduced in civilized nations, in order to
restrain or moderate the violence of war, were
unknown or despised; and they committed the
wildest ats of cruelty and outrage.

THE Emperor occupied with fuppreflfing the

infurre&ion in Castile, which more immediately
threatened the subversion of his power and pre-
rogative, was unable to give much attention to
the tumults in Valencia, and left the nobility
of that kingdom to fight their own battles.
His viceroy, the Conda de Melito, had the
filpreme command of the forces which the nobles
raied among the vassals. The Germanada
carried on the war during the years one thou-
sand five hundred r and twenty-one,
with a more persevering courage, than could
have been expeted from a body so tumultuary,
under the conduct of fuchr leaders. They de-

~,i::.X"a featec

feated the nobility in several actions, which, Booc IIT.
though not considerable, were extremely iharp. ';7j
They repulsed them in their attempts to reduce
different towns. But the nobles, by their fupe-
rior skill in war, and at the head of troops
more accustomed to service, gained the advan-
tage in moit of the rencourters. At length,
they were joined by a body of Caffilian cavalry,
which the regents dispatched towards Valencia,
soon after their vicory over Padilla at Villalar,
and by their assistance they acquired such fupe-
riority, that they entirely broke and ruined the
Germanada. The leaders of the party were
put to death, almost without any formality of
legal trial, and suffered such cruel punishments,
as the sense of recent injuries prompted the
nobles to inflit. The government of Valencia
was re-established in its ancient form '.

IN Aragon, violent symptoms of the fame Appemra-

spirit of difaffeaion and mutiny, which reigned Aoeffe i'
in the other kingdoms of Spain, began to ap- Ar^"ao
pear; but by the prudent conduct of the viceroy,
Don John de Lanufa, they were so far com-
posed, as to prevent their breaking out into any
open insurrection. But in the island of Ma-

Argenfola Anales de Aragon, cap. 7 . 90. 99. 18.

Sayas Anales de Aragon, cap. 5. ,

z. &c. P. Mart. Ep. lib.
xxxiii. & xxxiv. paifim. Ferrer, Hist. d'Rfpagne, viii. 54z.

jorca,

BooK IIL jorca, annexed to the crown s Aragon, the

22. ' fame causes which had excited the commotions

Foridab!e in Valencia, produced effe&s no less violent.
insurrection
in Majora. The people, impatient of the hardchips which

they endured under the rigid jurifdiiion of the
March 9. nobility, took arms in a tumultuary manner;

's5»' deposed their viceroy; drove him out of the

infand; and massacred every gentleman who
was so unfortunate as to fall into their hands.
The obltinacy with which the people of Ma-
jorca persised in their rebellion, was equal
to the rage with which they began it. Many
and vigorous efforts were requisite in order to
reduce them to obedience; and tranquillity
was re-eftablilhed in every part of Spain be-
fore they could be brought to submit to their
fovereignb.

Causes WHILE the spirit ofdifaffction was so general
which pre.
vented the among the Spaniards, and so many causes con-
union of the
Inal,,co curred in precipitating them into such violent

tena measures, in order to obtain the redress of their

grievances, it may appear strange, that the
malecontents in the different kingdoms lhould
have carried on their operations without any
mutual concert, or even any intercourse with

b Argenfola Anales de Aragon, c. I x1. Ferrer. Hit. viii.

542. Sayas Anale de ArAgon, cap. 7. 1'. 14. 76. 8s. Pcr
' reras Hilt. d'Efpagne, viii. 579, &c. 609

Sach

each other. By uniting their councils and Boor lir.
rins, they might have a&ed both with greater .~'
force, and with more effe& The appearance
of a natiQoal confederacy would have rendered
it no less refpe&able among the people,than
formidable to the crown; and the Emperor,
unable to resist such a combination, must have
complied with any terms which the members of
it thought fit to prescribe. Many things, how-
ever, prevented the Spaniards from forming
themselves into one body, and pursuing com.
mon measures. The people of the different
kingdoms in Spain, though they were become
the fubjeas of the fame sovereign, retained, in
full force, their national antipathy to each other.
The remembrance of their ancient rivalfhip and
hostilities was till recent, and the sense of reci-
procal injuries so intire, as to be incompatible
with their acing in confidence and concert.
Each nation chose rather to depend on its own
efforts, and to maintain the struggle alone, than
io. implore the aid of neighbours, whom they
distrusted and hated. At the fame time, the
fqrms of government in the several kingdoms
of Spain were so different, and the grievances
of which they complained, as well as the altera-
tions and amendments which they attempted to
introduce, so various, that it was not easy to
krin$ them to unite in any common plan. To

this

BooK III. this disunion Charles was indebted for the pre.

servation of his Spanish crowns; and while each
of the kingdoms followed separate measures, ali
of them were obliged at last to conform to the
willof their sovereign.

The Empe- THZ arrival of the Emperor in Spain filled
yor a pru-
dent and ge. his fubjets who had been in arms against him
nerous be-
baviourto. with deep apprehensions; from which he soon
Ml'on.: delivered them by an a& of clemency, no less

" prudent. than generous. After a rebellion so

general, scarcely twenty persons, among so many
criminals obnoxious to the law, had been
punished capitally in Castile. Though ifrongly
solicited by his council, Charles refused to shed
any more blood by the hands of the execu-
oa. is. tioner; and publithed a general pardon, ex-

tending to all crimes committed since the com-
mencement of the infurre&ions, from which
only fourscore were excepted. Even these he
seems to have named, rather with an intention
to intimidate others, than from any inclination
to seize them; for when an officious courtier
offered to inform him where one of the most
considerable among them was concealed, he
avoided it by a good-natured pleasantry; " Go,"
fays he, " I have now no reason to be afraid. of
that man, but he has some cause to keep at a
distance from me, and you would be better
employed in telling him that I am here, than in

acquainting

acquainting me with the place of his retreat '." BOOK Il.
By this appearance of magnanimity, as well as Li:.
by his care to avoid every thing which had
disgusted the Castilians during his former refi-
dence among them; by his address in assuming
their manners, in speaking their language, and
in complying with all their humours and cuf-
toms, he acquired an ascendant over them which
hardly any of their native monarchs had ever
attained, and brought them to support him in
all his enterprizes with a zeal and valour to
which he owed much of his success and gran-
deur d.

ABOUT the time that Charles landed in Spain, Adrian set

Adrian set out for Italy to take poffeflion of his Rome,,^^
new dignity. But though the Roman people bipi"^
longed extremely for his arrival, they could there
not, on his first appearance, conceal their fur-
prize and disappointment. After being accuf-
tomed to the princely magnificence of Julius,
and the elegant splendour of Leo, they beheld
with contempt an old man of an humble deport-
ment, of auster manners, an enemy to pomp,
destitute of taste in the arts, and unadorned with
any of the external accomplishments which the

C Sandov. 377, &c. Vida del. Emper. Carloi por Don
Juan. Anton. de Vera y Zuniga. p. 30.

Ulloa Vita de Carlo V. p. 85.

vulgar

Boot III. vulgr expet & in thdfe raised to eminetit ftdtiohst.

152. Nor did his political ie*s a id ma1ims seem

less strange and astonishing to the pontifical
ministers. He acknowledged and bewailed the
corruptions which abounded in the church, as
well as in the court of Rome, and prepared to
reform both; he discovered no intention of
aggrandizing his family; he even scrupled at
retaining such territories as some of his pre.
deceffors had acquired by violence or fraud,
rather than by any legal title, and for that
reason he inveRted Francesco Maria de Rovere
anew in the dutchy of Urbino, of which Leo
had stripped him, and surrendered to the duke
of Ferrara several places wrested from him by
the church'. To men little habituated to fee
princes regulate their condut by the maxims
of morality and the principles of justice, there
ations of the new Pope appeared incontestable
proofs of his weakness or inexperience. Adrian,
who was a perse& stranger to the complex
and intricate system of Italian politicks, and
who could place no confidence in persons whose
subtle refinements in business suited so ill with
his natural simplicity and candour, being often
embarraired and irresolute in his deliberations,

* Gui. 1. xr. 238. Jovii Vita Adriani, 117. Bellefor.
Epitr. des Princ. 84. 1 Guic. lib. xv. 240.

the

the opinion of his incapacity daily increased, BootK Il.
until both his person and government became is2.
objets of ridicule among his fubjeCs s.

ADRAAN, though devoted to the Emperor, Heenda.

oto re t-

endeavoured to assume the impartiality which tore peace
became the common father of Christendom, and i Europe.
laboured to reconcile the contending princes,
that they might unite in a league against Soly-
man, whose conquest of Rhodes rendered him
more formidable than ever to Europe . But
this was an undertaking far beyond his abilities.
To examine such a variety of pretensions, to
adjust such a number of interfering interests, to
extinguish the paflions which ambition, emu-
lation, and mutual injuries had kindled, to
bring so many hostile powers to pursue the fame
scheme with unanimity and vigour, required
not only uprightners of intention, but a great
Superiority both of understanding and address.

THE Italian states were no lets desirous of

peace than the Pope. The Imperial army under
Colonna was still kept on foot, but as the Em-
peror's revenues in Spain, in Naples, and in
the Low-Countries, were either exhausted, or

s Joy. Vita Adr. i 18. P. Mart. Ep. j74. Rufcelli Let-
tres de Princ. vol. i. 87, 96, lo[.

h Bellefor. Epitr. p. 86.

p~!lddI

BootKll. applied to some other purpose, it depended

sZ=v= entirely for pay and subsistence on the Italians.

A great part of it was quartered in the eccle.
fiaftical state, and monthly contributions were
levied upon the Florentines, the Milanele, the
Genoese, 'and Lucchefe, by the viceroy of Na.
ples; and though all exclaimed against such
oppreflion, and were impatient to be delivered
from it, the dread of worse consequences from
the rage of the army, or the resentment of the
Emperor, obliged them to submit .

1523. So much regard, however, was paid to the
league Pope's exhortations, and to a bull which he
againfithe issued requiring all Christian princes to consent
King. to a truce for three years, that the Imperial, the

French, and Engliih ambaifadors at Rome were
empowered to treat of that matter; but while
they wafted their time in fruitless negociations,
their masters continued their preparations for
war. The Venetians, who had hitherto adhered
with great firmness to their alliance with Francis,
being now convinced that his affairs in Italy
were in a desperate situation, entered into a
league against him with the Emperor ; to which
June s. Adrian, at the instigation of his countryman

and friend Charles de Lannoy, viceroy of Na-
ples, who persuaded him that the only obstacles

! Guic. 1. xv. 238.

to
.

to peace arose from the ambition of the French Boot I1l
King, loon /fter Acceded. The other Italian 1.52
Itates followed their example; and Francis was
left, without a single ally, to reift the efforts
of folmany enermies, whose armies threatened,
and whose territories encompafled, J4 dominions
on every fide k.

THE dread of this powerful confederacyg it Franc;.'

vigorous

was thought, would have obliged Francis to measures iN
keep wholly on the defensive, or at leait have ofit.*
prevented his entertaining any thoughts of
marching into Italy. But it was the character
of that prince, too apt to become retmifs, and
even negligent on ordinary occasions, to rouze
at the approach of danger, and not only to
encounter it with spirit and intrepidity, qualities
which never forsook him, but to provide against
it with diligence and industry. Before his ene-
mies were ready to execute any Qs their schemes#
Francis had aflembled a numerous army. His
authority over his own fubje6ts was far greater
than that which Charles or Henry possessed over
theirs. They depended on their diets, their
cortes, and their paliaments for money, which
was usually granted them in small rums, very
slowly, and with much relutance. The taces
he could impose wge more oqnfiderable, and

k Guic. 1 XV. 241, 248.
VOL. l, T levied

BOOK I!I. levied with greater dispatch; so that on this, as

r 53 well as on other occasions, his army was in the

field while they were devising ways and means
for railing theirs. Sensible of this advantage,
Francis hoped to disconcert all the Emperor's
schemes by marching in person into the Mila-
nefe; and this bold measure, the more formida-
ble, because unexpeced, could scarcely have

suriendd failed of producing that effe&. The vanguard
upon the D
difcoveryof of his army had already reached Lyons, and he
the consa.
ble Rour- himself was hastening after it with the second di-
fpiray. vision of his troops, when the discovery of a

domeffick conspiracy which threatened the ruin
of the kingdom, obliged him to stop short, and
to alter his measures.
His charac. THE author of this dangerous plot was Charles

duke of Bourbon, lord high constable, whose
noble birth, vait fortune, and high office, raised
him to be the most powerful fubje& in France,
as his great talents, equally suited to the field
or the council, and his signal services to the
crown, rendered him the most illustrious and
deserving. The near resemblance between the
King and him in many of their qualities, both
being fond of war, and ambitious to excel in
manly exercises, as well as their equality in age,
and their proximity of blood, ought naturally
to have secured him a considerable share in that

Monarch's

Monarch's favour. But unhappily Louise, the BooI III.
King's mother, had contracted a violent aver- 23.
sion to the house of Bourbon, for no better T2hjha~
reason than because Anne of Bretagne, the affcion.
Queen of Louis the Twelfth, with whom Ihe
lived in perpetual enmity, discovered a peculiar
attachment to that branch of the royal family
and ihe had taught her son, who was too sus-
ceptible of any impreflion which she gave him,
to view all the constable's actions with a mean
and unbecoming jealousy. His diftinguithed
merit at the battle of Marignano had not been
sufficiently rewarded; he had been recalled
from the government of Milan upon very frivo-
lous pretences, and had met with a cold recep-
tion, which his prudent conduct in that difficult
station did not deserve; the payment of his
pensions had been suspended without any good
cause; and during the campaign of one thou-
sand five hundred and twenty-one, the King, as
has already been related, had affronted him in
presence of the whole army, by giving the com-
mand of the van to the duke of Alen:on. The
constable, at first, bore there indignities with
greater moderation than could have been ex-
peaed from an high-fpirited Prince, conscious
of what was due to his rank, and to his services.
Such a multiplicity of injuries, however, ex-

T 2 haufted

BooKl r. haufted his patience; and inspiring him with

52;' thoughts of revenge, he retired from court, and

began to hold a secret correspondence with some
of the Emperor's ministers.

ABOUT that time the dutchess of Bourbon

happened to die without leaving any children.
Louise, of a disposition no less amorous than
vindi&ive, and still susceptible of the tender
palions at the age of forty-fix, began to view
the Conitable, a Prince as amiable as he was
accomplished, with other eyes; and notwith-
standing the great disparity of their years, she
formed the scheme of marrying him. Bourbon,
who might have expe&ed every thing to which
an ambitious mind can aspire, from the doting
fondness of a woman who governed her son and
the kingdom, being incapable either of imitating
the Queen in her suddeh transition from hatred
to love, or of dissembling so meanly as to pre-
tend affetion for one who had persecuted him
so long with unprovoked malice, not only re-
jected the match, but embittered his refusal by
some severe raillery on Louise's person and cha-
rater. She finding herself not only contemned,
but insulted, her disappointed love turned into
hatred, and since Ihe could not marry, Ihe re-
solved to ruin Bourbon.

~~~2 ~FOR

FOR this purpose fle consulted with the chan- BooK Ill.

cellor Du Prat, a man, who, by a base proftitu- ,'.
tion of great talents and of superior skill in
his profeflion, had risen to that high office.
By his advice a law-suit was commenced against
the Constable, for the whole estate belonging to
the house of Bourbon. Part of it was claimed
in the King's name, as having fallen to the
crown; part in that of Louise, as the nearest
heir in blood of the deceased Dutchess. Both
these claims were equally destitute of any foun-
dation in justice but Louise, by her folicita.
tions and authority, and Du Prat, by employ-
ing all the artifices and chicanery of law, pre-
vailed on the judges to order the estate to be
fequeftred. This unjut decision drove the Con- w;( r.cret
stable to despair, and to measures which despair ^i.h the
alone could have ditated. He renewed his in- Emperor
trigues in the Imperial court, and flattering
himself that the injuries which he had suffered
would justify his having recourse to any means
in order to obtain revenge, he offered to transfer
his allegiance from his natural sovereign to the
Emperor, and to assist him in the conquest of
France. Charles, as well as the King of Eng-
land, to whom the secret was communicated',
expeting prodigious advantages from his revolt,
were ready to receive him with open arms, and
spared neither promises nor allurements which

1 Rymer's Feder. xiii. 794.

T 3 might

BooK IlT. might help to confirm him in his resolution.
""'I The Emperor offered him in marriage his sifter

Eleanor, the widow of the King of Portugal,
with a vast portion. He was included as a prin-
cipal in the treaty between Charles and Henry.
The counties of Provence and Dauphine were
to be fettled on him, with the title of King.
The Emperor engaged to enter France by the
Pyrenees, and Henry, supported by the Flem-
ings, to invade Picardy; while twelve thoufapd
Germans, levied at their common charge, were
to penetrate into Burgundy, and to aft in con-
cert with Bourbon, who undertook to raise fix
thousand men among his friends and vassals in
the heart of the kingdom. The execution of
this deep-laid and dangerous plot was suspended,
until the King thould cross the Alps with the
only army capable of defending his dominions;
and as he was far advanced in his march for
that purpose, France flood on the brink of de.
Arution ".
diricored. HAPPILY for that kingdom, a negociation

which had now been carrying on for several
months, though conducted with the most pro-
found secrecy, and communicated only to a
few chosen confidents, could not altogether
escape the observation of the reft of the Con-

" Thuani Hil lib. i. c. to. Heuter. Rer. Auir. Ilb.
viii. c. 18. p. 207.

stable's

Rfable's numerous retainers, rendered more in- B,,OK If.
quifitive by finding that they were diftrulted. 53
Two of there gave the King some intimation of
a mysterious correspondence between their master
and the Count de Roeux, a Flemish nobleman
of great confidence with the Emperor. Francis,
who could not bring himself to fufpe& that the
first prince of the blood would be so base as to
betray the kingdom to its enemies, immediately
repaired to Moulins, where the Constable was
in bed, feigning indisposition, that he might not
be obliged to accompany the King into Italy,
and acquainted him of the intelligence which he
had received. Bourbon, with great solemnity,
and the most imposing affectation of ingenuity
and candour, aflerted his own innocence; and
as his health, he said, was now more confirmed,
he promised to join the army within a few days.
Francis, open and candid himself, and too apt
to be deceived by the appearance of those vir-
tues in others, gave such credit to what he said,
that he refused to arrest him, although advised
to take that precaution by his wisest counsellors,
and as if the danger had been over, he con-
tinued his march towards Lyons. The Con- sepn.btr.
liable set out soon after, seemingly with an in-
tention to follow him; but turning suddenly to Flie to
the left he crossed the Rhone, and after infinite Iy
fatigues and perils, escaped all the parties which

T 4 the

BooK III. the King, fetifible too lase 6f his credulity, sent

CS' out to intercept him, and reached Italy in

fafelty ',

FRANCIS tok every poflible precaution to

prevent the bad effecs of the irreparable error
which he had committed. He put garrisons
in all the places of strength in the Confta-
ble's territories. He seized all the gentlemen
whom he could fufpet of being his afobciates
and as he had not hitherto discovered the whole
extent of the conspirator's schemes, nor knew
how far the infeRion had spread among his sub-
jets, he was afraid that his absence might en-
courage them to make some defperate,.attempt,
and for that reason relinquished his intention of
leading his army in person into Italy.

wade the Hz did not, however, abandon his dedign on
Mildnfre. the Milanese; but appointed admiral Bonnivet

to take the fuprtnem command in his ltead, and
to march into that country with an army thirty
thousand strong. Bonnivet did not owe this
preferment to his abilities as a general; for of
all the talents requisite to form a great com-
mander, he pofieffed only personal courage, the
lowest and the rnoft common. 'But he was the

n Mem. de Bcllfy, p. 64, kc. Pafiluier Recherches do

most acconplifhed gentleman in the French Boot Ilf.
court, of agreeable manners, an insinuating ad- 1,3
dress, and a sprightly conversation ; and Francis,
who lived in great familiarity with his courtiers,
was so charmed with there qualities, that he ho-
nouied him, on all occasions, with the most par-
tial and diftingui/hing marks of his favour. He
was, betides, the implacable enemy of Bourbon;
and as the King hardly knew whom to trust at
that jun&ture, he thought the chief command
could be lodged no where so safely as in his
hands.

COLONwA, who was eritrufted with the de- Their ;t

eonduO.

fence of the Milanese, his own conquest, was in
no condition to resist such a formidable army.
He was destitute of money sufficient to pay his
troops, which were reduced to a small number by
sickness or desertion, and had, for that reason,
been obliged to negle& every precaution necef-
:fary for the security of the country. The only
pltn which he formed was to defend the palfage
of the river Teffino against the French; and as
if he had forgotten how easily he himself had
difcbncerted a similar scheme formed by Lautrec,
he ptb6rifed with great confidence on its being
efft&ual. -But 'in spite of all his caution, it fuc-
'ceeded 'to better with him than with Lautrec.
Donnivet passed the river without loss, at a ford

which

BooKIIl which had been negleted, and the Imperialifls

"-; retired to Milan, preparing to abandon the town

as soon as the French Ihould appear before it.
By an unaccountable negligence, which Guic-
ciardini imputes to infatuation °, Bonnivet did
not advance for three or four days, and loft the
opportunity with which his good fortune pre-
sented him. The citizens recovered from their
conlternation; Colonna, still active at the age
of fourscore, and Morone, whose enmity toFrance
was indefatigable, were employed night and day
in repairing the fortifications, in amaflling provi-
sions, in colle&ing troops from every quarter;
and by the time the French approached, had
put the city in a condition to hand a siege:
Bonnivet, after some fruitless attempts on the
town, which harafled his own troops more than
the enemy, was obliged, by the inclemency of
the season, to retire into winter-quarters,

Death of DURING these tranfa&ions, Pope Adrian died
Adrian VI.

an event so much to the fatisfation of the
Roman people, whose hatred or contempt of
him augmented every day, that the night after
his decease, they adorned the door of his chief
physician's house with garlands, adding this in-
scription, TO THE DELIVERER OF
HIS COUNTRYP. The Cardinal deMedici

° Guic. lib. xv. 254. P Jovii Vit. Adr. 127.

instantly

intantly renewed his pretensions to the papal BOOK II.
dignity, and entered the conclave with high ex- 5
petations on his own part, and a general opi-
nion of thepeople that they would be successful.
But though supported by the Imperial fation,
poffefied of great personal interest, and capable
of all the artifices, refinements, and corruption,
which reign in those assemblies, the obstinacy
and intrigues of his rivals protracted the con-
clave to the unusual length of fifty days. The Eleaion of

Clement

address and perseverance of the Cardinal at last vi.
surmounted every obstacle. He was raised to Nova".*
the head of the church, and assumed the go-
vernment of it by the name of Clement VII.
The choice was universally approved of. High
expectations were conceived of a Pope, whose
great talents, and long experience in business,
seemed to qualify him no less for defending the
spiritual interests of the church, exposed to im-
minent danger by the progress of Luther's opi-
nions, than for conduting its political opera.
tions with the prudence requisite at such a diffi-
cult juncture; and who, besides these advan-
tages, rendered the ecclesiastical state more
refpe6table, by having in his hands the govern-
ment of Florence, together with the wealth of
the family of Medici q.

CARDINAL WOLSEY, not disheartened by the w'altydir.
disappointment of his ambitious views at the an, filed

with refr '
Guic. 1 x. z63. m26. cnt.

former

BOOK III. former election, had entertained more sanguine

353. hopes of success on this ocftion. Henry wrote

to the Emperor, reminding him of his engage-
ments to second the pretensions of his minister.
Wolfey beftirred himfetf Lth acivity suitable
to the importance of the prize for which he
contended, and inftruted his agents at.Rome
to spare neither promises nor bribes in order to
gain his end. But Charles had either amused
him with vain hopes which he never intended
to gratify, or he judged it impolitick to oppose
a candidate who had such a profpe&t of succeed-
ing as Medici; or perhaps the cardinals durst
not venture to provoke the people of Rome,
while their indignation against Adrian's memory
was fill fiefh, by placing another Utra-mon-
tane in the papal throne. Wolfey, after all his
expectations and eadeavours, had the morti-
fication to fee a Pope ele6ted, of such an age,
and of so vigorous a confitution, that he could
not comfort himself much with the chance of
surviving him. This second proof fully con-
vinced Wolfey of the Emperor.s infinccrity, and
it excited in him all the resentment which an
haughty mind feels on being at once difap-
pointed and deceived and though Clement en-
deavoured to soothe his vindictive nature by
granting him a commiflion to be legate in Eng-
land during life, with such ample powers as
veiled in him almost the whole papal jurifdic-

tion

tion in that kingdom, the injury he had received BooK IlI.
entirely dissolved the tie which had united him 152'
to Charles, and from that moment he meditated 2
revenge. It was neceifary, however, to conceal
his intention from his master, and to suspend
the execution of it, until, by a dexterous im-
provement of the incidents which might occur,
he should be able gradually to alienate the King's
affeEtions from the Emperor. For this reason,
he was so far from expressing any uneasiness on
account of the repulse which he had met with,
that he abounded on every occasion, private as
well as publick, in declarations of his high satis-
faaion with Clement's promotion'.

HENRY had, during the campaign, fulfilled Htnry',

operationl

with great sincerity whatever he was bound to in Franc.
perform by the league against France, though
more slowly than he could have wished. His
thoughtless profusion, and total neglect of ceco-
nomy, reduced him often to great straits for
money. The operations of war were now car-
ried on in Europe in a manner very different
from that which had long prevailed. Instead of
armies suddenly assembled, which under diftin&
chieftains followed their prince into the field
for a ihort space, and served at their own cost,
troops were now levied at great charge, and

' Fidde's Life of Wolfey, 294, &c. Herbert.

received

BooK Ilr. received regularly considerable pay., Instead of

,523' impatience on both fides to bring every quarrel

to the issue of a battle, which commonly de-
cided the fate of open and defenceless countries,
and allowed the barons, together with their vas-
ials, to return to their ordinary occupations;
towns were fortified with great art, and defended
with much obstinacy; war, from a very simple,
became a very intricate science; and campaigns
grew of course to be more tedious, and less
decisive. The expence which there alterations
in the military system necessarily created, ap-
peared intolerable to nations hitherto unaccuf-
tomed to the burden of heavy taxes. Hence
proceeded the frugal, and even parsimonious
Jpirit of the Englih parliaments in that age,
which Henry, with all his authority, was seldom
able to overcome. The commons, having re-
fused at this time to grant him the supplies which
he demanded, he had recourse to the ample and
almost unlimited prerogative which the Kings
of England then possessed, and by a violent
and unusual exertion of it, raited the money he
Sept. n. wanted. This, however, wafted so much time,

that it was late in the season before his army,
under the duke of Suffolk, could take the field.
Being joined by a considerable body of Flemings,
Suffolk marched into Picardy, and Francis, from
his extravagant eagerness to recover the Mila-

nefe,

nefe, having leftthat frontier almost unguarded, BOOK 1I.
he penetrated as far as the banks of the river 3.'
Oyfe, within eleven leagues of Paris, filling that
capital with consternation. But the arrival of
some troops detached by the King, who was till
at Lyons; the aftive gallantry of the French
officers, who allowed the allies no respite night
or day; the rigour of a most unnatural season,
together with scarcity of provisions, compelled
Suffolk to retire; and La Tremouille, who corn- Nowmbcr,
manded in those parts, had the glory of having,
with an handful of men, checked the progress
of a formidable army, and of driving them with
ignominy out of the French territories '.

THE Emperor's attempts upon Burgundy and And there

of the Ger-

Guienne were not more fortunate, though in a,,eand
both there provinces Francis was equally ill pre- Spaniard.
pared to resist them. The condu& and valour
of his generals supplied his want of foresight;
the Germans who made an irruption into one
of these provinces, and the Spaniards who
attacked the other, were repulsed with great
disgrace.'

THus ended the year 1523, during which Enduefthe

Francis's good fortune and success had been cilmphi".
such as gave all Europe an high idea of his
power and resources. He had discovered and

Herbert. Mem. de Bellay, 73, &c.

disconcerted

/

BooK rr. disconcerted a dangerous conspiracy, the author

of which he had driven-into exile, almost without
an attendant; he kad rendered abortive all the
schemes of the powerful confederacy formed
against him; he had proteted his dominions
when attacked on three different fides; and
though his army in the Milanese had not made
such progress as might have been expeEted from
its superiority to the enemy in number, he had
recovered and fill kept poffieflon of one half of
that dutchy.

s514- THE ensuing year opened with events more

Sentiments
ofthenew difatrous to France. Fontarabia was loft by
February 17. the cowardice or treachery of its governor. In

Italy, the allies resolved on an early and vigo-
rous effort in order to difpoflefs Bonnivet of
that part of the Milaiefe which lies beyond the
Tefino. Clement, who, under the pontificates
of Leo and Adrian, had di'covered an impla-
cable enmity to France, began now to view the
power which the Emperor was daily acquiring
in Italy, with so much jealousy, that he refused
to accede, as his predecessors had done, to the
league against Francis, and forgetting private
palions and animofities, laboured with the zeal
which became his character, to bring about a
reconciliation among the contending parties.
But all his endeavours were ineffectual; a nu-
merous army, to which each of the allies fur-

nilhed

nilied their contingent of troops, was assembled Book III.
at Milan by the beginning of March. Lannoy, 5,.
viceroy of Naples, took the command of it ImlPtti
upon Colonna's death, though the chief direc- toS' t the

ld earfie y.

tion of military operations was committed to
Bourbon, and the marquis de Pescara; the
latter, the ablest and most enterprising of the
Imperial generals; the former inspired by his
refentmentwith new a&ivity and invention, and
acquainted so thoroughly with the characers
of the French commanders, the genius of their
troops, and the strength as well as weakness of
their armies, as to be of infinite service to the
party which he had joined. But all there ad-
vantages were nearly loft through the Emperor's
inability to raise money sufficient for executing
the various and extensive plans which he had
formed. When his troops were commanded to Retarded by

a Mutiny of

march, they mutinied against their leaders, de- the troops.
manding the pay which was due to them for
some months; and disregarding both the me-
naces and intreaties of their officers, threatened
to pillage the city of Milan, if they did not in-
ftantly receive fatisfa&tion. Out of this difficul-
ty the generals of the allies were extricated by
Morone, who prevailing on his countrymen,
over whom his influence was prodigious, to ad-
vance the fum that was requisite, the army took
the field '.

t Guic, 1. xv. 267. Capella, 19o.
VOL. II. U BONNIVri

B06K II. BONNIVET was defitute of troops to oppose

'i24 this army, and fill more of the talents which
The French could render him an equal match f6r its leaders.
obliged to
ahandon the After various movements and encounters, de-
Milaaee,

fcribed with great accuracy by the contemporary
historians, a detail of which, at this distance of
time, would be equally uninteresting and un.
inftrutive, he was forced to abandon the strong
camp in which he had entrenched himself at
Biagraffa. Soon after, partly by his own mif.
conduct, partly by the acivity of the enemy,
who harassed and ruined his army by continual
fkirmithes, while they carefully declined a battle
which he often offered them; and partly by
the caprice of Cooo Swiss, who refused to join
his army, though within a day's march of it; he
was reduced to the neceflity of attempting a
retreat into France through the valley of Aoft.
Just as he arrived on the banks of the Seflia,
and began to pass that river, Bourbon and Pes.
cara appeared with the vanguard of the allies,
and attacked his rear with great fury. At the
beginning of the charge, Bonnivet, while exert-.
ing himself with much valour, was wounded
f. o dangerouly as obliged him to quit the field;
and the condu& of the rear was committed to
the chevalier Bayard, who, though so much a
franger to the arts of a court that he never rose
to the chief command, was always called, in

times

times of real danger, to the posts of greatest BOOK III.
difficulty and importance. He put himself at 3.

1524.

the head of the men at arras, ahd animating
them by his pretence and example to fultain
the whole shock of the enemy's troops, he
gained time for the ref of his countrymen to
make good their retreat. But in this service Deathofthe

chevalier
he received a wound which he immediately per- Bayard, and

ruin of the

ceived to be mortal, and being unable to con- French
tinue any longer on horseback, he ordered one army.
of his attendants to place him under a tree, with
his face towards the enemy; then fixing his
eyes on the guard of his sword, which he held
tp instead of a cross, he addressed his prayers
to God, and in this posture, which became his
character both as a soldier and as a Christian,
he talhly waited the approach of death. Bour-
bon, who led the foremost of the enemy's
troops, found him in this situation, and ex-
pressed regret and pity at the fight. " Pity not
me," cried the high-fpirited chevalier, " I die
" as a man of honour ought, in the discharge
"of my duty: They indeed are objects of
" pity, who fight against their King, their
" country, and their oath." The marquis de
Pescara, passing soon after, manifested his admi-
ration of 13Byard's virtues, as well as his sorrow
for his fate, with the generosity of a gallant
enemy; and finding that he could not be re-

U a moved

oK Ill. moved with safety from that.fpot, ordered a

1524. tent to be pitched there, andappointed proper

persons to Attend him. He. died, norwith.
tanding their care, as his anceRfors for several
generations had done, in the field of battle.
Pescara ordered his body to be embalmed, and
lent to his relations; and such was the refped
paid to military merit in that age, that the
duke of Savoy commanded it to be received
with royal honours in all the cities of his domi-
nions; in Dauphine, Bayard's native country,
the people of all ranks came out in a solemn
procession to meet it u.

BONNIVET led back the fattered remains of

his army into France; and in one lhort cam-
paign, Francis was stripped of all he had pof-
sessed in Italy, and left without one ally in that
country.

Progrea of WHILE the war kindled by the emulation of
mation in Charles and Francis, spread over so many coun-
Gmany. tries of Europe, Germany enjoyed a profound

tranquillity, extremely favourable to the refor.
mation, which continued to make progress
daily. During Luther's confinement in his
retreat at Wartburg, Carloftadius, dne of his

' Bellefor. Epitr. p. 7. Mem. deBellay, 7S. Oeuv.
dp Brant. tom. vi. o18, &c. PTfquier Rechcrches, p 526.

disciples,

disciples, animated with the fame zeal, but pof- BooK Ill.
lefled of less prudence and moderation than his 24.
master, began to propagate wild and dangerous
opinions, chiefly among the lower people. En-
couraged by his exhortations, they rose in fe-
veral villages of Saxony, broke into the churches
with tumultuary violence, and threw down and
destroyed the images with which they were
adorned. These irregular and outrageous pro-
ceedings were so repugnant to all the Ele&or's
cautious maxims, that, if they had not received
a timely check, they could hardly have failed
of alienating from the reformers a prince, no
less jealous of his own authority, than afraid
of giving offence to the Emperor, and other
patrons of the ancient opinions. Luther, fen-
fible of the danger, immediately quitted his
retreat, without waiting for Frederick's per-
mifllon, and returned to Wittemberg. Happily March 6,
for the reformation, the veneration for his '*"
person and authority were fill so great, that his
appearance alone suppressed that spirit of extra-
vagance which began to seize his party. Car-
lotadius and his fanatical followers, struck dumb
by his rebukes, declared that they heard the
voice of an angel, not of a man x.

Sleid. His. 51. Scckend 19 9 .

U 3 BEFORi

BOOK lIn. BEFORE Luther left his retreat, he had begun

I 4 to translate the Bible into the German tongue,
Luther an undertaking of no less difficulty than im-
trantates
the Bible. portance, of which he was extremely fond, and

for which he was well qualified: He had a
competent knowledge in the original languages;
a thorough acquaintance with the style and senti.
ments of the inspired writers; and though his
compoficions in Latin were rude and barbarous,
he was reckoned a great master of the purity
of his mother tongue, and could express himself
with all the elegance of which it is capable.
By his own assiduous application, together with
the afliftance of Melan&hon and several other of
his disciples, he finished part of the New Testa-
ment in the year 522; and the publication of
it proved more fatal to the church of Rome,
than that of all his own works. It was read
with wonderful avidity and attention by persons
of every rank. They were afionilhed at dif-
covering how contrary the precepts of the
Author of our religion are, to the inventions of
those priests who pretended to be his vicege-
rents; and having now in their hand the rule
of faith, they thought themselves qualified, by
applying it, to judge of the elablifhed opinions,
and to pronounce when they were conformable
to the standard, or when they departed from it.

2 1 The

The great advantages arising from Luther's BooK ill.
tranflaxion of the Bible, encouraged the advo- " 4.
cates for reformation, in the other countries of
Europe, to imitate his example, and to publish
versions of the Scriptures in their refpeaive
languages.

ABOUT this time, Nuremberg, Francfort, several

Hamburgh, and several other cities in Germany ihthebo"
of the first rank, openly embraced the reformed ritess the
religion, and by the authority of their magi- church.
firates abolished the mass, and the other super-
flitious rites of Popery '. The elector of
Brandenburgh, the Dukes of Brunswick and
Lunenburgh, and Prince of Anhalt, became
avowed patrons of Luther's opinions, and coun-
tenanced the preaching of them among their
subje&s.

THE court of Rome beheld this growing de- Measures
fetion with great concern; and Adrian's first ~P,'dryin

y arder a

care after his arrival in Italy, had been to de- ihek the
liberate with the Cardinals, concerning the Pog "of'
proper means of putting a flop to it. This mtiLn.
Pope was profoundly {killed in fcholaftick theo-
logy, and having been early taken notice of on
that account, he still retained such an excessive
admiration of the science to which he owed his

Y Seckend. Z41. Chytrai Contin. Krantzii, 203.

U 4 reputation

Baoo III. reputation and fuceis in life, that he confidcred

, Luther's invetives against the fchoolme , par-

ticularly Thomas Aquinas, -a little les than
blasphemy. All the tenets of that dolftr ap-
peared to him so clear and irrefragable, that he
supposed every person who called in question
or contradicted them, to be either blinded by
ignorance, or to be aaing in opposition to the
convi&ion of his own mind: Of course, no
Pope was ever more bigotted or inflexible with
regard to points of docrine than Adrian he
noc only maintained them as Leo had done,
because they were ancient, or because it was
dangerous for the church to allow of innova-
tions, but he adhered to them with the zeal of
a theologian, and with the tenaciousness of a
disputant. At the fame time his own manners
being extremely simple, and uninfected with
any of the vices which reigned in the court of
Rome, he was as fenfihle of its corruptiona as
the reformers themselves, and viewed them with
no less indignation. The brief which he ad.
drefed to the diet of the Empire aflembled at
oiw,,sc, Nuremberg, and the inftru&ions he gave Che-

regato, the nuncio whom he sent hither, were
framed agreeably to there views. On the one
hand, he condemned Luther's opinions with
more asperity and rancour of expression than
Leo had ever usid $ he severely censured the

Princes

-Prime of Germany for suffering him to spread Booc IlI.
his pernicious tenets, by their neglecting to Sz,.
execute the edi& of the diet at Worms, and
required them, if Luther did not instantly re-
trat his errors, to destroy him with fire as a
gangrened and incurable member, in like man-
ner as Dathan and Abiram had been cut off by
Moses, Ananias and Sapphira by the apostles,
and John Huss and Jerome of Prague by their
ancestors '. On the other hand, he, with great
candour, and in the most explicit terms, ac-
knowledged the corruptions of the Roman court
to be the source from which had flowed most of
the evils the church now felt or dreaded; he
promised to exert all his authority towards re-
forming there abuses, with as much dispatch
as the nature and inveteracy of the disorders
would admit; and he requested of them to give
him their advice with regard to the most effec-
tual means of suppressing that new heresy which
had sprung up among them '.

THE members of the Diet, after praising the Diet of Nu.

Pope's pious and laudable intentions, excused ,-m',
themselves for not executing the edict of Worms, generA a
by alleging that the prodigious increase of theproper

remedy.
Luther's followers, as well as the aversion to

X Facic. Rer. gxpet. &, Fugicnd. 3I2.
* Ibid. p. 34S.

the

BOOK II. the court of Rome among their other fubjets

IS4. on account of its innumerable exa&ions, ren-

dered such an attempt rot only dangerous, but
impoilibl. They affirmed that the 1grievances
of Germany, which did not arise from imaginary
injuries, but from impositions no less real than
intolerable, as his Holiness would learn from a
catalogue of them which they intended to lay
before him, called now for some new and effica-
cious remedy; and in their opinion, the only
remedy adequate to the difeae, or which afforded
them any hopes of feeing the church restored to
soundness and vigour, was a General Council.
Such a council, therefore, they advised him,
after obtaining the Emperor's consent, to assem-
ble without delay, in one of the great cities of
Germany, that all who had right to be present
might deliberate with freedom, and propose
their opinions with such boldness, as the dan.
gerous situation of religion at this jun&ure
required b.

Arific of TNH.nuncio, more artful than his master, and
elud it better acquainted with the. political views and

interests of the Roman court, was itartled at
the proposition of a council and easily foresaw
how dangerous such an afiembly might prove
at a time when many openly denied the papal

b Fafcio. Rr. Expet, & Fugend p. 346,

authority,

authority, and the reverence and fubmiflion BooK I11
yielded to it visibly declined among all. For g.
that reason he employed his utmost address, in
order to prevail on the members of the Diet to
proceed theoafelves with greater severity against
the Lutheran heresy, and to relinquilh their
proposal concerning a general council to be
held in Germany. They, perceiving the nuncio
to he more solicitous about the interests of the
Roman court, than the tranquillity of the Em-
pire, or purity of the church, remained in-
flexible, and continued to prepare the catalogue
of their grievances to be presented to the Pope '.
The nuncio, that he might not be the bearer
of a retnonftrance so disagreeable to his court,
left Nuremberg abruptly, without taking leave
of the Diet,

THB faeular Princes accordc gly, for the The Diet

prefint a lift

eccleflafticks, although they gave no opposition, of an huo-
did not think it decent to join with them, drew drcdstie,
up the lift (so famous in the German annals) Pope.
of an hundred grievances, which the Empire
imputed to the iniquiious dominion of the papal
fee. This lift contained grievances much of
the fane nature with that prepared under the
reign of Maximilian. It would be tedious to
enumerato each of them; they complained of

Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugind. 349. d Ibid. 376.

the

pOOK III. the fums exacted for difpenrations, abfdoutions
'=-...' and indulgences; of the expence arising from

the law-suits carried to Rome; of'the innu-
merable abuses occasioned by reservations, com-
nendams, and annates; of the exemption from
civil jurifdition which the clergy had obtained
of the arts by which they brought all secular
causes under the cognizance of the ecclesiastical
judges; of the indecent and profligate lives
which not a few of the clergy led, and of
various other particulars, many of which'have
already been mentioned among the circum-
fiances which contributed to the favourable
reception, or to the quick progress of Luther's
doctrines. In the end they concluded, that if
the holy fee did not speedily deliver them from
those intolerable burdens, they had determined
to endure them no longer, and would employ
the power and authority with which God had
entrusted them, in order to procure relief .

The recess INSTE AD of such severities against Luther and
ofthe Diet.
March 6, his followers as the nuncio had recommended,

'53' the recef or edit of the Diet contained only a

general injuntion to all ranks of men to wait
with patience for the determinations of the
council which was to be assembled, and in the
mean time not to publiih any new opinions

Facic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. 354.

contrary

cntrary to the established dotrines of the BooK Ilr.
church; together with an admonition to all s
preachers to abtain from matters of controversy
in their discourses to the people, and to confine
themselves to the plain and inftru&ive truths of
religion .

THB reformers derived great advantage from This diet of

the tranfa&ions of this diet, as they afforded to thei Re
them the fullelf and most authentick evidence s""o.
thal gross corruptions prevailed in the court of
Rome, and that the Empire was loaded by the
clergy with insupportable burdens. With re-
gard to the former, they had now the testimony
of the Pope himself, that their invetives and
accusations were not malicious or ill-founded.
As to the latter, the representatives of the Ger-
manick body, in an assembly where the patrons
of the new opinions were far from being the
most numerous or powerful, had pointed out
as the chief grievances of the Empire, whose
very practices of the Romish church against
which Luther and his disciples were accustomed
to declaim. Accordingly, in all their contro-
verfial writings after this period, they often
appealed to Adrian's declaration, and to the
hundred grievances, in confirmation of what-
ever they advanced concerning the dissolute

f Fafcic. Rer. Expet. & Fugiend. 348.

manners,

BooK 1i1. manners, or insatiable ambition and rapacious-
-2- hlefs of the papal court.

Adrian's At Rome, Adrian's conduct was confideted
condua cenrured at as a proof of the moRe childith simplicity and
Rome. imprudence. Men trained up amidit the arti-

sices and corruptions of the papal court, and
accuflomed to judge of actions not by what
was just, but by what was useful, were afto-
nithed at a Pontiff, who, departing from the
wife maxims of his predecessors, acknowledged
disorders which he ought to have concealed;
and forgetting his own dignity, aiked advice of
those, to whom he was entitled to prescribe. By
such an excess of impolitick sincerity, they were
afraid that, instead of reclaiming, he would
render the enemies of the church more pre-
sumptuous, and instead of extinguishing heresy,
would weaken the foundations of the papal
power, or flop the chief sources from which
wealth flowed into the church '. For this reason
they industriously opposed all his schemes of
reformation, and by throwing objections and
difficulties in his way, endeavoured to retard or
to defeat the execution of them. Adrian, ama-
zed on the one hand, at the obstinacy of the
Lutherans, disgusted on the other, with the
manners and maxims of the Italians, and finding

s F. Paul, Hist. ofCounc. p. 28. Pallavic. Hist. 58.

himself

himself unable to correct either the one or the BooK III.
other, often lamented his own situation, and ` J

1Z54.

often looked back with pleasure on that period
of his life when he was only dean of Louvain,
a more humble but happier flation, in which
little was expeced from him, and there was no-
thing to frustrate his good intentions h.

CLEMENT VII. his successor, excelled Adrian ciaten

as much in the arts of government, as he was .a,.rL"-
inferior to him in purity of life, or uprightness hedr, and
of intention. He was animated not only with a g.rasrl
the aversion which all Popes naturally bear to
a council, but having gained his own ele&ion
by means very uncanonical, he was afraid of an
assembly that might subje&t it to a scrutiny
which it could not stand. He determined,
therefore, by every possible means to elude the
demands of the Germans, both with refpe&t to
the calling of a council, and reforming abuses
in the papal court, which the rashness and in-
capacity of his predeceflor had brought upon
him. For this purpose, he made choice of car-
dinal Campeggio, an artful man, often entrusted
by the Popes with negotiations of importance,
as his nuncio to the diet of the Empire aflem-
bled again at Nuremberg.

h Jovil Vit. Adr. p. I 18.

CAMPEGGIO,

BOOK ITI. CAMPEOGIO, without taking any notice of
t'.,. what had pafled in the last meeting, exhorted
1524. February. the diet in a long discourse, to execute the edi&

ation ofhis of Worms with vigour, as the only effe&ual
runco in a
econd diet means of fupprefling Luther's dotrines. The
arg,'. diet, in return, desired to know the Pope's in-

tentions concerning the council, and the redress
of the hundred grievances. The former, the
nuncio endeavoured to elude by general and
unmeaning declarations of the Pope's resolution
to pursue such measures as would be for the
greatest good of the church. With regard to
the latter, as the catalogue of grievances did
not reach Rome till after Adrian's death, and
of consequence had not been regularly laid
before the present Pope, Campeggio took ad-
vantage of this circumstance to decline making
any definitive answer to them in Clement's
name; though, at the fame time, he observed
that their catalogue of grievances contained
many particulars extremely indecent and un-
dutiful, and that the publilhing it by their own
authority was highly difrefpeaful to the Roman
fee. In the end, he renewed his demand of
their proceeding with vigour against Luther

ttrnded and his adherents. But though an ambassador
wthlittle from the Emperor, who was at that time very

solicitous to gain the Pope, warmly seconded
the nunfio, with many professions of his master's

zeal

zeal for the honour and dignity of the papal BOOK 1ll.
fee, the recess of the diet was conceived in terms 24.
of almost the fame import with the former, April AS.
without enjoining any additional severity againit
Luther and his partyJ.

BEFORE he left Germany, Campeggio, in

order to amuse and soothe the people, published
certain articles for the amendment of some dif-
orders and abuses which prevailed among the
inferior clergy; but this partial reformation,
which fell so far short of the expectations of the
Lutherans, and of the demands of the Diet,
gave no fatisfafion, and produced little effcEt.
The nuncio, with a cautious hand, tenderly
lopped a few branches; the Germans aimed a
deeper blow, and by striking at the root wished
to exterminate the evil k.

Seckend. z86. Sleid. Hist. 66. k Seckend. 292.
VOL. I X THE

# BOOK IV.

THE
HISTORY

OF THE

R E I G N
REIGN

OF THE
EMPEROR CHARLES V.

BOOK IV.
T HE expulfionof the French, both out of BOOK iv.

the Milanefe,and the republickofGenoa, -'
was confidered by the Italians as the conclusion viewsof

the Italian

of the war between Charles and Francis; and as dates with
they began immediately to be apprehensive of Chrl^e.td
the Emperor, when they raw no power remain- Franci,.
ing in Italy capable either to controul or oppose
him, they longed ardently for the re establish-
ment of peace. Having procured the reftora-
tion of Sforza to his paternal dominions, which
had been their chief motive for entering into
confederacy with Charles, they plainly discovered

X 2 their

BooN IV. their intention to contribute no longer towards

Z. increaling the Emperor's superiority over his

rival, which was already the object of their jea-
lousy. The Pope especially, whose natural
timidity increased his suspicions of Charles's de-
signs, endeavoured by his remonitrances to in-
spire him with moderation, and incline him to
peace,

Charler.- BUT the Emperor, intoxicated with success,
solve, to in-
4Frr-ace. and urged on by his own ambition, no less than

by Bourbon's desire of revenge, contemned Cle-
ment's admonitions, and declared his resolution
of ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to
invade Provence, a part of his rival's dominions,
where, as he least dreaded an attack, he was least
prepared to resist it. His most experienced
ministers diifuaded him from undertaking such
an enterprize with a feeble army, and an ex-
haufted treasury: But he relied so much on
having obtained the concurrence of the King of
England, and on the hopes which Bourbon,
with the confidence and credulity natural to
exiles, entertained of being joined by a nume-
rous body of his partisans as soon as the Impe-
rial troops should enter France, that he persisted
obstinately in the measure. Henry undertook
to furnish an hundred thouland ducats towards
defraying the expence of the expedition during

the

the firit month, and had it in his choice either Boor IV.
to continue the payment of that fum monthly, 12i,.
or to invade Picardy before the end of July with
a powerful army. The Emperor engaged to
attack Guienne at the fame time with a con-
fiderable body of men i and if these enterprizes
proved successful, they agreed, that Bourbon,
besides the territories which he had loft, flould
be put in poffefflon of Provence, with the title
of King, and should do homage to Henry as
the lawful King of France, for his new domi-
nions. Of all the parts of this extensive but
extravagant projet, the invasion of Provence
was the only one which was executed. For al-
though Bourbon, with a scrupulous delicacy,
altogether unexpeEted after the part which he
had a&ed, positively refused to acknowledge
Henry's title to the crown of France, and thereby
absolved him from any obligation to promote
the enterprize, Charles's eagerness to carry his
own plan into execution did not in any degree
abate; The army he employed for that purpose
amounted only to eighteen thousand men , the
supreme command of which was given to the
Marquis de Pescara, with instructions to pay the
greatest deference to Bourbon's advice in all his
operations. Pescara passed the Alps without Thetmtpe-
opposition, and entering Provence, laid siege to 'Povenc'i
Marseilles. Bourbon had advised him rather to Augua g.

X 3 march

BOOK IV. their intention to contribute no longer towards

LKS~i increasing the Emperor's superiority over his

rival, which was already the objec of their jea-
lousy. The Pope especially, whose natural
timidity increased his suspicions of Charles's de-
signs, endeavoured by his remonstrances to in-
spire him with moderation, and incline him to
peace,

charlesr. BTT the Emperor, intoxicated with success,
a4France. and urged on by his own ambition, no less than

by Bourbon's desire of revenge, contemned Cle-
ment's admonitions, and declared his resolution
of ordering his army to pass the Alps, and to
invade Provence, a part of his rival's dominions,
where, as he least dreaded an attack, he was leall
prepared to resist it. His mos experienced
ministers dissuaded him from undertaking such
an enterprize with a feeble army, and an ex-
haufted treasury: But he relied so much on
having obtained the concurrence of the King of
England, and on the hopes which Bourbon,
with the confidence and credulity natural to
exiles, entertained of being joined by a nume-
rous body of his partisans as loon as the Impe-
rial troops ihould enter France, that he persised
obstinately in the measure. Henry undertook
to furnish an hundred thousand ducats towards
lefraying the expence of the expedition during

the

the first month, and had it in his choice either BooK IV.
to continue the payment of that fum monthly, 524.
or to invade Picardy before the end of July with
a powerful army. The Emperor engaged to
attack Guienne at the fame time with a con-
fiderable body of men 1 and if there enterprizes
proved successful, they agreed, that Bourbon,
besides the territories which he had loft, should
be put in possession of Provence, with the title
of King, and should do homage to Henry as
the lawful King of France, for his new domi-
nions. Of all the parts of this extensive but
extravagant project, the invasion of Provence
was the only one which was executed. For al.
though Bourbon, with a scrupulous delicacy,
altogether unexpe&ted after the part which he
had afted, positively refused to acknowledge
Henry's title to the crown of France, and thereby
absolved him from any obligation to promote
the enterprize, Charles's eagerness to carry his
own plan into execution did not in any degree
abate; The army he employed for that purpose
amounted only to eighteen thousand men , the
supreme command of which was given to the
Marquis de Pescara, with inftru&ions to pay the
greatest deference to Bourbon's advice in all his
operations. Pescara passed the Alps without Thettlpe-
opposition, and entering Provence, laid siege to Provence,
Marseilles. Bourbon had advised him rather to Augusta 1

X 3 march

BooK IV. march towards Lyons, rs the neighbourhood of

5T24. which city his territories were ftuated, and where

of course his influence was molt extensive: But
the Emperor was so desirous to get pofreffion of
a port, which would, at all times, secure him
easy access into France, that by his authority he
over-ruled the Constable's opinion, and directed
Pcfcara to make the reduction of Marseilles his
chief obje t'.

Prudent FRANCIS, who, foresaw, but was unable to
~mfe of

,i"of prevent this attempt, took the most proper pre-

cautions to defeat it. He laid waite the adja-
cent country, in order to render it more difficult
for the enemy to subsist their army; he razed
the suburbs of the city, strengthened its fortifica-
tions, and threw into it a numerous garrison
under the command of brave and experienced
officers. To these, nine thousand of the citi-
zens, whom their dread of the Spanilh yoke in.
spired with contempt of danger, joined them-
selves; by their united courage and industry,
all the efforts of Pescara's military ikill, and of
Bourbon's activity and revenge, were rendered
abortive. Francis, meanwhile, had leisure to
assemble a powerful army under the walls of
Avignon, and no sooner began to advance to-
wards Marseilles, than the Imperial troops, ex-
haufted by the fatigues of a siege which ha4

* Guic. 1. xv. 273, &c. Men. do Bellay, p. 8o.

lasted

lasted forty days, weakened by diseases, and al. BooK IV.
mot deftitate of provisions, retired with preci- 152.
pitation towards Italy b. ImcP

retstt.

IF, during these operations of the army in cpt. tg.

Provence, either Charles or Henry had attacked
France in the manner which they had projeted,
that kingdom mut have been exposed to the
most imminent danger. But on this, as well as
on many other occasions, the Emperor found
that the extent of his revenues was not adequate
to the greatness of his power, or the ardour of
his ambition, and the want of money obliged
him, though with much reluctance, to circum-
scribe his plan, and to leave part of it unexe-
cuted. Henry, disgustRd at Bourbon's refusing
to recognize his right to the crown of France
alarmed at the motions of the Scots, whom the
solicitations of the French King had persuaded
to march towards the borders of England; and
no longer incited by his minister, who was be.
come extremely cool with regard to all the Em-
peror's interests, took no measures to support an
enterprize, of which, as of all new undertakings,
l.e had been at firt exceflively fond c.

IF the King of France had been satisfied with Francldat.
having delivered his fubjecs from this formi- edcwithhis

success.

h Guic. 1. xv. 277. Ulloa Vita dell CarloV. p. 93.
* Fiddes's Life of Wolfey. Append. N*. 70o 71, 72.

X 4 dable

BOOK IV,: d4ble, invasion, if he had thought it enough to

12, W ?f1ew all Europe the facility with which the in-

ternal strength of his dominions enabled him to
resist the impreflion of a foreign enemy, even
*when seconded by the abilities and powerful es-
forts of a rebellious fubjeft, the campaign, not-
withstanding the loss of the Milanese, would have
been far from ending ingloriously. But Francis,
animated with courage more becoming a soldier
than a general; pushed on by ambition, enter-
prizing rather than considerate; and too apt to
be elated with success ; was fond of every under-
taking that seemed bold and adventurous. Such
an undertaking, the situation of his affairs, at

Refoves to that jun&ure, naturally presented to his view.
invade the
Milanee' He had under his command one of the most

powerful and best appointed armies France had
ever brought into the field, which he could not
think of disbanding without having employed
it in any service. The Imperial troops had been
obliged to retire almost ruined by hard duty,
and disheartened with ill success the Milanese
had been left altogether without defence; it was
not impoflible to reach that country before Pes-
cara, with his Ihattered forces, could arrive there;
or if fear thould add speed to their retreat, they
were in no condition to make head against his
fresh and numerous troops; and Milan would
now, as in former inftraces, submit without re-

fiftance

fiftance to a bold invader. These confidera- BOOK IV.
tions, which were not destitute of plausibility, X

,

appeared to his sanguine temper to be of the
utmost weight. In vain did his wisest ministers
and generals represent to him the danger of
taking the field at a season so far advanced, with
an army comnpoed chiefly of Swiss and Germans,
to whose caprices he would be fubje& in all his
operations, and on whose fidelity his safety, must
absolutely depend. In vain did Louise of Savoy
advance by hasty journies towards Provence,
that lhe might exert all her authority in diffuad-
ing her son from such a rash enterprize. Francis
disregarded the remonstrances of his fubjets; and
that he might save himfelfthepain of an interview
with his mother, whose councils he had deter-
mined to reje&, he began his march before her
arrival; appointing her, however, by way of atone- Appotn.
ment for that neglect, to be regent of the king- regent du-

ring his bo ,

dom during his absence. Bonnivet, by his per. fence.
suasions, contributed not a little to confirm
Francis in this resolution. That favourite, who
strongly resembled his master in all the defective
parts of his character, was led, by his natural im-
petuofity, warmly to approve of such an enter-
prize; and being prompted besides by his im-
patience to revisit a Milanese lady, of whom he
had been deeply enamoured during his late expe-
dition, he is said, by his flattering descriptions of

her
S

BooK IV. her beauty and accomplifments, to have inspired

j,,. sFrancis, who was extremely susceptible of such

paflions, with an equal desire of eeing her d.
Oper*t;onn TnH French pasid the Alps at Mount Cenis

fneMia- and as their success depended on dispatch, they

advanced with the greatest diligence. Pescara,
who had been obliged to take a longer and more
difficult rout by Monaco and Final, was soon
informed of their intention ; and being sensible
that nothing but the pretence of his troops could
save the Milanese, marched with such rapidity,
that he reached Alva on the fame day that the
French army arrived at Varcelli. Francis, in-
ftru&ed by Bonnivet's error in the former cam.
paign, advanced diretly towards Milan, where
the unexpeded approach of an enemy so power-
ful, occasioned such conternation and disorder,
that although -Pescara entered the city with some
of his bes troops, he found that the defence of
it could not be undertaken with any probability
of success; and having thrown a garrison into
the citadel, retired through one gate, while the
French were admitted at another'.

Emba,,r- THESr briik motions of the French Monarch
fingfm Pof disconcerted all the schemes of defence which
rhelimti.

d Oeuv. de Brant. torn. vi. 253.
e Mrm. deBellay, p. 81. Guic. 1. xv. 278.

the

the Imperialits had formed. Never, indeed, BooK IV.
did generals attempt to oppose a formidable in- .
vafion under such circumstances of disadvantage.
Though Charles possessed dominions more ex-
tensive than any other Prince in Europe, and
had, at this time, no other army but that which
was employed in Lombardy, which did not
amount to sixteen thousand men, his prerogative
in all his different states was so limited, and his
fubjets, without whose consent he could raise no
taxes, discovered such unwillingners to burden
themselves withnewor extraordinary impositions,
that even this small body of troops was in want
of pay, of ammunition, of provisions, and of
clothing. In such a situation, it required all
the wisdom of Lannoy, the intrepidity of Pes-
cara, and the implacable resentment of Bourbon,
to preserve them from finking under despair,
and to inspire them with resolution to attempt,
or sagacity to discover, what was eflential to
their safety. To the efforts of their genius, and
the activity of their zeal, the Emperor was more
indebted for the preservation of his Italian do.
minions than to his own power. Lannoy, by
mortgaging the revenues of Naples, procured
ofme money, which was immediately applied to-
wards providing the army with whatever was
most necessary . Pescara, beloved and almost

' Guic, . xv. 280.

adored

BoOK IV. adored by the Spanilh troops, exhorted them to

sa^'c fhlew the world,. by their.engaging to serve the

Emperor, in that dangerous exigency, without
making any immediate demand ofpay, that they
were animated .with sentiments of honour very
different from those of mercenary soldiers; to
which proposition, that gallant body of men,
with an unexampled generosity, gave their con-
sent s. Bourbon having raised a considerable
fum, by pawning hisjewels, set out for Germany,
where his influence was great, that by his pre-
fence he might haften the levying of troops for
the Imperial service h.

Francs be. FRANCIS, by a fatal error, allowed the Em-
fiteE Pavi, peror's generals time to derive advantage from

all these operations. Instead of pursuing the
enemy, who retired to Lodi on the Adda, an
untenable post, which Pescara had resolved to
abandon on his approach, he, in compliance
with the opinion of Bonnevet, though contrary
Oaobr st. to that of his other generals, laid siege to Pavia

on the Tefino; a town, indeed, of great impor-
tance, the poffelion of which would have opened
to him all the fertile country lying on the banks
of that river. But the fortifications of the place

a JoviiVit. Davali, lib. v. p. 386. Sandov. vol. i. 621.

Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 94, &c. Vida dell Emper.
Carloo V. per Vera y Zuniga, p. 36.

b Mem. de Bellay, p. 83.

were

were strong; it was dangerous to undertake a BOOK IV.
difficult siege, at so late a season; and the Im- V,'
perial generals, sensible of its consequence, had
thrown into the town a garrison composed of fix
thousand veterans, under the command of An-
tonio de Leyva, an officer of high rank; of
great experience; of a patient, but enterprizing
courage; fertile in resources; ambitious of dif-
tinguilhing himself; and capable, for that rea-
ion, as well as from his having been long ac-
customed both to obey and to command, of sus-
fering or performing any thing in order to pro.
cure success.

FRANcJs prosecuted the siege with obstinacy Hiw vi.g

equal to the rashness with which he had under- rou, effor.
taken it. During three months, every thing
known to the engineers of that age, or that
could be effe&ed by the valour of his troops,
was attempted in order to reduce the place;
while Lannoy and Pescara, unable to obftru&t
his operations, were obliged to remain in such
an ignominious state of inaction, that a l'afqui-
nade was published at Rome, offering a reward
to any person who could find the Imperial army,
loft in the month of October in the mountains
between France and Lombardy, and which had
not been heard of since that time '.

J Sandov. i. 608.

LEYVA,

Boox IV- LeYVA, well acquainted with the difficulties

XL' 5. under which his countrymen laboured, and the

Tbhtowa impossibility of their facing, in the field, such
gallantly wafcn,. a powerful army as formed the siege of Pavia,

placed hisonly hopeof safety in his own vigilance
and valour. The efforts of both were extraor-
dinary, and in proportion to the importance of
the place, with the defence of which he was en-
trusted. He interrupted the approaches of the
French by frequent and furious sallies. Behind
the breaches made by their artillery, he erected
new works, which appeared to be scarcely in-
ferior in strength to the original fortifications.
He repulsed the besiegers in all their aflaults;
and by his own example, brought not only the
garifon, but the inhabitants, to bear the most
intolerable fatigues, and to encounter the greatest
dangers without murmuring. The rigour of
the season conspired with his endeavours in re-
tarding the progress of the French. Francis
attempting to become master of the town, by
diverting the course of the Tefino, which is its
defence on one fide, a sudden inundation of the
iver destroyed, in one day, the labour of many
weeks, and swept away all the mounds which
his army had raised with infinite toil, as well as
at great expence .

Guic. 1. xv. 28o. Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. 95.

NOTWITH-

NOTWITHSTANDING the flow progress of the Book Iv.

besiegers, and the glory which Leyva acquired !'
by his gallant defence, it was not doubted but The Pope

concluier

that the town would at last be obliged to fur- treaty o
render. The Pope, who already confidered the netr.ht
French arms as superior in Italy, became im.
patient to disengage himself from his connec-
tions with the Emperor, of whose designs he
was extremely jealous, and to enter into terms
of friendlhip with Francis. As Clement's timid
and cautious temper rendered him incapable of
following the bold plan which Leo had formed,
of delivering Italy from the yoke of both the
rivals, he returned to the more obvious and
practicable scheme of employing the power of
the one to balance and to restrain that of the
other. For this reason, he did not difemble his
fatisfaetion at feeing the French King recover
Milan, as he hoped that the dread of such a
neighbour would be rome check upon the Em-
peror's ambition, which no power in Italy was
now able to controul. He laboured hard to
bring about a peace that would secure Francis
in poffefion of his new conquests; and as Charles,
who was always inflexible in the prosecution of
hiafchemes, rejected the proposition with disdain,
and with: bitter exclamations against the Pope,
by whose persuasions, while Cardinal de Me-
dici, he had been induced to invade the Mila-
nwfe, Clement immediately concluded a treaty

2 of

Boos IV. of neutrality with the King of France, in which
'-O' the republick of Florence was included'.

Frrnci FRANCIS having, by this tranfa&ion, deprived
Naples the Emperor of his two most powerful allies,

and at the fame time having secured a passage
for his own troops through their territories,
formed a scheme of attacking the kingdom of
Naples, hoping either to over-run that country,
which was left altogether without defence, or
that at least such an unexpeted invasion would
oblige the viceroy to recal part of the Imperial
army out of the Milanese. For this purpose he
ordered fix thousand men to march under the
command of John Stuart duke of Albany. But
Pefcara,forefeeing that the effet of this diversion
would depend entirely upon the operations of
the armies in the Milanese, persuaded Lannoy to
disregard Albany's motions", and to bend his
whole force against the King himself; so that
Francis not only weakened his army very unfea-
fonably by this great detachment, but incurred
the reproach of engaging too rashly in chimerical
and extravagant projets.

iEfort of BY this time the garrison of Pavia was re-
Pecarad duced to extremity; their ammunition and pro-
Bourbon.

visions began to fail l the Germans, of whom

A Guic. I.. 8xv. 8 . G. 1. xv. 285.

it was chiefly composed, having received no BooKIV.
pay for seven months", threatened to deliver lirs.
the town into the enemy's hands, and could
hardly be restrained from mutiny by all Leyva's
address and authority. The Imperial generals,
who were no strangers to his situation, saw the
neceflity of marching without loss of time to
his relief. This they had now in their power:
Twelve thousand Germans, whom the zeal and
activity of Bourbon taught to move with un-
usual rapidity, had entered Lombardy under
his command, and rendered the Imperial army
nearly equal to that of the French, greatly
diminished by the absence of the body under
Albany, as well as by the fatigues of the siege,
and the rigour of the season. But the more
their troops increased in number, the more fen-
sibly did they feel the distress arising from want
of money. Far from having funds for paying
a powerful army, they had scarcely what was
sufficient for defraying the charges of conduBt-
ing their artillery, and of carrying their ammu-
nition and provisions. The abilities of the gene.
rals, however, supplied every defct, By their
own example, as well as by magnificent promises
in name of the Emperor, they prevailed on the
troops of all the different nations which com.
posed their army, to take the field without

" Gold. Polit. Imperial. 875,
, ,VoL. II. X pay

BooK IV. of neutrality with the King of France, in which
L-;4 the republick of Florence was included'.

3 524.

ranchy FRANCIS having, by this tranfa&ion, deprived
Waplcb the Emperor of his two most powerful allies,

and at the fame time having secured a passage
for his own troops through their territories,
formed a scheme of attacking the kingdom of
Naples, hoping either to over-run that country,
which was left altogether without defence, or
that at least such an unexpeted invasion would
oblige the viceroy to recal part of the Imperial
army out of the Milanese. For this purpose he
ordered fix thousand men to march under the
command of John Stuart duke of Albany. But
Pescara, foreseeing that the effe& of this diversion
would depend entirely upon the operations of
the armies in the Milanese, persuaded Lannoy to
disregard Albany's motions", and to bend his
whole force against the King himself; so that
Francis not only weakened his army very unfea-
fonably by this great detachment, but incurred
the reproach of engaging too ralhly in chimerical
and extravagant projects.

Efforts of BY this time the garrison of Pavia was re-
PSfcaia d duced to extremity; their ammunition and pro.
Bourbon.

visions began to fail ^ the Germans, of whom

* Guic. 1. xv. 28S. 285. Guic. I. xv. 285.

.%

it was chiefly composed, having received no BooKl V.
pay for seven months", threatened to deliver 1525.
the town into the enemy's hands, and could
hardly be restrained from mutiny by all Leyva's
address and authority. The Imperial generals,
who were no strangers to his situation, saw the
neceflity of marching without loss of time to
his relief. This they had now in their power:
Twelve thousand Germans, whom the zeal and
acivity of Bourbon taught to move with un.
usual rapidity, had entered Lombardy under
his command, and rendered the Imperial army
nearly equal to that of the French, greatly
diminilhed by the absence of the body under
Albany, as well as by the fatigues of the siege,
and the rigour of the season. But the more
their troops increased in number, the more fen-
sibly did they feel the distress arising from want
of money. Far from having funds for paying
a powerful army, they had scarcely what was
sufficient for defraying the charges of condu&t-
ing their artillery, and of carrying their ammu-
nition and provisions. The abilities of the gene.
rals, however, supplied every defest, By their
own example, as well as by magnificent promises
in name of the Emperor, they prevailed on the
troops of all the different nations which corn
posed their army, to take the field without

" Gold. Polit. Imperiil. 875,
, ¥OL. II. X pay

Bloox IV. pai; they engaged to lead them dire&iy towards

35S. the enemy; and flattered them with the certain

profpe& of vitory, which iould at once enrich
them with such royal spoils as would be an
ample reward for all their services. The fol-
diers, sensible that, by quitting the army, they
would forfeit the vast arrears due to them, and
eager to get pofleffion of the promised treasures,
demanded a battle with all the impatience of
adventurers who fight only for plunder °.
'heymarch THE Imperial generals, without suffering the

liattack
the Fnch. ardour of their troops to cool, advanced im-

'iNy 3. mediately towards the French camp. On the

first intelligence of their approach, Francis called
a council of war, to deliberate what course he
ought to take. All his officers of greatest ex.
perience were unanimous in advising him to
retire, and to decline a battle with an enemy
who courted it from despair. The leaders of
the Imperialists, they observed, would either
be obliged in a few weeks to diiband an army,
which they were unable to pay, and which they
Ikept together only by the hope of pillage, or
she soldiers enraged at the non-performance of
the promises to which they had trusted, would
r'fe in some furious mutiny which would allow

* Eryci Peuteani Hilft Cifalpina *p. Grevii Thef. An-
$dqi(, Itli. ii. 1170, 179,

them

them to think of nothing but their own safety: Bool IV.
That, meanwhile, he might encamp in some ,5
strong post, and waiting in safety the arrival
of fresh troops from France and Switzerland,
might, before the end of spring, take poffeflion
of all the Milanese, without danger, or blood-
ihed. But in opposition to them, Bonnivet,
whose destiny it was to give counsels fatal to
France during the whole campaign, represented
the ignominy that it would reflect on their fove-
reign, if he should abandon a siege which he
had prosecuted so long, or turn his back before
an enemy to whom he was still superior in num.
ber and insisted on the necessity of fighting
the Imperialists rather than relinquish an under-
taking, on the success of which the King's
future fame depended. Unfortunately, Fran-
cis's notions of honour were delicate to an
excess that bordered on what was romantick.
Having often said that he would take Pavia, or
perish in the attempt, he thought himself bound
not to depart from that resolution; and rather
than expose himself to the slightest imputation,
he chose to forego all the advantages which
were the certain consequences of a retreat, and
determined to wait for the Imperialists before
the walls of Pavia P.

P Guic. 1. xv. 291.

Y 2 THs

BooK Iv. THE Imperial generals found the: French so
"'" Rtrongly entrenched, that notwithstanding the
ia, of powerful motives which urged them on, they

hesitated long before they ventured to attack
them; but at last the neceflities of the besieged,
and the murmurs of their own soldiers, obliged
vc*. 1. them to put every thing to hazard. Never did

armies engage with greater ardour, or with an
higher opinion of the importance of the battle
which they were going to fight; never were
troops more firongly animated with emulation,
national antipathy, mutual resentment, and all
the passions which inspire obstinate bravery.
On the one hand, a gallant young Monarch,
seconded by a generous nobility, and followed
by subje&s to whose natural impetuosity, indig.
nation at the opposition which they had encoun.
tered, added new force, contended for victory
and honour. On the other fide, troops more
completely disciplined, and condutded by gene-
rals of greater abilities, fought from necessity,
with courage heightened by despair. The Im-
perialifts, however, were unable to resist the
first efforts of the French valour, and their
firmest battalions began to give way. But the
fortune of the day was quickly changed.' The
Swiss in the service of France, unmindful of
the reputation of their country for fidelity and

martial

martial glory, abandoned their post in a cow- BooK IV.
ardly manner. Leyva, with his garrison, sallied I;t,
,out and attacked the rear of the French, during
the heat of the action, with such fury as threw
it into confusion ; and Pescara falling on their
cavalry, with the Imperial horle, among whom
he had prudently intermingled a considerable
number of Spaniih foot, armed with the heavy
muskets then in use, broke this formidable
body by an unusual method of attack, against
which they were wholly unprovided. The rout TLe French

army routcd*

became universal and resistance ceased in
almost every part, but where the King was in
person, who fought now, not for fame or victory,
but for safety.. .Thqugh wounded in several
places, and thrawn from his horse, which was
killed under him, Francis defended himself on
foot with an heroick courage. Many of his
bravest officers gathering round him, and en-
deavouring to save his life, at the expence of
their own, fell at his feet. Among these was
Bonnivet, the: author of.this great calamity,
:who alone died pulamented.. The King ex-
hauted with fatigue,. and scarcely capable of
farther refitance, was left almost alone, exposcd
to the.fury.of fomw Spanish soldiers, ftranguE
to his rank, and enraged at his obstinacy. At
that moment came up Pomperant, s French
gentleman, who had entered together with

Y 3 Bourbon a

Booz IV, B'ourbon into the mnperor's service, and placing

ss hiimfiilf by the fide of the Monarch against

'whom he had rebelled, aflifted in prote&ing
Jim 'front the violence of the folditrs i at the
fame time beseeching him to surrender to Bour-
bon, who was not far distant. Imminent as
the danger was which now su'rrounded Francis,
he rejeted with'indignation the thoughts of an
acion which would have afforded such matter
of triumph to his traitorous subjef&; and calling
'for Lannoy, who happened likewise to be near

taken pr 't hand, gave' up his sword to him; which he,
soner. kneeling to'kifs'the King's hand, received with

,profound refpe&; and taking his own sword
'from his'fide, presentcd it to him, faying, That
it did not become ,so great' a'Monarchto remain
'disarmed in the pefence of 6e 'of the Empe.
ror's fubjets q.

T; t'thoufdhd men fell on this day, one of

;the mos fatilr'rance had ever' seen. Among
.hdie were many nbblemen of the highest dif.
tinttion, who choi~ rather to perish than to turn
their backs with dilhonour.. Not a few, were
!tAken prisoners, of whom the most illustrious
Lws'~Henry D'Albret, the unfortunate king of

'. .

·

i Guic. 1. xv. 29a. Oeuv. de Brant. vi. 3S5. Mien.

'de Bellaiypyp . Sandov. His. i. 638, &c. P. Mart. Ep.

S;ji 8ao. Rufcelli Lottere de Principi, ii. p. 70. Ulloa
Vit dell Carlo V. p. 98. N

Navarre.

Navarre. A small body of the rear-guard made BooK 1V,
its escape under the command of the duke 5
. Akwngon; the feeble garrison of Milan, on the
.first news of the defeat, retired without being
purfued,.:by another road; and in two weeks
.after the battle, not a Frenchman remained in
Italy.

LANNOY, though he treated Francis.with all

the outward marks of honour due to his rank
and characer, guarded him with the utmost
attention. He was solicitous, not only to pre-
vent any poflibility of his escaping, but afraid
.that his own troops might seize his person, and
detain it as the best security for the payment
.aoftheir arrears.. In order to provide againit
both these dangers, he condu&ed Francis, the
.day after the battle, to the strong castle of
Pizzichitone near Cremona, .committing him to
the custody of Don Ferdinand Alarcon, general
of the Spanish infantry, ,an officer of great bra-
very, and of ftri& honour, but remarkable for
that severe and scrupulous vigilance which such
·a trust required.

FRANCISj who formed a judgment of thd

'Emperor's dispositions by his own, was ex-
tremely desirous that Charles should 'be in-
formed of his situation, fondly. hoping that,
from his generosity ,or sympathy, he fhoul

Y 4. obt2

BooK IV. obtain speedy relief. .The Imperial generals

55-. '
were no less impatient to give their sovereign

an early account of the decisive vi&tory which
they had gained, and to receive his inftrutions
with regard to their future condu&. As the
most certain and expeditious method of con-
veying intelligence to Spain, at that season of
the year, was by land, Francis gave the Com-
mendador Pennalofa, 'who was charged with
Lannoy's dispatches, a passport to travel through
France.

EffeA. of CHARLES received the account of this signal
thi'oi6°y and unexpeted success that had crowned his
upon
CharleI. arms, with a moderation, which, if it had been
March go.

real, would have done him more honour than
the greatest victory. Without uttering one
word: expreflive of exultation, or of intemperate
joy, he retired immediately into his chapel, and
having fpenc an hour in offering up his thanks-
givings to heaven, returned to the presence-
·chamber, which by that time was filled with
grandees and foreign ambassadors, affimbled in
order to congratulate him. He accepted of
their compliments with a modest deportment;
he lamented the misfortune of the captive King,
as a firiking example of the fad reverse of
fortune, to which the modt powerful Monarchs
are subject; he sorbad any publick rejoicings, as
indecent in a war carried on among Christians,
t.'. Y. reserving

reserving them until he ihould obtain a vitory Boox IV.
equallyilluftrious over the Infidels; and seemed ~-,
to take pleasure in the advantage which he had
gained, only as it would prove the occasion of
restoring peace to Christendom '.

CHARLES, however, had already begun to The

form schemes in his own mind, which little bhet
suited such external appearances. Ambition, form
not generosity, was the ruling paflion in his
mind:;;aad the vi&ory at Pavia opened such
new and.unbounded profpeas of gratifying it,
as allured him with irrefitible force: But it
being no easy matter to execute the vast designs
which he meditated, he thought it neceifary,
while proper measures were taking for that
purpose,. to assec the greatest moderation, ho-
ping undtr that veil to conceal his real inten-
tions from the other Princes of Europe.

MEANWHILE France.was filled with confer- The eneal

T conflernao

nation. The King himself had early tranf- tion in
mitted an account of the rout at Pavia, in a Frane.
letter to his mother, delivered; by Pennalofa,
which contained only these words, " Macam, all
is los, except our honour." The officers who
made their escape, when they arrived from Italy,
brought such a melancholy detail of particulars
' Sandov. Hilt. i. 65 i. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo V. p. 'l o.

as «

.oo IV. as made all aks ofsmenftwfily ftl etgrteac-

.
!S 'ne i and exgecnt of th'csalamity.: Fxanci with.

outits ifo~reign, without.money ina.er treasury,
Iwitbauta an am, witbout .generdls to.cqmmand
it, and encompaledId.oAal l fides by.a yi&orious
and af&ive enemy, seemed to be on the very

The pt- brink of deftru&idno;' But'on that.ocalion the
of s4L.Rc. greatabilities of Louise the regent saved the
eut.'- kingdom, which the violence of her pariots had

more than once exposed to the greatest .anger.
Instead of giving herself up to such lainenta-
.tions as were natural,to a woman fo.remarkable
for her maternal tenderness, she discovered all
the foresight, and exerted all the ativi.of a
.confunmate politician, She aflembled the no.
:bles att;:ions, and animated them by her ex.
ample, -o less thanby 'her words, withfoch zeal
in jdefence of their! country, as its present itua-
tion required. She.collefted the xemaina of the
army which had served in Italy, ransomed the
prisoners' paid their 'trearts, and put them in a
condition to iake the field. She levied new
troops, provided for the security of the fron-
tiers, and raised' fums fffficient for defraying
these extraordinary expences. Her chief care,
however, was to appease the refeatment, or to
gain the friendship 'of the King of England;
and from that quarter, the first ray of comfort
.broke in upon the.French affairs.

THOUGH

THOoGH Henry, in entering into alliances Book IV.

with Charles or Francis, seldom followed any -'.
regular or concerted plan of policy, but was elia& of
influenced chiefly by the caprice of temporary at Paviaon
passions, such occurrences often happened as Hear#UU
irecalled his attention towards that equalbalance
-of power which it was necessary to keep be-
tween the two contending potentates, the pre-
servation of which he always boated to be his
peculiar office. He had expeted that his union
,withthe Emperot plight afford him an oppor-
tunityof recovering some part of those territories
in France which had belonged to his ancestors,
·and for the fake ,of such an.acquifition he did
-not scruple to give his..affitance towards raising
Chailes to a considerable .pre-eminence above
.Frnicis. He had' never dreamt, however, of
any: event so decisive and !so fatal as the vitory
.at:Pavia, which seemed not only to have broken,
but';to have annihilated the power of one of
the rivals; so that the profpee of the sudden
and entire revolution which this would occasion
in the political system, filled him with the most
disquieting apprehensions. He saw all Europe
·in danger of being over-run by an ambitious
prince, to whose power there now remained no
.counterpoifei and though he himself might at
fltt be admitted, in quality of an ally, to some
.lhare in. the spoils of the captive monarch, it

was

,otrIV. was easy to discern that withregard to the man.
't ner of making the partitio as wcll as his

security for:keeping .po'feion of what .hould
be allotted him, he must abolutely depend upon
the will of: a confederate,; to whose forces his
own bore no proportion. He wa4 sensible that
if Charles were permitted -to add any COnfider-
-able part of France to the vast dominions of
which he was already master, his neighbourhood
would be much more formidable to England
than that of 'the ancient French Kings while,
at the fame time, the pfoper balance on. the
.continent, to which Entgla4cdi wed ,J oth, its
safety and importance, would be..entirely loft.
Concern for the situation of the- unhppy. mo,
narch co-operated with these. political ?confider-
ations; his gallant behaviour in the battle of
Pavia had excited an high degree of admiration,
which never fails of augmrintigfyipt .;g , \ad
Henry, -naturally susceptible of generous-fenti-
ments, as' fond of appearing as the deliverer'
of a vanquished enemy from a state of captivity.
The paflons of the Englihi minister seconded
the inclinations of'the Monarch. Wolfey, who
had not forgotten the disappointment of his
hopes in two successive conclaves, 'which he im-
puted chiefly to the Emperor, thought this a
proper opportunity of taking revenge;' and
Louise, courting the friendlhip of England with

such

such flattering submissions as were no less agree- Boo I1V.
able to the King than to the Cardinal, Henry ^-
gave her secret assurances that he would not
lend his aid towards oppressing France, in its
present helpless state, and obliged her to pro-
mise that she would not consent to dismember
the kingdom even in order to procure her son's
liberty a.

BUT as Henry's connections with the Em-

peror made it necessary to at in such a manner,
as to save appearances, he ordered publick re-
joicings to be made in his dominions for the
success of the Imperial arms; and as if he had
been eager to seize the present opportunity of
ruining the French monarchy, he sent ambafsa-
dors to Madrid, to congratulate with Charles
upon his vi&ory to put him in mind, that he,
as his ally, engaged in one common cause, was
entitled to partake in the fruits of it; and to
require that, in compliance with the terms of
their confederacy, he would invade Guienne
with a powerful army, in order to give him pof-
fefion of that province. At the fame time, he
offered to fend the princess Mary into Spain or
the Low Countries, that Ihe might be educated
under the Emperor's dire&ion, until the conclu-
sion of the marriage agreed on between them

! Mcm. deBeUyy, 94. Guic. lxvi. 38. Herbert.

and

Boor IV. and in return for that mark of his confidence

1525 he insisted that Francis mhould be delivered to

him, in consequence of that article in the treaty
of Bruges, whereby each of the contracting
parties was bound to surrender all usurpers to
him whose rights they had invaded. It was
impoflible that Henry could expea that the
Emperor would liften to there extravagant de-
mands, which it was neither his interest, nor in
his power to grant. They appear evidently to
have been made with no other intention than
to furnish him with a decent pretext for enter-
ing into such engagements with France as the
junture required '.

Oatbe Ita- IT was among the Italian Rates, however, that
'- w:"', the vitory at Pavia occasioned the greatest alarm

and terror. That balance of power on which
they relied for their security, and which it had
been the constant obje& of all their negociations
and refinements to maintain, was destroyed in
a moment. They were exposed by their fitua-
tion to feel the first effects of the uncontrouled
authority which Charles had acquired. They
observed many symptoms of a boundless am-
bition in that young prince, and were sensible
that, as Emperor, or King of Naples, he could
either form dangerous pretensions upon each of

! Herbert, p. 64.

their

their territories, or invade them with great Boo IV.
advantage. They deliberated, therefore, with '-
titichiblrcitude concerning the means of raising
such a- force as might obftru& his progress".
But their consultations, conducted with little
union, and executed with less vigour, had no
effe&. Clement, instead of pursuing the mea-
fures which he had concerted with the Venetians
for securing the liberty of Italy, was so intimi-
dated by Lannoy's threats, or overcome by his
promises, that he entered into a separate treaty, April r.
binding himself to advance a considerable fum
in return-for certain emoluments which he was
to receive. The money was instantly paid;
Charles afterwards refused to ratify the treaty;
and the Pope remained exposed at once to in-
famy and to ridicule; to the former, because
he had deserted the publick cause for his private
interest; to the latter, because he had been a
loser by that unworthy action .

How dishonourable soever the artifice might Mutinyin

be which was employed in order to defraud the nail apy.
Pope of this fum, it came very seasonably into
the viceroy's hands, and put it in his power to

Gauie. 1. x+*. 300. Rufeelli Lettere de Princ. ii. 74.

76, &c. Thuani Hit. lib. i. c. i . x Guic. lib. xvi.
305. Mauroceni Hiftor. Venet. ap. Iforichi dell cofe
Venez. V. 131. 136.

a extricate

Boox IV. extricate himself out of an imminent danger,

C,5 Soon after the defeat of the French army, the

German troops, which had defended Pavia with.
such meritorious courage and perseverance,
growing insolent upon the fame that they had
acquired, and impatient of relying any longer
on fruitless promises with which they had been
so often amused, rendered themselves matters
of the town, with a resolution to keep pofleffon
of it as a security for the payment of their ar-
rears; and the reft of the army discovered a
much fronger inclination to aflift, than to punilh
the mutineers. By dividing among them the
money exacted from the Pope, Lannoy quieted
the tumultuous Germans; but though this satis-
sied their present demands, he had so little pro-
spec of being able to pay them or his other
forces regularly for the future, and was under
such continual apprehensions of their seizing the
person of the captive King, that, not long after,
he was obliged to dismiss all the Germans and
Italians in the Imperial service . Thus, from
a circumstance that now appears very singular,
but arising naturally from the conflitution of
most European governments in the sixteenth
century, while Charles was fufpe&ed by all his
neighbours of aiming at universal monarchy,
and while he was really forming vait projeóc

! Guic. 1. xvi. p. 30oa

of this kind, his revenues were so limited, that BooK IV.
he could not keep on foot his vitorious army 5
though it did not exceed twenty-fout thousand
men.

DURING these tranfacaions5 Charles, whofc The Empe-

for'! delibe.
pretensions to moderation and difintereltednefs ration con

c¢rning the

were soon forgotten, deliberated, with the utmost mrnner of
solicitude, how he might derive the greatest ad- hipo,,.
vantages from the misfortune of his adversary.
Some of his counsellors advised him to treat
Francis with the magnanimity that became a
vi&orious prince, and instead of taking advan-
tage of his situation to impose rigorous con-
ditions, to dismiss him on such equal terms, as
would bind him for ever to his interest by the
ties of gratitude and affecion, more forcible as
well as more permanent than any which could
be formed by extorted oaths and involuntary
Stipulations. Such an exertion of generosity is
not, perhaps, to be expeced in the condu& of
political affairs, and it was far too refined for
that Prince to whom it was proposed. The
more obvious, but less splendid, scheme of en-
deavouring to make the utmost of Francis's ca-
lamity, had a greater number in the council to
recommend it, and suited better with the Em.
peror's genius. But though Charles adopted
this plan, he did not execute it in a proper

VOL. II. Z manner.

Book IV. mariner. InRead of making one great effort to

s i e. penetrate into France with all the forces of Spain

and the Low-Countries; instead of trulhing the
Italian fates before they recovered from the
consternation which the success of his arms had
occasioned, he had recourse to the artifices of
intrigue and negociation. This proceeded partly
from neceflity, partly from the natural difpo-
fition of his mind. The situation of his sinan-
ces, at that time, rendered it extremely difficult
to carry on any extraordinary armament; and
he himself having never appeared at the head
of his armies, the command of which he had
hitherto committed to his generals, was averse
to bold and martial counsels, and trusted more
to the arts with which he was acquainted. He
laid, besides, too much stress upon the vi&ory of
Pavia, as if by that event the strength of France
had been annihilated, its resources exhausted, and
the kingdom itself, no less than the person of its
Monarch, had been fubjeded to his power.

The rga. FULL of this opinion, he determined to set the
ie proposer highest price upon Francis's freedom, and having
toFrinci. ordered the Count de Roeux to visit the captive

King in his name, he inftruted him to propose
the following articles, as the conditions on which
he would grant him his liberty: That he should
restore Burgundy to the Emperor, from whose
ancestors it had been unjultly wrested; that he

should

should surrender Provence and Dauphine, that BOOK IV.
they might be erected into an independent i525.
kingdom for the ConRable Bourbon that he
lhould make full fatisfation to the King of
England for all his claims, and finally renounce
the pretensions of France to Naples, Milan, or
any other territory in Italy. When Francis,
who had hitherto flattered himself that he 1hould
be treated by the Emperor with the generosity
becoming one great Prince towards another,
heard these rigorous conditions, he was, so tran-
sported with indignation, that drawing his dagger
hastily, he cried out, " 'Twere better that a
King should die thus." Alarion, alarmed at
his vehemence, laid hold on his hand; but
though he soon recovered greater composure, he
still declared, in the most solemn manner, that he
would rather remain a prisoner during life, than
purchase liberty by such ignominious concessions'.

This mortifying discovery of the Emperor's Frrncit er.

intentions, greatly augmented Francis's chagrin t' prifne
and impatience under his confinement, and must
have driven him to absolute despair, if he had
not laid hold of the only thing which could fill
administer any comfort to him. He persuaded
himself that the conditions which Roeux had
proposed, did not flow originally from Charles
himself, but were dictated by the rigorous po-

Mem. do Bellay, 94. Perreras Hilt. ix. 43.

Z licy

BOOK IV. licy of his Spanilh council, and that therefore he

iS, might hope, in one personal interview withhim,

to do more towards hastening his own deliver-
ance, than could be effeted by long negocia-
tions paling through the subordinate hands of
his ministers. Relying on this supposition, which
proceeded from too favourable an opinion of
the Emperor's charater, he offered to visit him
in Spain, and was willing to be carried thither
as a fpe&acle to that haughty nation. Lannoy
employed all his address to confirm him in these
sentiments; and concerted with him in secret
the manner of executing this resolution. Francis
was so eager on a scheme which seemed to open
some profpe& of liberty, that he furnished the
gallies neceTfary for the voyage, Charles being
at that time unable to set any fleet to sea. The
viceroy, without communicating his intentions
either to Bourbon or Pescara, conducted his pri-
soner towards Genoa, under pretence of tranf-
porting him by sea to Naples; though soon after
they set fail, he ordered the pilots to steer dig
recly for Spain; but the wind happening to
carry them near the French coast, the unfortu-
nate Monarch had a full profpet of his own
dominions, towards which he cast many a for-
rowful and desiring look. They landed, how.
ever, in a few days at Barcelona, and soon after
Francis was lodged, by the Emperor's command,
August ,4. in the Alcazar of Madrid, under the care of the

vigilant

vigilantAlarcon, who guarded him with as much BoK IV.
circumspection as ever . I' 5s.

A FEW days after Francis's arrival at Ma- HenyvIIr.

coqchdes a
drid, and when he began to be sensible of his trety with

Fronce, in

having relied without foundation on the Empe- orderto pro-
ror's generosity, Henry VIII. concluded a treaty ,urc hi,
with the Regent of France, which afforded him
some hope of liberty from another quarter.
Henry's extravagant demands had been received
at Madrid with that neglect which they deserved,
and which he probably expeced. Charles, in-
toxicated with prosperity, no longer courted him
in that refpe&ful and submissive manner which
pleased his haughty temper. Wolfey, no less
haughty than his mailer, was highly irritated at
the Emperor's discontinuing his wonted caresses
and profeSions of friendlhip to himself. These
flight offences, added to the weighty confide-
rations formerly mentioned, induced Henry to
enter into a defensive alliance with Louise, in
which all the differences between him and her
son were adjusted ; at the fame time he engaged
that he would employ his belt offices in order to
procure the deliverance of his new ally from a
state of captivity b,

* Mem. de Bellay, 95. P. Mart. Ep. ult. Guic. lib.
cvi. 323. b Herbert. Fiddcs's Life of Wolfey, 337.

3 WHILE

BooK IV. WHILE the open defetion of such a powerful
Ls' confederate affeced Charles with deep concern,
Moona. a secret conspiracy was carrying on in Italy,
intrigues, in
order to which threatened him with conlequences still
overturn the
Zmpcror'M more fatal. The restless and intriguing genius

z1y. of Morone, chancellor of Milan, gave rife to

this. His revenge had been amply gratified by
the expulsion of the French out of Italy, and
his vanity no less toothed by the re-establish-
ment of Sforza, to whose interest he had at-
tached himself in the dutchy of Milan, The
delays, however, and evasions of the Imperial
court in granting Sforza the investiture of his
new-acquired territories, had long alarmed Mo.
rone; these were repeated so often, and with
fich apparent artifice, as became a full proof to
his suspicious mind that the Emperor intended
to strip his matler of that rich country which he
had conquered in his name. Though Charles,
in order to quiet the Pope and Venetians, no
less zealous of his designs than Morone, gave
Sforza, at last, the investiture which had been
so long desired; the charter was clogged with
so many reservations, and fubje&ed him to such
grievous burdens, as rendered the duke of Milan
a dependant on the Emperor, rather than a vas-
fal of the Empire, and afforded him hardly any
other security for his poreflions, than the good
pleasure of an ambitious superior. Such an ac-

.}~~~2 ~ ceClion

'cession of power as would have accrued from BooK IV.
the addition of the Milanese to the kingdom of ' -5
Naples, was confidered by Morone as fatal to
the liberties of Italy, no less than to his own
power and importance. Full of this idea, he
began to revolve in his mind the possibility of
rescuing Italy from the yoke of foreigners, the
darling scheme, as has been already observed,
of the Italian politicians in that age, and which it
was the great object of their ambition to accom-
plith. If to the glory of having been the chief
instrument in driving the French out of Milan,
he could add that of delivering Naples from the
dominion of the Spaniards, he thought that no-
thing would be wanting to complete his fame.
His fertile genius soon suggested to him a project
for that purpose ; a difficult, indeed, and daring
one, but for that very reason, more agreeable to
his bold and enterprizing temper.

BOURBON and Pescara were equally enraged risnegocia.

at Lannoy's carrying the French King into Spain Pct'ef.ra
without their knowledge. I he former, being
afraid that the two Monarchs might, in his ab-
fence, conclude fonme treaty in which his interests
would be entirely sacrificed, hastened to Madrid,
in order to guard against that danger. The
latter, on whom the command of the army now
devolved, was obliged to remain in Italy; but,
in every company, he gave vent to his indigna-

Z 4 tion

BOOK IV. tion against the viceroy, in exprefflons full of

IS . rancour and contempt; he accused him, in a let-

ter to the Emperor, of cowardice in the time of
danger, and of insolence after a victory, towards
the obtaining of which he had contributed no-
thing either by his valour or his conduc; nor
did he abstain from bitter complaints against
the Emperor himself, who had not discovered
as he imagined, a sufficient sense of his merit,
nor bestowed any adequate reward on his ser-
vices. It was on this disgust of Pescara, that
Morone founded his whole system. He knew
the boundless ambition of his nature, the vast
extent of his abilities in peace as well as war,
and the intrepidity of his mind, capable alike of
undertaking and of executing the most defpe-
rate designs. The cantonment of the Spanilh
troops on the frontier of the Milanese, gave oc-
cafion to many interviews between him and Mo-
rone, in which the latter took care frequently
to turn the conversation to the tranfaR6ions sub-
sequent to the battle of Pavia, a fubje& upon
which the marquis always entered willingly, and
with paflion; and Morone observing his resent-
ment to be uniformly violent, artfully pointed
out and aggravated every circumstance that
could increase its fury. He painted, in the
strongest colours, the Emperor's want of dif-
cernment, as well as of gratitude, in preferring

Lannoy

Lannoy to him, and in allowing that prefump- BOOK iV.
tuous Fleming to dispose of the captive King, L
without consulting the man to whose bravery
and wisdom Charles was indebted for the glory
of having him in his power. Having warmed
him by such difcouries, he then began to infinu-
ate, that now was the time to be avenged for
these insults, and to acquire immortal renown
as the deliverer of his country from the oppref-
sion of itrangers; that the states of Italy, weary
of the ignominious and intolerable dominion of
barbarians, were at last ready to combine in
order to vindicate their own independence; that
their eyes were fixed on him as the only leader
whose genius and good fortune could enfiure the
happy success of that noble enterprize; that the
attempt was no less practicable than glorious, it
being in his power so to disperse the Spanish in-
fantry, the only body of the Emperor's troops
in Italy, through the villages of the Milanese,
that, in one night, they might be destroyed by
the people, who, having suffered much from
their exactions and insolence, would gladly un-
dertake this service; that he might then, with-
out opposition, take poffelfion of the throne of
Naples, the station destined for him, and a re-
ward not unworthy the restorer of liberty to
Italy; that the Pope, of whom that kingdom
held, and whose predecessors had disposed of it

on

Boor IV.' on many former occafionr, would willingly grant
';5"^ him the right of invetiture, that the Venetians,

the Florentines, the duke of Milan, to whom he
had communicated the scheme, together with the
French, would be the guarantees of his right;
that the Neapolitans would naturally prefer the
government of one of their countrymen, whom
they loved and admired, to that odious domi-
nion of firangers, to which they had been so
long fubje&ed; and that the Emperor, afto-
nifhed at a blow so unexpeced, would find that
he had neither troops nor money to resist such
a powerful confederacy'.

etnraed PESCARA, amazed at the boldness and extent
ajrd taken
rifonerby of the scheme, listened attentively to Morone,
Pckara. but with the countenance of a man loft in pro-

found and anxious thought. On the one hand,
the infamy of betraying his sovereign under
whom he bore such high command, deterred
him from the attempt; on the other, the pro-
fpea of obtaining a crown allured him to ven-
ture upon it. After continuing a thort space
in fufpence, the least commendable motives, as
is usual after such deliberations, prevailed, and
ambition triumphed over honour. In order,

Guic. 1. xvi. 32S. Jovii Vita Davali, p. 417. Oeuv.

de Brantome, iv. 171. Rufcelli Lettre de Princ. ii. 91.
Thuani Hil. lib. i. c. I . P. Houter. Rer. Autr. lib. ix.
c. 3. P. 207.

however,

however, 't throw a colour of decency on his Book IV.
condu&, he insisted that some learned casuists s
hlould give their opinion, " Whether it was
lawful for a fubje& to take arms against his im-
mediate sovereign, in obedience to the Lord
Paramount of whom the kingdom itself was
held." Such a resolution of the cafe, as he ex.
pected, was soon obtained from the divines and
civilians both of Rome and Milan; the nego-
ciation went forward; and measures seemed to
be taking with great spirit for the speedy exe-
cution of the design.

DURING this intervals Pescara, either shocked

at the treachery of the ation that he was going
to commit, or despairing of its success, began to
entertain thoughts of abandoning the engage-
ments which he had come under. The indifpo-
fition of Sforza, who happened at that time to
be taken ill of a distemper which was thought
mortal, confirmed this resolution, and deter-
mined him t6 make known the whole conspiracy
to the Emperor, deeming it more prudent to
expet the dutchy of Milan from him as the
reward of this discovery, than to aim at a king-
dom to be purchased by a series of crimes.
This resolution, however, proved the source of
a'tions hardly less criminal and ignominious.
The Emperor, who had already received full
ifonnation concerning the conspiracy from

other

Booz IV. other hands, seemed to be highly pleated with

ISZ- .Pescara's fidelity, and conunanded him to con.

tinue his intrigues for Tome time with the Pope
and Sforza, both that he might discover their
intentions ,more'fully,; and, be able to- convit
them of theicrime with greater certainty. Pes-
cara, conscious of guilt, as well as sensible how
suspicious his long -fience must have appeared
at Madrid, durst not:decline. that dishonourable
office; and, to his eternal disgrace, was obliged
to a& the meanef of all parts, that of seducing
with a purpose to betray. . Confidering the abi-
lities of the persons with whom he had to deal,
the part was scarcely less difficult, than base;
but he ated it with such address, as to deceive
even the penetrating eye of Morone, who rely-
ing with full confidence on his sincerity, visited
him at Novara, in order to put the last hand to
their machinations. Pescara received him in
an apartment where Antonio de Leyva was
placed' behind the tapestry, that he might over-
hear and bear witness to their conversation; as
Morone was about to take leave, that officer
suddenly appeared, and to his aftoniihment
arrested him prisoner in the Emperor's name.
He was conducted to the castle of .Pavia and
Pescara, who had so lately been his accomplice,
had now the assurance to interrogate him as his
judge. At the fame time, the Emperor de-
clared Sforza to have forfeited all right to the

dutchy

dUtchy of Milan, by his engaging in a con. Boor IV.
fpiracy againf the sovereign of whom he held; 525-
Pescara, by his command, seized on every place
in the Milanese, except' the castles of Cremona
and Milan, which, the unfortunate duke attempt-
ing to defend, were closely blockaded by the
Imperial troops d.

BUT though this unsuccessful conspiracy, in- The rgo-

stead of stripping the Emperor of what, he mentof
already possessed in Italy, contributed to extend S,"in.
his dominions in that country, it shewed him the
necessity of coming to some agreement with the
French King, unless he would draw on himself
a confederacy of all Europe, which the progress
of his arms, and his ambition, now as undisguised
as it was boundless, filled with general alarm.
He had not hitherto treated Francis with the
generosity which that monarch expeted, and
hardly with the decency due to his flation. In-
fRead of displaying the sentiments becoming a
great Prince, he seems to have ated with the
mercenary art of a corsair, who, by the rigorous
usage of his prisoners, endeavours to draw from
them an high price for their ransom. The cap-
tive King was confined in an old castle, under a
keeper whose formal austerity of manners ren-
dered his vigilance frill more disgustful. He was

r Guic. 1. xvi. 329. Jovi Hilt. 3. 19 Caella, lib. v.
*. 200 al

allowed

Beoo IV. llowed no exercise but that of riding on a mule,

- surrounded with armed guards on horseback.

Charles, on pretence of its being necessary to
attend the Cortes afembled in Toledo, had
gone to reside in that city, and suffered several
weeks to elapse without visiting Francis, though
he solicited an interview with the most pressing
Endangers and submissive importunity. So many indig-

fc' nities made a deep impreflion on an high-fpirited

Prince; he began to lose all relish for his usual
amusements; his natural gaiety of temper for-
sook him; and after languishing for some time,
he was seized with a dangerous fever, during
the violence of which he complained constantly
of the unexpeced and unprincely rigour with
which he had been treated, often exclaiming,
that now the Emperor would have the satis-
fation of his dying a prisoner in his hands,
without having once deigned to fee his face.
The physicians, at last, despaired of his life, and
informed the Emperor that they saw no hope of
his recovery, unless he were gratified with regard
to that point on which he seemed tobe so frongly
bent. Charles, solicitous to preserve a life,
with which all his profpets of farther advantage
from the vi&tory of Pavia must have terminated,
immediately consulted his ministers concerning
the course to be taken. In vain did the chan-
cellor Gattinara, the most able among them,

represent

represent to him the indecency of his visiting BOOK IV.
Francis, if he did not intend to set him at 12.
liberty immediately upon equal terms; in vain
did he point out the infamy to which he would
be exposed, if motives of avarice or ambition
ihould prevail on him to give the captive Mo-
narch this mark of attention and sympathy, for
which humanity and generosity had pleaded so
long without effec. The Emperor, less de-
licate, or less solicitous about reputation than
his minister, set out for Madrid to visit his pri- sept. *g.
soner. The interview was Ihort; Francis being ror vifitP
too weak to bear a long conversation. Charles him
accosted him in terms full of affe&ion and re-
fpe6t, and gave him such promises of speedy
deliverance and princely treatment, as would
have refleced the greatest honour upon him, if
they had flowed from another source. Francis
grasped at them with the eagerness natural in
his situation; and cheered with this gleam of
hope, began to revive from that moment, re-
covering rapidly his wonted health ".

HE had soon the mortification to find, that The con,.

his confidence in the Emperor was not better bl Bo,"ubon
founded than formerly. Charles returned in- Madrid.
ftantly to Toledo; all negociations were carried

Guic, . xvi. 339. Sandov. Hill. i. 65s.

on

BooK IV. on by his ministers; and Francis was kept in

l,~.-) as ftrit custody as ever. A new indignity, and

that very galling, was added to all those he
had already suffered. Bourbon arriving in
Spain about this time, Charles, who had so
long refused to visit the King, received his re-
bellious subje&t with the most studied refpet.
Nov. 15. He met him without the gates of Toledo, em-

braced him with the greatest affecion, and pla-
cing him on his left hand, conduted him to
his apartment. These marks of honour to him,
were so many insults to the unfortunate Mo-
narch; which he felt in a very sensible manner,
It afforded him some consolation, however, to
observe, that the sentiments of the Spaniards
differed widely from those of their sovereign.
That generous peqple detested Bourbon's crime.
Notwithstanding his great talents and impor-
tant services, they Ihunned all intercourse with
him, to such a degree, that Charles having de-
fired the marquis de Villena to permit Bour-
bon to reside in his palace while the court re-
mained in Toledo, he politely replied, " That
he could not refute gratifying the Emperor in
that request ;" but added with a Castilian dig-
nity of mind, " that he must not be furprized
if the moment the Conflable departed, he should
burn to the ground a house, which, having been

polluted

polluted byt}lie presence of a traitor, bdcalime BooK IV.
an unfit'habitatidn for a man; of honour' .

CHARLES himself, nevertheless, feeied 'to'Appointed

general of
have it much at heart to reward Bourbon's ser' the Impe-

iirl armn

vices in a signal manner. But as he infited, in in italy;
the first place, on the acc6mpliihmezit, of.'the
Emperor's promise of giving him in marriage'
his fiter. Eleanora, Queen dowager of Por.
tugal, the. honour of which' alliance had been
one.of his chief inducements to rebel agairift
his lawful sovereign; as Francis, in order td
prevent fuch:.a dangerous uhioh, had offeredi;
before he left Italy, to marry that Ptincefs '
and as Eleanora herself discovered an inclination'
rather to match with a powerful Monarch, than'
with his exiled subjet; all these interering
circumstances cleated greafrhrbarraffnient td
CharlIs, and left him hardly any hipe of extri-
Cating'hirmfelf with decency. But the death becembeic
ds Fefcara, who, at the age ot? thitty-?ix, left
Behind him the reputation of being one of the
greateit rgenerals ahd ablest politicians of that
century, happened'opportunely at this jun&uro
for his relief. By that event, the commalid of
the army in Italy bdcame vacant, and Charles;'
always fertile in refoutces, persuaded Bourboni,
who'was in ho condition t6 dirpute his will, to

r Guic. 1. xvi. 335.
Y.OL. II. A a accept

Rpnc IV. aceept the office of genera) in chief there, to..

,'' gether'. ith a grant of the dutchy dof Milan

forfeited 'by Sforza, and in, return for these to
rein4uilh all ahops of marrying the QuePnof

- -o gi '

t l. . · ...... · .

?tia' TitE chiif dbftacle that tood in the way of
tions for
prcuring Francis's liltbeywas the Etnptrot dontinuing
lit., . to inlift so peremptorily on the restitution of Bur-

gundy, as a preliminary to that event. Francis
often declared that he would never consent' to
dismember his fate; and that even if he
ohooW so far forget the duties of a;Monarch as
to come to such a resolution, the fundamental
laws of the kingdom would prevent its taking
effea. On his part he was. willing t omake an
absolute cefion to the Emperor of all his pre-
tensions in Italy mnd the Low-Countries he
promised to restore Bourbon all his lapd.which
had been confiscated; he renewe his: propoal
of marrying the Emperor's sifter, the Queen
dowager of Portugal; and engaged to pay a
great fum by way of ransom for his own perlbn.
But all mutual esteem and confidence between
the two monarchs were now entirely loft there
appeared on the one hand, a rapacious ambition
labouring to avail itself of every favourable cir-
cumftance on the other, suspicion and resent-

* Sandov. HiL i. 676. Oeuv. de Brant. iv. 249.
,.-, .. ment,

tnet, standing perpetually on their guard. so Booz IV.
that the profped of bringing their pegociations 's
to an issue, seemed to be far diifant The
dutchess of Alenon. the Fench King's fiftr,
whom Charles permitted to visit her brother ii
his confinement, employed all her address, in
order to procure his liberty on more rcafonable
terms. Henry of England interposed his good F^nc;il

de pair rei

offices to the fame purpose ; but both with so nfole. to
little success, that Francis in despair took fud- ¢oG"n.
denly the refolutioh of resigning his crown with
all its rights and prerogatives to his son the
Dauphin4 determining rather to end his days ih
prison, than to purchase his fieedom by con-
vefflons unworthy of a King,. The dedl for
this purpofl he signed with legal formality at
Madrid, empowering his sifter td carry it into
France, that it might be registered in all the
parliarients of the kingdom and at the fame
time intimating his intention to the Ermperor~
he desired hirh to name the place of his confint-
nent, and to assign him a proper number of
attendatt during the remainder of his days .

Tths resolution -of the French King had cthirii

great efeftl Charles began to be sensible; ;hat m"'d'
by pushing rigour to excess, he might defeat
his own mefaures, and ihftead of the vast ad.

h This paper is published ia Memoires Hiltofiqut, &e.
par Mi 1'Abbe Raynal, toi, ii. p. i ;J.

A a a vantages

ósK IV. vantages whichhe he oedto draw from ransom;

15$, ing --'p'Werftul" Mnatch, he ffight-at laft'find

in 4his haids, a' Prince!;widtho ' dominions or
revAues. .About the 'fame time, 'one of the
King' of Navarre's dodmeftics happeidd by an
extriottiinary extrtibn of fidelity, courage, and
addref,. to procure his .maier an opportunity
of efdapihg from the prifn. in which he had
been confined ever singe the battle of Pavia.
This convinced the Emperor, that the most
vigilant attention of his officers might pe eluded
by the igenuity or boldness of Francis, or his
attendants,: and one unlucky hour might de-
prive him of all the advantages which he had
been' so. flieitms to obtain. By these confi-
derationst:he was induced to abate somewhat
of hi*ibormer demands. On the other hand,
Francis's ,impatience under confinement daily
inereafed ;, ,nd. having received certain 'intel
litnce of a powerful' league forming against his
rivald in ;Ialy, he grew more compliant with
regard' to conceflions, truting, that, if he could
once obtain his liberty, he would soon be in a
condition to'refume w hatever he had yielded.

,5:6. As these were the lews 'and fentimints of
ldid. the two M6narchs, -th1 reaty which ptoeured

Ftratci .hiSliberty was' figne* at Madrid on the
fourteenth of January, one thousand five hun-
dred and twentyfik. The article with regard

... 1
..." to

to Burgundy, which had hitherto..created the BoOt it.
greatftt difficulty,"was compromised, Francis 1.5-.
engaging to restore that dutchy with all its de
pendencies in full sovereignty to the Emperor;
and Charles consenting that this restitution lhould
not be made until the King was set at liberty:
in order to secure the performance of this, as
well as the other conditions in the treaty, Francis
agreed that ;at the fame instant he himself was.
released, he would deliver as hostages to the
Emperor, his eldest son the Dauphin, his second
son the duke of Orleans, or in lieu of the latter,
twelve of his principal.nobility, to be named by
Charles. The otherarticles swelled to a great
number, and though not. of such importance,
wvrerextremely rigorous. Among.;thefe the
nmoit remarkable were, that Francis ihould re-
nounce all his preyenafons in Italy; that he.
Ihould disclaim any title which he bad. to. the
fovcreignty. of Slanders and Artois; that within
fix weeks after his release, he Should xeftore to
Bourbon and his adherents, all their goods,
moveable and immoveable, and. make them full
reparation for the damages which they had sus.
tained by the confiscation of them; that he
Should use his interest with Henry D'AJbret to
relinquiih his pretensions to the. crown of Na.
varrc, and should not for the future afllft him
in any attempt to recover it; that there.lhould
i ;..... Aa a3 bQ

iS

gtr IV., be ceftblir c&. between the Emperdr and Franci

~5,o. a keage of 'prpetu!l friendlhip and confe-

dcracyi, wjtith , promise of mutual affiftalce is
every care of necefity. That in corroboration
of this nion, Francds ioqld marry tb Em-
peror's fifcr, the Queen Dowager of Portugal i
that Francis (hoVld cause al the articles of this
treaty to be ratfied by the States, and registered
ia the paliaments. of his kingdom that upon
the Emperor's receiving this ratification, the
ioftages should be set at liberty; but. in their.
plac, the duke of Angouleme, the King's third
son, (houll be delivered to Chagles that ir

eoder to mraifeft, as well a to trengthen the
amity bewe.en.the two Monarchs, he might be
educate act he Imperial court; and. hat if
Francis did aot, ithin the time limied, fulfil
the ftipulatins inr the treaty, he should promise,
Wponi his honourand oath, to return into Spain,
and to fnr nde. himtflf again a prioner to tbh
Emperor '

St2arena DBy tsbSl, Rtety Charla fiattered himself tbat
with rs hpe had hot 'only effetually humbled his rival,

t ' but that ht h d taken such precautions as would

so' ever prevent his re-attaning 'y formidable
dee ofP e. Th opin o, u*hich obhe wlC

i tRcuetl deo Triit. tpom. ii. II. Ulloa Vita dell Carlo

ppliticiang

politicians formed concerning it, was very dif- Boo IV.
ferent , they could not perfaade themselves that s.'
Francis, after obtaining his liberty, would exe-
cute articles against which he had struggled so
long, and to which even. amidst the horrors
of captivity he had consented with such reluc-
tance. Ambition and resentment, they knew,
would conspire in prompting him to violate the
hard conditions to which he had been con-
frained to submit; nor would arguments and
casuistry be wanting to represent that which was
so manifestly advantageous, to be necessary and
just. If one part of Francis's conduti had been
known, at that time, this opinion might have
been founded, not in conjecture, but in cer-
tainty. A few hours before he signed the treaty, Frands
he afiembled such of his countellors as were tests agains
then in Madrid, and having exacted from tihem ohs evidit.
a folemin oath of secrecy, he made a long 'eniu
merttion in their pretenee of the di'hondurable
arts, as well as unprincely rig.or, which the
Emperor'had employed in order to ensnare or
i;ijmidate him. For that reafQi. he to0k a
formal pr9teft in the hands of nFotries, that 4hW
content to the treaty lhould be. confidered as a
involuntary deed, and be deemed null arid
.Vid.'k BBy his disingenuous artifice, for which
Cven the treatment that he had met with'Wua

k Recueil dc Trait. tor, ii. p. o07.

Aa 4 no

kw^ sRstourn d,,^qpe(;aiece in, fignigig the treaty,

Apd,^ pipovi 4q ai , fame tipe 4. pretetSop
whipch tq. break it.

, GREAT,? meanwiule! were thi oqtwaro 4 dcon-

itrations of love anI! confidence .between the
:'o Monarchs i they appe.are. oftel together
in public,; they frequently hd lo9ng cqnferences
n private i they travelled in the fame itter, and
'ioied' in the fame amusements. But amifl
thefefigns of peace and friendship, thEe Emperqr
fitl i ariboured suspicion in his mind. Though
the ceremonies of the marriage between Francis
and the, Queen of Portugal were performed
soon after the conclusion of the treaty, Charles
would no; permit him to cppfurnmit; it ,nlil
he'etiurn of the, ratificati9o from F rnce. Even
hen Francis ws ,hot allowedto,.be at fugl
liberty; hip guards, were still co.n in.ud; though
'caressed as abrother-in-law, he wa fill watched
like a prifoier, and it.

eas obvious to attentive

bfcrvers,, that an union, in the very beginning
ps which there rpght be discerned such fymp-
toms of jealolty /rid diifruft, could not be
'cordial, or of long continuance'.

},tied; ABOUT a month after the flgning of the
-r-D' treatyj the Regent's ratification of it was brought

'fom Friance; and that wife Princess, prefer- BEoar V.
ring, on 'this occasion, the publick good to do: 5,h
medick affecion, informed her son, that, instead
of the twelve noblemen named in the treaty;
she had sent the duke of Orleans along' with
his brother the Dauphin to the frontier, as the
kingdom, could fufler nothing by. the absence
of a child. but must be left almost incapable of
defence, if deprived of its ablest statesmen, and
most experienced generals, whom Charles had
artfully included in his nomination. At last Franc;, fct

- - at libertq

Francis took leave of the Emperor, whose sus-
picion of the King's sincerity increasing, as the
time of putting it to the proof approached, he
endeavoured to bind him frill faster by exacting
new prpmifes, which, after those he had already
made; the French Monarch was. not flow to
grant. He set out from Malrici, a place which
the remembrance of many afflicing circum-
stances rendered peculiarly odious to him, with
the joy natural on such an occasion, and began
the long-wilhed-for journey towards his, own
dominions. He was escorted by a body of
horse. under the command of Alarcon, who, as
the King drew near the frontiers of France,
guarded him with more scrupulous exatnefs
than.ever. When he arrived at the riyer An-
la ye, wiicbi separates the two kingdoms, La.-
trec appeared on the opposite bank with a
guard of horse equal in number to Alarcon's.

An

IobK Ir. An empty bark..was, moord an the middle of
',-Xf. the fream; the;uttendua drew. up in orderon

the oppo&e banls at che faminftntc Lannoy
with eight gentlde put of.ftom the $panifh,
andi Lu~ec with the fiawe number from the
French fide of the river; the former had the
King in his boat; the atter, the Dauphin and
duke of Orleans; they met in the empty veflel
the exchange was made in a moment: Francis,
after a ihore embrace to his children, leaped
into Lautrec's boat, and reached the French
1hore. He mounted that instant a Turkifl
horse, waved his hand over his head, and with
a joyful voice crying aloud several times, " I am
yet a King," galloped full speed to St. John
de Luz, and from thence to Bayonne. This
event, no less impatiently desired by the French
nation than by their Monarch, happened on the
eighteenth of March, a year and twenty.two
days after the fatal battle of Pavia ".
Thermpe. SOON, after the Emperor had taken leave of

ge with Francis, and permitted him to begin his journey
obrtes. towards his own dominions, he set out for

Seville, in order to solemnize his marriage with
Isabella, the daughter of Emanuel, the late
King of Portugal, and the sifter of John III.
who had succeeded him in the throne of that

Sadovv. Hit. 1. 735, Gid. 1, vi. 35.,

kingdom.

kingdom. Isabella was a princess of uncorm. Boomr V.
mon beanty and accompliihments and as the 5:ó.
Cort~ both in Catile and Aragon had warmly
folicitd their sovereign to marry, the choice of
a wife so nearly allied to the royal blood of
both kingdoms, was extremely acceptable to
his fubjets. The Portuguese, fond of this new
conneCtion with the first Monarch in Christen,,
dom, granted him an extraordinary dowry with
Isabella, amounting to nine hundred thousand
crowns, a fum, which, from the situation of
his affaits at that juncture, was of no small con-
sequence to the Emperor. The marriage was March 1s.
celebrated with that splendour and gaiety, which
became a great and youthful Prince. CharTes
lived with Isabella in perfect harmony, and
treated her on all occasions with much diftinc-
tion and regard .

DURING these tranfaaions, Charles cold Affair of

hardly give any attention to the affairs of Gcr- Ge""m"'
nany, though it was corn in pieces by commo-
tions, which threatened the molt dangerous con-
1fquences. By the feudal inititutions, which
till fubfited almost unimpaired in the Empirec
the property of lands was vested in the Princes,
and free-barons. Their vaflals held of them by Grievances

of the pca.

Ulloa Vita di Carlo V. p. o6. felcarius Cor. Rer. fntu.
Gallic. p. 56S. Spala!ti ap. Struv. Corp. Hist. Germ. ii.

the

BOOK IV. the' ftri&eft and noft limited: tenures; while
"t.6. the great body of the people was kept in a

state but little removed from absolute servitude.
In some places of Germany, people of the lowes
class were so entirely in the power of their
maffters, as to be fubje& to personal and do-
meftickflavery, the most rigorous form of that
wretched state. In other provinces, particularly
in Bohemia and Lusatia, the peasants were
bound to remain on the lands to which they
belonged, and making part of the estate, were
transferred like any other property fwiri one
hand to another. Even in Suabia, and the
countries on the banks of the Rhine, where their
condition was most tolerable, the peasants not
only paid the full rent of their..farms to the
landlord , but if they chose either to change the
phce of their abode, or to follow a new pro-
\ effion, they were obliged to purchase this pri-

vilege at a certain price. Beside this, all grants
of lands to peasants expired at their death,'
without descending to their posterity. Upon
thataevent, the-landlord had a right to the belt
of their. cattle, as well as of their furniture
and their heirs, in order to obtain a renewal of
the grant, were obliged to pay large fums by
way of fine. These exa&tions, though gricvous,
were born with patience, because they were cvtf-
tomary and ancient: But when the progress of
elegance and luxury, as well as the changes in.

troduced

troduced into the art of war, came to increase Booi IV.
the expence of government, and made it necef- i 26.
fary for Princes to levy occasional or stated
taxes on their fubjets, such impositions being
new, appeared intolerable; and in Germany,
these duties being laid chiefly upon beer, wine,
and other neceflaries of life, affected the com-
mon people in the mot sensible manner. The
addition of such a load to their former burdens,
'drove them to despair. It was to the valour
inspired by resentment against impositions of
this kind, that the Swiss owed the acquisition of
their liberty in the fourteenth century. The
fame cause had excited the peasants in several
other provinces of Germany to rebel againit
their superiors towards the end of the fifteenth
and beginning of the- sixteenth centuries i and
though these insurrections were not attended
with like success, they could not, however, be
quelled without much difficulty and bloodshed °.

*BY these checks, the spirit of the peasants Theitinfur.
was overawed rather than subdued; and their Suabia.
grievances multiplying continually, they ran to
agons, this year, with the most frantick rage.
Their firt appearance was near Ulm in Suabi4.
The peasants in the adjacent country flocked to
their flandard with the ardour and impatience

Seckend. lib. ii. p. 2. 6,
*,~~~~~/ ~natural

#oic IV. natural to men, who having groaned long under
LIz6' opprefflon, beheld at last fnome profpe&t of de-

liverance; and the contagin fpteading from
province to povince, reached almost every part
of Germany. Wherever they came, they plun-
dered the monasteries- wafted the lands of their
superiors; razed their castles, and maTfacred
without mercy all persons of noble birth who
were so unhappy as to fall into their hands P.
klaving intimidated their oppressors, as they
imagined, by the violence of there proceedings,
they began to confider what would be the most
proper and effectual method of securing them-
selves for the future from their tyrannical ex.
ations. With this view, they drew up and
published a memorial, containing all their de-
mands, and declared, that while arms were in
their hands, they would either persuade or oblige
the nobles to give them full fatisfa&ion with
regard to these. The chief articles were, that
they might have liberty to chufe their own pas-
tors ; that they might be freed from .the pay-
ment of all tythes except those of corn; that
they might no longer be confidered as the saves
or bondmen of their superiors that the liberty
of hunting and fishing might be common that
the great foreRts might not be regarded as pri-

P Petr. Crinitus de Bello Ruflicaao, ap. Freher. Script,

RIr. Germ, Argent. 1717 v. ol . 4
py 4.

vate

vate proprty, but be open for the use of all; BOOK 1
that they; might be delivered from the unusual 6.'
burden of taxes under which they laboured;
that the adminitration of justice might be ren-
dered less rigorous and more impartial; that
the encroachments of the nobles upon meadows
and commons might be restrained q

MANY of these demands were extremely rea- Quued.

fonable; and being urged by such formidable
numbers, might have met with some redress.
But those vast unwieldy bodies, assembled in
different places, had neither union, nor condu&t,
nor vigour. Being led by persons of the lowest
rank, without Ikill in war, or knowledge of
what was necessary for accomplishing their de-
signs; all their exploits were diftinguified only
by a brutal and unmeaning fury, To oppose
this, the princes and nobles of Suabia and the
Lower Rhine railed their vassals, and attack-
ing some of the mutineers with open force, and
others by furprize, cut to pieces or dispersed
all who infested those provinces; so that the
peasants, after ruining the open country, and
losing upwards of twenty thousand of their afro-
ciates in the field, were obliged to return to
their habitations with less hope than ever of
relief froin their grievances r.

q Sleid. Hill. p. 90. r Seckend. lib. ii. p. 1o. Petr.

Gnodalius de Rufticanorum Tumultu in Germania, ap.
Srli. Script. vol. ii. p. 131, &c.

THESE

Tas

loo,.lV. THUs commlotione hagened at first in pt0T

>2ó vminces of Germany where L'uther's opinions had

Th,'ri- made little progress ; andbeing excited wholly
This°,. by political causes, had no conneAion with the

disputed poipts in religion.; But the frenzy
reaching at lafi'thofe' tuntries in which th 'Re-
formation was efiabliihed, 'tdrived new- strength
from circumstances peculiar to them, and rose
to a till 'greater pitch of extravagane. 'the
Reformatibn,' Aereve'r it wa received,' iincraed
that bold and irinovaini fpirlt to which it owed
is birth. ' Men who had the courage to over-
turn a. ytem supported by evety thing whi, h
can comnmaid refip& or reverence, were, not to
be ovetawed' by any autiority, hoi.great dr
venerable foifie. After having bCei. aPc'tf-
tomied to confidder theimveves as judges :oh:l
most importidt do&trines in rellgion, to examine
these freely, and to reje&, without fcrple,;whlat
appeared to them erroneous, it was ntlural for,
them to turn the fame daring'and inquifiive
eye towardls government, and tO think of' tcti;
fying whatevdr difordets or 'imperfctiohs were
discovered there. As religious abuses had bean
reformed in fcveral places without the pe'riif;
iodn of the magistrate, it was an cafy tranition
to attempt the redress of politcail grievances in
the fame manner.

1X,*

No sooner, then, did the spirit of evolt break BooK IV.

out in Thuringia, a province fubje& to the 1,26.
EIleco of Saxony, the inhabitants of which Moi abtr-
were mostly converts to Lutheranifm, than it
assumed a new and more dangerous form. Tho-
mas Muncer, one of Luther's disciples, having
eftabliihed himself in that country, had acquired
a wonderful ascendant over the minds of the
people. He propagated among them the wildest
and mos enthufiaftick notions, but such as tended
tnanifeftly to inspire them' with boldness, and
lead them to sedition. " Luther, he told them,
had done more hurt than service to religion.
He had, indeed, rescued the church from the Theit fantr

tical fpizitz

yoke of Popery, but his do&rines encouraged,
and his life set an example of the utmost licen-
tioufnefs of manners. In order to avoid vice,
fays he, men must pra&ise perpetual mortifi-
cation. They must put on a grave countenance,
speak little, wear a plain garb, and be serious
in their whole deportment. Such as prepare
their hearts in this manner, may expet that the
Supreme Being will diret all their steps, and
by some visible sign discover his will to them,l
if that iliumination be at any time with-held,
we may expoRulate with the Almighty, who
deals with us so harlhly, and remind him of his
promises. This expostulation and anger will
be highly acceptable to God, and will at last

VOL. 1I. B b prevail

BooK IV. prevail on him to guide us with the fame uner-

i - ritng hand which condu&ed the patriarchs of

old. ',Let us beware, however, of offending him
by' dir arrogance; but as all rnn ate equal in
'ii'ieye, let them- return to that condition of

:quality in which he formed them, and having

" ,,things, itl common let them live together
' like brethren, without any marks of fubordina-
tidn or preemipnencec.,"

EXTRAVAGANT as these tenets were, they

fattered so many pallions in the .human heart,
as to make a deep iropeffion. To aim at no-
thing more than abridging the power of the
nobility, was now confidered as a trifling and
partial reformation, not worth the contending
for; it was proposed to level every diftin&ion
among mankind,.and by abolilhing property, to
reduce them to their natural state of equality,
in which all should receive their subsistence from
one common Rock. Muncer assured them, that
the design was approved of by heaven, and that
the Almighty had in a dream ascertained him
of its success. The peasants set about the exe-
cutipn of it, not only with the rage which ani-
mated those of their order in other parts of Ger-
many, but with the ardour which enthusiasm in-
spires. They deposed the magistrates in all the

' Sckend. lib. ii p . ld H.
p. 3.d. H. p. 83.

2 cities

cities f, which they were masters1 seized the Boox IV.
lands of the nobles, and obliged such of them i;a6.
as they got into their hands, to put on the dress
commonly worn by peasants, and instead of their
former titles, to befatidfed with the appellation
given to people in the lowest class of life, Vait
numbers engaged in this wild undertaking \ but
Muncer, their. leader, and their prophet, was
destitute of the abilities necessary for conducing
it. He had all the extravagance, but not the
courage, which enthufiats usually possess. It
was with difficulty ht could be persuaded to
take the field; and though he soon drew toge-
ther eight thousand men, he suffered himself to
be surrounded by a body of cavalry under the
command of the Ele&or of Saxony, the Land-
grave of Hefle, and Duke of Brunswick. These
Princes, unwilling to ihed the bloodof their de.
luded fubjest, sent a young nobleman to their
camp, with the offer of a general pardon, if
they would immediately lay down their arms,
and deliver up the authors of the sedition.
Muncer, alarmed at this, began to harangue his
followers with his usual vehemence, exhorting
them not to trust these deceitful promises of
their oppressors, nor to desert the cause of God,
and of Christian liberty.

BUT the sense of present danger making a Yeeafnts
deeper imprefion on the peasants than his elo defeatd.

B b 2 quence,

l;t IV. ;qiece, confuftoh aid terror Were visible in
ip6. every face, wheh a tIinbi'dw:,' whsch. ias'the em-

bftnc 'hfit' the m htineieg hid palited 'on their
'cbitoU,: .happening!t lappear in'tlhe clouds,
MUlheftiwitha admirabl' prefenht of rtind, laid
hold of-;that inddehitahtd ftddenly raising his
eyes. and hands towards heaven, " Behold,"
cries.h,; 'with an' elevated voice,-" the sign
"w-i'hi5ch God -has given. There is' the pkdge
'toftyour safety; and a token 'that the wicked
' ihaill bedefttoyed." The fanatical multitude
set 'up-iiftantly a great Ibout, as-if vi&ory had
been certain; and palling in a moment from
one extreme to another, massacred the unfor-
tunate 'nobleman who had comei with the offer
of :pardon, and demanded to be led towards the
e.nity ..The Princes enraged at'this ihocking
violation'of the laws of war, advanced with no
May Is. less impetuosity, and began the attack; but the

behaviour of the peasants in the combat was not
such aa miight have been expeEted either from
theiiferocity or confidence of success; an un-
difeiplined rabble was no equal match for well-
trained troops; above five 'thousand were slain
in thefield, almost without making resistance;
the reft :'ld, and among the forem6ft Muncer
their geheral. ' He was taken next day, and be-
ing condemned to such punilhments as his crimes
had delerved, he suffered them with a poor and

daflardly

dattarqly spirit. His death put,an end tothe Booic, v.
infurr.e&ions of.the pefants which had ,filled 1.
Germany with such terror '; I,ut the enlhufiaftick
notions which he had (cattered were not ;efir-
pated, and prnouced, not long after, erffes more
memorable, as well as more extravagant.

DURING there commotions, Luther aced Luther,'

with exemplary prudence and moderation$ like and prudent
a common parent, solicitous about the welfare co:"du.
of both parties, without sparing the faults or
errors of either. On the one hand, he addressed
a monitory discourse to the nobles, exhorting
them to treat their dependants with greater
humanity and indulgence. On the other, he
severely censured the seditious spirit of the pea-
sants, advising them. not to murmur at hardships
infeparable:;from their. condition, nor to seek
for redress by any but legal means'.

LUTHER'S, famous marriage with Catharine H, mar-

a Boria, a nun of a noble family, who, having r.'''
thrown off the veil, had fled from the cloister,
happened this year, and was far from meeting
with the fame approbation. Even his molt de-
voted followers thought this ftep indecent, at a
time when his country was involved in so many

* Seid. Hil. p. 84. 8eckend. lib. ii. p. 12. Gnodalius
Tumult. RuRican. 155. ' Slkid. Hit. p. 87.

B b 3 calamities ;

BOK IV, calamities while his enermies never mentioned

<a-6. it with any softer appellation than that of in.

ceftuous or profane. Luther himself was fen-
fible of the impression which it had made to his
disadvantage; but being fatisfied'with his own
condu&, he bore the censure of his friends,
and the reproaches of his adversaries, with his
'pfual fortitudex. '

THIs year the Reformation loft its sirs pro-

tetor, Frederick, Eledor 'of Saxony; but the
blow was the less sensibly felt, as he was fuc-
my s. ceeded by his brother John, a more avowed and

zealous, though less able patron of Luther and
his doctrines.

Prussia ANOTHER event happened about the fame
from the time, which, as it occasioned a confiderabIe
d"ckr change in the fate of Germany, mUst be traced

back to its source. While the frenzy of the
Crusades pofleffed all Europe during the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries, several orders of ieli-
gious knighthood were founded in defence of
the Christian faith against Heathens and In-
fidels. Among these the Teutonirk order in
Germany was one of the most illuftriotlo, the
knights of which distinguished themselves greatly
in all the wild enterprizes carried on in the

Seckend. lib. ii. p. i .

Holy

Holy Land. Being driven at last from their B OK IV.
settlements in the east, they were obliged tOb -26.
return to their native country. Their zeal, and
valour, were too impetuous to remain long,
inacive. They invaded, on very flight pre-
tences, the province of Prussia, the inhabitants
of which were still idolaters; and having com-
pleted the conquest of it about the middle of
the thirteenth century, held it many years as a
fief depending on the crown of Poland. Fierce
contests arose during this period, between the
grand maiters of the order, and the Kings of
Poland; the former itruggling for indepen-
dence, while the latter aflerted their right of
sovereignty with great firmness. Albert, a
Prince of the house of Brandenburgh, who was
eleced grand mailer in the year one thousand
five hundred and eleven, engaging keenly in
this quarrel, maintained a long war with Sigif.
mund, King of Poland; but having become
an early convert to Luther's dotrines, this gra-
dually lessened his zeal for the interests of his
fraternity, so that he took the opportunity of
the confusions in the Empire, and the absence
of the Emperor, to conclude a treaty witl
Sigismund, greatly to his private emolument.
By it, that part of Pruflia which belonged to
the Teutonick order, was erected into a secular
and hereditary dutchy, and the investiture of it

B b 4 granted

BooK IV, ganted to A-tte who in--rtutrn, bound him:
12~~'. el;fl t.dehomr et for it to the Kings of Poland

atheitvaf alR;t' I;mln diately after this, he made
public profeflion of the reforMie religion, and
married a Princess of Denm'ark. The Teutonick
knights ltclinied so loudly against the treachery
of their grand master; that he' was put under
the ban-of the Empire; but he Rill kept pof-
fefion- of the province which he had usurped,
and tranfnitted it to his pbfterity. In process
of time this rich inheritance fell to the elecoral
branch of the family, all dependence on the
crown of Poland was shaken off, and the Mar-
gravea; of :Brardenburgh, having assumed the
title of Kings of Prussia, have not only risen to
an equality with the first Princes in Germany,
but-take their rank among the great Monarchs
of Euroer.

irA tm- UPON the'return of, the French King to his
Ureof th dominiohs,-ihe eyes bs all the powers in Europe
French Kinszun were fixed'up6n him, that, by bferving his firt
&is returns
to Fnce. motions, they might form a judgment concern-

ing his subsequent oondu&. They were not
held long,:in fifpence. Francis' as soon as he
arrived at Bayonne* ;wrote to the King of Eng-
land, thanking him 'for his zealous and' affcc-

Sleid.'Hif. p. 98. Ps ell Abreg& dle l'hit. de Droit
Publ. p. 6o05 &c.t

tionatc

tionate interpfition in his favour, to which he BCOK IV.
acknowledged that he owed the recovery of his ;a b.
.liberty. Nextday the Emperor's ambassadors
demanded audience, and, in their -master's name
required him to issue such orders as were necef-
fary for'carrying the treaty of Madrid into
immediate- and full execution ; he coldly an-
fwered, that -though for his own part he deter.
mined religiously to perform all that he had
promised, the treaty contained so many articles
relative not to himself alone, but affecting the
interests of the French monarchy, that he could
not take any farther ftep without consulting the
States of his kingdom, and that some time
would be necessary in order to reconcile their
minds to the hard conditions which he had
coniented to ratify . This reply was confidered
as no obscure discovery of his being relolved
to elude the treaty; and the compliment paid
to Heny,: appeared a very proper flep towards
fecuriag the aiiftance of that Monarch in the
war with the Emperor, to which such a refo-
jution would certainly give rife. These circum-
stances, added to the explicit declarations which
Francis made in secret to the ambassadors from
several of the Italian powers, fully satisfied
them that their conje&ures with regard to his
conduct had been just, and that instead of in-

Mem. do eilay, p. 97.

tending

BooK IV. tending to execute an unreaConable treaty, he

zó-. was eager. to seize the first opportunity of re-

venging those injuries which had compelled him
to feign an approbation of it. Even the doubts,
and fears, and scruples which used, on other
occasions, to hold Clement in a state of uncer-
tainty, were diflipated by Francis's teeming im-
patience to break through all his engagements
with the Emperor. The situation, indeed, of
affairs in Italy at that time, did not allow the
Pope to hesitate long. Sforza was still besieged
by the Imperialists in the cafle of Milan. That
feeble Prince, deprived now of Morone's advice,
and unprovided with every thing necessary for
defence, found means to inform Clement and
the Venetians, that he must soon surrender, if
they did not come to his relief. The Imperial
troops, as they had received no pay lince the
battle of Pavia, lived at discretion in the Mila-
nefe, levying such, exorbitant contributions in
that dutchy,. as amounted, if we may rely on
Guicciardini's calculation, to no less a fum than
five thousand ducats a-day ', nor was it to be
doubted, but that the soldiers, as soon as the
castle ihould submit, would chufe to leave a
.ruined country which hardly afforded them sub-
fiftence, that they might take polefleon of more
.comfortable quarters in, the fertile and un-

Guic. 1. xvii. 360.

touched

touched territories of the Pope and Venetians. BooK IV.
The afliftance of the French King was the only 26.
* thing which could either save Sf6rza, or enable

them to protet their own dominions from the
insults of the Imperial troops.

FOR there reasons, the Pope, the Venetians, A leagu

and duke of Milan, were equally impatient to fnt the
come to an agreement with Francis, who, onh Empeor
his part, was no less desirous of acquiring such
a considerable acceflion both of strength and
reputation as such a confederacy wold bring
along with it. The chief objects of this alli-
ance, which was concluded at Cognac on the
twenty-fecond of May, though kept secret for
some time, were to oblige the Emperor to set
at liberty the French King's sons, upon pay-
ment ofa reasonable ranomrn; and to re-xeftablifh
Sforta in the Qiet poffiefion of the-'M ladce.
If Charles lh~uld refute either of thei',":hce
contra&ing parties bound themselves to. bring
into the field an army of thirty-five thousand
men, with which, afte 'driving the Spaniards
out of the Milanese, they would attack the
kingdom of 'Naples. The' kicng of'Eriah
was decltared. trotetor of tliis league, which
they dicnifcd;'w th t hiefame of Holy, because
the Pope was at the head of it; and in order
to allure Henry more effeaually, a principality
in the kingdom of Naples, of thirty thitirfnd

ducats

Boot IV. ducats yearly revenue, was to be f£etelr on

. r him; and lands to the value of ten tloufand

ducats on WoIleyhis favourite b

, t _/ . . ~., ,, . . ,,, - , ..

he Pope No lSoner was this Ieague concluded, than
Francil Clenlent, y the'plenitude of his papal power,
from his abfol'~ Francis from the oath which he had
oith to obh
,ervethe taken to obfetve the treaty of Madrid c. This
Madrid. right, how pernicious soever in its effets, and

deftrnftivc of that integrity which is the basis
of all tranfations among men, was the natural
consequence of the powers which the Popes
arrogated as the infallible vicegerents of Christ
upon earth. But as, in virtue of this pretended
prerogative, they had often dispensed with
obligations which were held sacred, the interest
of some men, and the credulity' f others led
them to imagine that the decisions of a fovce
reign pontiff authorized or j utified a4ions which
would, othcrwife, have been crimnnal and im-

pious.. .. .

The mrW MzAlwmzILs the difiovery o' Francis's in-
wal4NU . tention to elude the treaty of Madrid, filled: the

Emperor with a variety of difquicting thoughtis
He had eated An unfortunate Prince with the
most uhnenerous rigour he had ditplayed an

iP. H -t. RerAr. A l. ib. ix. c. 3. p. sl. Receil

dos TraitL i. 134. c Goldaft. Polit. Imperil.
. o a.

.p.
oo Pll H 70.

insatiable

insatiable' ambition in all his negociations with BoOK IV.
his prisoner: He knew what censures the former
* had drawn upon him, and what apprehensions

the latter had excited in every. court of Europe;
nor had he reaped from the measures which he
pursued, any of those advantages which poli-
ticians are apt to confider as an excuse for the
most criminal condu&, and a compensation for
the revereft reproaches. Francis was now out
of his'hands, and not one of all the mighty
cohfequences which he had expe&ted from the
treaty that let him at liberty, was likely to take
place. His ralhnefs in relying so far on his
own judgment as to trust to.the sincerity of, the
French King, in qppofition to the sentiments of
his wisest ministers, was now apparent; and he
easily conje&ured, that the fame confederacy,
the dread of which had induced him to set
Francis at liberty, would now be formed against
him with that gallant and incensed Monarch
at its head. Self-condemnation and lhame, on
account of what was past, -with anxious appre-
henfions concerning what might happen, were
the neceflary result of these rflections on his
own conduc and situation. Charles, ho*evet,
was naturally firm and inflexible in all his nea-
fures. To have receded suddenly from any
atticle in the treaty of Madrid, would'hiae been
a plain confeflion of imprudence, and a palpable

symptom

poop 1V fylpto of fear ; he determined therefore,
.- .that it was moflt suitable to his dignity, to insist,

.wha;ver might be the consequences, on the
ftric' execution of the treaty, and particularly
not. .rt accept of any thing which. might be
offered.as an equivalent for the restitution of
Burgundy d.

Require. IN coinequence of this resolution, he ap.
Francia to
perform pointed Lannoy and Alarcon, to repair, as his
,hathe had ambassadors, to the court of France, and for-
stipulated.

mally to summon the King either to execute the
treaty with the sincerity that became him, or to
return, according to his oath, a prisoner to
Madrid. Instead of giving them an immediate
answer, Francis admitted the deputies of the
flates of Burgundy to an audience in their pre-
fence, They humbly represented tp him, that
he had exceeded the powers veiled. a King of
France when he consented to alienate their
country from the crown, the domains of which
he was bound by his coronation. oath to preserve
entire and unimpaired. Francis, in return,
thanked them for their attachment to his crown,
and intreated them, though very faintly, to
remember the obligations which he lay under
tp fulfil his engagements with the Emperor.
The deputies afiuming an higher tone, declared

* Gqic. 1. xvii. 366.

that

that they would not obey commands which they Boo1 IV,
confidered as illegal and if he lhould abandon vLs6
them to the enemies of France,, they had re.
solved to defend themselves to the best of their
power, with a firm purpose rather to perish than
submit to a foreign dominion. Upon- which
Francis turning towards the Imperial ambaffa- His anfCww
dors, represented to them the impossibility of
performing what he had undertaken, and offered,
in lieu of Burgundy, to pay the Emperor two
millions of crowns. The Viceroy and Alarcon,
who easily perceived that the scene to which
they had been witnesses, was concerted between
the King and his fubje6ts in order to impose
upon them, signified to him their master's fixed
resolution not to depart in the smallest point
from the terms of the treaty, and withdrew e.
Before they left the kingdom, they had the
mortification to hear the holy league against
the Emperor published with great solemnity. June, g.

CHARLES no sooner received an account of The Empe.

this confederacy than he exclaimed in the most p'rtiPon
publick manner, and in the harihef terms, againi f ''w
Francis, as a Prince void of faith, and of
honour. He complained no less of Clement,
whom he solicited in vain to abandon his new

Belcir. Comment. de Reb. Gal. 573. Mem. de Bel-
lay, 97.

allies;

,bo, IV. allies,-; he aecufed him of ingratitude; he taxed

-6 'him with' tan ambition -unbecoming his cha-

ra&er, liHe:threatened hitn not only with all the
vengeance which the power of an Emperor can
intict, but ty appealing to a general council,
called upbefore him all the terrors arising from
the authority of those assemblies so formidable
to the papal fee. It was necessary, however,
to oppose something else than reproaches and
threats to the powerful combination formed
against him; and the Emperor, prompted by fp
many parions, did not fail to exert himself with
unusual vigour, in order to fend supplies not
only of men, but of money, which was Rill
more needed, into Italy.

Feeble ope- ON the other hand, the efforts of the confede-
rtions of
e.confe- rates bore no proportion to that animosity against

'atcs* the Emperor with which they seemed to enter into

the holy league. Francis it was thought, would
have infused spirit and vigour into the whole body.
He had his loft honour to repair, many injuries
to revenge, and the flation among the Princes
of Europe from which he had fallen to recover.
From all these powerful incitements, added to
the natural imnpetuofity of his temper, a war
more fierce and bloody than any that he had
hitherto made upon his rival, was expe&ed.
But Francis had gone through such a scene of

distress,
*

distress, and the imprefflon it had made was Boot IV,
still so fresh in his meymoy+ that he was become i, 6,
diffident of himfelfy diftruulof'fortune, and
desirous of tranquillity. To procure the release
of his sons, and to avoid the restitution of Bur-
gundy, by paying some reafenable equivalent,
were his chief.objecs ; and for the fake of;thefe,
he would willingly have sacrificed Sforza. and
the liberties of Italy to the Emperor. He flatter-
ed himfelfthat the dread of the. confederacy which
he had formed would of itself induce..Charles
to liften to what was equitable; and was afraid
of employing any considerable force for the re-
lief of the Milanese, left his allies, whom he
had often found to be more attentive to their
own interest, than punctual in fulfilling their
engagements, should abandon him as soon as the
Imperialists were driven out of that country, and
deprive his negociations with the Emperor. of
that weight which they derived from his being
at the head of a powerful league. In the mean
time the castle of Milan was pressed more, closely
than ever, and Sforza was now reduced to the
last extremity. The Pope and Venetians, trufte
ing to Francis's concurrence, commanded their
troops to take the fields in order to relieve him;
and an army more than fuficient for that
service was; soon formed.' The Milanese, pas-
fionately attached to their unfortunate duke,

VOL. 11. C c and

BOOK IV. and no less exasperated against the Imperialists,

6. 0'who had opprefred them so cruelly, were ready

to aid the confederates in al their enterprizes.
But the duke d'Urbino, their general, naturally
flow and indecisive, and restrained, besides, by
his ancient enmity to the family of Medici,
from taking any. fep that might aggrandize or
add reputation to the Pope , loft tome oppor-
tunities, and refuse to improve others, of
attacking the Imperialists, and raising the siege.
These delays gave Bourbon time to bring up a
reinforcement of fresh troops, and a supply of
Jul 24. money. He immediately took the command

of the army, and pushed on the siege with such
vigour, as quickly obliged Sforza to surrender,
who retiring to Lodi, which the confederates
had furprized, left Bourbon in full pofleffion
of the reft of the dutchy, the investiture of which
the Emperor had promised to grant him s.

Disquietude THE Italians began now to perceive the game
li' potr. which Francis had played, and to be sensible

that, notwithstanding all their address, and re-
finements in negociation, which they boasted
of as talents peculiarly their own, they had for
once been over-reached in those very arts by a
tramontane Prince. He had hitherto thrown
almost the whole burden of the war upon them,

Glic. 1. xvii. 382. s Guic. 1. xvii. 376, &c.

taking

taking advantage of their efforts, in order td BOOK IV
enforce the proposals which he often renewed ,,6
at the court of Madrid for obtaining the liberty
bs his sons. The Pope and Venetians expoftu-.
lated and complained h but as they were not
able to rouze Francis from his inactivity, their
own zeal and vigour gradually abated, and
Clement, having already gone farther than his
timidity usually permitted him, began to accuse
himself of rashness, and to relapse into his na-
tural state of doubt and uncertainty,

ALL the Emperor's motiofis depending on Meaturesd

the Impc.

himself alone; were more brisk and better con- riati,.
certed. The narrowness of his revenues, in-
deed, did not allow him to make any sudden or
great effort in the field, lut he abundantly sup-
plied that defe& by his intrigues and negocia-
tions. The family of Colonna, the most power-
ful of all the Roman barons, had adhered uni-
formly to the Ghibeline or Imperial fation, dur-
ing those fierce contentions between the Popes
and Emperors, which, for several ages, filled
Italy and Germany with discord and bloodshed.
Though the causes which at first gave birth to
these deftrudive factions existed no longer, and
the rage with which they had been animated

Rufcelli Letter: de Principi, ii. 157, &c. 159, 166-
166,

Cc 1 as

BOK IV. was in a great measur;e spent, the Colonnas ft1il

t^ó 6 retained their attachment to the Imperial interest,

and by placing themselves under the protection
of the Emperors, secured the quiet pofiorion of
their own territories and privileges. The Car-
dinal Pompeo Coloana, a man of a turbulent
and ambitious temper,, at that time the head of
the family, had long been Clement's rival, to
whose influence in the last conclave he imputed
the disappointment of all his schemes for at-
taining the papal dignity, of which, from his
known conneation with the Emperor, he thought
himself secure. This was too great an injury
to an aspiring mind ever to be forgiven; and
though he had dissembled his resentment so far
as to vote for Clement at his election, and to ac-
cept of great offices in his court, he waited with
the utioft impatience for an opportunity of
being revenged. Don Hugo di Moncada, the
Imperial ambassador at Rome, who was no
stranger to these sentiments, easily persuaded
him, that now was the time, while all the papal
troops were employed in Lombardy, to attempt
something which would at once avenge his own
wrongs, and be of eflential service to the Em-
peror his patron. The Pope, however, whose
timidity rendered him quick-fighted, was so at-
tentive to their operations, and began to be
alarmed so early, that he might have drawn to-

gether

gether troops sufficient to have disconcerted all BooK Iv.
Colonna's measures, But Moncada amused him 1526.
so artfully with negociations, promires, and false
intelligence, that he lulled asleep all his fufpi-
cions, and prevented his taking any of the pre-
cautions necessary for his safet.y; and to the
eternal disgrace of a prince possessed of great
power, as well as renowned for political wildom,
Colonna, at the head of three thousand men, Sept. ?9.
seized one of the gates of his capital, while he, The ecolot.

na, become

imagining himself to be in perfect security, was malters of
altogether unprepared for refilting such a feeble
enemy. The inhabitants of Rome permitted
Colonna's troops, from whom they apprehended
no injury, to advance without opposition; the
Pope's guards were dispersed in a moment; and
Clement himself, terrified at the danger, afham-
ed of his own credulity, and deserted by almost
every person, fled with precipitation into the
castle of St. Angelo, which was immediately in-
veifed. The palace of the Vatican, the chlrch
of St. Peter, and the houses of the Pope's mini-
iters and servants, were plundered in the moif
licentious manner ; the ret of the city was left
unmolefed. Clement, destitute of every thing
necessary either for subsistence or defence, was
soon obliged to demand a capitulation; and Acommo.
Moncada, being admitted into the castle, pre- dati"" be.

t :een the
fcribed to him, with all the haughtiness of a Pope and

CC 3 conqueror, Emperor.

c 3 conqueror,

Boo0 IV. conqueror, conditions which it was not in his
'"6. power to reject. The chief of these was, That

Clement hiould no; only grant a full pardon to
the Colonnas, but receive them into favour, and
immediately withdraw all the troops in his pay
from the army of the confederates in Lonm-
hardy .

THE Colonnas, who talked of nothing less

than of deposing Clement, and of placing PQm-
peo, their kinsman, in the vacant chair of St.
Peter, exclaimed loudly againrf a treaty which
left them at the mercy of a Pontiffjuftly incensed
against them. But Moncada, attentive only to
his matter's interest, paid little regard to their
complaints, and by this fortunate measure, broke
entirely the power of the confederates.

The Imp- WHILE the army of the confederates suffered
t_ "d. such a considerable diminution, the ImperialiRs

received two great reinforcements; one from
Spain, under the command of Lannoy and Alar-
con, which amounted to fix thousand men; the
other was raised in the Empire by George
Frondfperg, a German nobleman, who having
served in Italy with great reputation, had ac-
quired such influence and popularity, that mu,-

* Jovii Vita Pomp. Colon. p. Guic, 1. xvii. 407.
Rqc4i Lctter de Principi, i. p, lob.

titudeq

titudes of his countrymen, fond on every occa- BOOK IV.
sion of engaging in military enterprizes, and im- sja-
patient at that jun.ure to escape from the op-
pression of their superiors in religious as well as
civil matters, crowded to his standard i so that
without any other gratuity than the payment
of a crown to each man, fourteen thousand
enlisted in his service. To these the Archduke
Ferdinand added two thousand horse, levied in
the Austrian dominions. But although the
Emperor had raised troops, he could not remit
the fums necessary for their support. His or-
dinary revenues were exhausted; the credit of
princes, during the infancy of commerce, was
not extensive; and the Cortes of Castile, though
every art had been tried to gain them, and some
innovations had been made in the constitution
in order to secure their concurrence, peremp-
torily refused to grant Charles any extraordi-
nary supply k; so that the more his army in-
created in number, the more were his generals
embarrassed and diftrcffed. Bourbon, in par.
ticular, was involved in fich difficulties, that
he stood in need of all his address and courage
in order to extricate himself. Vast fums were
due to the Spanish troops already in the Mila.
nefe, when Frondfperg arrived with sixteen thou-
sand hungry Germans, destitute of every thing.

k Sandoy. i.8 4,

C c 4 Both

Boos IV. Both' made their demands with equal fierceness

1526. the: brmer claiming' their-arrears, and the lat-

Ter Empe- ter, the pay which had bedn promiaed-them on
ror ' sinan. p
cetcfici- their entiritng Lombardy. Bourbon'was alto-

utq gether idicapable of giving fatisfacgion to either.

In this Aituatioh, he was constrained to commit
$dts of violence extremely shocking to his own
nature, 'Which was geherous and humane. He
seized the principal citizens' of Milan, ind by
threats, and even by torture, forced from theni
a considerable fum; he rifled the churches of
all their plate and ornaments; the inadequate
supply which these afforded, he distributed
among the soldiers, with so many soothing ex-
pressions of his sympathy and affection, 'that,
though it fell far ihort' of the fums due 'to them,
it appeased their present murmurs'.

Bourbon AMONG other expedients for railing money,
set' Bo0n Bourbon granted his life and libertyto Morone

who having been kept in prison since his in.
trigue with Pescara, had been condemned to die
by the Spanifli judges empowered to try 'him.
For this remiflion he paid twenty thousand
ducats; and such were 'his singular talents, and
the wonderful afcendantwhich healways acquired
over the minds of those .to whom he had access,
that in a few days, from being Bourbon's pri-
soner, he became his prime confident, with whom

1 Ripamiond. Hist. Mediol. lib. ix. p. 717.

bc

he consulted in all affairs of importance; To Book IV.
his insinuations must be imputed the .fulpiciQns -'"6.
which Bourbon began to entertain, that the Em-
peror had never intended to grant him the in-
veftiture of Milan, but had appointed Leyva,
and the other Spanish generals, rather to be
spies on his conduct, than to co-operate heartily
towards the execution of his schemes. To him
likewise, as he still retained at the age of four-
Score all the enterprizing spirit of youth, may
be.attributed the bold and unexpeted measure
on which Bourbon soon after ventured m.

SucH, indeed, were the exigencies of the Im- His dlibe.

rations with.

perial troops in the Milanese, that it became in- 'rep to
difpenfably necessary to take some immediate his motions.
ftep for their relief. The arrears of the soldiers
increased daily; the Emperor made no remit-
tances -to his generals; and the utmost rigour
of military extortion could draw nothing more
from a country entirely drained and ruined. In
this situation there was no choice left, but either
to disband the army, or to march for subsistence
into the enemy's country. The territories of
the Venetians lay nearest at hand; but they,
with their usual foresight and prudence, had
taken such precautions as secured them from
any insult. Nothing, therefore, remained but
to invade the dominions of the church, or of the

- Guic. 1, xvii. 419.

Florentines

BOOK IV. Florentines; and Clement hadof late aaed such

6 a part, as merited the feveref vengeance from

the Emperor. No sooner did his troop, return
to Rome after the infurreftion of the Colonnas,
than, without paying any regard to the treaty
with Moncada, he degraded the Cardinal Co-
lonna, excommunicated the reft of the family,
seized their places of strength, and wafted their
lands with all' the cruelty which the smart of a
recent injury.naturally excites. After this, he
turned his arms against Naples, and as his ope.
rations were seconded by the French fleet, he
made some progress towards the conquest of
that kingdom; the Viceroy being 'no less defti-
tute than the other Imperial generals of the
money requisite for a vigorous defence ".

157. THESE proceedings of the Pope justified, in

Matache to
invade the appearance, the measures which Bourbon's fitua-
viPot"'t tion rendered necessary and he let about exe-

cuting them under such disadvantages, as furnilh
the strongest proof both of the despair to which
he was reduced, and of the greatness of his abi-
lities which were able to surmount so many ob-
ftacles. Having committed the government of
Milan to Leyva, whom he was not unwilling
:,nuary 3o. to leave behind, he began his march in the depth

of winter, at the head of twenty-five thousand

Jovii Vita Pomp. Colop. Guic, 1. xviii. 424,

menw

men, composed of nations differing from each Boos Iv.
Other in language and manners; without nroney, '57.
without magazines, without artillery, without
carriages; in short, without any of those things
which are necefrary to the smallest party, and
which seem essential to the existence and mo-
tions of a great army. His rout lay through
a country cut by rivers and mountains, in which
the roads were almost impracticable; as an ad-
dition to his difficulties, the enemy's army, fu.
perior to his own in number, was at hand to
watch all his motions, and to improve every
advantage. But his troops, impatient of their
present hardihips, and allured by the hopes of
immense booty, without confidering how ill
provided they were for a march, followed him
with great cheerfulness. His firlf scheme was
to have made himself master of Placentia,
and to have gratified his soldiers with the
plunder of that city; but the vigilance of
the confederate generals rendered the design
abortive; nor had he better success in his pro-
je& for the reduction of Bologna, which was
seasonably supplied with as many troops as fe-
cured it from the insults of an army which had
neither artillery nor ammunition. Having failed
in both there attempts to become maiter of some
great city, he was under a neceflity of advanc-
ing. But he had now been two months in the

field

BooK IV. field; his troops had fuffrred every calamity

5aJ;. that a long march, together with the uncom-

mon iigour of the season, could bring upon
men defitute of all necessary accomnmnoations
in an enemy's country; the magnificen pro-
mises to which they trusted, had proved' alto-
gether vain; they, saw no. profpEt of,.:relief;
their patience, -tried to the utmost, failed at lait,

Mutiny of and they broke out into open mutiny. Some
bii trwop .officers, :whorafhlyattempted to restrain them,

,fell vicims to.their fyry; ,Bourbon hirnaelf, not
daring to appear during the first transports of
their rage, was obligedto fly secretly from his
quarters . But this sudden ebullition of wrath
began at last to subside;. when Bourbon, who
possessed ip a wonderful degree the art of govern-
.ing the minds of soldiers, .renewed his promises
with more confidence than formerly, and aMlied
them. that they would be soon accomplilhed.
He endeavoured to render their hardship mone
,tolerable, by partaking of them himnelf; he
fared no better than the meanest centinel he
marched along with them on foot; he joined
them in singing their camp-ballads, in which,
with high praises of his valour, they mingled
many strokes of military raillery on his poverty;
.and wherever they came, he allowed them, as a
foretaste of what he had promised, to plunder

' Guic.J xvlli. 434. Jovii Vit. Colon, 163.

the

the adjacent villages at discretion. Encouraged BooK IV.
by all there soothing arts, they entirely forgot 1527.
their sufferings and complaints, and followed
him with the fame implicit confidence as
formerly .

BOURBON, meanwhile, carefully concealed ThePope's

.... ~~. IT-.* a~~~~iarrefolution

his intentions. Rome and Florence, not know.- and impru.
ing on which the blow would fall, were held a
in the.moft disquieting state of fufpence. Cle-
ment, equally solicitous for the safety of both,
flutuated in more than his usual uncertainty;
and while the rapid approach of danger called
for prompt and decisive measures, he spent the
time in deliberations which came to no issue,
or in taking resolutions, which, next day, his
restless mind, more sagacious in *discerning than
in obviating difficulties, overturned, without
being able to fix on what should be fubftitut-d
in their place. At one time he determined to
unite himself more closely than ever with his
allies, and to push on the war with vigour; at
another, he inclined to bring all differences to.
a final accommodation by a treaty with Lannoy,
who knowing his pallion for negociation, soli-
cited him incessantly with proposals for that
purpose. His timidity at length prevailed, and

P Oeuvrcsde Brant, vol. iv. p. 246, &c.

led

Book IV. led him to conclude an agreement with Lafl-

1.."- noy, of which the following were the chief
Maorc is. articles: That a suspension of arms lhould take
Concludes a
tty with place between the Pontifical and Imperial troops
the Viceroy
eofNpiT, for eight months; That Clement should adj

vance sixty thouland crowns towards satisfying
the demands of the Imperial army; That the
Colonnas should be absolved from censure; and'
their former dignities and pofleflions be restored
to them; That the viceroy lhould come tor
Rome, and prevent Bourbon from approaching
nearer to that city, or to Florence 9. On this
hasty treaty, which deprived him of all hopes
of afliftance from his allies:, without affording
him any solid foundation of security, Clement
relied so firmly, that, like a man extricated at
once out of all difficulties, he was at perfect
ease, and in the fulness of his confidence dif-
banded all his troops, except as many as were
sufficient to guard his own person. This ama,
zing confidence of Clement's, who on every
other occasion was fearful and suspicious to
excess, appeared so unaccountable to Guicciar'
dini, who being at that time the pontifical corn.
mif'ary-general and resident in the confederate
army, had great opportunity as well as great
abilities for observing how chimerical all his
hopes were, that he imputes the Pope's conduc,

Guic. I. xviii. 436.

*ó

at this juncture, wholly to infatuation, which BOOK IV.
those who are doomed to ruin cannot avoid'. '.

1Xi7.
LANNOY, it would seem, intended to have which

Bourbon

executed the treaty with great sincerity; and diliefds
having detached Clement from the confederacy,
wilhed to turn Bourbon's arms againff the Vene-
tians, who, of all the powers at, war with the
Emperor, had exerted the greatest vigour.
With this view he dispatched a courier to Bour.
bon, informing him of the fuflinfion of arms,
which, in the-name of their common matier, he
had concluded with the Pope. Bourbon had
other schemes; and he had prosecuted them
now too far to think of retreating. To have
mentioned a retreat to his soldiers, would have
been dangerous; his command was independent
on Lannoy; he was fond of mortifying a man
whom he had many reasons to hate: for these
reasons, without paying the least regard to the
message, he continued to ravage the ecclesiastical
territories, and to advance towards Florence.
Upon this, all Clement's terror and anxiety
returning with new force, he had recourse to
Lannoy, and intreated and conjured him to put.
a stop to Bourbon's progress. Lannoy accord-
ingly set out for his camp, but durst not ap-
proach it; Bourbon's soldiers having got notice

* Guic. lib, xviii. 4+6.

of

BoIK iV. of the truce, raged and threatened, demanding

5z27 the accomplishment of the promises to which-

they had trusted; their general himself could
hardly refirain them; every person in Rome
perceived that nothing remained but to prepare
for refining a storm which it was now imr
possible to dispel. Clement alone, relying on
some ambiguous and deceitful profefflons which
Bourbon made of his inclination towards peace,
funk back into s former security '.

Advances BOURBON, on his part, was far from being
Rome~. free from solicitude. All his attempts on any

place of importance had hitherto miscarried;
and Florence, towards which he had been ap-
proaching for some time, was, by the.arrival
of the duke d'Urbino's army, put in a condition
to set his power at defiance. As it nowbbecame
necessary to change. his rout, and to take in-
Itantly some new resolution, he fixed without
hesitation on one no less daring in itself, than
it was impious according to the opinion of that
age. This was to affa:'. and plunder Rome.
Many reasons, however, prompted him to it.
He was fond of thwarting Lannoy, who had
undertaken for the fafey of that city; he ima-
gined that'the Emperor would be highly pleated
to fee Clement, the chief author of the league

Guic. 1. xviii. 437, &c, Mom. do Bollay, p. ioo.

2 against

against him, humbled; he flattered himself, BooK IV,
that by gratifying the rapacity of his soldiers '152
with such immense booty, he would attach
them for ever to his interest; or (which is till
more probable than any of these) he hoped that
by means of the power and fame, which he
would acquire from the conquest of the first
city in Chriftendorh, that he might lay the
foundation of an independent power; and that
after shaking off all connection with the Em-
peror, he might take possession of Naples, or
of some of the ltalian states in his own name '.

WHATEVER his motives were, he executed ThePope'*

his resolution with a rapidity equal to the bold- "I,""n.'
nss with which he had formed it. His foldlers,
now that they had their prey in full view, com-
plained neither of fatigue, nor famine, nor
want of pay. No sooner did they begin to
move from Tuscany towards Rome, than the
Pope, sensible at last how fallacious the hopes
had been on which he reposed, started from his
security. But no time now remained, even for
a bold and decisive Pontiff, to have taken
proper measures, or to have formed any effc-
tual plan of defence. Under Clement's feeble
condu&, all was consternation, disorder, and
irresolution. He collected, however, such of
his disbanded soldiers as fill remained in the

Brant. iv. 271. vi. 189. Bclcarii Comment. 594.
AO.Ir. Dd city

eo V. city; he armed the artificers of Rome, and the
17. footmen and train-bearers of the Cardinals;

he repaired the breaches in the walls; he begun
to erect new works; he excommunicated Bour-
bon arid all his troops, branding the Germans
with the name of Lutherans, and the Spaniards
with that-of Moors . Trusting to there inef-
fe6ual military preparations, or to his spiritual
arms, which were fill more despised by rapa-
cious soldiers, he seems to have laid aside his
natural timidity, and contrary to the advice of
all his .counsellors, determined to wait the ap-
proach of an enemy whom he might easily have
avoided, by a timely retreat.

Afniult of BOUaBON, who saw the necellity of dispatch,
Rome,

now that his intentions were known, advanced
with such speed, that he gained several marches
on the duke d'Urbino's army, and encamped
in the plains of Rome. on the evening of the
fifth of May. From thence he ihewed his fol-
diers the palaces and churches of that city, into
which, as the capital of the Christian common-
wealth,'the riches of all Europe had flowed
during many centuries, without having been
once violated by any hostile hand; and com-
manding them to refre(h themselves that night,
as a preparation for the assault next day; pro-
mifed them, in reward of their toils and valour,

Seckend. lib. i5. 68.

the

the polrefion of all the treasures accumulated BooK IVr
there.

1527.

EARLY in the morning, Bourbon, who had

determined to distinguish that day either by his
death or the success of his enterprize, appeared
at the head of his troops, clad in complete
armour, above which he wore a vest of white
tissue, that he might be more conspicuous both
to his friends and to his enemies; and as all
depended on one bold impreflion, he led them
inltantly to scale the walls. Three diffinC bo-
dies, one of Germans, another of Spaniards,
and the last of Italians, the three different
nations of whom the army was composed, were
appointed to this service; a separate attack was
alligned to each; and the whole army advanced
to support them as occasion should require. A
thick mist concealed their approach until they
reached almost the brink of the ditch which
surrounded the suburbs: having planted their
ladders in a moment, each brigade rushcd on
to the affaut with an impetuosity heightened
by national emulation. They were received at
first with fortitude equal to their own the
Swiss in the Pope's guards, and the veteran fol-
diers who had been aflembled, fought with a
courage becoming men to whom the defence
of the noblest city in the world was entrusted.
Bourbon's troops, notwithitanding all their
valour, gained no ground, and even began to

D d give

.Booa IV. give way; when their leader, perceiving that

; 27. on this critical moment the fate of the day de-
Bourbon pended, threw himself from his horse, pressed

to the front, snatched a scaling ladder from a
soldier, planted it against the wall, and began
to mount it, encouraging his men with his voice
and hand, to follow him. But at that very
instant, a musket bullet from the ramparts
pierced his groin with a wound, which he im-
mediately felt to be mortal; but he retained so
much pretence of mind as to desire those who
were near him to cover his body with a cloak,
that his death might not dishearten his troops;
and soon after he expired with a courage worthy
of a better cause, and which would have enti-
tled him to the highest praise, if he had thus
fallen in defence of his country, not at the head
of its enemies ".

The city THIS fatal event could not be concealed from
t*ken. the army; the soldiers soon mifed their gene-

ral, whom they were accustomed to fee in every
time of danger; but instead of being difheart-
ened by their loss, it animated them with new
valour; the name of Bourbon resounded along
the line, accompanied with the cry of blood
and revenge. The veterans who defended the
walls, were soon overpowered by numbers;
the iritrained body of city recruits fled at the

M Mem. de Bellay, Xo0. Guic. 1. xviii. p. 445, &c.
Ocuv. de Brant. iv. 257, &C.

2 fight

fight of danger, and the enemy with irresistible BooK IV.
violence rushed into the town. 1sz7.

DURING the combat, Clement was employed

at the altar of St. Peter's in offering up to
Heaven unavailing prayers for viAtory. No
sooner was he informed that his troops began to
give way, than he fled with precipitation; and
with an infatuation still more amazing than any
thing already mentioned, instead of making his
escape by the opposite gate where there was no
enemy to oppose it, he shut himself up, together
with thirteen cardinals, the foreign ambassadors,
and many persons of diftinftion, in the caflle of
St. Angelo, which, from his late misfortune, he
might have known to be an insecure retreat.
In his way from the Vatican to that fortress,
he saw his troops flying before an enemy who
pursued without giving quarter; he heard the
cries and lamentations of the Roman citizens,
and beheld the beginning of those calamities
which his own credulity and ill-condut had
brought upon his fubjets Y.

IT is impossible to describe, or even to ima- Plundered.

gine the misery and horror of that fccne which
followed. Whatever a city taken by storm can
dread from military rage unrestrained by difci-
pline; whatever excefles the ferocity of the
German, the avarice of the Spaniards, or the

oev. Vit. Colon. 165.

D d 3 licen-

BOOK IV. licentiousness of the Italians could commit,
L . these the wretched inhabitants were obliged to

susser. Churches, palaces, and the houses of
private persons were plundered without dif-
tincion. No age, or character, or sex was
exempt from injury. Cardinals, nobles, priests,
matrons, virgins, were all the prey of soldiers,
and at the mercy of men deaf to the voice of
humanity. Nor did there outrages cease, as is
usual in towns which are carried by assault,
when the first fury of the form was over; the
Imperialists kept possession of Rome several
months; and during all that time the insolence
and brutality of the soldiers hardly abated.
Their booty in ready money alone amounted to
a million of ducats; what they raised by ran-
foms and exactions far exceeded that fum.
Rome, though taken several different times by
the northern nations, who over-ran the Empire
in the fifth and sixth centuries, was never
treated with so much cruelty by the barbarous
and heathen Huns, Vandals, or Goths, as now
by the bigotted subje&s of a catholick Mo-
narch ",

The Pope AFTER Bourbon's death, the command of
besieged in

Ithe dffleto the Imperial army devolved on Philibert de
St. Angelo.

z Joy. Vit Colon. 166. Guic. 1. xviii. 440, &c. Com-

ment. de capta urbe Roma3 ap. Scardium, ii 30o, Ulloa
Vita dell. Carlo V. p. lo, &c. Gianonne IHilt. of Nap.
B. xxxi. c. 3. p. 507.

Chalons

Chalons prince of Orange, who with difficulty BOOK IV.
prevailed on as many of his soldiers to desist ,
from the pillage, as were necessary to invest the
caatle of St. Angelo. Clement was immediately
sensible of his error in having retired into that
ill-provided and untenable fort. But as the
Irmperialifts, scorning discipline, and intent only
on plunder, puihed the siege with little vigour,
he did not despair of holdin: out, until the duke
d'Urbino Ihould come to his relief. That ge-
neral advanced at the head of an army com-
posed of Venetians, Florentines, and Swiss in
the pay of France, of fiflicicnt firength to
have delivered Clement fromr the prcefnt danger.
But d'Urbino, preferring the indulgence of his
hatred against the family of Medici to the glory
of delivering the capital of Christendom, and
the head of the church, pronounced the enter-
prize to be too hazardous; and, fi-oni ai cx-
quifite refinement in revenge, having marched
forward so far, that his army being lien from
the rampartsof St. Angelo, IfLttCred the Pope
with the profpeC of certain relics, lie imme-
diately retired'. Clement, deprived of every S rrenderr
resource, and reduced to such extremity of t'a; priTmr.
mine as to feed on aftls leflh ', was obliged to june6.
capitulate on such conditions as the conquerors
were pleased to prescribe. IHe agreed to pay
tour hundred thoulind ducats to the army; to

Guic. 1. xviii. 450, , Joy. Vit, Colon. 167.

lurrender

BooK IV. surrender to the Emperor all the places of

1527. strength belonging to the church; and, besides

giving hostages, to remain a prisoner himself
until the chief articles were performed. He
was committed to the care of Alarcon, who,
by his severe vigilance in guarding Francis, had
given full proof of his being qualified for that
office; and thus, by a singular accident, the
fame man had the custody of the two most
illustrious personages who had been made pri.
foners in Europe during several ages.

The Em- THE account of this extraordinary and un-
aperr'o be. expeted event was no less surprising than agree-
th:3junc- able to the Emperor. But in order to conceal
ture.

his joy from his subje&s, who were filled with
horror at the success and crimes of their coun-
trymen, and to lessen the indignation of the reft
of Europe, he declared that Rome had been
assaulted without any order from him. He
wrote to all the princes with whom he was in
alliance, disclaiming his having had any know-
ledge of Bourbon's intention'. He put him-
self and court into mourning; commanded the
rejoicings which had been ordered for the birth
of his son Philip to be flopped; and employing
an artifice no less hypocritical than gross, he
appointed prayers and processions throughout
all Spain for the recovery of the Pope's liberty,

c Rufcelli Lcttere di Principi, ii. 534.

which

which by an order to his generals he could have BooK IV.
immediately granted him d.

THE good fortune of the house of Austria Solymanin.

was no less conspicuous in another part of Eu- : Hu"-
rope. Solyman having invaded Hungary with
an army three hundred thousand firong, Lewis
II. King of that country, and of Bohemia, a
weak and unexperienced prince, advanced rashly
to meet him with a body of men which did not
amount to thirty thousand. With an impru-
dence fill more unpardonable, he gave the
command of these troops to Paul Tomorri, a
Franciscan monk, archbishop of Golocza. This
awkward general, in the dress of his order, girt
with its cord, marched at the head of the
troops; and hurried on by his own prefump-
tion, as well as by the impetuosity of nobles
who despised danger, but were impatient of
long service, he fought the fatal battle of Mo- Aug. g9.
hacz, in which the King, the flower of the ,s56.
Hungarian nobility, and upwards of twenty
thousand men fell the vi&ims of his folly and
ill-condut. Solyman, after his victory, seized Defet of
and kept poffeflion of several towns of greatest tg"ralj, nd
strength in the southern provinces of Hungary, death 'f
aud over-running the reft of the country, car-
ried near two hundred thousand persons into
captivity. As Lewis was the last male of the

d Sleid. iog. Sandov. i. 82z. Mauroc. Hist. Vcneta.
lib. iii. 220.

royal

Booi. IV. royal family of Jagellon, the Archduke Ferdi-

L"y"3 nand claimed both his crowns. This claim was

founded on a double title; the bne derived
from the ancient pretensions 'of the hb'ife of
Austria to both kingdoms; the other from the
right of his wife, the only filler of the deceased
Monarch. The feudal institutions however sub-
siftid both in Hungary'and Bohemia in such
vigour, and the nobles possessed such extensive
power, that the crowns were still elective, and-
Ferdinand's rights, if they had not been power-
fully supported, would have met with little
regard. But his own personal merit; the re-
fpeEt due to the brother of the greatest Monarch

Ser,;innd in Christendom; the neceflity of chufing a
eleted prince able to afford his fubjets some additional

protecion against the Turkilh arms, which, as
they had recently felt their power, they greatly
dreaded; together with the intrigues of his
sifter, who had been married to the late King,
overcame the prejudices which the Hungarians
had conceived against the Archduke as a so-
reigner; and though a considerable party voted
for the Vaywode of Tranfilvania, at length
secured Ferdinand the throne of that kingdom.
The hates of Bohemia imitated the example of
their neighbour kingdom; but in order to as-
certain and secure their own privileges, they
obliged Ferdinand, before his coronation, to
subscribe a deed which they term a Reverse,

·t»~~~ ~~declaring

declaring that he held that crown not by any BooK IV.
previous right, but by their gratuitous and 2
voluntary election. By such a vast accession of 5
territooies, the hereditary possession of which
they secured in process of time to their family,
the princes of the house of Austria attained that
pre-eminence in power which hath rendered
them so formidable to the reft of Germany .

THE difenfions between the Pope and Em- Progrers of

the Refor.

peror proved extremely favourable to the pro. mation.
grefs of Lutheranifm. Charles, exasperated by
Clement's conduct, and fully employed in op-
poling the league which he had formed against
them, had little inclination and less leisure to
take any measures for suppressing the new opi-
nions in Germany. In a diet of the Empire Jue s,
held at Spires, the state of religion came to be ISA'
confidered, and all that the Emperor required
of the princes was, that they would wait pati-
ently, and without encouraging innovations,
for the meeting of a general council which he
had demanded of the Pope. They, in return,
acknowledged the convocation of a council to
be the proper and regular ftep towards reform-
ing abuses in the church; but contended, that
a national council held in Germany would be
more effectual for that purpose than what he
had proposed. To his advice, concerning the
discouragement of innovations, they paid so

e Steph. Broderick Procancelarii IIunl;ar. Cladcs in

campo Mohacz ap. Scardium, ii. z218. IP Larre Hilt. d'Al-
lemakne, tom. viii. part i. p. 198.

3 little

BooK Iv. little regard, vn during the meeting of
..-v7-- the diet at Spires, the divines who attended the

Elector of Saxony and Landgrave of- ieffe-
Caffel thither, preached publickly, ancadmi-
niftered the sacraments according to the rites
of the Reformed Church'. The Emperor's own
example emboldened the Germans to treat the
.lHpal authority with little reverence. During

the heat of his resentment against Clement, he
had published a long reply to an angry brieve
which the Pope had intended as an apology for
his own condu&. In this manifesto, the Em-
peror, after having enumerated many instances
of that Pontiff's ingratitude, deceit, and ambi-
tion, all which he painted in the strongest and
most aggravated colours, appealed from him to
a general council. At the fame time, he wrote
to the college of Cardinals, complaining of
Clement's partiality and injustice; and requi-
ring them, if he refused or delayed to call a
council, to' manifest their concern for the peace
of the Christian Church, so shamefully neglected
by its chief pastor, by summoning that assembly
in their own name'. This manifesto, little
inferior in virulence to the invecives of Luther
himself, was dispersed over Germany with great
industry, and being eagerly read by persons of
every rank, did much more than counterbalance
the effect of all Charles's declarations against
the new opinions.

' Sleid. o103, Goldat, Polit. Imper. p. 984.

END Of THi IXCOOD VOLUMIE

At p J. B~Y ; 4 2~t /Zd L,S

.47 ~a, AL,. c- &;a'c/t #1" ~*1 tt4.r,Jp3
£AL;JSA3L~ /AJIA a; .Jt~s~ .Zt

Ir /
1 /L/L~~~/ yo 4- P4.0

",t t
y~r qc~;. ft ta.~r.L1*IL
