THE
H ISTORY

O F
SCOT LA ND

DURING THE REIGNS OF
QUEEN MARY and of KING JAMES VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND.

WITH A
REVIEW ofthe SCOTTISH HISTORYprevious to that Period;

And an APPENDIX con taiing ORicqiNA PAPERS.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D. D.

PRINCIPAl OF THE VNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGII, AND,

BISTORIOGRAPrER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

A N E W E D IT I O N.
WITH EMENDATIONS AND ADDITIONS.

VOL. III.

BA S I L:
Printed and fold BY J. J. TOURNEISEV.

MDCCXCI.

;

# THE HISTORY OF SCOTLAND. BOOK VIII.

THE

THE
HISTORY

0 P
SCOTLAND.

B, 0 0 K VIII.

ON the first of May the King and Queen ar. a o o
rived at Leith, and were received by their fubjeats viIi.
with every poflible expreflion of joy. The folem- ,9o.
nity of the (Queen's coronation was conduced with The Kin
peat magnificence; bdt so low had the order of , rivuc
Bifops fallen in the opinion of the public , that Scotlad.
none of them were present on that occasion, and
Mr. Robert Bruce, a Presbyterian Minister of
peat reputation, set the Crown on her head,
administered the sacred unaion, and performed
te other customary ceremonies.
The zeal and success with which many of the
clergy had contributed towards preferviog peace
and order in the kingdom, during his absence, re.
conciled James, in a great degree., to their per.
sons, and even to the Prelbyterian form of go.
vernmeit. In presence of an assembly , which agIeIft
VOL. 111. B

B00K met this year, he made high encomiums on the
viII. discipline as well as the docrine of the church
isgo. pr-mifed to adhere inviolably to both, and per.

mitted the assembly to frame such ads as gradually
abolilhed all the remains of episcopal jurifdidion,
and paved the way for a full and legal eftablilhment
of the Prelbyterian model'.
31S. An event happened soon after, which afforded the

Clergy no small triumph. Archbishop Adamson,
their ancient opponent, having fallen under the
King's displeasure, having been deprived of the
revenues of his fee in consequence of the at ol
annexation, and being oppressed with age, with
poverty, and diseases, made the meanest fubmiflion
to the Clergy, and delivered to the assembly a
formal recantation of all his opinions concerning
Church-government, which had been matter ol
offence to the Presbyterians. Such a confeflion,
from the moR learned person of the Episcopal
order, was confidered as a testimony which the
force of truth had extorted from an adversary'.

Dibrkrn ia Meanwhile. the King's excelive clemency towards
t king. offenders multiplied crimes of all kinds, and encour
do aged fucb ads of violence, as brought his govern

ment under contempt, and proved fatal to man)
of his fubjeds. The history of several years, aboul
this time, is filled wirh accounts of the deadl)
quarrels between the great families, and of murder!
and assassinations perpetrated in the moRs audaciot
manner, and with circumRances of the utmof

Cald i. i.204. ' Spotfw. w;;. Cald. iv. tr4
A

L

barbarity. All the defeds in the feudal aristocracy B o o K
were now felt more sensibly, perhaps, than at any vin.
other period in the history of Scotland, and universal s.
licence and anarchy prevailed to a degree scarce
confiflent with the preservation of society. While
the King, too gentle to puniffi, or too feeble to ad
with vigor, suffered all these enormities to pass with
impunity

But though James connived at ieal crimes, witch. An attempt
craft, which is commonly an imaginary one, engrof- of Rnot.
fed his attention, and those fufpeted of it felt the gainfls ti
whole weight of his .authority. Many persons, Iing.
neither extremely old nor wretchedly poor, which
were usually held to be certain indications of this
crime, but malters of families , and matrons of a
decent rank, and in the middle age of life, were
seized and tortured. Though their confelfions con.
tained the most absurd and incredible circumstances,
he King's prejudices, those of the clergy and of
the people, conspired in believing their extrava.
pancies, without hesitation, and in punilhing their
persons without mercy. Some of these unhappy
sufferers accused Bothwell of having consulted them
in order to know the time of the King's death,
and of having employed their art, to raise the storms
which had endangered the Queen's life, and had
detained James so long in Denmark. Upon this
evidence, that nobleman was committed to prison.
Histurbulent and haughty spirit could neither submit
ta the rcftraint , nor brook such an indignity.
Hiving gained his keepers, he made his escape,
and imputing the accusation to the artifices of his

B2

3

B o o x enemy, the Chancellor, he aflembled his followers
VIOL under pretence of driving him from the King'scoun.

'91. cils. Being favored by some of the King's attendants

he was admitted by a secret paifage, under cloud ol
night, into the court of the palace of Holy-rood
house. He advanced direcly towards the royal
apartment,but happily, before he entered, the alarm
Mcc. s. was taken, and the doors fbut. While he attempted

to burl open some of them, and to set fire to others
the citizens of Edinburgh had time to run to their
arms, and he escaped with the utmost difficulty;
owing his safety to the darkness of the night, and the
precipitancy with which he fled'.
Is9. He retired towards the north, and the King

having unadvisedly given a commiflion to the
Earl of Huntly, to pursue him and his followers,
with fire and sword, he, under color of execut
ing that commission, gratified his private revenge,
and surrounded the house of the Earl of Murray
rem. . burnt it to the ground, and flew Murray himself

The murder of a young nobleman of such pro
miling virtues, and the heir of the Regent Mur
ray, the darling of the people.' excited univeria
indignation. The citizens of Edinburgh rose ir
a tumultuous manner; and though they were re
frained, by the care of the magistrates. from an)
ai of violence, they threw aside all refpec for the
King and his ministers, and openly insulted and
threatened both. While this mutinous spirit con
tinued, James thought it prudent to withdraw

MelCv. 388. Spotsw. 384.

fromthecity, and fixed his residence for some time B o o i
at Glasgow. There Huntly surrendered himself to viil,
jutlice; and, notwithstanding the atrocioufneLs of his i.i.
crime, and the clamors of the people, the power of
the Chancellor, with whom he was now closely con.
fedcrated, and the King's regard for the memory
of the Duke of Lenox, whose daughter he had
married, not only protected him from the sentence
which such an odious acion merited, but exempted
him even from the formality of a public trial.*.

A flep of much importance was taken, soon after, Presbyte.
with regard to the government of the church. The "" Cburb"

governmert

Clergy had long complained of the encroachments eablishet
male upon their privileges and jurifdiaion by the by lW9.
ats of the parliament one thousand five hundred
and eighty-four, and though these laws bad now
los much of their force, they resolved to petition
the parliament, which was approaching, to repeal
them in form. The juncture for pnlhing such a
measure was well chosen. The King had loft much
olthe public favor by his lenity towards the Popifi
fadion, and fill more by his remissness in pursuing
the murderers of the Earl of Murray. The Chan.
cellor had not only a powerful party of the
courtiers combined against him, but was become
odious to the people, who imputed to him every
false flep in the King's conduct. Bothwell ftiH,
lurked in the kingdom, and being secretly sup.
ported by all the enemies of Maidand's adminif.

Spotfw. 387.

B3

5

B O0 K tration, was ready, every moment, to renew his
vill. audacious enterprises. James, for all these reasons,
tzi. was extremely willing to indulge the Clergy in

their request, and not only conrented to a law,
whereby the ads of one thousand five hundred and
eighty-four were rescinded or explained, but he car.
ried his complaisance fill further, and permitted the
Parliament to eRfablifh the Prebfyterian government,
its General Assemblies, Provincial synods, Prelby.
teries, and Kirk-felfions, with all the different bran.
ches of their discipline and jurifdidion, in the mol
ample manner. All the zeal and authority of the
Clergy, even under the administration of Regents,
from whom they might have expeded the moR
partial favor, could not obtain the fandion of law,
in confirmation of their mode of Ecclefiaflical go.
vernment. No Prince was ever less disposed than
James to approve a system, whose republican genius
inspired a paflion for liberty, so repugnant to his
exalted notions of royal prerogative. Nor could any
aversion be more inveterate than his, to the au.
stere and uncomplying cbaracer of the Prelbyte.
rian Clergy in that age; who, more eminent for
zeal than for policy, often contradided his opi-
nions, and censured his condud, with a freedom
equally offensive to his dogmatism as a Theologian,
and to his pride as a King. His situation, how-
ever, obliged him frequently to conceal, or to dif-
femble his sentiments; and as he often disgusted
his fubjets, by indulging the Popish fadion more
than they approved, he endeavoured to atone for
this by conceflions to the Prelbyterian Clergy,

more liberal than he himself would otherwise have B oo K
hdioL: to grant . Vlll.

Il [his Parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents us:.
were attainted. But he soon made a new attempt to
seize the King at Falkland; and James, betrayed by
some of his courtiers, and feebly defended by others,
who wished well to Bothwell, as the Chancellor's
avowed enemy, owed his safety to the fidelity and
vigilhnce of Sir Robert Melvil, and to the irrefo.
lution of Bothwell's associates'.
Scarcely was this danger over, when the na. A new con
ion was alarmed with the discovery of a new and rhray '"'o
more formidable conspiracy. George Ker, the Lord,.
Lord Newbattle's brother, being seized as he was
ready to set fil for Spain, many suspicious papers
were found in his custody, and among these,
several blanks signed by the Earls of Angus,
Huntly, and Errol. By this extraordinary pre-
caution they hoped to escape any danger of dif-
covery. But Ker's resolution shrinking when
torture was threatened, he confessed that he was
employed by these noblemen. to carry on a nego.
cintion with the King of Spain; that the blanks
fibfcribed with their names were to be filled up
by Crichton and Tyrie; that they were inftrueted
to offer the faithful service of the three Earls to
that Monarch; and to solicit him to land a body
of his troops, either in Galloway, orat the mouth
of Clyde, with which they undertook, in the first
place, to eftablifi the Roman Catholic Religion

Cald. iv. 248. 252. Spotfw. 388. ' Melv. 402,

B4

a o K in Scotland, and then to invade England with the
v1l. whole forces of the kingdom. David Graham ol

.intry, and Barclay of Ladyhand, whom he accufd
of being privy to the confplracy, were taken into
custody, and confirmed all the circumstances ol
his confeflion '.

ms3. The nation having been kept for some time in
ZMolrte continual terror and agitation by so many successive

conspiracies, the discovery of this new danger cow
pleted the panic. All ranks of men, as if the enemy
had already been at their gates, thought themselves
called upon to fiand forth in defence of their country.
The MiniRers of Edinburgh, without waiting forany
warrant from the King, who happened at that time to
be absent from the capital, and without having re.
ceived any legal commiflion, assembled a considerable
number of Peers and Barons, in order to provide an
instant remedy against the impending danger. They
seized the Earl of Angus, and committed him to
the castle; they examined Ker; and prepared 3
remonstrance to be laid before the King, concern.
ing the Rate of the nation; and the necessity of
prosecuting the conspirators with becoming vi.

ga, M gor. James, though jealous of every encroach.
ctdi.g,»f meat on his prerogative, and offended with fob.

. s ~jedts, who, instead of petitioning, seemed to pre-
the. scribe to him, found it necessary, during the vio.

lence of the ferment, not only to adopt their plan,
but even to declare that no consideration should
ever induce him to pardon those who had been

' Rymr, xvi. 190.

guilty of so odious a treason. He summoned the B o o K
jarls of Huntiv and Errol to flrrender themfclves vil.
to justice Graham of Fintry, whom his peers pro- i9sl.
noinced to be guilty of treason, he commanded to Jan. .
be publicly beheaded; and marching into the North
at the head of an army, the two Earls, together
with Angus, who had escaped out of prison, re-
tired to the mountains. He placed garrisons in the
calles which belonged to them; compelled their
vafflls and the Barons in the adjacent counties, to
subscribe a bond containing professions of their loyal-
ty towards him, and of their firm adherence to the
Protestant faith, and, the better to secure the tran-
quility of that part of the kingdom, constituted the
Latls of Athol and Marifchal his Lieutenants there'.

Having finilhed this expedition, James re. March iS.
turned to Edinburgh , where he found Lord Bor. Eliabeth

solicits him

rough. an extraordinary ambassador from the coat
court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at the them wi
discovery of a conspiracy which she confidered as "rior
no lhrf formidable to her own kingdom than to
Scotland, reproached James with his former re.
mifinefs, and urged him, as he regarded the pre.
servation of the Protestant religion, or the dignity
of his own Crown, to punish this repeated treason
with rigor; and if he could not apprehend the
persons. at leaf to confiscate the eflates, of such
audacious rebels. She weakened however the
force of these requests, by interceding at the fame
time in behalf of Bothwell, whom, according to

Spotrw. Jol. Cald. iv. 291.

9

B 0 0 K her usual policy in nourihling a fadious fpiritamong

VIL. the Scottish nobles, mhe had taken under her pro.
1ss3. tedcion. James absolutely refused to liften to any

intercefilon in favor of one, who had so often, and
with so much outrage, insulted both his government
and his person. With regard to the Popilf con.
fpirators, be declared his resolution to prosecute them
with vigor; but that he might be the better able to
do so, he demanded a small fum of money from
Elizabeth, which {he, distrustful perhaps of the
manner in which he might apply it, lhowed no
inclination to grant. The zeal, however, and impor.
tunity of his own fubjeds obliged h.m to call a Parlia.
ment, in order to pass an ad of attainder against the
three Earls. But before it met, Ker made his cfcape
out of prifon,and, on pretence that legal evidence
of their guilt could not be produced, nothing was
concluded against them. The King himself was
universally fufpeded of having contrived this
artifice, on purpose to elude the requests of the
Queen of England, and to disappoint the wilhes of
his own people; and therefore, in order to sooth
the Clergy, who exclaimed loudly against his con-
dud, he gave way to the palling of an ad, which
ordained those who obstinately contemned the
censures of the Church to be declared out-laws'.

Botwlen : While the terror excited by the Popish con-
frtpfirt fpiracy possessed the nation, the court had been

divided by two rival fadions, which contended
for the chief direcion of affairs. At the bead of

' Cald. iv. 343. Spotfw. ;39. ParL ia Jac. VI. c. 1;4.

one, was the Chancellor, in whom the King reposed B o o K
entire collfidence. For that very reason, perhaps, he vII.
hld fallen early under the Queen's displeasure. The ts.
Duke of Lenox, the Earl of Athol, Lord Ochiltree,
and all tle name of Stewart espoused her quarrel, and
widned the breach. James, fond no less ofdomeftic
trniquiility, than of public peace, advised his fa-
vorite to retire, for some time, in hopes that the
Oueen's relentment would subside. But as he
flood in need, in the present juncture, of the aflift-
ance of an able Minister, he had recalled him to
court. In order to prevent him from recovering
his former power, the Stewarts had recourse to an
expedient no less illegal than desperate. Having
combined with Bothwell, who was of the fame
surname, they brought him back secretly into July 24.
Scotland; and seizing the gates of the palace, in.
troduced him into the royal apartment with a nu-
merous train of armed followers. James, though
drferted by all his courtiers, and incapable of re.
fitance, discovered more indignation than fear,
and reproaching them for their treachery, called
on the Earl to finifl his treasons, by piercing his
Sovereign to the heart. But Bothwell fell on his
knees, and implored pardon. The King was not
in a condition to refuse his demands. A few
days after he signed a capitulation with this fuc-
cefftil traitor, to whom he was really a prisoner,
whereby he bound himself to grant him a remif-
sion for all past offences, and to procure the rati-
fication of it in Parliament; ard in the mean
time to difinifs the Chancellor, the master of Gla-

1I

o o K mis, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, from his
vlll. councils and presence. Bothwell, on his part, con.
1ssi sented to remove from court, though he left there

as many of his associates as he thought sufficient to
prevent the return of the adverse facion.

He rtcofn But it was now.no easy matter to keep the King
Ls ' under the fame kind of bondage, to which he had

been often subjed during hisminority. Hedifcovered
so much impatience to ihake off his fetters, that those
who bad imposed, dlurft not continue, the restraint.
They permitted him to call a Convention of the
nobles at Stirling, and to repair thither himself. All
Bothwell's enemies, and all who were desirous of
gaining the King's favor by appearing to be so,
obeyed the summons. They pronounced the insult
offered to the King's person and authority to be
high treason, and declared him absolved from any
obligation to observe conditions extorted by force,
and which violated so essentially his royal prero.
gative. James, however, still proffered him a
pardon, provided he would sue for it as an aa of
mercy, and promise to retire out of the kingdom.
Theef conditions Bothwell rejeded with dildain,
and betaking himself once more to arms, at-
tempted to surprise the King; but finding him
on his guard, fled to the borders ".

srir of The King's ardor against Bothwell, compared
&wit with his flow and evasive proceedings against the

.N* Popili Lords, occasioned a general disgust among

his fubjecs ; and was imputed either to an

' Cald. iv. ;26. Spotfw. 39;.

cxceflive attachment to the persons of those con- B o o
fpiratcrs, or to a secret partiality towards their vm.
opinions; both which gave rife to no unreasonable U9s.
fears. Ihe Clergy, as the immediate guardians of Sept. s.
the Protestant Religion, thought themselves bound,
in such a jundture, to take extraordinary steps for
its preservation. The provincial fynod of Fife
happening to meet at that time, a motion was
made to excommunicate all concerned in the late
conspiracy, as obstinate and irreclaimable Papists;
and though none of the conspirators resided within
the bounds of the fynod, or were subjet to its jurif-
didion, such was the zeal of the members, that,
overlooking this irregularity, they pronounced
against them the sentence of excommunication, to
which the ac of last parliament added new terrors.
Left this Ihould be imputed to a few men, and
accounted the at of a small part of the church, depu-
ties were appointed to attend the adjacent synods,
and to desire their approbation and concurrence..

An event happened; a few weeks after, which Hit tuitT
increased the people's suspicions of'the King. As towards
he was marching on an expedition against the bor- thE"
derers, the three Popilh Earls coming suddenly
into his pretence, offered to submit themselves to
a legal trial; and James, without committing
them to custody, appointed a day for that pur-
pose. They prepared to appear with a formidable
train of their friends and vassals. But, in the mean
time, the Clergy, together with many Peers and
Barons, assembling at Edinburgh, remonltrated
against the King's extreme indulgence with great

13

B o gK boldness, and demanded of him, according to the

vill. regular course of jullice, to commit to furecuftody
SM3. persons charged with the highest ads of treason,

who could not be brought to a legal trial, until they
were absolved from the censures of the Church;
and to call a Convention of estates, to deliberate
concerning the method of proceeding against them.
At the fame time they offered to accompany him
in arms to the place of trial, left such audacious
and powerful criminals should overawe justice, and
ditdate to the judges to whom they pretended to
submit. James, though extremely offendedboth with
the irregularity of their proceedings, and the
presumption of their demands, found it expedient
to put off the day of trial, and to call a Convention
of estates, in order to quiet the fears and jealousies of
the people. By being humored in this point, their
suspicions began gradually to abate, and the
Chancellor managed the Convention so artfully ,that
he himself, together with a few other members, was
impowered to pronounce a final sentence upon the
Key. 5& conspirators. After much deliberation, they ordained,

that the three Earls, and their associates, flould be
exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution, on
account of their correspondence with Spain; that,
before the firt day of February, they lhould either
submit to the Church, and publicly renounce the
errors of Popery, or remove out of the kingdom; that,
before the firt of January, they /hould declare which
of these alternatives they would embrace; that
they should find surety for their peaceable de.
meanour for the future; and that if they failed to
14

inify their choice in due time, they should lose B o o K
the bentfit of this ad of abolition, and remain vlim.
txpofed( to all the pains of law ".

By this lenity towards the conspirators, James 1,4.
incurred much reproach, and gained no advantage.
Devoted to the Popifli fuperfRition, submissive to
all the dictates of their priests, and buoyed up
with hopes and promises of foreign aid, the three
Earls refufet to accept of the conditions, and
continued their treasonable correspondence with
the court of Spain. A Convention of estates pro. Jan. is.
nounced them to have forfeited the benefit of the
articles which were offered; and the King re.
quired them, by proclamation, to surrender them.
selves to juflice. The presence of the Englilh
ambassador contributed, perhaps, to the vigor
of these proceedings. Elizabeth, ever attentive
to James's motions, and imputing his reluctance
to puniflh the Popish Lords to a secret approba-
tion of their designs, had sent Lord Zouche to
represent, once more, the danger to which he ex-
pofel himself, by this faire moderation; and to
require him to exercise that rigor, which their
crimes, as well as the posture of affairs, rendered
nccefary. Though the steps now taken by the
Kiing lilenced all complaints on that head, yet
Zouche, forgetful of his character as an ambaffa-
lor, entered into private negociations with such of
the Scottiflh nobles as disapproved of the King's
neafures, and held almost an open correspondence
with Bothwell, who, according to the usual arti-

Cald. iv. 33o. Spotfw. 397.

15

ooK fice of malecontents. pretended much fol;citude
vili. for reforming the disorders of the commonwealth;
Is4. and covered his own ambition with the specious

veil of zeal against those Counsellors who re.
strained the King from pursuing the avowed ene
mies of the Proteltant faith. Zouche encouraged
him, in the name of his MiRfrefs, to take arms
against his Sovereign.

A wat- Meanwhile, the King and the Clergy were filled
tmpt of
B.okudr with mutual distrust of each other. They were

jealous, perhaps, to excess, that James's affeions
leaned too much towards the Popish fafion;he
fufpeded them, without good reason, of prompting
Bothwell to-rebel:ion, and even of supplying him
with money for that purpose. Little instigation,
indeed, was wanting to route such a turbulent spirit
as Bothwells, to any daring enterprise. He appeared
suddenly within a mile of Edinburgh, at the head of
four hundred horse. The pretences, by which he
tndeavoured to justify this infurredion, were
extremely popular; zeal for religion, enmity to
Popery, concern for the King's honor, and for the
liberties of the nation. James was totally unprovided
for his own defence; he had no infantry, and was
accompanied only with a few horsemen of Lord
Home's train. In this extremity, he implored the aid
of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in order to en.
courage them to ad with zeal, he promised to
proceed against the 'Popish Lords with the utmost
rigor of law. Animated by their Ministers, the
citizens ran cheerfully to their arms. and ad-
vanced, with the King at their head, against

Bothwell;

Bothwell; but he, notwithstanding his fuccels in B o0 0 t
putting to flight Lord Home , who had rashly viil.
chrgcd him with a far inferior number of cavalry, IsS,
redired to Dalkeith without daring to attack the
king. His followers abandoned him soon after, and,
difeouriged by so many successive disappointments,
could never afterwards be brought to venture into
thefield. He betook himself to his usual lurking.
places in the North of England; but Elizabeth, in
compliance with the King's remonstrances, obliged
him to quit that retreat ".

No sooner was the king delivered from one Fresh dI-
danger, than he was called to attend to another. rq fron
The 'opifl Lords, in consequence of their nego- Lorda.
ciations with Spain, received, in the spring, a Apli3.
supply of money from Philip. What bold designs
this might inspire, it was no easy matter to con-
jedure. From men under the dominion of bi-
gotry, and whom indulgence could not reclaim,
the mo(l desperate acions were to be dreaded.
The assembly of the Church immediately took the
alarm; remonstrated against them with more bit.
ternefs than ever; and unanimoully ratified the
fenrence of excommunication pronounced by the
fynod of Fife. James himself, provoked by their
obflinacy and ingratitude, and afraid that his long
forbearance would not only be generally difpleaf.
ing to his own fubjets, but give rife to unfavor-
able suspicions among the Englilh, exerted himself
with unusual vigor. He called a Parliament; laid June a

" Spotfwv. 4. Cald. iv. 3(9.
VoL. Ill, C

17

a o o x before it all the circumRances and aggravations ot

VIIL the conspiracy; and though there were but few
s9. members present, and several of these connected

with the conspirators by blood or friendship, he
prevailed on them, by his influence and importunity
to pronounce the mot rigorous sentence which
the law can inflict They were declared to be
guilty of high treason, and their estates and honors
forfeited. At the fame time, statutes, more severe
than ever, were enated against the profefiors of
the Popish religion.

satde or How to put this sentence in execution, was a
GiCliM. matter of great difficulty. Three powerful Barons,

cantoned in a part of the country of difficult acces,
surrounded with numerous valfals, and supported
by aid from a foreign Prince, were more than an
overmatch for a Scottlib Monarch. No entreaty could
prevail on Elizabeth to advance the money, nec.
fary for defraying the expenses of an expedition
against them. To attack them in person, with his
own forces alone, might have exposed James both
to disgrace and to danger. He had recourse to the
only expedient which remained in such a situation,
for aiding the impotence of Sovereign authority; he
delegated his authority to the Earl of Argyll and
Lord Foi bes, the leaders of two clans at enmity
with the conspirators; and gave them a commillion
to invade their lands. and .o seize the carles which
belonged to them. Bothwell, notwithstanding all
his high pretensions ofzeal for the Protetant religion,
having now entered into a close confederacy with
them, the danger became every day more urging.

Argyll, solicited by the King, and roused by the B o O
Clergy, took the field at the head of seven thousand vllI.
men. Huntly and Errol met him at Glenlivat, with an .;».
army far inferior ill number, but composed chiefly of
ntctlemen of the low countries, mounted on horse-
b.ck, and who brought along with them a train
of lield pieces. They encountered each othir with Oc.
1ll the fury which hereditary enmity and ancient
irvallhip add to undisciplined courage. But the s«i.
Highllnderb, difconlcerted by the sirs difharge of
the cainnon, to which they were little accustomed,
and unable to resist the imprcflion of cavalry, were
soon put to flight; and Argyll, a gallant young
man of eighteen, was carried by his friends out of
the field, weeping with indignation at their dis.
grace, and calling on them to stand, and to vindicate
the honor of their name "

On the firfl intelligence of this defeat, James,
though obliged to pawn his jewels in order to raise
money ", iffembled a finall body of troops, and
marched towards the North. He was joined by the
Iriotes, Keiths, Leflys, Forbeses, and other cans at
cnmity with -luntly and Errol, who having loft
Ltvical of their principal followers at Glenlivat, and
others rcfuting to bead arms against the King in
ptrflo, were obliged to retire to the mountains.
J.incs waited their lands; put garrisons in some of
tlhir caliles ; bunt others; and left the Duke of
Lenox al his Lieutenant in that part of the kingdom,
with a body of men fuflicient to'reflrain them from
"Ca!d. iv. 4og. " fhitch, lem. i. i86.

C G

19

0 o o K gathering to any head there, or from infeRing the
viii. low country. Reduced at lai to extreme diftref by
zsgm. the rgor of the season, and the desertion of their fol.

lowers, they obtained the King's permilfion to go
beyond seas, and gave security that they (hould

Ppi. h neither return without his licence, norengagein any
Lodr fisr'h new intrigues againlt the Protefant religion, or the
Imdom. peace of the kingdom

By their exile, tranquillity wasre-eftablilhed in the

North of Scotland; and the firmness and vigor which
James had displayed in his las proceedings against
them, regained him, in a great degree,the confidence

The soun of his Proteflant fubjeds. But he funk, in the fame
Catholics proportion, and for the fame reason, in the esteem
.gin.t of the Roman Catholics. They had asserted his
Jaes. mother's right to the Crown of England with so much

warmth, that they could not, with any decency, reject
his; and the indulgence, with which he affeced to
treat the profefTors of that religion, inspired them
·with such hopes, that they viewed his accellion to
the throne as no undesirable event But the rigor with
which the King had lately pursued the confpira.
tors, and the severe statutes against Popery to
which he had given his consent, convinced them
that these hopes were visionary; and they begaa
to look about in quest of some new fucceilor,
whose rights they might oppose to his. The Pa.
p;fts who resided in England turned their eyes
towards the Earl of Eflex, whole generous mind,
though firmly eftablihed in the Protestant faith,

" Spotfw, 404. Cdd. 373, &c.

abhorred the fcverities infliCted in that age on ac- o o
cots t of religious opinions. Those of the fame seCt, vil.
xho were in exile, formed a bolder scheme, and igs,
on rore suitable to their situation. 'lheyadvanced
the claim of the infanta of Spain; and Parsons the
Jcfuit publifled a book, in which, by false quotations
from hflory, by fabulous genealogies, and absurd
argiumcnts, intermingled with bitter invectives
apainit the ling of Scots, he endeavoured to prove
the Infanta's title to the Englilh Crown to be pre.
ftrable to his. Philip, though involved already in
a war both with France and England, and scarce
able to defend the remains of the Burgundian pro.
vinces against the Dutch commonwealth, eagerly
grasped at this airy project. The dread of a Spanilh
Pretender to the Crown, and the opposition which
the Papists began to form against the King's fuc-
cellion, contributed not a little to remove the
prejudices of the Protestants, and to prepare the
wJy for that event.

Bothwe!l, whose name has been so often mentioned nothwetl
as the ditlurber of the King's tranquillity and of the forced o
"

into Sltain.

peace of the kingdom, was now in a wretched con-
dition. Abandoned by the Queen of England, on ac.
count of his confederacy with the Popish Lords; ex-
communicated by the Church for the fame reason; and
deserted, in his distress, by his own followers; he was
obliged to fly for safety to France, and thence to Spain
and Italy, where, after renouncing theProteftant faith,
heled many years an obscure and indigent life, remar-
kable only for a low and infamous debauchery. The
Kigg, though extremely ready to sacrifice the strong-

C 3

nO K eRl resentment to the flightelt acknnwledgments6
11l1 could never be softened by his submission, nor be
sss. induced to liften to any intercefflon in his behalf"

This year the King loft Chancellor Maitlandi

an able Minister, on whom he had lone devolved
the whole weight of public affair.. As Jame!
loved him while alive, he wrote, in honor of hi!
memory, a copy of verres, which, when crn.
pared with the compoGitions of that age, are fa
from being inelegant ".

A c. i. Soon after his death, a considerable change was
ku'.ni. made in the adminitration. At that time, the annual

charges of government far exceeded the King's re
venues. The Queen was' fond of expensive amufek
ments. James himself was a stranger to Economy,
It became necefflry, for all these reasons, to levy
the public revenues with greater order and rigor
and to husband them with more care. This import
ant trust was committed to eight gentlemen of the
law ", who, from their number, were caller
Ocaatmins. The powers veiled in them were ample
add almoRf unlimited. The King bound himsel
neither to add to their number, nor to supply an)
vacancy that might happen, without their consent
And knowing the facility of his own temper, agreue
that no alienation of his revenue, no grant of;

" Winw. Mem. i. Spotfw .

41 Id. 41r.

" Alexander Seaton President ofthe Seflion, WalterStewar

Commendator of Blantyre Lord Privy Seal, David Carnme
John Lindsay, James Elphingfton, Thomas Hamilton, Jobh
Sken Clerk Regiser, and Peter Young Elemofynar.

perrion, or order on the trenfury, should be held Boo
vji.l, unles it were ratified by the fibfcription of viii.
five of the commifiioners; all their ads and decisions s,.
vere declared to be of equal force with the sentence
ofjlldges in civil courts; and in consequence ofthem,
a:ul without any other warrant, any person might be
arrmfted, or their goods seized. Such extensive jurif.
dl;don, together with the absolute disposal of the
public money, drew the whole executive part of the
government into their hands. United among them.
fclves, they gradtally undermined the reft of the
KIing's Ministers, and fcized on every lucrative or
honorable office. The ancient servants of the Crown
repined at being obliged to quit their Rations to
new men. The favorites and young courtiers mur. Iss
mured at fceing the Ki:g's liberality flinted by their
prescriptions. And the Clergy exclaimed against
some of them as known apostates to Popery, and
fufpeded others of secretly favoring it. They re-
tained their power, however, notwithstanding this
general combination against them; and they owed
it entirely to the order and economy which they
introduced into the adminifiration of the finances,
by which the necessary expenses of government
were more easily defrayed than in any other period
of tle King's reign ".

The rumor of valf preparations which Philip Vinlenceof
wai said to be carrying on at this time, filled both the n°aton
England and Scotland with the dread of a new Popish
invaion. James took proper measures for the Lod
' Spotfw. 41. 435.

C4

23

B o o K defence of his kingdom. But these did not faisfy the
vwll. zeal of the Clergy, whose suspicions of the King's
iss. sincerity began to revive; and as he had permitted

the wives of the baniffed Peers to levy the rents
of their estates, and to live in their hoifes, they
charged him with rendering the'aa of forfeiture
ineffectual by supporting the avowed enemies of
lam4- the Protestant faith. The assembly of the Church

took under consideration the fate of the Kingdom,
and having appointed a day of public salting, they
iolemnly renewed the Covenant, by which the
nation was bound to adhere to the Protelfant faith,
and to defend it against all aggressors. A committee,
confiling of the most eminent Clergymen, and of
many Barons and gentlemen of diftincion, waited
on the King, and laid before him a plan for the fecuri.
ty of the kingdom, and the preservation of religion.
They urged him to appropriate the eRlates of the ba.
nilbed Lords as a fund for the maintenance of
soldiers; to take the ftrideft precautions for pre.
venting the return of such turbulent fubjecls into
the country; and to purrue all who were fufpeed
of being their adherents with the utmost rigor.

TheTiift Nothing could be more repugnant to the

-mifibs King's schemes, or more disagreeable to his in-

Wibh regard
eothe. clination, than there propositions. Averse, through

his whole life, to any course where he expected
opposition or danger; and fond of attaining his
ends with the character of moderation, and by
the arts of policy, he observed with concern the
prejudices against him which were growing among
the Roman Catholics, and resolved to make some

atonement for that part of his conduct which had nooK
drawvn upon him their indignation. Elizabeth was VllI.
now well advanced in years; herlife had lately been is.;
il, dalger; if any PopllsJ competitor should arise to
dispute his right of fuccellon, a faction so powerful
a; that of the baninled Lords might be extremely for-
midable; and any division among his own fubjeds
miglht prove fatal at a juncure which would require
their united and most vigorous efforts. Instead, there-
fore, of the additional severities which the Assembly
propoecd, James had thoughts of mitigating the
punilhnent which they already suffered. And as they
were surrounded, during their rcfidence in foreign
parts, by Philip's emissaries; as resentment might dif.
pose them to liften more favorably than ever to
their suggestions; as despair might drive them to
fiAll more atrocious ations; he resolved to recal
them, under certain conditions, into their native
country. Encouraged by these sentiments of the
King in their favor, of which they dil not want
intelligence, and wearied already of the dependent
aid anxious life of exiles , they ventured to return
secretly into Scotland. Soon after, they presented
a petition to the King, begging his permiflion to
reside at their own houses, and offering to give
security for their peaceable and dutiful behaviour.
James called a Convention of estates to deliberate
on a matter of such importance, and by their
advice he granted the petition.

As soon as they were informed of this, the The -tL
members of a committee, appointed by the last ofith'
General Assembly, met at Edinburgh, and with Clergy a.

, eoplc.

o o x all the precipitancy of fear, and of zeal, took
vTL. such resolutions as they thought necessary for the
AISK. safety of the kingdom. They wrote circular letters to

all the Prelbyteries in Scotland; they warned them
of the approaching danger; they exhorted them to
stir up their people to the defence of their just rights;
they commanded them to publish, in all their pulpits,
the ad excommunicating the Popilh Lords; and
enjoined them to lay all those who were fufpeded of
favoring Popery under the fame censure by a
summary sentence, and without observing the usual
formalities of trial. As the danger seemed too prcf.
sing to wait for the stated meetings of the judica.
tories of the Church, they made choice of the
moRs eminent Clergymen in different corners of
the kingdom, apointed them to reside conflantly
at EdiRburgh, and to meet every day with the
MiniRers of that city, under the name of the
Standinq Council of the chu;rch, and vefRed in this
body the supreme authority, by enjoining it, in
imitation of the ancient Roman form, to take care
that the Church Ihould receive no detriment.

These proceedings, no less unconstitutional

than unprecedented, were manifest encroachments
on the royal prerogative, and bold steps towards
open rebellion. The King's condudt, however,
justified in some degree such excesses. His lenity
towards the Papists, so repugnant to the princi.
ples of that age; his pardoning the confpiratorc,
notwirhftanding repeated promises to the contrary;
the refped he paid to Lady Huntly, who was at.
tached to the Romilh religion no less than her

huooandi; his committing the care of his daughter, B o o K
the Princcri l izabeth, to Lady Levingflon, who vil.
wvinfectfed with the fame superstition; the contempt li9ó.
with which he talked, on all occasions, both of the
charader of Minilters, and of their ftndtion; were
circumlbnces which might have filled minds, not
prnie by nature to jealousy, with some suspicions;
and might have precipitated into ralh councils those
who were far removed from intemperate zeal. But,
however powerful the motives might be which
influenced the Clergy, or however laudable the end
they had in view, they conducted their measures
wi;h no address, and even with little prudence. James
discovered a strong inclination to avoid a rupture
with the Church, and, jealous as he was of his
prerogative, would willingly have made many
concellions for the fake of peace. By his command,
some of the Privy Counsellors had an interview with
the more moderate among the Clergy, and inquired
whether Huntly and his associates might not, upon
making proper acknowledgments, be again re-
ceived into the bosom of the Church, and be ex-
empted from any further punilhment on account
of their patl apoflacy and treasons. They replied,
that though the gate of mercy stood always open
for those who repented and returned i yet as these
noblemen had been guilty of idolatry, a crime
deserving death both by the law of God and of
min, the civil magistrate could not legally grant
them a pardon; and even though the Church
Itildlabfolve them, it was his duty to inflic pu.
ni1fiment upon them. This inflexibility in those

a o o who were reckoned the most compliant of the or.

VIIL der, filled the King with indignation, which the
as.* imprudence and obstinacy of a private Clergyman

heightened into rage.

Mr. David Black, Minister at St Andrew's

oai;e discoursing in one of his sermons, according to
taught by custom, concerning the state of the nation, affirmed

that the King had permitted the Popifb Lords to
return into Scotland, and by that ation bad
discovered the treachery of his Own heart; that all
Kings were the Devil's children; that Satan had now
the guidance of the court; that the Queen of England
was an atheist; that the judges were miscreants and
bribers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the
Privy Counsellors cormorants, and men of no
religion i and in his prayer for the Queen he used

. ,, these words, we must pray for her for falbion-fake,
Te atmg but we have no cause, Ibe will never do us good.
**orM& James commanded him to be summoned before the

Privy Council, to answer for such seditious
exprefllons; and the Clergy, inflead of abandoning
him to the punilbment which such a petulant and
criminal attack on his superiors deserved, were so
imprudentas to espouse his caufe,as if it had been the
common one of the whole order. The controversy
concerning the immunities of the pulpit, and the
rights of the Clergy to testify against vices of
every kind, which had been agitated in one thou.
sand five hundred and eighty-four, was now re.
vived. It was pretended that, with regard to
their sacred function, Ministers were subjed to
the Church alone; that it belonged only to theit

ecclefiatical superiors to judge of the truth or B o 0
falfiood of doctrines delivered in the pulpit; that if, v1 f
upon any pretence whatever, the King usurped this W"'
jurifdi&iion, the Church would, from that moment,
fink under servitude to the civil magiftiate; that,
inflead of reproving vice with that honet boldness
which had often been of advantage to individuals,
andfalutary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn
to flatter the pallions of the Prince, and to connive
at the vices of others; that the King's eagerness to
punioh the indiscretion of a Protestant Minitler,
while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of Popish
conspirators, called on them to stand upon their
guard, and that now was the time to contend for
their privileges, and to prevent any encroachment
on those rights, of which the Church had been in
poeffeioa ever since the Reformation. Influenced
by these considerations, the Council of the Church
enjoined Black to decline the jurisdiCtion of the
Privy Council. Proud of such an oppotunity to
display his zeal, he presented a paper to that pur.
pose, and with the utmost firmness refused to plead,
or to answer the questions which were put to him.
In order to add greater weight to these proceed.
ing, the Council of the Church transmitted the
itinaturt to all the Prefbyteries throughout the
kingdom, and enjoined every Minilter to sub-
cribe it in teflimony of his approbation.
James defended his rights with no less vigor
than they were attacked. Sensible of the con.
tempt under which his authority must fall, if the
Clergy hould be pormattCd publicly, and wiJi

89

0 K impunity, to calumniate his Ministers, and eved
rll. to censure himcife, and knowing, by former ex.
s~,. amples, what unequal reparation for such offences

he might expeC from the judicatories of the Church,
he urged on the inquiry into Black's condus, and
ifued a proclamation, commanding the Members of
the Council of the Church to leave iidinburgh, and
to return to their own parilhes. Black, instead of
submitting, renewed his ddlinatre i and the members
of the Council, in defiance of the proclamation, de.
dared, that as they met by the authority of the
Church, obedience to it was a duty fill more sacred
than that which they owed to the King himself. The
Privv Council, notwithstanding Black's refuting to
plead, proceeded in the trial; and, after a solemn
inquiry, pronounced him guilty of the crimes of
which, he had been accused; but referred it to the
King to appoint what punilfment he lhould luffer.

Meanwhile, many endeavonrs were used to

bring matters to accommodation. Almost every
day produced some new scheme of reconcile.
peent; but through the King's fickleneft, the
obstinacy of the Clergy, or the intrigues of the
courtiers, they all proved ineffetual. Both par.
ties appealed to the people, and by reciprocal and
exaegerated accusations endeavoured to rendn
each other odious. Insolence, sedition, treason,
were the crimes with which James charged the
Clergy; while they made the pulpits resound with
complaints of his excessive lenity towards Papist,
and of the no les- exeffive rigor with which he
oppressed. the -eftabhihcd Church. ExIperated

31

by their bold invedives, he, at las, sentenced B O O X
Black to retire beyond the river Spey, and to Vlil.
reside there during his pleasure; and once more zss.
commanding the members of the flanding Coun-
cil to depart from Edinburgh, he required all the
liniRfers in the kingdom to subscribe a bond,
obliging themselves to submit, in the fame man-
ner as other fubjeds, to the jurifdidion of the
civil courts in matters of a civil nature.

1his decisive measure excited all the violent A tumlt't
palions which poffcfs disappointed factions; and , ut'.
deeds no less violent immediately followed. These
muftbe imputed in part to the artifices of some cour-
ctrs, who expeted to reap advantage from the cala-
mities of their country, or who hoped to lessen the
authority of the Odlavians, by engaging them in
holtilities with the church. On one hand, they in.
formed the King that the citizens of Edinburgh were
under arms every night, and had planted a strong
guard round the houses of their ministers. James, in
order to put a flop to this imaginary insult on his
government, issued a proclamation, commanding
twenty-four of the principal citizens to leave the town
within fix hours. On the other band, they wrote to
the \lnifters, advising them to look to their own
safety, as Huntly had been secretly admitted to an
interview with the King, and had been the authorof
the severe proclamation aiainft the citizens of
Edinburgh ". They doubted no more of the truth

" Though matters were industriously aggravated by perfonr,
sho wilhed bout parties to pursue violent measures neither of

o 0 x of this intelligence, than the Kinghad done ofthat
VIIL which he received, and fell as blindly into the snare.
ass. IThe letter came to their hands ju[t as one of their

number was going to mount the pulpit. They re.
solved that he should acquaint the people of their
Dm~. 17. danger: and he painted it with all the trong colors

which men naturally employ in describing any
dreadful and instant calamity. When the sermon was
over, he desired the nobles and gentlemen to assemble
in the Little Church The whole multitude, terrified at
what they had heard, crowded thither; they promised
and vowed to fland by the Clergy; they drew up a
petition to the King, craving the redress of those
grievances, of which the Church complained, and be.
feeching him to deliver them from all future ap.
prehensions of danger, by removing such of his
Counsellors as were known to be enemies of the
Protestant religion Two Peers, two Gentlemen,
two Burgefles, and two Ministers, were appointed
rT KiI to present it. The King happened to be in the

great hall of the Tolbooth, where the court of
session was fitting. The manner in which the
petition was delivered, as well as its contents,
offended him. He gave a haughty reply; the
petitioners infifed with warmth; and a promif.
cuous multitude pressing into the room, James

these reports was altogeth(r destitute of foundation. As their
Mlinifters were fuDpofed to be in danger, some of the more
zealous citizens had determined to defend them by force of
arms. Birch. Mem. ii. 2;o. Huntly had been privately in
Edinburgh, where he had an interview, if not with the King,
at leaf with some of his Ministers. Birch. Ibid. 2lo

retired

retired abruptly into another apartment, and a o O
commanded the gates to be Ihut behind him. The vill.
deputies returned to the multitude, who were still issL
lffembled, and to whom a Minister had been read.
ing, in their absence, the story of Haman. When
they reported that the King had refused to lifen
to their petitions, the Church was filled in a mo.
meot with noise, threatenings, execrations, and
all the outrage and confusion of a popular tumult.
Some called for their arms, some to bring out the
wicked Haman; others cried, The sword of the
Lord and of Gideon; and, ru/hing out with the
moR furious impetuosity, surrounded the Tol-
booth, threatening the King himself, and demand.
ing some of his Counsellors, whom they named,
that they might tear them in pieces. The ma.
iltrates of the city, partly by authority, partly
by force, endeavoured to quell the tumult; the
King attempted to sooth the malecontents, by
promising to receive their petitions, when pre.
rented in a regular manner; the Ministers, sensible
of their own raflnefs in kindling fich a flame, fe-
conded both; and the rage of the populace sub-
fiding as suddenly as it had risen, they all dispersed,
and the King returned to the palace; happy in
having escaped from an infurredion, which,
though the instantaneous and unconcerted effed
of popular fury, had exposed his life to imminent
danger, and was confidered by him as an unpar-
donable affront to his authority ".

" Spotfw. 47, &c. Cald. v. 54, &c. Birch Mem.i. . 5.
VOL. III. D

33

OOK As soon as he retired, the leaders of the male.
vll. contents aflembled, in order to prepare their peti.
i56. tion. The punilbment of the Popilh Lords; the

removal of those Counsellors who were fufpeced
of favoring their persons or options; the repeal
of all the late ads of council, subversive of the
authority of the Church; together with an ad ap.
proving the proceedings of the flanding council,
were the chief of their demands. But the King's
indignation was fill so high, that the deputies;
chosen for this purpose, durst not venture that night
to present requests which could not fail of kindling

He leae, his rage anew. Before next morning, James, with all
Edi"br . his attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; thefeflion,
with ree- and other courts of juflice, were required to leave a
ritapiai city where it was no longer confiflent either with
thcdttcn. __ ., _ .
d.d

their safety, or their dignity to remain; and the
noblemen and barons were commanded to return to
their own houses, and not to reassemble without the
King's permiflion. The vigor with which the King
ated, struck a damp upon the spirits of his adversaries.
The citizens, sensible how much they would susser
by his absence, and the removal of the courts of
justice, repented already of their condu& The
Miniters alone resolved to maintain the contelt.
They endeavoured to prevent the nobles from dif.
perfing; they inflamed the people by violent in.
vecives against the King; they labored to pro.
cure subscriptions to an association for their mu-
tual defence; and conscious what lustre and
power the junftion of some of the greater nobles
would add to their cause, the Ministers of Edin.

35

burgh wrote to Lord Hamilton, that the people, oo K
moved by the word of God, and provoked by the vill.
injuries offered to the Church, had taken arms; ,sir.
that many of the nobles had determined to pro.
tedt the Protestant religion, which owed its eflab.
liiment to the piety and valor of their ancestors;
that they wanted only a leader to unite them, and to
inspire them with vigor; that his zeal for the good
cause, no less than his noble birth, entitled him to
that honor: They conjured him, therefore, not to
disappoint their hopes and withes, nor to refuse the
suffering Church that aid which the so much needed.
Lord Hamilton, instead, of complying with their
desire, carried the letter direaly to the King, whom
this new insult irritated to such a degree, that he
commanded the magistrates of Edinburgh intantly
to seize their Ministers, as manifest incendiaries,
and encouragers of rebellion. The magistrates, in
order to regain the King's favor, were preparing to
,obey: and the Ministers, who saw no other hope
offafety, fled towards England ".
This unsuccessful insurrection, instead of over- The Kig
turning, eflablilhed the King's authority. Those humbl,,Oth
concerned in it were confounded and dispersed. Charcb.
The reft of James's fubjcts, in order to avoid J"' 3
lufpicion, or to gain his favor, contended who
lould be most forward to execute his vengeance.
A Convention of estates being called, pronounced
the late infurreacion to be high treason; ordained
wvery Minister to subscribe a dqclaration of his

Spotfl. 451. Cald. v. 126.

o o K fubmiflion to the King's jurifdi&ion, in all mat.
vT . ters civil and criminal; impowered magistrates to
*'n7 commit, instantly, to prison any MiniRer, who,

in his sermons, mfould utter any indecent refletions
on the King's condud; prohibited any Ecclcfiafticaj
judicatory to meet without the King's licence;
commanded that no person flould be eleted a
magiltrate of Edinburgh, for the future, withou
the King's approbation; and that, in the meat
time, the present magistrates fbould either difcove
and inflid condign puniflment on the authors o
the late tumult, or the city itself flould be sub
jeded to all the penalties of that treasonable action"

Abrine Armed with the authority of these decrees
t Pr"i. James resolved to cruib entirely the mutinous fpi
ciizn, of rit of his fubjeds. As the Clergy had, hitherto, de
E~id . rived their chief credit and strength from the f

vor and zeal of the citizens of Edinburgh, his fid
care was to humble them. Though the magistrate
submitted to him in the moRs abjed terms; thougl
they vindicated tbemfelves, and their fellow.cit
zens, from the most ditant intention of violatin:
his royal person or authority; though, after th
ftrideft scrutiny, no circumstances that could si
on them the suspicion of premeditated rebellio
had been discovered; though many of the nobles
and such of the clergy as still retained any degr
of favor, interceded in their behalf; neither a,
knowledgments, nor intercessions,. were of td
l,.. lear avail'. The King continued inexorable, d

*" Cald. 1. 147.

" Cald. v. r49.

city was declared to have forfeited its privileges as a B 0 0 K
corporation, and to be liable to all the penalties of vnl.
treason. 'he capital of the kingdom, deprived of ,,,.
mageifrates, deserted by its ministers, abandoned
by the courts ofjultice, and proscribed by the Kihg,
remained in desolation and despair. The courtiers
even threatened to rafe'the city to the foundation,
and to ered a pillar where it flood as an everlasting
monument of the King's vengeance, and of the guilt
of its inhabitants. At last, in compliance with Eli.
zabeth, who interposed in their favor, and moved
by the continual solicitations of the nobles, James uarch i.
absolved the citizens from the penalties of law, *but
at the fame time he stripped them of their most im-
portant privileges; they were neither allowed to
ele their own magistrates, nor their own ministers;
many new burdens were inpofed on them; and a
great fum of money was exated by way of peace-
offering.

James was, meanwhile, equally assiduous, and
no less successful, in circumscribing the jurifdi&ion
of the Church. Experience had discovered that to "ev ,*-
attempt this, by ads of parliament, and fetitences the Church.
of privy council, was both ineffelual- and odious.
He had recourse now to an expedient more artfut,
and better calculated for obtaining his end: The
EcclefiaRlical judicatories were composed of many
members; the majority of the Clergy were. ex.
tremely indigent, andunprovided of legal' fipends;
the ministers in the neighbourhood of Edinbiorgh,

Spotss. 414, 44.

37

B o o K notw;thftanding the parity eftablihed by the Pref.
rIIL byterian government, had aurumed a leading in the
*sn. Church, which filled their brethren with envy;

every numerous body of men is susceptible of sudden
and strong impreflions, and liable to be influenced
corrupted, or overawed. Induced by thref coo.
fiderations, James thought it possible to gain the
Clergy, whom he had in vain attempted to fubduc
Proper agents were set to work all over the kingdom;
promises, flattery, and threats were employed; the
tf~rpation. of the brethren near the capital were
aggravated; the jealousy of their power, which
was growing in the distant provinces, was aug.
mented; and two different General Assemblies were
held, in both which, notwithbtanding the zeal and
boldness wherewith a few leading Clergymen de
fended the privileges of the Church,' a majority
declared in favor of those measures which were
agreeable to the King. Many practices, which had
tontinued fioce the Reformation, were condemnedc
many points of discipline, which had hitherto beea
reckoned sacred and uncontroverted, were giver
up; the licence, with which ministers difcourfedol
political matters, was restrained; the freedom witt
which they inveighed against particular persons
censured; sentences of summary excommunicatior
declared unlawful; the convoking a General Asem
bly, without the Kings permiflion., prohibited
and the right of nominating miniters to the principa
towns, vested in the Crown. Thus, the Clerg]
themselves surrendered privileges, which it woule
have been dangerous to invade, and voluntaril

fibmitted to a yoke more intolerable than any o o K
James would have ventured to impose by force; vill.
while such as continued to oppose his measures, 1s7.
inltead of their former popular topic of the King's
violent encroachments on a jurifdidion which did
not belong to him, were obliged to turn their out-
cries against the corruptions of their own order".

By the authority of these General Assemblies, the
popilh Earls were allowed to make a public recan. Popish Lords
ttion of their errors; were absolved from the sentence pardoned.
of excommunication; and received into the bosom
of the Church. But, not many years after,,they,
rrlapfed into their former errors, were again recon-
ciled to the church of Rome, and by their apoftacy
julified, in some degree, the fears and scruples of
the Clergy with regard to their absolution.
The Ministers of Edinburgh owed to the inter.
ceflion of these assemblies the liberty of returning
to their charges in the city. But this liberty was
clogged in such a manner as greatly abridged their
power. The city was divided into diftint parilbes;
the number of Ministers doubled; persons on whose
fidelity the King could rely were fixed in the new
parilses; and there circumstances, added to the
authority of the late decrees of the Church, con-
tributed to confirm that absolute dominion in Ec-
clefiaRical affairs, which James possessed during.the.
remainder of his reign.

The King was so intent on new modelling thqr
Church, that the other tranfadions of this periodc
" Spotw. 4;3. Cald. v. 189. sl;.

D4

3!

0o O scarce deserve to be remembered. The Oacavians,
vin. envied by the other courtiers, and splitting into
ian. fations among themselves, resigned their ton.

million; and the administration of the revenue
returning into its former channel, both the King
and the nation were deprived of the benefit of
their regular and frugal aeco4pmy.
1as 1An Towards the end of the year, a parliament was

held in order to restore Huntly and his associates
to their estates and honors, by repealing the ad of
forfeiture passed against them. The authority of
this supreme court was likewise employed to intro.
duce a farther innovation into the Church; but,
conformable to the system which the King had now
adopted, the motion for this purpose took its rife
reaHd~m from the Clergy themselves. As the ad of general

;i. . annexation, and that eftablilhing the Prelbyterian
_irre government, had reduced the few Bilhops, who

still survived, to poverty and contempt; as those
who possessed the Abbeys and Priories were mere
laymen, and many of them temporal Peers, few or
none of the Ecdcliaftical order remained to vote in
parament, and, by means of that, the influence
of the Crown was considerably diminilbed there,
anda proper balance to the power and number of
the nobles was wanting. But the prejudices the
ration had conceived against the name and charadr
of Bifops were so violent, that James was obliged,
wih the utmost care, to avoid..the appearance of
a design to revive thatorder. He prevailed therefore
on the Commiflion appointed by the las General
Assembly to complain to the Parliament, that the
4o

Church was the only body in the kingdom defti. B o o K
tute of its representatives in that supreme court, viii.
where it so nearly concerned every order to have ssgs.
some, who were bound to defend its rights; and to
crave that a competent number of the Clergy Ihould
be admitted, according to ancient cuflom, to a feat
there. In compliance with this request, an aC was
pallffed, by which those MinifRers, on whom the
King Ihould confer the vacant Bishoprics and
Abbeys, were entitled to a vote in Parliament; and
that the Clergy might conceive no jealousy of any
encroachment upon their privileges, it was remitted
to the General assembly, to determine what spiritual
jurifdidion or authority in the government of the
Church these persons lhould poffcfs ".

The King, however, found it no easy matter to
obtain the concurrence of the Ecclesiastical judi.
catories, in which the a& of Parliament met with
a fierce opposition. Though the Clergy perceived
how much lustre this new privilege would reflec
upon their order; though they were not insensible
of the great accellion of personal power and dig-
nity, which many of them would acquire, by be.
ing admitted into the supreme council of the na.
tion, their abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme;
and to that they sacrificed every consideration of
interelt or ambition. All the King's professions of
regard fcr the present constitution of the Church
did not convince them of his sincerity; all the
devices that could be invented for reflraining and
" Spotfw. 4so. ParL i~tb JaC. VI. c. 21s.

41

Boo x circumscribing the jurifdidion of such as were

vii. to be raised to this new honor, did not diminish
IUs. their jealousy and fear. Their own experience

had taught them, with what insinuating prngrels
the hierarchy advances, and though admitted at
first with moderate authority, and under specious
pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion.
a Varnilh over this scheme, laid one of lead.
ing Clergymen, with what colors you please;
deck the intruder with the utmof art; under all
this disguise, I fee the horns of his mitre." The
fame sentiments prevailed among many of his
brethren, and induced them to rejec power and
honors, with as much zeal as ever those of their
order courted them. Many, however, were al.
lured by the hopes of preferment; the King him.
self and his Ministers employed the fame arts,
which they had tried so successfully lat year; and
Mui7. after long debates, and much opposition, the Ge.

neral Assembly declared that it was lawful for Mi.
nifters to accept of a feat in Parliament; that it
would be highly beneficial to the Church, to have
its representatives in that supreme court; and
that fifty.one persons, a number nearly equal to
that of the EcclefiaRics, who were anciently
called to Parliament, lhould be chosen from
among the Clergy for that purpose. The manner
of their election, together with the powers to be
veeted in them, were left undecided for the present,
and furnilhed matter of future deliberation".

Spodow. 450. Cald. v. 278.

As the profpeC of succeeding to the Crown of B o o K
England drew nearer, James multiplied precau- vill.
tions in order to render it certain. As he was *s99.
allied to many of the Princes of Germany by his Jdeavs.
marriage, he sent ambassadors extraordinary to with file.
their several courts, in order to explain the julf. ":s to gain
ness of his title to the Englith throne, and to de- 'Enland.
fire their assistance, if any competitor ihould arise
to dispute his undoubted rights. There Princes
readily acknowledged the equity of his claim,
but the aid which they could afford him was
distant and feeble. At the' fame time, Edward
Bruce, abbot of Kinlofs, his ambassador at the
English court, solicited Elizabeth, with the utmost
warmth, to recognize his title by some public
deed, and to deliver her own fubjets from the
calamities which are occasioned by an uncertain
or disputed fucceflion. But age had Rrengthened
all the passions which had hitherto induced Elizabeth
tokeep this great question obscure and undecided;
and a general and evasive answer was all that James
could obtain. As no impreflion could be made on the
Queen, the ambassador was commanded to found
the disposition of her fubjeds, and to try what prd.
grcfs he could make in gaining them. Bruce possesset
all the talents of secrecy, judgment, and address,
requisite for conduning a negociation no lels delicitb
than important..A Miniser of this charader was
entitled to the confidence of the Englifl. Malay of
the highest rank unbosomed themselves to him with.
out rcferve , and gave him repeated assurances of
their resolution to assert his mater's right, in

43

0o oK opposition to every pretender*. As several pam.
vili. phlets were dispersed, at this time, in England,
as,,. containing objedions to his title, James employed

some learned men in his kingdom to answer these
cavillers, and to explain the advantages which would
refnlt to both kingdomsby the union of the Crownn.
These books were eagerly read, and contributed not
alittle to reconcile the Englilh to that event A book
publifbed this year by the King himself, produced an
dlee still more favorable. It was entitled BFhion
Don, and contained precepts concerning the art of
government, addressed to Prince Henry his son. Not.
withfanding the great alterations and refinements
in national taste fice that time, we mul allow
this to be no contemptible performance, and not
to be inferior to the works of most contemporary
writers, either in purity of Rykle or justness ol
composition. Even the vain parade of erudition
with which it abounds, and which now difguts
us, railed the admiration of that age; and as it
was filled with those general rules which fpecu
.ative authors deliver for rendering a nation happy,
and of which James could discourse with great
plausibility, though often incapable of putting
them in pradice, the Englilh conceived a high
opinion of his abilities, and expected an increa
.of national honor and prosperity,, under a Prince
so profoundly ikilled in politics, and who gave
such a specimen both of his wifdm and of his love
to his people".

' Joh.42. " Cad. Spot2w. 457.'

The Queen of England's sentiments concerning B o o K
James, were very different from those of her fubjeas. vl l.
His excessive indulgence towards the Popith Lords; 1(99.
the facility with which he pardoned their repeated
treasons; his restoring Beaton, the Popilh Archbilhop
of Glasgow, who had fled out of Scotland at the
time of the Reformation, to the polleflion of the
temporalities of that benefice; the appointing him
hisAmbalfador at the court of France; the applause
he bellowed, in the Bafilicon Doron, on those who
adhered to the Queen his mother, Elizabeth con-
fidered as so many indications of a mind alienated
from the Protestant religion; and suspeCted that he
would soon revolt from the profeflion of it. These
suspicions seemed to be fully confirmed by a dif-
covery which came from the Master of Gray, who
resided at that time in Italy, and who, rather than Accures him
fufferhisintriguing spirit to be idle, demeaned himself fr"cnr

fpondig

so far as to act as a spy for the Englilh court. He with the
conveyed to Elizabeth the copy of a letter, written Pope.
by James to Pope Clement VIII. in which the King,
after many expreflions of regard for that pontiff, and
of gratitude for his favors, declared his firm refo-
lution to treat the Roman Catholics with indul-
gence; and, in order to render the intercourse
between the court of Rome and Scotland more
frequent and familiar, he solicited the Pope to
promote Drummond, Bilhop of Vaifon, a Scots.
man, to the dignity of a Cardinal". Elizabeth,
who had received by another channel ", ome im.
" Cald. 313. " Winw. Mem. vol. i. 37. s2.

45

B o o K perfed intelligence of this correspondence, was filled
vill. with just surprise, and immediately dispatched
'I-s Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more fully into the

truth of the matter, and to reproach James for an
adion so unbecoming a Protestant Prince. He was
altonilhed at the accusation, and with a confidence,
which nothing but the concioufnefs of innocence
could inspire, affirmed the whole to be a mere
calumny, and the letter itself to be forged by hi4
enemies, on purpofc to bring his incerity in religion
to be fufpcded. ElphingRon the Secretary of State
denied the matter with equal solemnity. It came to
be known by a very singular accident, which
happened fomc years after, that the information
which Elizabeth had received was well founded,
though at the fame time the Kings declarations
of his own innocence were perfedtly confiRent
with truth. Cardinal Bellarmine, in a reply
which he publilbed to a controversial treatire, ol
which the King was the author, accused him ol
having abandoned the favorable sentiments which
he had once entertained of the Roman Catholic
religion, and, as a proof of this, quoted his letter
to Clement VII. It was impoflible, any longer,
to believe this to be a fiction; and it was a mat
ter too delicate to be pafled over without flrid
inquiry. James immediately examined Elphing
sion, and his confeflion unravelled the whole
myltery. He acknowledged that he had fhufflie
in this letter among other papers, which he li
before the King to be signed, who furpeding nK
such deceit, subscribed it togther with the reft

and without knowing what it contained; that he B o o K
bad no other motive, however, to this action, viII.
but zeal for his Majesty's service; and, by flat. 1599.
tering the Roman Catholics with hopes of in.
dulgence under the King's government, he imagined
that he was paving the way for his more easy
acceflion to the Englifl throne. The Privy Council
of England entertained very different sentiments of
the Secretary's conduct In their opinion, not only
theKing's reputation had been exposed to reproach,
but his life to danger, by this ralh imposture; they
even imputed the gunpowder treason to the rage and
difippointment of the Papists, upon finding that the
hopes which this letter inspired were frustrated. The
Secretary was sent a prisoner into Scotland, to be
tried for high treafon.His peers found him guilty, but,
by the Queen's intercession, he obtained a pardon ".
According to the account of other historians,
James himself was no stranger to this correspond.
ence with the Pope; and, if we believe them, El-
phinglton, being intimidated by the threats of the
Englih council, and deceived by the artifices of
the Earl of Dunbar, concealed some circum.
flances in his narrative of this tranfadion, and
falsified others; and at the.expenfe of his own fame,
and with the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw
a veil over this part of his master's conduct '

But whether we impute the writing of this letter James at
to the Secretary's officious zeal, or to the King's gr'at ,5II
command, it is certain, that, about this time, James Bonma

Catholica

" State Trials, vol. i. 429. Spotfw. 456. 07. Johnfi. 448.
Cald. vol. v. ;a2. vi 147.

47

B o was at the utmost pains to gain the friendlhip of the
VllL Roman Catholic Princes, as a necessary precaution

towards facilitating his accelilon to the Englilb
throne. Lord Home, who was himself a Papist, wa
intrufed with a secret commifflion to the Pope ";
the Archbilhop of Glasgow was an ative infirumenl
with those of his own religion . The Pope exprelfed
such favorable sentiments both of the King, and of hi
right to the Crown of England, that James thought
himself bound, some years after, to acknowledge
the obligation in a public manner ". Sir James Lind.
fay made great progress in gaining the Englilh Papifti
to acknowledge his Majesty's title. Of all thefi
intrigues Elizabeth received obscure hints fron
different quarters. The more imperfeftly the knew,
the more violently Ihe fufpeced the King's designs;
and the natural jealousy of her temper increasing
with age, Ihe observed his condud with greatet
solicitude than ever.

1ó0s nThe questions with regard to the election and
Marh s. power of the representatives of the Cburcb, wen
ms ' finally decided this year by tbe General AlTembly

r to which met at Montrose. That place was chofer

'ht h.
- as most convenient for the Miniters of the North

among whom the King's influence chiefly lay
Although great numbers retorted from the north
ern provinces, and the King employed his wholi
interest, and the authority of his own pretence, t
gain a majority, the following regulations wen
with difficulty agreed on. That the Genera

" Winw.Mem. vol. ii. 7. ' Cald. voL vLi 14
" Cald. vol. v. 60

Aflembly

Assembly Ihall recommend fix persons to every ooK
vacant benefice, which gave a title toa feat in viil.
parli;tmeltt, out of whom the King /hould nominate i6oo.
one; that the person so elected, after obtaining his
fcatin Parliament, flall neither propose, nor consent
to any thing there, that may affect the interest of
theChurch, without special intrudions to that pur.
pose; that he Ihall be answera'ble for his conduc to
every General Assembly; and submit to its censure,
without appeal, upon pain of infamy and excom-
munication; that he shall discharge the duties of a
PaRor, in a particular congregation; that he Thall
not usurp any ecclesiastical jurifdicion, superior t6
that of his other brethren; that if the Church inflict
on him the censure of deprivation, he shall thereby
forfeit his feat in Parliament; that he Ihall annually
resign his commillion to the General Assembly,
which may be restored to him, or not, as the As.
fembly, with the King's approbation, Ihall judge
noft expedient for the good of the Church ".
Nothing could be more repugnant to the idea of
episcopal government, than these regulations. It
was not in consequence of rights derived from
their office, but of powers conferred by a corn-
million, that the ecclesiastical persons were to be
admitted to a feat in Parliament; they were the
representatives, not the superiors of the Clergy.
Deflitute of all spiritual authority, even their civil
jurifdicion was temporary. James, however, flat-
tered himself that they would soon be able to Ihake

i' Spots. 4($. 457. Cald voL v. 398.
VOL. 111. E

49

1

BOOK off these fetters, and gradually acquire all the
vin. privileges which belonged to the epifoopal order.
aox The Clergy dreaded the fame thing; and of course

he contended for the nomination of there corn
missioners, and they opposed it, not so much on
account of the powers then vested in them, as
of those to which it was believed they would
soon attain 7.

Gonrie's During this summer, the kingdom enjoyed ar
coi.pia unusual tranquillity. The Clergy, after many llrug

gles, were brought under great subjection; th(
Popilh Earls were restored to their estates and lon
ors, by the authority of Parliament, and with tb
consent of the Church; the reft of the nobles wer
at peace among themselves, and obedient to th
royal authority; when, in the midst of this security
the King's life was exposed to the utmost danger
by a conspiracy altogether unexpected, and almof
inexplicable. i he authors of it were John Ruthven
Earl of Gowrie, and his brother Alexander, the foa
of that Earl who was beheaded in the year oni
thousand five hundred and eighty-four. Nature hat
adorned both these young men, especially the elde
brother, with many accomplishments, to whid
education had added its molt elegant improvemcnu
More learned than is usual among persons of thei
rank; more religious than is common at thei
age of life; generous, brave, popular; their cour
trymen, far from thinking them capable of an:
atrocious crime, conceived the moit fanguin
hopes of their early virtues. Notwitbftandi,

3 Spots. 454.

all there noble qualities, some unknown motive BO O K
engaged them in a conspiracy, which, if we ad- vill.
here to the account commonly received, mull be 1O.
transmitted to poferity, as one of the molt wicked,
as well as one of the worf concerted, of which
bifRory makes any mention.
On 'the fifth of AuguR, as the King, who resided
during the hunting season in his palace of Falkland,
wasgoing out to his sport early in the morning, he
was accofled by Mr. Alexander Ruthven, who,
with an air of great importance, told the King,
that the evening before he had met an unknown
man; of a suspicious aspect, walking alone in a
by.path, near his brother's house at Perth ; and on
karching him, had found, under his cloak, a pot
filed with a great quantity of foreign gold; that he
had immediately seized both him and his treasure,
and, without communicating the matter to any
erfon, had kept him confined and bound in a
solitary house; and that he thought it his duty to
impart such a singular event, first of all to his
Alajefty. James immediately suspeCted this unknown
peron to be a seminary priest, supplied with foreign
coin, in order to excite new commotions in the
kingdom ; and resolved to empower the Magiltrates
ofPerth to call the person before them, and inquire
into all the circumfiances of the story. Ruthven
violently opposed this resolution, and with many
arguments urged the King to ride direcly to Perth,
and to examine the matter with his own eyes. Mean-
while the chafe began; and James, notwithstanding
hi palfion for that amusement, could not help rumi-

h.2

B O O K nating upon the fRrangenefs of the tale, and on Ruth.
vlll. ven's importunity. At laR, he called him, and pro.
lm. mifed, when the sport was over, tofet out forPert.

The chafe, however, continued long; and Ruthven,
who all the while kept close by the King, was Itil
urging him to make haste. At the death of the buck
be would not allow James to fay till a fresh horse
was brought him ; and observing the Duke ol
Lenox and the Earl of Mar preparing to accom.
pany the King, he entreated him to countermand
them. This James refused; and though Ruthven'i
impatience and anxiety, as well as the apparent
perturbation in his whole behaviour, railed some
suspicions in his mind; yet his own curiosity, and
Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on him to let on
for Perth. When within a mile of the town, Ruthvez
rode forward to inform his brother of the King'
arrival, though he bad already dispatchea two mel
fengers for that purpose. At a little distance from th
town, the Earl, attended by several of the citizens
met the King, who had only twenty persons in hi
train. No preparations were made for the King
entertainment; the Earl appeared pensive and embai
rafred, and was at no pains to atone, by his courtef
orhofpitality for the bad fare with which he treate
his guests. When the King's repast was over, hisa
tendants were led to dine in another room, and h
beingleft almost alone, Ruthven whispered him, ti
now was the time to go to the chamber where the uc
known person was kept. James commanded himt
bring Sir Thomas Erfcine along with them; bh
ianead of that, Ruthven ordered him.not tofollot

And concduding the King up aftair-cafe, and then B o 0o
through fcveral apartments, the doors of which he vi.
locked behind him, led him at last into a fmali study, o.
inwllich there stood a man clad in armour, witha
fiord and dagger by his fide. The King, who expect.
ed to have found one disarmed and bound, Darted
at the fight, and inquired if this was the person ; but
Ruthven snatching the dagger from the girdle of the
man in armour., and holding it to the King's breast,
" Remenber," aid he,,, how unjufily my father sus-
sered by your command; you are now my prisoner;
' iubmit to my disposal without refifance, or outcoy;
"or this dagger Ihall instantly avenge his blood."
lames expoftulated with Ruthven, entreated, and
flattered him. The man whom he found in the
fiudy flood , all the,while, trembling, and dif-
maved, without courage either to aid the King, or.
to second hi. aggressor. Rutbven protested, that if
the King raised no outcry, his life should be safe;
and, moved by some unknown reason, retired in
order to call his brother, leaving to the mran in,
armour the care of the King, whom he bound by
oath not to make any noise during his abefnce.
While the King was in this dangerous fitua-
tion, his domeltics growing inrpatiept to know.
whither he had retired, one of Gowrie's attend-
ants entered the room hastily, and told them that
the King had jufl rode away towards Falkland. All-
of them rufled out into the. reet; .and the Earl -
in the utmost hurry, called for their horses. But
by this time his brother had returned to the King,
ind fearing that now there'was no remedy, he

'E 3

f'0 0 K muf die, offered to bind his hands. Unnrmtd
VIli. James was, he scorned to submit to that ihdignitv

a and doling with the affaRin, a fierce Rruggle ensud

1 he man in armour flood, as formerly, amazedan
inotionleft; and the King dragging Ruthvi'e toward
a window, which during his absence he bat
persuaded the person with whom he wasleft toopen
cried, with a wild and affrighted voice, Trealon

a Treason! Help! I am murdered! ' His attendant
heard, and knew the voice; and saw, at the window,
a hand which 'grasped the King's neck with vinlence
They flew with precipitation to his affillance
Lenox and Mar, with the greaternumber.rang,
the principal flair-cafe, where they found all th
doors shut, which they battered with the utmol
fury, endeavouring to burfR them open. ButSirJobi
Ramsey, entering by a back-ftair, which led n
the apartment where the King was,'found thi
door open; and ruffing upon Ruthten, who wa
flill'ftuggling with the King, struck him twia
*irth his dagger,' and thrust him towards the flair
cafe, where'Sir Thomas Erskine aHd Sir Huo
Herries met, and killed.him; he cryiig with biS
last breath, a Ala's'I am not to blane for tbi
s.'adion. " During 'this scuffle, the -han who bad
been concealed in the fludy efcaped'uiiobferved
Together with Ramsey, Erlkihe ,' and Herries, od
Wilson, a footman, entered the roor f wiere tk
King was, and before they had iime 'to' but tW
doot, Gowrie rufhled in with a drtaW'rtwirdin eaA
bhad;- followed by seven of hi "attendants wt
armed ,'and with a loud voice threatened' them

vithinflant death. They immediately thruf the B o o K
King into the little fludy, and Ihutting the door vlll.
upon him, encountered the Earl. Notwithstanding i6oo
the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsey pierced
Gowrie, through the heart, and he fell down dead
without uttering a word; his followers having
received several wounds, immediately fled. Three
of the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the
conflict A dreadful noise continued still at the
opposite door, where many perfous labored in vain
to force a passage ;and the King being assured that
they were Lenox, Mar, and his other friends, it
was opened on the inside. They ran to the King,
%ahom they unexpectedly found safe, with transports
ofcongratulation; and he, falling on his knees, with
allhisattendants around him, offered solemn thanks
to God for such a wonderful deliverance. The
danger, however, was not yet over. The inhabitants
of the town, whose Provost Gowrie was, and by
whom he was extremely beloved, hearing the fate
ofthetwo brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounded
the houfe,threatening revenge, with many insolent
and opprobrious speeches against the King. James
endeavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, by
fpeakingto them from the window; he admitted their
magiflrates into the house; related to them all the
circumRtances of the fad; and ,their fury subsiding
by degrees, they dispersed. On searching the Earl's
pockets for papers that might discover his designs
and accomplices, nothing was found but a small
parchment bag, full of magical charaters and
words of enchantment; and if wemay believe the

E4

o o account of the conspiracy publilhed by the King,
rilL " while these were about h;n, the wound ol
%,o a which he died, bled not; but as soon as they

a were taken away, the blood gulhed out ingreal
a abundance. " After all the dangerous adven.
tures of this busy day, the King returned in dh
evening to Falkland, having committed the diad
bodies of the two brothers to the cultody of Lhe
Magistrates of Perth.
Tlimsdw Notwithstanding the minute detail which the King

gave ofall the circumstances of this conspiracy againf

efi t.- his life, the motives which induced the two brothen
pai~u. to attempt an action so detestable, the end they bad

in view, and the accomplices on whole aid they
depended, were altogether unknown. The words d
Ruthven to the King gave some grounds to think
that the desire of revenging their father's death had
instigated them to this attempt. But, whatever
injuries, their father had suffered, it is (carcely
probable that they could impute them to the King,
who&e youth, as well as his fubjetion at that time to
the. violence of a faction, exempted him from being
the obje& ofrefentment, on account of adions which
were nod done by his command. James had even
endeavoured to repair the wrongs which thefather
had suffered. by benefits to his children; and Gowric
himself, sensible of his favor, had acknowledged
it with the warmef expreflions, of gratitude.
Three of the Earl's attendants, being convitcd
of assisting him in this assault on the King's ser.
vants, were executed at Perth; but they could give
no light into the motives which had prompted

their mairer to an action so repugnant to there B o 0 K
Icknowledgmecits. Diligent search was made for viln.
the person concealed in the study, and from him "6s.
great dilcoveries were expeced. But Andrew Hen-
derfon the Earl's steward, who, upon a promise of
pardon, confessed himself to be the man, was as
much a stranger to his master's design as the reft;
and though placed in the study by Gowrie's com-
mand, he did not even know for what end that fta-
tion had been assigned him, The whole tranfaftio
remained as impenetrably dark as ever, and the
two brothers, it was concluded, had concerted their
scheme without either confident or accomplice,
with unexampled secrecy as well as wickedness.
An accident, no less strange than the other cir- Sprt'dir.
cuaiplances of the story, and which happened nine co.ri,
yearsafter, discovered that this opinion, however it.
plausible, was ill founded; and that the two brothers
had not carried on their machinations all alone. One
Sprot, a notary, having whispered among several
persons that he knew some secrets relating to
Gcwrie's conspiracy, the privy council thought the
matter worthy of their attention, and ordered him to
be seized. His confeflion was partly voluntary, and
partly forced from him by torture. According to his
account, Logan of Reftalrig, a gentleman of an
opulent fortune, but of dissolute morals, was privy
toall Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice in his
nimes.Mr.Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviews
with Logan, in order to concert the plan of their
operations; the Earl had corresponded with him to
the ame purpose; and one Bour, Logan's confi.

57

I oo K. dent, was trusted with the secret, and carried the
viil. letters between them. Both Logan and Bour
zso0. were now dead. .But Sprot affirmed that he had

read letters written both by Gowrie and Logan
on that occasion; and, in confirmation of his
testimony, several of Logan's letters, which a cu.
riofity fatal to himself had prompted Sprot to
feal from among Bour's papers, were produced".
These were compared, by the privy council, with
papers of Logan's hand-writing, and the refem.
blance was manifest. Persons of undoubted credit,
and well qualified to judge of the matter, examined
them, and swore to their authenticity. Death
itself did not exempt Logan from prosecution;
his bones were dug up and tried for High Treason
and by a sentence, equally odious and illegal",

Logan's letters were five in number. One to Bour, anodr

to Gowrie, and three of them without any diredion; nor could
Sprot discover the name of the person to whom they were writ.
ten. Logan gives him the appellation of Right Hoorablb.
It appears from this, however, and from other words in the
letter, Cor. 9;. that there were several persons privy toth
conspiracy. The date of the first letter is July PIth. Mr. Ruth.
Ten had communicated the matter to Logan only five days be
fore. Ibid. It appears from the original fummoau of fir.
farxare against Logan's heirs, that Bour, though he had et.
tes addrefied to him with regard to a conspiracy equally
dangerous and important, was To illiterate that he could not
real. "Jacobus Bour, literarum prorfos ignatus, didi Gr-

gn opera in legendis omnibus foriptis ad eum millis, ed

" pertintibos, utebatur." This is altogether Irauge, and
nothing but the capricious characer of Loga can account
for his chuing such a confident.
-' By the Roman law, persons guilty of the crime of High
Treason might be tried even after death. This pratice was

his lands were forfeited, and his posterity declared B o K
jiGfmoui. Sprot was condemned to be hanged vill.
fr nifprifion of treason. He adhered to his con- icoo.
fellion to the last, and having promised, on the
aop:ed by the Scots, without any limitation, Pad. i(40. c.
6s But the unlimited exercise of this power was soon con-
c:v.f to be dangerous; and the Crown was laid under proper
reltri;io's, by an act . D. 1 542. which has never been printed.
The words of it are, " And because the said Lords (i. e. the
lords of Articles) think the said ad (viz. in i ¢40) too general,
and prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, therefore statutes
and ordains that the said act shall have no place in time coming,
but against the heirs of them that notoriously commit or shall
commit lefe Majesty against the King's person, against the
realm for averting the fame, and againt them that hall happen
to betray the King's army allenarly, and being notourly known
intheir time; and the heirs of these persons to be called and
judged within five years after the decease of the said persons
committers of the said crimes; and the said time being bypast,
the said heirs never to be pursued for the fame." The fen-
tence against Logan violated this statute in two particulars.
ie was not notourly known during his life to be an accomplice
in the crime for which he was tried; and his heir was called in
quetion more than five years after his death. It is remarkable
that this fhtute seems not to have beenattended to in the par-
liament which forfeited Logan. Another singular circumstance
deserves notice. As it is a maxim ofjuftice that no person
an be tried in absence; and as lawyers are always tenacious of
their forms, and often absurd in their devices for preserving
them, they contrived that, in any process against i dead per-
son, his corpe or bones shall be presented at the bar. Examples
ofthis occur frequently in the Scottish hiltory. After the battle of
Corrichie, the dead body of the Earl of Huntly was presented'
in parliament, before sentence of forfaultre was prohounced
igainft him. For the fame reason the bodies ofGoiiie'and his
brother were preserved, in order that they might be produced
in parliament. Logan's bones, in compliance with the fame rule,
yere dug up. Mlackenz. Crim. Law, Book i. Tit. 6. 5 2.

59

BO 0 K scaffold, to give the speCtators a sign in confirm.

vlll. ation of the truth of what he had deposed, he
soo. thrice clapped his hands after he was thrown off

the ladder by the executioner".

- It appears that Archbishop Spotfwood was present atthe

execution of Sprot, Crom. t i. and yet he seems to have given
no credit to his discoveries. The manner in which he speaks of
him is remarkable, "Whether or not I should mention the ar.

raignment and execution of George Sprot, who suffered at

" Edinburgh, 1 am doubtful His confellion, though voluntary
"and constant, carrying small probability. The man deposed,
" &c. It seemed to be a very fidtion, and a mere invention of
" the man's own brain, for neither did he show the letter, not
" could any wife man think that Gowrie, whowentaboutthe
" treason so secretly, would have communicated the matter to

such a man as Logan was known to be." p. so8. Spotfwood

could not be ignorant of the solemnity with which Logan had been
tried, and of the proof brought of the authenticity of his letters.
tie himself was probably present in parliament at the trial The
EarlofDunbar, of whom he always speaks with the highel refped,
was the person who directed the process againf Logan. Such a
peremptory declaration against the truth of Sprot's evidence,
notwithstanding all thefecircumftances,is surprising. Sir Thomas
Hamilton, the King's advocate at that time, and afterwards Earl
of Hadington, represents the proof produced at Logan's trial as
extremely convincing; and in an original letter of his to the King,
the 2 ft of June 1609, (in Bibl. Facult. Jurid.) after mentioning
themannerin which the trial had been conducted, he thus goes on:

" When the probation of the summons was referred to the

Lords of Articles votes, they found uniformly, all in one
voice, the laid summons to be so clearly proved, that they
seemed to contend who (hould be able most zealously to exprtes
the faoi'adion of his heart, not only by the most pithy words,
but by tears of joy; diverse of the belt rank confeding,,that
that whereof they doubted at their entry into the house was
now so manifest, that they behoved to efeem them traitors
who should any longer refuse to declare their assured r;foludon
of the truth of that treason."

But though it be thus unexpectedly discovered B o o K
that Gowrie did not ad without associates, little vill.
additional light is thrown, by this discovery, on Ico
the motives and intention of his condut. Itappears
alnmof incredible that two young men of such dif-
tinguilled virtue should revolt all at once from their
duty, and attempt a crime so atrocious, as the
murder of their Sovereign. It appears still more im-
probable, that they should have concerted their
undertaking with so little foresight and prudence.
If they intended that the deed should have remained
concealed, they could not have chosen a more im-
proper scene for executing it, than their own house.
If they intended that Henderson lhould have fruck
the blow, they could not have pitched on a man
more destitute of the courage that must dired the
hand of an assassin; nor could they exped that he,
unsolicited, and unacquainted with their purpose,
would venture on such a desperate action. If
Ruthven meant to stab the King with his own
hand, why did he withdraw the dagger, after it
was pointed at his breadt? How could he leave
the King, after such a plain declaration of his in-
tention? Was it not preposterous to commit him
to the keeping of such a timid and false associate,
as Henderson? For what purpose did he waste
time, in binding the hands of an unarmed man,
whom he might easily have dispatched with his
sword? Had Providence permitted them to im-
brue their hands in the blood of their Sovereign,
what advantage could have accrued to them by
his death ? and what claims or pretensions could

a o o K they have opposed to the rights of his children " ?
VIil. Inevitable and instant vengeance, together with

perpetual infamy, were the only consequences they
could expect to follow such a crime.

On the other hand, it is impossible to believe

that the King had formed any design againR the
life of the two brothers. They had not incurred
his indignation by any crime; and were in no
degree the objects of his jealousy or hatred "; nor

' It has been asserted, that, in consequence of the King's

death, the Earl of Gowrie might have pretended to the Crown of
England, as the son of Dorothea Stewart daughter of Lord
Methven by Margaret of England, who, after her divorce from
the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third husband.
Burnet, HifL of his own times. But this aflertion is ill founded. It
appears, from undoubted evidence, that Lord Methven had
only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in its infancy,
and Dorotbea Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queen
Margaret, but ofJanet Steward, Lord Methven's second wife, a
daughter of John Earl of Athol. Crawf. Peer. 2 9. And though
Gowrie had really been descended from the blood.royal of
England, the King at that time had a son and a daughter; and
besides them, Lady Arabella Stewart, daughter of Charles Earl
of Lenox, bad a preferable title to the Crown of England.

" Sir Henry Neville, in a letter to Sir Ralph Winwood.

imputes the death of the two brothers to a cause not mentioned
by any of our historians. a Out of Scotland we hear that there is
no good agreement, hut rather an open diflidence betwixt the
King and his wife, and many are of opinion that the discovery of
some aflfeion between her and the Earl of Gowrie's brother (who
was killed with him) was the truest cause and motive of that
tragedy." Winw 'alem. vol. i. 2-,4. Whether the following
pafiages in Nicholson's letter be any confirmation of that fufpi-
cion,is ubmittedto the reader. In his letter, Sept. 22, 16o2,he
mentios the return of Gowrie's two younger brothers inta

wa he ofa spirit so sanguinary, or so noted for rafli B o K
and dfperate valor, as to have attempted to murder v111.
iher in their own house, where they were fur- 160.
rounded with many domestics, he only with a fender
and unarmed train; where they could call to their
afiflance the inhabitants of a city, at the devotion
of their family, while he was at a distance from all
aid; and least of all would he have chosen for his
associates, in such an enterprise, the Earl of Mar,
and the Duke of Lenox, the former connected in
lose friendflip with the house of Gowrie, and
the latter married to one of the Earl's filers.
Wlhichfoever of these opposite systems we em- A conjec.
brace; whether we impute the intention of murder to tui' con.

cerning the

Gowrie, or to the King; insuperable difficulties arise, intention or
andweare involved in darkness, myflery, and con- the co"rpi.
trdiAions. Perhaps the source of the whole con-
fpiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by
deriving it from a more remote cause, we may
discover it to be less criminal.
Scotland, and adds, " The coming in of there two, and the
Queen of Scots dealing with them, and fending away and fur-
niCling illrs. Beatrix .(their fiter) with such information as
Sir Thomas Erskine has given, hath bred great suspicion in the
King (f Scots that they come not in but unon onme dangerous
plot." In another letter. January i, 160o. "The day of
writing my last, M rs. Beatlix Ruthven was brought by the Lady
Plifey, and Mrs. of Angus, as one of their gentlewomen into
lte court in the evening, and lowed in a chamber prepared for
er by the Queen's direction, where the Queen had much time
ard conference with her. Of this the liing got notice, and
h'Ted his dislike thereof to the Queen, gently reprovingher
':i!, and examining quietly of the Queen's servants of the
ile, and of other matters thereunto belonging, with such
licretion and secrecy as requires such a matter. "

63

B 0 0

O To keep the King of Scots in continual depend.
viil. ance, was one great object of Elizabeth's policy. In
~oo. order to this, she sometimes soothed him; and some.

times bribed his Ministers and favorites; and when
the failed of attaining her end by these means, Ihe
encouraged the Clergy to render any administration
which The distrusted unpopular, by decrying it, io
stirred up some facion of the nobles to oppose and te
overturn it. In that fierce age, men little acquainted
with the arts of undermining a Ministry by intrigue,
had recourse to the ruder pratice of rendering them.
selves masters of the King's person, that they mighi
thereby obtain the direction of his councils. Those
nobles, who seized the King at the Raid of Rulhvtn
were inffigated and supported by Elizabeth. Roth
well, in all his wild attempts , enjoyed her pro
tedion, and when they miscarried, he was secure
of retreat in her dominions. The connexion!
which James had been forming of late with thi
Roman Catholic Princes, his secret negociation!
in England with her fubjeds, and the maxims b)
which he governed his own kingdom, all contri
buted to excite her jealousy. She dreaded tome
great revolution in Scotland to be approaching
and it was her interest to prevent it. The Ear
of Gowrie was one of the most powerful of thi
Scottifl nobles, and descended from ancestor
warmly attached to the English interest. He hac
adopted the fame system, and believed the welfar
of his country to be inseparably conne ,ed witl
the subsistence of the alliance between the tw(
kingdoms. During his residence at Paris, he ha(

contraded

contaced an intimate friendlhip with Sir Henry B o o K
Neville the Queen's ambalLfdor there, and was re- vill.
commended by him to hiq court, as a person of whom 36oo.
great use might be made". Elizabeth received him,
as he passed through England, with diftinguiflied
marks ofrefpect and favor. From all these circumftan-
ces a suspicion may arise, that the plan of the confpi-
racy against theKing was formed at that time, in con-
certwith her. Such a suspicion prevailed in thatage,
and from the letters of Nicholson, Elizabeth's agent
in Scotland, it appears not to be destitute of foun-
dation An Englifli Ihip was observed hovering, for
fame time, in the mouth of the frith of Forth. The
Earl's two younger brothers fled into England after
the ill success of the conspiracy, and were protected
by Elizabeth James himself, though he prudently con-
cealed it, took great umbrage at her behaviour. None,
however, of Elizabeth's intrigues in Scotl.nd tended
to hurt the King's person, but only to circumscribe
hisauthority, and to thwart his schemes. His life was
the surest safe-guard of her own, and restrained the
Popish pretenders to her Crown, and their abet-
tors, from desperate attempts, to which their im.
patience and bigotry might, otherwise, have
urged them on. To have encouraged Gowrie
to murder his Sovereign, would, on her part,
have been an ad of the utmost imprudence.
Nor does this seem to have been the intention of
the two brothers. Mr. Ruthven, first of all, en.
dtavoured to decoy the King to Perth, without

O Winw. i. Fs6.
VOL 111. F

B K any attendants. When these proved more numerous
vill. than was expeded, the Earl employed a stratagem
Iso in order to separate them from the King,by pretend.

ing that be bad rode away towards Falkland, and
by calling haRfily for their horses, that they might
follow him. By their fbutting James up, meanwhile,
in a diltant corner of the house, and by attempting
to bind his hands, their design seems to have been
rather to seize, than to affaflinate him. Though
Gowrie had not colleted his followers in such num.
bers as to have been able to detain him long a pri.
soner, in that part of the kingdom, by open force,
be might soon have been conveyed aboard the En.
glifh (hip, which waited perhaps to receive him, and
be might have been landed at Faft-Cafile, a house
of Logan's, in which, according to many obscure
hints in his letters, some rendezvous of the con.
fpirators was to be held. Amidst the surprise
and terror, into which the King mufl have been
thrown by the violence offered to him, it was ex.
tremely natural for him to conclude that his life
was fought It was the interest of all his follow.
ers to confirm him in this belief, and to magnify
his danger, in order to add to the importanceand
merit of their own services. Thus his fear, and
their vanity, aided by the credulity and wonder
which the contemplation of any great and tragical
event, when not fully underfood, is apt to in-
spire, augmented the whole tranfacion. On the
other hand. the extravagance and improbability
of the circumflances which were added, detraded
from the credit of those which really happened;

and even furnished pretences for calling in question B OK
the truth of the whole conspiracy. VIll.

The account of H .at had happened at Perth taoo.
reached Edinburgh next moraing. The privy coun- Many dir
oil commanded the Ministers of that city instantly account pb.
to assemble their people; and after relating to them ",ied by the
the circumstances of the conspiracy formed against ''.
the King's life, to return public thanks to God, for
the protection which he had so visibly afforded him.
But as the first accounts transmitted to Edinburgh,
written in a hurry, and while the circumstances of
the conspiracy were but imperfeetly known, and the
passions which it excited firongly felt, were indiftind,
exaggerated, and contradictory, the MinifRers laid
hold of this, and though they offered to give public
thanks to God for the King's fLfety, they refused to
enter into any detail of particulars, or to utter from
the chair of truth, what appeared to be Rill dubious
and uncertain.
A few days after, the King returned to Edin-
burgh; and though Galloway, the Minister of his
own chapel, made an harangue to the people at
the public cross, in which he recited all the cir-
cumninces of the conspiracy; though James him-
fell, in their hearing, confirmed his account;
though he commanded a narrative of the whole
trnfaidion to be publithed; the Ministers of that
city, as well as many of their Brethren, fill con.
tinued incredulous and unconvinced. Their high
tReem of Gowrie, their jealousy of every part of
the King's conduct, added to some sale and many
improbable circumstances in the narrative, not

Y

67

B o o x only led them to fufpet the whole, but gave their

vin. suspicions an air of credibility. But at length, the
roM. King, partly by arguments, partly by threats,pre-

vailed on all of them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to
own that they were convinced of the truth of the
conspiracy. He could be brought no further thanto
declare, that he reverenced the King's account of the
tranfadion, but could not fay that he himself was
persuaded of the truth of it. The scrupled or obRinacy
of a single man would have been little regarded; but
as the fame spirit of incredulity began to spread
among the people. the example of one in so high
reputation for integrity and abilities, was extremely
dangerous. The King was atthe utmost pains to con.
vince and to gain Bruce, but finding it impossible to
remove his doubts, he deprived him of his benefice,
and after repeated delays, and many attempts to.
wards a reconcilement. banished him the kingdom".

Proceedi. The proceedings of Parliament were not re.
.ef,Ptt arded by any scruples of this fort. The dead
tbe conlfi bodies of the two brothers were produced there,

according to law; an indictment for High Treafnn
was preferred against them; witnesses were ex.
amined: and by an unanimous sentence, their
estates and honors were forfeited; the punilhment
due to traitors was inflicted on their dead bodies;
and, as if the punishment hitherto in use did not
express sufficient detetation of their crimes. the
Parliament enaded that the surname of Ruthven
should be abolifled; and in order to preserve the

"Spodw. 461, &c. Cald.. S. S9. &c.

69

memory of the King's miraculous escape, and to B o o K
declare the sense which the nation had of the di. viiI.
vine goodness, to all future ages, appointed the 6oo
flth of August to be observed, annually, as a day
of public thanksgiving ".

" A few weeks after the death of the two brothers, the King
publilhed a difcozrfe of their vile and unnattral co;Jiiracy
,,,1,,l ii, life. In the year 17 1 , George Earl of Cromertie pub.
Ifled an" Historical account of the conspiracy by the Earl of
' (l;oie, and Robert Logan of Reftalrig, againfl King James VI."
He teems not to have seen the account which the King
himfrlthad given of that matter, and borrows the whole hitori-
calpart from Spotfwood and other authors; but he has extracted
from the public records the depolitions of the witnesses produced
b! the King's Council, in order to make good the charge aglnft
the tro brothers, and Logan their associate. From there two trea.
lifes our knowledge of all the material circumltances ofthe con-
ftir;cy is derived. The evidence which they contain, one would
cipect to be authentic and decisive. An account of a fadt, still
recent, published by royal authority, and the original depositions
ofperfons examined in presence of the highest court in the nation,
ought to convey a degree of evidence seldom attained in hiflorical
relations, and to exclude all remaining doubt and uncertainty.
But as every thing with regard to this tranfalion is dark and
problematical, thc King's account an'd the depofitions'of the
iritnelfes notonly vary, but contradict each other ih"fi'inany
tircurnflances, that much room is still, left for hesitation and
hillorical scepticism. The teftimony'of Henderson iishe'fullef
and molt important, but in several particulars the King's ac-
count and his are contradictory. I. According to the King's
account, while Mr. Ruthven was holding the dagger at his
brealt," the fellow in the fludy flood quaking and treifiblirig."
Disc. lT. But Henderson fays, that he himself wrefted'the
digeer out of Mr. Ruthven's hands. Disc. (j. Crom. So.
Htederron likewise boafled to his wife, that he had that day
tice saved the King from being ltabbed. Disc. 4. Crom. 5 j.

F

Go Though Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a fud.
Vlil. den and a great alarm, it was followed by no confe.
601a. quences of importance; and having been concerted

Ert co.- by the two brothers either without any associates,
fpiracy a.
gina E 11. The King asserts that Henderson opened the window during

.Mr. Buthven's abfcnce. Disc. 21. Henderson deposes that he
was only attempting to open it when Mr. Ruthven returned,
and that during the firuggle between the King and him, he
opened it Disc. s , s4. Crom. i, 2. IlI. If we may believe
the King, the fellow in the study flood, during the (ruggle,
behind the King's back, inative and trembling all the time.
Disc. 2-. But Henderson affirms, that he snatched away the
garter with which Mr. Ruthven attempted to bind the King;
that he pulled back Ruthven's hand, while he was endeavouring
to lop the King's mouth, and that he opened the window.
Disc. ;4. Crom. C2. IV. By the King's account, Mr.Ruthven
left him in the study, and went away in order to meet with
his. brother, and the Earl came up the lairs for the fame pur.
pole. Dif. 2;. Henderson deposes, that when Mr. Ruthwen
left the King, "he believes that he did not pals from the door.'
Crom. $ r. It is apparent both from the situation of the house,
and from other circumfances, that there couldiot possibly have
been any interview between the brothers at this time. Disc. 2t.

Henderson was twice examined, first atFalkland before the

privy council in August, and next at Edinburgh befoe the
parliament in November. Not to mention some leser vaiiatdo
between these depositions, we shall point out two which ar
remarkable. In his irft deposition Mr. Henderson relates the
most material circumlance of the whole in there words:
" Mr. Ruthven pulled out the deponent's dagger, and held
" the fime to his Majelly's breast, faying, remember yff
" of .v fatbr' murder; ou shall now.die for it, and

minting to his Highness's heart, with the dagger, the de
" ponent threw the fame out of Mr. Rnthven's hands, and

swore that as God shall judge his foul, that if Mr. Ruth.
venhad retained the dagger in his hand, the space a m
'may go fix fieps, he would have stricken the King to the

witlh fulch as were unknown, and chose to remain B o O K
f thedanger was over,asfoon as discovercd. But VIII.
not long after, a conspiracy broke out in England 16or.

"hilts with it. " Disc. s2. But at his fecund examination
he rried from this in two material circumltances. First, the
lords which he at that time put in 3lr. Ruthven's mouth
rhile he held the dagger at the King's breat are, " Sir, yor
;ai,iji be mny priJbner; remei;lcr on nmy fatber's death. "
Secondly, when he threatened him with death, it was only to
deter him from maling any noire. "Hold youer tongne, or bIy
" (.Irisyonr shall die. " 2. In this first dcpofition, the words
oflr. Futhven, when he returned to the chamber where he
had left the King, are, " There is no remendy, by God you
" ;d die." But in his second depdfition, " By God there is no
' remedy, and offered to bind his Mlajefty's hands." Crom. r,
The material words you mufl die are omitted. The 6rft depofi.
ion seems plainly to intimate that it was Ruthven's intention td
murder the King. The second would lead us to conclude that
he had no other design than to detain him as a prisoner.

There are likewise some remarkable contradiCions in the
tellimonies of the other witnesses. i. In the discourse pub.
lilhl by authority, it is insinuated that the tumult of the
inhabitants was raised against' the liing, and that it requited
some art to pacify them. DiSc. ;2. The Duke of Lenox
mnfirms this in his deposition. Crom. 44. An at of privy
ouncil summoning the Magistrates of Perth to answer for that
rit is fRill extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of the baillies
of the town, deposes, that he himself raised the people, and
that they took arms in order to assist the King. Crom. 66.
l. Henderson deposes, that he gave an evasive answer to Mr.
John loncrief, who inquired where he had been that morn,
ing, because the Earl had commanded him not to let any
man know that be had been at Falkland. Disc. ;4. Ilon-
criefdepofes to the fame purpose Crom. 64. And yet
Ceorge Hay, afterwards Lord Kinnoul, and Chancellor of
Scotland, and Peter Hay, depoet', that the Earl, in their
Paeence, asked Henderson, " Whom he fbund with the

F4

against Elizabeth, which, though the first danger
was instantly dispelled, produced tragical effeds;
that rendered the close of that Queen's reign dismal
and unhappy. As James was deeply interested in
that event, it merits our particular notice.

The court of England was at this time divided

between two powerful facions, which contended
for the supreme direcion of affairs. The leader ofthe
one was Robert D'Evreux, Earl of Effex; Sir
Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treasurer Burleigh,
was at the head of the other. The former was the molt
accomplilsed and the most popular of all the Englil
nobles; brave, generous, affable; though impetuow,
yet willing to liften to the counsels of those whom
he loved; an avowed, but not an implacable enemy;
a friend no less constant than warm; incapable of
disguising his own fentiments,or of misrepresenting
those of others; better fitted for a camp than fora
court; and of a genius that qualified him for the sirs
place in the administration, with a spirit which
scorned the second as below his merit. He wy
soon diftinguifled by the Queen, who, with apro
fusion uncommon to her, conferred on him, eve
in his earliest youth, the highest honors. Not
did this diminilh the esteem and affeaion of it
countrymen; but, by a rare felicity, he was at
once the favorite of his Sovereign, and td

King at Falkland?" Crom. 70, 7 t. Which question few
to prove that he did not aim at keeping that journeyafecr
In the Colledion oF Criminal Trials, published by Mr. And
in r785, the evidence against the two brothers ha bea
confidared with great attention, P. o2, &c.

darling of the people. Cecil, on the other hand, a o o K
educated in a court, and trained under a father viii.
deeply skilled in all its arts, was crafty, infinuat. 1601'
ieg indultrious; and though possessed of talents
which fitted him for the highest offices, he did
not rely upon his merit alone for attaining them,
but availed himself of every advantage, which his
own address,or the mistakes of others, afforded
him. Two such men were formed to be rivals and
enemies. Effex despised the arts of Cecil as low
nd base. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity ap.
peared to be presumption and folly. All the mi-
litary men, except Raleigh, favored Eflex. Most
of the courtiers adhered to Cecil, whose manners
morenearly resembled their own.
As Elizabeth advanced in years, the firuggle be- His corre.
tween these factions became more violent. Effex, 'fondence

with the

inorder to strengthen himself, had early courted the Scottish
friendlhip of the King of Scots, for whose right of Kidg.
fucceiTon he was a zealous advocate, and held.a
dtofe correspondence both with him and with his
principal Ministers. Cecil, devoted to the Queen
alone, role daily to new honors by the assiduity of
bisfervices, and the patience with which heexpected
the reward of them; while the Earl's high fpirit:and
impetuosity sometimes exposed him to checkssfrom!
P MiRlrefs, who, though partial in her afedtioi
[toward him, could not easily bear contradiction, nd,
Rho conferred favors often unwillingly, and alwayt
powly. His own solicitations, however, fecoikd'
Maliciously by his enemies, who wiihed to remove
inm ata distance from court, advanced. him to the

73

s O 0 K command of the army employed in Ireland againlt
VIII. Tyronne, and to the office of Lord Lieutenant of
"s' that kingdom, with a commiflion almost unli.

mited. His success in that expedition did not equal
either his own promises, or the expetations of
Elizabeth. The Queen, peevilh from her dif.
appointment, and exasperated against Miffex by the
artifices of his enemies, wrote him a harlh letter, full
of accusations and reproaches. These his impatient
spirit could not bear, and, in the first transports of
his resentment, he proposed to carry over a part of
his army into England, and, by driving his enemies
from the Queen's pretence, to reinstate himself in
favor and in power. But upon more mature thoughts
he abandoned this rash design, and, setting fail with
a few officers devoted to his person, landed in
England, and polled direAly to court. Elizabeth
received him without any symptom either of
affeion or of displeasure. By proper compliances
and acknowledgments, he might have regained his
formerafcendant over the Queen. But he thought
himself too deeply injured to submit to these.
Elizabeth, on the other hand, determined to subdue
his haughty temper; and though her severity drew
from him the most humble letters, Tfe confined
him to the Lord Keeper's honue, and appointed
rommiffloners to try him, both for his conduc
during his government of Ireland, and for leaving
that kingdom wihout her permiflion. By their
feahnce, he was fofpended from all his offices, ex
cept that of Master of the horse, and continued
a prisoner during the Queen's pleasure. Satisfied

with having mortified his pride thus far, Elizabeth B o o I
did not fiffer the sentence to be recorded, and soon vill.
sier allowed him to retire to his own house. During &so.
theft tralfaciois, which occupied several months,
Esex fluduated between the allegiance he owed to
his Sovereign, and the desire of revenge; and
fomctimes leaned to the one, and sometimes to the
other In one of the intervals when the latter
prevailed, he sent a messenger into Scotland, to
encourage the King to assert his own right to the
fuccellion by force of arms, and to promise that,
besides the assistance of the Earl and all his friends in
England, Lord Mlountjoy, now Lord Lieutenant of
Ireland, would join him with five thousand men from
that kingdom. But James did not chufe to hazard the James's
losing a kingdom, of which he was jaft about to cautious
obtain poffefion, by a premature attempt to seize
it Mountjoy, too, declined the enterprise, and
Elfex adopted more dutiful schemes; all thoughts
of ambition appearing to be totally effaced out of
his mind
This moderation, which was merely the effedof The wild

attempts oT

disgust and disappointment, was not of longcomtt Erx.
nuance; and the Queen, having not only refuscd
to renew a lucrative grant which Ihe had formerly
kbeowed, but even to admit him into her' pre-
fence, that new injury drove a temper, naturally
impatient, and now much fretted, to absolute
despair His friends, instead of soothing his rage,
or restraining his impetuosity, added to both by
their imprudent and interested zeal. After many
anxious consultations, he determined to attempt

a o o K to redress his wrongs by violence. But being con.
vilI. fcious how unpopular such an enterprise would be,il
o60L it appeared to proceed from motives of private re,

venge alone, he endeavoured to give it the semblance
of public utility, by mingling the King of Scotland's
interest with his own. He wrote to James, that the
fation which now predominated in the Engliih court
had resolved to support the pretensions of the Infanta
of Spain to the crown; that the places of the greatefl
importance in the kingdom were put into the hands
of his avowed enemies; and that unless he fentambaf.
fadors, without delay, to insist on the immediate
declaration of his right of fucceflion, their measures
were so well concerted, that all his hopes would be
desperate. James, who knew how disagreeable such
a propoal would be to the Queen of England, was
not willing ralhly to expose himself to her difplea
lure. Ellex nevertheless, blinded by resentment,
and impatient for revenge, abandoned himself to
thefepaffions, and adted like a manguided by frenzy
or despair. With two or three hundred followers in.
completely armed, he attempted to assault a throne
the best eftablilhed in Europe. Sallying at their head
out of his own house, he called on the citizens of
London, if they either valued his life, or wibed to
-preserve the kingdom from the dominion of the
-Spaniards, to take arms, and to follow his standard.
-Headvanced towards the palace with an intention to
.drive Cecil and his faction out of the Queen'sprefencg
and.to obtain a declaration of the Scottilb King's right
oi fucceflion ". But, though almost adored by the
- " Birch. Mem. i477.

citizens, not a man would join him in this wild B o o K
enterprise. Dispirited by their indifference, deserted vill.
bvfomeofhisown attendants, and almost surrounded 1so1.
bi the troops, which marched against him under
ditcrent leaders into the city, he retreated to his
own house; and without any bold effort, suitable
to his present condition, or worthy of his former
reputation for courage, hefurrendered to his enemies.
As soon as James heard of Essex's ill success, he
appointed the Earl of Mar, and Bruce, Abbot of
Kinlofs, to repair as his Ambassadors to the Court
of Enland. The former of these was the person by
whole means Effex had carried on his correspondence
with the King. He was a paflionate admirer of the
Earl's characer, and disposed to attempt every
thing that could contribute to his safety. Bruce,
united in a close friendship with Mar, was ready
to second him with equal zeal. Nor was the pur-
pose of the embassy less friendly to Effex, than the
choice of his Ambassadors; they were commanded
tofolicit, in the warmeR manner, for the Earl's
life, and if they found that the King, by avowing
his friends, could either promote their designs, or
contribute to their safety, they were empowered to
layafide all disguise, and to promise that he would
put himself at their head, and claim what was due
to him by force of arms ". But before the Ambar.
fidors could reach London, Effex had suffered Him death.
the punishment which he merited by his treason.
Perhaps the fear of their interposing, in order to
"Johnft. 289. Birch. Mem. ii. 5;o.

77

o o K obtain his pardon, hastened his death. Elizabeth
VIII. continued, for some time, irresolute concerning his
toó. fate, and could not bring herself to consign in.e

the hands of-the executioner, a man who had once
polfeffed her favor so entirely, without a painful
firuggle between her resentment against his late
mifconduA, and her ancient affetion towards him.
The distress to which he was now reduced, tended
naturally to soften the former, while it revived
the latter with new tenderness; and the intercellion
of one faithful friend, who had interest with th.
Queen, might perhaps have saved his life, and
have procured him a remiflion, which, of herfell,
fie was alhamed to grant. But this generous noI
bleman had at that time no such friend. Elizaeth,
solicited inceflantly by her Ministers, and offendd
with the haughtiness of EfTex, who, as Ihe imagined,
scorned to sue for pardon, at las commanded th
sentence to be put in execution. No sooner wa
the blow struck, than ihe repented of her ow
rahnefs, and bewailed his death with the deepef
sorrow. James always confidered him as one wh
had fallen a martyr to his service, and after h
acccffion to the Eoglifh throne, restored his son
his honors, as well as all his associates in the co
fpiracy, and diftinguimled them with his favor .

Imean- The Scottilh Ambassadors, finding that th
*"m i had arrived too late to execute the chief bufine
bsa.t committed to their charge, not only conceal

hbat part of their inftrutions with the uua
"' Cad. Spotr. 464.

care; but congratulated the Queen, in their Maser's o oK
name, on her happy escape from such an audacious yvll.
conspiracy. Elizabeth, though no stranger to the o161.
King's correspondence with Effex, or to that no-
bleman's intentions of asserting James's right to the
Crown, was not willing that these lhould be known
to the people, and, for that reason, received the
congratulations of the Scottilh Ambassadors with
all possible marks of credit and good will; and in
order to sooth James, and to preserve the appearances
of union between the two courts, increased the
subsidy which she paid him annually. The Ambaf.
fadors resided for some time in England, and were
employed, with great success, in renewing and
extending'the intrigues, which Bruce had formerly
entered into with the Englilh nobles. As Elizabeth
advanced in years, the Englilh turned their eyes
more and more towards Scotland, and were eager
to prevent each other in courting the favor of their
future Monarch. Assurances of attachment, pro.
feTllons of regard, and promises of support, were
offered to James from every corner of the kingdom.
Cecil himself, perceiving what hopes Effex had
founded on the friendship of the Scottish King,
and what advantages he might have derived from
it, thought it prudent to fiand no longer at a
dillance from a Prince, who might so soon be.
come his master. But being sensible at the fame
time how dangerous such an intercourse might
prove, under a Mistress naturally jealous, and
whnoe jealousy grew stronger with old age; though
he entered into a correspondence with him, he car-

o o K tied it on with ill the f-crecy and caution necessary in
vill. his situation, and peculiar to his character". James hay.
nio0. ing gained the man whose opposition and influence

he had hitherto chiefly dreaded, waited, in perfec
security, till that event flould happen, which would
open hisway to the throne of England". It was with
some difficulty that he reRrained within propel
bounds his adherents in that kingdom, who, labor.
ing to diftinguilh themselves by that officious zeal,
with which a Prince, who has a near profped ol
mounting the throne, is alwaysferved, urged him to
allow a motion to be made in Parliament for declaring
his right of fuccellion to the Crown. James prudently
discouraged that design; but it was with no small
fatisfadion that he observed the ascendant he was ac.
quiring in a court, the ditates of which he had been
so long obliged to obey; and which had either pre.
fcribed or thwarted every flep he had taken during
the whole course of his reign ".

, See Appendix, No. a.
s' Dr. Birch, in his life of Prince Henry, p. 2 2, has given

some account of the mytierious mode in which this corn
fpondence was carried on, and how the letters were conveced
from London to Dublin, and fr6m thence to Scotland. Not-
withftlading the solicitude which Cecil repeatedly difcovern
that his letters lhould be destroyed as soon as the King had
read them, a considerable number of them has been pre.
served, and published by Sir David Dalrymple in the
year -66. They were written by Lord Henry Howard.
under the infpetion of Cecil, in a style affectedly obfcumr
The whole correspondence is more curious than infirudive.

" Spotfw. 467. 471. Birch. Mem. ii. s14.

Notwithstanding

Notwithstanding the violent struggles of the B o o x
pnltiCnal fadtions which divided the court, and the vill.
frequent revolutions which had happened there, 6.
fSce the King firfl took the reins of government Attempn
into his own hands, Scotland had enjoyed unufnal to c;v''ize
tranquillity, being undisturbed by any foreign th ig.
tnemy, and free from any intestine commotion of
long continuance. During this period, James
endeavoured to civilize the Highlands and the
Ines, a part of his dominions too much neglected
by former Monarchs, though the reformation of
itwas an objet highly worthy of their care. The
long peace with England had afforded an oppor-
tunity of subduing the licentious spirit of the bor-
derers, and of restraining their depredations,
often no less ruinous to their countrymen than
to their enemies. The inhabitants of the Low
Country began, gradually, to forget the use of
arms, and to become attentive to the arts of peace.
But the Highlanders, retaining their natural
fierceness, averse from labor, and inured to ra-
pine, infested their more industrious, neighbours
by their continual incursions. James, being so.
licitous, not only to repress their inroads, but to
render them useful subjeCts ", had at different
imes enacted many wife laws extremely con.
du:ive to there ends. All landlords, or chiefs of
Clns, were enjoined to permit no persons to re-
lide in their efates, who could not find sufficient
surety for their good behaviour; they were re-
quired to make a lift of all suspicious persons

"BaGil. Dor. 139.
Vol. III. G

B o K under their jurifdicion, to bind themselves to deliver

vill. them tojuftice, and to indemnify those who should
so~ susser by their robberies ;and, in order to ascertain the

faithful performance of these articles, the chiefs them.
selves were obliged to give hostages to the King, or to
put pledges in his hands. Three towns, which might
ferveas a retreat for the industrious, and a nurferyfor
arts and commerce, were appointed to be built in
different parts of the Highlands; one in Cantire,
another in Lochaber, and a third in the isle of
Lewis; and in order to draw inhabitants thither,
all the privileges of Royal Boroughs were to
be conferred upon them. Finding it, however,
to be no easy matter to inspire the inhabit.
ants of those countries with the love of indulry,
a resolution was taken to plant among them co
Jonies of people from the more industrious coun.
ties. The first experiment was made in the ifli
of Lewis; and as it was advantageously situated
for the filling-trade, a source from which Scot
land ought naturally to derive great wealth, the
colony transported thither was drawn out of Fife,
the natives of which were well skilled in tha
branch of commerce. But before they had re
mained there long enough to manifest the goo
effecs of this institution, the islanders, enragel
at feeing their country occupied by those intruders
took arms, and surprising them in the night.time
murdered some of them, and compelled the ret
to abandon the settlement. The King's attentiol
being soon after turned to other objects, we bea
no more of this salutary projcct. Though Jame

did not pursue the design with that heady appli. BOOK
cation and perseverance, without which it is im. vm.
poflible to change the manners of a whole peo- 10.
ple, he had the glory, however, not only of having
lirltconceived the thoughts, but of having firlt
pointed out the proper method of introducing the
ivil arts of life into that part of the island. ".
After having long enjoyed a good state of health, Elizbeth'
the efede of a found conflitution, and the reward 'taa ii"ne
of uncommon regularity and temperance, Elizabeth ad dath.
begai this winter to feel her vigor decrease, and
to be sensible of the infirmities of old age. Having
removed on a very flormy day from WefRminller to
Richmond, whither she was impatient to retile, her
complaints increased. She had no formed fever; her 16o03
pulf was good; but fie ate little,and could not sleep. Ja'"ar 31'
Her dilfemper seemed to proceed from a deep melan-
choly, which appeared both in her countenance and
behaviour. She delighted in solitude, fie fat con.
bnltly in the dark; and was often drowned in tears.
No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known,
than persons of all ranks, and of all different feels
and parties, redoubled their applications to the
King of Scots, and vied with each other in pro-
felions of attachment to his person, and in pro-
mlbes of fubmifion to his government. Even
tome of Elizabeth's own servants, weary of the
length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient
toget rid of the burden of gratitude for past bc-
nttits, and expecting to flare in the liberality of

Parl. 1587. 1594. F'597. Spotfw. 468.

Ga

BOOK a new Prince, began to derert her. And crowds
vilI. of people hurried towards Scotland, eager to pre.

6 occupy the favor of the successor, or afraid of

being too late in paying homage to him.

Meanwhile, the Queen's difcafe increased, and hb

melancholy appeared to be fettled and incurable,
Various conjeAures were formed concerning the
causes of a disorder, from which she seemed to be
exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper,
Some imputed it to her being forced. contrary tobei
inclination, to pardon the Earl of Tyronne, whoef
rebellion had for many years created her much trou.
ble. Others imagined that it arose from oblervingtht
ingratitude of her courtiers, and the levity of het
people, who beheld her health declining with moio
indecent indifference, and looked forward to the
accellion of the Scottish King, with an impn
tience which they could not conceal The moR
common opinion, at that time, and perhaps the
most probable, was, that it flowed from grief foi
the Earl of Effex. She retained an extraordinarg
regard for the memory of that unfortunate noble
man; and though Ihe often complained of hi
obstinacy, feldoin mentioned his name withou
tears ". An accident happened soon after her rt
tiring to Richmond, which revived her affediol
with new tenderness, and embittered her sorrows
The Countess of Nottingham, being on her deal
bed, desired to fee the Queen, in order to revel
something to her, without discovering which, fl

' Birch. Mem. ii. o05.

could not die in peace. When the Queen came into B o o x
herchamber, she told her, that while Effexlay under viii.
fetenlce of death, he was desirous of imploring par- is03
don in the manner which the Queen herself had pre-
fcribcd. by returning a ring, which during the height
oflisfavor fIe had given him, with a promise that if,
inj ny future diflrefs. he sent that back to her as a to.
Ien, it flould entitle him to her protetion; that Lady
Scroop was the person he intended to employ in order
toprefent it; that, by a mistake, it was put into her
hands instead of Lady Scroop's; and that The having
communicated the matter to her hulband, one of Es-
tx's most implacable enemies, he had forbid her either
tocarry the ring to the Queen , or to return it to the
ELrl. The Countess, having thus disclosed her secret,
begged the Queen's forgiveness; butElizabeth, who
now saw both the malice of the Earr's enemies, and
how unjustly Ihe had fufpeded him of inflexible ob.
finacy, replied, "God may forgive you, but I never
can;" and left the room in great emotion ". From that

"This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was sirs published by
Osbornc, Mlem. of Eliz. p. 2; ; is confirmed by the testimony
o del Maurier, Mem. 2 60, and by the traditional evidence of
I.adv Elizabeth Spelman published by Dr. Birch, Negoc. o6.
Camden mentions the Queen's grief for Essex's death as one of
the causes of her melancholy. Some original papers. remain
which prove that this was commonly believed at the time,
Birch. Alem. ii. So6. Effex, however, had been beheaded
tm years before her death, and there seems to have been no
tier reason, but that which we have assigned, why her for.
ras Ihould revive with so much violence at so great a distance
f time. As the death of the Countess of Nottingham hap,

U 3

85

o OK moment, her spirit funk entirely; tfe could scarce
vill. taste food; she refused all the medicines prercribed by
soL her physicians; declaring that hIe wilhed to die, and

would live no longer. No entreaty could prevail on
her to go to bed; she fat on cuflions, during ten days
and nights, pensive and silent, holding her fingera.
most continual!j in her mouth,. with her eyes open,
and fixed on the ground. The only thing to which
Ihe seemed to give any attention, were the ads of
devotion performed in her apartment by the Arch.
bilhop of Canterbury; and in these Lhe joined with
great appearance of fervor. Wafted, at lat, as well
by anguish of mind, as by long abstinence, lhe
expired, without a Itruggle, on Thursday the
twenty-fourth day of March, in the seventieth yar
of her age, and in the forty-fifth of her reign",
aHer c . Foreigners often accuse the English of indil

ference and difrefpet towards their Prioces. But
without reason; no people are more grateful than

penea about a fortnight before the Queen's death, thecoin.
cidence of there events, together with the other evidenceme
tioned, adds so much probability to the ftury related by O.
borne, as will entitle it to a place in history. The only ob
jedion to the account we have given of Elizabeth's attachment
to Effex, arises from her great age. At the age of 68, th
amorous passions are commonly abundantly cool, and td
violence of all the pafions, except one, is much abated. U
the force of this objection is entirely removed by an aui
who has illultrated many palfages in the Englilh Hitory,
adorned more. Catalogue of Royal and Noble Auathon
Article Effex.

'" Camd. Birch. Mem. iL 0o6. Birch. Negoc. 2i

Strype, iv. 373.
86

they to those Monarchs who merit their gratitude. BOOK
The names of Edward Il1. and Henry V. are men- vili.
tioned by the Englifl of this age with the fame 60o3.
warmth as they were by those who Ihared in the
blellings and splendor of their reigns. The memory
of Elzabeth is Rill adored in England. The hiRforians
of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of her
people; her sagacity in discerning their true interest;
herfeadinefs in pursuing it; her wildom in the choice
ofher Minilters; the glory the. acquired by arms;
the tranquillity the secured to her fubjets; and
the increase of fame, of riches, and of commerce,
which were the fruits of all these; justly rank
her among the most illustrious Princes.. Even
the defects in her charadler, they observe, were
not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her ex-
ceflive frugality was not accompanied with the
love of hoarding; and though it prevented some
great undertakings, and rendered the success of
others incomplete, it introduced meconomy into
her administration, and exempted the nation from
many burdens, which a Monarch, more profuse
or more enterprising, must have imposed. Her
slowness in rewarding her servants sometimes dif-
couraged useful merit; but it prevented the un-
dteerving from acquiring, power and wealth, to
which they had no title. Her extreme jealousy
of those Princes who pretended to dispute her
right to the Crown, led her to take such precau-
tions, as tended no less to the public safety, than
to her own; and to court the affections of her
people, as the firmest support of her throne.

G 4

87

THE HISTORY
a o o K Such is the picure which the Euglilh draw of this

ill. great Queen.
aoi. Whoever undertakes to write the History of

Scotland, finds himself obliged, frequently, to view
her in a very different, and in a le.s amiable light.
Her authority in that kingdom, during the greater
part of her reign, was little inferior to that which
hle possessed in her own. But this authority, acquired
at first by a service of great importance to the nation,
The exercised in a manner extremely pernicious to
its happiness. By her indultry in fomenting the rage
of the two contending factions; by supplying the
one with partial aid; by feeding the other with
faire hopes; by balancing their power so artfully,
that each of them was able to diRrefs, and neither
of them to subdue the other: (he rendered Scotland
long the feat of discord, confusion, and bloodlbed:
and her craft and intrigues, effecing what the
valor of her ancestors could not accomplilh, reduced
that kingdom to a state of Jependance on Eng.
land. The maxims of policy, often little confo.
mant to those of morality, may, perhaps, jut.
tify this conduct. But no apology can be offered
for her behaviour to Queen Mary; a scene of
dissimulation without necefity; and of severity
beyond example In almost all her other acions,
Elizabeth is the objed of our highest admiration;
in this we mull allow that Ihe not only laid aside
the magnanimity which became a Queen, but the
feelings natural to a woman.

J Though Elizabeth would never permit the
Kmug. question concerning the right of fucceflion to the

.~sa

Crown to be determined in parliament; nor declare Bo K
her own sentiments concerning a point which she vile.
wdlhed to remain an impenetrable mystery; she 1603.
had, however, formed no design of excluding the
Scottish King from an inheritance to which his title
was undoubted. A (hort time before her death,
fie broke the silence which file had so long pre.
ferred on that subjed, and told Cecil and the Lord
Admiral, " That her throne was the throne of Kings;
that (lie would have no mean person to ascend it,
and that her cousin the King of Scots should be
herfucceffor." This she confirmed on her death-bed.
As soon as fle breathed her las, the lords of the
Privy Council proclaimed James King of England.
All the intrigues carried on by foreigners in favor
of the Infanta, all the cabals formed within the
kingdom to support the titles of Lady Arabella and
the Earl of Hartford , disappeared in a moment;
the nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient
hostilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the
dominion of strangers, testified their fatisfadtion
with louder acclamations than were usual at the
acceflion of their native princes. Amidst this
tumult of joy, a motion made by a few patriots,
who proposed to prescribe some conditions to the
successor, and to exact from him the redress of
tome grievances, before they called him to the
throne, was scarcely heard; and Cecil, by Rifling
it, added to his flock of merit with his new master.
Sir Charles Percy, brother of the Earl of North.
umberland, and Thomas Somerset, the Earl of
Worcester's son, were dispatched to Scotland, with

89

i o o x a letter to the King, signed by all the Peers and

iii. Privy Counsellors then in London; informing him
Uo. of the Queen's death, of his accellion to the throne,

of their care to recognize his title, and of the
universal applause with which the public procl.
mation of it had been attended. They made the
utmoR haste to deliver this welcome meflage; but
were prevented by the zeal of Sir Robert Carey,
Lord Hunfdon's youngest son, who setting out a
few hours after Elizabeth's death, arrived at ldin.
burgh on Saturday night, just as the King had
gone to bed. He was immediately admitted into
the royal apartment, and kneeling by the King's
bed, acquainted him with the death of Elizabeth,
saluted him king of England, Scotland, France,
and Ireland, and as a token of the truth of the
intelligence which he brought, presented him a
ring, which his filler Lady Scroop had taken from
the Queen's finger after her death. James heard him
with a decent composure. But as Carey was only
a private meflenger, the information which he
brought was not made public, and the King kept
his apartment till the arrival of Percy and Somerset
Then his titles were solemnly proclaimed; and his
own fubjeds expressed no eftsjoy, than the Englili,
at this increase of his dignity. As his presence
was absolutely necefiary in England, where the
people were extremely impatient to fee their new
Sovereign, he prepared to set out for that kingdom
without delay. He appointed his Queen to fol
low him within a few weeks. He committed the
government of Scotland to his Privy Cowucil
90

He intrufed the care' of his children to different B BOOK
noblemen On the Sunday before his departure, he viiI.
repaired to the church of St. Giles, and after hearing 16o3.
afermon,in which the preacher displayed the great-
ness of the divine goodness in raising him to the
throne of such a powerful kingdom without oppofi-
tion or bloodshed, and exhorted him to express his
ratitude, by promoting, to the utmolt, the hap-
piness and prosperity of his fubjeds; the King rose
up and addreling himself to the people, made many
profelions of unalterable affection towards them;
promised frequently to visit Scotland; assured them
that his Scottilh fubjeCs, notwithstanding his ab-
fence, hould feel that he was their native Prince,
noles than when he resided among them; and might
fill trul that his ears Ihould be always open to their
petitions, which he would answer with the alacrity
and love of a parent. His words were often inter-
rupted by the tears of the whole audience; who,
though they exulted at the King's prosperity, Jvere
melted into sorrow by these tender declarations'.
On the fifth of April he began his journey, with Take poC.
ifplendid, but not a numerous train; and next refion of
day he entered Berwick. Wherever he came, im- the guoe.
mense multitudes were assembled to welcome him;
and the principal persons in the different counties
through which he passed, displayed all their
wealth and magnificence in entertainments prepared
for him at their houses. Elizabeth had reigned so
long in England, that most of her fubjete
"Spotfw. 476.

91

0o K remembered no other court but hers; and their
vill. notions of the manners and decorums suitable to
IO. a prince were formed upon what they had observed

there. It was natural to apply this standard to
the behaviour and actions of their new Monarhb,
and to compare him, at first fight, with the Queen,
on whole throne he was to be placed. James,
whose manners were extremely different from
hers, uffered by the comparison. He had not
that flowing affability, by which Elizabeth cap.
tivated the hearts of her people; and, though easy
among a few whom he loved, his indolence could
not bear the fatigue of rendering himself agree-
able to a mixed multitude. He was no left a
franger to that dignity with which Elizabeth
tempered her familiarity. And, instead of that
well-judged frugality with which 0he conferred
titles of honor, he bestowed them with an un-
diftinguifing profusion, that rendered them no
longer marks of diltindion, or rewards of merit
But these were the reflecions of the few alone;
the multitude continued their acclamations; and,
amidst these, James entered London on the 7th
of May, and took peaceable poffefion of the
throne of England.
e-soa. Thus were united two kingdoms, divided from

the earlierf accounts of time, but destined, by their
situation, to form one great monarchy. By
this jundion of its whole native force, Great Bri-
tain hath risen ta an eminence and authority in
Europe, which England and Scotland could
never have attained.
9Z

The Scots had so long confidered their monarchs B o o K
as next heirs to the Englilh throne, that they had VIll.
fullleifure to reflect on all the consequences of their A view of
being advanced to that dignity. But, dazzled with 'hio, i.
the glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful tbe cunti.
enemy, relying on the partiality of their native tio
Prince, and in full expectation of rbaring liberally fine tbe
in the wealth and honors which he would now be accef"lo of
able to bestow, they attended little to the mole
obvious consequences of that great event, and
rejoiced at his acceflion to the throne of England, as
if it had been no less beneficial to the kingdom, than
honorable to the King. They soon had reason,
however, to adopt very different sentiments; and
from that period we may date a total alteration in the
political constitution of Scotland.

The feudal AriRocracy, which had been sub-
verted in most nations of Europe by the policy of
their Princes, or had been undermined by the
progress of commerce, fill subsisted with full
force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed
gradually to augment the power of the Scottifli
nobles; and even the Reformation, which in
every other country where it prevailed added to
the authority of the Monarch, had increased their
wealth and influence. A King possesed of a tmall
revenue, with a prerogative extremely limited,
and unsupported by a fRanding army, could not
exercile much authority over such potent fubjeds..
He was obliged to govern by expedients; and
the laws derived their force not from his power
to execute them, but from the voluntary fubmiC

93

00 K sion of the nobles. But though this produced a
TIlL species of government extremely feeble and ir.

regular; though Scotland, under the name, and
with all the outward ensigns of a monarchy, was
really subjed to an Aristocracy, the people were
not altogether unhappy; and even in this wild form
of a constitution, there were principles, which tended
to their security and advantage. The King, checked
and overawed by the nobles, durst venture upon no
ad of arbitrary power. The nobles, jealous of the
King, whose claims and pretensions were many,
though his power was small, were afraid of irritating
their dependants by unreasonable exadions, and
tempered the rigor of ariftocratical tyranny, with a
mildness and equality to which it is naturally a
stranger. As long as the military genius of the feudal
government remained in vigor, the vassals bothof
the Crown and of the Barons were generally not
only free from oppreflion, but were courted by
their superiors, whose power and importance
were founded on their attachment and love.

But, by his accelion to the throne of Eng.

land, James acquired such an immense acceflion
of wealth, of power, and of splendor, that the
nobles, alfonilfed and intimidated, thought it vain
to struggle for privileges which they were now
unable to defend. Nor was it from fear alone
that they submitted to the yoke; James, partial
to his countrymen, and willing that they Ihould
partake in his good fortune, loaded them with
riches and honors; and the hope of his favor
concurred with the dread of his power, in taming
94

95

their fierce and independent spirits. The will of B o O K
the Prince became the supreme law in Scotland; vll.
and the nobles Rrove, with emulation, who hould
m0Roimplicitly obey commands, which they had
formerly been accustomed to contemn. Satisfied
with having fubjeted the nobles to the Crown, the
King left them in full poffeflion of their ancient
jurirdidtion over their own vassals. The extensive
rights, veIled in a feudal Chief, became in their
bands dreadful inRfruments of oppression, and the
military ideas, off which these rightswere founded,
being gradually loft or disregarded, nothing
remained to corred or to mitigate the rigor with
which they were exercifed.hThe nobles, exhausting
theirfortunes by the expense of frequent attendance
upon the Englilh court, ,and by attempts to imitate
the manners and luxury of their more wealthy
neighbonrr, multiplied exacions upon the people,
who durst hardly utter complaints which they knew
would never reach the ear of their Sovereign, nor
move him to grant them any redress. From the union
of the Crowns to the revolution in 16X8, Scotland
was placed in a political situation, of all others the
moll singular, and the moll unhappy; fubjeded
at once to the absolute will of a Monarch, and to
the oppreflive jurifdidtion of an Aristocracy, it
luffered all the miseries peculiar to both these
forms of government. Its Kings were despotic;
its nobles were saves and tyrants; and the people
groaned under the rigorous domination of both.
During this period, the nobles, it is true ,made
one effort to Ihake off the yoke, and to regain their

B oo0 ancient independency. After the death of Jame,
vill. the Scottilh nation was no longer viewed by our

Monarchs with any partial affection. Charles L
educated among the Englilh, discovered no p.
culiar attachment to the kingdom of which be was
a native. The nobles, perceiving the sceptre to be
now in hands less friendly, and swayed by a Prince
with whom they bad little connexion, and over
whose councils they bad little influence, no longer
submitted with the fame implicit obedience. Pro
voked by some encroachments of the King on their
order, and apprehensive of others, the remains of
their ancient spirit began to appear. They comn
plained and remonRfrated. The people being, at the
fame time, violently disgusted at the innovations
in religion, the nobles secretly heightened this dif-
guit; and their artifices, together with the ill-condu&
of the court, raised such a spirit, that the whole
nation took arms against their Sovereign, with an
union and animosity of which there had formerly
been no example. Charles brought against then
the forces of England,, and notwithstanding their
own union, and the zeal of the people, the nobles
nuft have funk in the ftrugglc. But the difaffecion
which was growing among his Englilh fubjeds,
prevented the King from acting with vigor. A
civil war broke out in both 'kingdoms; and after
many battles and revolutions , which are well
known, the Scottilh nobles, who first began the
war, were involved in the fame ruin with the
throne. At the Restoration, Charles II. regain
ed full poffcflion of the royal prerogative in Scot

land;

hnd; and the nobles, whose estates were wafted, o n n
or their spirit broken, by the calamities to which vil1
they had been exposed, were less able and less
willing than ever to resist the power of the Crown.
During his reign, and that of James VII. the
dicites of the Monarch were received in Scot.
had with most abje&t fubmiflion. The poverty
to which many of the nobles were reduced ren-
dered them meaner saves, and more intolerable
yrants, than ever. The people, always neglect%
ed, were now odious, and loaded with every in.
jury, on account of their attachment to religious
and political principles extremely repugnant to
those adopted by their Prirics.
The Revolution introduced other maxims into
the government of Scotland. To increase the au-
thority of the Prince, or to secure the privileges of
he nobles, had hitherto been almost the sole objet
of our laws. The righs of the people were hardly
teer mentioned, were disregarded, or unknown;
Attention began, henceforward, to be paid to the
welfare of the people. By the claim of iiyht; their
iberties were secured'; and the number of their
representatives being increased, they gradually
acquired new weight and consideration in parlia,
tent. As they came,to enjoy more security and
greater power, their minds began to open, and
to form more extensive plans of commerce, of
inlultry, and of police. But the ariltocratical
Iirit which fill predominated, together with
may other accidents, retarded the improvement
and happiness of the nation.
VOL. Ill, H

lo o Another great event completed what the Re
vII. volution had begun. The political power of thi

nobles, already broken by the union of the twe
Crowns, was almost annihilated by the union of th,
two kingdoms. Instead of making a part, as formerly
of the supreme assembly of the nation, inRead o
bearing the most considerable sway there, the Peers o
Scotland are admitted into the British parliament b}
their representatives only, and form but an inconfi
derable part of one of those bodies in which the legil
lative authority is vested. They themselves are ex
eluded absolutely from the house of Commons., an(
even their eldest sons are not permitted to reprefen
their countrymen in that august assembly. Nor havi
their feudal privileges remained, to compensate so
this extinotion of their political authority. As con
merce advanced in its progress, and governmen
attained nearer to perfetion, these were infenfiblj
circumscribed, and atlaft, by law& no less salutary t(
the public, than fatal to the nobles, they havi
been almost totally abolished. As the noble
were deprived of power, the people acquired li
berty. Exempted from burdens, to which tael
were formerly subjea, screened from oppreflion
to which they had been long exposed, an(
adopted into a conftitutioq whose genius an
laws were more liberal than their own, they hay
extended their commerce, refined their manners
made improvements in the elegancies of life, am
cultivated the arts and sciences.

This survey of the political state of Scotland
in which events and their causes have been mee

tioned rather than developed, enables us to point n o o
out three eras, from each of which we may date villi
some great alteration in one or other of the three
dfferent members of which the supreme legifla-
tire assembly in our conftitut;on is composed. At
their Accetion to the throne of England, the Kings of
Scotland, once themoft limited, became, in an
inftit, the molf absolute Princes in Europe, and
exercised a despotic authority, which their parlia-
ments were unable to control, or their nobles to
refit. At the Union of the two kingdoms, the feudal
ariltocracy, which had fubfiRed so many ages, and
with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and the
Scottilh nobles having surrendered rights and pre.
eminences peculiar to their order, reduced them.
felvesto a condition which is no longer the terror
and envy of other subjects. Since the Union, the
Commons, anciently negleted by their Kings,
and seldom courted by the nobles, have emerged
into dignity ; and, being admitted to a partici-
pation of all the privileges which the English had
purchased at the expense of so much blood,
mufl now be esteemed a body not less considerable
in the one kingdom, than they have long been
in the other.

The church felt the effecs of the abfoltte power
'Which the King acquired by his acceflion; and its
revolutions, too,' are worthy of notice. James,du-
ring the latter years of his administration in Scot-
and, had revived the name and office of Bilhops.
But t ey possessed no ecclesiastical jurifdicion or
pin.cminencc, their revenues were inconsiderable,

H 4

99

z 0 0 K and they werercarcely diftinguilfed byanythingbut
Viii. by their feat in parliament, and by being the obiec

of the clergy'sjealoufy, and the people's hatred. The
King, delighted with the splendor and authority
vhich the Englilh Biflops enjoyed, and eager to
effect an union in the ecclesiastical policy, which he
had, in vain, attempted in the civil government of
the two kingdoms, resolved to bring both Churches
to an exac conformity with each other. Three Scot.;
men were consecrated Bithops at London. From
them, their brethren were commanded to receive
orders. Ceremonies unknown in Scotland were
imposed; and though the Clergy, less obsequious
than the nobles, boldly opposed these innovations,
James, long pratifed and well.fkilled in the arts of ma
naging them, obtained at length their compliance.
But Charles L a (uperftitious Prince, unacquainted
with the genius of the Scots, imprudent and preci
pitant in all the measures he pursued in that kingdom,
prefingtoo eagerly the reception of the Englilh litur.
gy , and indiscreetly attempting a resumption of
Church-lands, kindled the flames of civil war; and the
people being left at liberty to indulge their own
wvilies, the Episcopal church was overturned, and
the Prelbyterian government and discipline were re.
eftabliflied with new vigor. Together with Monar.
chy, Episcopacy was retored in Scotland. A formol
government, so odious to the people, required force
to uphold it; and though not only the whole ri
gor of authority, but all the barbarity of perse
cution were employed in its support, the aversion
of the nation was insurmountable, and it fubffltt

with difficulty. At the Revolution, the inclinations t e o x
of the people were thought worthy the attention of tlul.
the legifnttlre, the Preflbyterian government was
gahin elablifhed, and, being ratified by the Union.,
ig ill maintained in the kingdom.
Nor did the influence of the Acceflon extend to
the civil and ecclesiastical constitution alone; the
genius of the nation, its taste and spirit, things of
a nature Rfill more delicate, were sensibly affected
bythat event. When learning evived in the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages
were in a fate equally barbarous, devoid of elegance,
ofvigor, and evenofperfpicuity. No author thought
of writing in languages so ill adapted to express and
embellifll his sentiments, or of erecting a work
for ipmortality , with such rude and perlfhing
materials. As the spirit, which prevailed at that
time, did not owe its rife to any original effort of
the human mind, but was excited by admiration
of the ancients , their compositions were deemed
not only the Randards of taste and of sentiment,
but of style; and even the languages in which
they wrote were thought to be peculiar, and almolt
cnnfecrated to learning and the mules. Not only
the manner of the ancients was imitated, but
their language copied: and, extravagant as the
attempt may appear, to write in a dead tongue,
in which men were not gccuftomed to think, and
which they could not speak, or even pronounce,
thefuccefl of it was aftonilhing. As they formed their
ly leupon the purelt models; as they were uninfeted
with those barbarisms, which the inaccuracy of

Hi

10 Bo familiar conversation, the affetation of courts,
TI1. intercourse with fRrangers, and a thousand othe

cmaes introduce into living languages; many
moderns have attained to a degree of elegance in
their Latin compositions, which the Romans them.
selves scarce poffeifed beyond the limits of the
AuguRan age. While this was almost the only
species of composition, and all authors, by ufino
one common language, could be brought to a
nearer comparison, the Scottif writers were nol
inferior to those of any other nation. The happy
genius of Buchanan, equally'formed to excel in prolf
and in verse, more various, more original, and
more elegadt, than that of almost any other moder
who writes in Latin, refleds, with regard to thi
particular, the greatest lustre on his country.

But the labor attending the fludy of a dead

tongue was irksome; the unequal return for theii
industry which authors met with, who could be
read and admired only within the narrow circle
of the learned, was mortifying; and men, infead
of wafting half their lives in learning the language
of the Romans, began to refine and to poilfl their
own. The modem tongues were found to be ful
ceptible of beauties and graces, which, if no0
equal to those of the ancient ones, were at leaf
more attainable. The Italians having firR set thi
example, Latin was no longer used in the work!
of tate; it was confined to books of science; ant
the politer nations have banished it even from thete
The Scots, we may presume, would have hac
Po cause to regret this change in the public Cta
1102

and would fill have been able to maintain some B a o o
equality with other nations, in their pursuit of vlto.
literary honor. The English and Scottilh languages,
derived from the fame sources, were, at the end
ol the sixteenth century, in a Rate nearly similar,
differing from one another somewhat in ortho-
graphy, though not only the words, but the idioms
were much the fame. The letters of several Scottish
hatefmen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
or in purity, to thole of the Englifl Ministers with
whom they corresponded. James himself was
mailer of a Ryle far from contemptible; and, by
his example and encouragement, the Scottilh
language might have kept pace with the Englilh
in refinement. Scotland might have had a series
of authors in its own, as well as in the Latin lan-
guage, to boast of; and the improvements in taRe,
in the arts, and in the sciences, which spread over
the other polished nations of Europe , would not
have been unknown there.
But, at the very time when other nations were
beginning to drop the use of Latin in works of
talRe, and to make trial of the strength and com-
pass of their own languages, Scotland ceased to
be a kingdom. The transports of joy, which the
Accefflon at first occasioned, were soon over:
and the Scots, being at once deprived.of all the
objets that refine or animate a people; of the
presence of their Prince, of the concourse of no-
bles, of the splendor and elegance of a court, an
universal dejedion of spirit seems to have seized
he nation. The Court being withdrawn, no domefic

H 4

I3

standard of propriety and correcnef of fpeec
remained; the few compofirions that Scotland pro
duced were tried by the'.aghh standard, and ever
word or pbrafe that variedin the leat from that, vwa
condemned as barbarous; whereas, if the two nation
had continued ddftind, each might have retained
idioms and forms of speech peculiar to itself; and
tbefe,-rendered falhionable by the example of a
Court, and flpported by the authority of' writen
of repuration. might have been confidered in the
fame fight with the varieties occasioned by tih
different diatets in the Greek tongue; might have
been cofilcered as beauties; and, in many cafes,
might have been used promifeuoully by the authori
of both nations But, by the Accellion, the EngliOl
waturally became the sole judges and law-givers in
language, and rejeied as solecisms, every form ol
speech to which their ear was notaccuftomed. Nor
did the Scots, while the intercourse between the two
nations was inconsiderable , and ancient prejudict

M A remarkable proof o the litte intereonre between te

Eoglilh and Scots before the union of the Crowns, i to
be found in two curious papers, one publilhed by Haynes,
the other by Strype. In the year a 67, Elizabeth com-
manded the Bishop of London to take a firvey of aH the
Rrangers within the cities of London and Weftminner. rB
this report, which is very ainute, it appears thatthewhok
nnmber of Scots at that time was s8. Haynes, 4C. A furve
of the fame ind was made by Sir Thomas Row, Lord Mlyor,
A. DI. i 6. The number of Scots had then increased to
88. Strype, iv. Supplement, No. I. On the accefion of
James, a considerable number of Scots, epecially of thi
higher rank ;resorted to England; but it was nottill the Union
batthe intercourse between the two kingdoms became grat
104

re ftillfo violent as to prevent imitation, possess B o 0 K
the means of refining their own tongue accord- ;vill.
ingto the purity of the Englilb flandard. On the
contrary, new corruptions flowed into it from eve-

different source. The Clergy of Scotland, in that

age, were more eminent for piety than for learning;
and though there did not arise many authors
among them, yet being in poffefion of the privilege
of dlfcourfing publicly to the people, and their
sermons being too long, and perhaps too frequent,
such hafy produtions could not be elegant; and
many slovenly and incorrct modes of expreflion
may be traced back to that original. The pleadings of
lawyers were equally loose and inaccurate, and that
proefllion having furnilhed more authors and the
matters of which they treat mingling daily in
common discourse and business, many of those
vicious forms of speech, which are denominated
otticifms, have been introduced by them into the
language. Nor did either the language or public
taRe receive any improvement in Parliament, where
amore liberal and more corret eloquence might have
been expeCed. All business was tranfaCed there by
the Lords of Articles, and they were so servilely
devoted to the Court, that few debates arose, and,
prior to the Revolution, none were conduced with
the pirit and vigor natural to a popular assembly.
Thus, during the whole seventeenth century,
lhe Englifi were gradually refining their language
irI th .r taste; in Scotland the former was much
dieafd, and the latter almost entirely loft. In
the beginning of that period, both nations were

lo5

X o o K emerging out of barbarity, but the distance between
vii. them, which was then inconsiderable, became

before the end of it, immense. Even after science ha
once dawned upon them, the Scots seemed to b
finking back into ignorance and obscurity; and
adive and intelligent as they naturally. are, the
continued, while other nations were eager in th
pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a state of languno
This, however, mul be imputed to the unhappinel
of their political situation, not to any defed c
genius; for no sooner was the one removed in an
degree, than the other began to display itself. The ac
abolihiing the power of the Lords of Articles, an
other salutary laws passed at the Revolution, havin
introduced freedom of debate into the Scottil
Parliament, eloquence, with all the arts that al
company or perfed it, became immediate objed
of attention; and the example of Fletcher c
Salton alone is sufficient to show that the Scol
were fill capable of generous sentiments, and
notwithstanding some peculiar idioms, were abl
to express themselves with energy, and with el
gance.

At length the Union having incorporated th

two nations, and rendered them one people, th
diftindions which had subsisted for many age
gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear; th
fame manners prevail in both parts of the ifiand
the fame authors are read and admired; the fam
entertainments are frequented by the elegant an
polite; and the fame fandard of taste, and of pE
rity in language, is cftablilhed. The Scots, afte
ic6

bding placed, during a whole century, in a situ- B OO K
,ion no less fatal to the liberty than to the taste vill.
and genius of the nation, were at once put in
pofellion of privileges more valuable than those
which their ancestors had formerly enjoyed; and
every obltrudion that had retarded their pursuit,
or prevented their acquisition of literary fame,
was totally removed.

# A CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King HENRY, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letter to Bothwell.

A CRITICAL
DISSERTATION

CONCERNING
tThe I Murder of King HENRY, and t

Genuineness of the Queen's Letle
to Bothwell

IT is not my intention to engage in all the coi
troverfies to which the murder of King Hemy
or the letters from Queen Mary to Bothwel
have given rife; far less to appear as an adverfar
to any particular author, who hath treated c
them. To repeat, and to expose all the i
founded assertions with regard to thee points
which have sowed from inattention, from preju
dice, from partiality, from malevolence, and fio
difonefty, would be no 'less irksome to myfel
than unacceptable to most of my readers All
propose, is to aflift others in forming some judge
ment concerning the fads in dispute, by ftatin
the proofs produced on 'each fide, with as mud
brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the fanr
attention and impartiality which I have endea
voured to exercise in examining other contr
verted points in the Scottilb history.

In order to account for the King's murder, two

different systems have been formed. The on
supposes Bothwell to have contrived andexecutd

tis crime. The other imputes it to the Earls of
lurray, Morton, and their party.
The decision of many controverted fats in his.
tory, is a matter rather of curiosity than of use.
They fRand detached; and whatever we determine
with regard to them, the fabric of the IRory re-
mains untouched. But the fast under dispute in
this place is a fundamental and essential one, and
ccording to the opinion which a historian adopts
with regard to it, he must vary and dispose the
whole of his subsequent narration. A historical sys.
tern may be tried in two different ways, whether it
be confident with probability, and whether it be
supported by proper evidence.
Those who charge the King's murder upon Both.
well, argue in the following manner; and though
their reasonings have been mentioned already in dif.
Ierent places of the narrative, it is necessary to repeat
item here. Mary's love forDarnly, fay they, was a
sudden and youthful passion. The beauty of his per.
ion, set off by some external frivolous accomplil..
ments, was his chief merit. His capricious temper
soon raised in the Queen a disgust, which broke out
on diffrent occasions. His engaging in the conspiracy
aginft Rizio, converted this disgust into an anti.
pathy which she was at no pains to conceal. This
breach was perhaps, in its own nature, irrepara-
ble; the King certainly wanted that art and con-
descension which alone could have repaired it.
It widened every day, and a deep and fettled
hatred effaced all remains of affetion.. Bothwell
obrerved this, and was prompted by ambition,

l0O

and perhaps by love, to found upon it a fchemen
which proved fatal both to the Queen and to himself
He had served Mary at different times with fidelity
and success. He insinuated himself into her favor,
by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained
her heart. In order to gratify his love, or at leall
his ambition, it was necessary toget rid of the King,
MIary had rejeded the proposal which, it is said,
had been made to her for obtaining a divorce,
The King was equally hated by the partisans of the
house of Hamilton, a considerable party in the
kingdom; by Murray, one of the molt powerful
and popular persons in his country; by Morton and
his associates, whom he had deceived; and whom
Bothwell had bound to his intcreft by a recent
favor. Among the people Darnly was fallen under
extremet contempt. Bothwell might exped, for
all these reasons, that the murder of the King
would pals without any inquiry, and might truftto
Mary's love, and to his own address and good
fortune, for the accomplishment of the reft of his
withes. What Bothwell expeded really came to
pals. Mary, if not privy herself to the design,
connived at an adion which rid her of a man whom
The had such good reason to detest. A few months
after the murder of her hulband, fle married the
person who was both fufpeded and accused of
having perpetrated that odious crime.

Those, who charge the guilt upon Murray and

his party, reason in this manner. Murray, they
fay, was a man of boundless ambition. Notwith,
tanding the illegitimacy of his birth, he had early

formed a design of usurping the Crown. On the
Queen's return into Scotland, he insinuated himself
into her favor, and engrossed the whole power into
his own hands. He set himself againlt every pro.
pofil of marriage which was made to her, left his
own chance of succeeding to the Crown should be
deRlroyed. He hated Darnly, and was no less hated
by him. In order to be revenged on him, he entered
into a sudden friendlhip with Bothwell, his ancient
and mortal enemy. He encouraged him to affalinate
Henry, by giving him hopes of marrying the Queen.
All this was done with a design to throw upon the
Queen herself the imputation of being accessary to the
murder, and under that pretext, to destroy Bothwell,
to depose and imprison her, and to seize the sceptre
which he had wrested out of her hands.
The former of there systems has an air of proba.
bility, is confitent with itself, and solves appear.
ances. In the latter, some assertions are false, some
links are wanting in the chain, and effecs appear,
of which no sufficient cause is produced. Murray,
on the Queen's return into Scotland, served her
with great fidelity, and by his prudent adminiftra.
tion rendered her so popular, and so powerful, as
enabled her with ease to qualh a formidable infur.
relion raised by the party of which he was the
leader in the year 1565. What motive could
induce Murray to murder a Prince without ca-
pacity, without followers, without influence over
thenobles, whom the Queen, by her neglect, had
reduced to the lowest Rate of contempt, and who,
after a long disgrace, had regained (according to

the moR favorable supposition ) the precarious po
fefinon of her favor only a few days before hii
death? It is difficult to conceive what Murray har
to fear from theKing's life. It is still a more difficuli
matter to guess what he could gain by his death. I
we suppose that the Queen had no previous attach
ment to Bothwell, nothing can appear more chime
rical than a scheme to persuade her to marry a man,
wbole wife was till alive, and who was not onl}
fufpeded, but accused, of murdering her former hus.
band. But that such a scheme Ihould really succeed
is still more extraordinary.-If Murray had inftig,
ted Bothwell to commit the crime, or had himfell
been acceffcry to the commiflon of it, what hopei
were there that Bothwell would silently bear from
a fellow - criminal all the persecutions which he fio
sered, without ever retorting upon him the accua.
tion, or revealing the whole scene of iniquity
An ancient and deadly feud had subsisted between
Murray and Botbwell; the Queen with difficulty
had brought them to fomt terms of agreement But
is it probable that Murray would chufe an enemy,
to whom he had been so lately reconciled, for
his confidentin the commifion of fucb an.atrocious
crime ? Or, on the other hand, would it evc
enter into the imagination of a wife man, firRt t
raise his rival to supreme power, in hopes that
afterwards he /hould render him odious, byaccufin
him of crimes which he had not committed, and
in consequence of this unjuR charge, Ihould bI
enabled to deprive him of that power? The mo
adventurous politician never hazarded such da

Se[0us

gernUS experiment; The mot credulous folly never
nletd such an uncertain chance.
How fprong soever these general reasonings may
rppcr to be, it is iot upon them alone that
we mufi decide, but according to the particular
evidence that is produced. This We now proceed
to examine.

ThatBothwell was guilty of the King's murder,
appears, [. From the concurring teftimory of all the
contemporary historians. 2. From the cornfeffion of
tofe persons who suffered for aflifing at the corn.
million of the crime, and Who enter into a minute
detail of al its circumftarices. Andert. ii. 65. 3. From'
theacknowledgment of Mary's own cdmmiffioners,
who allow Bothwell to have been one of those who
where guilty of this crime. Good. ii. r23. 4. From
tbeexprefs testimony of Lefljr, BifbopofRofs, to the
lime effe& with the former. De. of Q. Mary's
Honor. And. i. 76. Id. iii. p. 31. 5. Morton ;
a his death ,declared that Bothwell had solicited
him, at different times, to cbncur in the confpi-
Rcy formed against the life of the King; and that
he was informed by Archibald Douglas,' one of
te conspirators, that Bothwell was prefect at the
murder Crawf. Mem. App. 4.. The letter from
Douglas to the Queen , which I have pubtfifed
i the Appendix to Vol. II. No. 34. confirms
Morton's testimony. 6 Lord Herries prortifes, in his
Own name, and in the name of the nobles who
adhered to the Queen, that they would concur in
poilhing Bothwell as the murderer of the King
Append. Vol. II. No. iI.
VOL. III. i

The most dired charge ever brought against

Murray is in these words of Bishop Lefy. Is it
a unknown," addressing himflf to the Earl of Mur.
ray, what the Lord Herries said to your face openly
s even at your own table, asew daysafter the murder
a was committed ? Did he not charge you with the
a foreknowledge of the fame murder; did he not,
a nul circumlocutiontufiiu, flatly and plainly burden
g.you, that riding in Fife, and coming with one of
a your molt aftured and trufiy servants the fame day
a whereon you departed from Edinburgh, said to
s him, among other talk. This night ere morning
a Lord Darnly Iball lose his life ? " Defence of Q
Mary, Anders. ii 75. But the assertion of a man so
heated with facion as Lefty, unless it were supported
by proper evidence, is of little weight. The fervantto
whom Murray is said to have spoken tbefe words, is
not named; nor the manner in which this secret con.
verfation was brought to light mentioned. Lord
Herries was one of the mos zealous advocates for
Mary, and it is remarkable that, in all his negociation
at the court of England,be never once repeated this ac.
cufation of Murray. In answering thechallengegiven
him by Lord Lindsay, Herries had a fair opportunity
of mentioning Murray's knowledge of the murder;
but though he openly accuses of that crime some of
those who adhered to Murray, he indufirioufy avoids
any insinuation againil Murray himself. Keith. Prcf.
xii. Mary berfelf, in conversation with Sir Francis
Knolles, accused Morton and Maitland of being privy
to the murder, but does not mention Murray. And.
iv. 55. When the Bi/hop of Ross and Lord ferrics

appeared before the Englilh council, January r,
1569, they declared themkelves ready, in obedience to
the Queen's command, to accuse Murray and his afro.
ciates of being accessory to the murder, but "they
" being also required, whether they, or.any of them,
a as of themselves, would accuse the said Earl in
"special, or any of his adherents, or thought them
a guilty thereof; " they anfvered, "that they took
" God to witness that none of them did ever know
"any thing of the cotfpiracy of that murder, or were
"council and foreknowledge thereof; neither who
weredevifers, inventors, and executors of the fame,
"till it was publicly discovered long thereafter by
" omeoftheaffafllns, who fuffred death oh that ac-
" count." G ood. ii. 308. These words are taken out of
a rcgifler kept by Ross and Herries themselves,
and seem to be a dirct confutation of the Biflop's
alertion.

The Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Protiefltion
toicing the mu/der of the King of Scots, after mentioning
the conference at Craigmillar concerning a divorce,
add, "So after these premilfes, the murder of the
"King following, we judge in our consciences, and
" holl for certain and truth, that the Earl of Murray
"and secretary Lethington were authors, inventors,
"counsellors and causers of the fame murder, in what
"manner, or by whatfomever persons the fame
"was executed." Anders. iv. 188. But, i. This
is nothing more than the private opinion or per-
fonal affirmation of these two noblemen. 2. The
conclusion which they make has no connexion
with the premisses on which they found it. Because

I

Murray proposed to obtain for the Queen a divorce
from her hulband with her own consent, it does not
follow that therefore he committed the murder
without her knowledge. 3 Hundy and Argyll were
at that time the leaders of that party opposite to

lurray, and animated with all the rage of'faiioo.
4 Both of them were Murray's personal enemies.
Huntly, on account of the treatment which bisfamily
and clan had received from that nobleman. Argyll was
desirous of being divorced from his wife, with whom
he lived on no good terms, Knox, 328. and by whom
he had no children. Crawf. Peer. 19. She was Murray's
ttler, and by his interef he had obftruded thatdefign.
ieith, 55 i. These circumfiances would gofar toward;
invalidating a poftive testimony; they more than
counterbalance an indeterminate suspicion. 5. It i
altogether uncertain whether Huntly and Argyll ever
subscribed this protefation. A copy offuch a protela.
jon as the Queen thought would be of advantage to
her cause, was transmitted to them by her. Anders. iv.
p. ii. 186. The proteRtation itself, publilbed by
Anderson, is taken from an unfubhcribed copy with
blanks for the oath and place of ubfcribing. On the
back of this copy, there is paftedindeed a paper,which
Ceci I has marked "Answer of the Earl of Murray to a

writing of the Earls of Huntly and Argyll." Andert
1i4, i95. But it can hardly be deemed a reply to the
above-mentioned proteflation. Murray's anfwerbean
date atLondon, January 19. i568. The Queen'sletter,
in which (he inclosed the copy of the proteflation,
blars date at Bowton, Jan. 5. 1568. Nowitisfcarceto
befuppofed that the copy could be sent into Scotland,
be subscribed by the two Earls, and be seen and

anfvered by Murray within fofhort a time. Murray's
reply seems intended only to prevent the impreifion
which the vague and uncertain accusations of his
enemies might make in his abSence.' Cecil had got the
original of the Queen's letter into his custody. Andert
iv 185. This naturally leads us to conjeaure that the
letter itself, together with the inclosed protectation,
were intercepted before they came to the hands of
Huntly and Argyll. Nor is this mere conjeAure alone.
The letter to Huntly, in which the protelation was
inclosed, is to be found; Cott. Li. Cal. C. 1. fol. 280
and is an original subscribed by Mary, though' not
written with her own hand, becatfe Ife seldom chose
towrite in the English language. The protestation is
inthefame volume, fol. 282. and is maiiifefly written
by the fame person who wrote the Queen's letter.
Thisfeemsto render it highly probable that both were
intercepted. So that muchhasbeen founded on aa per
no tfubfcribed by the two Earls, and probably never
seen by them. Besides, this method which the Queeo
took offending a copy tothe two Earls, of what was
properfor them to declare with.regard to a conference
held in their own presence, 'appears somewhat
ffupicious. It would have been more natural, and not
lo liable to any misinterpretation, to have desired
them to write the most exact account, which they
could recolled, of what had passed at the conversation
It Craigmillar. 6. But even if all this reasoning shultd
beset aside, and the authenticity of the Protejiation
lhould be admitted in its full extent, it may fRll
be a question , what degree. of credit Ihoukl be
given to the afTeition of the two Earls, who were

13

rot only present in the firftl Parliament, held by
Mlurja as Regent in December 1567 ,in which the
one carried the sceptre, and the other the sword ol
state, Spotfw, 214 but were both members of the
Committee of Lords of Articles, and in thit capacity
afifted in framing all the ads by which the Queen wai
deprived of the crown, and her son feated on the
thron; and in particular concurred in the ad by
which it was dedlared, that whatever had befallen
the Queen, was in her'awin default infafaras,be
divers bir previe letters written halelie with hirawin
hand, and fend by hir to James fometyme Erie ol
Bothwell, cheif executour of the said horribill
murthour,as weill befoir the committing thairof a
thairaftir: And be hir ungodlic and dilhonourabil
proceeding to ane pretendit marriage with him,
fuddaindlie and unprovifitlie thairaftir it ii
maift crtane that fcbe was previe, airt and pairt
of the adual devise and deid of the foirnamil
nurthour of the King her lauchfull hulband,'and
thairfoir jutlie defirvis quhatfumever hes bene
done to bir in ony tyme bygaine, or that fal be
ufit towards hir, for the said cause." Andert ii
221.

The Queen's commillloners at 'the Conset

emce in England accused Murray and his as.
fociates of having murdered the King Good,
i. 28r. But this charge is to be confiderec
ms a recrimination, extoited by the pccuCfaio
preferred against the Queen, and contains no
thing more than loose and general affirmations
vithout dcfccndig to such particular circpm

llances as either ascertain their truth, or discover
their fallhood. The fame accusation is repeated
by the nobles assembled at Dumbarton Sept
j168. Good. ii. 359. And the fame observation
may be made concerning it.
All the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to
account for Murray's murdering of the King, by sup.
poring that it was done on purpose that he might have
the pretence of disturbing the Queen's administration,
and thereby rendering ineffectual her general Kcvo.
cation,of Crown lands, which would have deprived
inm and his associates of the best part of their efates.
Lefly Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 73. Anders. iv. Part ii.
I;o. But whoever confiders the limited powers of a
Scottilh Monarch, will fee that such' a revocation
could not be very formidable to the nobles. Every
king of Scotland began his reign with such a revoca.
tion; and as often as it was renewed, the pow-
er of the nobles rendered it ineffectual. The best
vindication of Murray and his party from this accufa.
tion, is that which they presented to the Queen
of England, and which hath never hitherto been
pubhliled.

Anfrers to the ol'jteiont and alledgance of the Quten, Paer.
a!.edging the Earl of Murray, Lord Regent, tbe Oac"
E£rl o Morton, Mart, Glencairn, Hume, Ruth-
ten, &rc. to have been moved to armour, for tbat
they abborred and might not abide her revocation
f tbe alienation made of her property.

It is answered, that is alledged but (i. e. with.
cut) all appearance, and it appears God has be.

4

reft the alledgance of all wit and good remem.
brance, for thir reasons following:

Imprimis, as to my Lord Regent, he never had

occaion to grudge thereat, in refpet the Queen
made him privy to the fame, and took resolution
with him for the execution thereof, letting his
Lordihip know she would assuredly in the famine
except all things Ihe had given to him, and ratety
them in the next parliamnent as h'e did indeed;
and for that cause wilbed my Lord to leave behind
bim Maiter John Wood, to attend upon the fame,
to whom /he declared, that als well in that as in all
others her grants it /hould be provided, yei of free
will did promise and offer before ever he demand.
ed, as it came to pass without any lett or impe.
dimeot, for all was ratified by her command, and
band write, at the parliament, but ( i. e. without)
any difficulty.

Item as to my Lord of Morton, he could not

grudge thereat quba never had of her property
worth twenty dollars that ever I knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencair.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.
Only my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing

of the prbperty quilk alfua was gladly and libe.
rally confirmed to him, in the said parliament
preceeding a year; was never ane had any cause
of miscontent of that revocation, far less to have
put their hvcs and heritage to so open and mani-
cft ane danger as they did for sic ane frivole cause,

Gyf ever any did make evill countenance, and
0how any miscontentment of the fdid revocation,
it was my Lord of Argyll in fpeciall, quha fpak
largely in the time of Parliament thairanents to
the Queen herself, and did complain of the ma-
nileft corruption of ane aa of parliament pall upon
her Majefly's return, and fa did lett any revoca-
tion at that time; but the armour for revenge of
the King's deid was not till twa months after, art
quhat time there was no occasion given thereof,
Dor never a man had mind thereof.
Having thus examined the evidence which has
been produced againIt the Earls of Murray and
Bothwell; we Ihall next proceed to inquire whe-
ther the Queen herself was acceflory to the mur-
der of her hulband.
No sooner was the violent death of Darnly
known, than trong suspicions arose, among some
of herfubje&s, that Mary had given her content
to the commifflon of that crime. And. ii. 156.
IVe are informed, by her own ambassador in
France, the Archbiftop of Glasgow, that the fen-
timents of foreigners, on this head, were no less
unfavorable to her. Keith, Pref. ix. Many of
her nobles loudly accused her of that crime, and
a great part of the nation, by supporting them,
leem to have allowed the accusation to be well
founded.

Some crimes, however, are of such a nature,
that they hardly admit of a positive or dire& proof.
Deeds of darkness can seldom be brought per-
fetly to light. Where persons are acctifed not of

be;lg Principal., but only of being Acceffares in the
commiiflon of a crime; not of having perpetrated it
themselves, but only of giving consent to the
commiflion of it by others; the proof becomes fill
more difficult: and unless when rome accomplice
betrays the secret, a proof by circumstances, or
presumptive evidence, is all that can be attained.
Even in judicial trials, such evidence is sometimes
held to be sufficient for condemning criminals. The
degree of conviction which such evidence carries
along with it, is often not inferior to that which arises
from positive testimony; and a concurring series of
circumItances satisfies the underfianding no less than
the express declaration of witnesses.

Evidence of both these kinds has been pro.

duced against Mary. We Ihal first confider that
which is founded upon ciroumRfances alone.

Some of these suspicious circumstances preced

the King's death; others were subsequent to it
With regard to the former, we may observe that
the Queen's violent love of Darnly was soon con.
verted into an aversion to him, no less violent; and
that his own ill condudt, and excesses of every
kind, were such, thit if they did not juflify,atlJcaf
they account for this sudden change of her dif-
position towards him. The rife and progress
this dometic rupture, I have traced with grea
care in the history, and to the proofs of it which
may be found in papers publilhed by other au
thors, I have added those contained in App. Vol..
No. 111. and IV. Le Croc, the French amiba
fador, who was an eye-witness of what he d
122

fIrinb, not only represents her aversion to Darnly to
kextreme, but declares that there could be no hopes
osareconcilement between them. " The Queen is in De-. s;
the hands of physicians, and I do assure you is not at 6
a1i well; and do believe the principal part of her
dieae to consist in deep grief and sorrow; nor does
irfeem possible to make her forget the fame. Still Ihe
epeats these words, I could wish to be dead. You
know very well that the injury The has received is
exceeding great, and her majelly will never forget
it-To speak my mind freely to you, I do not expet,
upon several accounts, any good understanding
ntween them (i. e. the King and Queen ), unless God
effeaually put to his hand.-His bad deportment is sM4 3
incurable; nor can there ever be any good expedted
from him, for several reasons, which I might tell you
was present with you. I cannot pretend to foretell
how all may turn, but I will fay, that matters cannot
fubfil long as they are, without being accompanied
with sundry bad consequences. " Keith, Pref. vii Had
Henry died a natural death, at this junture, it mulf
have been confidered as a very fortunate event to
te Queen, and as a seasonable deliverance from a
hulband who had become altogether odious to
her. Now as Henry was murdered a few weeks
afierwardl, and as nothing had happened to render
tie Queen's aversion to him less violent, the opi-
nionof thole who confider Mary as the author of
an event which was manifeitly so agreeable to her,
sill appear perhaps to some of our readers to be
neither unnatural nor over-refined. If we add to
t>is, what has been observcd in the hifory, that

in proportion to the increase of Mary's hatred of he
husband, Bothwell made progress in her favor, an(
that he became the objed not only of her confidenc(
but her attachment, that opinion acquires net
firength. It is easy to observe many advantages whici
might redound to Mary as well as to Bothwell fron
the King's death ; but excepting them, no person and
no party in the kingdom could derive the leat benefli
from that event. Bothwell, accordingly murdered
ihe King, and it was, in that age, thought nc
unwarranted imputation on Mary's charater, te
suppose that Ihe had consented to the deed.

The steps which the Queen took after her hut

band's death add strength to that supposition. i,
Melvil, who was in Edinburgh at the time of the
King's death, aflerts, that " ever body fufpeed
the Earl of Bothwell; and tholf who durst fpeal
freely to others, said plainly that it was He,"p.
155. 2. Mary having iflued a proclamation, on the
xath of February, offering a reward to any person
who hIould discover thole who hid murdered he
hutibnd; And.i. 36.a paper in conieqience of this wa
affixed to the gates of the Tolbooth, February 16, in
which Bothwell was named as the chief person guilty
of that crime, and the Queen herelf was accused o
having given her consent to it. And. ii. 16. 3, Soon
after, February 2Q, the Earl of Lenox, the
King's father, wrote to Mary, conjoring her, by
every motive, to prosecute the murderers with
the utmoR rigor. He plainly declared his pWn
suspicions of Bothwell, and pointed out a method
of proceeding aganft him, and for discovering

dbe other authors of that crime, no. less obvious
thanequitable. He advised her to seize, and to commit
tofure custody Bothwell himself, and such as were
already named as his accomplices; to call an assembly
of the nobles; to iflue a proclamation, inviting
Bothwell's accusers to appear; and if, on that
encouragement, no person appeared to accuse them,
mo hold them as innocent, and to dismiss them
without farther trial. And. i. 40. 4. Archbishop
Btatoun, her ambassador in France, in a letter to
Mary, March 9th, employs arguments of the utmost
weight to persuade her to prosecute the murderers
with the greatest severity. " I can conclude nathing
({yshe) by quhat zour Majefly writes to me zourfelf,
thatsen it has plefit God to conserve zow to make a
rigorous vengeance thereof, that rather than it be
notadually taine, it appears to me better in this warld
hatze had loft life and all. I afl your Ma jetie pardon
that I writ fa Car, for I can heir nathing to zour
prejudife, but I man conftraindly writ the famin, that wafu
all may come to zour knawlege; for the better remede
may be put therto. Heir it is needfull that ze forth
lhaw now rather than ever of before, the greite
vertue, magnanimitie,and constance that God has
gantitzow, be quhais grace, I hope ze fall overcome
this moR heavy envie and difplefir of the committing
hereof,and conserve thatreputation in all godliness,
tehave conquift of lang, quhich can appear na
layis mair clearlie, than that zow do fiih justice fuhc
hat tie lnaill world may declare zour innocence, who l
nad give testimony forever of thair treason that
Us committed (but fear of God or man) so cruel W'"oug

and ungodlie a murther, quhairof there is fa mreikle
n.a spoken, thatlam contrainit to ak zow mercy, tha

neither can I or will make therehearfal thereof, whic
is oar odious. But alas! Madanme, all over Europ
this day there is na purpose in head fa frequent as a
zour Majeftie, and of the present tate of zour realm
qubilk is in the mo sR part interpretit sinisterly." Keitl
Pref. ix. 5. Elizabeth, asappearsfromAppend. Vol 1
No. VL urged the fame thing in frong terms
6. The circumfances of the cafe itself, no less than the
solicitations and remonstrances, called for the utmol
vigor in her proceedings. Her hulband had bee
murdered in a cruel manner, almost in her own pr
fence. Her fubjeds were filled with the utmoftborro
at that crime. Bothwell, one of her principal favorite
had been publicly accused as the author of it Re
flections, extremely dilhonorable to herself, ha
been thrown out. If indignation, and the lov
of jufice, did not prompt her to pursue the mur
derers with ardor, decency, at leaf, and con
cern for vindicating her own charader, fbouli
have induced her to avoid any appearance of re
miffnefs or want of zeal..

But instead of this, Mary continued to discover

in all her actions, the utmost partiality toward
Botbwell. On the r5th of February, five days aftc
the murder, she beltowed on him the reversion o
the superiority of the town of Leith, which in thi
year 1565 Ihe had mortgaged to the citizens a
Edinburgh. This grant was of much importance
as it gave him not only the command of the prin
cipal port in the kingdom, but a great afcendal

over the citizens of Edinburgh, who wisted much
to keep poefflion of ic '. 2. Bothwell being e.-
' Y fronm tbe original in the Charterr bojfe of tbe city of
Einnbtrgb of an AiJgnation to the reverJtogt of the frperi.
ritJrof Ltitb ly Queean Mary, to the Earl of Botbhewll
Maria Dei gratia Regina Scotorum, omnibus probis homi.
ibs fuis ad quos paefcntes litera pervenerint falutem. Sci.
i, quod nos ad memoriam reducentes multiplex bonum ve-
a et fidele fervitium, non tantum quondam noltrr chariffi.
et matri Marih Rcgine regni noftri pro tempore in noftra mi.
roriute fadum et inpenfum, verum etiam nobifmet ipfis, tam
itra partes Gallix quam intra hoc noltrum regnum, ad exten-
okirn nofri honoris et auforitatis in punitione furum, male.
Arum, et tranrgrefforum infra idem, per noRrum confifium
coafanguineum et confilarium Jacobum comitem Buthuile,
dominum Halis, Creihton et Liddifdale, magnum admirallum
egrinollri, commiiflonem et onerationem ad hunc effedum
hbentem, per quas ipfe fuum corpus et vitam in magno periculo
plti; ac eciam, in performatione et extencione noftri didi ser-
rii, fuai hereditatem, foprafuinmam viginti millium merca.
rm hujus noftri regni, alienavit ac lalit. Et nos cogitantes quod,
tr noRra principali honore ec devoria dictum nostrum confifum
ncfanguineuni & confiliarium cum quodam aecidente et gratitu-
dinrecompenfare et gratificare incumbit qut nos commode fibl

ncedere poterimus, unde ipfe magis habilis omnibus affuturis
tenporibus effe poterit, et ad hujufmodi performandum in omni-
b ecausis feu eventihus: In recompenfatiunem quorumpra;-
mifl;rum, ac pro diverfis allis nofris rationabilibus caufis et cork
L:.itionibus nos morentibus, Fecimas, &c. didum Jacobum
rmnien Bothuile, &c. ac suos h;redes mafculos quofcunque
rilroslegitimos, &c. aflignatos in et ad literas reverfionis fats,
k per Symonem Preston de eodem, militum prtpofitum,
blivos, consules, et communitatem hujus noftri burgi de
dinburgh, pro feipfis ac fuis fuccefforibus, &c. nobis, noltrif.
qac haredibus, fucceolbribus, et affignatis pro redemptione,
e fuperioritatis torius villa de Leith, &c. impignoratc pec
0Mdiclis prapofito, &c. sub reverfione alienate continentis
Ilmam decem millium mercatum moncit prafcripta nu-

tremely desirous to obtain the command of the
castle of Edinburgh, the Queen, in otder to prevail
on the Earl of Mar to surrender the government of it,
offered to commit the young Prince to his custody,
Mar consented; and Ihe infantly appointed Both.
well governor of the castle. And. i. Pref. 64 Keith,
379. note (J. 3 The inquiry into the murder, previos
to Bothwell's trial, seems to have been conduded
with the utmost reriffnefs. Buchanan exclaims loudly
against this. And. ii. 24 Nor wasit without reason that
be did so, as is evident from a circumstance in the afi.
davit of Thomas Nelson, one of the King's servants,
who was in the houre when his master was murdered,
and was dug up alive out of the rubbifb. Being exa.
imined on the Monday after the King's death, " This
deponar bhew that Bonkle had the key of the cellare,
and the Queenis fervandis the keyis of her mfalmir.
Qubilk the Laird of Tillibardin hearing, said, Hald
thair, here is ane ground. Efter quhilk words Ipo.
kin, thai left of, and procedit na fartherin the inquifi
tion." Ard. iv. p. a. 167. Had there been any inten-
tion to fearcb into the bottom of the matter, a cir.
cumftance of so much importance merited the
molt careful inquiry. 4. Notwithstanding Leno's
merandum et calculandum in parociali ecclesia de Edinburgh,
fnper premonitione quadriginta dkim, ut moris eft, velui
in didis reverfionis litetis, &c. de data Svo Oftob l i6,
&c. (The reft is form, and contains a clufeofabfolutewar-
randice) IN sUJOS eI TESTIMONIUM priEentibus magnum
figillum nofirum apponi fecimus. Apud Edinburgh, deciio
quinto die menfis Februarii, anno Domini milelimo qingen.
telimo fexagemo sexto, et regni noltri vicefimo quinto.

TbI great feal entire.

repeated

K. HENRY's MURDER, &c. 145

power and favor, but from any hope of personal
faety. On this account they long confined them.
feives to that which was originally declared to be
the rcafon of their taking arms; the avenging the
King's death, the dissolving the marriage with Both-
well, the infliding on him condign punifbment, or
hailhing him for ever from the Queen's presence.
Itappears from the letters of Throkmorton, pub.
lilied by Bilhop Keith, and in my Appendix, that
his fgacity early discovered that this would be the
tenor of their conduct; in his letter from Edinburgh,
dated July 14th, he observes that " they do not
forgettheir own peril conjoined with the danger of
the Prince, but as far as I perceive, they intend not
totouch the Queen eitherin surety orin honor; for
theyfpeak of her with refpet and reverence, and
do affirm, as I do learn, that, the condition afore.
flidaccomplilhed , ( i. e. thefeparation from Both.
well) they will both put her to liberty, and restore
her to her estate." Vol. III p. 247. His letter of
August 22d, contains a declaration made to him by
Lethington, in name and in presence of his associates,
'that they never meant harm neither to the Queen's
person nor to her honor-that they have been con-
tented hitherto to be condemned, as it were, of all
Princes, grangers, and, namely, of the Queen of Eng-
land, being charged of grievous and infamous titles,
as to be noted rebels, traitors, seditious, ingrate
and cruel, all which they susser and bear upon
their backs, because they will not justify them.
lives, nor proceed in any thing that may touch
thir Sovereign's honor. But in cafe they be
VOL. III. L

with there defamations continually oppressed, or
with the force, aid, and pradices of other Princes
and namely of the Queen of England, put in danger,
or to an extremity, they Ihall be compelled todeal
otherwise with the Queen than they intend, or than
they desire; for, added he, you may be furewewill
not lose our lives, have our lands forfeited, andbe
reputed rebels through the world, feeing we havethe
means to justify ourselves. " Keith, 448. From this
view of the slippery ground on which they stood al
that time, their condud in not producing theletter
for several months, appears not-only to have beer
prudent but essential to their own fifety.

But, at a subsequent period, when the Confe

derates found it necessary to have the form of govern
ment, which they had eftablilbed, confirmed by an
thority of Parliament, a different mode of proceedin{
became requisite. All that had hitherto been don
with refped to the Queen's difmillion, the featingth
youngKing upon the throne, and the appointmento
a Regent, was in reality nothingmore than the dcn
of private men. It required some exhibition of fom
legal evidence to procure a constitutional ad givinj
the fandion of its approbation to such violen
meanures, and to obtain" a perfet law and fecurit
for all them that either by deed, counsel, orfub
scription, had entered into that cause since thebe
ginning." Haynes, 453. This prevailed with tb
Regent and his secret counsel, after long delib
ration to agree to produce all the evidencea
which they were possessed; and upon that prn
dudion Parliament palIcd the ads which Wa
146

rtquired. Such a change had happened in the Rate of
te kingdom as induced the Confederates to venture
poathis change in their condud. In June, a powerful
combination was forming against them, under the
ladingoftheHamiltons. In December, that combi-
ntion was broken; moRs of the members of it had
xknowledged the King as their lawful Sovereign,
adhad fibmitted to the Regent's government. Hun.
y, Argyll, Herries, the most powerful noblemen of
ht party, were present in the Parliament, and con.
mrred in all its acts. Edinburgh, Dunbar, Dunbar.
ton, and all the chief strong holds in the kingdom,
are now in the hands of the Regent; the arms of
Frnce had full occupation in its civil war with the
Hugonots. The ardor of Elizabeth's zeal in behalf of
Ak captive Queen seems to have abated. A ftep that
would have been followed with ruin to the Confede.
ntes in June, was attended with little danger in De.
amber. From this long deduction it appears, that no
soos of the letters being forged can be drawn from
I circumstance of their not having been produced
imediately after the twentieth of June; but though
mpublic accusation was brought instantly against the
ueen, in consequence of seizing thecafket, hints were
Fen by the Confederates, that they possessed evi.
tce sufficient to convid her. This is plainly implied
aletter of Throkmorton,July 2 ft, Keith, Pref. p.
iiand more clearly in the passage which I have quot-
ihom his letter of Auguf 22. In his letter of July 25,
hpapers contained in the casket are still more plainly
0inted out." They (i. e. the Confederates) fay,
it they have as apparent proof against her

L

as may be, as well by the testimony of her own hand.
writing, which they have recovered, as alo by
sufficient witnesses." Keith, 426.

II. With regard to the internal proofs of the gen

inenefs of the Queen's letters to Bothwell, we may o
serve, i. That whenever a paper is forged with a par
ticular intention, the eagerness of the forger to efta
lilh the point in view, his solicitude to cut offal
doubts and cavils, and to avoid any appearance o
uncertainty, always prompt him to use expreloi
the mot explicit and full to his purpose. The palfage
foisted into ancient authors by Heretics indiffere
ages; the legendary miracles of the Romish faints; th
fuppoftitious deeds in their own favor produced b
monasteries; the false charters of homage mentiored
Vol. L p. 13. are so many proofs of this assertion. N
maxim seems to be more certain than this, thatafo
ger is often apt to prove too much, butfeldomfal
into the error of proving too little. The point whi
the Queen's enemies had to eftablifl ,was, that
the Earl of Bothwell was chief executor of thehorrib
and unworthy murder perpetrated, &c. so was she
the foreknowledge, counsel, device, persuader, anm
commander of the laid murder to be done." Good. ii
207. But of this there are only imperfect hints, obfcur
intimations, and dark expressions in the letters,wbict
however convincing evidence they might furnifi,i
found in real letters, bear no resemblance to that glar
and fuperfluitv of evidence which forgeries commo0
ly contain. All the advocates for Mary's innocent
in her own age,contend that there isnothig inth
letters which can serve as a proof of her guilt. Lefly

Blackwood, Turner, &c. abound with pafrages to this
urpnle; norare the sentiments of those in the present
teedifferent. "Yet still it might have been expect-
i fays her later defender) that some one or other
Of the points or articles of the accusation Ihould be
,mde out clearly by the proof. But nothing of that is
to be seen in the present cafe. There is nothing in the
ltters that could plainly show the writer to have been
i the foreknowledge, counsel, or device of any mur-
der, far less to have persuaded or commanded it; and
Blittle is there about maintaining or justifying any
murderers." Good. i. 76. How ill advised were Mary's
ldverfaries, to contrac so much guilt, and to pradife
fomnany artifices, in order to forge letters, which are
so ill contrived for eflablilhing the conclusion they
had in view ? Had they been so base as to have re-
ourfe to forgery is it not natural to think that they
would have produced something more explicit and
decifve ? It is almost impossible to inventa long nar-
ntion of ficitious events, confiding of various mi.
nute particulars, and to conned these in such a manner
withreal fads, that no markof fraud Ihall appear. For
this reason, skilful forgers avoid any long detail of
ircumftances, especially of foreign and fnperfluous
ones, well knowing that the more these are multi.
plied,the more are the chances of detedion increased.
Now Mary's letters, especially the first, are filled v ith
amultiplicity of circumltances, extremely natural in
areal corrcfpondence, but altogether foreign to the
purpose of the Queen's enemies, and which it
would have been extreme folly to have inserted,
if:hey had been altogether imaginary, and with-

L3

out foundation. 3. The truth and reality of fever
circumstances in the letters, and these, too, of
very public nature, are confirmed by undoubte
collateral evidence. Lett. i. Good. ii. p. 1. TI
Queen is laid to have met one of Lenox's gentl
men, and to have had some conversation with hin
Thomas Crawford, who was the person, appear
before Elizabeth's commissioners, and confirmed
upon oath, the truth of this circumfiance. He likewi
declared, that during the Queen's flay at Glafgo
the King repeated to him, every night, whateverli
passed through the day, between her Majefly a
him; and that the account given of these convae
tions in the firfletter, is nearly the fame with whatd
King communicated to him. Good. ii. 245. Accn
ing to the fame letter there was much difcourib
tween the King and Queen concerning Mynto, Hi
gait, and Walcar. Good. ii. 8. to, it. Whatl
might be, was altogether unknown, untila letter
Alary's, preserved in the Scottish college at Paris, a
published, Keith, Pref. vii. discovered it to bean a
of so much importance as merited all the attention
paid to it at that time. It appears by a letter frond
French ambassador, that Mary was fubjedtoavi
lent pain in her fide. Keith, ibid. This circumlln
is mentioned, Lett. I. p. 30. in a manner so natunl
can scarcely belong to any but a genuine produdi
If we [hall Rill think it probable to suppose that
many real circumfRances were artfully iotroduc
into the letters by the forgers, in order to givean
of authenticity to their producion; it will har
be poflible to hold the fame opinion conceri

i following particular. Before the Queen began her
irt letter to Bothwell, fie, as usual among those
who write long letters containing a variety of sub-
0s, made notes or memorandums of the particulars fie
wihed to remember; but aslhe fat up writing during
great part of the night, and after her attendants
wereafleep, her paper failed her, and fie continued
kr letter upon the fame sheet on which she had for.
aerly made her memorandums. This (he herself takes
Noticeof, and makes an apology for it: " It is late;
Ideire never to cease from writing unto you, yet
low, after the kissing of your hands, I will end my
kttr. Excuse my evil writing, and read it twice over.
Excuse that thing that is fcriblit, for I had na paper
kRerday, quhen I wrait that of the memorial. "
Food. ii. 28 These memorandums fill appear in the
middle of the letter; and what we have said seems
Bturally to account for the manner how they might
hod their way into a real letter. It is scarce to be sup-
lsed, however, that any forger would think of
placing memorandums in the middle of a letter, w here,
tfirt fight, they make so absurd and so unnatural an
Ippearance. But if any lhall still carry their refinement
b far, as to suppose that the forgers were so artful as
to throw in this circumstance, in order to preserve
theappearance of genuinenefs,they mufl at least allow
that the Queen's enemies, who employed these
orgers, could not be ignorant of the design and
mcaning of these Ihort notes and memorandums;
but we find them mistaking them so far as to ima-
pne that they were the credit of the bearer, i. e.
points concerning which the Queen had given him

verbal inftrudions. Good. ii. 152. This they cannot
pollibly be; for the Queen herself writes with so much
exaanefs concerning the different points in the me.
morandums, that there was no need of giving any
credit or inftruaions to the bearer concerning them
The memorandums are indeed the contents of the
letter. 5. Mary, mentioning her conversation with
the King, about the affair of Mynto, Hiegait, &c
fays, "The morne ( i. e. to-morrow) I will fpeik to
him upon that point;" and then adds, " As totberef
of Wille Hiegait's, he confeffit it; but it was the
morne (i. e the morning) after my coming orhedid
it " Good. ii. 9. This addition, which could not hare
been made till after the convcrfation happened, fems
either to have been inserted by the Queen into the
body of the letter, or, perhaps, she having writtn
it on the margin, it was taken thence into the text If
we{uppofe the letter to be a real one, and writtenat
different times, as it plainly bears, this circumlfanc
appears to be very natural; but no reason could hve
induced a forger to have ventured upon such a
anachronism, for which there was no necessity. AQ
addition perfetly similar to this made to a genuin
paper, may be found, Good. ii. 282.

But, on the other band, Mary herself, and t

advocates for her innocence have contended, tMt
these letters were forged by her enemies, on pur.
pose to blast her reputation, and to justify thir
own rebellion. It is not necessary to take notic
of the arguments which were produced, in hb
own age, in support of this opinion; the obfo
vations which we have already made, contain
full reply to them. An author, who has inquis

intothe .ffairs of that period with great industry, and
who lhaiacqtired much knowledge ot them, has pub-
jifled (an he affirm. ) a demonstration ot the forgery
of Mary's letters. 'Ihrs demonstration he founds upon
evidence both internal and external. With regard to
the former, he observes, that the French copy of the
Queen's letters is plainly a translation of Buchanan's
Latin copy; which Latin copy is only a translation of
theScottilh copy; and, by consequence, the aftertion
ofthe Queen's enemies, that she wrote them originally
in French, is altogether groundless, and the whole
letters are grofi forgeries. He accounts for this strange
fuccellion of translations, by supposing that when the
forgery was projeded, no person could be found ca-
pableofwriting originally in the French language let-
ters which would pass for the Queen's; for that reason
they were first composed in Scottilh; but unluckily the
French interpreter, as he conjectures, did not under.
fIand that language; and therefore Buchanan tranf-
lated them into Latin, and from his Latin they were
rendered into French. Good. i. 79, 80.

It is hardly necessary to observe, that no proof
whatever is produced of any of these suppositions.
The manners of the Scots, in that age, when almost
every man of rank fpenta part of his youth in France,
and the intercourse between the two nations was
great, render it altogether improbable that so many
complicated operations lhould be necessary in order
to procure a few letters to be written in the French
language.

But without insisting farther on this, we may
observe, that all this author's premises may be
granted, and yet his conclusion will not follow,

unless he likewise prove that the French letters, a
we now have them, are a true copy of those whicl
were produced by Murray and his party in the Scot
tilh Parliament, and at York and Westminster. Ru
this he has not attempted; and if we attend to thb
history of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious

oust have been unsuccessful. The letters were sirs

publifbed at the end of Buchaana's Deteion. Thefiril
edition of this treatie was in Latin, in which languag
three of the Queen's letters were subjoined to it; thi
Latin edition was printed A. D. 1571. Soonafter, a
Scottih translation of it was publilhed, and at the end
of it were printed, likewise in Scottitb, the threelet.
ters which had formerly appeared in Latin, and five
other letters in Scottifb, which were not in the Latin
edition. Next appeared a French translation of the
Detedion, and of seven of the letters; this bearsto
have been printed at Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem,
1572. The name of the place, as well as the printer,
is allowed by all parties to be a manifeftimpofture.
Our author, from observing the day of the month,
from which the printing is said to have been finiled,
has afierted that this edition was printed at Lon.
don; but no stress can be laid upon a date found
in abook, where every other circumstance with re
gard to the printing is allowed to be false. Black-
wood, who (next to Lefly) was the best informed
of all Mary's advocates in that age, affirms that
the French edition of the Detetion was publiled
in France; "11 ( Buchanan) a depuis adjouft a
cefte declamation un petit libelle du pretendu
marage du Duc de Norfolk, et de la faSon de son

proces, et la tout envoye aux freres i la Rochelle,
lcquels voyant qu'il pouvoit fervir a la cause,
'ont traduit en Francois, et iceluy fut imprime a
Edinbourg, c'eft a dire, la Rochelle, par Thomas
Waltem, nom apoftR et fait a plaifir. Martyre de
Mlarie. Jebb. ii. 256 " The author of the Innocence de
jariegoes farther, and names the French translator of
the Detetion. " Et icelui premierement compofC
Icomme ii femble) par George Buchanan Efcoffoys, et
depuis traduit en langueFrancoife parun Hugonot,
Poitevin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, soy difant
gentilhomme, et un de plus remarquezfeditieuz de
France Jtbb, i. 425; 443." The concurring testimony
of two contemporary authors, whose residence in
France afforded them sufficient means of information,
mufl outweigh a flight conjecure. This French trans.
ahtordoesnot pretend to publifli the original French
letters as written by the Queen herself; he expressly
declares that he translated them from the Latin. Good.
i. 103. Had our author attended to all these circum.
stances, he might have saved himself the labor of so
many criticisms to prove that the present French
copy of the letters is a translation from the Latin.
The French editor himself acknowledges it, and,
so far as I know, nio person ever denied it.

We may observe that the French translator
was so ignorant, as to affirm that Mary had written
there letters, partly in French, partly in Scottish.
Good. i. 1o3. Had this translation been pub.
lilied at London by Cecil, or had it been made
by his direction, so gross an error would not have
been admitted into it. This error, however, was

owing to an odd circumltance. In the Scottilb
translation of the Detection, two or three fen.
tences of the original French were prefixed to each
letter, which breaking off with an &c. the Scottilh
trnflation of the whole letter followed. This method
of printing translations was not uncommon in that
age. The French editor observing this, foolilhly
concluded that the letters had been written partly
in French, partly in Scottilh.

If we carefully confider those few French sentences

of each letter, which still remain, and apply to them
that species of criticism, by which our author has
examined the whole, a clear proof will arise, that
there was aFrench copy not translated from the Latin,
but which was itself the original from which both the
Latin and Scottilh have been translated. This minute
criticism must necessarily be disagreeable to many
readers; but luckily a few sentences only are to be
examined, which will render it extremely ihort.

In the firR letter, the French sentence prefixed

to it ends with there words, yfaioit bon. It is plain
this exprefiion, weu cc qu pent un corpfrau caur, is
by no means a translation of cum plane perinde effm
aque corpus fine corde. The whole sentence has a
spirit and elegance in the French, which neither
the Latin nor Scottilh have retained. Jufques d 1i
dine is not a translation of toto prandii temporet the
Scottilh translation, quhile denner-time, expresses the
sense of the French more properly; for anciently
quhil signified until as well as during. Je day pO
toe grand propos is not juRly rendered neque con0l-
rim fermonanm um quoquams the phrase used id the

French copy is one peculiar to that language, and
gives a more probable account of her behaviour than
the other. Juyeant bien qu'iln'yfaifoit bon, is not a trans.
lation of ut qijudicarent id non eff e x tfu. The French
sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with appendre. It is
evident that both the Latin and Scottilh tranfations
have omitted altogether these words, et toutefois ie ne
pil apvrendre. The French sentence prefixed to Lett.
3. ends with presenter. .'Iaye willi plus tard la haut is
plainly no translation of diutius ilic morara fun; the
fnfe of the French is better expressed by the Scottili
I/have waikit later there up. Again, Pour excuser vojfrc
ffaire is very different from ad excufandum nolra ne.
Motia. The five remaining letters never appeared in
Latin; nor is there any proof of their being ever
tranfated into that language. Four of them, however,
are publifled in French. This entirely overturns our
author's hypothesis concerning the nceffity of a trans-
lation into Latin.

In the Scottifi edition of the Detetion the whole
sinnet is printed in French as well as in Scottifl. It is
not poflible to believe that this Scottilh copy could be
the original from which the French was translated.
The French consists of verses which have both mea-
sure and rhyme, and which, in many places, are far
from being inelegant. The Scottilh consists of an equal
number of lines, but without measure or rhyme.
Now no man could ever think of a thing so ab-
surd and impracticable, as to require one to traof-
late a certain given number of lines in prose into
an equal number of verses, where both measure
and rhyme were to be observed. The Scottilb,

on the contrary, appears manifestly to be a trans
lation of the French; the phrases, the idioms
and many of the words are French, and not Scot
til. Besides, the Scottilh translator has, in fe.
veral instances, mistaken the sense of the French,
and in many more expresses the sense imper.
fedly. Had the sonnet been forged, this could
not have happened. The directors of the fraud
would have understood their own work. I
1hall satisfy myself with one example, in which
there is a proof of both my aflertions Stanza
vii ver. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luy je veux garder fanth et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j'ay envie,
For him I attend all good fortune,
For him I will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him I desire to ensue courage.

Attend in the first line is not a Scottif, but a

French phrase; the two other lines do not express
the sense of the French, and the last is absolute
nonsense.

The eighth letter was never translated into

French. It contains much refined mysticism about
devics, a folly of that age, of which Mary was
very fond, as appears from several other circum.
fiances, particularly from a letter concerning ir.
presa by Drummond of Hawthornden. If Mary's
adversaries forged her letters, they were certainly
employed very idly when they produced this.

From these observations it seems to be evident
that there was a French copy of Mary's letters,

of which the Latin and Scottifl were only trans-
lations. Nothing now remains of this copy but
tbofe few sentences which are prefixed to the
Scottiih translation. The French editor laid hold
ofthefe sentences, and tacked his own translation
tothem, which, so far as it is his work, is a ser-
vile and a very wretched translation of Buchanan's
Latin; whereas, in those introductory sentences,
we have discovered strong marks of their being
originals, and certain proofs that they are not
translated from the Latin.

It is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin
and Scottilh translations with these sentences, that
the Scottilh translator has more perfectly attained
the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin.
And as it appears that the letters were very early
trannated into Scottifb, Good. ii. 76. it is pro-
bable that Buchanan made his translation not
rom the French, but from the Scottish copy.
Were it necessary, several critical proofs of this
might be produced. One that has been already
mentioned seems decisive. Diutius illic morata
fum bears not the leaf reffemblance to fay veilli
plus tard k! haut; but if, instead of I walkit ( i. e.
watched) laiter there up, we suppose that Bu-
chanan read I waitit, &c. this mistake into which
be might so easily have fallen, accounts for the
rror in his translation.
These criticisms, however minute, appear to be
well founded. But whatever opinion may be formed
oncerning them, the other arguments, with regard
0 the internal evidence, remain in full force.

The external proofs of the forgery f the Queen'

letters, which our author has produced, appear al
first fight to be specious, but are not more solid that
that which we have already examined. These proo
may be clafed under two heads. i. The erroneom
and contradidory accounts which are said tobegive
of the letters, upon the first judicial produdion ol
them. In the Secret Council held Decem. 4, 1567, Ith1
are described " as her privie letters written and ful
Ecrivitwith herawin hand. " Haynes, 454 Goodii
64. In the ad of parliament, passed on the i th ol
the fame month, they are described as "her privie
letters writtin halelie with hir awin hand." Good.i,
67. This diversity of description has been confiderd
as a strong presumption of forgery. The mannerin
which Mr. Hume accounts for this is natural nd
plausible, vol. vi. p. 491. And several ingeniom
remarks, tending to confirm his observations, ar
made in a pamphlet lately published, entitled, /if
cdlaneou: Remarks on the Inquiry into the Evidence ag9r

mary Queen of Scots. To what they have obfervd
it may be added, that the original ad of Sem
Council does not now exist; we have only a copy
of it found among Cecil's papers, and the tranfcrib
has been manifestly so ignorant, or so carelcfs, d

argument founded entirely upon the fuppofitiol

of his accuracy is of little force. Several erro
into which he has fallen, we are enabled to pid
out, by comparing his copy of the ad of Scrd
Council with the ad of Parliament pafled i
consequence of it. The former contains a pI
titon to Parliament; in the latter the real p0ó

ton

Iion is resumed verbatim, and converted into a law.
In the copy, the Queen's marriage with Bothwell
it called "a priveit marriage, " which it certainly
was not; for it was celebrated, after proclamation
of banns, in St. Giles's church three feveraldays,
and with public solemnity, but in the ad it is de-
nominated "ane pretendit marriage," which is the
proper description of it according to the ideas of the
party. In the copy, the Queen is said " to be so thrall
and bludy affedionat to the privat appetite of that
tyran," which is nonsense, but in the ad it is " blindly
affetionat." In the copy, it is said, "all nobill and
virtuous men abhorring their traine and company."
In the adt, " their tyrannie and companie," which is
evidently the true reading, as the other has either no
meaning, or is a mere tautology. 2. The other proof
of the forgery of the letters, is founded upon the im-
pofllbility of reconciling the account, given of the
time when, and the places from which, the letters are
supposed to have been written, with what is cer-
tainly known concerning the Queen's motions. Ac-
cording to the paper publilhed, Anders. ii. 269.
which has been called Murray's Diary, and which
is formed upon the authority of the letters, Mary
et out from Edinburgh to Glasgow, January 21,
1567; Ihe arrived there on the 23d; left that place
oithe 27th; ihe, together with the King, reached
Linlithgow on the 28th, flayed in that town only
one night, and returned to Edinburgh before the
end of the month. But, according to Mr. Goodal,
the Queen did not leave Edinburgh until Friday
January 24th; as lhe fayed a night at Callendar,
VOL. III M

The could not reach Glasgow sooner than the evening
of Saturday the l5th, and she returned to Liolitbgo,
on Tuesday the 28th. By consequence, the sird letter
which supposes the Queen to have been at leaf foul
days in Glasgow, as well as the second letter, which
bears date at Glasgow Saturday morning, whereas Ihe
did not arrive there until the evening, must be forge
ries. That the Queen did not set out from Edin.
burgh sooner than the 24th of January, is evident (a
he contends) from the public records, which con
tain a Precept of a confirmation of a lifc.rnt by
James Boyd to Margaret Chalmers, granted by
the Queen, on the 24th of January, at Edin.
burgh; and likewise a letter of the Queen's dated
at Edinburgh on the fame day, appointing Jama
Inglis taylor to the Prince her son. That th
King and Queen had returned to Linlithgow on
the 28th, appears from a deed, in which they ap.
point Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palace.tbere,
dated at Linlithgow January 28. Good. i. 118

This has been represented to be notonlyacon

vincing,. but a legal proof of the forgery of the
etter said to be written by Mary; but how far it
falls (hort of this will appear from the following
considerations:

i. It is evident, from a declaration orconfeffil

made by the Bithop of Ross, that before the con
ferences at York, which were opened in theb
ginning of Odober 1568, Mary had. by an art
fice of Maitland's. got into her hands a copy
those letters which her fubjecls accused her
having written to BothwelL Brown's trial of the

Duke of Norfolk, 31. 36. It is highly probable
ltht the Binip of Ross had seen the letters before
be wrote the defence of Queen Mary's honor in
he year 157o. They were publilhed to all the
world, together with Buchanan's Deteaion, A. D.
1,.'Now, if they had contained an error so
gross, and, at that time, so obvious to discovery,
I the supposing the Queen to have passed several
divs at Glasgow, while (he was really at Edin.
burgh; had they contained a letter dated at Glaf.
gow Saturday morning, though she did not arrive
tbre till the evening; is it poflible that ihe her.
fell, who knew her own motions, or the able and
zalous advocates who appeared for her in that
age, liould not have published and exposed this
ontradi&ion, and, by so doing, have blafed, at
oce, the credit of filch an imposture? In dif.
glifitions which are naturally abstruse and intri.
ate, the ingenuity of the latest author may dif.
cover many things which have escaped the atten-
on, or baffled the sagacity of those who have
rmery confidered the fame subjet. But when a
ttr of fat lay so obvious to view, this circum-
nce of its being unobserved by the Queen her.
. or by any of her adherents, is almost a de.
lntration that there is some mistake or fallacy
our author's arguments. So far are any,
ier of our historians, or of Mary's defenders,
m calling in question the common account
ncerning the time of the Queen's setting out to
afgow and her returning from it, that there is

M 2

not the leaR appearance of any difference amone
them with regard to this point. But farther,

2. Those papers in the public records, on which

our author reRs the proof of his allertion con
cerning the Queen's motions, are not the original!
subscribed by the Queen, but copies only, or tranf
lations of copies of those originals. It is not ne
ceffary, nor would it be very easy to render thi
intelligible to persons unacquainted with the form
of law in Scotland; but every Scotsman conver
sant in business will underfand me, when I j
that the precept of confirmation of the life.red
to Boyd is only a Latin copy or note of a precept
which was fealed with the Privy-feal, on a w
rant from the signet- office, proceeding on afit
nature which bore date at Edinburgh the
of January; and that the deed in favor of Jan
Inglis is the copy of a letter, fealed with the Pri
- eal, proceeding on a signature which bore date
Edinburgh January 24. From all this we m
argue with some degree of reason, that a pr
founded on papers, which are so many removc
distant from the originals, cannot but be v
lame and uncertain.

3. At that time all public papers were iss&

in the name both of the King and Queen,
law, the King's subscription was no lels requif
to any paper than the Queen's; and therefore a
less the original fignaturcs be produced, in 0o1
to ascertain the particular days when each of the
signed, or to prove that it was signed only
one of them, the legal proof arifig from d

papers would be, that both the King and Queen
signed them at Edinburgh on the 24th of Ja.
nuary.

, The dates of the warrants or precepts issued
by the sovereign, in that age, seem to have been
i a great measure arbitrary, and affixed at the
pleasure of the writer; and, of consequence,
tlee dates were seldom accurate, are often false,
and can never be relied upon. This abuse be-
came so frequent, and was found to be so per.
nicious, that an a& of parliament, A. D. 1592,
declared the fixing a false date to a qnature to
be High Treason.
5. There still remain, in the public records,
great qunmber of papers, which prove the ne-
cefity of this law, as well as the fallacy of our
author's arguments. And though it be no easy
matter, at the distance of two centuries, to prove
any particular date to be false, yet surprising in-
Rances of this kind shall be produced. No-
thing is more certain from history, than that the
King was at Glasgow 24th January 1567; and
yet the record of signatures from 1565 to 15X2,
Fol, 16th, contains the copy of a signature to
Archibald Edmonfton, said to have been fubfcri.
bed by our Sovereigns, i. e. the King and (ueen,
at Edinburgh, January 24, 1567; so that if we
were to rely implicitly upon the dates in the
records of that age, or to hold our author's argu-
ment to be good, it would prove that not only
the Queen, but the King too, wa's at Edinburgh
0" the 24th of January.

M 3

It appears from an original letter of the Bilhof

of Ross, that on the 25th of Odobre 1566, Mary
lay at the point of death; Keith, App. 134; and
yet a deed is to be found in the public records
which bears that it was signed by the Queen thai
day Privy-feal; lib. 35. fol. 89. Ouchterlony .

Bothwell seized the Queen as she returned fror

Stirling, April 24th, 1567, and (according to het
own account) conduded her to Dunbar with al
diligence. And. i. 95. But our author, relyingon
the dates of some papers which he found in the re.
cords, fS* fes that Bothwell allowed her to l
at Edinburgh, and to tranfad business there. Nothia
can be more improbable than this supposition. W
may therefore rank the date of the deed to Wrighi
Privy-feal, lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is mention
by our author, vol. i. 24. among the intanccs
the false dates of papers which were issued in th
ordinary course of business in that age. Our auto
has mistaken the date of the other paper to Forbe
ibid. it is signed April 14th, not April 24th.

If there be any point agreed upon in Mary

history, it is, that Ihe remained at Dunbar lio
the time that Bothwell carried her thither,

N. B. In some of the early editions of this Diffltiia

another instance of the fame nature with those which go
fore and follow was mentioned; but that, as has si
been discovered, was founded on a mistake of the pia
employed to search the records, and is therefore omitted
this edition. The reasoning, however, in the Ditrtas
flands fill in force, notwithstanding this omifilon.

te returned to Edinburgh along with him in the
beginine of May. Our author himself allows
that ihe resided twelve days there, vol. i. 367.
Now though there are deeds in the records which
bear that they were signed by the Queen at Dun.
bar during that time, yet there are others which
bear that they were signed at Edinburgh; e. g.
there is one at Edinburgh, April 27th, Privy.
feal, lib. 36. fol. 97. There are others said to
be signed at Dunbar on that day. Lib. 31.
Chart. No. 524. 526. Ib. lib. 32. No. 154
157, There are some signed at Dunbar April
2sth. Others at Edinburgh April 30th, lib. 32.
Chart. No. 492. Others at Dunbar May ift.
d. ibid. No. 158. These different charters
suppose the Queen to have made so many un-
known, improbable, 'and inconfitent journeys,
that they afford the clearef demonstration that
the dates in these records ought not to be de-
pended on.

This becomes more evident from the date of
the charter said to be signed April 27th, which
happened that year to be a Sunday, which was
not, at that time, a day of business in Scotland,
as appears from the books of fedrunt, then kept
by the Lords of Seflion.
From this short review of our author's proof
of the forgery of the Letters to Bothwell, it is evi-
dent that his arguments are far from amounting
to demonstration.

Another argument against the genuineness of
these letters is founded on the flyle and composition,

M4

which are said to be altogether unworthy of the
Queen, and unlike her real produtions. It is
plain, both from the great accuracy of comp'olition
in most of Mary's letters, and even from her soli.
citude to write them in a fair hand, that Ibe valued
herself on those accomplilhments, and was desirous
of being esteemed an elegant writer. But when lhe
wrote at any time in a hurry, then many marks of
inaccuracy appear. A remarkable instance of this
may be found in a paper published, Good. ii. 301.
Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in the ut.
most hurry; and yet under all the difadvaotages of
a tranflaton, they are not destitute either of spirit
or of energy. The manner in which Ihe exprelfes
her love to Bothwell has been pronounced indecent
and even shocking. But Mary's temper led her to
warm exprellions of her regard; those refinements
of delicacy, which now appear in all the commerce
between the sexes, were, in that age, but little
known, even among persons of the highet rank.
Among the Earl of Hardwicke's papers there is a
series of letters, from Mary to the Duke of Nor.
folk, copied from the Harleian Library, P. 37.
B. 9 Fol. 88. in which Mary declares her love
to that nobleman in language which would now'
be reckoned extremely indelicate; Hardw. Sate.
Papers, i. 189, &c.

Some of Mary's letters to Bothwell were rit

ten before the murder of her bulband; some of
them after that event, and before her marriage
to Bothwell. Those which are prior to the deal
of her bulband abound with the fondeR expr

sions of her love to Botbwell, and excite some-
thing more than a furpicion that their familiarity
had been extremely criminal. We find in them,
too, some dark expreflions, which her enemies
employed to prove that she was no firanger to the
schemes which were forming against her hus.
band's life. Of this kind are the following
paafges, " Alace! I nevir diffavit ony body;
hot I remit me altogidder to zour will. Send
me advertisement quhat I fall do, and quhatfa-
ever thing come therof, I fall obey zow. Ad-
vise to with zourfelf, gif ze can find out ony
mair secret inventioun by medicine, for he fuld
tak medicine and the bath at Craigmillar."
Good. ii. 22. "See not hir quhais fenzeit teiris
fuld not be fa meikle praifit and eftemit, as the
trew and faithfull travellis quhilk I fuftene for to
merit hir place. For obtaining of the quhilk,
agains my natural , I betrayis thame that may
impefche me. God forgive me," &c. Ibid. 27.
"I have walkit later thairup, than I wald have
done, gif it had not been to draw something out
of him, quhilk this berer will fchaw zow, quhilk
is the fairest commodity that can be offerit to
excuse zour affairis. " Ibid. 32. From the let.
ters posterior to the death of her husband, it is
evident that the scheme of Bothwell's seizing
Mary by force, and carrying her along with him,
was contrived in concert with herself, and with
her approbation '.

'That letters of o much importance as those of Mary to
Bothwell Ihould have been entirely loft, appears to many alto.

WITH refped to the Sonnets, Sir Davit

Dalrymple has proved clearly, that they mug

gether unaccountable. After being produced in England before
Elizabeth's commiflioners, they were delivered back by them
to the Earl of Murray. Good. ii. 2 ;. Hefeems to have ket
them in his polfeffion during life. After his death, they fell
into the hands of Lenox his successor, who reftoredthemto
* the Earl of Morton. Good. ii. 9 . Though it be not necef
rily coaneted with any of the queftionswhich gave occafln
to this Dissertation, it may perhaps satisfy the curiolity of some
ofmy readers to inform them, that, after a very diligent earch,
which has lately been made,no copy of Mary's letterstoBot.
well can be found in any of the public libraries in Great B
tai. The only certain intelligence concerning them, fiBn
the time of their being delivered to Morton, was commani
cated by the accurate Dr. BirEh.

Extrad of the letters of Robert Bowes, Efq ; ambalfad

from Queen Elizabeth to the King of Scotland, written m
Sir Francis Walilngham, secretary offtate, from the orignl
register book of Mr. Bowes's letters, from i th of Angst
i82, to28th September x ;, in thepoeffion ofChriftophe
Hunter, M. D. of Durham.

f gz , 8th November, from Edlnbur

Albeit I have been borne in hand, That the coffer wher

in were the originals of letters between the Scottish Queen an
the Earl of Bothwell, had been delivered to sundry hamh,
and thereby was at present wanting, and unknown where i
refted, yet I have learned certainly by the Prior of Plufa.
dyne's means, that both the coffer and also the writings a
come, and now remain with the Earl of Gowrie, who, Ip.
ceive, will be hardly intreated to make delivery to her Mr
jefly according to her Majesty's desire.

This time paR I have expended in searching where the cos.
fr and writings were, wherein withoutthe help ofthe Priol

have been written after the murder of the
King, and prior to Mary's marriage with Both.

Ihnuld have found great difficulty; now I will essay Gowrie,
and of my success you shall be Ihortly advertised.

12th of November xs82, from Edinburgh.

Because I had both learned, that the casket and letters
mentioned in my last, before there were come to the poffeflion
of the Earl of Gowrie, and also found that no mean might pre.
vail to win the fame out of his hands without his own content
and privity; in which behalf I had employed fit intruments,
thatneverthelers profited nothing; therefore, I attempted to
eay himself, letting him know that the said casket and letters
lhould have been brought to her Majesty by the offer and
good means of good friends, promising. to have delivered
them to her Majesty before they came into his hands and cuf-
tody, and knowing that he did bear the like affecion, and was
ready to pleasure her Majesty in all things, and chiefly in this
that had been thus far tendered to her Majesty, and which
thereby Ihould be well accepted, and with princely thanks
and gratuity be requited to his comfort and contentment; I
moved him that they might be a present to be sent to her Ma-
jeRy from him, and that I might cause the fame to be convey-
ed to her Majesty, adding hereunto such words and arguments
as might both fir up a hope of liberality, and also best effet
the purpose. At the firRt he was loth to agree that they were
in his poffifion; but I let him plainly know that I was certain.
ly informed that they were delivered to him by Sanders Jar.
din; whereupon he prefled to know who did so inform me,
enquiring whether the sons of the earl of Morton had done it
or no. I did not otherwise in plain terms deny or answer
thereunto, but that he might think that he had told me, as the
Prior is ready to avouch, and well pleased that I shall give him
to be the author thereof; after he had said (though) all these
letters were in his keeping (which he would neither grant nor

well But as hardly any part of my nara.
tive is founded upon what is contained in the

deny ) yet he might not deliver them to any person without the
conents and privities, as well of the King, that had interest
therein, as also of the reft of the noblemen enterprifen of
the a~ioa againt the King's mother, and that would have
them kept as an evidence to warrant and make good that ac
tion. And albeit I replied, that their aCtion in that part touch.
blg the assignation of the crown to the King by his mother, had
received such eflabliihment, confirmation, and firength, by ads
of parliament and other public authority and instruments, as
neither Ihould that cafe be suffered to come in debate or question,
nor such fcrols and papers ought to be shewed for the frength-
ening thereof, so as these might well be left and be rendered
to the hands of her Majfty, to whom they were destined be
fore they fell in his keeping; yet he would noh be removed
or fatisied; concluding, after much reasonings, that the
Earl of Morton, nor any other thathadthe charge and keep
ing thereof, d(rft at any time make delivery; and because it
was the sift time that I had moved him therein, and that he
would gladly both answer her Majesty's good expetation in
him, and also perform his duty due tohis sovereign and das
ciates in the adion aforelaid; therefore be would feck out the
laid casket and letters, at his return to his house, which he
thought should be within short time; and upon finding of
the fame, and better advice and consideration had of the
canfe, he would give further answer. This resolution I have
received as to the thing; and for the present I could notbet.
ter, leaving him to give her Majesty such teltitony of his
good will towards her, by his frank dealing herein, as The
may have cause to confirm her Highnesses good opinion con-
ceived already of him, and be thereby drawn to greater good-
nest towards him. I ihall Rill labour him both by myfelfand
also by all other means; but I greatly difiruft the deired
fncctf herein.

Sonnets, and as in this Dissertation I have been
contrained to dwell longer upon minute and ver-

24th of November (82, from Edinburgh.

For the recovery of the letters in the coffer, come to the
hands of the Earl of Gowrie, I have lately moved him earnefly
therein, letting him know the purpose of the Scottilh Queen,
both giving out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels,
and also seeking thereon to have them delivered to her or de-
faced, and that the means which she will make in this behalf
shall be so great and efieL lal, as these writings cannot be
safely kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him that
hath the custody thereof, neither hlall he that is once known to
have them be suffered to hold them in his hands. Herewith I
have at large opened the perils likely to fall to that ation, and
the parties therein, and particularly to himself that is now
openly known to have the pofeffion of there writings, and I
have lettin him fee what surety it shall bring to the said cause
and all the parsies therein, and to himself, that there writings
may be with secrecy and good order committed to the keeping
of her Majefy, that will have them ready whensoever any use
ball be for them, and by her Highnesses countenance defend
them and the parties from such wrongful objections as shall
be laid against them, offering at length to him, that if he be
not fully satisfied herein, or doubt that the reft of the aflbo
ciates shall not like of the delivery of them to her Majesty in
this good manner, and for the interest rehearsed, that I shall
readily, upon meeting and conference with them, procure
their assent in this part (a matter more easy to offer than to
perform); and lastly, moving him that (for the secrecy and
benefit of the cause, and that her Majesty's good opinion to.
ards himself may be firmly fettled and confirmed by his ac.
ceptable forwardness herein) he would, without needlers
scruple, frankly commit these writings to her Majesty's good
custody for the good uses received. After long debate he re.
solved, and said, that he would unfeignedly ihew and do to

bal criticisms, than may be interesting or agree.
able to many of my readers, I Lball ret satisfied

her Majefy all the pleasure that he might without offence
to the King his Sovereign, and prejudice to the associates in
the ation, and therefore he would first make search and view
the iid letters, and herein take advice what he might do, and
how far he might satisfy and content her Majesty: promising
thereon to give more resolute answer; and he concluded flatly,
that after he had found and seen the writings, thathe might
not make delivery of them without the privity of the King.
Albeit I flood long with him against his resolution in this
point, to acquaint the King with this matter before the lette
were in the hands of her Majesty, letting him fee that his
doings there lhould admit great danger to the cause; yet I
could not remove him from it. It may be that he meaneth
to put over the matter from himself to the King, upon fight
whereof I shall travel efetually to obtain the King's conset
that the letters may be committed to her Majefty'skeeping,
thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the King. in the
present love and affecion that he beareth to her Highness;
than to win any thing at the hands of the afflciates in the
adtion, whereof some principal of them now come andremain
at the devotion of the King's mother; in this I shall ill cl
on Gowrie, to search out the coffer, according to his promise;
and as I /hall find him minded to do therein, so shall I do my
best and whole endeavour to effie the success toher Majeft's
bet contentment.

2d December rqtg, from Edinburgh.

Because 1 saw good opportunity offered to renew the mat-

ter to the Earl of Guwrie for recovery of the letters in tbecof.
ser in his hands, therefore I put him in mind thereof; where-
upon he told me, that the Duke of Lenox had fought ear.
neftly to have had those letters, and that the King'did know
w here ~y were, fu as they could not be delivered to ha

with referring, for information concerning every
particular relative to the Sonnets, to Remarks on
tih Hi/tory of Scotland, Chap. XI.
HAVING thus flated the proof on both fides;
having examined at so great a length the different
systems with regard to the fads in controversy;
it may be expeced that I flould now pronounce
sentence. In my opinion, there are only two con-
clufions, which can be drawn from the fads which
have been enumerated.
One, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition
or love, encouraged by the Queen's known aver-
sion to her husband, and presuming on her attach.
ment to himself, struck the blow without having
concerted with her the manner or circumstances of
perpetrating that crime. That Mary, instead of
tefifying much indignation at the deed, or disco-
veriig any resentment against Bothwell, who was
accused of having committed it, continued to load

Mlajefy without the King's privity and consent, and he pre.
tended to be fill willing to pleasure her Majesty in the fame,
f far as he may with his duty to the King and to the reft of
the associates in that ation; but I greatly distrust to effed
this to her Majesty's pleasure, wherein, nevertheless, I Ihall
do my uttermost endeavours.

W'hether James VI. who put the Earl of Gowrie to death,
A. I. . 14, and seized all his effects, took care to deltroy his
mother's letters, for whose honour he was at that time ex-
remely zealous; whether they have perished by some un.
lknown accident; or whether they may not ill remain un-
obie ed among the archives of some of our great families,
it is impollible to determine.

him with marks of her regard, condudted his trial
in such a manner as rendered it impoflible to dif.
cover his guilt, and soon after, in opposition to
all the maxims of decency or of prudence, volun.
tarily agreed to a marriage with him, which every
consideration should have induced her to detel.
By this verdid, Mary is not pronounced guilty of
having contrived the murder of her hulband,
or even of having previously given her consent
to his death; but the is not acquitted of hay.
ing discovered her approbation of the deed, by
her behaviour towards him who was the author
of it.

The other conclusion is that which Murray

and his adherents labored to eRfablith, a That
James, fometymme Erie of Bothwile, was the
chiefe executor of the horribill and unworthy
murder, perpetrat in the person of umquhile
King Henry of gude memory, fader to our
Souveraine Lord, and the Queenis laucbfull
hulband; fa was the of the foreknowledge,
counfall, devise, perfwadar and commander of
the laid murder to be done. " Good. ii. 207.

Which of these conclusions is most agrble

to the evidence that has been produced, I lea*
my readers to determine.

i i TN APPEN
liENAPlpENDlX.

# APPENDIX.

AP P E N D I X.

N'. I. (Vol. I. p. 216.)

A MEMORIAL of certain points meet
for restoring the realm of SCOTLAND to
the antient weale.

IMPRIMIS, ' it is to be noted, that the best worldly
flicity that Scotland can have, is either to continue in a
perpetual peace with the kingdom of Englord, or to
be made one monarchy with England, as they both make
but one island, divided from the reft of the world.

If the sirs is fought, that is, to be in perpetual peace
with England, then muff it necessarily be provided, that
Scotland be not so fubjedc to the appointments of France,
as is presently, which, being an antient enemy to England,
feeketh always to make Scotland an inftrumeRt, to exer-
cife, thereby, their malice upon England, and to make
a foot-stool thereof to look over England as they may.

Therefore, when Scotland shall come into the hands
of a mere Scottish man in blood, then may there be hope
of ruchaccord; but as long as it is at the commandment
of the French, there is no hope to have accord long
betwixt these two realms.

Therefore feeing it is at the French King's corn.
mandment by reason of his wife, it is to be confidered

(th AnruR 1Os9. Cotton. Lib. Cal. B. Io; fol. 17, From a copy
in ecretary Ccil's hand.

VOL. III. N

for the weale of Scotland, that until (he' hare childr
and during her abCence out of the realm, the next bh
to the crown, being the house of the Hamiltons, flio
hare regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crow
be imposed nor wafted; and, on the other. fide,
nobility and commonalty ought to force that the laws
the old customs of the realm be not altered, neither t
the country be not impoverished by taxes, empreft,
new imposts, after the manner of France; for proml
wherein, both by the law of God and man, the Fred
king and his wife may be moved to reform their ma
vernance of the land.

And for this purpose, it were good that the nobh

and commons joined with the next heir of the cown
to seek due reformation of such great abuses u tend h
the ruin of their country, which must be done bei
the French grow too strong and insolent.

First, That it may be provided, by conlent ofdi

three estates of the land, that the land may be fre E
all idolatry like as England is; for juRification wer
if any free general council may be had where the P
of Rome have not the feat of judgment, they may
to show their cause to be molt agreeable to Christ'

Next, to provide that Scotland might be governed,

all roles and officers, by the antient blood of the r
without either captains, lieutenants, or folders, aI
other Princes govern their countries, and efpecilly
the forts might be in the hands of mere Scottilh me

Thirdly, that they might never be occasioned to'

into wars against England, except England Ihould
the irft cause to Scotland.

Fourthly. that no nobleman of Scotland ihould

pension of France, except it were whilt he did
in France, for otherwise thereby the French would fl
corrupt many to betray their own country.

Fifthly, that no office, abbey, living, or commod

be given to any but mere Scottilh men, by the aft
the three estates of the realm.

Sixth, that there be a council in Scotland appointed
in the queen's ablence, to govern the whole realm, and
iD thole cafes not to be directed by the French.

Seventhly, that it be by the said three efates appointed
bow the queen's revenue of the realm tfall be expended,
bow much the queen Ihall have for her portion and eflate
during her abfcnce. how much shall be limited to the
vernance and defence of the realm, how much yearly
apointed to be kept in treasure.

In there, and such like points, if the French king and
the queen be found unwilling, and will withRtand these
provisions for the weale of the land, then hath the three
eates of the realm authority, forthwith, to intimate to
ie said king and queen their humble requests; and if the
me be not effecually granted, then humbly they may
cmmit the governance thereof to the next heir of the
mown, binding the fame also to observe the laws and an.
ent rights of the realm.
Finally, If the queen Ihall be unwilling to this, as it
i likely she will, in refped of the greedy and tyrannous
sion of France, then it is apparent that Almighty God

pleased to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom
r the weale of it,. and this time mutl be used with great
drcnmfpedion, to avoid the deceipts and tromperies of the
'rench. i

And then may the realm of Scotland confider, being
ce made free, what means may be devised by God's

oies, to accord the two realms, to endure for time
come at the pleasure of Almighty God, in whose hands
hearts of all princes be.

N 2

s79

N. IL (Vol. L p. 226.)
A letter of Allaitland of Lethington's, thus di

reled:
To my loving friend James. Be this delivered

at London.

I U N D E R STA N D by the lalt letter I received from
yow, that discoursing with zour countrymen upon the mat.
ter of Scotland, and commoditeys may ensew to that
realm hereafter, giff ze presently alfift ws with zour forces,
ze find a nombre of the contrary advise, doubting that we
fall not at length be found trusty friends, nor mean tl
contynew in constant ametye, albeit we promise, but oly
for avoyding the present danger make zow to frer om
tome, and after being delivered, 'becom enenmies of
before. For prose quhareof, they alledge things that hae
past betwixt ws heretofore, and a few prefumptones tendin
to the fam end, all grounded upon miftrut; quhill, at
the first ficht, have some shewe of apparance, gif men
wev not the circumstances of the matter; but gif they
will confer the tyme pafl with the present, confider the
nature of this caus, and estate of our contrye, I dout
not but jugement fal be able to banish miftnft. And fit,
I % d wilh ze (hould examine the causes of the old inmitye
betwixt the realms of Ergland and Scotland, and qohet
moced cur arceftors to enter into ligue with the Frenchet
quhiks by our storeys and regift es offanriquiteys appear tok
these. The princes of Engia-d, some tyme, alledeing
certain !.ynde of foverainrse over this realm; some tyr
upon hye courage, or incited by incursions off our bor.
dourares, and semblable occalions, mony tymes enterprifl

2oth J.nuary 1t£9.60. Cott. Lib. Cal. B. ix. From tbe origiili
his own buad.

Ie conquest of ws, and fa far furth preift it by force off
imes, that we' wer dryven to great extramiteys, by loss
of our princes, our noblemen, and a good part of our
rontrey, fa that experience taught ws that our owne
Irength wvas fcarfe sufficient to withstand the force of Eng-
land. The Frenche zour auncient enemies, confidering
;l11 how nature had fa placed ws in a island with zow,
that na nation was able fa to annoye England as we being
enemyes, foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending
bv that meane to detourne zour armyes from the invasion
of France, and occupy zow in the defence of zour country
at hane, offering for that effect to beftowe some charges
upon ws, and for compalling off theyr purpos, choyfed a
qmty to propone the matter, quhen the frefche memory
of injuris lately receaved at zour hands, was fa depely
prented on our hartes, that all our myndes were occupied
how to be revenged, and arme ourselfes with the powar
of a forayne prince against zour enterprises thereafter.

This wes the beginning off our confederacy with France.
At quhilk tyme, our cronicles maks mention, that some
off the wyfeft foresaw the perril, and small frute should
redound to us thereof at lenth: zit had affection fa blinded
jugement, that the advise of the maift part overcame the
beh The maift part of all querells betwixt ws since
that tyme, at least quhen the provocation came on our
f(de, hes ever fallen out by theyr procurement rather
than any one caus off our selves: and quhenfaever we
brack the peace, it come partly by theyr intyfements,
partly to eschew the conquest intended hy tnat realm. But
now hes God's providence altered the cafe,. zea changed it
to the plat contrary, that now hes the Frenfche taken
tour place, and we, off very jugement, becum defyrous
to have zow in thyr rowme. Our eyes are opened, we
tfpy how uncareful they have been of our weile at all
tymes, how they made ws ever to serve theyr turne, drew
us n mailt dangerous weys for theyre commodite, and
nevertheiefs wad not ftyck, oft tymes, against the natour
of the ligue, to contrak peace, leaving ws in weyr. We

N

fae that their support, off late zeres, wes not grantit ft
any affedion they bare to ws, for pytie they had off ou
eftae, for recompense of the lyke friendship fchawin t
theym in tyme off theyr afflifiones, but for ambition, an,
infaciable cupiditie to reygne, and to mak Scotland a
accessary to the crown of France. This was na friendll
ofice, but mercenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding th
proportion of theyr deserving; a hale realm for the defent
of a part. We fee theym manifestly attempt the thing we
fofpeded off zow; we feared ze ment the conquest of
Scotland, and they are planely fallen to that work; we
hated zow for doubt we had ze ment evill towards s,
and fall we love theym, quhilks bearing the name oil
frends, go about to bring ws in maift vile servitude? Gil
by zoor frendly support at this tyme, ze fall declare tht
not only seek ze not the ruyne of our country, but wil
prefrrve the libertie thereof from conquest by trangeares,
fall not the occasion off all inimite with zow, and ligne
with theym, be taken away? The causes being removed,
how fall the effeces remane ? The fear of conquest mae
us to hate zow and love theym, the cais changed, quihe
we fee theym planely attempt conquest, and zow fchaw i
friendlhip, fall we not hate theym, and favour zow? Gil
we have fchawne fa great constance, continuing fa m0ny
zeares in amity with theym, off quhome we bad fa Imll
commodite, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, tin
off all nations may do ws greatest plefour?

But ze will fay, this matter may be reconcyled, ad

then fiends as off before. I think weil peace is the end
of all weyr. but off this ze may be assured, we will nerw
fa far trust that reconciliation, that we will be content t
forgo the amctye of England, nor do any thing may brir
ws in suspicion with zow. Giff we wold, at any tYne
to please theym, break with zow, Ihould we not, befylt
the los'e off elimarion and discrediting off ourselfes, P
petually expone our common weill to a maift manifest d
ger, and becum a prey to theyr tyranny? Quha il
could we implore, being efritute of zour fdiendlhip, i

ty off new wald attempt theyr format enterprise? Quhat
ation myght help ws giff they wald, or wald giff they
might? and it is lyke eneuch, thay will not sick hereafter
to tak theyr tyme off ws, quhen difplefour and grudge
it talen depe rute on baith fydes, feeing ambition has fa
impyrit ower theyr reason, that before we had ever done
ay thing myght offend theym, but by the contrary plea.
ld them by right and wrang, they did not flick to at-
terpte the subversion of our hale state. I wald ze should
ot eteeme ws fa barayne of jugement, that we cannot
foresee our awne perril; or fa foolifche, that we will not
tudy by all gode means to entertayne that thing may be
our fafetye; quhilk consistes in all the relaying of zour
friendlhips. I pray zow confider in like cafe, when, in the
ays of zour princes off maift noble memory king Henry
te VIII. and king Edward the VI. meanes were opened
offamytye betwixt baith realms; was not at all tymes the
diffrence of religion the onley flay they were not em,
haced? Did not the craft of our clergy and power of
theyr adherents subvert the devises of the better fort?
But now has God off his mercy removed that block furth
off the way; now is not theyr practice lyke to tak place
any mare, when we ar comme to a conformity off doc-
rine, and profes the fame religion with zow, quhilk I
taie to be the ftraytefl knot of amitye can be devised. Giff
it may be alledged, that Come of our countrymen, at ony
mie, violated iheyr promis ? giff ze liss to way the cir-
cumnances, ze fall find the promis is rather brought on
by neceffit¢, after a great overthraw off our men, then
comme of fre will, and tending ever to oun great in-
oimmodite and decay off our haill state, at kifl fa taken.
But in this care, fall the preservation of our libertie be
aeparably joined with the keping off promeffe, and the
violation of our fayth cast ws in maif miserable fervi-
tode. So that giff neyther the fear off God, reverence of
man, religion, othe, promise, nor warldly honeftye wes
fficient to bynd, us, yet fall the zeale of our native
cMuntrey, the maintenance off our own estate, the fafery

N

l83

of our wyffes and childrene from slavery, compell s t
kepe promifle. I am assured, it is trewly and fincrel
ment on our part to continew in perpetual ametye wit
zow; it fall be uttered by our proceedings. Giff ze I
as defyrous of it as we ar, assurances may be devyfed
quharby all partyes will be out of doubte. There b
gode meanes to do it, fit instruments for the purpos, tvne
serves wenil, the inhabitants of baith realms wish it. God
hes wrought in the people's hartes on bayth parties a cer.
taine till agreement upon it, never did, at any tyme, so
mony things concurre at ones to knyt it up, the difpol.
tion of a few, quhais harts are in Godis hands, may mia
up the hale. I hope he quha hes begun his work, and
mainteyned it quhile now, by the expedtadon of man,
fall perfyte it.

I pray zow, let not zour men dryve tyme in confuth.

tion, quhether ze fall support ws or no. Seyng the mater
fpeaketh for itself, that ze mon take upon zow the de.
fence off our caus, giff ze have any refpedt for zour arne
weilL Their preparatives in France, and levying of men
in Germany, (quheyroff I am lately advertised) ar no
altogyddei ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark they tate at;
they feke our realme, but for ane entrey to zors. Giff
they should directly fchaw hofilite to zow, they likn
zo wald mak redy for theyme, therefor they do, by in
diret meanes, to blind zow, the thing, they dare not a
zit planely attempte. They feme to invade us to th' end
that having assembled theyr hayle forces fa nete zour
bordours, they may unlok it to attack zow: It is ane of
theyr aid fetches, making a fchew to one place, to lyghi
on ane other. Remember how covertly zour places abont
Boulougne were affaizcic, and carryed away, ze being in
peace as now. How the enterprise of Calais was fyndy
dissembled, I think ze have not fa sone forgotten. Be
ware of the third, prevent theyr policy by prudence.
Giff ze fe not the lyke disposition presently in theym, zo
fe nathing. It is a grosse ignorance to milknaw, what all
nations planely fpeks of Tak bede ze zay not hereaflr,

' Had I witR;" ane uncomely sentence to procede off a
,fk man's mouth. That is onwares chanced on to zow,
0ukilk zow commonly wilfed, that this countrey myght
e divorfed from the Frenfche, and is fa comme to pals as
was miiit expedient for zow. For giff by your intyfe.
ment we had taken the mater in hand, ze myght have
fufpeled we would have been untrufty frends, and na
lfnger continued fledfalte, then perril had appeared. But
now, quhat off our self, we have conceyved the hatered,
provoked by private injuries, and that theyr evil dealing
with i's hes deserved our ininitye, let no man dobte but
they fall fynde ws ennemyes in ernest, that fa ungently
hesdemeyned our countrey, and at quhais hands we can
lolk for nathing but all extremitye, giff ever they may
get the upper hand. Let not this occali,,n, fa happely
ofered, escape zow : giff ze do, neglecting the present
opportunitie, and hoping to have ever gode luk comme
feaping upon zow, it is to be feared zour enemye waxe so
great, and fa ftrang, that afterwards quhen ze wald, Ze fall
not be able to put him down; and then, to zour smart,
after the time, ze will acknowledge zour error. Ze have
felt, by experience, quhat harme cometh of oversight,
and trulting to zour enemyes promefle. We offer zow the
occasion, quheyrby zour former losses may be repayred.
Quhilk gif ze let over flyde, suffering ws to be overrun,
qaha then, I pray zow, fall stay the Frenfche, that they
fall not invade zow in zour own boundes, lick it is their
lult to reygne, that they can neither be content with theyr
fortune present, nor reft and be satisfied when they have
gode luck, but will fiill follow on, having in theyr awne
brayne conceaved the image of fa great a conquest, quhar
think ye fal be the end? Is ther any of fa fimall jugement,
tat he doth not foresee already, that theyr hail force fall
hen be bent againfi zow?
It fall not be amis, to confider in quhat cafe the
Frenrche be presently. Theyr estate is not always fa calme
at hame as every man thinketh. And trewly it wes not
theyr great redines for weyr made theym to tak this mater

on hand, at this tyme, but rather a vayne trust in their
awne policy, thinking to have found na refifance, theit
opinion hes deceaved theym, and that makes them now
~mafed. The eltates off the empire (as I heare) has futed
refutidon off the Imperial towns Metz, Toull, and Verdun,
quhilk may grow to some befynes; and all thing is not a
alme within theyr awne countrey, the less fit they be
prefendy for weyr, the mare opportune efteme ye the time
for zow. Giff the lyke occaGon were offered to the Frenfce
againf zow, wey, how gladly would they embrace it. Are
ze not efchamed of zour sleuth, to spare theym that bet
already compassed zour deftrudtion, giff theym wer able?
Confider with zour self quhilks is to be choyfed? To weyt
againt them out with zour realme or within? Giffquhill
ze fleape, we fal be overthrowne, then fall they not fayl
to fute zow in zour awne countrey, and use ws as a fote
tole to overloke zow. But some will fay, perhaps, they
meane it not. It is foly to think they wald not giff they
wer able, quhen before hand they tfick not to gi zour
ames, and ufurpe the style of zour crown. Then quhit
difference there is to camp within zowr awne bounds or
without, it is manifest. Giff twa armyes should camp with
in zowr country, but a moneth; albeit ye receaved et
other harme, zit Should zowr loffe be greatar, nor ll
the charge ze will nede to bestow on our support will draw
to, befydes the dishonour

Let not men , that eyther lack gode advise, or at not

for particular refpeds weill affeced to the caus, move zow
to fubtrat zour helping hand, by alleging things not ap
parent, for that they be possible. It is not, I grant, ub
possible that we may receave conditiones of peace; but I
fee little likelyhode that our ennemyes will offer ws fl a
will remove all mistrust, and giff we wald have accepted
other, the mater had bene lang or nowv compounded
Let zow not be moved for that they terme ws rebelles,
and diffimes our just querell with the name of confpinrac
against our foverayne. It is hit hyenes right we mant
tayne. It is the liberty off hir realm we study to pit

avc, with the hazard of our lyves. We are not (God
lmaweth) comme to this poynt for wantones, as men
impatient of rewll, or willing to fchake of the zoke of
oavermnent, but ar drawne to it by neceflite, to avoyde
tc tyranny of ftrangeares, feaking to defraude ws of
hwful government. Giff we should susser ftrangeares to
plant themfelffes peaceably in all the lrenthes of our
reaile, fortify the feyportes, and maift important places,
as ane entre to a plain conquest, now in the minoritie of
our foverane, beyng furth of the realme, should we pot
be thought oncareful off the common weill, betrayares of
our native countrey, and evill fubjeds to hir majefte?
Quhat other opinion could fche have off ws ? Might (he
not juRlly hereafter call ws to accompt, as negligent mi-
nifteres? Giff firangeares should be thus suffered to broke
the chefe offices, beare the hail rewll, alter and pervert
our lawes and liberty at theyr plefour; myght not the
people esteem our noblemen unworthy the place of coun-
falours? We mean na wyfe to fubtrak our obedience from
our foverane, to defraud hir hyenes off her dew reverence,
rents and revenues off hir crown. We feke nathing but
that Scotland may remane, as of before, a fre realme,
rewlit by hir hyenes and hir ministeres borne men of the
fam; and that the succession of the crown may remane
vith the lawful blode.

I wald not ze fould not Fa lyttil efteme the friendlhip

of Scotland, that ze juged it not worthy to be embraced.
It fall be na small commodite for zow to be delivered off
Ihe anoyance of so neir a nyghtbour, quhais inimitye may
more trouble zow, then off any other nation albeit twyfs
as puissant, not lyeng dry marche with zow. Besides that
zt fall not nede to feare the invasion off any prince lackying
the commodite to invade zaw by land, on our land. Con-
fider quhat superfluous charge ze beltowe on the fortification
and keping of Barwick; quhilk ze may reduce to a mean
r»ome, having ws to frendes. The realme of Ireland
being of natour a gode and fertill countrey, by reason off
the continewall unquietnes and lak of policey, ze knaw to

I87

be rather a burthen unto zow then great advantage; and
giff it were peaceable may be very commodious. For
pacification quhayroff, it is not onknowne to zow quhaC
service we ar abil to do. Refuse not theyr commodites,
beides mony ma quhen they ar offred. Qubilks albeit I
study not to amplify and dilate, yet is na other countrq
able to offer vow the lyke, and are the rather to be
embraced, for that zour aunceftors, by all meanes, maiR
erneftly futed our amity, and yet it was not theyr hap to
come by it. The mater hes almaift carryed me beyond
the boundes of a lattre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zow
after I have geven you this note. I wald wiss that ze, and
they that ar learned, fould rede the twa former orations
of Demosthenes, called Olynthiacz, and confidere quhat
counfall that wyfe oratour gave to the Athenians, his
countrymen, in a lyke care; quhilk hes ro great affinite
with this cause of ours, that every word therof myght be
applyed to our purpos There may ze leame of him quhat
advise is to be followed, when zour nyghtbours hous
on fyre: Thus I bid zow heartily fareweilL From Sat
Andrews, the 2oth ofJanuary, 1iS9.

N'. I. (VoL I. p. 234.)
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir William

Cecil, from the camp before Leith, 29th of
April 1560.'

I WILL only, for this time, discharge myself of my
promise to the earl of Huntly, who so defyreth to be
recommended to you, as one, who with all his hean
favoureth this cause, to the uttermost of his power. Half
the words that come out of his mouth were able to per
fuade an unexperienced man to speak farther in his behalf,
than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your honou
* An Originl in the Paper Office.

to judge of him, as of a man not unknown to you, and
,ill myself always measure my thoughts, as he shall
deserve to be spoken of. With much d;fficulty, and great
ptrfuafion, he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords
to join with them in this a&ion; whatfomever he can invent
to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promised to do
itdl solemn protestation, and many words; he trusted to
adjoin many to this cause; and faith surely that no man
Ihall lie were he taketh part. He hath this day subscribed
a bond between England and this nation; he faith, that
there was never thing that liked him better.

N. IV. (Vol. I. p. 248.)
Randolph to Cecil, loth August I56o. From

Edinburgh. '

SINCE the 29th of July, at what time I wrote las to
iour honour, I have heard of nothing worth the reporting.
At this present it may please you to know, that the most
prt of the nobles are here arrived, as your honour shall
receive their names in writing. The earl of Huntly ex.
cutrh himlelf by an infirmity in his leg. His lieutenant
for this time is the lord of Lidington, chosen speaker of
the parliament, or harangue-maker as there men term it.
The first day of their fitting in parliament will be on
Thursday next. Hitherto as many as have been present
of the lords have communed and devised of certain heads
then to be propounded, as, who lhall be sent into France,
*ho into England. It is much easier to find them than
the other. It feemeth almost to be resolved upon that for
Englaj:d the Master of Maxwell, and laird of Lidington.
ior France, Pitarrow and the Justice Clerk. Also they
hive consulted whom they think meeteft to name for the
XXV. of the which the XII. counsellors must be chosen.
An Original in the Paper Office.

i89

They intend very shortly to fend away Dingwall the herald
into France, with the names of those they shall chufe;
and also to require the king and queen's consent unto thia
parliament. They have devised how to have the contrad
with England confirmed by authority of parliament; how
also to have the articles of the agreement between them
and their king and queen ratified. These things yet have
only been had in communication. For the confirmation ol
the contra& with England I have no doubt; for that I hea
many men very much like the fame, as the Earl of Athol,
the Earl of Sutherland, the L. Glamis, who dined yesterday
with L James. The Lord James requested me this present
day to bring the centrad unto him. I intend also, this
day, to speak unto the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name,
for that he promised in my hearing to subscribe and then
presently would have done it, if the contrad could have been
had. For the more afiurance agairAn all inconvenients, I
would besides that, that I trust it Shall be ratified in par-
liament, that every nobleman in Scotland had put his hand
and set his feal, which may always remain as a notable
monument, tho' the ad of parliament be hereafter dilan.
nulled. If it might, therefore, fiand with your advice,
that the lords might be written unto, now that they are here
present to that effrdc, or that I might receive from yonr
Honr. some ear-eft charge to travel herein. I doubt not
but it would serve to good purpose. If it might be also
known with what fubflantial and effcctious words or charge
you desire to have it confirmed. I thir:k no great difficulty
would be made. -The Earl Mlarfhal has oft been moved to
fubfcnbe, he used mo delays then men judged he would
His son told me ycfterday, that he would Ipeak with me
at leisure, so did allb Drumlanrick; I know not to what
purpose: I have caused L. James to be the earnefer with
the L Marihal, for his authority's fake, when of late
it was in consultation by what means it might be wrought,
that the amity between these two realms might be
perpetual; and among diverse men's opinion, one said
that he knew of no other, but by making them both
one, and that in hope of that mo things were done,
190

Itha' would otherwise have ever been granted; the earl
of l!rgll advised him earnefly to stick unto that, that he
had promised, that it Ihould pass his power and all the
craft knaves of his counsel (I am bold to use unto your
H. his own vords) , to break so gdbly a purpore.
This talk liked well the assisters, howsomever it
Pleased him to whom it was spoken unto. The barons,
sho in time palt have been of the parliament, had
leRerday a convention among themselves in the church,
in very honest and quiet fort; they thought it good to
require to be restored unto their ancient liberty, te have
roice in parliament. They presented that day a bill unt
the lords to that effect, a copy whereof Ihall be sent as
soon as it can be had. It was answered unto gently and
taken in good part. It was referred unto the lords of the
aticles, when they are chosen to resolve thereupon.-
inre follows a long paragrapb concerning the fortifications
or DInibar, &ic.-This present morning, viz. the 9th,
lunderltood, that the lords intended to be at the parlia-
ment, which caused me somewhat to stay my letter, to
fee what I could hear or learn worth the reporting unto
your Honour. The lords, at ten of the clock, assembled
thremfelves at the palace, where the duke lieth; from
whence they departed towards the Tolbooth, as they were
in dignity. Each one being let in his feat, in such order
is your H. shall receive them in this scroll. The crown,
the mace, the sword, were laid in the queen's feat. Silence
being commanded, the L. of Lidington began his oration.
He excused his insufficiency to occupy that place. He
made a brief discourse of things past, and of what necessity
men were forced unto for the defence of their country,
what remedy and support it pleased God to fend them in
the time of their necessity, how much he were bound
heartily to acknowledge it, and to requite it. He took
Maay the pe-fuafion that was in many men's mind that
lay back, that misdeemed other things to be meant than
ais attempted. He advised all efRates to lay all particulars
'part, and to bend themselves wholly to the true service
of God and of their country. He willed them to remem-

19s

her in what slate it had been of long time for lack o
government, and exercise of justice. In the end he exhort
ed them to mutual amity and hearty friendihip, and tr
live with one another as members all of one body._
He prayed God long to maintain this peace and amitj
with all princes, especially betwixt the realms of Ergland
and Scotland, in the fear of God, and so he ended. The
clerk of the register immediately flood up, and asked them
to what matter they would proceed: it was thought nece.
fary, that the articles of the peace should be confirmed
with the common content. for that it was thought neref
fary to fend them away with speed into France, and to
receive the ratification of them as soon as might be. The
articles being read, were immediately agreed unto: A day
was appointed to have certain of the nobles ubfcribe onto
them, and to put their feals, to be sent away by a
herald, who shall also bring the ratification again with
him. The barons, of whom I have above written, required
an answer to their request, somewhat was said unto the
contrary. The barons alledged for them custom and authority.
It was in the end resolved, that there thould be chosen
fix to join with the lords of the articles, and that if they,
after good adv'fement, should find it ripht and necessary
for the commonwealth, it should be ratified at this parlia.
ment for a perpetual law. The lords proceeded immedl
ately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the article
The order is, that the lords spiritual chufe the temporal,
and the temporal the spiritual, and the burgesses their oan
There were chufen as in this other paper I have writte
This bei-g done, the lords departed and accompanied the
duke, all as far as the Bow t which is the gate going ut
of the high flteet), and many down into the palace hete
he lieth. The town all in armour, the trumpets founding,
and other music such as they have. Thus much I report
unto your honour of that I did both hear and fee. Oter
folemnities have not been used saving in times long pS
the lords have had parliament-robes, which are now si
them wholly out of use.

The

The names of as many earls and lords spiritual and
nporal as are assembled at this parliament.

The duke of Chatelherault.

Lords.
Erikine.
Ruthven.
Lindsay.
SorIervilL
Cathcart.
Hume.
LivingRon.
Innermeth.
Boyd.
Ogilvy.
Fleming.
Glamis.
Gray.
Ochiltree.
Gordon.

Lords Spiritua.
St. Andrews.
Dunkell.
Athens.
The bilhop of the Iiles.
Abbots and Priors I know

not how many.

The lords of the Articles.
Spinitual Temporal. Barons eleded to be of

the Articles.
Athens. The Duke. Maxwell.

Argyll.
Mlarfhall.
Athole.
Morton.
Glencairn.
Ruthven.
Erfline.
Boyd.
Lindsay.
the Subprior

Tillibardine.
Cunninghamhead.
Lochenvar.
Pittarow.
Lundy.
Ten ProvoRs of the chief

towns, which also are
of the Articles.
of St. Andrews, the whole

0

9

1

1
j Earls.
ran.
gyle.
hole.
awford.
Ills.
Iafhall.

.rton.

lencairn.
utherland.
athnefs.
other.
lonteith.

lks.
lord james.
Albiouth.
Newbotile.
Lr1doris.

wpnar.

Rittrors.

Winning.

ohat with
i 36.

VOL. Ill1

1

r

r

'1

;1

1
C M

SE
i

191

It were too long for me to rehearse particularly the

disposition, and chiefly the affedions of these men, that
are at this time chosen lords of the articles. May it satisfy
your Honour for this time to know that, by the common
opinion of men, there was not a fubftntialler or more fuffi.
cient number of all forts of men chosen in Scotland thef
many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good
to ensue. 'iThis present morning, viz. the loth, the L. of
Lidington made me privy unto your letter; he intendeth,
as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some hard
points there are He himself is determined not to go into
France. lie allegeth many reasons, but fpeaketh leat
of that, that moveth him most, which is the example of
the lat, that went on a more grateful mefiage than he hall
carry, and food on other terms with their prince than he
doth, and yet your honour knoweth what the whole wold
judgeth.
Petition of the Lesser Barons to the Parliament,

held Aug. 1560 '.

M Y lords, unto your lordlhips, humbly means an
shows, we the barons and freeholders of this realm, yor
brethren in Christ, That whereas the causes of true reigion
and common well of this realm, are, in this prefeat p
liament, to be treated, ordered, and efablilhed, to te
glory of God, ard maintenance-bf the commonwealth; a
we being the greatest number in proportion, where tl
said caules concern, and has been, and yet are ready
bear the greireft part of the charges thereuntil, as cll ih
peace as in war, both with our bodies and with our goods;
and feeing there is no place 'where we may do betr
service now than in general councils and parliaments, i
giving our betl advice and reason, vote and council
the furtherance thereof, for the maintenance of virtue, a
punishment of vice, as use and custom had been of 0i
s Inclosed in Randolph's letter to Cecil, 15th Aug. IHO,

g19

br ancient ass of parliament obrerved in this realm; and
wteeby we underhand that we ought to be heard ro reason
Ind vote in all causes concerning the commonwealth, as
Well in councils as in parliaments; otherwise we think that
bhalomever ordinances and Riatutes be made concerning
s and our eliate, we not being required and suffered to
ttifn and vote at the making thereof, that the fame should
ot oblige us to itand thereto. Therefore it will pleare
!or lodllhips to take consideration thereof, and of the
hage burn, and to be born by us, fiace we are willing
t serve truly to the common well of this realm, after our
thoe, that ye will, in this present parliament, and all
coanfells, where the common well of the realm is to be
treated, take our advice, counfell and vote, so that,
sirhout the fame, your lordships would susser nothing to
be par d and concluded in parliament or councils aforesaid;
pi that all adts of parliament made, in times past, con.
Cring us for our place and estate, and in our favor, be
althis present parl;ament confirmed, approved and ratified,
d ad r, parliament made thereupon. And your lordIhipt
faer humbly befcechen.
Of the ilJIiefJ of this Petition, the following account
Gi'e; 1ji' Randolpb; Lett. to Cecil, 19 Aug. 1(6o. The
ters concluded and past by common consent on Satur-
last, in such solemn fort as the first day that they afecm.
ed, are these. FirfI, that the barons according to an
d ad of parliament, made in the time of James I. in
year of Cod 1427, shall have free voice in parliament,
i act paled without any contradiction.

a

N'. V. (Vol. L p. 259.)
A letter of Thomas Randolph, the Englilh refi.

dent, to the right wor[hipful Sir Willam Cecil,
knt. principal secretary to the queen's mnajefy'.

I HAV E received your honour's letters of the first of
this month, written at Ofyes in Elfex; and also a letter
unto the lord James, from his kinsman St. Come oil of
France, in this they agree both that the queen ofScodand
is nothing changed of her purpose in home coming.
aflure your honour that will be a stout adventure for
sick crafed woman, that may be doubted as well what ma
happen unto her upon the seas, as also how heartily l
may be received when she cometh to land of a great nu
her, who are utterly persuaded that she intended th
otter ruin, come when the will; the preparance is yer
finall whensoever that the arrive, scarcely any man can
persuaded that Ihe hath any such thought in her head.
have shown your honour's letters unto the lord James, I
Morton, lord Lidington; they wish, as your honour doth
that The might be flayed yet.for a space, and if itw
not for their obedience fake, some of them care notth
they never saw her face. They travel what they can
prevent the wicked devices of these mischievous purpof
of her ministers, but 1 fear that that will always be fou
that filij hujus feculi, they do what they can to Rand l
the religion, and to maintain amity with their neighbour
they have also need to look unto themselves, for their
zard is great, and that they fee there is no remedy
safety for themfdvles, but to repose themselves upon
queen's majesty, our sovereign's favours and fupp
Frienis abroad they have none, nor many in whom t,
may trust at home. There are in mind shortly to try W

9 Aug. 1561. Cott. Lib. B. to. fog 32.
X96

Iev may be aflured at of the queen's majety, and what
ti.e may alfuredly perform of that they intend to offer for
their parties. This the queen of Scotland above all other
rlir. s doubteth; this lhe feeketh by all means to pre-
[r:; and hath caused St. Come, in her name, earnestly
t xr:te to charge him that no such things be attempted
!;!re ler coming homne; for that it is said that they too
[alredy arrived here out of .ng!and for the purpufe, what
let.rblint fomever the noblemen do make, that they are
Iricv'd with tleir queen's refusal, that cometh far from
tcir hearts. They intend to expostulate with me here.
upon. I have my answer ready enough for them. If she
It.rlt all Engliflhmen out of this country, I doubt not
bt there xill be some of her own that will bear us some
lirdrel. Of me she flall be quit, so soon as it pleafeth
the qteen's majesty my mifirefs no longer to use my ser-
rice in this place. By such talk, as I have of late had with
tie lord James and lord of Lidington, 1 perceive that
thy are of nind that immediately of the next convention,
I f.ail refair towards you with their determinations, and
rtfoiutio(ns, in all furpofes. wherein 3our honour's advice
is airtlft'v requiced, and shortly lcoked for. Whatfom-
tvcr I delite niveflf, I know my will ought to be subjed
rto the queen my' sovereign's pleasure, but to content
relff, mSould Ced I were so happy as to serve her majesty
i .s mean a state as ever poor gentleman did, to be quit
if this plice; not that I do in my heart wax weary of
lrr naj}iii's fcivice, but because my time and years re-
quirc fnie place of more repose and quietness than I find
in this country. I doubt also my insufficience when other
roubles in t'iis country arise, or ought Thall be required
/ t me to the advancement of her majcfln's service, that
tthtr nmy will is not able to compals, or my credit fuffi-
cieOt tn xorl; to that effcdt, as perchance shall be looked
fr at may hands. As your honour hath been a means of
t! cort;ruance in this room, so 1 trufi that I shall find
:it Cot.rii;al favour at your hands, that so soon as it shall
land with the queen's majelty's plealure, I may give this

0

197

place unto some far worthier than I am myselF, and in the
mean season, have my course directed by your good ad.
vice how I may by my contrivance do fame such service,
a may be agreeable to her majesty's will and pleasure.

There few words, I am bold to write unto your ho.

Dour of myself For the ref, where that is wilhed that
the lords will toutly continue yet for one month, I'afflre
your honour that there is yet nothing omitted of their old
and accustomed man.er of doing, and feeing that they
have brought that unto this point, and Ihould now pi.
vail, they were unworthy of their lives.

I find not that they are purposed so to leave the mat

ter. I doubt more her money than I do her fair words;
and yet can I not conceive what great things can be
wought with forty thousand crowns, and treasure of her
own here I know there is no Cure or ready means to get
t. The lord of Lidington leaveth nothing at this dine
nmwritten, that be thinketh may be able to fatify you
defi'e, in knowledge of the present state of things her.
~hatfomever cometh of that, he findeth it ever bes, tht
the come not; but if /he do come, to let her know, t
the first, what Ihe hfall find, which is due obedience,
and willing service, if Ihe embrace Christ, and defre to
live in peace with her neighbours. By such letters as you
have las received, your honour somewhat undertndet
of Mr. Knox bimfelf, and also of others, what is dcter-
mined, he himself to abide the uttermost, and other anevr
to leave him until God have taken his life, and thus to
gether with what comfort fomever it will please you o
give him by your letters, that the queen's maj sty doth nit
utterly condemn him, or at the least in that point, thatbC
is so fore charged with by his own queen, that her maj(ly
will not allow her doing. I doubt not but it will ek
great comfort unto him, and will content many otheri
his daily prayer is for the maintenance of unity with Eng
land, and thdt God will never susser men to be so ungrt,
s by any persuasion to run headlong unto the deftrolt
of thm, that have saved their lives, and refturd t

country to liberty. I leave farther, at tais time, tq trouble
pur honour, desiring God to fend such an amity between
there tro realms that God may be glorified to them of this
world.-At Edenburgh the 9th of Augut 1561.

N'. VI. (Vol. I. p. 269.)

A letter of Queen Elizabeth to Queen Mary '.

To the right excellent, right high and mighty princesse,

our right dear and well-beloved sifter and eoufin the
queen of Scotland.

RIGHT excellent, right high, and mighty princefle,
our right dear and right well-beloved ifter and cousin, we
greet )ou well. The Lord of St. Cofme brought to us
your letters, dated the 8th of this present at Abbevile,
ihereby ye signify, that although by the answer brought
to Sou by Monsieur Doyzell, ye might have had occasion
to have entered into some doubt of our amity, yet after
terrain purposes pasTed betwixt you and our ambassador,
you %ould assure us of your good meaning to live with
us in amity, and for your purpose therein ye require us
to give credit to the said St. Colme. We have there-
unto thought good to answer as followeth. The fame
St Cofme hath made like declaration unto us on your part,
br your excuse in not ratifying the treaty, as yourself
imde to oar ambassador, and we have briefly answered to
every the fame points, as he can show you: and if he
hall not so do, yet least in the mean leafon you might be
induced to think that your reasons has satisfied us fomer-
aly we assure you, that to our requefs your answer cannot

' lth of Aug. t6r. Paper-Office, rom a Copy. This is the otm.
ltte paper of whikh that indultrious and impartial 'collettor, Bihop
6lib, has publi<heJ a fragment, from what he calls his shattered
ii$,1, note (a) igi.

04

199

be reputed for a satisfaction. For we require no benefit
of you, but that you will perform your promire whereunto
you are bound by your feal and your hand, for the refual
whereof we fee no reason alledged can serve. Neither
covet we any thing, but that which is in your own
power as queen of Scotland, that which yourself in words
and foeech doth confess, that which your late husband
our good brother's ambafladors and you concluded, that
which your own nobility and people were made privy An.
to, that which indeed made peace and quietnef betwit
us, yea that without which no perfect amity oan continue
betwixt us, a if it be indifferently weighed, we doubt
not but ye will perceive, allow and accomplish. Never.
thelef, perceiving by the report of the bringer, thatyou
mean furthwith upon your coming home, to follow herein
the advice of your council in Scotland, we are contentt
suspend our conceipt of all unkindness, and do alure you
that we be fully resolved, upon this being performed, to
unite a sure band of amity, and to live in neighbourhood
with you as quietly, friendly, yea as assuredly in the lnot
of friecndhip, as we be in the knot of nature and blood
And herein we be so earnestly determined, that the world
Ihould fee if the contrary should follow (which God for.
bid), the very occafoo to be in you and not in us; as td
tory witneffeth the like of the king your father, our uncle,
with whom our father fought to have knit a perpetul
bond by inviting to come in this realm to York, of which
matter we know there remain with us, and we think
with you, sundry witnesses of our father's earnest good
meaning, and of the error whereunto divers evil counci!
lors induced your father; or finally where it feemeth that
report had been made unto you, that we had ent our
admiral to the seas with our navy to impeche your pl-
lage, both your servants do well underfand how faire
that is knowing for a truth that we have not any mm
than two or three small barks upon the seas, to apprehend
certain pirates, being thereto entreated, and almoR co`.
pelled, by the eareft complaint of the mbaflido of
2oo

our good brother the king of Spain, made of certain Scot.
tlmen haunting our seas as pirates, under pretence of
krers of marque, of which matter also we earnestly require
Tou, at your coming to your realme, to have some good
cunfideration, and the rather for refped that ought to be
btidxt your realme and the countries of us, of France,
of Spain, and of the house of Burgundy And so, right
excellent, right high and mighty princers, we recommend
us to you with most earnet request, not to neglect these
our fr;endly and sisterly offers of friendship, which, before
God, we mean and intend to accomplish. Given under
ou signet at Heyninghamn the 6th of August, in the third
yar of our reign.

N'. VII. (Vol. 'I. p. 304.)

A letter of Randolph to the right honorable Sir
William Cecil, knight, principal secretary to
the queen's majesty'.

OF late, until the arrival of monsieur Le Croc, I had
nothing worth the writing unto your honour. - Before his
coming we had so little to think upon, that we did nothing
bit pass our time in feaRs, banquetting, masking, and
running at the ring, and such like. le brought with
tim ruch a number of letters, and such abundance of news,
hith, For the space of three days, we gave ourselves to
]loc!il!g else but to reading of writings, and hearing of tales,
ainy so truly reported , that they might be compared
t any that ever Luciane did write de veris narrationibus.
Among all his tidings, for the molt assured, I fend this unto
)our honour as an undoubted truth, which is, that the
Ilrlinal of Lorraine, at his being with the emperor. moved
1 marriage between his youngeR fCon, the duke of Atlruche,
"hlh of May, 1563. Pper. Office, from the Original.

Bog

and this queen; wherein he hath Co far travelled, that it hath
already come unto this point, that iffhe find it good, the raid
duke will out of hand fend hither hisembaffador,and farther pro
ceed to the consummation hereof, with as convenient speed as
may be; and to the intent her mind may be the better known,
Le Croc is sent unto her with this message from the cardinal
who hath promired unto the emperor, to have word again be.
fore the end of May; and for this cause Le Croc is ready f
his departure, and his letters writing both day and night This
queen being before advertized of his towardnefs, by many
means hath fought far off, to know my lord of Murray's
mind herein, but would never so plainly deal with him,
that he could learn what her meaning is, or bow she is bent
She ufeth no man's council, but only this man's that hft
arrived, and assuredly until the L. of Lidington's return,

lhe will do what she can to keep that secret; and because
refolation in his absence cannot be taken, Ihe will, for
this'time, return Le Croc with request, to have longr
time to devize; and after, with the most speed she can,
the fully propofeth to advertize him, I mean, her uncle
the cardinal, of her mind. Of this matter the L of
Lidington is made privy. I know not whether by some
intelligence that he had before his departure, or lince his
arrival in France, divers letters have passed between he
grace and him, whereof as much as it imported not
greatly the knowledge of, was communicated to some,
as much as was written in sypher, is kept unto themnfels.
Whether aso the L of Lidington hath had conference
with the Spanish ambassador in England of this matte,
or any like. I leave it unto your honour's good means,
to get true knowledge thereof Guesses or farmizes in
so grave matters, I would be loath to write for veritiE
This also your honour may take for truth, that the em
peror bath offered with bis son, for this queen's dower,
the county of Tyroll, which is laid to be worth oPoooM
franks by year. Of this matter also the rhingrave wt
a letter unto this queen, out of France not long fine,
This all that preently I can write unto your hono
LBo

heeoF; as I can come by farther knowledge, your honour
Iall be informed.

1 have received your honour's writings by the Scottifl
man that JaR came into there parts; he brought also
etters unto this queen from the L. of Lidington; their
date was old, and contained only the news of France.
perceive divers ways, that Newhaven is forre closed,
but I am not so ignorant of their nature, but that I know
they will fay as much as they dare to, I will not fay as
the proverb doth, 'canis timidus fortius latrat. ' From
hence I do aflure them, what means fomever they make,
or how pitiful fomever their mone be, they are like to re.
cwve hut finall comfort for all their long allie. We fiand
daily in doubt what friendship we Ihall need ourrtlf, ex-
cept we put better order unto our mirruled papiRs, than
trt we do, or know how to bring to pass that we may be
toid of their comber.

To morrow, the i ith of this infant, the queen departeth
ofthis town , towards Edenburgh. If my hap be good,
!ou lhall thoroughly hear some merry tidings of the Bp. of
St Andrews; upon Wednesday next he shall be arraigned,
ad five other priefis, for their mailing at Easter lait. Thus
molt humbly I take my leave; at St. Andrews the a th of
31iy, t61;.

N'. VIII. (Vol 1. p. 313.)

Letter of Randolph to the right honourable Sir
William Cecil, knight, principal fccretary to
the queen's majesty '.

M AY it please your honour, the 7th of this inflant,
loalet, this queen's secretary, arrived here; he reporreth
"ery honeflly of his good usage, he brought with him

' icth of April x563. Paper-Office, from the Original in his own

' "iii
1

sot

many letters unto the queen that came out of France, f
of lamentation and sorrow. She received from the qucee
mother two letters, the one contained only the reherfal of
her griefs, the other signify the fate of France as then it
was, as in what fort things were accorded, and what farther
was intended for the appearing of the discords there, not
mistrusting but that if reason could not be had at the quer
of England's hands, but that the realm of France ihould
find her ready and willing to support and defend the right
thereof, as by friendlhip and old alliance between thetwo
realms Ihe is bound.

How well these words do agree with her doings, yor

honour can well confider, and by her writings in this fort
unto this queen, (which I allure your honour is true) you
may afluredly know, that nothing lhall be left undone
of her part, that may move debate or controverlie beene
this queen and our sovereign.

It was much mused at by the queen herself, how this

new kindness came about, that at this time The received
two long letters written all with her own hand, faying, all
the time since her return she never received half so many
lines, as were in one of the letters, which I can myfeif
teffify by the queen's own faying, and other good asur.
ance , where hitherto I have not been deceived. I ca
also farther alfure your honour , that this queen hath fayed
that Ihe knoweth now, that the friendlhip of the queen's
maiefty my sovereign may stand her more in dead, than
that of her good mother in France, and as Ihe is dfir.
ous of them both, so will she not lose the one for the
other. 1 may also farther aflure your'honour, that what
fomever the occasion is, this queen hath somewhat in her
heart that will buift out in time, which will manifft that
some unkindness hath palTed between them, that will no
be easy forgotten. In talk sometimes with myself, lhe fait
that the queen mother might have used the matter other.
wife than Ihe hath done,. and doth much doubt what Iha
be the success of her great desire to govern alone, inall
things to have her will. Seeing then that presently they

land in such terms one with the other, I tho't it better
to confirm her in that mind (th's queen I mean), than
to speak any word thal might cause her to conceive bet.
t:r of the other. And yet I am allured hfe Ihall receive
as friendly letters , and as many good words from this
oueen, as the other did write unto her. Whether the
queen mother will speak any thing unto the L. of Li-
dington of that purpose lhe did write unto this queen
of, I know not; but if Ihe do, I think it hard if your ho-
nour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or I per.
chance by some means here. It may, perchance, be writ.
ten only by that queen, to try what answer this queen
will give, or underfand what mind she beareth unto the
queen's majelty our sovereign. The queen knoweth now
that the earl Bothwell is sent for to London. She cau-
fed a gentleman of hers to enquire the cause; I answered
that I knew none other, but that his takers were in con.
troverfy who took him , and that it Ihould be judged
there. I know that she thinketh much that he is not sent
into Scotland. It is yet greatly doubted that if he were
here, he would be reserved for an evil intrument. If
the Lord of I[idington have not been plain with your ho.
nour herein, he is in the wrong to those who are his
friends here , but most of all to himself. There comes
a vulture in this realm, if ever that man come again into
credit.

20;

N'. IX (Vol. . p. 322)
The oration made by W illam Maitland of Le

thiugton, younger secretary for the time, inthe
parli.ment holden by our sovereign the king's
mother, queen of this re Im for the time, the
time of the restitution of Umquile Matthew
Earl of Lenox.

M Y Lords, and others here convened. Albeit be
that it has pleased her Majefly moR graciouily to utter
unto you, by her own mcuth, ye may have fufficiendy
conceived the cause of this your present assembly; yt
having her majesty's commandment to supply my Lord
Chancellor's place, being presently as ye fee deceased,
am willed to txFrefs the fame somewhat more at large.

Notour it is, how in her h:ghnefs's minority, a pro.
eels of forfaultour was decreed against my Lord of Lenox,
for certain offences alledged committed by him, specified
in the dome and cenfement of Parliament given thereupon;
by reason whereof he has this long time been exiled, ad
absent forth of his native country; how grievous the fame
has been unto him, it has well appeared by divers hi
suites, sundry ways brought unto her Majesty's knowledge
not only containirg most humble and due fubmiflion, bt
always bearing witr.eG of his good devotion to her Majety,
his natural princess, and earnef affecion he had to he
Highr.efs most humble service, if it should please her
Majesty of her clemency to make him able to enjoy the
benefit of a fubjedt; many refpets might have moved
her Highness favourably to incline to his request, as th
anciency of his house, and the firname he bears, di
honour he has to appertain to her Majesty by affinity, by
reafoR of my lady Margaret her Highness's aunt, anddito
other his good considerations, as aifo the effetuous requc

of her good sifter the Queen's Majesty of England, whose
(lrnef commendation was not of least moment, besides.
that of her own natural, her Majesty has a certain inclina.
nation to pity the decay of noble houses, and as we heard,
bt her own report, has a great deal more pleasure to be
the inflrument of the uphold, maintenance, and advance-
ment of the ancient blood, than to have matter miniftred
if the decay or overthrow of any good race. Upon this
occasion, her Majesty the more tenderly looked upon his
requefl, and her good filler the Queen of England's favourable
lIter, written for recommendation of his cause, in conli-
deration whereof not only has Ihe granted unto him her
teter of restitution, by way of grace, but also licensed
him ro pursue, by way of redution, the remedies provided
bh the law for such as think themselves grieved by any
judgment, unorderly led, and to have the process reversed;
for examination whereof, it has pleased her'Alajelly presently
to aTemble you the three elates of this her realme, by
shofe advice, deliberation, and decision at her Majesty's
mind, to proceed forward upon his complaints, as the
merits of the cause, laws of the realme, and pradcice ob-
served in such cafes, will bear out. The fum of all your
proceedings at this time, being by that we have heard, thus
as it were pointed out, I might here end, if the matter
we have in hand gave me not occasion to fay a few more
words, not far different from the fame subjed,' wherein
I sould extend the circumllances more largely. If I
fared not to offend her highness, whose presence and modest
nature abhors long speaking and adulation, and to will corn.
pel me to speak such things, as may seem to tend to any
good and perfect point, and left it should be compted to
Ime, s that I were oblivious, if I should omit to put you
in remembrance, in what part we may accept this, and
the like demionfrations of her gentill nature; whole gracious
behaviour towards all her fubjct's, in general, may serve
for a good proof of that felicity, we may look for under
her happy government, so long as it Thall please God to
gant her unto us; for a good harmony to be had in the

207

common weill, the offices between the prince and de
fubjeds mulf be reciproque; as by her Majety's prudence
we enjoy this present peace with all foreign nations, an
quietness among yourselves, in such' fort, that 1 think jollU
it may be affirmed Scotland, in no man's age, that prefentl
lives, was in greater tranquillity; so is it the duty ofll
us her loving fubje.ts to acknowledge the fame as a md
high benefit, p;oceeding from the good government of th
Majefy, declaring ourselves thankful for the fame, rd
rendering to her Majesty such due obedience, as a juftpine
may look for at the hands of faithful and obedient subjed.
I mean no forced nor unwilling obedience, which 1 knw
her nature does detest, but such as proceeds from the co
templation of her modest kind of regiment, will for Io
and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A good pr
have we all in general had of her Majefy's beunity
thef three years, that Ihe has lived in the gov
over you, and many of you have largely tte of her la
liberality and frank/ dealing; on the ouher part her hk
nefl has had large appearance of your dutiful obedi~e,
so it becomes you to continue, as we have begun, in
fideration of the many notable examples of her cleme
above others her good qualities, and to abhor and det
all falf: bruites and rumours, wh:ch are the most pelit
evils that can be in any common weill, and the sowers a
inventors thereof. Then may we be well allured to iha
of her an molt gracious princefle, and she molt fidbh
loving fubjets; and so both the head and the embim,
being encouraged to maintain the harmony and accord d
the politic bodies. whereof I made mention before, a
the glory thereof (hall partly appertain to her Majelti
so Ihall no small praise and unspeakable commodity cIda
therechrough to you all universally her fubjeds.

N'. X. (Vol. L p. 333.)

The perils and troubles that may presently enfoe,
and in time to come follow, to theQueen's ma.
jfty of England, and slate of this realm, up.
on the marriage of the Queen of Scots to the
Lord Darnley.

FIRST, the minds of such as be affited to the Qe
ofScmot, either for herself or for the opinion of he
pretnce to this crown, or for the desire to have change
of the forme of religion in this realm, or for the difeon
tention they have of the Queen's majety, or her uec.
Ecfion, or of the fucceflion of any other beside the
Queen of Scotts, lhall be , by this marriage, ereced,
comforted, and induced to devise and labour how to bring
thr desires to pali; and to make some effimate what
pirfons those are, to the intent the quantity of the danger
my be weighed; the fame may be compalfed in those fort
thcr within the realm or without.
The firlt :r futch as are specially devoted to the Queen
f Scotts, or to the Lord Darnley, by bond of blood and
lliance; as first, all the house of Lorrain and Guise for hes
pt, and the Earl of Lenox and hi wife, all such ja
Scotland as be of their blood, and have received difpjii
Lcs by the Duke of Chatelherault and the HamlCkoin
The second are all manner of persons, both in th realme
ad other countries, that are devoted to the authority of
lome, and mislike of the religion now' reelveJi and in
there two fort are the fubflance of them comprehended,
that lhall take comfort in this marriage.

Next therefore to be confidered what peril* and troubl
thee kind of men shall intend to this realm.

Firl, the general scope and mark of all their delires
h, and always hall be, to bring the Queen of Scotu to

8eo

bave the royal crown of this realm; and therefore, though
the devilers may vary amongst themselves for the compaflig
hereof, according to the accidents of the times, andac.
cording to the impediments which they qhal find.by meGl
cdthe Queen's majesty's adions and goverhnts, ye i
their purpoes, drifts, devises, and praftice, shall tioly

tndonlr tend to make the Queen of Scotts Queen of dt

~ali, and to deprive our sovereign lady thereof; 7nd
bn their proceediigs, there are two manners to be confidr.
ed, whereof the one is far worse than the other; the one
is intended by them , that either from malicious bliWd.
m religion h or for natural affetion to the Q~ a

, or the Lord Darnley, do persuade themfeles that the

fid Queen of Scotts hath presently more right to the acon
than our fouvreign lady the Queen, of which fort be a
their kindred on both fides, and all fch as arc devoted to
popery, either in England, Scotland, Ireland, or dft.
where: the other is meant by them, which, with 16
malice arc persuaded that the Queen of Scotts hath only
right to be the next heir to succeed. the Queen's majtd
and her fione, of which fort few .are without the realm,
but here within, and yet of them, not so many u are
the contrary, and from these two forts shall the peril, d
vises and prafices proceed. From the firt, which in
gine the Queen of Scotts to have perpetually, right are t
be looked for these perils. Sirs, is it to be doubted te
devil will inset some. of them to imagine the hurt of td
life of our dear foereign lady, by such means as the do
vl shall suggest to them, although it is to be affuredl
hoped, that Almighty God will, as he hath hitherto, Pi.
cioufly protct and preserve her from such dangers? Se
condly, there will be attempted, by perfuaflons, bybri,
by rumours, and such like, to alienate the minds of god
fubjecis from the Queen's majesty, and to concilate thrl
to the Queen of Scotts, and on this behalf the fronces
and the north will be much solicited and laboured Tir
ly, there will be attempted causes of some tumults d
rebellions, especially in the north towards Scotland, rfo

4. r W. ,r

r. JL

. L 1A A

óereupon may follow some open enterprise set by vio.
knee. Fourthly, there will be, by the said Queen's coun.
d and friends, a pew league mad, with France, or Sppin
t Ihall be offensive to this- realm , and a furtherance
their title. And as it is anto very likely, that they will
a foot; as many pdfratif 'iis tht can', 'both upon-te
rontiers and in Ireland, to cGih^ -4.6een'..a iajefty
t increase and continue her charge thereby, to retain her
from bringmighty ot pbtent, and for teh teihting of
ill tefe tbings, many deWifes will be imagnied, from time
totime, and no negligence will therein apper.

From the fecQnd fBrt, which mean no otter I~ ur to
te Queen of Scotts, but that Ihnt lhould fidcceed in title
to the Queen's majefti, is not much to bb seaid j tut thats
tkev will content themselves to fee i:o4,ntJoeQitheen's
majefy not to marry, and so to impeach it, but to hope,
th tie Qaeen of Scan m.iti lve il they will
tnk to be more pleafable to all men, becauie thereby. the
oewns of bngland and^Scotland shall be united in pne,
id thereby the occafit of war shall cecac; with which
pduafion many people may, be seduced, and aabured to,
incline themselves to the pair of the Quee of Sca.
The remedies against these perils

P 2

A Ib

A Duplicat
A fumnary of the consultation and advice givet

by the lords and others of the privy council,
Colleaed out of the sundry and several fpdccci
of the laid counfior'.

lord Keeper, Mr. Comptroler,
Lord Treasurer, Mr. Vice.Cbambedad;

Deby, Mr. Secretary,
larof < Bedford, Cave,

ILdeefer, Peter,

Lord Admiral, Mason.
Lorad Chmberlin,

QeftioM popounded were these two

,. F STr, what peni might ensue to the Qet'
majety, or thh realm, of the muniag betwixt the Qma
ds Scoo, and the Lord Damley.

.-What were meet to be done, to aoid or tmd
Ihe fame.

To tbe FirL

Taz pei being fndr, and very many, were redual
by roe counfelona into only one.

. Frft, tht by this marriage the Queen of Sco,

(being not married) a great number in this realm not1
the worst fubjeds might be alienated in their mind from th
natual duies to her majety. to depend upon the rof cc
this marrige of Scotland, as a mean to eftablilh the facc
sion of both the crowns in he ilfue of the fame mani,
and so favour all devises and pradices, that fbouldtdl
the advancement of the Queen of Scott.

a. Secodly tht confidering the chief foundadion
et, i.. ch furthered the muriage of the Lord Dl0a,

ts 4th f Jlue 1s. Ca. LL. Ca B. to. foL 2.
$x$

s hiij upon the trutF of ruch a were papists, s the
oaly means left to restore the religion of Rome, it was
plinly to be seen, that both in this realm and Scotland,
the papilts would molt favour, maintain, and fortify this
mraiage of the Lord Darnley, and would, for furtherance
cffaion in religion, devise all means and pradiaes that
could be within this realm, to difurb the estate of the
Queen's majesty, and the peace of the realm, and confc.
quntly to itchieve their purposes by force, rather than fail.
By rome other, there perils having indeed many branches,
were reduced, though somewhat otherwise, into two forts,
and these were in nature foch as they could not be easily
seered the one from the other, but were knit and lincked
together, naturally for maintaining the one with the other.
The firt of these fort of perils was that, by this marriage
with the Lord Darnley, there was a plain intention to further
dte pretended title of the Queen of Scotts, not only to
steed the Queen's majesty, as in her bet amity she had
proflfed, but that to occupy the Queen's eftatc, as when Ihe
1n in power, she did manifefly declare.

The second was, that hereby the Romilh religion &hould
k erected, and increared daily in this realm, and these two
vre thus knit together, that the furtherance and maintenance
f the tide flaid, in furthering of the religion of Rome within
his realm; and in like manner the furtherance of the fame
nligion flood by the title, for otherwise the title bad no
oundation.

Proofs of the sirs.) And to prove that the intention to
aannce the title to disturb the Queen's majesty, mut needs
ensue, was confidered that always the intention and will of
y person is most manifeRt, when their power is greatef,
mad contrary when power is (mall, then the intention and
*il of every person is covered and les seen. So as when
te Queen of Scotts power was greatest, by her marriago
it the dauphin of France, being afterwards French king, it
anifefly appeared of what mind she, and all her friends
ere, using then manifestly all the means that could be
diftd to impeach and difpoff~. the Queen's majesty, fit

P3

lt'

by writing and publifling herself in all countries Duem qs
England'; by granting charters, patents, ard commilions,
with that style, and with the arms of England, both the
French and Scotts, which charters remain fill undefaced;
and to prosecute it with effet, it is known what preparations
of war were made, and sent into Scotland; and what other
forces were assembled in foreign countries; yea, in rha(
manner a fihameful peace was made by th. French with
king Philip to employ all the forces of France to pursue
all the matters by force which by God's providence, and
the Queen's majesty contrary power, were repelled; and
afterwards, by her husband's death, her fortune and power
being changed, the intention began to hide itsel, and
although by the Scottish Queen's commiffaries an accord
was made at Edenborough, to reform all those titles, and
claims , and pretences, yet to this day, by delays and
cavillations , the ratification of. that treaty bath been de.
ferred. And so now, as Coon as she shall feel her power,
Jhe will set the fame again abroad, and by confidering of
?uch errors as were committed in the first, her friend;
and allies will amend the fame, and proceed fubfhotiall
to her purpose. By sone it was thought plainly, thei
the pesil was greater of this marriage with the lord DarMnt
being a subjec of this realm, than with the mightiest priec
abroad; for by this, he being of this realm, and baving
for the caure of religion, and other retpets, made aparn
here, Ihould increase by force with diminution of thepower
of the realm; in thar v hatfoever power he could make by the
fadion of= the papist, and other discontented petfons here
slould be as it were deducted out of the power of tti
realm; and by the marriage of a stranger, she could no
be assured of any part here; so as by this marriage Ihe
ihould have a portion of her own power to serve her turn,
and a small portion of adversaries at home in our om
bowels, always feum more dangerous than treble the like
abroad; whereof the examples are in our own flont
many, that foreign powers never prevailed in this reala,
but with the help of some at home. It was alfb riaoC
314

bred, that feeing now before this attempt of marriage, it
is funJ, and nmanifefly seen, that in every corner of the
teolnr, the faction that mos favoureth the Scottifl title,
isgCtown Rout and bold, yea seen manifestly in this court,
bol in hall and chamber, it could. nor be but (except
god herd were speedily given to it) by this marriage,
nd by the practice of the fautors thereof, the fame fadtioi
you!d flortly encreafe, and grow so great and dangerous,
as the redress thereof would be almost desperate. And to
this purpose it was remembered, how of late in perufint
of the substance of the justices of the peace, in all the
countries of the realm, scantily a third was found fully
alhred to be trusted in the matter of religion, upon which
only fring the Queen of Scotts title doth hang, and some
doubt might be, that the friends of the Earl of Lenox,
and his had more knowledge hereof than was thought, and
thereby made avant now in Scotland, and their party was so
great in England as the Queen's majesty durst not attempt tO
contrary his marriage. And in this fort, was the fum of
the perils declared, being notwithstanding more largely and
lhinly set out, and made so apparent by many sure argu.
munts, as no one of the council could deny them to be
bt many, and very dangerous.

Second Quefion.

THE queltion of this consultation was, what were meet
to be done to avoid these perils, or else to divert the
force thereof from hurting the realm; wherein there were
a great number of particular devires propounded, and yet
the more part of them was reduced by some into three
eads.

I. The firRf thought necessary by all persons, as the
only thing of the most moment and efficacy, to remedy
ill these perils, and many others, and such as without it,
no other remedy could be found sufficient, and that was
to obtain that the Queen's majesty would marry, and make
theein no long delay.

elt

a. The second was to adtnce, elhblih, ad lbs

iadeed the profession of religion, both in Scotlandd md
England, Iad to diminilb, e aen, ad feeble dt c
tory.

i. The third wa, to proceed on sundry thin, eit

to diappot and break this intended marriage, or, it the
let, thereby to procure the ime not to be to hundl t

is realm, as othewie it will be.
The it of thef three hath no partcar rights it,

but an east ad unfeigned deire and suite, with a
bumblene, by pryer to Almighty God, and advice ad
aonucd to the Q~een't majety, hat she would dek n

on time from marrage, wherey the good febjed de
the eahn might tay their heart, to depend apon ba
mjety, and the ifne of her body, without which no frel
an be derifed to tcerai any pebon of oonduoance d
their fmiame or poaeritc , to enjoy tt which othcis

oul come to thea.
Seond, concerning the matten of religion, hrah

both trn and policy were joined togeter, hd
partic r

Slut, whea. of hte the advefares of religi,

the realm, hae taken occasion to comfrt and incre
their faion, both in England, Scotland, and broad,
with a mruour and expeddo that religion shalle Ihxly
canged in his ream, by means that the blhope, by
to Qeen's mjedy commandment, have of lae dr
~eighdy with Tome pe of good religion, B eadchi
Ids born, to wear ccn apparel, and fch lle thbp;
being more of fonm and accidents, than of any f bl~C,
for thtt its well known that her majety had no main
to comfort the adversaries, but only to maintain an mi
finity n well things external, in the fbh~e,
nr yet bath y intention to make any chnge of thc
bgion, a it i eftaliled by laws. It was t t b
dl menery n cefary, for the fopprefng of the prid d
arrogacy of the advrfria, indireftly hereby to nofi
by her pecir letCtr to the two ardcbioopc, d

fmnr commandment was only to retain an uniformity,
id not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge of
he mujcfty, in the change of any part of religion, but that
he did determine firmly to maintain the form of her reli.
on, as it wu efablifhed, and to pnilh such u did
terein violate her law. And in theft points, some alb
ilhed that it might pleage her archbiflope, tat if they
should fee that the adversaries continued in taking occa.
bn to fortify their faction, that in that cafe they should
fc a moderation therein, until the next parliament, at
hich time, some good, uniform and decent order might
be devied, and eftablified, for such ceremonies, so u
both uniformity and gravity might be retained nom t
the dergy.

The second means was, that the quondam bilhopo'
d others, which had refuted to acknowledge the Qujeen'
majesty power over them, according to the law, and
ere of late dispersed in the plague time to sundry places
tabd, where it it known they cease not to advance their
ffion, might be returned to the tower, or fomr other
prison, where they might not have such liberty to seduce
and inveigle the Queen's majesty's subjes, a they daily
do.

The third means was, that where the biWhop do com.
plain that they dare not execute the ecclfiaftical laws, to
the furtherance of religion, for fear of the premunire
wherewith the judges and lawyers of the realm, being not
eft affeded in religion, do threaten them, and in many
afe lett not to pinch and deface them, that upon such
ases opened, fame convenient authority might be given
thtm, from the Qpeen's majeft, to continue during her
pleasure.

The fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicionu
and unlawful books in English brought from beyond seas,
and are boldly received, read, and kept, and efpecialy ia
the North, seducing of great numbers of good fubjeds,
the like boldners whereof was never suffered in ny othe
pFne'4 time, thatfomne reight order ight be irra a

gal

avoid the fame, and that it might be confidered by the
judges, what manner of crime the fame is, to maintain
such books, made direcly against her majeRy's authority,
and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the lws of
the realm.

The fifth was, that where a great number of monks,

fryars, and such lewd persons are fled out of Scotland, and
do serve in England, especially in the North, as curate
of chorctes. and all such of them as are not found honed
and conformable, may be banished out of the realm, for
that it appeareth they do sow sedition in the realm, in
many places, and now will incresze their dings.

The sixth, wh-re sundry having ecclefialtical livings, are

on the other file the Pfa. and from thence maitain fedi.
tion in the reaial; that livings may be better beftcwed, to
the commodity of the realm, upon good fubj;t.s.

The seventh is. that the j,dges of the realm, harwn

mo final authority in this realm in governance of all pro
perty ot the realm, might be sworn to the (ueen's majelty
according to the laws of the realm, and so thereby they
should for conscience fake maintain the Queen's majesty'
authority.

The particulars of the third intention, to break and
avoid this marriage, or to divert the perils.

First to break this marriage, confidering nothing can likely

do it, but force, or fear of force, it is thought by sOet
that these means following might occasion the breach of the
marriage.

i. That the earl of Bedford repair tq.his charge.
2. That the works at Berwick be more aBfadced.
t. That the garrison be there increased.
4. That all the wardens put their frintiers in oretk
with speed, to be ready at an hour's warning.

5. That some noble person, as the duke of Norfolk, o

the earl of Salop, or such other, be sent into Yorklhire,
to be leutenant-general in the North.

6; That preparations be made of a power, to be is

readiness to serve, either at Berwick, or to invade Scodatl
aie

) That presently lady Lenox be committed to tome
place, where Ihe may be kept from giving or receiving qs
intelligence.

9. That the earl of Lenox and his son may be sent for,
and required to be sent home by the Queen of Scotts, accord-
ing to the treaty; and if they (hall not come, then to denounce
to the Queen of Scotts the breach of the treaty,, and therc.
Non to enter with hostility; by which proceeding, hope
is conceived (so the fame be done in deeds and not in
iews) that the marriage will be avoided, or at the leat
thatit may be qualified from many perils; and whatsoever
i to be done herein, is to be executed with speed, whilst
tie has a party in Scotland that favoureth not the marriage,
nd before any league made by the. Queen of Scotts with
france or Spain.

Some other allows well of all theie proceedings, saving
of proceeding to hostility, but all do agree in the reft, and
aio to these particularities following.

lo. That the earl's lands upon his refusal, or his son's
ntffing, should be seized, and bellowed in gift or cufodg,
as Ihall please her majefly, upon good fubjetas.

iI. That all manifest favourers of the earl, in the North,
Qr eTheahere, be inquired for, and that they be, by sundry
reans, well looked to.
12. That inquiry be made in the North, who have the
Bemardlhip of the Queen's majesty's lands there, and that
o person, deserving mifiruft, be suffered to have govern-
ance or rule of any of her fubjefs or lands in the North,
but only to retain their fees, and more trusty persons have

'rle of the fame people's lands.
1o. That all frequent passages into this realm, to and
from Scotland, be restrainad to all Scottish men, saving
ItLh as have fafe-conduc, or be especially recommended
flona Mr. Randolph as favourers of the realm.

'4. That rome intelligence be used with such in Scot-
.nd, as favour not the marriage, and they comforted from
tme to time.
15. That the Queen's majesty's houlhold, chamber, and

pendone, be better seen unto, to avoid broad ant .
codmey fpees ued by sundry against the Rate of the ralm

16. That the younger son of the earl of Lenox, Mr.

Charles, be remembered to some place where he mq be
forth coming.

7. That confidering the fation and title of the Q.u

of Scott, hath now of long time received great faour,
and continued, by the Queen's majety' favour heren to
the Queen of Scotta and her miniftes, and the hdy C.
tharine, whom the said Queen of Scotts accompted a
competor unto her in pretence of tide, it may plea te
Queen's majety, by some exterior at, to shew fomnre.
nillion of her displeasure to the lady and to the etl d
Hartford, that the Queen of Scotts thereby may find so
cange, and her friends put in doubt of further proc
thereto.

g. That whofover lhan be lieutenant in the Nort,
Sir Ralph Sadler may accompany him.

19. That with specd the realm of Ireland may e co.
,mited to a new governor.

so. Finaly, that these advises being confidered b e

majety, it may please to choose which of them fit liltWh,
and to put them in execution in deeds, and not to p
them over in confultadons and speeches.

For it is to be alfured. that her adversaries mwi tre
eans to pot their intention in excution. Some by pnti
some by force, when time fiall serve, and no tim M
fere so well the Queen's majfty to interrpt the peis,
ow at the ift, before the Queen of 8cotp pp
fully fettled.

N'. XI. (Vol. I. p. 349.
Randolph to the earl of Leicester, from EdinbuW

the 3(it of July 1565 ".

M A Y it please your lordflhip, I have red Mp
Jordihip's letter by 'y fcrnnt, fffiient tefiao of iw

s Cte. jib Ca; .. . a.

. si. As Origiul..
i**

Lflhip's favour towards me, whereof I think my self always

aflTurcd, that what other milhap soever befal me, I have
nough to comfort ryfelf with; though I have not at this
ime received neither according to the need I fsand, nor
te nectlity of the service that I am employed in, I will
dther pals it, as I may with padence, than trouble your
loidlip to be further futer for me, when there is folittle
hope that any good will be done for me. I doubt not but

lr ordfhip hath heard by such infortation as I have given
bence, what the present fate of this country is, how thio

Queen is now become a married wife, and her husband, the
Ids- ame day of his marriage, made a king. In their desires,
&ierto, they have. found so much to their contentment, that
ihc reft succeed and prosper accordingly, they may think
tkmtflves much happier, than there is appearance that they
Ill be; so many discontented minds, so much mifiiking
d the fubjets to have these matters thus ordered, and in
ti fort to be brought to pass I never heard of any
aurage; so little hope, so little comfort as men do talk,
wv never seen, at any time, when men should most have
fewed themselves to rejoice, if that consideration of her
an honour and well of her country had been had as ap.
ptmined in so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear,
it overthrow of religion, the breach of amite with the
Queen's najefty, and the deftrution oFas many of the no-
iliy as Ihe hath milliking of, or that he liketh to pitch
a qiurel unto. To fee all these inceveniencys approach.
ig, there are a good number that may sooner lament
*ith themselves, and coihplain to their neighbours, than
kable to find remedie to help them, some attempt with
ll the force they have, but are too weak to do any gsod,
lha is required otherways, er what means there is made
7our lordlhip knoweth; what will be answered, or what
sill be done, therein we are in great doubt, and though
Por intent be never so good unto us, yet do we so much

your delay, that our ruin shall prevent your fuppott

wfencouncil is once taken. Nothing so needful. as speedy
tiuncao, UpuO the Qunn'e majesty, va wwhlly dt.

nor

pend,' in her majesty's hands it standeth to frve our livei
or to susser us to perilh; greater honour her majesty can.
not have, than in that which lyeth in her' majesty' power
to do for us; the fums are not great, the numbers of men
ae no many thai we desire; many will dayley be found tho'

is wilt be tome chaice; men grow dayley, though, at

this time, I think 'her .Spajely shall loose but few; ha
friends here being onc ,taken away, where will her m.
jety find the like; Ilpeak leaR, of that which I think i
nolt careftly inteded by this Queen, and her husband,
when by him it was lately said, that hecared more so the
papifls in England, than he did for the prote..an inScodand;
if therefore, his hopes be so great in (hepapif of England
what may your lordship believe that he iigketh of the pro,;
tefants there; for his birth, for his nurritour, for the honout
he hath to be of kine to the Queen my mifirefs, if in prt
Ferring thole that are the Queen's majt's worst fubje to
tlofe that are her best, he declareth what mind he beaed
to the Queen's majesty's self, any man may fay it is fiendal
rewarded, and his duty evil forgotten; he would now fen
to be indiferent to both the religions, Ihe to uss her mals,
and he to come sometimes to the preaching; they were
married with all the folemnities of the popish time, fanin
that he heard not the mass; his speech and talk argueth i
mind, and yet would he fain seem to the world that he
were of some religion; his words to all men, against who
he conceived any displeasure how unjulf soever it be, so
proud and pitfull, that rather he feemeth a monarch of te
world, than he that, not long fnce, we have fen ad
linown the lord Darnley; he looketh now for reverelc of'
many that have little will to give it him; and some there at
that do give it, that think him little worth of it. All honor
that may be attributed unto any man by a wife, e hath it
wholly and fully; all praises that may be spoken of him,
he lacketh not from herfeif; all dignities that fe can indue
him with, which are already given and granted.; no ma
pleafeth her that contenteth not him i and what may I fa
more, ihe bath given over to hnjh whole will, to k

ratd and guided as himself bell liketh; ..he can. as much
p:vail with him, in any thing that is against his will, as
Our lordship may with me to persuade that 1 should hang
mafcif; this last dignity out of hand to have been proclaimed
ling, she would have it deferred untill .it were agreed by
trliament, or he had been himrelf' 2 years of age, that
Ihins done in his name might have the better authority. He
nould, in no cafe, have it deferred one day, and either
Itn or never; whereupon this doubt is risen anionig our
an of law whether she being clad with a husband, and
kerhusbandnottwenty-one years, any thing without parlia.
uaotcanbe of Rrength, that.is done between them; upon
Saturday at afternoon, these matters were long in debating.
lad before they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night,
hythree heralds, at fo6nd of the trumpet he was proclaimed
ling. This was the night before the marriage; this day,
Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that were in
e toun, were present at the proclaiming of him again,
bhere no man said so much as Amen, saving his father,
aat cried out aloud God save his Queen. The manner of
de marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the morning
kteen five and fix, The was conveyed by divers of her
odles to the chapell; The had upon her back the great
wurnin;g gown of black, with the great wide mourning

cd, nut unlike unto that, which she wore the doulfull

da of the burial of her husband: Ihe was led into the
chtpell, by the earls of Lenox and Athol, and there was
IrC left untill her husband came, who also was copveyed by
te tme lords, the minister priests, two, do there receive
tttm, the bands are afled the third time, and an instrument
tcn by a Notour that no man said against them, or alledged
ty cause why the marriage might not proceed. The words
s'e spoken, the rings which were three, the middle a rich
Iamond, were put upon her finger; they kneel together,
and many prayers said over them, she tarneth out the mars,
'ad he taketh a kirs, and leaveth her there, and went to
her chamber, whither within a space she followeth; and
1ig required, according to the solemnity, to cat off

221

ber eates and leae dide those forrowfl gapmem ,
eve brlf to a more pleaant life, ser rome prey t
fftll, more I beliee for m er fake thn grief of hea
Ihe rfuled them tdat -ood by, every man that cold
p ch, to take ut a pin, d so being commid to
ladies, c ged hbe garment, but went ot to bed,
ignii to the woid, that t m not uft that more d
to mry, bat only th e nffty of her counry, aot,
God wil, log to leae t de ftt ofan heir. Sufpki
ma, or fucb a are gen of d thing to make the ri

oold that it ould be bdid,that they Lknew ech
befe that they cam thre;'I would not your lord
~hood so bdiee it, the liklihood re so great to he

ar, that if it we polible to fe fch an ad doa,
ould not beliee i. After the mrriage folloeth cam]
great chee and dancing: to their dinner they were acen
by the whole noblty; the trumpe found; ala igehf c
mony thrn bout the house in great abundae, i
such m were hppy to get any prt; they dine bod ta

ebke, ihe poa td upper band, there fe her tldfe

Athoe Sewer, Morto Caver, Craufiord Cup-beare; i

ere him in like office, eas Eglingtoo, Caflu, ndCe
cirn; fter dinner they danced a while, and thea nth
teasee till the hbe of fpper; nd a they daed
do they &p, bme dancing there wa, andfo dthiep
bed; of l this I have written to your lordflip 1 Mu
Oclat tcflb, o this, but of the vity our lordlhip d
ot need to doubt, bowoever I cam by it; I le
for t e

e ben at the supper, but like a cur~h oer

coutly car 1 restsed to be there; nd yet that whido
ordlhip may tink might move me much, to haelhdt
fght of my mibfiR , of whom these eihteen dat byj
account I got nota fight, I am my lord taken by ali
fort as very evil person, which in my heart I do
allow, and like of myfef the bette, for ye
find either bonet or good that liketh their doi I b
at thi time further so trouble your ordlhip, curi p
kr my oog B~ce, I hae more ado thm I m al

-3
*4

difcarge, I walk now more abroad by night than by day,
nd the day too little to discharge myself of that which I
Cnctivc, or receive in the night. As your lordlhip, I
a sure, is partaker of such letters as I write to Mr.;Se.

Gnty, so that I trust that he shall be to this, to save

s of a little labour, to write the fame again, must humbly
ake my leave at Edinburgh, the last day of July xi 6.

N'. XII. (Vol. I. p. 349.)

Ltter of the earl of Bedford to the, honourable
Sir William Cecil knt. her Majesty's principal
secretary, and one of her highness's privy
council ".

AFTER my hearty commendations, this day at noon
optin Brickwell came hither, who brought with him the
been's majesty's letters containing her full resolution,
id pleasure for all things he had in charge to give infor.
tiuon of, saving that for the aid of the lords of the
mngregation there is nothing determined, or at the least
npreffd in the fame letters, and for that purpose received
I, this morning, a letter subscribed by the duke, the
ail of Murray, Glencarne, and others, craving to be
lipen with oo00 harquebufyers out of this garrison, for
ir better defence. And albeit, I know right well the
odnefs of their cause, and the Queen's majesty our
iaereign's good will, and care towards them; and do
I!o underfand that it were very requisite to have them
blpen, for that now their cause is to be in this manner
aided, and that it now landeth upon their utter overthrow
ad undoing, lince the Queen's party is at the least
00o, and they not much above 1ooo; besides, that the

hQn bath harquebufyers, and they have none, and do

7I want the power that the earl of Arguyle should

" ad of Sept. 16i. Pper.Office, from the Original.
VOL. III. Q

*2S
-

bring to them, who is not yet joined with theirs; 1 hay
thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means to
learn her majet.y's pleasure in this behalf, uhat, and
how, 1 {hall answer them, or otherwise deal in this nat.
ter, now at this their extreme necelliry. For, on the one
fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow,
and the rniferable subversion of religion there; and, M
the other lide, to adventure so great and weighty a mat.
ter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few soldiers, for a fniall
time ) withour good warraun:e, and thereby to bring, per.
adventure, upon our heads fonle wilful warrs, and in the
mean time to leave the place unfurnished, (having in the
whole but Soo) without any grant of new supply For the
fame; and by that means allb, to leave the marches here
the more fubj-A to invasion, while in the mean season
new helps are preparing; to this know not I what to fit
or how to do. And fu much more I marvel thereof, a
that having so many times written touching this matter
no refolote determination cometh. And fu between the
writing, and looking for answer, the occasion cannot pals,
but must needs proceed and have success God turn it to
his glory; but surely ;ill men's reason hath great cause to
fear it. Such a push it is now come unto, as this little
supply would do much good to advarce God's honour, to
continue her maeRfy's g;eat and careful memory of them,
and to prelerve a great' many noblemen and gentlemen.
If it be not now helpen, it is gone for ever. Your good
will ar.d affection that way 1 do nothing mifRruft, and
herein fliall take such good advice as by any means lan.
I received irum tl'ere lords two papers inclof:d, the eed
whereof fhdal appear unto you. For those matters that
captain Brick ell brought, 1 shall anfier you hy my
next, and herewith fend you two letters from Mr. Ran
doiph, both received this day. By him you shall hea
that the proteltants are retired from Edenborolgh, fur.
ther off. So I hope your resolution for their aid hall
come in time, if it come with speed, for that the will
not now lb picfently need them; and so with my heaqi
926

olns

ci; mmit you to God. From Berwick, this 2d of
Skt. ió65.

N'. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 345.)

The Quieen to the earl of Bedford "

UPON the advertisements lately received from you,
with such other things as came also from the lord Scrope
ni Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole matter well

,rfildred, we have thus determined. We will, with all

the speed that we can, fend to you 3oool. to be thus
ltd. If you ihall certainly underhand that the earl of
uray hath such want of money as the impresting to
hi of ioool, might stand him in fead for the help td
dfend himself, you shall presently let him fecredy un-
derdlnd, that you will, as of yourself, let him have so
mu;h, and so we will that you let him have, in the most
kcrec fort that you can, when the said fum shall come to
!ru, or if you can, by any good means, advance him
onie pa't there beforehand.
Tne other 20001. you (hall cause to be kept whole,
nfpent, if it be not that you Ihall fee necessary cause to
imprelt folne part thereof to the now numbers of the
loo footmen and oo horfcmen; or to the cafling out of
ligeS of such workmen, as by lickncrs, or otherwise,
:;..: to be discharged Al:d where we perceive, by
lpr sundry letters, the earnest request of the said earl of
lurra) and his associates, that they might have, at the
hio, 3oo of our soldiers, to aid them. And that you also
tri:e, that tho' we would not command you to give them
l, yet if we would but wink at your doing herein, and
[im to blame you for attempting such things, as you
wi:h the help of others should bring about, you doubt
ot but things would do well; you lhall underhand for
tru:h, that we have no intention, for many refpeds, to
"I ': Sit. i6. Pper. Office.

Qz

a27

maintain any other prince's fubjeds, to take arms againj
their sovereign, neither would we willingly do any thing
to give occalion to make wars betwixt us and that prince,
which has caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any
power to let them be aided with any men. But now,
confidering we take it, that they are pursued, notwith.
handing their humble fubmiflion, and offer to be ordered
and tried by law and justice, which being refused to them,
they are retired to Domfrefe, a place near our wtóf
marches, as it feemeth there to defend themselves, and
adding thereunto the good intention that prefenly the
French king pretendeth, by fending one of his to join
with some one of ours, and jointly to treat with that
Queen, and to induce her to forbear this manner of vio.
lent and rigorous proceeding against her subje's, for
which purpose the French ambassador here with us ha
lately written to that Queen, whereof answer is daily
looked for; to the intent in the mean time the said lrds
should not be oppressed and ruined, for lack of some help
to defend them, we are content and do authorize, if you
shall fee it necessary for their defence, to let them (as o
your own adventure, and without notifying that you hai
any direction therein from us) to have the number of lo
soldiers , to be taken either in whole bands, or to be
drawn out of all your bands, as you shall fee cause. And
to cover the matter the better, you shall fend theec nuts
bers to Carlisle, as to be laid there in garrison, to defend
that march, now in this time that such powers are on the
other part drawing to thofc frontiers, and so from thence
as you shall fee cause to diret of, the fame numbers or
any of them, may most covertly repair to the said lords,
when you (hall expressly advertize, that you fend them tlht
aid only for :heir defence, and not therewith to iaake iat
against the Queen, or to do any thing that may offend ht
person, whertin you shall so precisely deal with them, that
they may perceive your care to be such as if it Ihoold
orherwife appear, )our danger should be so great, is ad
the friends you have could not be able to save you torua

us, And so we assure you our conscience moveth us to
charge ou, so to proceed with them; for otherwise than
to prdeerve them from ruin, we do not yield to give them
aiI of money or men: And yet we would rot that either

,f Ihefe were known to be our act, but rather to be covered
iLh your own desire and attempt.

Q

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME.

A P P E ND I

TO THE
SECOND VOLUME.

N'. I. (Vol. IL p. 6.)
Randolph to Cecil, from Edinburgh, 7th Feb.

1565-6 .

M Y humble duty confidered; what to write of te
present Rate of the country I am so uncertain, by rafon
of the daily alterations of men's minds, that it maketh me
much flower than otherwise I would. Within there few
days, there was some good hope, that this Queen would
have lhewed some favour towards the lords, and that Robet
Mdvin mould have returned unto them with comfort, upon
some conditions. Since that time, there are come oot of
France Clemna by land, and Thorneton by sea; the one
from the cardinal, the other from the bishop of Glasgow.
Since whose arrival neither can there be good word gotten,
nor appearance of any good intended them, except tht
they be able to perfwade the Queen's majesty our sovereign to
make her heir apparent to the croun of England. I write
*A AOs O l.

of this nothing less than I know, that Ihe hath spoken.
ind by all means that she thinketh the bes doth travaile to
brng it.to pars. There is a band lately devised, in which
the late pope. the emperor, the king of Spain, the duke
ofSaroy, with divers princes of Italy, and the Queen mother
fuceded to be of the fame confederacy to maintain papistry
ilrouBh!out Chritliandom ; this band was sent out of France
bvThorrPeton, and is iublicribed by this Queen, the copy
tereof remaining with her, and the principal to be re-
turned very fiortlie as I hear by hlr. Stephen Willsen, a
it mionier for such a devililh devise; if the copy hereof
may be gotten, that ihall be sent as I conveniently may.
i,; licer Rambollet came to this toun upon Monday, he
s;ike that night to the Queen and her husband, but not
long; the next day he held long conferences with them
buth, hut nothing came to the knowledge of any whereof
they intreared. I cannot speak with any that hath any
hope that there will be any good done for the lords by
hin, though it is said that he hath very good will to do so
to the uttermos of his power. He is lodged near to the
court, and liveth upon the Queen's charges. Upon Sunday
theorder is given, whereat means made to many to be
prese;t that day at the mars. Upon Candlemas day there
ctried their candles, with the Queen, her husband, the
earl of Lerox, and earl Ithol; divers other Lords have
been called together and required to be at the mars that
day, some have promised, as Cassels, Mongomerie, Seton,
Cathnefs. Others have refuaed, as Fleming, LevingfRon,
Lindsay, Huntly and Bothel; and of them all Bother is the
fltutr, but worf thought of; it was moved in council that
mars shou!d have been in St. Giles church, which I believe
was rather to tempt men's minds, than intended indeed:
She was of late minded again to fend Robert Melvin to
negotiate with such as the trufieth in amongst the Queen's
majeRy's fubjets, of whose good willis this way I trust
that the bruit is greater than the truth, but in these matters,
her majesty is too wife not in time to be ware, and provide
fat the woft; some in that country are thought to be privie

«}1

unto the bands and confederacie of which I have written
where of I am fore there ii some things tho' perchance f
all I have not beard the truth; in this court dirers quarle,
contentions, and debates; nothing so much fought as to
maiin aifchief and disorder. David yet retaineth fil
his place, not without heart grief to many, that fee their
sovereign guided chiefly by such a fellow; the Queen hath
utterly refaued to do any good to my lord of Argll, and it
said that (hall be the first voyage that she will make afe
(he is delivered of being with child; the bruit is common
that she is, but hardly believed of many, and of this, I
an assure you, that there have of late appeared some to.
ke to the contary.

N. IL (Vol. In.) p. 15.
part of a letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr.

Tho. Randolph to the lords of the council of
England from Berwick, 27th of March 1566.
An Original in the Cotton Library, Caligula B.
io. fol. 372 .

tay it Please oar Honrours,

H E R I N G of so maynie matters as we do, aid
fyndinge such 'varietie in the reports, we have nyche
ado to decerne the veride: which maketh us t
flower and loother to put any thing in wryting, to the
entente we wold not that your honours, and by you the
Queen's majeftie, our fovereigne, should not be advewtif
but of the verie trothe as we can possible. To this end we
thought good to fend up captain Carewe, who was in Fdin
bourge at the tyme of the last attemptate, who spoke thee
with diverse, and after that with the Queen's self and her
husband conforme to that, which we have learned by othet

' :7th MarC. 1566.
»sl

23g

and know by this reporte, we fend the fame, confirmed by
the parties self, that were there present and affyfters unto
these that were executors of the ade.

This we fynde for certain, that the Queen's husband
being entered into a vehement suspicion of David, that by
byr some thynge was committed, which was moll agaynfte
theQueen's honour, and not to be borne of his pere, fyrfte
communicated his mynde to George Duglas, who fynding
his sorrows so great fought all the means he coulde to put
some remedie to his griefs; and communicating the fame
unto my lord Ruthen by the king's commandment, no other
nve coulde be found then that David Ihould be taken out
of the waye. Wherein he was so earnet and daylye prelfed
the fame, that no refte could be had untyll it was put in
execution. To this that was found good, that the lord Morton, and
lord Lindfaye should be made privie to th' intente that theie
might have their friends at hande, yf neade required; which
caused them to assemble so mayny, as theie thought sus-
icient againfl the tyme, that this determination of theirs
Ihould be put in executione; which was determined the
iith of this inftante, 3 daies afore the parliament should
kg'ne, at which time the fayde lords were assured that
the erles Argyle, Morraye, Rothes and their complyces
Iholde have been forfeited, yf the king could not be per-
fuaded through this means to be their friend; who for
the defvre he had that this intent should take effect th'
one waye, was content to yielde, without all difficultie to
tother, with this condition, that theie should give their
consents, that he might have the crowne matrimonial. He
wasfo impatient to fee these things he saw, and were daylye
bought to his eares, that he dayly presTed the said lord
Ruthen, that there might be no longer delay; and to the
itentthat myvght manifefe unto the world, that he approved
the acte, was content to be at the doing of that himself.

Upon Saturdaye at night neire unto viii of the clock the
king conveyeth himself, the lord Ruthen, George Duglafs,
"d two others, throwe his own chamber by the privy tayers
Op to the Queen's chamber going to which there is a cabinet,

about XII sot square; in the fame a little low repolin
bed and a table. at the which they were fitting at fuppethe
Queene, the lady Argile, and David with his capp upon his
head. Into the cabinet there cometh in the king and lord
Ruthen, who willed David to come forth, faying, that wa
no place for him. The Queen said, that it was her will
Her howsband anfwerede, that yt was against her honor
The lord Ruthen said, that he lhould lerne better his deuti
and offering to have taken him by the arm, David took the
Queen by the blychtes of her gown and put himself behind
the Queen who wolde gladlee have saved him: But th
king having loosed his had d, and holding her in his ars,
David was thrust out of the cabinet throw the bed chambr
of prefens. whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindsey, who
intending that night to have referred hym, and the next
day to hang him, so mane being about him, that bore hi
evil will, one thrult him into the boddie with a dagger,
and after hym a great many others. so that he had in his
bodie above wonds. It is told for certayne, that te
king's own dagger was left iticking in him. Wheather he
duck him or not we cannot be here certayn. He was not
flayne in.the Queen's prefens, as was said, but going don
the fayres out of the chamber of prefens.

There remayned a long tyme with the Queen her hof.

band and the lord Ruthen. She made, as we here, grat
intercelion, that he (hold have no harm. She blmed
greatlee her howsband that was the ador of so foul a deed
It is said, that he did answer, that David had more con
panic of her boddie than he for the space of two months;
and therefore for her honour and his own contentment he
gave his confient that he (hould be taken away. a It is
v not, " (faythe she) " the woman's part to seek the hus
a band, " and therefore in that the fault was his own. He
laid that when he came, fihe either wold not or made herself
sick. Well, " faythe Ihc, " you have taken your laftof
"me and your farewel. " Then were pity, fayd the Lord
Ruthen, he is your majesty's husband and must yield doti
.t each other. " Why may I not, " faythe hc, " ltt

"' him as well as your wife did her husband ? " Other have
one the like The lord Ruthen said that she was lawfully
dixorced from her husband, and for no such cause as the
iing found himfcif greve. Befydes this man was mean,
ale, ene!nie to the nobility, shame to her, and deflrution
t herrelf and country. " Well, " faith she, " that shall

be dear blude to some of you, yf his be fpylt. " God
foaid, fayth the lord Ruthen; for the more your grace
howe youfrelf offendel the world will judge the worse.
Her hcsband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself continually
wep:th. I he lord Ruthen being ill at ease and weak
ciltb for a drir.k, and faythe, " This I must do with
" yur majesties pardon, ' and perfuadeth her in the best
frt he could, that Ihe would pacify herself. Nothing that
culd be Laid, could please her.

In this mean time there rote a nombre in the court;
topacify ahich there went down the lord Ruthen, who
rent ftrayt to the eries Huntly, Bothwell and Atholl to quiet
them, and to assure them from the king that nothing was
itend against them. These notwithstanding taking fear,
rhen theie heard that my lord lurray wold be there the
Kext day, and Argile meet them, Huntly and Bothwell both
gi out of a window and so depart. Atholl had leave of
the king with Flyfh and Glandores t who was lately called
De)ley the person of Owne) to go where they wold, and
bring concorde out of the court by the lord of Lidington.
Theie went that night to such places, where they thought
thenofelves in molt fauftie.

Before the king least talk with the Queen, in the hering
of the lord Ruthen she was content that he should lie with
her that night. We know not how he ** himself, but
came not at her, and excused hymfelf to his friends, that
h was so fleepie, that he could not wake in due season.

There were in this companie two that came in with the
king; the one Andrewe Car of Fawdenfide , whom the
Queen fayth would have ftroken her with a dagger, and
ne Pdtrick Balentine, brother to the justice clerk, who
i1o her grace fayth, offered a dag against her belly with

the cock down. We have been earnelly in hand with
the lord Ruthen to know the varitie; but he afflureth a
of the conarie. There were in the Queen's chamber the
lord Robert, Arthur Arflin, one or two others They t
the first offering to make a defence, the lord Ruthven drawl
his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that were not dram
nor seen in her prefens, as we are by this lord assured

[ The letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to

Dunbar Cafle , whither resorted the lords Huntley and
Bothwell: That the earl of Morton and lord Ruthven find
themselves left by the king for all his fair promises, bonds,
and subscriptions. That he had protefed before the couni,
that he was never consenting to the death of David, adi
that it is fore against his will: " That of the great fubftce
" David had there is much spoken, some fay in gold to
"the value of z mL. His apparel was very good, as it i
laid, 28 pair of velvet-hofe. His chamber well furnihed,
"armour, dagger, pyfloletts, harquebuses, 22 sword.
"Of all this nothing fpoyld or lacked saving 2 or daggen

He had the custody of all the Queen's letters, which i

£ were delivered unlooked upon. We hear of a joil, dth
" he had hanging about his neck of some price, that ca.
"not be heard of. He had upon his back, when he
I

flayn, a night gown of damafc furred, with a fa
" doublet, a hose of rufret velvet. "]

N'. III. (VoL IL p. 25.)
Part of a Letter from Randolph to Cecil, Jan 16

1565-6.

- I CANNOT tell what minliking of late there ht

been between her grace and her husband, he prelfeth earned
for the matrimonial crown, which fie is loth hastily
grant; but willing to keep somewhat in store, until fAt
know how well he is worth to enjoy such a foereig

Ed therefore it is thought that the parliament for a time
hall be deferred, but hereof I can write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's letter to secretary Cecil'.

T HE jultice- clerk in hard terms, more for his
brother's cause than any desert, and as far as I can hear
the king of all other in worst, for neither hath the Queen
good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that was
gainlt her will, nor the people that he hath denied so
manifdft a matter, being proved to be done by his com-
mandment, and now himself to be the accuser and pur-
suer of them that did as he willed them. This Scott, that
ns executed, and Murray that was yesterday arraigned,
ere both accused by him. It is written to me, for cer.
tin, by one , that upon Monday last spoke with the
Queen, that Ihe is determined that the house of Lenox
Ihall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl
coninueth sick, fore troubled in mind; he ftaith in the
abby, his son hath been once with him , and he once
with the Queen, since she came to the catle. The Queen
bath now Leen all the covenants and bands that passed
between the king and the lords, and now findeth that his
declaration, before her and council, of his innocency of
the death of David was falfCe and grievously offended
that, by their means, he lhould feck to come to the
rown matrimonial.
Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Ber.

wick, 25 April 1566.

--T HERE is continually very much speech of the
discord between the Queen and her husband, so far that,
that is commonly said and believed of himself, that Mr.
4 April, n165. Paper-OfiBc. from the Oriinal.

James Thornton is gone to Rome to Cue for a dihorce
between them. It is very certain that Malevalier had not
spoken with hi:n within there three days. He is neither
accompanied nor looked upon of any nobleman: attendd
upon by certain of his own servants, and fix or leven of
the guard; at liberty to do, and go where and what he
will, they have no hope yet among themselves ofquietnefs.

- David's brother named Joseph, who came this wa

with Malevafier, unknown to any man here, is become
secretary in his brotmer's place.

N'. 1V. (Vol. II. p. 30.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d August 1566

T H E Queen and her husband agree after the old mnnner,
or rather worse. She eatech but very seldom with him, lieth
not, nor keepeth company with him, nor loveth any such as
love him. He is so far out of her books, as at her going out
of the Castle of Edinburgh, to remove abroad, he kneI
nothing thereof. It cannot for modity, nor witthe honour
of a Queen, be reported what she said of him. One Hickman,
an Englilh merchant there, having a water spaniel which was
very good, gave him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards,
for the pleasure, u hich he fdw the king have in such kind of
dogs, gave him to the king. Ihe Queen thereupon fd
marvelloully out with lelvill, and called him diffcmbler
and flatterer, and said she could not trult one, who woulJ
give any thing to such one as hfe loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, Aug. 8

T HE disagreement between the Queen and her husband
continneth, or rather increafeth. Robert Melvill drawing
homewards, within twelve miles of Edinburgh, could not
tell where to find tbe Queen; sith which time fle is coon

o, Edinburgh, and had not twelve horses attending on her.
Tnere was not then, nor that I can hear since, any lord
bion, or other nobleman in her company. The king her
husband is gone to Dumfermling, and pafTeth his time as
ldl as he may; having at his farewell, such countenance
, would make a husband heavy at the heart.

Sir John Softer to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.

T1 E Qjeen hath her husband in aGnll eflimation, and
tie earl of Lenox came not in the Queen's ight since the
decth of Davy.

Sir John Softer to Cecil, trth Dec.

THE earl of Bothwell is appointed to receive the ambaC
bdors, and all things for the chriltening are at his lordship's
Ippointment, and the fame is Scarcely well liked of the
nobility, as is said. The king and Queen is presently at
Craigmillar, but in little greater familiarity than he was all
I: hile past.
Advertisements out'of Scotland from the earl of

Bedford '.

THA T the king and the Queen agreed well together
a days, after her coming from--, and after my lord of
ilarray's coming to Edinburgh, some new discord has hap.
Pned. The Queen hath declared to my lord of lurray that
the king bears him evil will, and has said to her, that he is
deermined to kill him, finding fault that she doth bear him
lo much company: and in like manner hath willed my lord
Milurray to fpiere the king, which he did a few nights since
i the Queen's presence, and in the hearing of diver. The
' AguRE 1166, Paper. Office, fom the riginal.

39t

king confefled, that reports were made to him, that
my lord of Murray was not his friend, which made him
speak that thing he repented; and the Queen afirmed,
that the king had spoken such words unto her, and con.
ffIed before the whole house, that Ihe could not be con.
tent that either he or any other should be unfriend to my
lord of Murray. My lord of Murray enquired the fame
ftoudy, and used his speech very modestly, in the man
time the king departed very grieved; he cannot bea that
the Queen Ihould use familiarity either with man or wo.
man, and efpeciaily the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and
Mare, who keep mot company with her. My lord i
Murray and Bothwell have been at evil words for tde L
of Ledington, before the Queen, for he and Sir JamuBa
foure had now come from Ledington, with his anfer
upon fach heads or articles as Bothwell and he Ihould aee
upon, which being reported to the said earl in the Quee's
presence, made answer, that er he parted with fibh
land as was desired, he fiould part with his life. My
lord of Murray said stoutly to him, that twent as hod
men as he hould lose their lives ere he reafte Ldedi~o.
The Queen spake nothing, but heard both; in there tm
they parted, and since, that I hear of, have not met
The Queen after her hunting came to Edinburgh, and
caryeth the prince thence to Stirling with her. Thi.
aft Saturday was executed a servant of the lord Ruthen's,
who confesscd that he was in the cabinet, but ot of
council of the fad The Queen hath also opened to my
lord of Murray, that money was sent from the pope,
how much it was, and by whom, and for what prpdc
it was brogbt.

N'.V.

N. . Vol.

V I. p. 46.)

Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 26,
1569. A copy interlined by Cecil. It contains
an answer to a complaining letter of Mary's
upon the imprisoning of the Bishop of Ross.

A FT ER this i. e. Mary's landing in Scotland]

bow patiently did I bear with many vain delays in not
nrif!ing the treaty accorded by your own commiflioners,
*hereby I received no small unkindness, besides the
panifold causes of suspicion that I might not hereafter
truR to any writings. Then fillowed a hard manner of
kaling with me, to entice my filhjed and near kinsman,
dl lord Darnly, under colour of private suits for land, to
come into the realm, to proceed in treaty of marriage
with him without my knowledge, yea to conclude the fame
without my assent or liking. And how many unkind parts
lccompanied that fad, by receiving of my fubjeds that
tre base runnegates and offenders at home, and enhancing
them to places of credit against my will with many such
like, I will leave for that the remembrance of the fame
annot but be noyfome to you. And yet all there did 1 as
it were fupprers and overcome with my natural inclination
of love towiards you; and did afterwards gladly, as you
kin,, christen your son, the child of my said kinfinan, that
ld before so unlovally offended me, both in marriage of you,
Ld in other undutiful usages towards me his sovereign. How
friendly also dealt I by meflages to reconcile him, being your
husband, to you, when others nourified discord betwixt you,
'ha as it seemed had more power to work their purposes,
king evil to you both, than I had to do you good, in
ttire of the evil 1 had received. Well I will overpass
pfur hard accidents that followed for lack of following my
c0-:il. And then in your most extremity, when you was
prtioner indeed, and in danger of your life from your
VOL. 1II. ' R

notorious evil willers, how far from my mind wa the
remembrance of any former unkindness you had fThew
me. Nay how void was I of respect to the deligns which
the world had seen atumpted by )ou to my crown, an
the security that might have ensued to my hate by yo
death, when I finding your calamity to be great, thd
you were at the pit's brink to have miserably lc yo
life, did not only intreat for your life, but so threen
some as were irritated against you, that 1 only may fy
even I was the principal cause to lave your life.

N. VI. (Vol. II. p. 65.)
Letter of Q. Elizabeth to Q. of Scotts. Th

marked on the back with Cecil's hand. - C
Litteranm Rgi, Majftatir ad Reginm &
VIII. Arili '

M ADAME , voos ayant trop molest par M. d
Crocq, je n'eoufe eu si peu de consideration de V
farcher de cette lettre, f Ils liens de charite vcrs les ruin
& le prieres des miserables ne m'y contraignafTent Je
tens que on edit a et& divulgue de par vous, madame,
ong charcur, que veult jutifier que ons este les eurie
de votre fe mari, & mon feu couGn, viennent a le i
le Xlime de ce mois. Laquelle chore, comme 'efR Id
honorable & neceffaire, qui en tel cas fe pourra faire,
y eftant cache quelque miftere ou finesse, ainfi Ie pe
amis du mort gentelhomme m'ont humblement rquis
que je vous prialle de prolonguer le jour, pourcequSl
cognoiffent que les iniques fe font combines par force
faire ce que par droi& ils ne pourront pas faire; partan
je ne puis mais finon pour l'amour de vous meme, a qui
touche le plus, & pour la confoladon des innocens,
vous exhorter de leur conceder cette requefte, laquelc,

S'P c.Oe.
,+4

tile les fetoit nie, vous tourneroit grandement en foupqon,
de plus que j'cfpere ne pensez, & que ne voudriez volon-
tirs ou r. Pour I'amour de Dieu, madame, usez de telle
6nctrire & prudence en ce cas qui vous touche de si pres,
tue tout le monde aye raison, de vous livrer comme in.
lccente d'ung crime si enorme, chose que si ne siftes feriez
dignement esbloye hors de rancz de princeflls, & non fans
aufe faire opprobre de vulgaire, & plutot que cela vous
aienne, je vous fouhaiterois une sepulture honorable,
u'une vie maculee; vous voiez, madame, que je vous traits
comme ma fille, & vous promets, que si j'on euffe, ne luy
ouhaiterais mieulx, que je vous desire, comme le Seigneur
btu me porte tefmoignage, a qui je prie de bon cceur de
rus inspirer a faire ce qui vous sera plus a honneur, &
aIos amis plus de consolation, avec mes tres cordiallea
ecommendations comme a icelle a qui je fouhaire le plus
kbien, qui vous pourra en ce monde avenir. De Weft
a 8 jour de Janvier ' en hafe,

N. VII. (Vol. II. p. 80.)

Account of the sentence of divorce between the
earl of Bothwell and lady Jean Gordon his wife.
From a manuscript belonging to Mr. David
Falconer, advocate. Fol. 455.

UPOUN the 29 of Apryle s;67, before the richt hon.
Mr. Robert Aaitland, dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward
Brnryfon dodior in the laws, two of the senators of the
Illege of jultice, Mr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alexander
Steadvocantis, commiffers of Edendurgh; compeered Mr.
Cry Kinrolfe, procurator for Jean Gourdoune l countes of
thsel, conititute be her for purfewing of ane proces of

trcemet intendit by her contra James erie Bothwel her

'sband for adultry, committed be him with Beflie Craw.
A miRhake in bi date cortcted with Cecils hand VIIt. Aprilis.

R

furde the pursuers servant for the time; and Ccklyke, so
the said erle, compeared Mr. Edmond Hay, who efrer h
bid pursued and craved the pursuer's procurator's oath d.
calumnia, if he had just caus to purfew the laid actin,
and obtained it, denyed the libell, and the said Mr. Harrij
took the morne, the last day of :pryle, to prove the fir
pro prima. The quhill; day, having produced some witnef
fes, he took the next day, being the I of May, tod
farther diligence. Upon the quhilk i of May, heproduced
some moe witnesses, and renounced farther probatiounc
After quhilk, he desired a term to be assigned to pronounce
sentence. To whom the said commissars afigned Satterdal
next, the ; of May, to pronounce sentence, therein, fc
cundum allegata et probata, quilk accordingly was giver
that day in favour of the purfewar.

At the fame time there was another pr )ces intendit bh

the eri of Bothwell contra his lady, for to have their mar
riage declared nul, as being contraded against the canons
without a dispensation, and he and his lady being withio
degrees defendand, viz ferdis a kin, and that wyfe for exM
peding of this proces, there was a commillioune grand
to the archbishop of St. Androis to cognofce and determine
it, and Rot. bilhop of Dunkeld, William bilhop of Dun.
blane, Mr. Andro Craufurd chanon in Glasgow, and
parson of Egelfhame, Mr. Alexander Creichtoun, and 51
George Cooke chancellor of Dunkeld, and to Mr. JohnI
Wanderftoune chanon in Dunbar and prebendar of Be
toune, or any ane of them. This commiflione is dati
27? Aprile (67, was presented to two of the saids con
missioners, viz. Alr And' Crawfurd and Mr. John Man
derftoune on Satterday i May, by Mr. Thomas lHpbuO
parson of Auldhamftocks, procurator for the erie of 11th.
well, m ho accepted the delegatioune, and gave outth:
citation by precept, direed, Decano Chriftianitais de
Hadingtone, nec non vicaio feu curato eccle. pirochia d
Creichtoune, feu cuicunq; alteri cappellano debite requii
tis, ser summoning. at the said eries instance, both ofthi
lady personally if lhe could be had, or ctherwa) at t

pclie kerk of Creichtoune the time of service, or at her
Ii,' place before witnefies, primo, fecundo, tertio et
1rrem:iorie, unico tamen cortextu pro duplice edico.
-ij hlie'ays to be witneftes in the said matter, Alex.
b1:np of (;iloway, who did marry the said erie and his
LWl, in Hilerud house kirk, in Feb.s 6i , fir John Ban-
trane of Auchnou:e justice clerk, Mr. Robert Creich-
toe ns htliok the Queen's advocate, Mr. David Chalmers

1U It of Creichtoun and chancellor of Ross, Michael-

ab0ot of i'elrofs, and to compear before the [aid judges
ra..v one of them in St Geils kirk in Edr on Monday
the of May, be thamfelves, or their procurators. Upon
the said , day. MAr John Manderfloun, one of the judges
d:legat only being prelent, compeared the fame procura.
tors for both the parties that were in the former proces,
lr. Elniund lay ( * articulatlie ' ) and
tome of the witnesses summoned produced, and received
lo provirg of the fame. The said procurator renounced
rder probatioune, and the judge assigned the morne, the
6th of May, ad publicandum produca, nempe depofli
thdes ipforum teflium. The quhilk day, post publicatas
def;liiones praditas, Mr. Hen. Kinrofie, procurator for
te lady inflanter objecit objeCtiones juris generaliter,
to-ira producta, infuper renunciavit ulteriori defenfioni;
pnride conclufa de confenfu procuratorum hinc inde
urfa, judex praxdidus ftatuit craftinum diem pro termino,
ai pronuncidndam fuam fententiam definitivam, ex de.
dtis coram eo, in praefenti caufa et proceffu. Con.
kfm hereunto, on Wednesday the 7th of May, the [aid
.slt gave out his sentence in favour of the erie, declar.
g the nmarriage to be, and to have been null from the
gioninc, in respect of their contingence in blood, which
hidered their lawful marriage without a dispensation ob-
rcaed of befoir.

T,%o wards in the parenthefs illegible.

24;

N*. VIII. (Vol. II. p. 84.)
A letter from England concerning the murder ol

king Henry Darnley '.

HA V TNG the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark
I tho't good to write a few words unto you. I have
ceived some writs from you; and some I have seen latr
sent to others from you, as namely to the earl of Bedford
the 16th of May. I have participat the contents thereof
such as I thought meet, this mekle I can assure you; th
intelligence given hither by the French was untrue,
there was not one papist nor protefltant which did not co
sent that justice should be done, be the Queen my for
reign's aid and support, against such as had committedt
abominable ill murder in your country; but to fay truth
the lack and coldness did not rife from such as were cal
to council, but from such as should give life and execuu
thereunto. A d further, I assure you, I never knewn
matter of estate proponed which had so many favourers
all forts of nations as this had: yea, 1 can fay unto you
no man promoted the matter with greater affetion, th
the Spanish ambassador. And sure I am that no man dan
openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that wholoe
is guilty of this murder handfasted with advoutre, is unwo
thy to live. I shall not need to tell you, which be u
letts, and fayes from all good things here. You
acquainted with them as well as I. Needs 1 muf confds
that howsoever we omit occasions of benefit, honour, an
surety; it bthoveth your whole nobility, and namely fu
as before and after the murder were deemed to allow
Bodwell, to prorecute with sword and justice the punishiten
of those abominable a'ts, though we lend you but a i
aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both honourl
and honest, be well known to me, and sundry others bere

0 E. of Mdrtoo's Archieves. Bundle B. N. 1I5
246

o b juflifijble in all their afions and doings; yet think
iot he contrary but your whole nation is blemished and
ijfjmir by these doings which lately passed among you.
Yhat we lhall do I know not, neither do I write unto you
aftredly, for we be subject unto many mutations, and yet
Ithink we ihall either aid you, or continue in the defence
and safeguard of your prince, so as it appear to us that
pou mean his safeguard indeed, and not to run the fortune
dfFrance, which mill be your own deftrution, if you be
unadvied. 1 know not one, no not one of any quality or
chte ii this country; which does allow of the Q een your
frereign. but would gladly the world were rid of her, so
as the fame were done without farther slander, that i& to
ay by ordinary jutice. This I fend the 2;d of May.

N'. IX. (Vol. It. p. 94)

Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Throkmorton to

Cecil, 1th of July 1567, from Berwick'.

-SI R, your letter of the 6th of July. I received the
loth at Berwick. I am forty to fee that the Queen's ma-
jetfy's dipofition altereth not towards the lords, for when
ill is done, it is they which must stand her more in stead,
than the Queen her cousin, and will be better instruments
to work Come benefite and quietness to her majeRty and
her realm, than the Queen of Scotland which is void of
good famle.
A letter from Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to Cecil,

from Faftcaftle, i2th of July 1567'".

SIR, as you might perceive by my letter of the nrth
July, I lodged at Faftcaftle that night, accompanyed

An Original. I'aper.Officc.
Pper. Offiet.

»47

with the lord Home, the lord of Ledington, and James
Melvin, where I was intreated very well, according to the
state of that place, which is fitter to lodge prisoners than
folks at liberty, as it is very little, so it is very firong,
By the conference I have had with the lord of Ledingion
I find the lords his afociates and he hath left nothing on.
thought of, which may be either to their danger, or work
them surety, wherein they do not forget what good and
harme France may do them, and likewise they confider
the fame of England; but as farr as I can perceive, to
be plain with yow. they find more perril to grow onto
thtm through the Queens majeft}s dealing than either they
do by the French, or by any contrary faction amongdl
themselves, for they assured themfelves'the Queen will leare
them in the bryers if they run her fortot.n, and though
they do acknowledge great benefit as well to them, as to
the realm of England by her majefly's doings at Leith,
whereof they fay mutually her majesty and both the realms
have received great fruit: yet upon other accidents which
have chanced firce, they have observed fucb things in her
majesty's doings, as have ended to the danger of such as
she hath dealt withal, to the overthrow of your own design
ments, and little to the surety of any party: and upon thee
considerations and discourses at length, methinketh I find
a difpofiion in them, that either they mind to make their
bargain with France, or else to deal neither with France
nor yow, but to do what they shall think meet for their
state and surety, and to use their remedy as occasions Ihall
move them; meaning neither to irritate France nor Eng-
land untill such time as they have made their bargain as-
furedly with one of yow; for they think it convenient to
proceed gith yow both for a while pari paffu, for that
was my lord of Ledington's terms. I do perceave they
take the matter very unkindly, that no better answer is made
to the letter, which the lords did fend to her majeiy,
and likewise that they hear- nothing from yow to their f.
tisfadion, I have answered as well as I can, and have al.
ledged their own proceedings so obscurely with the Queen,

and their uncertainty hath occasioned this that is yet hap-
prej, and therefore her Majesty hath sent me to the end
I mns inform her throughly of the ltate of the matters, and
upnn the dedl;ririon of their minds and intents to such
purpfles as shall be by me proposed on their majesty's be-
half unto ther:, they shall be reasonably and resolutely an.
fbered. At thele things the lord of Ledington smiled and
fhok! his head, and said it were better for us yow would
let us alone , thait neither to do us nor yourselves good, as
I fear me in the end that will prove; Sr if there be any
tuth in Ledington, le Crocq is gone to procure Ramboilet'
his coming hither or a man of like qulity , and to deliver
them of their (ueen for ever, who shall lead her life in
France, in a abby reclufed, the prince at the French de.
vition, the realm governed by a council of their election
of the Scottish nation . the forts committed to the custody
offuch as shall he chosen amongst themselves, as yet I find
no great likel hood that I shall have access to the Queen,
it is objected they may not so displease the French king,
unless they were sure to find the Queen of England a good
ftird; and when they once by my access to the Queen
have offended the French, then they fay yow will make
pour profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the Queen's
liberty, which was the firfI head that I propfoed, they said
that thereby they did perceive that the Queen wants their
undeing, for as for the reft of the matters it was but folly
to talk of them, the liberty going before; but said they, if
you sill do us no good, do us no harm, and we will pro-
vide for our selves. In the end they said, we should refuse
cur own commodity, before they concluded with any other,
"hilh I should hear of at my coming to Edin'; by my
ntet I hope to fend you the baud concluded by Hamiltons,
Arg!li, Huntly, and that fadion, not so much to the pre.
rdice of the lords of Edinr , as that which was sent into
frarce; thus having no more leasure but compelled to leap
In i orftbacl with the lords to go to Edinr, I humbly take
I lenve of from Faftcaftle the X th of July 1 67.

249

To Sir Nicolaq Throkmorton being in Scotland,

By the Queen, the 14th July 1567.

T RUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, though
we think that the causes will often change upon variety of
accidents, yet we think for sundry refpedls, not amii,
that as yow shall deal with the lords having charge of the
young prince for the committing of him into our realm,
so Ihall yow also do well, in treaty with the Queen, to
offer her that where her realm appeareth to he subjet to
sundry troubles from time to time, and thereby (as it is
manifet) her son cannot be free, if she Ihall be conteed
that her son may enjoy fuerty and quietners, within this
our realm, being so near as Ihe knows it is; we shall not
fail to yield her as good fuerty therein for her child, u
can be devised for any that might be our child born of
our own body, and shall be glad to shew to her therein
the trew effed of nature; and herein Ihe may be by yov
remembered how much good may ensue to her son to be
nourihcd and acquainted with our country; and thereore
all things confidered, this occasion for her child, were rather
to be fought by her and the friends of him, than offre
by us; and to this end, we mean that yow lhall so dea
with her, both to shy her indeed from inclining to the
French praitice, which is to us notorious, to convey her
and the prince into France, and also to avoid any jut
offence. that Ihe might hereafter conceive, if Ihe fhoull
hear that we Ihould deal with the lords for the price.
Sir Nicolas Throkmorton to Queen Elizabeth,

14th July 1567, from Edinburgh. ".

IT may please your majesty to be advertised, I did fignit
unto Mr. Secretary by my letters of the lath and stb fd

'BAa OrigiaL Paper. Office.

ulvy, the day of mine entry into Scotland, the caures of
,v flay, nv lodging at Faftcarlle, a place of the lord Hume's,
ihere I was met by the said lord and by the lord Lidington,
and what had palTed in conference betwixt us, whileft I was
a the said Fatfaltle. Since which time, accompanyed with
the lords aforesaid, and with 400 horses by their appointment
for my better conduct, I came to Edinr the r2th of this
plefent. Ihe ;lth being Sunday appointed for a folemne
commurion in this town, and also a folemne'faft being
publilhed, 1 could not have conference with the lords which
he alfembled within this town as I desired, that is to lay
the earls of Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord
Liaington, Sir James Balfour captain of the castle, Mr. James
lM;ill, and the president of the feflion.

Nevertheless I made means by the lord of Lidington
that they would use no protrade of tine in mine audience,
so did I likewise to the earle of Morton, whom I met by
chance; I was answered by them both, that albeit the day
were defined to sacred ekercifes, such as were there of the
council would consult upon any moyen touching my accelf
unto them and my conference with them, and said also,
that in the afternoon either they would come to me, or I
Lhould hear from them. About 4 of the clock in the after-
noon, the said i th day, the lord of Lidington came to
my lodgings, and declared unto me on the behalf of the
lords and others, that they required me to have patience,
thugh they had deferred my conference with them, which
sas grounded principally upon the absence of the earles of
Ilar and Glencairn, the lords Semple, Crighton, and others
of the council, faying also that they did confider the matters
Which 1 Sas on your* behalf to treate with them of,
'ere of great importance , as they could not satisfy nor
conveciently treate with me, nor give me answer without
the advice of the lords, and (thers their afrociates ; the lord
f Lidington also said unto me, that where he perceived,
by his private conference with me in my journey hither.
t'ads, that I pressed greatly to have speedy access to the
Queen their sovereign, he perceived, by the lords and

25.

others which were here, that in that matter there wa grat
difficulty for many refpets, but specially becaure they had
refused to the French ambassador the like access, which
being granted unto me, might greatly offend the French, a
matter which they desired and intended to eschew; for they
did not find by your majcfly's dealings with them hitherto, that
it behoved them to irritate the French king, and to Ite
his favour and good intelligence with him: I answered, that
as to their refusal made onto the French ambdifador, man.
fieur de Ville Roye was dispatched forth of France before
these accidents here happened, and his special errand tv
to impeach the Queen's marriage with the earle of Bothel
(for so indeed since my coming hither I learned his com.
miflion tended to that end, and to make offer to the Queen
of another marriage), and as to monsieur de Crocq, he
could have no order forth of France concerning these matten,
since they happened; and therefore they might very well
bold them fufoeted to have conference with the Queen,
least they might treate of matters in this time without in
ftruiadins, and so rather do harm then good; but your mi
jety being advertized of all things which had chanced, had
sent me hither to treat w'th them, for the well of the reali,
for the conservation of their hotours and credit, and fr
their surety; and I might boldly fay onto him, that your
majesty had better deserved than the French had. He said,
for his own part, he was much bound unto your majfty,
and had always found great favour and courtesy in England,
but to be plain with you, Sir, fayed he, there is not many
of this assembly that have found so great obligaltin at the
Queen your sovereigns hands, as atyhe French kings, for
the caries of Morton and Glencairn be the oily perloan
wh;ch took benefit by the Queen's majesty's aid at Leith,
the reft of the noblemen were not in the action; and we
think, said he, the Queens majesty your sovereign, by the
opinion of her own council, and all the world, took as great
benefit by that charge as the realm of Scotland, or any par
ticular person; and not to talk with yow as an ambafidor,
but with Sir Nicolas Throkmorton, my lord Morton, and
such as were in pain for the death of Davie, found but
Sz

2;s

cold favour of the Queens majestys hands, when they were
banifled forth of their own country; but 1 would all our
whole company were as well willing to accompliff the Queen
sour fovere;gn intents and desires as I am; for mine own
par;, I am but one, and that of the meanest fort, and
thev be many noblemen and such as have great interest in
the matter, mary yow 3all1 be assured I will employ myself
to employ my credit, and all that I may do, to fatisfie the
Queen your mistress, as much as lyeth in me, and for your
own part you have a great many friends in this assembly,
with many other good words. But for conclulion I must
ake this for an answer to ftRy untill the other lords were
come, and thereupon I thought meet to advertize your
majefy what hath passed, and how far forth I have pro.
ceeed; your expeCtation being great to hear from hence.

And now to advertize your majesty of the state of all
things, as 1 have learned lince my coming hither, it may
please your majesty to underltand as followeth.

The Queen of Scotland remaineth in good health in the
caile of Lochleven, guarded by the lord Lindsay and Loch.
Icven the owner of the house, for the lord Ruthven is im.
ployed in another commission, because he began to ihow
reat favour to the Queen, and to give her intelligence.
She is waited on with ; or 6 ladys, 4 or ( gentlewomen,
and 2 chamberers, whereof one is a French woman. The
earle of Buchan, the earl of Murray's brother, hath also
liberty to come to her at his pleasure; the lords aforesaid,
ohich have her in guard, doe keep her very firaitly, and
as far as I can perceive, their rigour proceedeth by their
order from there men, because that the Queen will not by
an? means be induced to lend her authority to prosecute
the murder, nor will not content by any perfwafion to
abandon the lord Bothell for her husband, but avoweth
tonfantly that she will live and die with him; and faith
that f it were put to her choice to relinquiflh her crown
and kingdom, or the lord Bothell, she would leave her
kingdom and dignity, to go as a simple damfell with
him, and that she will never content that he Ihall fare
1orfe or have more harm than hersel£

And as far as I can perceive, the principal caue of ber

detention is, for that these lords do fee the Queen being
of so fervent affection towards the earle Bothell as he i,
and being put at, as they should be compelled to be ij
continnall arms, and to have occasion of many battles, he
being with manifest evidence notoriously deteced to be
the principall murderer, and the lords meaning profec.
tion of justice against him according to his merits.

The lords mean also a divorce betwixt the Queen and

him, as a marriage not to be suffered for many refped,
which reparation cannot take place if the Queen be at li
berty, and have power in her hands.

They do not also forget their own perill, conjoined

with the danger of the prince, but as far as I can per.
ceave, they intend not either to touch the Queen in fuert
or in hooour, for they do speak of her with refped and re-
verence, and do affirm, as I do learn, that the condi.
tions aforesaid accomplilhed, they will both put hae to
liberty, and restore her to her estate.

These lords have for the guard of their town 4Co Hu.

quebufhers which be in every good order, for the enter.
tainment of which companys, undl all matters be coe.
pounded, they did sue unto your majefly, to aid then
with such fum of money as hath been mentioned to Mr. Se.
cretary by the lord of Lidington's writing, amounting a
I perceive to ten or twelve thouCand crowns of the

They were lately advertized that the French King dot

mind to fend hither monsieur de la Chapell des Ursine, a
knight of the French order, and always well affectionate to
the house of Guyfe, and howsoever a Forest, Villaroy, and
de Crocq have used language in the Queens favour and to
these lords disadvantage there, to your majesty; de Crocq
doth carry with him such matter as hall be little to the
Queen's advantage; so as it is thought the French king,
opon his coming to his presence, will rather fatisfie te
lords, than t;!eafure the Queen; for they have their patt
so well made, as the French will rather make their prt
by the, than any other way.
a$4

Herewith I fend your majeRy the last bond agreed on,
and signed by the Hamiltons, the earl of Argyll, Huntly,
aid sundry others at Dumbarton.,

Nevertheless, since my coming to this town, the Ham.
ilons have sent unto me a gentleman of their sur-name,
n2soed Robert Hamilton, with a letter from the bilhop of
St. Andrews and the abbot of Arbroth, the copy whareof
I fend your majesty and mine answer unto them, referrirg
to the bearer the declaration of some things, as these did
by him unto me.

The earle of Argyll hath, in like manner, sent another
unto me with a letter and credit, I have used him as I
did the others, the copy of both which letters I fend your
majicy also. The lord Harrys hath also sent unto me
but not written, and I have returned unto him in like fort.

Against the zoth day of this month there is a generall
ti':mbly of all the churches, Ihires, and boroughs - towns
of this realm, namely of such as be contented to repair to
three lords to this town, where it is thought the whoe
Aee of this matter will be handeled, and I fear me much
to the Queen's disadvantage and danger; unless the lord of
Lidington and some others which be best affected unto her
do provide some remedy; for I perceave the great num-
kr, and in manner all, but chiefly the common people,
*hich have assisted in these doings, do greatly dilhonour
the Queen, and mind seriously either her deprivation. or
rhr defrudion; I used the belt means I can (confidering
the furie of the world here) to prorogue this afTembly, for
tit appeareth to me to be the best remedy: I may not
speak of dilfolution of it, for that may not be abiden, and
I lould thereby bring myself into great hatred and peril.
The chiefelt of the lords which be here present at this time
dre not show so much lenity to the Queen as I think they
ould be contented, for fear of the rage of the people.
The women be mod furious and impudent against the
Queen, and yet the men be mad enough; so as a itranger
ver bufGe may soon be made a sacrifice amongst them.
There was a great bruit that the Hamiltonr with their

adherents would put their force into the fields against thl
24th of this month, but I do not find that intent so true,
as the common bruit goeth.

The earle of Argyll is in the Highlands, where there ii
trouble among his own countrymen.

The earle of Lenox is by there lords much desired hre

and I do believe your majesty may so use him, and dired
him, as he shall be able to promote your purpose wid
these men.

1 he earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incompa.

tible. -- do find amongst the Hamiltons, Argyll and te
company two strange and sundry humours.

Hamiltons do make show of the liberty of the Queen

and prosecute that with great earnestness, because they would
have these lords destroy her, rather than Ihe should k
recovered from them by violence; another time they fee.
to desire her liberty, and Bothwell's deftituion, because
they would compass a marriage betwixt the Queen and the
lord of Arbroth.

The earle of Argyll doth asset her liberty, and Both

weil's deftrution, because he would marry the Queen t
his brother.

And yet neither of them, notwithitanding their open co

corance (as appeareth by their bond), doth dicover thei
minds to each other, nor mind one end; Knox is not here
but in the wet parts, he and the reft of the minitenrs
be here at the great assembly, whos anfterity againf th
Queen I fear as much as any man's.

By some conference which I had with some of t

councill, me thinketh that they have intelligence that te
is a difpolition in the Queen of Scotland to leave this real
and to retire herself into either England or into Fianc
but most willingly into England, for such - and
likeings as she knoweth hath been, and is meant unto
io France, leaving the regiment either to a nIumbI
persons deleagued, and authorized by her, or to foCe
or more.

And it pkafe your majesty, I think it not amis to

yOw
as6

,0r ;i remembrance, that in cafe the said Queen come into
tIlard br your allowance, without the French king's con-
tti, fle (hall loose her dowery in France, and have little
r nothing from hence to entertain her; and in cafe she do
S0 into France with the king's contentment, Ihe may be
An inflrument (if she can recover favour, as time will help
to cancell her disgrace ) either by matching with some hus-
band of good quality or by some other devire, to work
rw unqiiictnefs to her own contry, and so consequently to
Icur Mraj-l 's.

Therefore it may please your majesty to confider of this
matter, and to let me know your pleasure with convenient
Ifted, hout 1 (hall answer the fame, if it be propounded
rio me, either by the Queen, or by the councill, as a
Fece of the erd and compotition. For I am sure, of late,
ft hath ffemed very desirous' to have the matter brought
to palr that Ihe might go into England, retaining her estate
nd jorifdiclion in herself, though [he do not exercise it;
ti likeenife I understand that some of this council which be
klt affected to her safety do think there is no other way
t five her. Thus Almighty God preserve your majesty in
ikh, honour, and all felicity; at Edinburgh the 14th
lly iS67.
SirNicholas Trokmorton to Queen Elizabeth, the

itth of July 1567, from Edinburgh ".

IT may pleare your majesty, yow might perceave by my
ers of the v6th, how far I had proceeded with there
hds and What was their answer; since which time I
hoe roken particularly with the earle Morton, the lord
Lidington, and Sir James Balfour, captain of this castle,
those hands I cannot perceave that as yet access to the
cen to Lochleven will be granted me, Raying themselves
I1 ly the abrence of the lords and others their associates,
itich they fay) they look for within two days; and for

': an origial. Paper. Office.
VOL. ll.

that I find, by likelihood and apparent presumptions th
mine access to the Queen will hardly be granted, I ha,
thought good not to defer this dirpatch untill I have a
solute answer in that matter.

May it therefore please your majesty, to underlRand R

bert Melin returned from the Queen in Lochlevin, to th
town the 6th of July, and brought a letter from her
ten of her own hand to these lords, which doth contain
1 understand matter as followeih-A request unto themn
have consideration of her health, and if they will not p
her to liberty, to change the place of refraint to the as
of Stirling , to the end The might have the comfort a
company of her son, and if they will not change her ha
Lochleven, she required to have some other gendewsom
about her, naming none.

To have her Apothecary, to have rome modet minifte

-To have an imbroiderer to draw forth such work
Ihe would be occupied about, and to have a valetof d
chamber.--Touching the government of the realm A
maketh two offers. which are but generally touched in hi
letter, the particularitys be not specified, but rcfred
Robert N!e!vin's credit, the one is to commit it only
wholly to the earle of Murray, the other is to the Io
whole names ensue, assisicd with such others as they fil
call unto them, that is to fay , the duke of Chattellt
the earls of Morton, Murray, Marr, and Glencairn.

She hath written unto them that I might have accefi d

her.--She requireth further, that if they will not w
her and regard her as their Queen, yet to use her as d
king their lo.-creign's daughter ( whom many of them lnew
and as their prince's mother.-She will by no means yid
to abandon Bothell for her husband, nor relinquilh h
which matter will do her most harm of all, and bardt
these lords :o great severity against her.

She yieldeth in words to the prosecution of the muri
I have the means to let her know that your majesty
sent me hither for her relief.

I have alfno erfuaded her to conform herfelftorenol
2,8

t1hell for her husband, and to be contented to susser a
rvorce to pals betwixt them; The hath sent me word that
,it il in no ways consent unto that, but rather die;
gountlig herself upon this reason, taking herself to be seven
leks gone with child; by renouncing lothell, fle Ihould
,kn.owledge herfelt to be with child of a bastard, and to
Lue forfeited her honour, which she will not do to die
r it; I have perfwaded her to save her own life and her
ild, to choose the leafl hard condition.
ilt. Knox arrived here in this town the 6th of this month,
th hom 1 have had conference, and with Mrs Craig also,
t other minister of this town.
Ihare peifwaded with them to preach and perfwad lenity,
find them both very aultere in this conference, what they
ll do hereafter I know not, they are furnished with
na arguments, some forth of the scripture, some forth
hiiories, some grounded (as they fay) upon the laws
this realm, some upon practices used in this realm, and
c upon the conditions and oath made by their prince
her coronation.
The bi(hop of Galloway, uncle to the earle of Huntley,

sent hither to there lords, that his nephew the earle
son.: others of that fide may, at Linlithgow or at
ling, have some communication with some appointed
this fide, assuring them that there is a good difppoi-
in the lords of the other party to concurre with these,
ring further that they will not dissent for triffles or
eceffarv things, and (as I am given to underltand)
can be pleased the Queen's restraint be continued, un.
the murder be pursued in all persons, whereby the
aration of the Queen and Bothell is implyed, the pre-
aion of the price¢, the security for all men, and a
iorder taken for tl:e governance of the realm in tran-
lity.
Captain Clerk, which hath so long served in Denmark
lfrved at Newhaven, did the i6th of this month
tornpanyed with one of his soldiers, or rather the soldier
iegrealer fame goeth) kill one Wilson a seaman, and

»(2

such a one as had great estimation with there lords bod
for his skill, his hardynefs, honefly, and willingness ii
this ation; whereupon Clerk hath retired himself; thd
quarrel was about the chip which took Blacketer, whcl
(hip was appointed by these lords to go to the north o
Scotland to impeach the paflage of the earle Bothell, il
cafe he went either to the isles or to any other placei b
the death of this man this enterprize was dashed.

The bilhop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, an
doth desire to Cpeak with the lord of Lidington.

The abbot of Kilwinning hath sent for Sir James Balf
captain of the castle, to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majesty in my last, the Hamilt

now find no matter to difever there lords and them afu
der, but would concur in all things (yea in any extreil
against the Queen) so as that they might be assured
prince of Scotland were crouned king, and shoold
without issue, that the earle of Lenox's son living iot
not -inherit the croon of this realm, as next heir to
nephew.

And although the lords and councelors speak reveren

mildly, and charitably of their Queen, so n I cannot gat
by their speech any intention to cruelty or violence, yet
do find by intelligence, that the Queen is in very
peril of her life, by reason that the people aflembled
this convention do mind vehemently the detrudfion of

It is a public speech amongst all the people, and am

all estates (faring of the counsellors) that ther Qu
hbth no more liberty nor priviledge to commit murder
adultery, than any other private pcrfon, neither by
laws, nor the laws of the realm.

The earl of Bothwell, and all his adherents and affoci

be put to the horn by the ordinary justice of this to
named the lords of the fefion; and commandnent fp
to all Ihirriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend h
and all other his followers and receiptors--The aa
Bothell's porter, and one of his other firvitorsof hisclh
her, being apprehended, have confessed such fundrycir
t6o

bncrs, as it appeareth evidently, that he, the said earl was
W of the principal executors of the murder , in his
otn person accompanyed with sundry others, of which
number I cannot yet certainly learn the names but of three
ofthem, that is to fay, two of the Ormiftons of Tivot.
Ail, and one Hayborn of Bolton; the lords would be
pcd that none of the murderers should have any favour
r receipt in England, and hereof their desire is, that the
f;iers upon the border may be warned; Bothell doth till
rmain in the north parts, but the lord Seaton and Fle.
sing, which have been there, have utterly abandoned
in, and do repair hitherwards.-The intelligence doth
pw daily betwixt there lords, and those which held of;
ad notwithltanding there lords have rent an hundred and
h harqubufhers to Stirling, to keep the town and pafiage
fro furprize; and so have they done in like manner to
k JohnRton, which be the two paflfges from the north,
ed welf to this town, I do understand the captain of Dun-

is much bufled in fortifying that place, I do mervile
carriages be not impeached otherwise than they be.
Of late this Queen hath written a letter to the captain
ithe said cafle, which hath been furpri2ed; and there-
ly amtter is discovered which maketh little to the Queen's
siantage.

Thus, having none other matter worthy your maje-
e's knowledge, I beseech God to prosper your majeny
with long life, perfed health, and prosperous felicity. At
dinburgh the i8th of July 1567.

Ltter of Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to the right
honourable the earl of LeicetRer, knt. of the or-
der, and one of the lords of her majelty's most
honourable Privy Council ".

Vmy former dispatches sent to her majelty, and Mr.

ry, ince the Izth of Jnly, your lordship might have
":4tb of July tr67. Paper. Office, ftom the OliginaT.

s

261

perceived the hate of this country, and to what end the
matters be like to come: so as not to trouble your lordli
with many words; this Queen is like very shortly to be depriv,
of her royal estate, her fun to be crowned king, and I
detained in prison within this realm; and the fame to I
governed, in the young king's name, by a council, conGfii
of certain of the nobility, and other wile men of this redl
so as it is easy to be seen that the power and ability to
any thing to the commodity of the Queen's majesty, an
the realm of England, will chiefly, and in manner wholl
ret in the hands of these lords, and others their allocite
aflembled at Edinburgh. Now if the Queen's majety wi
fill perlift in her former opinion towards the Queen
Scotland, (unto whom the (hall be able to do no good) th
I do plainly fee that there lords and all their accomplih
will become as good French, as the French. king can vil
to all intents and purposes. And as for the Hamito
the earls of Arguile, Huntlye, and that sC&ion, they
already o far inchanted that way, as there neadeth Ii
devise to'draw them to the French devotion. Then
is the date of things so come to pals of this country,
France has Scotland now as much conjoined unto th
to all purposes, as ever it was; and what an irdiumen
the young prince will prove, to unquiet England, 1rcp
me to your lordships' wisdom, and therefore conidi
the weight of the matter, and all the circumitnce,
trust your lordlhips will well bethink you in time (for'
high time) how to advise her majesty, to leave nothing
done that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in b
podffefion, or, at the least, to be at her.devotion, A'
amongst other things, that I can imagine, fAr the i
degree nothing is more meet to bring this to esfd, t
to allure this company here assembled, to beat her majt
their favour. Some talk hath palled between the lord
Liddington and me, ii certain conferences, about
matter. By him I find, that when her majely shall h
woo these men to her devotion, the principal point
will make them conformable to deliver their pincc

ngland, will reft upon the Queen, and the realms en-
iling him to the succession of the crown of England,
hr fault of ilTue of the Queen's majesty's body, some other
sings will also be required, as the charge of the said prince
ed his train to be at the charge of England. I do well
prceire that thcfe men will never be brought to deliver
leir prince into England, without the former condition,
fur the fucceflion of England; for ( faith Liddington ) that
tking place, the prince shall be as dear to the people of
England as to the people of Scotland; and the one will
h as careful of his preservation as the other. Otherwise,
h sith, all things confidered, it will be reported that the
Scottilhmen have put their prince to be kept in safety, as
those which commit the sheep to be kept by the wolves.
So as for conclusion, your lordships may perceive here
sill be the scope of this matter. As unto the delivering
ofhim upon hostages, he fayeth, let no man think, that
Fe condition of the succession not being accomplished,
tie nobility and the gentry will never content to leave
lemledves defitute of their sovereign, upon any hostages,
nither upon any promises, nor likelihood of good to issue
i time to come. It were not good for yourselves (faith
h) that the matter were so handled; for then you should
adventure all your goods in one ship, which might have
a dangerous effee, confidering the uhwiNingnefs of the
Queen your sovereign to consent to establishing any fuc-
aclor to the crown. And then, how unmete were it, that
hr majelty having in her pofleflion already all such persons
a do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown, to have
our prince also in her custody. For so there might follow,
without good capitulations, a strange and dangerous issue,
tho' the Queen your mistress do think that such imaginations
could not proceed but from busy heads, as you have uttered
unto us on her behalf. What is come to paCs since my las
dispatch, and how far forth things are proceeded, I refer
Your lordship to be informed by ny letters sent unto her
"ajlty, at this time. And so I pray Almighty God, preserve

S 4

:63

your lordship in much honour and felicity. At Edinbu:
this 24th or July s167.

It may please your good lordllip to make my lorb
Stuard partner of this letter.

The Queen to Sir Nicholas Throkmorton '

By the Queen.

T RUSTY and right well beloved, we greet you vel
for as much as we do confider that you have now a long ti
remained in those parts, without expedition in the chrg
committed unto you, we think it not meet feeing there h
not followed the good acceptation and fruit of our w
meaning towards that slate, which good reason would ha
required, that you should continue there any longer; o
pleasure, therefore, is, that you fiall, immediately upo
the receipt hereof, fend your servant Middlemore unto
lords and estates of that realm, that are assembled together
willing him to declare unto them, that it cannot but f
very strange unto us, that you having been sent from us,
fich good intent, to deal with them, in matters tending
much to their own quiet, and to the benefit of the hW
ef~ae of their country, they have so far forgotten themfdivs
and so lightly regarded us and our good meaning, not only 1
delaying to hear you, and deferring your acccfs to
Queen their fotereign, but also, which is irangeft of all,
not vouchsafing to make any answer unto ps. And ih
thee dealings be such, indeed, as were not to be look
for at their hands, yet do we find their usage and
ceeding toward their Soveraign and Queen, to overpls
the reft in so firange a degree, as we for our part, and
suppose the whole world besides, cannot but think them
have therein gone so far beyond the duty of fubjcdss,

," 6th Aqg. I57.

rust needs remain to their perpetual tauche for ever. And
herefore ye Ihall fay, that we have tlio't good, without
confulming any longer time in vain, to revoke you to our
yrefence, requiring them to grant you licence and parport
so to do, which when you shall have obtained, we will that
Tou make your repair hither, unto us, with as convenient
Ifeed as you may. Given, &c.

Indorfed 6th August, ir67.

Throkmorton to the right honourable Sir Wil.
liam Cecil, knight, one of her majesty's privy
council and principal secretary, give there "

S 1 R .
SIR,

W H A T I have learned, since the arrival of my lord
f Murray, and Mon. de Linnerol, you lhall understand
by my letter to her majesty, at this time. The French do,
i their negotiations, as they do in their drink, put water
to their wine. As I am able to fee into their doings, they
tke it not greatly to the heart how the Queen deep,
thether she live or die, whether The be at'liberty or in
pizon. The.mark they shoot at, is, to renew their old
ague; and can be as well contented to take it of this
itle king, (howsoever his tite be) and the fame by
t order of these lords, as otherwise. Lineroll came 'but
yeterday, and methinketh he will not tarry long; you may
Pess how the French will seek to displease these lords, when
hey changed the coming of La Chapelle des Ourfins for this
man, because they doubted that de la Chapelle should not
k grateful to them, being a papist. Sir, to speak more
Phinly to you, than I will do otherwise, me thinketh the
trl of Murray will run the course that thole men do, and

partaker of their fortune. I hear no man speak more

fterly against the tragedy, and the players therein, than
t, so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an inkling
: !-'h Aug. IM7 Paper.Offic, from the Onrginal.

265

that Ledington is to go into France, which I do am nacd
milike, as any thing, for our purpose. I can ffTre o
the whole proteflants of France will live and die in thef
men's quarrels; and, where there is bruit amongfl yo;
that aid Ihould be sent to the adverse party, and thatMar.
iues should come hither with some force; MonL Bauddtl
bath aflfred me of his honour, that instead of Martigm
coming againf them, he will come with as good a fore
to succour them: and if that be sent under meaner con.
du*d, Robert Stuart shall come with as many to sots
them. But the constable hath assured these lords, that the
king meaneth no way to offend them. Sir, I pray you hd
my revocation convenient, and speed you to further it, f
I am here now to no purpose, unless it be to kindle theft
lords more against us. Thus I do humbly take my leae c
you, from Edenburgh the 12th of August, 1567.

Yours to use and command.

The Queen to Nicholas Throkmorton.

T RUSTY and well-beloved we greet you well. We h,
within these two days, received three sundry leti of
yours,of the 2oth, 22d, and 2 d,of this month, hria
not before those received any seven days before; nd do
fnd, by these your letters, that you have very dligetl
and largely advertised us of all the haiRy and permcM
proceedings there; which as we nothing like, so we ti
in time to fee them wax colder, and to receive Lbm rcf
mtion. For we cannot perceive, that they with wbo yp
have dealt can answer the doubts moved'by the Hailom,
who howsoever they may be carried for their privnate re
yet thoe things which they move, will be alowd bY i
reafbable perbons. For if they may not, being noblnend
the realm, be fufered to hear the Queen their foverigded
her mind concerning the reports which are made of her, by
such as keep her in captivity, how should they belie the
rcports, or obeythem which do reportit? and thfercft

meaning is, you shall let the Hamiltons plainly under.
Afrl, that we do well allow of their proceedings, (as far
forth as the fame doth concern the Queen their sovereign
for her relief) and in such things as shall appear reason.
able fjr us therein to do, for the Queen our sifter, we
rill be ready to perform the fame. And where it is so
required that upon your coming thence, the lord Scroope
should deal with the lord Herris to impart their meanings
to us, and ours to them, we are well pleated therewith,
and we require you to advertise the lord Scroope hereof
by your letters, and to will him to shew himself favour.
able to them in their adions, that may appear plainly to
tend to the relief of the Queen, and maintenance of her
authority. And as we willed our secretary to write unto
you, that upon your message done to the earl of Murray,
you might return, so our meaning is you shall. And if
these our letters Ihall meet you on the way, yet we will
have you advertise both the lord Scroope, and the Hamil.
tons, of our meaning.

Indorfcd 29 Aug. 1567.

N'. X. (Vol. II. p. ioo.)

SirNicholas Throkmorton to the archbishop of

St. Andrew's and the abbot of Arbrothe ".

AFTER my good commendations to your good lord-
Nlips, this thall be to advertize you, that the Queen's
majefy my sovereign having sent me hither her ambalfa.
dor to the Queen her lifer your sovereign, to communi.
cate unto her such matter as ihe thought meet, confider-
ing the good amity and intelligence betwixt them, who
being detained in captivity (as your lordlhips know) con-
trary to the duty of all good fubjeds, Or the enlargement
of whose person, and the restitution of-her to her dignity,

' 13th Aug. 1567. Paper.Office, from a copy which Sir Nicholas
'r to the Quecn.

2f7

her majety gave me in charge to treat with dtere lords
assembled at Edenburgh, offering them all reasonable con.
ditions and means as might be, for the safeguard of the
young prince, the punishment of the late horrible murder,
tbe dissolution of the marriage betwixt the Queen and the
ea:l of Bodwell, and latly for their own sureties. In the
negociation of which matters I have ( as your lordlhip
well know) spent a long time to no purpose, not being
able to prevail in any thing with those lords, to the Queen
my sovereign's satisfaction. Of which trange proceedins
towards her majesty, and undutiful behaviour towards
their sovereign, I have advertised the Queen's majesty; Ih
(not being minded to bear this indignity) hath given me
in chaige to declare her further pleasure unto them, in
lich fort as they may well perceive her majesty doth dil
low of their proceedings, and thereupon hath revoked me.
And further hath given me in charge to communicate tie
fame unto your lordflips, requiring you to let me know,
before my departure hence, (which Ihall be, God willing,
as soon as I have received answer from you ) what you
and your confederates will alfuredly do, to set the QOetq
your sovereign at liberty, and to restore her to her forme
dignity by force or otherwise; feeing these lords have re.
fured all other mediation, to the end the Queen's majesy
my sovereign may concur with your lordlhips in this ho.
nourable enterprize.

And in cafe through the dispersion of your affociats,

your lordlhips can neither communiclte this matter amongf
you, nor receive resolution of them all by that time, it
may please you to fend me the opinions of so many of you
as may confer together, within two or three days, so as I
may have your answer here in this town by Monday or
Tucfdaynext at the farthet, being the s9th of this AuguRi
for I intend (God willing) to depart towards Enghnd,
upon Wednesday illowing. Thus I most humbly take my
leave of your lordships at Edenburgh, the ithb of Aug. 156.

Indorfd the t1th of Aug. x567.
tS6

Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to' the lord Herrys ".

YOUR good lordship's letter of the x;th of August I
have received the loth of the fame. For anfver whereunto
it may like your lordship to understand, that I will signify
onto you plainly, how far forth I am already thoroughly
inltrudted of the Queen's majelf my sovereign's pleasure
concerning the detention of the Queen your Sovereign, and
concerning her relief.

To the firtl her majefly hath given in charge, to ure all
kin Is of persuasion in her name, to move these lords assem-
bled at Edenhurgh to deftfi from this violent and undutiful
behaviour, which they used towards their fivereign. And
in this part, betides the shew of many reasons, and fun.
dry persuasions of amicable treaty with them, her majef.
t! hath willed me to use some plain and severe speech unto
them, tending so far forth, as if they would not be better
adviled, and reform these their outrageous proceedings
exercised against their sovereign, that then they might
k alfured her majesty neither would nor could indure such
an indignity to be done to the Queen, her good cousin and
neighbour.

And notwithstanding these my proceedings with them,
tey have made proof to be little moved thereby, for as
oet neither will they consent to the enlargement, neither
fffer me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me, it
is superfluous to treat any more with them after this
manner. Whereupon 1 have advertised the Queen's ma.
jelly yv sovereign, expecting daily her majesty's further
order; and as I thall be advertised thereof, so will not
fail to signiFy the fame to your good lordship; and in the
utaa time will advertise her majesty also, what your lord.
ilip hath written unto me. Thus with my due com-
m:ndanions to your good lordlhip, I commit the fame to

': :'Ih Au. IS'-. Paper. Office, from a copy wrliGh Sir Nicbolat
'nt to fcrt:ary C cil.

269

almighty God, refting always to do you the pleafup and
firvice that I can lawfully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of AuguR, 1567.

N'. XI. (Vol. II. p. 11.)
Account of lord Herrys's Behaviour in the Par.

liament held December 15, 1567 ".

HE lord Herrys made a notable harangue , in tbe

name of the duke and himself their friends and adherents,
(the duke himself, the earl of Caffilles, and the abbot of

ilwinning being also prefeat) to perSuade the union of the
whole realm in one mind. Wherein he did not spare to
set forth solemnly the great praire that part of this nobility
did deserve, which in the beginning took mcanes for puniih.
ment of the earl Bothwell, as also feeing the Queen's inor.
dinat affetion to that wicked man, and that the could not
be induced by their persuasion to leave him, that in fequefrirg
her person within Lochlevin, they did the duty of noblemen,
That their honourable doings, which had not spared to
hazard their lives and lands, to avenge their native country
from the flanderoos reports that were spoken of it among
other nations, had well deserved that all their brethren
lbould join with them in so good a cause. That he and
they, in whore names he did speak, would willingly,
and without any compulsion, enter themselves in the fame
yoke, and put their lives and lands in the like ha2ard, for
maintenance of our cause. And if the Queen herrelfwere
in Scotland, accompanied with 20,000 men, they will be
of the fame mind, and fight in our quarrel. He hoped
the remainder noblemen of their party, Hundy, Argoile,
and others, which had not as yet acknowledged the king,
would come to the fame conformity, whereunto he would
llarnefly move them. And if they ill remain oblinatt,

"t Paper.Offce.
j o

and refuse to qualify themselves, then will the duke, he,
and their friends, join with us to correct them, that other.
,ije will not reform themselves. So plaulible an oration,
and more advantageous for our party, none of ourselves
could have made. He did not forget to term my lord
regnt, by the name of regent, (there was no mention at all
of the Earl of Murray) and to call him grace at every word,
shen his speeches were direded to him, accompanying all
i words with low courtesies after this manner.

N'. XII. (Vol. II. p. 134.)

Queen Mary to Queen Elizabeth ".

MIAD A M,

ALthough the neceTity of my cause (which maketh
ea to be importune to you) do make you to judge that
lam out of the way; yet such as have not my pallion,
nor the refpeds where you are persuaded, will think that
I do as my cause doth require. Madam, I have not accu.
d you, neither in words, nor in thought, to have ured
yourself evil towards me. And I believe, that you have
no want of good underltanding, to keep you from per-
wafion againit your natural good inclination. But in the
man time I can't chufe (having my fenres) but perceive
ery evil furtherance in my matters, since my coming hi.
ter. I thought that I had sufficiently discoursed unto
you the difcommodities, which this delay bringeth unto
me. And especially that they think in this next month of
uguft, to holl a parliament against me and all my ser.
rnts. And in the mean time, I am stayed here, and yet
till you, that I Ihould put myself further into your coun-
tg, (withaut feeing you) and remove me further from
tine; and there do me this dilhonour at the requelt of my
rbls, as to fend commilfloners to hear them against me,
:' Cot. Lib. Cal. 1. A Copy, and probably a Translation.

271

-m yo would do to a mere subjed, and not hear me Ib
mouth. Now, madam, I have promised you to come to
ya, and having there made my moan and complaint of
thee rebels, and they coming thither, not as poleffons,
but a subjes , to answer. I would have besought you to
hear my jufic~ation of that which they have falfly et fth
against me, and if 1 could not purge myself thereof, vie
might then discharge your hands of my caores, and lkt m
go for fch as I am. But to do a you fay, if I wrte a
pable I would be better advised ; but being not so, I can't
accept this dishonour at their hands, that being in pofleflio
they will come and accuse me before your commiflionm,
whereof I can't like: And feeing you think it to be agin
your honour and confignage to do otherwise, I beseech ou
that you will not be mine enemy, untill you may fee how
can discharge myself every way, and to susser me go into
France, where I have a dowry to maintain me; or at lat
to go into Scotland, with assurance that if there coe any
firanger thither, I will bind myself for their return withot
any prejudice to you, or if it pleis you not to do thus, I protei
that I will not impute it to falihood, if I receive ftnng
in my country, without making you any other discharge For
it. Do with my body as you will, the honour of blame Iba
be yours. For I had rather die here, and thatmy faithrol fe.
vants may be succoured ( tho' you would not so) by stag: c,
than to susser them to be utterly undone, upon hope to
receive, in time to come, particular commodity. The
be many things to move me to fear that I Ihall hare t
do, in this country, with others than with you. But f,
afmuch as nothing hath followed'upon my lad moan,
hold my peace, happen what may hap. I have as led t
altie my fortune, as to eek it, and not find it. Fte
it pleased you to give licenCe to my fubjedb to go
come. This has been refuted by my lord Scroop and Mr. Rnolb
(as they fay) by your commandment, because 1 would no
depart hence to your charge, untill I had answer of thO
lewrr , tho' I Ihewed them that you required my anr r,
upon the two points, contained in your letter.

ZTh

The one is to let you briefly undertand, I am come
D you to make my moan to you, the which being heard,
I ould declare unto you mine innocency, and then require
tour aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan
ad complaint to God, that I am not heard in my jut
Barrel, and to appeal to other princes to have refpet
iereunto, as my cafe requireth; and to you, madam, first
jall, when you shall have examined your conscience be.
fe him, and have him for witness. -- And the other,
which is to come further into your country, and not to
ome to your pretence, I will esteem that as no favour,
hbt will take it for the contrary, obeying it as a thing
forced. In mean time, I beseech you, to return to me
m! Lord Herries, for I can't be without him, having
Done of my counfal here, and also to fuller me, if it please
log, without further delay, to depart hence whitherfo-
iver it be out of this country. I am sure you will not-
deny me this limple request for your honour's fake, feeing
idoth not please you to use your natural goodners to.
nrds me otherwise, and feeing that of mine own accord,
I am come hither, let me depart again, with yours. And
iGod permit my causes to succeed well, I Ihall be
bund to you for it; and happening otherwise, yet I can't
game you. As for my Lord Fleeming, feeing that upon
my credit you have suffered him to go home to his house,
warrant you he shall pars no further, but lhall return
when it lhall please you. In that you trult me, I will not
(to die for it i deceive you. But from ' Dumbarton I an.
SIer not, when my L. Fleeming ihall be in the Tower..
For they which are within it, will not forbear to receive
sccour, if I don't assure them of yours; no, tho' you
would charge me withal, for 1 have left them in charge ,
o bave more refped to my servants and to my estate, than
my life. Good filter, be of another mind, win the hear,
nd al! shall be yours, and at your commandment. I
hought to satisfy you wholly , if I might have seen you.
i! do not as the serpent, that ftoppeth his hearing,
: Perhaps for.

OL. III. T

for I am no enchanter, but your siser, and nmtal coi,'
If Ceffa had not disdained to hear or read the compaint
of an advertiser, he had not so died; why bfould princ
cars be stopped feeing that they are painted so long; Meal.
ing that they Ihould hear all and be well advIed, befor
they answer. I am not of the nature of the bafilif, a,
les of the chamelion, to turn you to my likene, nd
tho' I hould be so dangerous and curs'd s men fay, yog
are fafficiently arm'd with constancy and wsh jufice,
which I require of God, who give you grace to afe it ell
with long and happy life. From Carlisle the Sth of Jy,

N'. XIM . (VoL n. p 135.)
Part of a letter from Sir Francis Knollys to Ceci,

8th Aug. 1468, from Bolton".

B U T surely this Queen dod& eemt, outardly, n

only to favour the form, but allo the chief article of th
religion of the gospel, namely jufificati on by thi& tb l
and Ihe heareth the faults of papiliry revealed, byprmad
or otherwise, with contented ears, and'with gentle and ke
replys, and she doth not seem to like the wor ofrcligi
throw me.
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecii

21 Sept. 1568, from. Bolbt.

- IT came to this Queen's ea,8 e t. that Ie t"
bruited to be lately turned to the religin of the golpl
to the great disliking of the papifrs hereabout, which t
herfelfconferfed unto me, and yefierda, opcly inthe Pg
chamber, when the assembly was full, and isme p Pa

a' Am Original. PaPf-Oct.

sent she tookl occalion to speak of religion, and then openly
ie professed herself to be of the papist religion, and took
upon her to patronize the fame more earnetly than Ihe had
donea great while afore, altho' her defences and arguments
rere so weak i

that the effec of her speech was only to shew

het zeal; and afterwards to me alone, when I mifliked to
fee her become so confidently backward in religion. Why,
aid she, would you have me to lore trance and Spain,
lnd all my friends in other places, by feetning to change
my religion, and yet I am not assured the Queen my good
fsler will be my assured friend, to the fatisfaiion of my
honour and expectadon.

N'. XIV. (Vol. II.) p. i36.
A letter from my lord Herries to my lord Scroop

and fir F. Knollys, September 3d, 1568 ".

MY lords, pleafit your honourable lordffiips, I am
informed by James Borthwick, lately come from the
Queen's majesty your foverane, that is fchawin to her
ighnefs, I should have ridden in Crafurdmure, fen my
hi cunring into this realm, upon the earl of Murray's
dependents. And that I fuld have caufit, or been of
teunfil to Scottifren to have ridden in Englandi- to flay
erfpulzie her majesty's fubjedts.

My lords, I thought it 'right ffeedfill because your lords
Lips is, by your foverane, commanded to attend upon the
Queen's majelty my miftres , so having daily access in thir
itters, to declare upon the truth; hutnbly deiring that
t!ur lordships will, for God's cause certificate the Queer
)oar foverane the fame.

As God lives, I have neither contented nor day wire
hi knowledge of any Scottifman's riding in England, td
de the fubjtes thereof hurt in bodies or goods; fene the
kge of Leith; and as I undertand it shall be fund trMe
" Cot. Lib. Cal. C. An Originlr in his own hald:

T2

27;

that gif ony sic open hurt be done, it is by the Queen m
fovreign's disobedients, and that I have not ridden nor
hurt no Scottihman, nor commanded no hurt to be do
to them, fen my coming from the Queen's majft of E.
land, it is vell kend, for that never ane will CompIb
of me.

I have done more good to Crawfrdmure nor eer te

earl of Murray has done, and will be loather to do the
any harm than he will. Except the Queen's majesty y
fovereiga, command sic faire reports to be tryit, quheof
this is altogidder an inventit leafing, her grace i be
trublit, and tyne the hearts of true men here, qpho of
sic report fall be made, that baieth would serve hir, ad
may, better than they unworthy liar.

My lords , underfand the Queen's majesty your .

vereign is not contented of this bruite, that there Ihoid
ony Frenchman come in this realm, with the duke d
Chattlherault Truth it is, I am no manne r of my e
counall of their cuming, nor has no sic certainty thereof,
a I hear by Borthwick' report fro the Qae's muid
your overeign. And gif I might as well fay k,;u i
true indeed, her grace' self is all the wyitt, and the couna
that wil neer let her take order with my mailfreb ai
For that our sovereign havand her majefy's promile, h

riting, of luff, friendihip, and afiftanc gif needbad
so requirit, enteri that realm, upon the s6 day of Ml,
fen that time the Queen's majesty has commuanded
diverse time-to declare she would accept her cfe, and
do for er, and to pt her in peaceable poefion of i
reame , and when I required of her majesty, in my min
trefo name, that her highmefs would either do fr bc, (
her fpecia trust was fie would) according w her form
promises, or otherwise give her counfal, would not eont,
(as I how her grace I sand diverse repugnat) then ti
she would permit her to pas in France, or to Gome ota
prince to seek support, or failing hereof, (quailk n
aaft all reason ) that le would permit her to retnM
her awin countrie, in sic fcmpil manner as Ihe Cae
276

of it, and said to her majefy ane of thir, for her honour,
would not be refufit, feeand that Ihe was corned in her
realm upon her writings and promises of friendship. And
ficklike, I said to her highness, gif my maiftrefs had the
like promise of her nobility and estates, as he had of
herrelf, I Ihould have reprovit them highly, gif they had
not condefcendit to one of thir three, and so I fay, and
so I write, that in the warld It shall be maift reprehend-
able, gif this promise taketh not other good effea, nor yet
it does. Notwithstanding, I get gud answer of thir promises
offriendlhip made to my sovereign, and to put her grace
in this her awin countrie peaceably, we have fund the con.
ttary working by Mr. Middlemore diredit from her highness
to (by the army that cuift down our houses. And alfua,
in the proceeding of this late pretendit parliament, promised
twenty days before the time to myself to have caused it
been dilchargit. And yet contrary to this promise, have
they made their pretendit manner of forfaulture of ; x men
ofguid reputation, biWhops, abbottis, and barronis, obe-
dient fubjeds to our sovereign, only for her cause.

They have also difponit, fen our sovereign's cause was
taken upon hand be the Queen's majesty of that realm, an
hundred thousand pound Scots worth of her awin true
fubjeds geir, under the color of the law, groundit upon
their faie, treasonable, ibowin, authority.

The murders, the opprefflons, the burnings, the ra-
tilhing of women, the deltrudtion of policy, both eccle-
fialical and temporal, in this mean time, as in my former
witings I said it was lamentable to ony christian man to
hear of, except God gif grace, the profeflion of the evan-
gilt of Jesus Christ profelfit be your prince, counfall and
realme, be mair myndit, nor the auld inamity that has stand
betwixt the realms, many of my countrymen will doubt in
this article, and their proceedings puttis my self in SanA
Thomas belief.

Now, my lords, gif the Queen's majesty of that realm,
upon quhais promise and honour my maiftrefs came there,
s I have said, will leave all the French writings, and

277

French phrases of writirgs, quhilks amongis then is ove
meikle on baith the fides unfit and plainly, according to
the auld true custom of Ingland-and Scotland, quharcin
be a word promif truth was obferv'd, promire in tLh
name of the eternal God, and upon the high honour of
that nobill and princely blude of the kings of Ingland,
quhereof Ihe is defcendit, and prefendy wears the diadem,
that (he will put my maiRrefl in her awin country, and
cause her. as Queen thereof in her authority and trength to
be obeyit, and to do the fame will appoint an certain day
within two months ag the fdtthet, as we underitand his
to be our weil, fua will we, or the maiR part of us all,
follow upon it, leaving the Frenchmen, and their evilFrench
phrases togidder. And therefore, and for the true perpetual
friendihip of that etalm, will condition, and for our pan,
with the grace of Almighty God, keep sic heads and COn.
dirions of agreement, as noble and wife men can cond.e
scend upon, for the weiU of this hail island. As 1 hae
been pardings declaring to the Queen your Covereign,
quhilk I (hew to your.lordchips ffe!is both in religion, in
the punilhment of the earl- lot4hwie, for the Queen's lahf
husband's slaughter, and fot'a .m(tual band of amity pe.
petually to remain amongis us.

Doubdefs, my lords, withot that, we pna find Gc

time and friendly working, as may gif us occaion baith
to forgette Middlmore and his lte pretendit parliament,
we will tur the leaf, leaving our sovereign agains our

ill to reft where she is, under the promise of friendlhip
As I have baith laid, and will ever affirm, made be your
sovereign, quhilk was only cuofe. of her graces comirg
in that realme, and seek the help and moyen of French,
qr Spanish, till expulfe this treasonable and falle pretesn
authority, quhilk means to reign *bo.e us,

My lords, I desire your lordlhips confider, that it is e,

that maig desires the amity betwixt Ingland and. Scotland t
continue, and of a poor man bel cause has, that Witthi

My brother the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, thatis
your lordlhips communing with him, it appearit to him'

Pour mind was we shold susser the earl of Murray to work,
;ltho' it were agains reason to us, and complain thereof to
the Queen's majesty, and her highness wald fee it reformit.
My lords, her majesty will be over meikle troublit to reform
the wranges we have fuftainit already. For I am sure, gif
rafon and justice may have place, our maiftrefs, and we
her subjects, have received express wrang, far above two
hundred thousand pounds sterling, in the time of this un-
happy government, feeing the reformation offa great causes,
comes, now a days, so flowlie and the ungodly law of
oblivion in sic matters so meikle pradis'd, I think, nowther
for the Queen's honour, nor our weill, your lordlhips would
fua mean , nor that it is good to us to follow it. I\nd
that ye will give your sovereign sic advertisement thereoF,
.a your good wisdoms shall find in this cause meet; It will
be true and frindfull working for us, indeed, and nowther
French phrases, nor boasting, and finding little other effe&,
that will cause us to hold away the Frenchmen. This is
plainly written, and I desire your Iordfhip's plain answer, ,
for in truth and plainness langeft continues gud friendf/i'p,
quhilk in this matter I pray God may lang continue, and
have your lordllhips in his keeping. OffDumfreis, the 3d.
day of September 1568.

Your lordlhips at my power
to command leifully

HERR I.S

Queen IMary to Q. Elizabeth ".

IAD MblE ma bonne femur. J'ay refceu de vos lettres,
cune mefine date; l'une, ou vous faites mention de 'ex-
ctre de lonfr. de Murra pour tenir son pretendu parlement;
qui me femble bien froid, pour obtenir plus de tollerance
"ue e m'eftois perfuadee n'avoir par voftre promeffe, quant
an'o'er donner commi.Tion de venir fans. un parlement pour
ltur peu de nombre de noblefle alors, je vous refpons, qu'lUs
:' I'S. Cott. lib. Cal. I. An OriginaL

T4

279

n'ont que troi on quatre d'atantage, qui effent aufi bi
dit leur opinion hors de parlement, qui n'a este tenu tl
pour cette effc , mais pour faire ce qu'expreffement nom
nvions requis este empefche*, qui et la forfalture de m
subjed* pour m'avoir ess fidelle, ce que je m'affuro
jufques a heir, avoir eu en promefte.de vous, par halen
ecrite a mi lord Scrup e Maiftre Knoleis vous induire a i
conre culx, voire, a let enfayre refenir; toutefois je oi
que je 'ay mal pris, j'en fiis plos marie, pour c e u f
otre lcttre qu'i me montrcrent, ct letr parole, j l' ay
divulguement affuray que pour vengeance que j'cn detGrif
si non mettre difference entre leur faux deportemens, & l
miens sinceres. Dans voftre lettre aufi datec do lou
d'Aouft, vous metties ces mot. "I think your adir
" party, uppon my sundry former tvices, will hld

parliament at all; and if they do, it Ihall be only i
"form of an assembly, to accord whom to fend into d

realm, and in what fort; for otherwise, if td llh

, proceed in manner of a parliament, with my ad d
"judgment against any person, 1 lhall not, in myit
"allow thereof; and if they shall be so overiee, tht
"you may think the fame to be as no other moment,
"the former procedures; and by flch their ralh .alwnct
" proceeding, they shall moat prejudice themfclvea; s

be afiured to find me ready to condemn them, in tbd

" doings. Sur quoy, j'ay contremande mes fcrvitm
les faiflant reirer, fouffrant felon voflre comma~de
d'tre fauffement nommes traitres, pr ceulx, qui k fl
de vray; & encore d'etre provoqnus par efaors dies,
par prinfes de mes gens & lettres, & au contraire vo
inform& e oes fubjets ont evahis ler voftreMahr
qui a fait ce rapport n'est pas homme de bien, ca
de Ssford & fan fils font & ont eftes rebelles k pai
le commencement; enquires vous, s'il n'efoient a Do
aveques alix, j'avois ofiri refpondre de f ontier, cc
me fut refif", ce qui me devroit asses defchlrg, n1
moins, pour vous faire preuve de ma fidelit, et d'
falfiti, s'il vous me fayte donner le nom des co0lpbl
l8o

& me fortifier, je commanderay mes subjects les pour-
fuine, ou si vous voules que ce foit les voftres, les miens
kur ayderont; ie vous prie m'en mander voltre volonte, au
stee mes fubjeds fidelles feront refponfables a tout ce que
lur sera m;s fu les contre vous, ni les voftres, ni les
rebellcs, defpuis que me confeillates les faire retirer. Quant
aux Francois, j'efcrivis que I'on n'en fit nulle pourfuite, car
j'efperois tant en vous, que je n'en aurois befoign,--je ne
fqeu li le did aura en mes lettres, mais je vous jure devant
Dieu que ne fqay chose du nionde de leur venue, que
ce que m'en aves manday, ni n'en ai oui de France mot
du monde, & ne le puis croire pour celt occasion, et si ils
font, c'eft ans mon fceu ni confentement, Pourquoy je
vous fupplie re me condamner fans m'ouire, car je fuis
prelt de tenir tout ce que j'ay offert a Mester Knoleis, &
rous assure que votre amitie, qu'il vous pleft m'offrir, sera
rescue avant toutes les chores du monde, quant France
fervit la pour presser leur retour a cefRe condition, que
prtnies mes alfaires en mein, en fceur, & bonne amie,
comme ma France eft en vous; mais une chose feule me
rende confife, j'ay tani d'enemis qu'ont votre oreille, la
quelle ne pouvant avoir par parolle, toutes mes acions vous
font defguifes , & falfement raportees, par quoi il m'eR
impofible de m'affurer de vous, pour les manteries qu'on
rous a fait, pour deftruire voftre bonne volonte de moy;
par quoi je defirerois bien avoir cc bien vous faire entendre
ma lincere & bonne affection, laquelle je ne puis si bien
defcrire, que mes enemis a tort ne la decolore. Ma bonne
fiur, gagnes moy, envoyes moy querir, n'entrs en jalousie
pour faulx raports de celle que ne desire que votre bonne
grace; je me remettray fur Mester Knoleis a qui je me fuis
librement defcouverte, & apres vous avoir baifCe les main,
jt prierai Dieu vous donner en fante longue & heureufe
lie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, je n'efpere pertir,
quT'veques vofre bonne grace, quoyque les menteurs men-
t"t. Ce 26 d'Aouft.

281

N'. XV. (Vol. IL p. 137.)

Queen Elizabeth to the Earl Murray ".

R IGHT trully and right well beloved cousin, wegretl
you well. Where we hear fay, that certain reports are
made in sundry parts of Scotland, that whatsoever Ihotl
fill out now upon the hearing of the Queen of Scotts cauc,
in any proof to convince or to acquit the said QuJeen cm
cerning the horrible murder of her late husband our couCn,
we have determined to restore her to her kingdom and
government, we du so much mislike hereof, as we canno
indure the fame to receive any credit: and therefore we
have thought good to assure you, that the fame is untrul
devised by the authors to our dishonour. For as we have
been always certified from our said filer, both by her lett
and mefiages, that ihe is by no means guilty or participat
of that murder, which we wiLh to be true, so surely i
ihe should be found juRly to be guilty thereof as hath be
reported of her, whereof we would be very sorry, then,
indeed, it should behove us to confider otherwise of e
cause than to satisfy her desire in retitution of ha
to the government of that Kingdom. And so we would
have you and all others think, that ihould be disposed
conceive honourably of us and our adiona

Indorfed 20 Sept. ix68.

N*. XVL (VoL IL p. i44.)
Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil, the 9th of Odobe

1568, from York ".

--_ M Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me o
Bolton, to attend upon him here Thursday last, I made m

24 Paper Office. From a copy corrread by fecrtary Cecil
s1 An Original Paper -Ofice.

erpair hitler accordingly, meaning to stay here until Monday
rct; as touching the matters of the commiflion, that his
race and the reft have from her highness, his grace hath
in:p.rted unto me of all things thereunto appertaining, and
,.it hath hitherto passed, and altho' the matters be too
i,,ihty for my weak capacity, to presume to utter any
o,;iion of mine own thereof, yet I fee that my lord Herris,
for his parte laboureth a reconciliation, to be had without
the extremity of odious accusations; my lord of Ledington
all, faith to me , that he could with there matters to be
ended in dulce maner, so that it might be done with safety;
ct the ellt \ou can conceive, by the advertisements and
writings, sent up by our commifioners.
A letter from the bishop of Ross to the Queen of

Scotts, from York, October 1568 ".

PLEIS your majesty I conferred at length with A.
ane great part of a night, who affurit me that he had
reasoned with B. this Saturday C. on the field, who de-
terminrate to him that it was the D. determinit purpore
not to end your cause at this time, but to hold the fame
ih ulfpeice, and did that was in her power, to make
the E. pursue extremity, to the effed F. and his adhe.
rent* nmight utter all they could to your dishonour, to
the effid to cause you come in disdain with the hail sub-
jtcts of this realm , that ye may be the mair unable to
aremrn any thing to hcr disadvantage. And to this effect
is all her intention. and when they have produced all they
oan a :inft you , D. will not appoint the matter instantly,
but trmnfport you up in the country, and retain you there
till Ihe think time to shew you favour, which is not likely
to be hafily , because of your uncles in France, and the
feat ile has of yourself to be her unfriend. And there-
fore their counsel is, that ye write an writing to the D.
:' Cot. ilib. Calif. C. l. a copy.

2»«

meaning that ye are informit that your' fubjefs which hs
offendit you. - This in effet that your majefy hearing
the estate of your affairs as they proceed in York, wa
informed that her majesty was informed of you, that you
could not gudely remit your fubjeds in uIch fort as the
might aedit you hereafter, which was a great caue of the
fay of this controversy to be ended. And therefore pe.
foading her D. effecually not to trft any who had made
nch narration. But like as ye had rendered you in er
bands, as most tender to you of any living, so prayit her
take ma opinion of you, but that ye wald use her corn
fell in all your affairs, and wald prefer her friendhip to
all others, as well uncles as others, and alure her to kep
that thing ye wald promise to your fubjets by her advice.
And if D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to faidfy he
in that point be removing within her realm in secret ad
quiet manner, where her G. pleased, until the time her
G. ere fully atisied, and all occasion of difedit
moved from her. So that in the an time your tab
were holden in quietness, and your true fubjedb reftor
and maintained in their own estate, and Gc other thin
tending to this effe. And affirms that they bdie
that this may be occasion to cause her credit you tht ht
offer so far; and it may come that within two or thr
months she may become better- minded to your gci
for now she is not well minded, and will not sI TO
any plealre for the caunes forelaid.

X. B. The tide of this paper is in Cecirs hnd;t
folwing key is added in another hand.

A. The laird of Lethington.
B. The Duke of Norfolk.
C. Was the day he rode to Cawood.
D. The Queen of England.
E. The Queen of Scots commiihone.
F. The earl of Murray.
284

N'. XVII. (Vol. II. p. a56.)
Deliberation of Secretary Cecil's concerning Scot.

land, Dec. 21. 1568 ".

THE best way for England, but not the eafief, that
dt Queen of Scots might remain deprived of her crown,
ad the state continue as it is.

The second way for England profitable, and not so hard.
-That the Queen of Scots might be induced, by fomo
prwafions, to agree that her son might continue king,
ecaufe he is crowned, and herself to remain also Queen *
md that the government of the realm might be committed
t such persons as the Queen of England Ihould name.,
so as for the nomination of them it might be ordered,
ht a convenient number of persons of Scotland Ihould be
t named to the Queen of England, indifferently for the
Qoeen of Scots, and for her son, that is to fay the one
bh by the Queen of Scots, and the other by the earle
f Lenox and lady Lenox, parents to the child; and
cot of those, the Queen's majesty of England to make
choice for all the officers of the realm, that are, by the
bl of Scotland, disposable by the king or Queen of the

That until this may be done by the Queen's majesty
he government remain in the hands of the earle of Mur.
ny as it is, providing he lhall not dispose of any offices or
pertuals to continue any longer but to these offered of
th premises.

That a parliament be frmmoned in Scotland by several
commandments, both of the Queen of Scots and of the
nung king.

- That hostages be delivered unto England on the

Young king's behalf, to the number of twelve persons
f the earle of Murray' part as the Queen of Scots hall
"P ptr. Ofice.

tiame; and likewise on the Queen's behalf to the like nunm
her as the earle of Murray lhall name; the fame not to b
any that have by inheritance or office cause to be in this
parliament, to remain from the beginning of the fummong
of that parliament, until three months after that parlia.
ment; which hostages thall be pledges, that the friends
of either part ihall keep the peace in all cafes, till by this
parliament it be concluded, that the ordinance which the
Queen of England shall devise for the government of te
realm (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland,
nor contrary to the laws of Scotland for any man's inhe.
ritance, as the fame was before the parliament at Edin. the
Decem. i(67) Ihal be eftablilhed to be kept and obeyedj
under pain of high treason for the breakers thereof.

That by the faine parliament also be established al

executions and judgments given agaiift any person for the
death of the late king.

- That by the fame parllaanent, a remission be made

universally from the Queen of Scota to an her contnrp
and also from every one fubjeft -o another, faring that

ftimtution be made of lands and houses, and all otkt
things heritable, that have been by either fide taken silo
them which were the owners thereofatthe committing of
Ae' Queen of Scotts to Lochlevin,
'That by the fame rarliament it be declared who fhd
be focceffors to the crown next after the Q. of Scotts ad
her issue; or else, that such right of the D. of Chatelhalt
had, at the marriage of the Q. of Scotts with the lrd
Darley, may be conserved and not prejudiced.

That the Queen of Scotts may have leave of the Quen't

majesty f England, twelve months after the said parliament
and that she shall not depart out of England, withoat ,pe-
cial licence of the Queen's majesty.

That the young king mhall be nourished and brought. up
in England, till he be years of age;

It is to be confidered, that in this cause the compoi

tio between the Queen and her fobjet may be made wit
certain articles, outwardly to be seen to the world for her

I

287

honour, as though all the parts Should come of her, and
let for the surety of contrarys, that certain betwixt her
nd the Queen's majeRy are to be concluded,

N'. XVIII. (Vol. Il. p. 159.)
Tile Queen to Sir Francis. Knolleys, as Jan.

1568-9"

W E greet you well, we mean not, at this point, by
t.' lriting, to renew that which it hath pleased God to
uake grievous to us and forryfull to yow; but forbearing
te fame as unmeet at this point, having occafon to command
iou in our service, and yow also Whilelt you are to serve
is We require yow to confider of this that followeth with
lie consideration and diligence, as hitherto yow have accuf-
tomate in our fervife; at the time of out last letters written
to low the fourteenth of this ntmonth for temovrig of the
Queen of Scots, we had unfderftandtng out of Scotland of
certin writtings sent by her from thence into Scotland,
amongst the which orie is found to contain great and mani.
set untruths touching us and others also, as shall and may
plainly appear unto yow by the copy of the fame, which
illewifewe fend yow, and because at the fame time *e were
idvertiCed, that it should be fiortly proclaimed In Scotland,
though then it was not, we thought good ArRf to remove
the Queen, before we would ditflore the fame, and then
txpet the ilTue thereof; and now, this day, by letters from
our coufln of Hunfdon we are afcertalned, that since that
fte the fame matters contained in the writings, are" pub.
lied in diverse parts of Scotland, whereupon we have
thought it very meet, for the discharge of our h6nour, and
to confound the falsehood contained in that writing, not
only to have the fame reproved by opef proclamatiod upon
our frontiers, the copy whereof we do herewith fend yow,
" aper. Office.

but alto in convenient fort to charge that Queen thereth,
so as she may be moved to declare the author thereof
nd perfaden of her to write in such slanderous fort fuac
untruths of us; and in the mean season, we have here
thyed her commissioner, knowing no other whom we nay
more probably presume to be parties hereunto, than they,
until, the Queen Ihall name some other, and acquit then;
who being geneal charged, without expressing to the
ny paicularity, do use all manner of speeches to dirchare
themlves; wherefore our pleasure is, that ye Ihll, aft
ye have well perfed the copy of this writing sent to ow,
lpeedily declare unto her, that we have good undenhandin
iven us of diverse letters and writings, sent by her into
Scotand, signed by her own hand, amongst which, on
such writing ent with her commndment exprefly a nov
it is arady publihced, as we are much troubled in mind
that a pince s

as e is having a cane in our hands so im

plicatd with difficultys and calamitys, foulitho r

cA

in her on mind, or allow of them tht fbld derife d
fdc, untrue, and improbable matters gains m, ond
honor, and fpecda to have the aventure to have be
being known so untrue to be pubiied, and you
igob fay, becafe we will not think so ill of her, u ti
hould proceed of her fell, but rather (he ath

be en c

elled therento, or by abuse nade to thinl e

te

theof to be rue, we require her, even a Ihe mylo
for o7 favour at our hands, that lhe will disburden
ftlf a much a truly lie may herein., and name
which have been the authors and perfwade thereof,
so ihe fall make as great amends to u as the cafe
require; after you have thiu far proceeded, andl hd
answer of her, whether fhie hall deny the wniting a
intey, or name any that have been the advifen lt
you shall 6y unto her that we have layed herco
sionen here, until we may have some answer theea
becan we cannot but impute to them some put of
evil dealing, until by her answer the authors rm
known; and as soon as you can have dirc a

fóom
a8s

fbom her, we pray.you to return us the fame; for aS thd
Cfe sandeth, we cannot bat Be much disquieted with it,
baring our honour so deeply touched contrary to any in.
,tiin in us, and for any thing we know in our judg
tent thc earl of Murray and others named in the fame
niting void of thought for the nratters, to them therein
imputed; you may impart to the Queen of Scots eithef
te contents of the slanderous letter, or Thew her the
copy t0 read it, and you may also impart this matter td
the lord Scroop, to join with you there as you flall think
met.
Sir Francis Knrolleys to Queen Elizabeth, froni

lrWetherby, the 28th January i568 "'

-I WILL suppress my bwn grieifs, ind pals thei
or with silence, for the present learninghf ybur inajeft:
,and for this Queen's afifwet to the copie tif her fuppoted
ktnr sent unto Scotland, I mull add this untb my brother's

ter, sent unto Mr. Secretaty yefternight late ih procefr
f tdme she did not deny but that the sirs lifes contained id
dt fame copie, was agreeable to a letter that she had sent
mto Scotland, which touched my lord of Mhrtay's prohnifd
o deliver her son intd your majeflt's hands, and tb avoid
at the fame thould not be done without eir cionrentt
mde her, she faith, tb write in that behalf; ihe laith
iso that she wrote that they flould cause i proclainadio
to be made to stir her people to defend my lord bs Murray'd
brot and purpose, for dellvering of her taid son, and
impugne his rebellious government, as lie termed it i but
oe utterly denyeth to have written any of the othet
landerous patt of the said letter tOuching yOut imajeftyi
fh fid alfa, that Ihe fufpeded that a Frenchman, noW

Scotland, might be the abthor of fonie Scotch lettert
Wised in her name, but she would not allow mr te *fitC
h for any part of her answer.
" n Original. Paper. Office,
VOL, IIL

V

iS#

N'. XIX. (Vol..II. p 68.}
Sir Nicholas Throkmorton to the right honour.

able the Lord of Liddington ".

OUR letter of the Id of July, I have received
th of the ame. For answer whereunto you Ihall ader.

fRand, that friends here to my lord regent and you do
wish such a concurrence in all doings, as in matter ia
circunances there arise no dissension, or at the least,
no more nor other than the difference of countries da
neccffarily require. We here do think convenient that u
few delays be used u may be, for the conrummation of the
matter in hand, which principally to advance, your al
lowance, prosecution, and speedy promotion inScoiad,
is most requisite, for you are so wife, and well auaintd
with the tate of the world, and with all our humoun, a
you know thatfome do allow and disallow for relon, fto
for refped of multitde, some for refped of perCfon, W
so the cause is to go forward as men do like to et it
forward. You are not to seek that some will use cauions,
some neutrality, some delays, and some vwiU plainly
pugne it. And yet all and every of there forts will ak
their doings, when they Ihall fee the regent and hi f
vourers accord with the best and greate part there, lI
agree with the iclft and tronget party here. Tho
matter has taken its beginning here, upon deep and weih
considerations, for the weil of both the princes and the
realms, as well prefendy, as in time to come, yet it
thought most expedient, that the regent and realm of SoJ
land, by you, &hould propose the matter to the Quiee
sovereign, if you like to use convenience, good orde,
be difpoed to leave but a cfar, and no wound of tl h
pat. I would be glad that this my letter Ibould cW
your hands before the convention, whereat it fearns y

3' ZO- ofJuly 15ó9. From the Origia&L

Qteen's restoration and marriage to the duke oof borfolk
hould he propounded, either to wynne in them both allow.
Lce or rejection. To which proceedings, because you pray
se to write frankly, I fay and reason thus, methinketh
so use a preposterous order, to demand the content of
uch persons, in such matters, as their minds to a good
ad hath rather been felt or prepared, and therefore there
galt needs follow either a universal refusal or factious divilion
imongIt you, whereby a bloultering intelligence must need&
come to Queen Elizabeth of the intended marriage from
Kence, which ought to have been secretly and advisedly
ropounded unto her highness; hereby you fee then the
nening is, by this dealing, her majesty Ihall be made inexor.
abe and so bring the matter to such passe, as this which
lould have wrought surety, quietness, and a flay to both
Queens and their realms, Ihall augment your calamity, and
rnw us your best friends into divorfe with you and into
nhappy division amongst ourselves; for you may not on-
· re that the matter is now in deliberation, but expecteth
pad occasion for executing; fare I am you do not judge
llenderly of the managing of this matter. as to think we
brenot catl the worst, or to enter therein so far with-
ot the assistance of the nobility, the ablelt, the wiset,
ad the mightiell of this realm except Queen Elizabeth:
ai hhom it hath been concealed untill you , as the fittedf
riler, might propound it to her on the behalf of the
ent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far master
nodles defamations do carry them of Queen Elizabeth's
tions, and mnailer fecrcrary's, to afltil the regent and
suppress the Q(ueen of Scotts, I know not, nor is it not

ierll; but do afruredly think, that her majesty will
r her surety, the tranquillity of her reign, and the
rfervation of her people, bcfore any device , which may
ceed from vain discourse, or imperfections of passions,
insconfiJerate affections And as for Mr. Secretary,
are not to learn, that as he liketh not go too fafl
e, so he cG;'etcth not to tarry too far behind, and fpe-
'5 ihen tie reliques be of no great value or power.

e9t .

If I could as well afrure you of his magnnimity, a
confancy, as of his present conformity, 1 would fay con.
fidenty, you may repose as well of him in this matter,
as of the duke of Norfolk, the earls of Arundel, Pce.
broke, Leicter, Bedford, Shrewsbury ,and the reft of th
nobility; all which do embrace and protefte the acom.
plilhment of this cafe. I have, according to your advice
written presently to my lord Regent, with the fame zca
and care of his well doing that I owe to him, whom I lovr
and honour. Mr. Secretary hath allured unto him te
Queen of Scotand's favour of good opinion, wherewi
he feemeth to be well fatisfy'd. If your credit be, a
Utra, hasen your coming hither, for it is very ne
that you were here presently. Q. Elizabeth both d
write to my lord Regent in such fort, as he may perc
Mr. Woodrs discourses of her majefy's afetion to
vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwise bent than he con
tnrcth of him, the effe~ of which her majesty's letter
lhan underfiand, by my lord Lcicefter's letter unto you
this diqfach. At the court, zoth July *569.

N. XX. (Vol. I. p. 170.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L.

probab.d Lord Burligb '.

- B E C A USE I fee that great advantage is toki
small occasions, and that the mention of the mi
betwixt the Queen my sovereign's mother, and the
of Norfolk hadh this while past been very frequent
both the realms, and then I myself to be spoken of
a motioner, which 1 perceive is at the las come to
majeily's ears; I will, for fatsfation of her high
and the discharge of my duty towards her majefy,
fft unto you my interest, and medlg in that

' xs69. IHar. Lib. 37 .
B . . 43.

son the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is preju.
Iicial to her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king
my forereign , this his realm, and me. What conferences
as betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that
were with me within the realm of England, I am not able
to declare; but I am no wife forgetful of any thing that
palled betwixt hun and me, either at that time, or since.
And to the end het Majesty may understand how I have
ben dealt with, in this matter, I am compelled to touch
ame circumltances, before there was any mention of her
mrriage. In York, at the meeting of aUl the commiflion-
ms, I found very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and
others her hignefs's commissioner in the beginning of the
auce, as in the making of the others to proceed incerely,
and so furth. During which time, I entered, into general
fpech, flicking at our, jur defence in the matters that
were objected againfi us, by the said Queen's commirf
Goners looking certainly for no other thing, but summary
cognition in the cause of controversy , with a final decla.
ation to have followed. Upon a certain day the lord
Ithington secretary rode with the duke to Howard, what
rrpofe they had. I cannot fay, but that night Lithingtoa
returning, and entering in conference with me upon the
Ihte of our action., I was advised by. him to. pa&l to, the
duke, andl require familiar conference, by the which I might
bae some feeling to. what ilue our matters would tends
According to which advice., having gotten time and place
convenient in the gallery of the house where the duke, was
lodged, after renewing of our first acquaintance made at
knerick, the time before the afize of Leith, and fonme
Ipeeches palsed betwixt us; he began to fay to me, how he
iEngland had favour and credit', and I in Scotland, had. will
and friendnhip of many, it was, to be thought there could
be none more fit inftrumenta, to travel for the.continuance
of the amity betwixt the. realms, than we two. And lb
tht discourse upon the present state of both., and. how I
nu entered in that action tending so ftr to. the Queen's
difionour, I was willed by him to confider bow matters

V

$99

tood in this, what honour I had received of the Pem,
and what inconveniences her defamation in the matters laid
to her charge might breed to her posterity. Her refped
was not litte to the crown of England, there was but one
heir. The Hamiltons my unfriends, had the next trfped
and that I Ihould esteem the ifluc of her body wuid be the
more affedionate to me and mine, than 'any other dnt
cold attain to that crown. And so it lhoold be metee,
that fle affirmed her dimiflion made in Lochkvin, and e
to abfitnd the letters of her hand write, that Ihe should ot
be defamed in England. My reply to that was, how the
matter had passed in parliament, and the letters fee of many,
so that the abftrating of the fame could not then fecurler
to any purpose, and yet should we, in that doing, bri1
the igrominy upon us. Affirming it wouldnot befiti for
that way to proceed, feeing the Queen's majefly of E
land was not made privy to the matter as e oh a
to be, in refped we were purposely cwime in England for
that end, and for the -of the grants of our cause Th
duke's answer was, he would take in hand to handle m.
ters well enough at the court. After this, on the oco
ion of certain articles, that were required to be refolod
on, before we entered on the declarationof the rvy
ground of our action, we came up to the court; yre
fume new commifioners were adjoined rm the former, nd
the hearing of the matter ordained to be in the pab
ment-houfe at Weftminfler, in presence of kwichb c.
mifioenr of the said Queen, and ---through the-
rebuking of the Queen of England's own commifonen,
we uttered the whole of the action, and produced fd
evidences, letters, and probation, aswebad, chi imi
move the Queen's majesty to think. w fl . o0 ock
Whereupon expeting her'highnefs declaration, and feal
no great likelihood of the (mie to be' suddenly lim,
daily motions then made to come to an iccord with te hi
Queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mea -
son . Randing in hazard and danger, we were put to tbe ir
temoft point of our wit, to imngine whiereto the mat
t94

vould tend, tho' albeit we had left nothing undone for
uRitifcation of our causes, yet appeared no end, but
continual motions made to come to some accord with the
Queen, and restore her to whole or half reign. I had no
other answer to give them, but that 1 should neither do
against conscience or honour in that matter. Notwith.
tanding fceing this my plain answer wrought no end, nor
dispatch to us , and that I was informed that the duke
began to mislike of me, and to speak of me, as that I had
reported of the said Queen irreverently, calling her --- '
and murderer; I was advised to pass to him, and give
him good words and to purge myself of the things ob.
ijeed to me, that I 1hould not open the sudden entry of
his evil grace, nor have him to our enemy--- conlider-
ing his greatness. It being therewithal whispered, and
Ilewed to me, that if I departed, he Handing discontented
ad not satisfied, I might peradventure find such trouble
in my way, as my throat might be cut before 1 came to
Berrick And therefore since it might well enough ap-
pear to her marriage, I Ihould not put him in utter despair,
that my good will could not be had therein. So few days
Ibdore my departing I came to the park in Hampton court,
nlbre the duke and I met together, and there I declared
onto him, that it was come to my ears, how some mir.
icport should be made of me to him, as that I flould
fink irreverently and rashly of the said Queen my fove-
rtign's mother, such words as before expressed, that he
night ---" thereby my affedtions to be so alienate from
her, as that I could not love her, nor be content of her
preferment, howbeit he might perfwade himself of the con-
Inry, for as she once was the person in the world that I
loved beR, having that honour to be so near unto her, and
hkiing received such advancement and honour by her, I
las not so ungrate or. so unnatural ever to wi(h her body

olnm, or to speak of her as was untruly reported of

at, (howsoever the truth was in the self) and as to the

;' Probably ddilerer.
" Probablly fusil.

V4
!

preferation of her son, now my sovereign, had moved
me to enter into this cause, and that her own preling was
the occafon of that was uttered to her -- ' whensoever
God Ihonld move her heart to repent of her bypast bha.
viour and life, and after her known repentance, that she
lbould be separate from that ungodly and unlawful mar.
riage that she was entered in, and then after were joined
with such a godly and honourable a personage, at sere
affedioned to the true religion, and whom we might mitl,
I could find in my heart to love her, and to hcw her t
great pleasure, favour. and good will, as ever I did in my
life; and in cafe, he should be that personage, thre wa
none whom I could better like of. the Queen - o --
of England being made privy to the matter, and te aUlo.
ing thereof, which being done, I should labour in all thing
that I could, to her honour and pleasure, that were not
prejudicial to the king my sovereign's eflate, and pnaed
him not to think otherwise of me, for my affeAion w
rather buried and hidden within me, awaiting until G0d
should diret her to know herself, that utterly alienated
and abftraced from her; which he seemed to accept in
very good part, faying, Earl of Murray thou thinks ol m
that thing, whereunto I will make none in England or Scot
land privy, and thou haft Norfolk's life in thy hand.
So departing, I came to my lodging, and by the wa
and all night, I was in continual thought and agitatio
of mind, how to behave myself in that weighty matter;
first, imagining whereunto this lhould tend, if it wer
attempted without the Queen's majesty of England's kno-
ledge and good will, rhis realm and I myself in particulr
having received such favour and comfort at her highotfsi
hands, and this whole ile such peace and quietness, fCin
Qod poffelfed her majesty with her crown. And on
the other part, feeing the duke had difclored him to °ia
protesting, none other were or should be privy to 0
speech, I tho't I could not find in my heart to utter anl
thing that might endanger him; moved to the utted

4 Probably disdimo'r.
z96

with these cogitations, and all desire of sleep then removed,
I pra!ed God to fend me some good relief and outgate,
to my discharge, and fatistation of my troubled mind,
»hich I found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a
day or two thereafter, I entered in conversation with my
lord of Leicester , in his chamber at the court, where
he began to find fIrange with me, that in the matter I
nude so difficult to him, landing so precisely on confer-
rence, and how when I had in my communication with
the duke, come so far--" and there he made some dif-
course iith me, about that which was talke betwixt us, I
perceiving that the duke had -- the matter to my lord
f Leicester, and thinking me thereby discharged at the
duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame communi-
cation in every point to my lord of Leicelfer, who desired
me to shew the fame to the Queen's majesty, which I
refued to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her
highness any thing, that he as one -- by her majesty,
and for many benefits received at her highness's hands is
obliged to with her well, should make declaration of the
fame to her majesty, as I underhand by some speech of
her highness to me, he did. This my declaration to the
duke was the only cause, that Raid the violence and trouble
prepared for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways
understood. The fame declaration I was obliged to
enew lince in i ritings of -- sent to my servant John
Wood. The fum whereof, I trust, he shewed the duke,
and frmething also 1 wrote to himself, for it was tho't this
Ihould redeem some time, that the duke should not fud-
denly declare him our enemy, for his greatness was oft
laid before me, and what friendship he had of the chief of
the nobility in England, so that it might appear to the
Queen's muajefty of England-f o cold towards us, and doing
nol;ing publickly that might seem favourable for us, we
had fime cause to fufpet that her highness flould not be
ontrarious to the marriage when it should be proposed to
her. he fllarp message sent by her majeRty with the lord
" Probably difrelrd.

297

Boyd, who had the like commission from the duke tending
so far to the said Queen's preferment, as it were propufng
one manner of conditions from both, gave us to think that
her highness had been foreseen in the duke's design, and
that ihe might be induced to allow thereof. But howbeit
it was devised in England, that the lord of Lethington
should come as from me, and break the matter to her high.
ness, as her majesty in a letter declared that The looked for
his coming, yet that devise proceeded never of me, nor
the noblemen at the convention could nowise accord to hin
fending, nor allow of the matter motioned, but altogether
mifliked it, as bringing with the fame great inconveniencies
to the surety and quietness of this whole ife; for our pro.
ceedings have declared our milliking and disallowance of
the purpose from the beginning, and if we had pleaed he
was ready for the journey. And in likewise it was devied
to give consent, that the-- "between the said Qujen
and Bothwell, should be suffered to proceed in this ream,
as it was desired by the said lord Boyd, by reason we could
not underhand what was the Queen's majesty's pluafr,
and allowance in that behalf- And whereas ye mean,
that her highness was not made privy of any such intention,
the fault was not in me. The firit motion being declared,
as I have written, to my lord of Leiceter, and by him
imparted to her majeRty, so far as I could perceived by
some speech of her bighnefs's to me, before my departing.
Thus I have plainly declared how I have been dealt wital
for this marriage, and how just necessity move me not to
require diredly, that which the duke appeared so-
unto. And for my threatnings, to assent to the fame, I
have expressed the manner; the persons that laid the matter
before me, were of my own company. But the duke fmce
hath spoken, that it was his writing which saved my life a
that time. In conclusion I pray you persuade her miajey,
that the let no speeches nor any other thing pased and
objected to my prejudice, move her majesty to alter be
favour- towards me, or any ways to doubt of my affard

i3 Probably diiorct.
29t

conRancy towards her highners, for in any thing wl:ich
may tend to her honour and surety, I will, while I live,
bestow myself, and all that will do for me, notwithflanding
my hazard or danger, as proof Ihould declare, when her
majesty finds time to employ me.

N'. XX. (Vol. II. p. 182.)

'il'iam Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of
Leicester, March zoth, 1570, from Ledington ".

THE great desolation threatned to this whole realm, be
the divisions thereof in dangerous factions, doth press me
to frame my letters to your lordship, in other fort, then
were behovefull for me, if I had no other refped, but
only to maintain my private credit; therefore I am driven
to furnif them with matter, which I know not to be plau-
fble, thereupon by misconstruing my meaning, some there
may take occalion of offence, thinking that I rather utter
my own padions, than go about to inform your lordship
truly of the (late; but I trufR my plain dealing Ihall bear
record to the sincerity of my meaning; to make the fame
fefGible, I will lay before your lordship's eyes, the plat of
this country; which first is divided into two factions, the
one pretending the maintenance of the king's reign, the
other alledging the Queen to have been cruelly dealt withall,
and unjustly deprived of her state; the former is composed
of a good number of nobility , gentlemen, and principal
burroughs of the realme, who shall have, as Mr. Randolph
beareth us in hand, the Queen's majesty your sovereign's
a!!owance and protection; the other hath in it fume most
principall of the nobility, and therewithall, good numbers
," the inferior fort, throughout the whole realme, which
alo look assuredly that all kings do allow their quarrel and
*ill aid them accordingly. What consequence this divilion
"' An Original.

299

will draw Ter it, I leave it to your lordlhips consideration
there is fallen out another division, accidentally, by my
lord regent's death, which is like to change th e tatof the
other two factions, to encreafe the one, and diminish the
other, which is grounded upon the regiment of the realm.
Some number of noblemen arpire to the government, pre.
tending right thereto by reason of the Queen's demilion of
the croun, and her commiflion granted it that time for the
regiment during the king's minority; another fation doth
altogether repine against that diviGon, thinking it neither
fit nor tolerable, that three or four of the meanest fort
amongst the earls, (hall presume to challenge to themielves
a rule over the whole realrne, the next of the blood, the
first in rank, the greatest alway both for the antientry of
their houres, degree, and forces, being neglected; this
order they think preposterous, that the uneaner fort shall
be placed in public fundcion to command, and the greater
Iball continue as private men to obey; besides that, they
think if the commiflion, had in the beginning been valew.
able, (which the most part will not grant), yet can it not
be extended to the prgfent, for that the conditions thee.
nto annexed are ceased, and so the ffect of the whole
void; the latter part of this division hath many prtcen.
ces, for besides the Queen's faion, which is wholly on
that fide, a great number of these that have heretofore pro.
fefed the king's obedience, do favour the fame, and will
not yield to the government of the other · whole preferment
for refpedts tl*y millike, when the Queen's facion (hall
be increased, with a part of the king's, and these not of
least substance, and yow may judge what is like to ensue;
an other incident is like to move men to enter in further
discourses, it is given out here in Scotland that the Queen's
majesty is setting forth some forces towards the border,
which (hall enter this realm, to countenance these, that
aspire to the regiment, and suppress the contrary fafion,
and bruits are spread, that the fame (hall be here out of
hand; these that think themselves of equal force with their
contrary fation at home, are rather an overmatch to then,

vet not able to encounter with the forces of another prince,
rather than yield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take ad-
vi.e of necellty, and evil councillors, and seek also the
mailtenance of some foreign prince, whereby her majesty
(altho no further inconvenient were to be feared) must be
driven to excellive charges, and it would appear there
were a conspiracy of all the elements at one time to set
us together by the ears, for now when the rumour of
oaur forces coming towards the border is spread abroad,
even at the fame time is arrived at Dumbarton, a galzeon
with a messenger sent exprefly from the king of France, to
that part of the nobility that favours the Queen, to learn
the Rate of the country, and what support they lack or
desire, either for furtherance of her affairs, or for their
own safety; alfuredly this meflage will be well received,
and suffered accordingly, this is the present state of Scot-
land. Now, if your lordlhip would also know my opinion,
how to choice the belt, as the cafe standeth; I will in
that also fatisfie your lordlhip, I am required from them to
deal plainly, and your lordship shall judge whether I do so
or not; for I think it plain dealing, when I limply utter
my judgment, and go not about to disguise my intents.
1 truf the Queen's majesty hath a desire to retain at her
devotion the realme of Scotland, which The hath gone
about to purchase, with beflowing great charges, and the
lois of some of her people; this desire is honourable for her
highness, profitable for both the countrys, and of none to
be disallowed; specially if it be (as I take it) to have the
amity of the whole realme, for it is not a portion of Scot-
land can serve her turn, nor will it prove commodious
fur her to suit the friendlhip of a faflion of Scotland, for
in so doing, in gaining the bell, she may lore the more,
and the fame would bring all her actions with us in sus-
picion, if The fliould go about to nourish factions aumongst
us, which meaning I am sure never entered into her ma-
jety's heart; then if it be the friendship of the whole she
doth demand, let her not, for pleasure of one part, go
about to overthrow the remnant , which will not be so

301

faifable, as rome may give her to understand; but rather,
by way of treaty , let her go about to pacify the whole
ftte, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all by
good means to an uniformity, so shall she give us all oc.
cafion to think well of her doings, that The tendeth our
wealth, and provokes us universally to wish unto her ma.
jefty a most prosperous continuance; by the contrary, if,
for the pleasure of a few, she will fend forces to suppress
there whom they mislike, and so consequently offend ma.
ny; men be not so faint hearted, but they have courage
to provide for their own safety, and not only will embrace
the means partly offered, but will also procure further, at
the hand of other princes. This for mine own part, I do
abhor, and protest I desire never to fee forces of strangers
to set foot within this land, yet 1 know not what point
necelfity may drive men into; as if men in the middle of
the sea were in a ship, which suddenly Ihould be set on
fire, the fear of burning would make them leap into the
sea, and soon after the fear of the water would drive them
to delve again to the fired ship, so for avoiding present
evil, men will many times be inforced to have recourse to
another, no less dangerous. TruRt me forces will not bring
forth any good fruit to her majesty's behove, it must be
fume way of treaty shall serve the turn, wherein by my
former letters your lordflip doth know already what is my
judgment; you fee how plainly I do write, without con-
fideration in what part my letters may be taken, yet my
hope is that such as will favourably interpret them, Ihll
think that I mean as well to her majesty, and that realme,
as these that will utter other language. I with the con-
tinuance of the amity betwixt the two countrys, without
other refpedf , and Xill not conceal from her majesty any
thing, to my knowledge, tending to the prejudice thereof;
if 1 (hall perceave her majesty taking frank dealings in evil
part, I shall from thenceforth forbear; in the mean fealon
I will not cease to trowble your lordship, as I ihall have
occaLoa to write, and so I take my leave of your lordship.
!o2

N'. XXII. (Vol. II. p. 189.
Lecter of Queen Elizabeth to the earle of Suffeks,

July 2d, 1570 ".

RIGHT truy and well beloved cousin, we greet you
»ll, this day we have received your letters of 28 the
lilt morth , with all other letters, sent from Scotland,
ail nieniioned in your letters, whereunto answer is de-
lreld to be given before the tenth of this month; which
is a very short time, the weightiness of the matters , and
the dilfance of the places confidered; nevertheless we
hbe, as the Ihortnefs could susser it, resolved to give this
afver following, which we will that yow, by warrand
h'reotf hall cause to be given in our name to the earl of
Lencx and the reft of the noblemen conveened with him.
\\here it is by them, in their letters, and writings al-
itdged, that for lack of our resolute answer, concerning the
eliablifhing of the regiment of the realm, under their young
king, great inconveniencies have happened, and therefore
!hey have deferred now at their last convention to deter-
mine of the famine, who shall have the place of govern-
our, until the 2lft this month, before which time they
trquire to have our advise, in what person or persons the
Eternnment of that realme shall be established, we accept
Setr thankfully the good will and reputation they have of
ts, in yielding so frankly to require and follow our advise
i a nma;er, that toucheth the itate of their king, their
lves, and realm so near, wherein as we perceive, that by
:.r former forbearing to intermeddle therein, they have
tken some discomfort, as though that we would not have
:'rd to their Hate and surety, so on the other part, they
" their wifdonrs ought to think, that it might be by the
'lhal: orld evil interpreted in us to appoint them a form
.: Sevcrnment, or a governour by name, for that howfo-
'' rldeir, MS. Ililory, vol. 2. p. 1S9.

303

ever we fiould mean well if we should do so, yet it could
not be without some jealousy in the heads of the estate, no.
bility, and community of that realm, that the government
thereof should be by me specially named, and ordained; so
as finding difficulty on both parts, and yet mifliking moR
that they should take any discomfort by our forbearing to
show our mind therein, we have thought in this fort for to
proceed, confidering- with ourselves how now that realm
had been a good space of time ruled in the name of their
king, and by reason of his base age, governed heretofore
by a very careful and honourable person, the earle of Mlt.
ray, untill that by a mischievous person, (an evil exam.
pie) he was murdered, whereby great disorder and con.
fusion of necefity had, and will more follow, if determin.
ation be not made of some other special person, or per.
foas, to take the charge of governor, or superior ruler,
fpeiall for adminifration of law and justice, we cannot
but very well allow the desire of there lords to have some
special governor to be chosen; and therefore being well
assured , that their own understanding of all others is bet
to confider the fate of that realm, and to discern the
abilities and qualities of every person meet and capable for
such a charge, we shall better fatisfie ourselves, whom dty
by their common consent shall first choose, and appoint to
that purpose, then of any to be by us aforehand uncertainly
named, and that because they ihall perceave that we have
care of the person of their king, who by nearness of blood,
and in refped of his so young years, ought to be very
tender and dear to us, we shall not hide our opinion from
them, but if they shall all accord to name his grandfather,
our cousin, the earl of Lenox to be governor alone, or
jointly with others, ( whom we hear to be in the mean time
by their common consent appointed lieutenant-general) reaon
moveth us to think that none can be chosen in that whole
realme, that hall more desire the preservation of the king,
and be more meet to have the government for his safetY,
being next to him in blood of any nobleman of that realm
or lfewhere; and yet hereby, we do not mean to prefcriw

tO
4or

othem this choice, except they shall of themrelves fully
;j freely allow thereof; furthermore we would have thent

,:ll asured, that whatsoever reports of devises, are, or
',;i be spread or invented, that we have already yielded

Bar mild to alter the fate of the king or government of
th:rrline, the fame are without just cause or ground by
cs gien, for as we have already advertized them, that
:!:::ouh we have yielded to hear, which in honour we
c.aJI not refuse, what the Queen of Scotts on her part
hI! fay and osTcr, not only for her own afrurance, but
fir the wealth of that realm, yet not knowing what the
f.l: will be, that fliall be offered, we mean not to break

t? or.er of law and jultice, by advancing her cause, or

prj,.',ilig her contrary, before we (hlll deliberately and
a,'r l!y lee, upon the hearing of the whole, Come place
nr::'iry, and jult cause to do; and therefore finding that
rlilne ruled by a king, and the fame affirmed by laws of

r:' rea!me, and thereof invested by coronation and other

i::r itis used and requisite and generally so received by
C.: Xhole eltates, we mean not by yielding to hear the
icalaints or informations of the Queen against her Con,
tao any aCt whereby to make conclusion of governments,

L:t as ,e have found it, so to susser the fame to continue,

5,1 noe to fu;rer it to be altered by any means that we
;i! i'iloehle, as to our honour it doth belong, as by your
I.. ldions hath nnnifeftly appeared, untill by forme julticec
etd !.,r cause, we shall be directly induced otherwise to
d're our opinion; and this we would pave them to
-..;. to be our determination and course that we mean
to it,'l, whereon we trust they for their king may fee
to; plainly and honourably we mean to proceed, and

. little cause they have to doubt of us, vhatfoever to
: contrary they have or fha!l hear; and on the other
p:n, we pray them of their wisdoms to think how unh(.
'trjble, and contrary to all huinan order it were for us,

P 1 the Qicen of S;oiland doth so many ways require

t, ' e.ir ler C;,i, and doth offer to be ordered by us in
t:. ;w, i:s \>eil for matters betwixt ourfclves and her,

V."1 i. li, X

3o$

as betwixt herself and her Con and his party of that reale,
againit which offers no reason could move us to refuse to
give ear, that we Ihould aforehand openly and directly,
-before the causes be heard and confidered, as it were, give
a judgment or sentence either for ourselves or for them
whom !he maketh to be her contraries. Finally ye Ihll
admonish them, that they do not, by misconceiving out
good meaning towards them, or by indirect afernions of
their adversary grounded on untruths, hinder or weaken
their own cause, in such fort, that our good meaning
towards them lhall not take such effec towards them, as
they Shali deire, or themselves have need of. Allthi
our answer ye lhall cause be given them, and let then
know, that for the lhortnefs of time, this being the nd
of the second of this month, we neither could make any
longer declaration of our mind, nor yet write any feverd
letters, as if time might have served we would have done
2 July, I 7°

N'. XXIII. (Vol. II. p. 189.)
The bilhop of Ross, to secretary Lidington trom

Chattifworth ".

I H AVE received your letters dated the 26th of Ml,
here at Chattifworth, the to of January, but en h(
receipt thereof I had written to you at length, lile X
the Queen did with my lord Levingfton, by the which io
will be resolved of many points contained in your fai
leiter. I writ to you that 1 received your letter and erc
dit from Thomas Cowy at London, and sent to Leicet
to know the Queen of England's mind whether P)
Ihould come here or not. He sent me word, that hte »i
no ways have you come as one of the gommifiront
because she is yet offended with you; and therefodt

' L Sth Jane ISo.

yppears good that ye come not hither, but remain where you
re, t uCe your wisdom and diligence, as may best
dvance the Queen's affairs, for I perceive your weill and
,fary depends thereon, in respect of the great feid and
nlimity born against you by your Scots people, and the
reat heirhfip taken of your father's landis; both were sure
demonltrations of their malice. Yet I am encouraged by
tour flout and deliberate mind. Assure yourself no dili-
tgnce shall be omitted to procure supports forth off all
arti where it may be had. We will not refute the aid
leither of Papist, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice ; and
a this end, during this treaty let all things be well
Icpared. And feeing my lord Seaton is desirous to go into
slanders, the Queen thinks it very necessary that he so do,
for the duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the
lig of Spain to give support, and I am Cure that there
le shall hare aid both of Slanders and the pope, for it
lides only on the coming of some men of countenance,
t procure and receive the fame. He muff needs tarry
tere, on the preparations thereof, during the treaty,
alich vill be a great furtherance to the fame here. The
Quien has already written to the duke D'Alva for this
rtd, advertizing of his coming; there is certain fums
t money coming sot support of the Englishmen, as I wrote
to nou before from the pope. Whereupon I would he
ad a general commifnion to deal for them, and teceivd
rch fums as ihall be given. The means Ihall be found
to cause you be anfuerit of the rums you writ for, to be
oilpoift upon the furnilhing of the cafle of Edenburgh,
being, obme honest and true man were sent to Slanders
receive i:, as laid is, which I would you prepared and
n. Orders fh.,ll be taken for the metals as you writ of.
e h.ve preponit your avyce in entering to treat with the
eat of Eneland, for retiring of her forces puntyoally
lick of aid. Your anivers to the Englishmen are tho'c
rsi gnol, but above all keep you weil out of their hands,
tt't car, eltote prudentes ficut serpentes. You may
csperience with the hard dealing with me, how ye

X S

3o7

would be uscd if ye were here, and yet I am not forth f
danger, being in medio nationis pravan; always no tear
r-ith God's grace, ihall make me shrink from her majlct's
gervice. Since the Queen of England has refused that yo
come here, it appears to me quod nondom eft fedata ma
itia amorreorum, &c. and therefore if Atbol or Cathen
might by any means be procured to come, they were th
mot fit for the purpose, Rothes were also meet, if heand
I were not both of one firname; so the treaty would gt
the less credit either in Scotland or here. Therefore as,
and fend the best may serve the turn, and fail not Robtt
Melvil come with them, whoever comes, for o is the
Queen's pleasure; in my laR packet, with James Fogc,
to you, in the beginning of May, I sent a letter of ie
Queen's own hand-writing to him, which I trua e re-
ceived. I am sorry ye come not for the great relief I hop
to have had by your presence , for you could well lai
handled the Queen of England, after her humour, as yo
were wont to do. The reft I refer to your good wisdom
praying God to fend you health. From Chattifworth te
alth of January.

N'. XXIV. (Vol. I p. 211.)
The declaration of John Cais to the lords ol

Grange and Lethington zoungare upon the st
day of Ot. 1571.

W HEREAS you desire to know the Queen's maji'
pleasure, what Ihe will do for appealing of these cons
verfies, and therewith has offered yourselves to be It h
commandment, touching the common tranquillity of
whole isle, and the amity of both realms; her pleasure
in this behalf, that ye Ihould leave off the maintenrie
this civil discord, and give your obedience to the krf
whom she will maintain to the utmoR of her power.

And in this doing, she will deal with the regent and the
line's party, to receive you into favour, upon reasonable
conditions for security of life and livings.

Also she fays that the Queen of Scotts, for that The has
praised with the pope and other princes, and also aith
ter own fubhjecs in England, great and dangerous treasons
,iintl the fiate of her own country, and alto to the de-
tunion of her own person, that The shall never bear au-
thority, nor have liberty while The lives.

If ye refuse these gentle offers, now offered unto you,
Ihe nill presently aid the king's party, with men, ammu-
,iion, and all necessary things, to be had against you.

V hereupon her majelly requires your answer with speed ,
lithout any delay.

N". XXV. (Vol. II. p. 223.)
Articles sent by Knox to the general Assembly

August 5th, 1572 ".

FIRST, desiring a new ad to be made ratifying all things
coiccrning the king and his obedience that were enacted
of before without any change, and that the ministers who
ble contravened the former acs be corrected as accordeth.

That fute he made to the Regent's grace and nobility
mainaining the king's cause, that whatsoever proceedeth
in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk be not
prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they especially of the
miniletrs, that have been robbed of their potfeflions within
the kirhi, during the time of the troubles, or otherwise dung
and inju:ed, may be restored.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any bilhoprick or
Other benefice be given to any person, contrary to the
tecor of the acs made in the time of the first regent of
;ood memory, and they that are given contra the said adts,
' Cahlcrw. MS. Hilory, Vol. ^. 356.

X 3

or to any unqualified person, may be revoked and mad
pull by an act of secret council, and that all bilhepricb
so vacand may be presented, and qualified persons nomi
thereunto, within a year after the vaking thereof, acd
ing to the order taken in Leith by the commillionen
the nobility and of the kirk in the month of January aR
and in special to complain upon the giving of bifboprick
Ross to the lord Methven.

That no penions of benefices, great ot fmral, be gie

by simple donation of any lord regent, without conlent
the poffeftor of the said benefices having tittle thereto, and
the admifiion of the superintendent or commifllonen of the
province where this benefice lyeth or of the bilhops la.
fully eleded according to the said order taken at Leihl
and desire an act of council to be made thereupon, until
the next parliament, wherein the famine may be fpeciall
inaded, with inhibition to the lords of felfion to give any
letters or decreets, upon such simple gifts of benefices or
pentions not being given in manner above reheared,
that the kirk presently assembled declare all such gifts nll
so far as lyeth in their power.

That the sirs form of presentation to benefices, w*id

were in the fft and second regent's time, be not changd
as now it is commonly; but that this clause be containdt
in the presentation, that if the persons presented make na
refdance, or be slanderous or found unworthy either in lif
or do~rine by the judgment of the kirk (to which alsli
he shall be subjed) or meet to be transported to nonttl
room at the fight of the kirk, the said presentation m
all that shall fall thereupon shall be null and of no ft
nor efft; and this to have place also in the noniniia
of the bishops.

That an adt be made in this aflembly, that all thins don

in prejudice of the kirk's assumption of the third, eitha b
papists or others, by giving of fews, liferents, or taks,o
any otherwise difponing the said a(fumed thirds, be dedla
null with a solemn protestation, the whole kirk difaftn
thereto.
3te

That an act be made decerning and ordaining all bishops,
;lnmitted to the order of the kirk now received, to give
account of their whole rents, and intromissions therewith
once in the year, as the kirk shall appoint, for such causes
s the liirk may easily confider the fame to be most expedient
and neceffar.

Anent the jurifdiCion of the kirk, that the fame be de-
termined in this assembly, because this article hath been
lon, postponed ta make fute to the regent and council for
remedy against messengers and excommunicate persons.

I.alt that orders be taken anent the procures of the kirk,
nho procure against miniflers and ministry, and for fut;ing
of juflice of the kirk's actions in the felfion.

N'. XXVI. (Vol. IL p. 230.)
Declaration of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the

peace concluded the 23d Feb. 157,.

BE it known to all men, by these prerents, that I Henrv
Killegrewe, Efq; ambassador for the Queen's mnjcity of
Enl.nmd. Foralmuch as, at the earnef motion and folc;ta-
ton being made to me, on her highness's behalf, there is
accord and pacification of the public troubles and civil war
iithin this realm of Scotland agreed and coicli.ed, and
the fame favourably extended towards the right honourable
ócorge earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and Ba;dzcnuch, and
the lord John Hamilton , son to the duke's Grace of
Chatlldlaiault, and commendatour of the abby of .birbiot-
hod:;, for the surety of their lives, livings, honours, and
Eo;ds (of them, their kinsfolks, friends, servants, and
partalers, now properly depending on them; in treating
of tile \ihich laid pacification, the murders of the late earl
of Murray uncle, and the earl of Levenax grandfather, late
"gnct to the king's majesty of Scotland his realm and
Iics, as albo an article touching the discharge for tha

X 4

fruois or moreable goods, which the said persons bhue
taken fra perfonis professing the king's obedience, before
the damages done or committed by them, since the Ith
day of Juni;, 1567, and before the pemiult day of July
aft by passed, by reason of the common cause or any thing
depending thereupon, being thought by the king's commir.
saries matteris of such wecht and importance, as the king's
present regent could not conveniently, of himself, remit
or d;f;harge the fame. Yet in repect of the necessity of
the present pacification, and for the weil of the king, and
common ouictners of this realm and lieges, it is accorded,
that the matters of remission of the said murderers, and
of the diicharge of the said frudis, moveable goods, and
othner dAmaecc, he moved by the persons desiring the ail
rc.r.:i:i's and difciarge to the Queen's majesty my fove.
reign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and habit.
ation to the king of Scots. And whatsoever her majeft
shall advise and counsel touching the said remiflion and
discharge, the siid lord regent, for the veil of the king
and univerf2l quiemerss of the realm of Scotland, Ihall
perform, obfervc. and fulfil the fame. And in likewie,
the said earl luntiv , and commendatour of Abirbrothock,
being urged to have delivered pledges and holtages for
ob'ervation of the conditions of the said accord and
pacification, hath required me in place thereof, in her
majesty's name, by virtue of my commiflion , to promnif
for them -that they fnall truly and faithfully obferre and
keep the said pacification, and all articles and conditions
thereof, far their parts, and that it would please her mn
jelty to interpose herself, as surety and cautioner for them
to that effect, to the king's majesty of Scotland their so
vereign and his fjid regent, which I have done and pro
mise to do, by virtue of her majesty's commillion, as by
the honourable and plain dealing of the said earl and lord,
their intention to peace well appears, the fame being mrs
agreeable to the mind of the Queen's majesty my fore
reign, which so long by her ministers hath travelled so
the said pacification, ar.d in the end, at her motion nd

solicitation, the fame is accorded, knowing her majelty's
dcfire, that the fame may continue unviolate, and that
the noblemen and others now returning to the king's obe-
dience Thall have sufficient surety for their lives, livings,
honours and goods. Therefore in her majelty's name,
and by virtue of my commission, I promise to the afore.
said earl Huntly and commendatour of Abirbrothock, that
by her maiefty's good means, the said remiflion and dif-
charge shall be purchased and obtained to them, their
kinsfolks, friends, fcrvants, and partakers, now properly
depending upon them (the persons specified in the first
abtiinence always excepted), as also that the said pacification
shall be truly observed to them, and that her majesty liall
interpose herself as confervatrix thereof, and endeavour herself
tocaufe the fame to be truly and finccrely kept in all points
and articles thereof accordingly. In witness whereof, I have
to this present subscribed with my hand, and fealed the fame
»ith mine own feal, the ; th day of Feb. Anno Domini 1572.
And this to be performed by me, betwixt the date hereof,
and the parliament which shall be appointed for their refli-
tution, or at the furthest before the end es the said par-
liament. Sic fubfcribitur.
The biflop of Glasgow's note concerning the

Queen of Scotland's dowry ".

THE Queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for
her dowr), besides other poffeflions, the dukedom of Tu-
rene, which was folcmnly contracted and given to her by
the iing and estates of parliament; which dukedom she
poLfefed peacefully till 1r67, and then, upon the paci-
fiation betwixt the king and MonT. his brother, to augment
llore appenage this dutchy was given, to which the Qucen
it Scotland yielded upon account of princes, who were
her near relations, provided the equivalent which was
4" '76. Cott. lib. Calig. B. 4.

; 4

promised her dhould be faithfully performed. So that
year, after a great many solicitations, in lieu of that
dutchy, she had granted her the county of Vermandailc
with the lands and bailiwicks of Senley and Vetry; tho'
'ts known that county, and the other lands were not of
equal value with Turene, but was promised to have an
addition of lands in the neighbourhood to an equal value.
Upon this letters-patent were granted, which were con.
firmed in the courts of parliament, chamber of accounts,
court of aids, chamber of the treasury, and others necef-
fary, upon which {he entered into poffeflion of that county,
&c. Afterwards, by a valuation of the commissioners of
the chamber of accounts, it was found that the revenue
of that county, &c. did not amount to those of Turtne,
by 0ooo livres. But inftcad of making up this deficiency
according to justice, some of the privy council, viz. M. de
Cheverney, the presidents of Bellievre, Nicocholay and
St. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwithstanding of her
aforeaid losses, did fell and alienate the lands of Senlis, and
the dutchy of Eftaimpes, to Madam de Monpenfiet, fron
whom the king received money; of which sale the counfellon
aforesaid obliged themselves to be guarantees, which hath
hindered the aforesaid Queen to have justice done her. So
that Madam de Monpenfier hath been put in pofTeffion of
there lands of Senlis, contrary to all the declaration, protelt.
tion and aflurances of the king of France to Queen Mary's
ambassadors. So that the Queen of Scotland is difpotfftled es
her dowry; contrary to all equity, without any regard to her
quality.

'. XXVII. (Vol. n. p. 236.
A letter from the Lord of Lochlevin to theRegent

Mlortoun ".

IT will please vour grace, T received your grace's Ile
ter, and has confidered the fame. The parson of Cam.

4 5;1 March 1I77. E. of Mlortoa's Archives. Buud. B. .'- 19.

fey was here at me before the receit thereof, direced
fra my lord of Mar, and the mafler anent my laR written,
vhich was the answer of the writing that the master
sent to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring me to
come to Sterling to confer with them. I had given my
answer before the receit of your grace's letter, that I
behuiffit to be besyd Sand Androis, at ane friends tryst,
which I might not omit: I underhand by my said cousin,
that the king's majesty is to write to divers of the nobility
to come there, anent your lordfilips trial, and that he
had uritten before his departure to my lord ilontlhrois.
I underand , likewise , he will write to your grace to
come there for the fame effect, which 1 tho't good to
make \our grace foreseen of the fame, praying your grace,
for the love of God Almighty, to look upon the best, and
not to Ileep in security, but to turn you with unfeigned
heart to God, and to confider with yourself, that when
the king's majesty was very young, God made him the
infrument to divest his mother from her authority, who
was natural princess, for offending his Divine Majesty, and
that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame is as
largely in you, except to that your grace condescended not
to the deftrudtion of your wife. For as to harlotry and
ambition, I think your grace has as far offended God, and
far more in avaritioufnefs, which vycis God never left
tnplagued, except speedy repentance, which I pray God
grant to your grace, for otherwise your grace can never
have the love of God nor man. I pray your grace flatter
not yourself; for if your grace believes that ye have the
good will of them that are the king's good willers ye deceive
yourself; for surely I fee perfectly that your own particulars
are not contented, lat be the reft, and that most princi-
pally for your lard dealing. I pray your grace, beir with
me that I am thus hamlie, for certainly it proceeds from no
grudge, but from the very affection of my heart towards
your grace, which has continued since we were acquainted.
And now I fee, because the matter sands in Your grace's
handling with the king's majefRy, for certainly, if your

grace fall forth with him now, I fee not how ye hall
meet hereafter; pray 1 your grace to call to God, and
look on the belt, and cast from your grace both your vices,
to wit, ambition and avaritioufners. I am riding this day
to Sand Androis, and trust to return on Wednesday at the
farthest If your grace will command me in any'office
that ate honest, that I may do your grace pleasure at
Sterling, advertise of your grace's mind, and Ihall do to
m} power and knowledge, and this with my heartilie, &c.

To our trusty cousin the lord Lochleven ".

T R U S T Y cousin, after our most hearty commendation
we received your letter of the Id of March, and as we
take your plainness therein in good part, as proceeding from
a friend and kinsman, in whose good affection towards as
we never doubted, so ye may not think it ifrange that we
purge ourself so far of your accusation, as in conscience weind
not ourself to have offended in. As touching our ofence
to God, we intend not to excuse it, but to fubmir us to
his mercy, for ambition surely we think none can jutly
accuse us; for in our private estate we could, and can live
as well contented, as any of our degree in Scotland, with
out further aspiring. The bearing too the tharge of the
government of the realm, indeed, mon lead us, or any
other that Ihall occupy that place, not simply to refpet
ourself, but his majesty's rowme, which we supply, and
therein not transcending the bounds of measure, as, we
trust, it shalt not be found we have done, it ought not to
be attributed to any ambition in us. For as soon as eva
his majesty hull think himself ready and able for his om
government, none shall more willingly agree and advance
the fame nor I, since I think never to set my face aginó
him, whose honour, safety, and preservation has been ft

' Frorm th OriginaL 1. of Morton's Archives, Bund. B. X. 31

,,r unto me, nor I will never believe to find otherwlfe at
his hand than favour, although all the unfriends I have in
the earth were about him, to persuade him to the contrary.
As we write unto you, our friendly dealing and confidence
in the house of Mar is not thankfully acquit; as we trust
yourrflt confiders; but because the ambassadors of England,
my lord of Angus, the chancellor, treasurer, and some
noblemen rides weft this day to fee the king, we pray you
heartily address yourself to be there as soon as ye can,
and as ye fiall find the likelihood of all things, let us be
advertized thereof, with your own advice, by Alex. Hay, whom
rte have thought good to fend weft, feeing my lord of An.
gus from Stirling rides to Douglas. And so we commit
you in the protecion of God. At Holyrood-houfe, the
4th of March, ri77.

For the avaritioufnefs laid to our charge, indeed it lies
not in us so liberally to deal the king's geare, as to satisfy
all cravers, nor never shall any Sovereign and native
born prince, let be any officer, eschew the disdains of
such, as thinks them judges to their own reward; in many
cauecs I doubt not to find the affilance of my friends,
but cohere my actions shall appear unhonelt, I will not
crise their aflilance, but let me bear my own burthen.

N'. XXVIII. (Vol. II. p. 265.)
Letter of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3,

1580-I .

SIR,

II iH V E received from my lord lieutenant the copy of
your letter of the 2 th of the last direced unto his lordship,
containing a report of your negotiation with the king and
his council, in your second audience, wherewith having

Cott. Lib. Calig. C. g.

317

made her majesty acquainted, she seemed somewhat to
mislike, that you should so long defer to deal for the
enhlurgemetrt of Empedocles. But I made answer in your
behalf, that I thought you were directed by the advice of
the said Empedocles frierd, in the soliciting of that cause,
who knew what time was fittet for you to take to deal
therein, with mod effect, and best success, with which
answer, her majesty did in the end ret very well satisfied,
touching that point.

Your putting of us in hope that d'Aubigny might ealil

be won at her majesty's devotion, was at sift interpreted
to have been ironic spoke by you. But since it feemeth
you inift upon it, I could wilh you were otherwise periuaded
of the man, or at leat kept that opinion to yourself, for
confidering the end and purpose of his coming into Scodand,
as may be many ways' fuficiently proved, was only to
advance the Queen's liberty, and reception into that
government, to overthrow religion, and to procure a foreign
match with Villenarius, wherein the inclosed copy, which you
may use to good purpose there, shall partly give you lome
light; there is no man here can be persuaded that he sill
change his purpose, for so small advantage as he is likely
to find by it, and therefore you shall do well to forbear to
harp any more upon that firing, as I have already written
to you. The prince of Orange fending, I fear will not be
in time that it may do any good; for belides that there people
are in themselves flow in their resolutions, their own affair
are, at present, so great, their fate so confuied, and tbe
prince's authority so small, that he cannot so Coon take order
in it; and yet for mine own part, I have not been negligent
or careless in the matter, having, more than three veekl
pad, sent one about it, from whom nevertheless I do yet
hear nothing.' The letters, you desire hpould be written
thither by the French ministers, I have given order 0
Mr. Killingrew to procure, who, I doubt not, will arnfully
perform it, so that, 1 hope, I ihall have them to fend )o0

by the next. And so I commit you to God. AtWhitehall,
the ;d of February s80o.

Your very loving cousin and servant,

FRA. WALSINGHAM.

Tir !ltter is an original, and in fame part of it wrote in

ciphers and explained by another banid. By Empedocler
it 1!n;,ieoood Morton. By Villenarius the king of S&ot,
I'Abigsney is marked thus o I o

3 Feb. 158o.

Sundry notes gathered upon good diligence given,

and in time to be better maniefcted, being now
thought meet to be in convenient fort used, and
l.id again ft D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing
the king, the nobility, and that state ".

FIRST, it bath been informed, by credible means,
tIat D'Aubigny was privy and acquainted with la Nave
tie King's mother's secretary, coming into Scotland,
and of his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the
ling, to think and citeem it an evil president for princes,
teat fuI'iecs might have power to deprive their lawful
ftvereigns, as they did his mother, who was not minded,
t' any mean, to defeat him, either of the present govern-
ment of that realm, or yet of the polleflion of the crown
ail inheritance thereof, but rather to alTure the fame to
him: and that for the accomplishment of that assurance,
the liing Ihould have been advised and drawn to have go.
ernel, for some short time, as prince, calling D'Aubigny
to rule as governor of the prince, by commission from
" Con. Lib. Calig. C. 6. An Original.

the Queen his mother , until the king's enemies were sup
pressed; after which time, d'Aubigny Ihould have power
given to establish and resign that kingdom to the king, by
his mother's voluntary consent, whereby all such, as had
before been in action against the Queen or her authority,
might be brought to stand in the king's mercy. And for
that the king might live in more surety, D'Aubigny should
be declared both fccond person in succession of that crown,
and also lieutenant general of Scotland, and that D'Aubigny,
before his departure out of France, received commifion
from the king's mother to the efets remembered, or nat
the fame. That in this behalf he had conference with the
bilhops of Glasgow, and Ross, and with fir James Baford,
with which persons, and with the duke of Guise he had
and bath frequent intelligence, and by Sir James Baford be
was advised to confer with the lord John Hamilton before
his repair into Scotland, whereunto he agreed, and vet
afterwards he sent one John Hamilton to the said lord John
to excuse him in this part, alledging, that he did forbear
to come to him, left thereby he Ihould marr or hinder
greater etfecs to be executed by him in Scotland.

That before his coming into the realm, the nobilit

and country were well quieted and united in good concord,
with great love betwixt the king and nobility, and amonglt
the noblefie, but he hath both drawn the king againt
sundry of the chiefeR of his nobility, that have been moA
ready, and have expended their blood and poleflion to
preserve religion, and defend the king's person, his government
and elfate, and also hath given occasions of great furpiciom
and offence to be engendered betwixt the king and hb
nobility, and especially with such as have been in atior
againit the king's mother, and her authority, who by for
and means of the said commission and practice, Ihould bav
been brought into molf dangerous condition; and who ll
may find themselves in no small perill while he po(rft'
the king's ear, abufeth his presence, and holdeth fch
the principal keys aaid ports of his realm, as he prefud
enjoyeth.

That he hath drawn the king not only to forget the
great benefits done to him and his realme, by the Queen's
mljeti of Englard, but also to requite the fame with sundry
signs of gcat unthanikfulnefs, and wounding therewith the
honur ot her majesty, and thereby hath adventured to
ha'. t':e happy amity long time continued, betwixt those
pinces.

And whereas there griefs were to be repaired by gentle
ltters and good otfers, to have passed, and been done
kbrixt them: In which respeCt, the king and council
lving resolved to write to her majesty, for her highness
better fatisfadtion in the late negotiation of Mr. Alexander
Humen of Northberwick, had given order to the king's
secretary to frame that letter: He minding to break the
bond of amity in funder, willed the secretary to be sure
hat nothing should be inserted in that letter, whereby the
lig Ihould crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby
to cut off all loving courtesies betwixt them, as by the
elaration of the said secretary may be better learned, and
tcreupon further approved.
That under the hope and encouragement of D'Aubigny's
potedion, Alexander King presumed with that boldness to
take his lewd harangue, and by his means hath hitherto

aped chaflifement and correcdion, due for his offence.
That fir James Baford, condemned of the slaughter of
ke king's father, hath been called into the realme by Le-

wi, wthout the privity of the king. And whereas the

d fir James found in a green velvet desk , late the earl
Bothwell's, and saw, and had in his hands the principal
dof the conspirators in that murder, and can best declar:
witness who were authors and executors of the fame;
is drawn by Lenox to suppress the truth, and to accuse
has he himself knoweth to be innocent, and as by order
ifaw, will be so found, if they may have due trial,
hch, contrary to all justice, is by Lenox means denied.
Tir ir tbe charge against D'Anbigny, mentioned in the

lejrJng ltter by IValf#ghan; but by Baford they mtan

h JO:,e. Bal/nor.
VOL. Ii. y.

321

N. XXIX. (Vol. II. p. 283.)
The copy of the king of France his directions ent

to Scotland with Seigneur de la Motte Fenelon.
Tranilated out of the French 4.

FIRST. on their most christian majesty's part, hel l
make the most honourable salutation and visiting to the
most serene king of Scotland, their good brother and litde
tof, that in him is possible.

To give him their letters that are closed, such and fth

like as they have written to him with their hands, and to
haow exprely the perfet friendship and singular affeaion,
that their majestys bear to him, and to bring back the anfiet

To take heed to the things which touch near the moR

serene king, to the effec that his perfontmay be in no danger
but that it may be mofa surely preserved.

And that he be not hindered in the honest liberty th

le ought to have, and that no greater, or straiter gad
be about him than he had before.

And such like, that he be not impeached in the authorin

that God -ath given to him of king and prince fovereig
above his fubjecs, to the effec he may as freely ordai
and command in his affairs, and in the affairs of his countq
with his ordinary council, as he was used to do of befote

That his nobility, barons, and commonality of his counn

may have their free liberty to resort to his serene mijel
without suspicion of greater guards or more armed men ab
his person than the use was, that they be not afraid m
hindered to resort; and further that the seigneur de
Motte Fenelon fall liberally and freely speak to the said ser
king and council, requiring the reeftablilhing of that th
may or hath been changed or altered.

And that he may know if the principalls of the nobili:1y, i
4" Calderw. nS. iisaory, VoL 3. . 21p .

4

ot!ir men of good behaviour of the towns and commonality
,u the contry conveens, and are content with the form of
,ivrernment presently with the said serene king, to the end
i:l: if there be any miscontent he may travaile to agree
tl;cn together, and that he return not without the certainty
cif le famine.

':dI if he may underltand that there be any who have not

af..d them so reverently towards the said serene king, their
forereign lord, as the duty of their obedience required,
thit he may pray on this behalf of his majesty molt christian,
the tfil serene king his good brother, giving him cpuncill
iholly to forget the fame, and exhorting them to do their
duty towards his majesty, in time coming, in all refpeds
vith the obedience and true fubjetlion they ought him.

And if the said seigneur de la Motte perceives the fail
serene king to be in any manner conltrained of his person,
luthority, Iberty, and disposition of his affairs, than he
usld to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, or as
the sovereignty of a prince does require, that he use all
nmoen lawful and honest to place him in the famine, and
that he imploy as much as the credit of his most chriltian
najelty may do towards the nobility, and subjects of that
cuntry, and as much as may his name, with the name of
hi, crown towards the Scottith nation , the which he loves
r.l conni:les in as much as they were proper Frenchmen
And that he vittnefs to the said serene king, and his
t.ites, of his consent, and to all the nobility and princi-
pli rerfonijaes of the contry, that his molt Christian ma.
itl nill continue on his part in the moll ancient aili-
lce and confederacy, which he hath had with the said
fi::n kin., his good brother, praying his nobility and
turoy. in;!l his principall fubjeds, to persevere in the
fnlie, in all good understanding and friendship with him i
'' :!.xihi, on his part, he Ihall do, observing the famine

,',i i:wuiolblc.

t riler his moth chriltian majesty underffanding that

'ir frene ling his good brotlhtr was cur,;.eted xil ta
t:: t.,: of Lenox, and his fervife; the flidl IcigncLr DUI

Y z

:12

la Motte had charge to pray his serene majelty that he
might remaine beside him to his contentment, believing
that he ihould more willing intertain the points of love
and confederacie, betwixt their majestys and their contrrs,
because he was good subjet to them both; and if he
might not remain, without some alteration of the tranqil
ity of his estate, that he might retire him to his oaw
bouse in the laid contry, in furenes, or if he pleased to
return to France that he might surely - and if it plear
his serene majesty, to cause cease and flay the impeac.
ments, that are made of new upon the frontiers, to the
eset that the natural Frenchmen may enter as freely into
the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

And that there may be no purpose of diffamation, na

no speech but honourable of the most Christian king, in
that contry, but such like as is spoken most honourabl
of the serene king of Scotland in France.

He had another head to propone, which he conceald

till a little before his departure, to wit, that the Queen,
the king's mother, was content to receive her son in al
ciation of the kingdom.

N°. XXX. (Vol. II. . 0o.)
Lord Hunfdon to Sir Francis Walsingham, th

i4th of Auguf 1584, from Berwick ".

S I R,

ACCORDING to my former letters, touching my meieq
with the earl of Arran upon Wednesday lat, there ca
hither to me from the earle, the justice clerk, andS
William Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, both of the king
privie council, to treat with me about the order of 0
meeting, referring wholly to me to appoint the hour, o
the number we should meet withal; f as we conclud

47 Calderw. MS. Hifory, ol. 3. p. 374.

the place to be Foulden, the hour to be ten o'clock, and
the number with ourselves to be 1; of a fide; and the
rte of our troops to Rand each of them a mile from the
t,'n; the one on the one fide, the other on the other
EJe, so as our troops were two miles asunder; I was not
many horsemen, but I supplied it with footmen, where I
had ioo Ihot on horse, but they were very near $oo horse
rell appointed : According to which appointment, we met
relterday, and after Come congratulations, the erie fell in
the like protestations of his good will and readiness to
serve the Queen's majesty, before any prince in the world,
next his sovereign, as he had done heretofore by his letters,
and rather more; with such earnef vows, as unless he be
worse than a devil, her majesty may dispose of him at her
pleasure; this being ended, I entered with him touching
the cause I had to deal with him, and so near as I could,
left nothing unrehearsed, that I had to charge the king or
him with any unkind dealing toward her majesty, according
to my inltrucions, which without any delay he answered
presently, as ye fllall perceive by the said answers, sent
herewith; but I replying unto him, he amplified them with
may moe circumstances, but to this effe&t. Then I dealt
with him touching the point of her majesty's fatisfacion, for
the uttering such pracices as has been lately set on foot for
the dilquieting of her majesty and her estate, who thereof
nude sundry discourses, what marriages have been offered
to his majesty by fundrie princes, and by what means the
nrle has fought to divert them, and for what causes; the
one, for that be marriage with Spain or France, he must also
aler his religion, which as he is sure the king.will never
do, so will he never susser him to hearken unto it, so long
s he has any credit with him; he denys not but the king
has been dealt withal be practices to deal against her ma-
j:Ry, which he has so far denied and refused to enter into,
as they have left dealing therein, but whatsoever the king
or he knoweth therein there shall be nothing hidden from
her majelty, as her majefly shall know very shortly; surely
i fSems by his speeches, that if the king would have yielded

thereunto there had been no small company of French in
ScotLnd ere now to difquiec her majefty.--This being
ended, I dealt with him earnestly for the lay of this par.
liament, which now approacheth; or at the leat that
there may be nothiPg done therein, to the prejudice of
these noilemen and others now in England, for the for.
faultirng of their livings and goods; hereupon he made a
long discourse to me, first of the earl of Angus dealing
about the earl of Morton, then of his going out, notwitb.
sanding of fundrie gracious offers the king had made him,
then of the road of Ruthven, how that presently after they
had the king's majelty in their hands, they imprisoned
himself, dealt with the king for putting of the duke out
of the realme, the king refused so to do, they told him
plainly that if he would not he should have the earl of
Arran's head in a dish; the king asked what offence the
earl had made? and they answered it mult be so, and
should be so; hereupon, for the safeguard of Arran's life,
the king was content to fend away the duke, and yet Ar.
ran afterwards fundrie times in danger of his life; I alledg.
ed unto him the king's letter to the Queen's majelty, and
his adts in council , that they had done nothing but for
his fervife, and with his good liking and contentment,
mho answered me he durst do no otherwise, nor could not
do any thing but that which pleased them , with such a
number of other their dealings with the king whillf he was
in their hands as are too long to be written, and too bad
if they were true; 1 said the king might have let the Queen't
majefly's ambassador have known his mind fcretly, and
her majesty would have relieved him; he anfweed, that
th" king was not ignorant that the apprehensions in that
manner, proceeded from Mr. Bow's pradice, indthereby
durst not impart so much to him, and yet the king au
content, and did give remiflion to as many as would a-
kno-. ledge their faults, and ask remiflion, and such 2
would not, he thought fit to baniih, to try their furtbtt
loyalty, in which time they conspired the king's econd
apprehension, and the killing of the earle and otbs,

and reduced the ministers to their faction, and yet not
fitisfied with there conspiracies and treasonable dealings
(as he terms them), are entered into a third, being in Eng.
land under her majesty's prote&ion, to dishonour her ma-
jelvy as far as in them lyeth, or at leaf to cause the king
conceave some unkindness in her majesty, for harbouring
of them; I wrote to you what the conspiracy was, the
taking of the king, the killing of the earle of Arran, and
some others, the taking of the castle of Edin. and bring.
ing home the earles, to take the charge of the king; all
which (fays he) is by Drummond confessed, and by the
provost of Glencudden not greatly denied, and- the con-
liable of the cattle thereupon fled; the earl brought Drum.
mond with him as far as Langton, where he lay, to have
confelfed the conspiracy before me, but having at his light-
ing received a blow on his leg with a horse, so as he could
bring him no further, I replied that I thought verily they
would not work any such pracices in respect of the Queen's
majesty, abiding within her realme, and if there be any
such praftices, they have proceeded from others, and they
not pririe unto them: and that if it be not apparently proved
agaift them, that it will be thought to be some pratice to
aggravate, the fault, and to make them the more odious to
the king. lie answered me, that it should be proved so
fufiicently, that they should not be able with truth to deny
it, for their own hands is to be showed to part of it, and
therefore concluded, that if her majesty fiould so prcfs the
iing for them at this time, that would rather hinder this mat-
ter of the amitty, not further it, and that lince they fecki
chie.y his life, he could not, in any reason, seek to do
them any good; and besides he assured me, that if he would'
hl dare not, this ladt matter being fallen out as it is; and
strely if this matter had not fallen out, I would not have
doubted the restoring of the earl of Mar very Ihortly, if her
majlhy "'ould have employed me therein, but for the earl
of Angus, 1 perceive the king is persuaded that both he,
and the reft of the Douglasses, have conceived so morta!P
al hatred against him and the earl of Arran, about the death

4

?27

of the earl of Morton, as if they were at home, to-mor.
row next, they would not leave to pracice and confpir
the death of them both, and therefore a hard matter te
do any thing for him: finally, he concluded and required
me to allure her majesty from the king, that there ihall no
thing be hid from her, nor any thing left undone that mal
atihfie her majelty with reason, and that the king shall nc
ver do any thing, nor consent to have any thing done
in her prejudice, so long as he had any credit with him,
or authority under him. Having this far proceeded, he
deGred to Ihew me his commiflion, which is under the
great feal, to himself only, wiich is as large as may be,
and yet fundrie of the privie council there with him, but
not one in commiflion, nor present, nor near us all tbil
time having spent almost five hours in these matters; he
presented to me the matter of Gray, who delivered to me alette
from the king in his commendation, whom I perceive the
king means to fend to her majesty, and therefore requires
a fafe-condut for his passage, which I pray you procure,
and to fend it as soon as you may. I let him underlland oi
the lord Seaton's negociation with the French king. He
swore to me, that Seaton was but a knave, and that it war
partly against his will, that he flould be sent thither. But
his commiffon and infirution being of no great importance,
he yielded the sooner; and if Seaton has gone beyond hi,
inftrutions, which Arran drew himself, he will mahl
Seaton smart for it. Touching William Newgate, and
Mark Golgan, he protested he never heard of any fuchi
he fays there was a little poor foul, with a black beard,
come thither a begging, mho said he was an enemy to
Dcemond, to whom he gave a croun, but never heard
of him since. and for any Scotsmnan going into Ire.
land, he fays there is no such matter; if there be, then
may be some few rafkals that he knows not of; and
touching the coming of any Jesuits into Scotland, he fay, i
is but the slanderous devise of the king's enemys, and such
as would have the world believe the king were ready to revOlt
in religion, who the world Thall well fee will continue Ia

coftant therein, as what prince soever profefred it molt; and
the carl himrelf dos protest to me, that to his knowledge,
lie never law a Jefuir in his life, and did assure me if there
iras any in Scotland, as their miniflers would do, if they
preach such doctrine as they did in Scotland; and touching
one Uallenden, of whom I wrote to yow, I heard from Mr. Col.
sill, the earle avows conflantly that he knows not, nor
hath not heard of any such man, but lie would inquire at
the jufice clerk , and would inform me what he could learn
of that; thus I have made you as /hort a discourse as I
can of so many matters, so long discoursed upon, but
there are the principal points of all our talk, so near as I
can remember it, and for this time I commit you to the
Almighty. At Berwick the 14th of August, 184.

The king is very desirous to have
my son Robert Cary to come to him.
I pray you know her majesty's pleasure.

Arran's Answers to the griefss or articles proponed
to the lord Hunfdon, set down in another form.

AS to the frait and revere persecution of all such, as
have been noted to have been well affeled to the Queen's
majelly, it cannot appear they were either for that cause
punilfed, or hardly dealt with, since his majelly of late has
been so careful and diligent to choice out good instruments
to deal betwixt her majefly and him, as his majesty has
done in elefing of your lordship and me; besides that in
11 their accurations, their good will and affiefion born to
hr majefly was, at no time, laid to their charge, but
capital acions of treason many way tried now be the whole
tiTce eflates, and more than manifest to the world.

As for his majesty inhibiting, by publick proclamation,
uch as were banilhed, not to repair in England; the bruits
and IhifFerings that came to his majesty's ears, of their
c0fipiracies and treasons, which since fyn they accomplished,

t29

lo far as in them lay, moved his majesty to inhibit them t
repair to any place, so near his majesty's realme, left the,
ihould have attempted there things, which shortly they dic
attempt, being farther off, and mere distant both by sec
and land.

As for reception of Jesuits, and others , her majerly'

fugitives, and not delivering them according to his promire,
as your lordship propones, his majesty would be moll glad thai
so it might fall out by your lordship's travailes, that no fugitive
of either realme should be received of either, and when fc
thall be, it mhlll not fail on his majesty's part, albeit in
very deed this time bygone his majesty has been contrained
to receipt her majesty's mean rebells and fugitives, contr
his good natural, since her majesty hath receipt, in effeet
the whole and greatest rebells and traitors his majesty in
his own blood ever had; as for the agreement with hi'
majeRy's mother aneat their afflciation, his majesty ha;
commanded me, in presence of your lordship's servant, tc
afure her majesty and your lordship, in his majesty's rame,
that it is altogether false, and an untruth , nor any such liki
mater done yet.

His majesty has also commanded me to assure your lordihip,

that it is also faife and untrue, that his majesty has, by
any means direct or indirect, sent any meifage to the pope,
or received any from him; or that his majesty has dealt wit
Spain or any foreigners, to harm her majesty or her realm,
which his majesty could have no honour to do, this good
intelligence taking place, as I hope in God it Ihall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majeRy'i

ministers, sent unto his majesty, his majesty used none of
them so; and if his majesty had, sufficient cause was given
by them, as some of their own writs do yet testify: as I
more particularly thowed your lordflip at Foulden at o
lace meeting.

W1

N'. XXXI. (Vol. II. p. 304.)

The Scottish Queen's offers upon the effec of her

liberty propounded by her secretary Naw, No.
vember 1584 ".

T HE Queen my mistress being once well assured of;your
majesty's amity,

I. Will declare openly that she will (as it is lincerely

her meaning) firaitly to join unto your majesty, and to the
fame to yield and bear the chief honour and refpea, before
all other kings and princes in Chriltendom.

2. She will swear, and protest solemnly, a sincere for-
getfulnefs of all wrongs which fie may pretend to have
been done unto her in this realme, and will never, in any
fort or manner whatroever, shew offence for the fame.

;. She will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own

particular name, as also for her heirs and others descending
of her for ever, your majesty, fur jult, true, and lawful ·
Queen of England.

4 And consequently, will renounce, as well for herself,
as for her said heirs , all rights and pretences which she
may claim to the crown of England, during your majesty's
life, and other prejudice.

(. She will revoke all a&s and shews, by her heretofore

made, of pretence to this said crown to the prejudice of
your majlltv, as may be the taking of the arms and ltile of
Queen of England, by the commandment of king Francis,
her late lord and husband.

6. She will renounce the pope's bull for so much as may
be expounded to turn in her favour, or for her behoof,
touching the deprivation of her majesty, and will declare
that she will never help and serve herself with it.

7. She will not prosecute, during your majesty's life,
" Cott. Lib. Calig. C. S. A Copy.

by open force or otherways, any publick declaration of her
right in the succession of this realme, so as secret assurance
be given unto her, or at the least publick promise, that no
deciding thereof &hall be made in the prejudice of her, or
of the king her son, during your majesty's life, nor after
your decease, until such time as they have been heard
thereupon, in publick, free, and general assembly of the
parliament of the said realme.

8. She will not pradtife, direfly or indiretly, with any

of your majety's fobjedts, neither within nor out of your
realme, any thing tending to war, civil or foreign, againf
your majety and your estate, be it under pretext of reli.
gion, or for civil and politick government.

9. She will not maintain or support any of your fubjds
declared rebels, and convicted of treason against you.

so. She will enter into the association, which was Ihewed

her at Wingfield for the surety of your majesty's life, so a
there be mended or right explicated some clause, which
I will shew to your Majesty, when I shall have the copy
thereof, as I have before time required.

s1. She will noc treat with foreign kings and princes,

for any war or trouble against this state, and will renounce,
from this time, all enterprises made or to be made in her
favour for that refpecl

12. Furthermore, this realme being aflailed by any civil

or foreign war, fie will take part with your majesty, and
will assist you in your defence with all her forces and mean,
depending of herself and with all her friends of Chrilendom.

I;. And to that effed, for the mutual defence and

maintenance of your majesty, and the two realms of this
idle, Ihe will enter with your majesty in a league defen-
five, as hall be more particularly advised, and will per-
fwade as much as in her, the king her son to do the like.

The leagues with all parts abroad remaining firm, and

especially the antient league between France and Scotland,
in that which Ihall not be against this present.

14. She will enter into a league offensive, having good
assurance, or secret declaration and acknowledgement of

her right in the succession of this crown, and promise,
that happening any breach betwixt France and this realme,
(which /he prayeth God never to happen) the just value
of her dowry shall be placed for her in lands of the reve-
nue of the crown.

aI. For aflurance of her promises and covenants, lhe
doth offer to abide herself in this realme for a certain time,
(better hostage can she not give than her own person)
which, so as lhe be kept in the liberty here before pro.
I mnded, is not in cafe to escape secretly out of this
country, in the sickly tate she is in, and with the good
ordet which your majesty can take therein.

16. And in cafe your majesty do agree to her full and
whole deliverance, to retire herself at her will out of this
ralmc, the said Queen of Scotts she will give sufficient
ho0age for such time as will be advised.

17. If the abide in this realme, the will promise not to
depart out of it, without your licence, so as it be pro.
mired unto her that her fate, in such liberty as lhall be
accorded unto her, Ihall not be in any fort altered, untill
after tryall to have attempted against your life, or other
trouble of your estate.

iR. If she go into Scotland, she will promise to alter
nothing there in the religion which is now used there, flhe
being suffered to have free exercise of hers, for her and
her houfhold, as it was at her return out of France; and
further, to pull out every root of new division between the
fubjeds, that none of the fubjels of Scotland thall be
tffed for his conscience, nor constrained to go to the service
ofthe contrary religion.

19. She will grant a general abolition of all offences
done against her in Scotland, and things shall remain there
is they are at this present, for the refpe&, saving that which
hath been done against her honour, which she meaneth to
have revoked and annulled.

20. She will travel to fettle a sure and general reconciliation
kthveen the nobility of the country, and to cause to be
appointed about the king her Con, and in his council, such

333

as lhall be fit for the entertainment of the peace and quit
of the country, and the amity of the realm.

21. She will do her best to content your majesty, in favou

of the Scots lords banished and refuged hither, upon thei
due fubmiflon to their princes, and your majesty's promi,
to afift the said Queen and king of Scotland against them
if they happen to fall into their former faults.

22. She will proceed to the marriage of the king he
son, with the advice and good council of your majesty.

2;. As Ihe will pass nothing without the king her son

so doth fle desire that he intervene conjointly with her i
this treaty, for the greater and perfecter assurance thereof
for otherwise any thing can hardly be eflblilhed to be founi
and continue.

24. The said Scotch Queen trufteth, that the French king

her good brother, according to the good affection which hi
bath always ihewed her, and hath been afresh tefified unte
me by Mon! de Manniffiere for this said treaty, will vetl
willingly intervene, and will assist her for the surety ofhec
promises.

2(. And so will the princes of the house of Lorrain,

following the will of the said king, will bind themfelva
thereunto.

26. For other kings and princes of ChrifRendom, Ihe will

allay to obtain the like of them, if for greater folemniiy
and approbation of the treaty it be found to be necefary.

27. She doth detire a speedy answer, and final concluoion

of the premises, to the end to meet in time with all in.
conveniencies.

28. And in the mean time, the more to strengthen the

Laid treaty, as made by her of a pure and frank will, ihe
defireth that demonstration be made of some releafement
of her captivity.
334

Objelions againfl the Scottish Queen, under fe.

cretary Walsinghame's hand, November 1584.

THE Queen of Scots is ambitious, and standeth ill
aseled to her majeRy, and therefore it cannot be but that
her liberty fliould bring peril unto her majesty.

That her enlargement will give comfort to papists, and
ether ill affected fubjeds, and greatly advance the opi.
nion had of her title as successor.

That as long as she Thall be continued in her majesty's
pffelfion, the may serve as it were a gage of her ma.
jeti's surety, for that her friends, for fear of the dan-
ger she may be thrown into, in care any thing ihould
be done in her favour, dare not attempt any thing in the
ffence of her majesty.

(emb What course were fit to be taken

ov ber with the Queen of Scots, either

1584. ! , to be enlarged or not ".

THE course to be taken with the said Queen may be
confidered of in three degrees; either,

i. To continue her under cultody in that slate The

now is.

:. To restrain her of the present liberty the now hath.
3. Or to set her at liberty upon caution.
i. Touching the first, to continue her under custody

in that fate Ihe now is; it is to be confidered, that the
Frinces that favour that queen, upon the complaint file
maketh of hard usage, are greatly moved with commifera.
lion towards her, and promise to do their endeavour for
her iberty, fur which purpose her ministers solicit them
" Coto t.ib. Cal. $.

iM

And to move them the more to pity her cafe, Ihe ac

quinteth them with her offers made to her majesty \hic
appeared to be no less profitable than reasonable for hel
majefy, so as the refusal and rejecting giveth her friend!
and favourers cause to think her hardly dealt withal, an
thefore may, with the better ground and reason, attemp
fbmewhat for the setting of her at liberty.

It is also likely that the said Queen, upon this refusal

finding her cafe desperate, will continue her pratice un
der hand, both at home and abroad, not only for her de
livery, but to attain to the present possession of this crow,
upon her pretended tide, as lhe had hitherto done, a,
appeareth , and is mot manifest by letters and plots inter.
cepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of Scoand,
which hath proceeded altogether by her diredion, where
by a gap is laid open for the malice of all her majeftl'
enemies, so as it appeareth that this manner of keeping
her, with such number of persons as she now hath, and
with libery to write and receive letters (being duly con.
dered), is offensive to the princes, the said Queen's friends;
ather chargeable, than profitable to her majesty; and tub.
jed to all such practices as may peril her majefy's perCin
or fate, without any provision for her majelty's fafety,and
therefore no way to be liked of.

2. Touching the fccond, to reflrain her in a more
.traighter degree of the liberty Ihe hath hitherto enjoyed

It may at first fight, be thought a remedy very apt r

fLop the course of the dangerous pratices fobtered hereto.
fore by her: For, true it is, that this remedy might prove
very profitable, if the realme of Scotland flood in that son
devoted to her majesty, as few years pad it did; and if the
king of that realme were not likely, as well for the relafe
of his mother, as for the advancement of both their pre.
tended tides, to attempt somewhat against this realme and
her majesty, wherein he should neither lack foreign at
fifnance, nor a party here within this realme: But the kin
and that realme Randing affeed as they do, this refitaint,

inflead
t16

inea4d of remedying, is likely to breed these incorveniencies

Firlt, it sill increase the offence both in him, and in
ite ieR of the princes her friends that mifliked of her re-

raiLr.
Secondly, It will give them just cause to take some way
f redress.

Laildy, It is to be doubted, that it iay provoke some
desperate ill-difpofed person, all hope of her liberty removed,
i attempt somewhat against her majesty's own person (a
stter above all others to be weighed ), which inconveniency
Iiag duly confidered, it will appear manifefly, that the
ilraiint, in a afraighter degree, is likely to prove a remedy
ibjed to very bhrd events.
The latter degree, whether it were fit to set the said

Ien at liberty, minifireth some cause of doubt, touching

th manner of the liberty, in what fort the fame is to be
pformed, whether to be continued here within the realme,
*r to he reltored into her own country.
But first, this propolition, before the particularities be
tighed, is to be confidered in generality.
hor it is very hard for a well.affetced subjeCt, that ten-
ercth her majesty's surety, and weigheth either the nature
it the Scottiff Queen, being inclined to ambition and
trenge, or her former a&ions, what practices (he hath

on i;ot most dangerous For her majesty and this realm ,
to allow of her liberty, being not made acquainted with
:L caures, as time hath wrought, to make it less perilous
than it hath been, nor with such cautions as may, in some
fh, he devised to prevent both her ambition and malice;
aJ therefoie, to make this apparent.
It is to be confidered, that the danger that was in the
*ot'er, is now grown to be in the son. He pretendeth
tht fame t;tle she doth: Such as do affect her, both at
one and abroad, do affect him (and he is the more
tieronus for that he is unmarried, which may greatly
drance his fortune; and that he is a man, whereby he
my enter into action in his own person); where she is

337
VOL. III.

z

rerained, he is at liberty; his own realme is now altogt
ther at his devotion, and the party affeced to this crown
abased; so as the matter duly conidered, neither her liben
nor restraint doth greatly alter the cafe for perils toward,
her majefly. unless by such promises as may be made by
way of treaty with her, the danger likely to grow from the
king her son to be provided for.

But in this behalf it may be objected, that so long a

the mother remains in her majesty's hands, the king ill
attempt nothing for fear of his mother's peril.

To this objetion it may be answered, first, That the!

hope that her majesty, being a prince of jutice, and in
dined to mercy, will not punilh the mother for the son'
offence, unless she shall be found, by good proof, culpable
Secondarily, That men will not be over-haRy, confiderin(
in what predicament the king flandeth touching his expedation
of this crown, to advise any thing that in time future mia
be dangerous to the giver of such council as may reach u
hi mrther's peril.

And lastly, the taking away of his mother, be being fIreq

in the field through both foreign assistance, and a part hen
within the realme, will appear so weak a remedy (which m
rather exasperate both him, and her party, to proceed wi
more courage and beat to revenge, if any such hard meanr
lhould be offered unto her), as they will fuppore for th
reason above specified, that no such extremity will be aed.

It may also be objeted, that the setting of her at liberl

will greatly encourage the papifls both at home and abroad
but herein, if the provision be duly confidered, thatmay
made by parliameni both here and there, they lhall nthe
find cause of discomfort than otherwise.

These two doubts being resolved, and the perils that ea

in the mother appearing, most manifeltly to be seen in the so
accompanied with more danger, with due consideration al
also of such remedies as may be provided for the prevetin!
of the dalgers, that her liberty may minister just cauf t
doubt of; there will be good cause of hope found,that t
fame will rather breed benefit than perils.

Now it relleth, in what fort the said liberty lhall be
iitrrned; if it shall be thought meet she shall be con.
tuti within the realm with some limitation, especially in
tlr place where The now refidech, the country round about
bgi infecded in religion as it is, it is greatly to be doubted
t ill ver much increase the corruption, and falling away
ithat behalf. Besides, lhe Ihould have commodity, with

luh nore ease, and speed, to entertain pradties within
lsr:alne, than by being in her own country.
It abroad freely without limitation either in Scotland, or
i ce then shall her majesty lore the gages of her safety,
Ien shall Ihe be at hand to give advice in furtherance
lfuch practices, as have been laid for to flir trouble in this
lie, wherein Ihe hath been a principal party.
Fur the first, it is answered before, that the refpe& of any
ils that may beFal unto her, will in no fort restrain her
n. For the other, if it be confidered what harm bet
sice will work unto herrelf, in refpeC of the violation
ihc treatv, and the provision that may be made in
liment here, it is to be thought, that (he will then
Iell advised, before she attempt any such matter, which
(he may do without perill. Besides such princes, as
re interposed their faith and promire for her , cannot
th honour afliR her, wherein the French king will not
found very forward, who, in mouf friendly fort, hath.
[l rejected all such requests, propounded either by

or her son's ministers, that might any way offend
maijey. And so to conclude, feeing the capfe of her
its hall be taken away; the French king gratified,
b is a mediator for her, and will mislike, that, by any

igh pratice, she Ihould be drawn to violate her faith,
the reft of the princes shall have no just cause of of-

he, hbu rather to think honourably of her majefy con.

ring the Scottish Queen's carriage towards her, which
i deserved no way any such favour; the noblemen of
alnd shall be restored, who will be a good fray of
t cn nfells as may tend to the troubling of this realme,
cilly having so good a ground of warrant as the par.

Za

339

liament to sand unto; the charges and periis which het
praties might have bred to this realme hall be avoided;
and lafliy, the hope of the papists shall be taken away, by
flch good provisions, as in both the realmes may be made,
whereby the perills that might fall into her majesty' own
person, (a matter of all others to be weighed) hall be
avoided, when by the change that may grow by any such
wicked and ungodly pratice, they Ihall fee their cafe n
way relieved in point of religion.
Reasons to induce her majesty to proceed in the

treaty under Secretary Walsingham's hand ".

T H AT ffch plots as have of late yer been deiied
(tending to the railing of trouble within this eaime) have
grown from the Scots Queen's ministers, and favourn,
not without her allowance and reeking: Or,

That the means used by the Laid minister, to inda

princes to give ear to the said plots, is principally grond.
ed upon some commiseration had of their reftaint.

That the fay, why the aid plots have not been pul

in execution, hath procecded, for that the said princa
have, for the mofl part, been entertained with hometnd
domefrick troubles.

That it is greatly to be doubted, that now their melm

begin to be quiet, that fomewbat will be attempted in bh
favours by the laid princes.

That it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may b

attempted by some of her fautors in an extraotdiary folt
to the perill of her majesty.

That for the preservation thereof, it shall be conveneit

for her majetty to proceed to the finilhing of the eattT
not long ithence begun between her and th said Q~ote

5s Cao Lib. CaL C. a

N'. XXXII. (Vol. II. p. 315.)

Letter of Q. Mary to Q. Elizabeth "

ladane ma bonne Sccur,

M'ASSEURANT que vous avez eu communication d'une
trre de Gray que voftre homme Semer me livra hier foubz
It nom de mon filz y recongnoiffant quasi de mot a la mot
less mermes raisons que le dit Gray m'efcrivit en chifre
tfant dernierement pres de vous defmontrant la fuffifance
& bonne intention du personage je vous prieray feulement
fuivant ce que ci devant je vous ay tant inftantement im-
portune que vous me permettiez defclaircir librement & ou.
vertement ce point de 1'a(fociation d'entre moy & mon filz
& me defier les mains pour proceder avec lui comme io
jageny efre requis pour son bien & le mien. Et j'entre.
prendz quoi que I'on vous die & puiffe en rapporter de faire
mentir ce petit brouillon qui perfuadd par aucuns de vos
minifires a enterpris cette separation entre moy & mon en.
sint, & pour y commencer je vous fupp!ie m'odroyer que
jt puille parler a ce jultice clerk qui vous a eRt nouvellement
tnvoye pour mander par luy a mon filz mon intention fur
tcla, cc qui je me promis que ne me refuserez, quant ce
ne feroit que pour demontrer en effect la bonne intention
que vous m'avez affeuree avoir a l'accord & entretien de
naturel devoir entre la mere & I'enfant qui dit en bonnes
ttrmes efre empefche pour vous me tenant captive en un
detert ce que vous ne pourrez mieux defmentir & faire
proitre voftre bon defir a notre union que me donnant les
Imoens d'y proceder, & non m'en retenir & empefcher
comme aucun de vos miniftres pretendent afin de laifTer
toujours lieu a leur mauvais & finiftres pradiques entre
nDus. La lettre porte oue l'afiociation n'est pas paffle,
LEi ne luy ai je jamais dit, bienque mon filz avoit accept4;
" Cott. Lib. Col. B. VIIL Fol. 147. A original.

Z!

J4

& que nous en avions convenu ensemble, comme r'ae
figni de fa main, & fes lettres rant a moy, que en Franct
en font soy, ayant donne ce meme temoignage de fa bo.,
che propre a plufieurs ambaffadeurs & perronnes de credit,

e'excufant de ne I'ofer faire publier par crainte de vro
feulement, demandant forces pour vous reflier d'avant de
fe declarer si ouvertement eftant jornellement persuade au
contraire par vos miniftres qui luy promettoyent avecque
une entreire a Yorck le faire declarer votre heretier. An
surplus Madame quand mon enfant feroit si malheureux quc
de s'opiniaftrer en cette extreme impiete & ingratitude vemi
moy, je ne puis penser que vous non plus qu'aucun aultr
prince de la Chretiente le vouluffiez en cela applaudir ou
meintenir pour luy fayre acquerir ma malediAion ains que
pluts iatroviendres pour luy faire recongnoitre l raifontr0I
jurte & evidante devant Dieu & les hommes. Helas & t
core ne luy vouluir j'en ofter, mays donner avec droi
ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout commife
vous, & fidelement faites ii i vous plef que je ne en foye
pis qu'auparavant, & que la faulfete des uns ne prevale dce
vant la verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & hi
plus grande affliAion que me fiaurroit arriver a fiavoir hi
perte de mon fils. Je vous fupplie de me mander en ca
qu'il perfifte en cette m'efconnoiffance de ion devoir, q9i
de luy on de moy il vous plaid advouer pour legitiime ro
eu reyne d'Ecoffe, & si vous aves agreable de pouruim
avec moy a part le traite commence entre nous de quoy jc
vous requiers, fans plus attendre de refpor.e de ce mal
gouverne enfant, vous en requerrant avec autant d'alff
tion que je fens mon coaur opprelfT d'ennuy. Pour Diel
fouvenez vous de la promeffe que m'avez faites de me
prendre en votre protcciion me raportant de tout a VOu1
& fur c prian. Dieu qu'il vous viueille preserver de toua
os cnnemys & diffimulez amys, comme je le desire de ml
consol r & de me venger de ceulz qui pourchanieft tm t
malheur tetre la mere & 'cenfant. Je cefferay de voli
troubler, mais non a m'ennuicr que je ne reCoiv quclq

consolation de vous & de Dieu encore un coup je le faop
p!ie de vous garder de tout peril. Futhbery x i Mars.

Votre fidelement vouee foeur
& obeilfante coufine,

MARIE Q.

A la reyne d'Angleterre,
madame ma bonne feur
& coufine.

N'. XXXIII. (Vol. II. p. 315.)

A Testament by Q. Mary ".

N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd.

Nr. Crawford late regius .professor of church.hifory
in the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper,
according to him, is written by Naue, Mary's fecre-
tary, the reft with the Queen's own hand. What is
marked " is in the Queen's hand.

CONSIDERANT par ma condition prefente i'eftat de vie
humaine, si incertain, que perfonne ne s'en peuft, ou doibt
afTeurer, finon foubs la grande & infinie misericorde de
Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre tous les dan.
gers & accidens, qui me pourroient inopinement furvenir
en cette captivite, meemes a cause des grandes & longues
maladies, ou j'ay etC detenue jufques a present; j'ay advise
tandis que j'ay la commodite, ou raison en jugement, de
pourvoir apres ma mort le falut de mon ame, enterrement
de mon corps & disposition de mon bien, eftat, & affaires,
par ce present mon testament & ordonnance de mon dernier
volonte, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, & du benoite S'. Efipit
: Cott. Lib. Verpat L. 1s. p. 415.

Z4

143

Premierement, me recongnoilFant indigne pechereffe avec
plus d'ofences envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfation par
toutes les adverites que j'ay fouffert; dont je la loue f6
bonte Et m'appuyant fur la croix de mon Sauveur & Re.
dempteur Jesus Chris. Je recommende mun ame a la be.
noifte & individue Trinit , & aux prieres de la glotieufe
Vierge Marie, & de tous les anges faints & fainctes de
paradis, efperant par leur merites & intercession, eftre ayde
a obtenir de efire faile parricipante avec eulx de felicit
eternelle. Et pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net& entier,
defpouillant des a present tout reftentiment des injures, ca.
lomnies, rebellions, & aultres offences, qui me pourroient
avoir ete faifies durant ma vie, par mes subjet rebelles &
aultres ennemis; Jen retriet la vengeance a Dieu, & le
fupplie leur pardonner, de mefme affcdion, que je luy
requiers pardon a mes faultes, & a tous ceuls & celler
que jc puis avoir offense de fails ou de parolles. Je veulx
& ordonne, &c. [ The two followirg paragrapbr contaln
direaions concerning tbe place and circammftlace of ber
brial. ]

Pour ne contrevenir a la gloire, honneur, & confera.

tion de 'Eglife catholique, apoitolique & Romaine, en la
quelle je veulx vivre & mourir, file prince d'Efcofle mon
fiz v pueft etre reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture qu'il
a prise a mon tres grand regret en l'herefie de Calvin ente
mes rebells, je le laiffe feul & unique heritier de mon
rQyaume dEfcoffe, de droid que je pretende jullement en
a la couronne d'Angleterre & pays qui en dependent, &
generallemnent de tons & chacun rmes meubles & immeubles
qui refteront apres ma mort, & execution de ce present
teament.

Si non , & que mon dit filz continue a vivre en la dire

herefe. Je cede. tranfporte, & faide don " de touts 6
" chacuns mes droidts, que je pretende & puis pretendre

a la couronne d'Angleterre, & aultres droidls, fig
neuries. ou rovaulmes en dependantz, au roy catholique,

" u aultre des fiens qu'il luy plaira, avefques advis, con-
?' fentement de fa fiinteti; tant pour le voyr aujourbuy

le feul feurs appui de la religion catholique, que pour
"reconnoilfince de gratuitcs faveurs que moy, & les miens
"recommandez par moy, ont avons receu de luy en ma
"plus grande neceffite; & refguard auffi au droidt que
" luy merme peut pretendre a ces ditz royaulmes & pays,
" je c fupplie qu'en recompence il preign alliance, de la

maifon de Lorraine, & il ce pleut de celle de Guise,
" pour memoire de la race de laquelle je fuis sortie au
"coRte de Mere'. n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que
" mon feul enfant, lequel eftant Catholiquc j'ay tousjours
u voue pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de l'accepter,
0 ou fillant une de fes niepces mariee comme fa fille.

" Je ayffe mon filz a la protection du roy, de prince,
a & dues de Lorraine & de Guise, & du Mayne, aux.
" quelz je recommende & son eftat en Efcoffe, & mon
" droict en Angleterre, si il eft catholique, & quelle le
" prlie de cefte reyne. "

Je fairz don au " conte de Lenox" du compte de Le.
nox Eenu par feu son pere, & commande mon filz, comme
mon h: iticr & fucceffeur, d'obeyr en celt en droit a mon
volonre.

Je veulx & ordonne toutes les sommes & deniers, qui fe
troveront par moys deues, tien mis cause de droit eftre
fits " a Lohliven " etre promptement payes & acquittes, &
tout tort & griefs repares per lefdits executeurs defquel7
Yen charge la conscience. Oultre, &c. C Follow two or
tbree pragraphr concerning particular legacies, and then i
anlded] FaiCt au manoir de Sheffeld en Angleterre le jour
de-- lil cinq cens foixanc & dix sept.

After a large blank page follows in the Queen's band:

' Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, au Claude
° Hamilton lequel te montrera le plus fidelle vers moy , &

plus constant en religion,. au jugement de - Dues de
Lorraine & de Guyfe, ou je le rapporte fur ce de ceulx a
que j'aurly donnay le charge de trayter avefque eux de

par my & ceulx, a condition de cc marie ou alliet e
s h dite mayfon ou par leur adviL '

Follow ear two pagte of particlar legacies.

' Et le remets ma tante de Lenox au droift quelle peat

a pretendr a la cont d'Angous avant r'Acort fait par mon
, commandement entre ma dice tante de Lenox & le
a comte de Morton , veu quil a et fait & par Ie feu roy
a mon Mary & moy, fur la promerfe de fa fidelle affitance, si
t luy & moy encourions dangier & befoign d'ayde, cc qu'il
a rompit, s'entendant fecretement au les not ennemis rebel-
a les, qu'attemtprient contre fa vie, & pour cell effed pris
a les arme, & ont porte les bannieres defploiecs, contre
a nous, je revoque auffi tout autre don que je luy ai fait de
c conte de Morton fur promeffes de fes bons services a adve.
a nir, & ntends quc la dite Conte foit reunie a la couronne,
a si ele fe trouve y partenir, comme res trahifons tant en la

mrort de mon fcu Mary, que en mon banilfement, &

a pourfuit de la mien ne I'ont merite. Et defends a mon
a filz de cc jamays fervire de luy pour la hayne qu'il aye
a a fes parents, la quelle je crains ne s'elende jufqes a
a luy, le connoiflant du tout affeflionne aux ennemis de
a mon droite en ce royaume, du quel il eR pencunnaire.

a Je recommende mon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon
* si, et lui commande detenir pres de luy et s'enfcrvir,

et je li laile le bien du conte de Boduel son oncl,
a en refpe oqu'il eft de mon fang, .mon filleul, et mi

ea ft laiffe en tutelle par son pere.
a Je declare que mon frere bastard Robert Abbe de St.
a Croix n'a eu que par circonvention Orkenay, et que k

ne fut jamays mon intention, comme il apert par la re

a vocation que j'ay fayte depuys, et ete aufli faite d'avanl
a l afge de xxv. ans, ce que j'aimois deliberer iil nl
a m'euffent prenner par prison de fe de defayre aulx efta!
a je veulx donc que Orkenay foit reunie a la couronnf
c comme une de plus necedaires pour mon fil, & fan
a mayfon ne poura ctre bien tenne

" Le silks de Morra ne parvient acceffi heriter, ains
a revient la conte a la Couronne, si i luy pleft luy don.
a ner fa ou fille en marriafge, et il nome 'enfienne
a ligne.

N'. XXXIV. (Vol. II. p. 327.)
A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the Queen

of Scotts "

PLEASE your majesty, I received your letter of the
date the i2th of Nov. and in like manner has seen some
part of the contents of one other of the fame date, di-
reded to Mons. de Movifir, ambassador for his majefly
the most Chriltian king, both which are agreeable to your
princely dignity, as by the one your highness desires to
know the true cause of my banishment, and offers unto me
all favour if Ihould be innocent of the heinous fats corn.
mitted in the person of your husband of good memory, so
by the other the said ambassador is willed to declare unto
me, if your husband's murder could be laid justly against
me, that you could not follicit in my cause, neitheryet
for any person that was participant of that execrable fat,
but would seek the revenge thereof, when you Ihould have
any means to do it; your majesty's offer, if I be innocent
of that crime, is most favourable, and your desire to know
the truth of the fame is most equitable; and therefore that
1 Ihould with all my simplicity, sincerity and truth answer
thereunto is most reasonable, to the end that your princely
dignity may be my help, if my innocence shall sufficiently
appear, and procure my condemnation, if I be culpable in
any matter, except in the knowledge of the evil disposed
minds of the most part of your nobility againif your said hus-
band, and not revealing of it; which I am assured was
sufficiently known to himself, and to all that had judgment

" April Hal. Lib. 37. B. 9. so. rlc.

347

sever so little in that realme; which also I wl.eonraitned
to underfland, as he, that was specially empoyed betwit
the arl Morton, and a good number of your nobility,
that they might with all humility intercede at your majefty'i
band for his relief, in such matters as are more fpecilly
contained in the declaration following, which 1 am confirained
for my jufification, by this letter to call to your majesty's
remembrance. Notwithstanding that I am aflured, to my
grief, the reading thereof will not finally offend your princely
mind. It may plafe your majesty to remember, that in the
yar of God, *s66, the said earl of Morton, with diven
other nobility and gent. were declared rebels to your ma.
jefty, and banished your realme for insolent murder con.
mitted in your majesty's own chamber, which they alledged
was done by command of your husband, who notwithtanding
ffirmed that he was compelled by them to subscribe the
warrant given for that else&, howsoever the truth of that
matter remains amongst them; it appertains not to me at
this time to be curious; true it is that I was one of that num.
ber, that heavily offended against your majefly, and palsed
into France the time of our banishment, at the desire of
the reft, to humbly pray your brother the molt Christian
king to intercede that our offcnces might be pardoned, and
your majesty's clemency extended towards us, albeit divers
of no fimall reputation, in that realme, was of the opinion,
that the said fad merited neither to be requisite for, not
yet pardoned. Always such was the careful mind of his
majesty towards the quietness of that realm, that the dea.
ling in that .cause was committed to Mons. de Movifir,
who was direded at that time to go into Scotland, tc
congratulate the happy birth of your son, whom Almighn
God of his goodness may long preserve in happy ellat
and perpetual felicity; the careful travail of the said de Mo
vifir was so efedual, and your majesty's mind so inclind
to mercy, that within short space thereafter, I was per.
mitted to repair in Scotland, to deal with earls Murray,
Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and secretary Ledington, in the
name and behalf of the laid earl Morton, lords ReCvc

Lindsay, and remanent complefis, that they might make
offer in the names of the said earl, of any matter that
might satisfy your majesty's wrath, and procure your cle.
mency to be extended in their favours ; at my coming to
them, after 1 had opened the effect of my message, they
declared that the marriage betwixt you and your husband
had been the occasion already of great evil in that realme,
and if your husband should be suffered to follow the ap.
petite and mind of such as was about him, that kind of
dealing might produce with time worse effects; for help.
ing of such inconvenience that might fall out by that kind
of dealing, they had thought it convenient to join them.
selves in league and band with some other noblemen, re.
solved to obey your majesty as their natural sovereign, and
have nothing to do with your husband's command whatfo.
ever, if the said earl would for himself enter into that band
and confederacy with them, they could be content to
humbly request and travel by all means with your majesty
for his pardon, but before they could any farther proceed,
they desired to know the said earl's mind herein; when I
had answered, that he nor his friends, at my departure,
could not know that any such like matter would be pro.
ponit, and therefore was not intruted what to answer
therein, they desired that I Ihould return fufliciently in.
ftruded in this matter to Sterling, before the baptifin of
your son, whom God might preserve; this message was
faithfully delivered to me at Newcastle in England, where
the laid earl then remained, in presence of his friends and
company, where they all condescended to have no far.
ther dealing with your husband, and to enter into the
said band. With this deliberation I returned to Ster.
ling, where at the request of the most Christian King and
the Oueen's majesty of England by their ambaFladors pro.
sent, your majesty's gracious pardon was granted unto them
all, under condition always that they ihould remain banished
forth of the realme, the space of two years, and farther
during your majesty's pleasure, which limitation was after
mitigated at the humble request of your own nobility, so

349

that immediately after the said earl of Morton repaired
into Scotland to Quhittingaime, where the earl of Bodvell
and secretary Ledington come to him; what speech palled
there amongst them, as God lhall be my judge, I knew
nothing at that time, but at their departure I was requefed
by the said earl Morton to accompany the earl Bodvell and
secretary to Edenburgh, and to return with such anfver as
they should obtain of your majesty, which being given to
me by the said pcrfons, as God Ihall be my judge, was
no other than there words, " Schaw to the earl Mortoa
" that the Queen will hear no speech of that matter ap.
"pointed unto him; " when I crafit that the answer might
be made more sensible, fecreary Ledington said, that the
earl would sufficiently underfand it, albeit few or none at
that time understand what pafled amongst them It is known
to all men, als veill be railling letters pafred betwixt the
said earl and Lcdington when they become in divers fahions,
as also ane buck set furth by the miniters wherein they
affirm that the earl of Morton has confeTfed to them, before
his death, that the earl Bodvell come to Quhittingaime to
prepon the calling away off the king your husband, to the
which proposition the said earl of Morton affirms that he
could give no answer unto such time he might know your
majesty's mind therein, which he never received. As to the
abominable murder, it i known too by the depositions of
many persons that were executed to the death for the com-
mitting thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and
at the command of such of the nobility, as had fubfcrivit
band for that effet; by this unpleasant declaration, the
most part thereof known to yourself, and the remainder
may be understood by the aforelaid witneles that was ex-
amined in torture, and that are extant in the custody of
the ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency so far as may
concern any fast does appear fufficienly to your majelty.
And as for my dealing aforesaid, I can be no otherwise
charged therein, but as what would accuse the veflel that
preserves the vine from harm, for the intemperancy of such
a immoderately ufc the fame. As for the special cause at

,y banishment, I think the fame has proceeded upon ane
,pinion conceived, that I was able to accuse the earl of
hiorton of so much matter as they alledge himself to have
otnfeffed before he died, and would not be induced, for
lo's of reputation, to perform any part thereof. If this be
te occasion of my trouble, as I suppose it is, what pu.
nifhment I should deserve, I remit me to your majefiy's
beter judgment, who well knows how careful ever ilk gentle.
man should be of his fame, reputation and honour, and
how far ever ilk man should abhor the name of a pultroun,
and how indecent it would have been to metoaccufe the earl
of Morton, being so near of his kin, notwithftandiug all
the injuries I was constrained to receive at his hand all the
ime of his government, and for no other caure, but for
Ihewing of particular friendship to particular friends in the
tne of the last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now
:o accuse him in any matter being dead, and more sorry
that being on lyff, be such kind of dealing obtained that
name of Ingrate. Always for my own part I have been ba.
nilhed my native country those three years and four months,
living in anxiety of mind, my holl guds in Scotland, which
were not small, intermittit and difpofit upon, and has
continually since the time I was relieved out of my lat
roubles at the desire of Monsr. de Movifir, attended to
how your majelty's pleasure , and to wait upon what
fehvice it should please your majesty for to command. Up.
on the 8th of April intl. your good friend secretary Wal.
fnghame has declared unto me , that her highness tho't
it expedient that I ihould retire myself where I pleased, I
declared unto him I had no means whereby I might perform
hat desire, till such time as I should receive it from your
ajefty. Neither knew I where it would pleale your high.
ness to direc me, until such time as I should have received
farther information from you. Upon this occasion, and
prtly by permillion , I have taken the hardrefs to write
this present letter, whereby your majesty may underhand
my part of my troubles pail, and strait present. As to
it intention future, 1 will never deny that I am fully reg

3jI-

solved to spend the reft of my days in your majefy's ser.
vice, and the king your son's, wheresoever 1 Ihall be di.
reded by your majesty, and for the better performing
thereof, if so Ihall be her majesty's pleasure, to recom.
mend the tryal of my innocency, and examination of the
verity of the preceding narration, to the king your son,
with request that I may be pardoned for such offences as
concerned your majesty's fcrvice, and var common to all men
the time of his les aige and perdonit to all, except to me,
I should be the bearer thereof myself, and be direted in
whatsoever service it should please your majesty for to com.
mand. Most humble I beseech your majesty for to confider
hereof, and to be so gracious as to give order, that I may
have means to serve your majesty according to the sincerity
of my meaning, and so expefing your majesty's answer,
after the killing your hand with all humility, I take leae
from London.

N. XXXV. (Vol. I. p335.)

A letter from Sir Amias Pawlet ".

S IR,

I Did forbear, according to your direcion signified in
your letters of the fourth of this present, to proceed to the
execution of the contents of Mr. Waade's letters unto you,
for the dispersing of this lady's unneceftary servants, and
for the seasing of her money, wherein I was bold to write
unto you my simple opinion (although in vain as it now
falleth out), by my letters of the ?th of this intant, which
I doubt not are with you before this time; but upon the
receipt of your letters of the $th which came not unto my
hands untill the 8th in the evening, by reason, as did
appear by indorfement, that they had been milaken, and

<4 Oarisi. Ca. C. g.

were

were lent back to Windsor, after they were entered into the
nay towards me, I confidered, that being accompanied only
by mny own servants, it might be thought that they would be
intrcated to fay as I would command them, and therefore
]thought good , for my better disch.arge in there money.
matters, to crave the afiiltance of lAr. Richard Baggot, who
repairing unto me the next morning, we had access to this
Outen, whom we found in her bed, troubled after the
(ci manner with a defluxion, which was fallen down into
the fide of her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one
of her hands, unto whom I declared, that upon occasion
of her former practices, doubting left she would persist
therein by corrupting underhand some bad members of this
Fate, I was exprelly commanded to take her money into
my hands, and to reft answerable for it, when it shall be
required: advising her to deliver the said money unto me
iith quietness. After many denials, many exclamations,
and many bitter words against you (1 fay nothing of her rail-
ling against myself), with flat affirmation that her majesty
might have her body , but her heart she should never have,
reiuGng to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my
servants, and sent for bars to break open the door, where-
upon she yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I
Lund there in the coffers, mentioned in Mr. Waade's re-
rombrance, five rplls of canvas, containing five thousand
French crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one
had, in gold, one hundred and four pounds two Ihillings,
and the other had three pounds in silver, which bag of silver
nas left with her, affirming that Ihe had no more money in
this house, and that she was indebted to her servants for
their wages. Mr. Waade's note maketh mention of ; rolls
left in Curie's chamber, A wherein, no doubt, he was
nifreckoned, which is evident as well by the testimonies
and oaths of diverse persons, as also by probable conjectures;
so as in truth we found only two rolls, every ok which
tntaineth one thousand crowns, which was this Queen's
luifte to Curle's wife at her marriage. There is found in

5 cile (an tell you the truth of this matter.
XVL. Ill.

A a

3$1

Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a chain worth by eltimation
one hundred pounds, and in money, in one bag nine hun.
dred pounds, in a second bag two hundred fourscore and fix
pounds eighteen Ihillings. All the foresaid parcels of money
are bellowed in bags, and fealed by Mr. Richard Baggot,
saving five hundred pounds of Naw's money, which I reserve
in my hands, for the uie of this houlheld, and may be
repayed at London, uwhere her majesty Ihall appoint, out of
the money, received lately by one of my servants, out of
the Exchequer. I feared left the people might have dispersed
this money in all this time, or have hidden the fame in
some secret corners; for doubt whereof, 1 had caused all this
Queen's family, from the highest to the lowe4, to be guarded
in the several places where I found them, so as )ffl had not
found the money with quietness, I had been forced to have
search sirs all their lodgings, and then their own persons. I
thank God with all my heart, as for a singular blefling, that
that falleth out so well, fearing left a contrary success might
have moved some hard conceits in her majesty.

Touching the dispersing of this Queen's servants, I trust

I have done so much, as may suffice to satisfy her majefly
for the time, wherein I could not take any absolute course,
until I heard again from you, partly because her majelty,
by Mr. Waade's letter, doth refer to your consideration to
return such as shall be discharged to their several dwellings
and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, you have forgotten
to deliver your opinion; partly, for that as yet, I have re-
ceived no anfwcr from you, of your resolution, upon the
view of the Scottish family sent unto you; what persons you
will appoint to be difrift; only this 1 have done, I have
bcftowed all such as are mentioned in this bill inclosed in
three or tour several rooms, as the fame may suffice to contain
t'r.em, and that their meat and drink shall be brought unto
theL by my servants. It may please you, to advertise m:
by .our next letters, in what fort, and for what courle, I
lhaii make their paflports, as also, if they Ihall fay thai
ti.ev are unpaid of their wages, what I shall do therein.
It i» Cid that they have been accuftumed to be paid of thti

,ges at Christmas, for the whole year." ler majeltly'

c':arge sill be somewhat diminiflied by the departure of
t!1is people, and my charge by this occasion, will be the'
nore cafy. But the persons, all save Balltin, are such filly
and iinple fouls, as there was no great cause to fear their
nac-ice., and upon this ground, I was of opinion, in my
trnmer letters, that all this dismissed train should have fol-
!jwed their miltrefs, until the next remove, and there to
tar been discharged upon the sudden, for doubt that the
fil remove might be delayed, yf she did fear, or expedt
inn hard measure.

Others fliall excuse their foolish pity as they may; but
for my part, I renounce my part of the joys of heaven, yf
in any thing that I have said, written or done, I have
had any other refpec than the furtherance of her majesty's
!ervice; and so 1 shall most earnestly pray you to affirn
fir me, as likewise for the not fearing of the money by
)lr. lManners, the other commiflioners and myself. I
!ruLt Mr. Waade hath answered, in all humble duties,
for the \shole company, that no one of us did so much as
think that our commiflion reaching only to the papers, we
might be bold to touch the money, so as there was no
.eeth of that all to my knowledge, and as you know I
nas no commissioner in this search, but had my hands full
st Tyxall, discreet servants are not hastily to deal in great
r:ters, without warrant, and especially where the cause
is such as the delay of it carried no danger.

Your alvertifement of that happy remove hath been greatly
conaiortble unto me. I will not fay, in respect of myfclf,

tLaufe nmy private interest hath no measure of comparison
with her niajefty's safety, and with the quiet of this realme.
(Gd grant a happy and speedy yffue to these good and
godiy councels; and so I commit you to his merciful pro,
tedion. From Chartley the loth of September 1586.

"S This lady hath good store of money at preftnt in thc French
AmtiLa4or's hands.

A a2

S-

N'. XXXVI. (Vol. II p. 349 )
Letter from the king of Scotts to Mr. Archibald

Douglas his ambassador in England, October,
15S6"

R E S ER V E up yourself na langer in the earned deal.
ing for my mother, for ye have done it too long; anm
think not that any your travellis can do goode if hit life
be taken, for then adeo with my dealing with thaime that
are the fpedal inftrumentis thairof; and theirfore, gif )e
looke for the contineuance of my favour towaris you,
fpair na pains nor plainnes in this cace, but redde my
letter wettin to Williame Keith, and conform yourself
quhollie to the contentis thairof, and in this requeift let
me reap the fruidis of your great credit there, ather now
or never. FairwelL Odober, 1586.
Letter to fir William Keith, ambassador in Eng.

land, probably from secretary Maitland. Nov.
27, 1586 "

BY your letters sent by this bearer, (albeit concerning
no pleasant fubjeft) his majesty conceives well of your
earnestness and fidelity in your negotiations, as alo of
Mr. trchibald's activity and diligence, whom you fu
greatly praise and recommend. I with the issue corref
pond to his Majesty's opinion, your care and travell
and his great diligence as you write. His majesty take
this rigorous proceeding against his mother deeply it
heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both in hono-
and otherwise. His highnesses ations and behaviour uttu

s" Cott. Lib. Cali .

C. 9. An Original in the king's hand.
" A Copy in the collft. of fir A. Dick. Vol. A. l. '.- i

,!ainlv not only how far nature prevails, but also how he
apprehends of the sequel of that process, and of what mo-
ment he eReems it There is an ambaffade shortly to be
dirctld, wherein will be employed an earl and two coun-
fllors, on whore answer will depend the continuance or
dilTilu:ion of the amity and good intelligence between the
princes of this isle. In the mean season , if farther ex-
trenity be used, and his majesty's suit and request disdained,
his highness will think himself dishonoured and contemned
far belides his expectation and deserts. Ye may perceive
his majelty's disposition by his letter to you, which you
ihall impart to Alr. Archibald, and both deal according
thereto. I need not to recommend to your care, concerning
your master's service both in weill and in honour. As you
and your colleague shall behave yourself in this behalf, si for
my own part, will I interpret your affection to your maIter.
I am glad of that I hear of yourself, and I do fully credit
that you write of Mr. Archibald, whose friends here make
great account of his professed devotion to the Queen, hetides
the duty he owes to the king's majesty her son. Farther I
am conftr.ined to remit to next occasion, having scarce time
to scribble these few lines (which of themselves may bear
rincfs of my haste). Wilhing you a prosperous ifloe of
)our negotiation, 1 commit you, &c. Ilalyrudhoufo,
lovr. 27th, 1586.

The people , and all efates here are so far moved by
tie rigorous proceedings against the Queen, that his ma-
jelty, and all that have credit are importuned, and may
not go abroad for exclamations againfl them, and impre.
tations against the Queen of England.

A a ?

N-. XXXVII. Vol. II.) p. 352
To the king's majesty, from Mr. Archibald

Douglas ".

P LEASF your majesty, I received your letter ofthe date
the zSth of September, the sth of Otober, which was the
fame day that I d.rected ' m. Murray towards your highners,
by such letters as he carried, and others of several dates,
your majefiv may perceive that I had omitted nothing so
far as my travel might reach unto, anent the performing
of the two chief points contained the said letter befor the
receit thereof, which by there presents I must repeat for
answering of the faidis. As to the first, so far as may con.
cern the interceding for the Queen your majesty's mother
her life, I have divers times and in every audience travelled
with this Queen in that matter, specially to know what her
full determination must be in that point, and could never
bring her to any further answer, but that this proceeding
against her by order of justice was no less agaiflt her mind,
than againt their will that loved her best as toiwards her
life she could give no anlfer thereunto, untill such time as
the law hath declared whether The was innocent or guilty.
Herewithal it was her pleasure thus far to inlorm me, that
it was a number of the affuciants that earnestly pressed her
that the law might proceed against her, giving reasons that
so long as she was suffered to deal in matters, so long
would never this realme be in quiet, neither her life,
neither this slate in assurance, and in the end they used this
protestation that if she would not in this matter follow their
advice, that they should remain without all blame whatf'eser
thould fall out; whereupon She had granted them liberrl
to proceed, left such as had made the requelt, migl;l

'* I Oct. I. 86.ro the Original in the colltA of firA, Dirt

Vo B. .ol. 3:4.
38

Ireafter have charged herself with inconvenience if any thould
j!rp'in.

rind y mryfelf I know this her speech to be true, be-

cuafe both papist and proteflant has behaved them, as it
i;ah been her pleasure to declare, but upon divers re-
?,dis, the one to avoid suspicion that otherwise was con-
teived againlt them, the other upon zeal, and care that rhey
\ c11

be known to have for preservation of their sovereign's

lif and fate in this perilous time, upon consideration
Y.hereof, I have been conltrained to enter into some deal-
irg with both, wherewith I made her majesty acquainted;
the proteltants, and such as in other matters will be known
t. bear no small favour unto your majesty's service , hath
frayed that they may be excused from any dealing in the
contrary of that, which by their oath they have avowed,
and by their speech to their Sovereign requeferl for , and
that before my coming in this country; if they should
r!w otherwise do, it would produce no better effet but to
mi;e them subjet to the accufition of their sovereign,
Y.hen it should please her to do it, of their inconstancy,
in giring councell whereby they might incur the danger of ill
cluncellors and be consequent worthy of punishment. Such
of tl'e papilts, as I did deal with, went immediately, and
told her majety what I had spoken to them, who alheit lae
unldciftood the matter of before, sent for me and declare 1
to me my own speech that I had uttered to them, willii.g
me for the weil of my maifter's service to abstain frotmu
dealing with such , as were not yet sufficiently moved to think
of my mafier as she did. I craved leave of her maijety,
that I might inform them of your majesty's late behaviour
toairds her. and the slate of this realme, whereunto with
fLme difficulty she gave her consent. At my late departure
from court, which was upon the 5t1'.; r.ch;s instant, and the
day after that the lords of this grand jury had taken their
leaves of her majesty to go northward to Fothringham, it
vas her pleasure to promise to have further speech in this
n.irtcr at the returning of the said lords , and to give fMll
answer according to your majefly's contentment to t'e,

A a4

remainder matters, that T had proponit in name of your ma.
jelly. As to the 2d part concerning the afrociation, and
desire that the promise made to the mailer of Gray concerning
Tour majelty's title may be fulfilled; it appears by the said
letter, that the very point. whereupon the quelion that may
bring your majesty's title in doubt hath not been tightly t
the writing of the said letter confidered, which I take to have
proceeded for lack of reading of the ad of parliament, whereia
is fulfilled all the promise made by the Queen to the laid
master, and nothing may now cause any doubt to arise
against your said tide, except that an opinion should be con.
ceived by these lords of this parliament that are so vehement at
this time against the Queen )our majeftv's mother, that
your majesty is, or may be proved hereafter aflenting to her
proceedings, and some that love your majesty's service were
of that opinion that too earnet request might move a ground,
whereupon suspicions might grow in men so ill affected in
that matter, which I t:h't might be helped by obtaining
of a declaration in parliament of your majesty's innocence
at this time, and by reason that good nature and public
honesty wnuld constrain you to intercede for the Queen your
mother, which would carry with itself, without any further,
some suspicion that might move ill affeded men to doubt. In
my former letters 1 humbly craved of your majesty that some
learned men in the laws, might be moved to advise with
the words of the association, and the mitigation contained
in the as of parliament, and withall to advice what sus-
picious effeds your majelty's request might work in there
choleric men at this time, and how their minds might be
bell moves to receive reason; and upon al these coniderations
they might have formed the words of a declarator of your
majesty's innocence to be obtained in this parliament, and
failing thereof, the very words of a protestation for the fame
effed that might best serve for your majelty's service, and
for my better information. Albeit this was my Gmple opinion,
I Ihall be contented to follow any diredion it lhall please
your majesty to give; I have already opened the fubflanc
hereof to the Queen of his realne, who seems not to be

offended herewith, and hath granted liberty to deal therein
Aith such of the parliament as may remain in any doubt of
mird. This being the fum of my proceedings in this matter,
besides the remainder, contained in other letters of several
dates, I am constrained to lay the whole open before your
mnjefty, and to humbly pray that full information may be
sent unto me what further to do herein ; in this middle time,
wlile I (hall receive more ample direction 1 lhall proceed
and be doing according to such direction as I have already
received. And so, most gracious sovereign, wifling unto
your majesty all happy success in your affairs, I humbly take
my leave from London, r6th of Or. this igS6. Your
majelly's most humble subjeCt and obedt servant.
A memorial for his majesty by the mailer of

Gray ".

IT will please your majesty, I have tho't meeter to set down
all things as they occur, and all advertisements as they
come to my ears, then jointly in a lettre.

I (ame to Vare the ?4th of Dec', and sent to \W"
lc;th, and Mr. Archibald Douglas to advertise the Queen
of it, !ik as they did at their audience. She promised the
Q.leen your majefy's mother's life should be spared till
re \ire heard. The 27th they came to Vare to me,
the hl'ich day Sir Robt came to Vare, where they shewed
us lihw' f:r they had already gone in their negociation,
but for tl,.t the discourse of it is set down in our general
lkter, I remit me to it, only this far I will testify unto
Your m t'-j, that W"'. Keith hath used himself right ho-
rcdily a;:d wifely till our coming, refpecling all circum-
flances, and chiefly his colleague his dealing, which indeed
is not betaer than your majesty knows already.

Tie 29th day of Deer. we came to London, where

' '2 Jan. isS. An Original in his own hand is the colit. of
ir A. Dtli. Vol. A. fol. 222.

361

we were no ways friendly received, nor after the honel
fort it has pleased your majesty use her ambafladors; neve
man sent to welcome or convey us. The fame day wi
underRtood of Mr. de Bellievre his leave taking, and so
that the custom permitted not, we sent our excuses by Mr
George Young.

The ift day of Jany. Wm. Keith. and his colleagul

according to the custom sent to crave our audience. \VW
received the answer contained in the general letter, an
could not have answer till the 6th day, what was don
that day your majefy has it in the general, yet we wa
not out of esperance at that time, albeit we received hare
answers.

The gth day we speak with the earl of Leicester, when

our conference was, as is set down in the general. 1 re
marked this, that he that day said plainly the detainir4
of the Queen of Scotland prisoner was for that she pre
tended a fucceflion to this crown. Judge then by this, wha
is tho't of your Majesty as ye shall hear a little after.

The 9th day we speak with the French ambassador, whor

we found very plain in making to us a wife discourse of al
his proceedings, and Mr. de Bellievre we thanked him ir
your majesty's name and opened such things as we had tc
treat with this Queen, save the lat point, as more largell
set down by our general.

It is tho't here, and some friends of your majesty's ad

vised me, that Bellievre his negociation was not effeAual.
and that the resident was not privy to it, as indeed 1
think is true, for since Bellievre his perting, there is a tall
of this Chafeauneuf his servants taken with his whole papen
and pacquets, which he was fending in France for that thel
charge him with a conspiracy of late against the Queen
here her life. Ic is alledged his servant has confessed the
matter, but whom I /hall trust I know not, but ti1 I fee
proof I shall account him an honest man, for indeed so he
appears, and one (without doubt) who hath been very
instant in this matter. I shew him that the Queen and earl
of Leicester had desired to speak with me in private, and

craved his opinion; he gave it freely that he tho't it meetefR,
1 flew him the reason why I communicate that to him,
for that I had been fufpeded by some of her majetv's
friends in France to have done evil offices in her service,
that he should be my witness that my earnest dealing in
this Thould be a sufficient testimony that all was lyes, and
that this knave Naue who now had betrayed her, had in
that done evil offices ; he desired me, feeing the saw only
will other folks eyes, that I should no ways impute it to
her, for the like Ihe had done to himself by Naue his per-
fualion. I answered he should be my witness in that.

The 9th day we sent to court to crave audience, which

we got the loth day; at the first, she said a thing long
looked for should be welcome when it comes, I would now
fee your mailer's offers. I answered, no man makes offers
but for some cause; we would, and like your majelty, first
know the cause to be extant for which we offer, and like-
wife that it be extant till your majefly has heard us. I
think it be extant yet, but I wil not promise for an hour,
but you think to Ihift in that fort. I answered we mind
not to /hist, but to offer from our sovereign all things that
with reason may be; and in special, we offered as is set
down in our general, all was refused and tho't nothing.
She called on the three that were in the house, the earl
of Leicester, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very
despitefully repeated al our offers in pretence of them all.
I opened the last part and said, Madam, for what respect is
it that men deal againfi your rerfon or estate for her cause ?
Si e answered, because they think the shall succeed to me,
a:d for that fle is a papilt; appearingly said I both the
causes may be removed, she said The would be glad to un-
desihnrd it. If Madam, said I, all that she has of right
of i'uccclion were in the king our sovereign's person, were
ro: all hope of papists removed ? She answered , I hope
so. Ihen ;ladam 1 think the Queen his mother (hall
"illingly demit all her rights in his person. She answered
fle hath no right, for fle is declared unhabil. Then I
said, if he have no right, appearingly the hope ceases

;61

already, so that it is not to be feared that any man attempt
for her. The Queen answered, but the papists allow not
our declaration; then let it fall, fays I, in the king's per.
son by her assignation. The earl of Leicester answered,
ihe is a prisoner, how can the demit ? I answered the de.
million is to her on , by the advice of all the friends Ihe
has in Europe, and in cafe, as God forbid, that any attempt
cuttis the Queen here away, who Mhall party with her to
prove the demiflion or assignation to be ineffedual, her son
being opposite party and having all the princes her friends for
him, having bonded for the efficacy of it with his majesty of
before. The Queen made as lhe could not comprehend
my meaning, and fir Rob' opened the matter again, the yet
made as tho' she understood not. So the earl of Leicetr
answered that our meaning was, that the king Ihould be put
in his mother's place. Is it so, the Queen answered, then
I put myself in a worse cafe than of before by God's pas.
sion, that were to cut my own throat, and for a dutchy,
or an earldom to yourself, you or fuchas you would cause
some of your desperate knaves kill me. No, by God, he
thall never be in that place. I answered he craves nothing
of your majesty but only of his mother. The earl of Leicelter
answered that were to make him party to the Queen my
miftrels. I said, be will be far more party, if he be in
her place thro' her death. She would Ray no longer, but
said hie ihould not have a worse in his mother's place.
And said, tell your king what good I have done for him
in holding the crown on his head since he was born, and
that I mind to keep the league that now tands between
us, and if he break it shall be a double fault, and with
this minded to have bidden us a farewell; but we achevit
(i. eft finilhed arguing upon this point). And I spake
craving of her that her life may be spared for rs days;
ihe refused. Sir Robt craved for only eight days, (he said
not for an hour; and so geid her away. Your majesty fees
we have delivered all we had for offers, but all is for
nothing, for Ihe and her councel has laid a determination
that they mind to follow forth, and I fee it comes thet

es her councel than herself, which I like the worse; for
#ithout doubt, fir, it thall cut off all friendship ye had
here. Altho' it were that once they had meaned well to
your majety, yet remembering themselves, that they have
medled with your mother's blood, good faith they cannot
hope great good of yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry for;
farther your majesty may perceive by this last discourse of
that 1 proponit, if they had meaned well to your majesty,
they had used it otherwise than they have done, for reason
has bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind some-
thing to speak in this matter, because we look fiurly our
letters ihall be truffit by the way.

For that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their
determination, altho' the Queen again and the earl of Lei-
cefter has desired to speak with me in particular; I mind not
to speak, nor shall not; but assuredly Ihall let all men fee
that I in particular was-no ways tyed to England, but for
the refped of your majelty's service. So albeit, at this
time, I could not effectuate that I desired, yet my upright
dealing in it Ihall be manifested to the world. We are,
God Ailling, then to crave audience, where we mind to
use lharply our instructions, which hitherto we have used
very calmly, for we can, for your honour's cause, fay no
less for your majesty, than the French amballador has
fid for his matter.

So I pray your majesty confider my upright dealing in

your service, and not the effect, for had it been doable
(i. e. possible to be done) by any I might have here
had credit, but being I came only for that cause I will
not my credit lhall serve here to any further purpose. I
pray God preserve your majesty and fend you a true and
sincere friendlhip. From London this 12th of Jan. s8g6.

I underhand the Queen is to fend one of her own to
your majesty.

To the right hon. my lord vice-chancellor and

secretary to his majesty, from the master of
Gray ".

M Y lord, I fend you these lines with this Inclored to
his majesty, whereby your lordship shall underhand how
matters goes here. And before all things I pray your lord.
lhip move his majesty to refpe& my diligence, and not
the ese&t in this negociation, for I swear if it had been
for the crown of England to myself I could do no more,
and let not unfriends have advantage of me, for the
world lhall fee that I loved England for his majelty's
service only. I look Ihortly to find your lordlhip friend as
ye made promise, and by God I ihall be to you if I can.
Nm. Keith and I devyfed, if matters had gone well, to have
run a course that your lordlhip might have here been in
credit and others disappointed, but now I will do for you
as for myself; which is to care for no credit here, for in
conscience they mean not honestly to the king our love.
reign, and if they may, he will go get his mother is
goner or ihorly to go, therefore my lord without all kind
of scruple I pray you to advise him the bet is not this way,
They fay here, that it has been said by one who heard it
from you, that ye desired not the king and England to
agree, because it would rack the noblemen, and gave an
example of it by king James the fourth, I answered in your
name that I was assured you never had spoken it. Mr Archi.
bald is the speaker of it, who I aflure your lordship has
been a poison in this matter, for they lean very mickle to
his opinion. He cares not, he fays, for at length the king
will be fain to deal this way, either by fair means or nectf.
fity, so that when he deals this course he is assured to be
welcome; to set down all that is past of the like purposes,
it would consume more paper than I have here, so 1 defer

" 1,th Jan. 1SS, an Original in the CoUO. of fir A. Disk.
VoL A. feL 179.

it to meeting. There is a new conspiracy alledged against
the Queen to have been intended, for the French ambafiLdor
relient three of his men taken, but I think in the end it
shall prove nothing. Mr. Stafford who is ambassador for
this Queen in France, is touched with it, his brother is
taken here, always it has done this harm in our negociation
that all this council would not move this Queen to meddle
gith the Queen of Scotland's blood, till this invention was
found forth. I remit all other things to the inclosed. We
irinded to have sent to his majelty a discourse, which we
have let down of all our proceedings since our hither com.
ing, but we are surely advertized that the bearer is to be
trnued by the way for our pacquets, so that we defer it till
our own coming; this I have put in a privy part beside the
pacquet. We lhall I think take leave on Fryday the i jth
day, where we mind exadly to follow the rigour of our
isltruclions, for it cannot stand with the king's honour that
we Lay less than the French ambassador, which was, le roy
mno maifire ne peult moins faire que fe refentir. So that
about the 24th I think we shall, God willing, be at home
except that some Ray come which we look not for. The
Qacen and the earl of Leicester has desired to speak with
me. 1 refused save in presence of my colleagues, by reason
1 fee a determination which particular credit cannot help,
and I crave no credit but for that cause. It will please your
;urdfhip retire the inclosed from his majesty and keep it.
So after my service commended to yourself and bedfellow,
conmmit you to God. From London the lith of Jan. 1586.

To the king's majesty, from fir Robert Melvil ".

IT may pleale your majesly, since the diredion of our
former letters, we had audience, and her majesty appeared
to take our overtures in good part in presence of her coun-
il; albeit no offers could take place with them, having

" :th Jan. ss86. An Original in his own band, in the colled.
ti sr A. Di.k. Vol. A. fol. IrI.

07

taken rerolotion to proceed with extremity, not the leli
it pleased her majeRfy to desire us to hay for two days
on taking our leave, untill ihe had advised upon our pro.
poitions; since which time, her majeRy is become more
hard by some letters (as we are informed) has come from
Scotland, making some hope to believe that your majefly
takes not this matter to heart, as we know the contrary
in effec, and had of before removed the like opinion out
of her majesty's mind, which by sinister information was
credited, thir reports has hindered our commission, and
abused this Queen, fearing in like manner we lhall be Ray.
ed until answer come from Scotland by such person as
they have intelligence of. And albeit that it will be well
enough known to all men how heavily your majesty takes
this proceeding to heart, the truth is, that they have by
this occaion so persuaded the Queen, that it is like to hin.
der our negotiation. As also Alchinder (i. e. Alexander)
Steward is to be directed in their party, by our know.
ledge, who has awantyt more of his credit, than I believe
he may perform, and we wreat him to deist from this deal.
ing, laying it does harm, and he is not meet for that pur.
pose, remitting to your majesty's good discretion to take
older herein as we lhall be answerable to your majesty not
to omit any point we have in charge, as the.truth is, the
master of Grhaye has behaved himself very uprightly and
discreetly in this charge, and evil tayne with be divers in
there parts who were of before his friends. We have been
bedalding to the menfirals who has born us belt comnany,
but has not been troubled with others. Wylzeme Kethe
hath left nothing undone that he hath in charge. As for
ma.ftr Archibald he has promised at all times to do his de.
woyr, wherein he ihall find true report made to your ma-
jcRy, craving pardon of your majesty that I have been so
tedious, after I have kissed your majelty's hand I humbly
take my leave. Praying God to grant your majety many
good days and happy, in whose protetion I commit you
maijfty at London , the zoth of Jan. 1S86,

SI RI

SIR.

ALBFIT Malfer George has not been in commifllon he is

not i'ferior in his service to any of us, as well by his
good advice and diligent care he takes for the advancement of
sour service, wherech we have not been a little furthered.
To the king's majesty, from the malfer of Gray

and Sir Robert Mclvill "

PLEASE it your majefly in the last audience we had,
fnce our laR advertisement by Wm Murray, we find her
rajerty at the resuming our offers something mitigated, and
inclined to confider more deeply of them, before we got our
leave, at our reasoning, certain of the council, namely, my
lord LeiceRfer, fir Christopher Haton, my lord Hunfdon, and
my lord Hawart being present in the chamber, gave little
Ihow of any great contentment to heare from her former
reflution, now caffin in perplexitie what she lhould do,
ar ays we left her in that date, and lince have daily pressed
conference with the whole council, which to this hour we
have not yet obtained. This day we have rent down to
crave our leave. The greatet hinder which our negotiation
has found hitherto is a persuasion they have here that either
your majfty deals filpericially in this matter, or that with
time ye may be moved to digest it, which when with great
difficulty we had expugnit, we find anew that certain letters
written to them of late from Scotland has found some place of
credit with them in our contrare. So that refolviag now to
clear them of that doubt by a special meflage, they have
made choice of Sir Alexander Stewart to try your highness's
meaning in it, and to persuade your majesty to like of their
proceedings, where from no terror we can fay out unto him
is able to divert him, he has given out that he has credit
with your majesty, and that he doubts not to help this matter

i lTR Jan. 1s8(. An Original il the coUcl. of lir A. Dick. Vol.
1 fol. 10.
VOL. IIL B b

1l»

at your highness's hand. If he come there that errand, w
think your majesty will not oversee the great disgrace thai
his attempts shall give us here, if he be not tane order witt
before that he be further heard, and if so be that any other
be direted ( as our intelligence gives us there shall) ou
humble suit is to your majeftv, that it may please your highnei
to hear of us what we find here, and at what point we leav,
this matter with her majety, before that they find accidence
the causes whereof remitting to our private letters. Wi
commit your majesty for the present to God's eternal pro
tetion. From London this 21ft of Jan. 1586.

N*. XXXVII (Vol. IL p. 360.)
Copy of a letter from the earls of Sbrewibur)

and Kent, &c. touching their proceedings witd
regard to the death of the Scottilh Queen, te
her majesty's council.

IT may please your honb* good lordlhipE to be advertred
that, on Saturday the 4th of this present, I Robert aBal
came to the house of me the earl of Kent in the count
of- to whom your lordships letter and mefage was de
livered, and her majety's commiflion hewn; whereupor
I the earl forthwith fen precepts for the staying of fuct
hues and crie as had troubled the country, requiring thi
officers to make flay of all such persons, as uhould brinn
any such warrants without names, as before had beer
done, and to bring them to the nalt julicc of peace, tc
the intent that, upon their examination, the occalion and
causes of fNch fediidou bruites might be bolted oat and
known. It was also resolved that I dtefaid earl of Kcnl
should, on the Monday following, come to Lylford te
Mr. Elmes, to be the nearer and readier to confer witt
my lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robnl
37e

teale came to Fotheringay, where after the communicat.
ing the commission, &c. unto us fir Amice Pawlet and fir
Drue Drury, by reason that fir A. Pawlet was hut late re.
covered and not able to repair to the earl of Shrewsbury,
being then at Orton, fix miles off; it was thought good
that we fir Drue Urury and Robert Beale should go unto
him, which we did on--- morning; and together with
the delivery of her majesty's commission, and your lord-
Ihip's letter imparted unto him what both the earl of Kent
and we thought meet to be done in the cause, praying
his lordship hither the day following, to confer with me
the said earl, concerning the fame; which his lordlhip
promised. And for the better colouring of the matter, I
the said earl of Shrewsbury sent to Mr. Beale, a justice of
peace of the county of Huntingdon next adjoining, to whom
I communicated that warrant, which Robert Beale had under
Nour lordllip's hands, for the flaying of the hues and cries,
requiring him to give notice thereof to the town of Peter-
borough, and especially unto the jolfties of peace of Hun.
tingdonfhire, and to cause the purilers and bringers of such
warrants to be flayed, and brought to the next juflice of
pcece; and to bring us word to Fotheringay castle on Wed,
nefday morning what he had done, and what he should in
the .mean time uhderftand of the authors of such bruites.
Which like order, I also fir Amias Pawlet had taken on
Alonday morning in this town, and other places adjoining.
The fame night, the sheriss of the county of Northamptod
upon the receit of your lordflip's letter came to Arundel , and
letters were sent to me the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrews-
bur,'. intention and meeting here on Tuesday by nooni
and ,iher letters were alto sent with ;heir lordships aTcent
to fir Edward Montague, fir Richard Knighrly. Mr. Tho.
Brudenlell, &c. to be here on Wednesday by eight of the
clock in the morning, at which time ii was thought meet that
tile execution Ihould be. Sn upon Tuefd.y , we the earls
canme hiticr, s here the sherif riiet us; and upon conference
ert'.cei us it wac resolved . thlrt the care for the len hi. t ur
tile surgeons, and other necidary provision f!huli be .om.

it

mited unto him against the time. And we forthwith repaired
unto her, and first in the presence of herself and her folks,
to the intent that they might fee and report hereafter that

ihe was not otherwire proceeded with than according to
law, and the form of the statute made in the 27th year of
her majety's reign, it was thought convenient that her ma.
jefy's commifon Should be read unto her, and afterwards

ihe was by sundry speeches willed to prepare herself againt
the next morning. She was also put in remembrance of her
fault, the honourable manner of proceeding with her, and
the necefity that was imposed upon her majesty to proceed to
execution, for that otherwise it was found that they could
not both tand together; and however, fithence the lord
Buckburft' his being here new conspiracys were attempted,
and so would be ftil; wherefore lince Ihe had now a good
while since warning, by the (aid lord and RobertBeale, to
think upon and prepare berelf to die, we doubted not but
that Ihe was, before this, fettled, and therefore would accept
this mefage in good part. And to the effe~ that no christian
duty might be laid to be omitted, that might be for her
c3mfort, and tend to the salvation both of her body and foul
in the world to come, we offered unto her that if it would
please her to confer with the bishop and dean of Peterborough,
The might; which dean, we had, for that purpose, appointed
to be lodged within one mile of that place. Hereto she
replied, erosing herself in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, laying that she was ready to die in
the catholic Roman faith, which her ancestors had profefled,
from which fie would not be removed. And albeit we
used many persuasion to the contrary, yet we prevailed
nothing; and therefore, when The demanded the admittance
of her pries, we utterly denied that unto her. Hereupon,
she demanded to underfiand what anrwer we had touching
her former petition to her majesty, concerning her papers
of accounts, and the bestowing of her body. To the sis
we had none other answer to make, but that we thought if
they were not sent before, the fame might be in Mr. Waadei'
custody, who wa now in France, and feeing her paper

could not any wife pleasure her majesty, we doubted not
but that the fame would be delivered unto fich as fie should
appoint. For, for our own parts, we undoubtedly thought
that her majesty would not make any profit of her things, and
therefore (in our opinion) she might set down what she
would have done, and the fame should be imparted unto
her majesty, of whom both she and others might expec
all courtesy. Touching her body, we knew not her ma..
jelly's plea'ure, and therefore could neither fay that her
petition should be denyed, or granted. For the practice of
llabington, she utterly denied it, and would have inferred it,
that her death was for her religion; whereunto it was
eftsoons by us replied, that for many years she was not
touched for religion, nor should have been now, but
that this proceeding against her was for treaton, in that
the was culpable of that horrible conspiracy for destroying
her majesty's person; which she again denied, adding fur.
ther, that albeit /he for herself forgave them that were the
procurers of her death, yet /he doubted not but that God
would take vengeance thereof. And being charged with
the depositions of Naue and Curie to prove it againit her,
she replied, that lhe accifed none, but that hereafter when
lhe (hall be dead, and they remain alive, it Ihall be seen
haw indifferently the had been dealt with, and what mea.
sure had been used unto her; and alked whether it hacd
been heard before this, that servants had been prafifed tq
accuse thair miltrefs, and hereupon also required what wal
become of them, and where they remained.

Upon our departure from her, for that it seemed by the

commiflion, that the charge of her was in the disposition
of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S. Drue
Drurie, to receive, for that night, the charge, which they
hal before, and to cause the whole number of soldiers ta
watch that night, and that her folks ihould be put up, and
take order that only four of them lhould be at the execu-
tion, remaining aloof of and guarded with certain perrons.
so as they (holuld not come near unto her, which were
Melvil her Iteward, the physician, surgeon, and apothecary..

Blb

Vednefday morning, after that we the earls were repairei

unto the castle, and the sheriss had prepared all things it
the hall for the execution, he was commanded to go inot
her chamber, and to bring her down to the place when
were present, we which have signed this letter, Mr. Henr]
Talbot, elq; fir Edward Montague, knt. his ofn and heis
apparent, and William Montague his brother, fir Richard
Knightly, knt. 3lr. Thomas Brudenel, Mr. Beuill, Mr. Roben
and John Wingefield, Mr. Forreft, and Rayner, Benjamin
Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterborough, and others.

At the .airfold, she paused' to speak to Melvil in our

hearing, which was to this effec, '" elvil, as thou hadl
been an honest servant to me, so I pray thee continue to
my son, a"d commend me unto him. 1 have not impugn'd
his religion, nor the religion of others, but wish him well.
And as I furgive all that have offended me in Scotland, so
I would that he should also: and beseech God, that he
would lei.d him his Holy Spirit, and illuminate him. "
]lelvil's answer was. chat he would so do, and at that
inilant he wou!' befCech Gnl to aifilt him with his Spirit.
Then she demanded to speak with her priest, which was
denied unto her, the rather for that Ihe came with a fu.
pert.tious pair of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to
have her women to help her, and upon her earned request,
and laying that whea other gentlewomen were executed,
Dhe had read in chronicles that they had women allowed
unto them, it was permitted that she should have two
named by hertelf, which were Mrs. Curie and Kennedy.
After the came to the scaffold, firit, in presence of them
all, her majety's commifion was openly read; and after-
wards Mr. Dean of Peterborough, according to a direcion
whi-h he had received, the night before, from us the earls
would have made a godly admonition to her, to repent and
dye well in the fear of God and charity to the world. But
at the firt entry, The utterly refused it, faying that she
was catholic, and that it were a folly to move her,
being so resolutely mind d, and that our prayers would
litde avail her. Whereupon, to the intent it might appear
that we, and the whole assembly, had a chrifa deflc to

have her die well, a godly prayer, conceiv'd by Mr. Dean,
was read and pronounced by us all. " That it would please
Almighty God to fend her his Holy Spirit and grace, and
alto, if it were his will, to pardon all her offences, and
of his mercy to receive her into his heavenly and everlasting
kingdom, and finally to blers her majelty, and confound
all her enemies; " whereof Mr. Dean, minding to repair
up shortly, can Ihew your lordships a copy.

This done, she pronounced a prayer upon her knees to
tlis effet, " to beseech God to fend her his Holy Spirit,
and that The trusted to receive her salvation in his blood,
ard of his grace to be received into his kingdom, be-
fujght God to forgive her enemies, as Ihe forgave them;
and to turn his wrath from this land, to bless the
Queen's majesty, that The might serve him. Likewise to
be merciful to her son, to have compaflion of his church,
and altho' The was not worthy to be heard, yet she had a
confidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faints, to pray
unto her Saviour to receive her." After this (turning to-
»ards her servants) The desired them to pray for her, that
thr Saviour would receive her. Then, upon petition made
by the executioners, Ihe pardoned them; and said, Ihe
was glad that the end of all her sorrows was so near. Then
the disliked the whining and weeping of her women, fay-
ing, that they rather ought to thank God for her refolu-
tion, and kissing them, willed them to depart from the
scaffold, and farewell. And so rebolutely kneeled down,.
and having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down
her neck, whereupon the executioner proceeded. Her
servants were incontinently removed, and order taken that
none should approach unto her corps, but that it lhould
be embalmed by the surgeon appointed. And further her
crofe, apparel, and other things are retained here, arb
not yielded unto the executioner for inconveniences that
might follow, but he is remitted to be rewarded by such
as sent him hither.

This hath been the manner of our dealings in this
service, Whereof we have thought good to advertise your

Bb 4

M7

lotdlhips, as particusly a we could, for the time, and
further have thought good to signify unto your lordlfipi
besid~, that for the avoiding of all finiter and uanderoui
repors that may be raised to the contrary, we have caused
a note thereof to be conceiv'd to th fame fame in writ.
ing, which we the said lords have fubrcribed, with the
hands of such other there the knights and gentlemen above
named that were present at the action. And so beseech
ing Almighty God long to bless her majesty with a mos
profperou reign, and to confound all his, and her ene.
mies, we take our leaves. From Fotheringay-Cale, the
Ith of Febuary i86, in haft.

Your lordhips at commndment

B. B. Thb, ac well as several other papers-in thi Ap.
pendi , is taken fiom a collection made by Alr.
Crawturd of Drumfoy, historiographer to Queen
Anne, now in the library of the faculty of Advo.
ares. Mr. Crawfurds trancriber has omitted to
mention the book in the Cott. Lib. where itis to be

N'. XXXIX (VoL L p. 365.
The objec ions against Mr. Davison, in the cause

of the late Scottifl Queen, muRf concern things
done either, r. Before her trial at Fotheringay.
2. During that fellion. 3. After the fame "

. BEFORE her trial, he neither is, nor can be
charged to have had any hand at all in the canfe of the
aid Queen, or done any thing whatsoever concerning the
fame, diredly or indirely.

2. During that session, he remained at court, whee
the only interest he had therein, was as her majetj

' Cott. Lib. Calig. C. I.

,77

secretary, to receive the letters from the commifloners,
impart them to her highness, and return them her
answers.

;. After the return thence, of the said commiflioners,

it is well known to all her council,

i. That he never was at any deliberation or meeting

whatsoever, in parliament, or council, concerning the
cause of the said Queen, till the fending down of her ma-
jef) 's warrant unto the commiflioners, by the lords and
others of her council.

-. That he was no party in signing the sentence, pal.

fed against her.

1. That he never penned either the proclamation

publilhing the fame, the warrant after her death, nor any
other letter, or thing whatsoever concerning the fame.
And,

That the only thing which can be specially and truly

imputed to him, is the carrying up the said warrant unto
her majeRy to be fgned. She fending a great counsellor
unto him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it
to the great feal of England, by her own (pecial direction
and commandment.

For the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
i. That the letter, being penned by the lord trea-

furer, was delivered by him unto Mr. Davison, with her
majelly's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when she
should be pleased to call for it.

2. That being in his hands, he retained it at the least

five or fix weeks unprefented, nor once offering to carry
it up, till the sent a great counsellor unto him for the
fame, and was sharply reproved therefor by a great peer,
in her majesty's own presence.

3. That having signed it, ihe gave him an express

commandment to carry it to the feal, and being fealed to
fend it immediately away unto the commissioners, ac-
cording to the direction. Herself appointing the hall of

Fotheringay for the place of execution, mifliing the
court-yard. in divers refpeds, and in conclusion abfo-
lotely sorbad him to trouble her any further, or let her
hear any more hereof, till it was done. She, for her
part, having (as lhe said) performed all that, in law or
reason, could be required of her.

4. Which diretions notwidhftanding, he kept the warrant

fealed all that night, and the greatest part of the next day
in his hands, brought it back with him to the court, ac-
quainted her majesty withal, and finding her majesty resolved
to proceed therein, according to her former diredions, and
yet desirous to carry the matter so, as she might throw
the burthen from herself, he absolutely resolved to quit his
hands thereof.

;. And hereupon went over unto the lord treafarer's

chamber, together with Mr. vice.chamberlain Hatton, and
in his presence restored the fame into the hands of the
said lord treasurer, of whom he had before received it,
who from henceforth kept it, till himself and the ret of
the council sent it away.

Which, in substance and truth, is all the part and interest

the laid Davison had in this cause, whatsoever is, or may
bc pretended to the contrary.

Touching the fending down thereof unto the commis

fioners, that it was the general ad of her majesty's council
(as is before mentioned) and not any private ad of his, may
appear by,

I. Their own confclion. 2 Their own letters sent down

therewith to the commissioners. ;. The testimonies of the
lords and others to whom they were directed. As also,
4. of Mr. Beale, by whom they were sent. ;. The tenor
of her majesty's sirs commission for their calling to the
liar-chamber for the fame, and private appearance and fb-
milfion afterward intead thereof, before the lord chancellor
Bromley. 6. The confession of Mr. Attorney general in open
court confirmed. 7. By the sentence itself upon record.
8. Besides a common ac of council, containing an anfwcr
178

to be verbally delivered to the Scottish ambassador then
remaining here, avowing and juflifying the fame.

Now where some suppose him to have given some ex-

traordinary furtherance thereunto, the contrary may evi-
dently appear by,

t. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of afrociation,

being earnefily pressed thereunto by her majesty's self.

:. His excusing of himself from being used as a commi-

sioner, in the examination of Babington and his complices,
ard avoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.

I. His being a mean to fay the commiflioners from

pronouncing of the fenmence at Fotheringay, and deferring
it till they should return to her majesty's presence.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands fix weeks un-

presented, without once'offering to carry it up, till her
majilty sent exprefly for the fame to sign.

(. His deferring to fend it away after it was fealed un-

to the commifloners, as he was Specially commanded,
flaying it all that night, and the greatef part of the next
day in his hands.

6. And finally, his restoring thereof into the hands of

the lord treasurer, of whom he had before received the
fame.

Which are clear and evident, proofs, that the said

Davison did nothing in this cause whatsoever, contrary
to the duty of the place he then held in her majefty'a
service.

Cal. C. 9.

This seems to be an original. On the back is this title,
The innocency of Mr. Davison in the cause of the late
Scottilh Queen.

;79

# APPENDIX TO THE THIRD VOLUME.

APP E N D I X

TO THE
THIRD VOLUME.

N. L (Vol. III. p. 8o.)

Letter from e, to his majesty King James'.

M OST worthy prince, the depending dangers upon
your affedionates have been such, as hath inforced fience
in him, who is faithfully devoted to your person, and in
doe time of trial, will undergo all hazards of fortune, for
the maintenance of the just rega rights, that, by the
laws divine, of nature, and of nations, is invested in
your royal person. Fall not then, mos noble and re-
nowned prince, from him, whore providence bath i
many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an influ-
ment of his glory, and the good of his people. Some
secrets, I find, have been revealed to your prejudicc,

' From the Original. Bibl. Sac. Jur. Edl. A. 1. 34. '*. 4. I1

the former editions, I prited this as a letter from Sir lokert Ceil,
but a ow atisfied that I was mfiRake in forming this opisi. See
Sir D. Dalryple's Ren. on the Hist. of Scot . p3. 3 As thk l1ett
is curious. I republish it, though I cannot pretend to fay to which
of tie Kig's *umrou comlpodeat in Eglanud it should be ftaii

which must proceed from some ambitious violent rpirited
pe'ron near your majesty in council and favour; no man
in particular will I accuse, but I am sure it hath no found-
ation from any, with whom, for your service, I have held
correspondence; orherwife, I had, long since, been dif-
abled from performance of those duties, that the thoughts
of my heart endeavolureth; being only known to this wor-
thy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of
Christendom for his fidelity to your person and fate, and
to Mr. David Fowlis your most loyal servant, my first and
faithful correspondent; and unto James Hudfone, whom I
have found in all things that concern you, most secret and
allured. It may, therefore, please your majesty, at the
humble motion of e, which jargon I desire to be the in-
dorfement of your commands unto me, that, by some
token of your favour, he may understand in what terms
you regard his fidelity, secrecy and service. My pallionate
affciion to your person (not as you are a king, but as you
are a good king, and have just tite, after my sovereign,
to be a great king) doth transport me to presumption.
Condemn not, mot noble prince, the motives of care and
love, altho' mixed with defects in judgment.

i. I, therefore, firfi beseech your majesty, that for the

good of those whom God, by divine Providence, hath detined
to your charge, that you will be pleased to have an ex-
traordinary care of all praficers or pratices, against your
person; for it is not to be doubted, but that in both king-
doms, either out of ambition, facion, or fear, there are
many that desire to have their sovereign in minority, whereby
the sovereignty and fIate might be swayed by partiality of
subalternate perions, rather than by true rule of power and
uftice. Preserve your person, and fear not the practices
of man upon the point of your right, which will be pre.
fcrved and maintained against all aflaults of competition
whatever. Thus I leave the protection of your person, and
royal posterity, to the Almighty God of Heaven, who bles
and preserve you and all yours, in all regal happiness to
his glory.
2. Next to the prfervation of your person, a the con.

38i

verfation and secret keeping of your councells, which, i
1 have said, are often betrayed and discovered, either oul
of pretended zeal in religion, turbulent fasion, or base
conception, the which your majesty is to regard with all
circomfpedion, as a matter most dangerous to your perfor
and state, and the only means to ruin and destroy all thol
that stand faithfully devoted to your majesty's service. Some
particulars, and .persons of this nature, I make no doubt
have been discovered by the endeavours of this nobleman,
the bearer hereof, of whom your majesty may be furthei
informed.

1. The third point considerable is that your majesty, by

all means pofible, secure yourself of the good affeclion ol
the French King and States, by the negociation of some
faithful secret confident; the French naturally distaffing the
union of the British islands under one monarch. In Ger.
many, I doubt not, but you have many allies and friends,
but by reason of their remote state, they do hot so much
importe this affair which must be guided by a quick and
sudden motion.

4. When God, by whose Providence, the period of all

persons and times is determined, ihall call to his kingdomr
of glory her majesty (although I do alfuredly hope that
there will not be any question in competition, yet for that
I hold it not fitting to give any minute entrance into a caufo
of so high a nature), I do humbly beseech your majesty
to design a secret, faithful, and experienced confident servant
of yours, being of an approved fidelity and judgment, con-
tinualy to be here resident, whose negociation, it were
convenient your majesty lhould fortifie, with such secret
trust and powers, as there may not need 4. days respite,
to post for authority, in a cause, that cannot endureo10
hours respite, without varieties of danger. In the which it
is to be confidered, that all such as pretend leaf good to
your efablifhment, will not in public oppugn your tide,
but out of their cunning ambition will seek to gain time,
by alledging their pretence of common good to the state,
in propounding of good conditions for disburthening the

common weale, of divers hard laws, heavy impositions,
corruptions, oppressions, &c. which is a main point to lead
the popular, who are much disgusted with many particulars
of this nature. It were therefore convenient, that there
motives, out of your majesty's providence Thould be pre-
vented, by your free oler in these points following, viz.

r. That your majesty would be pleased to abolilh pur-

veyors and purveyance, being a matter infinitely offensive
to the common people, and the whole kingdom, and not
profitable to the prince.

2. That your majesty would be pleased to dissolve the

court of wards, being the ruin of all the noble and ancient
families of this realme, by base matches, and evil educa-
tion of their children, by which no revenue of the crown
will be defrayed.

1. The abrogating the multiplicity of penal laws, generally

repined against by the subjet, in regard of their uncertainty,
being many times altered from their true meaning, by
variety of interpretations.

4. That your majesty will be pleased to admit free outport
of the native commodities of this kingdom, now often
relrained by subalternate persons for private profit, being
moll prejudicial to the commerce of all merchants, and a
plain deftru&ion to the true industry and manufacture of all
kingdoms, and againIt the profit of the crown.

These, being by your majelty's confidents in the point of
time propounded, will assuredly confirm unto your majesty
the hearts and affections of the whole kingdom, and absolutely
prevent all insinuations and devices of designed patriots, that,
out of pretext of common good, would reek to patronize
themedves in popular opinion and power, and thereby to
derogate from your majesty's bounty and free favour, by
princely merit of your moderation, judgment and justice.

Your majesty's favour, thus granted to the subjed, will

no way impeach the profits of the crown but advance them.
The difproportionable gain of ome checquer officers, with the
base and mercenary profits of the idle unnecessary clerks and
attendants, will only susser some detriment; but infinite will

38;

be the good unto the kingdom, which will conirm unto your
aijeftv the universal love and affeftion of the people, and
Celabblh yqur renown in the highest esteem to all poerity.

The Lord preserve your majcfty, and make you triumphant
over all your enemies.

My care over his person, whose letters pass in this pacque,

and will die before he leave to be yours, lall be no less than
of mine own life, nd in like esteem I will hold all your
faithful confident, notwithlanding I will hold myself re.
served rom being known unto any of them, in my par.
tiular devoted afeions unto your majesty, only this ex.
tnordinay worthy man, whose afTociate I am in his mis-
fortue, doth know my heart, and we both will pray for
you, and if we live you Ihall find us together.

I beseech your majesty burn this letter, and the others;
for aio' it be in an nfual hand, yet it my be didovered

Your majesty's most devoted,

and humble fevant,

e.
INDEX

# INDEX.

I N D E X.
T. . The Numeral Letters refer to the Volume,

and the Figures to the Pages. -

A

ADAMSON, Archbilhop of St Andrews, is excom.

municated by the fynod of Fife, ii. 324. He excom-
municated his opponents, ib. is reltoted by the general
alTembly upon conditions 3a;.

-- his mean fubmilion to the general alfembly, ili. 2.
lb,1any, Alexander Duke of, cabals with his nobles against
his brother K. James III. i. Sg. is made prisoner, but
escapes to France, ibid. concludes a treaty with Ed. IV.
of England, <9. procures afliftance to invade Scotland
on mean conditions, ib. returns to Scotland, and is re-
ltored to favor, 60. cabals again, but is forced to fly
to France, 61.
- Duke of, made Regent during the minority of K.
James V. i. . 64. after several unsuccessful struggles
with the nobility, he is forced to retire to France, 6q.

Aln1eSt, Duke of, Q. Elizabeth long amuees the court of

France by carrying on a treaty of marriage With him, ii. 2 7.
d/lent, cardinal, published a book proving the lawfulness of

killing excommunicated Princes, ii. 1o.

Adva, Duke of, his intrigues in favor of Q. Mary, ii.

208. 212. 227. is recalled from his government of the
Netherlands, 235.
diubiadors, their office, i. 90,

VOL. III. C

_···_ · ____ W_ --- ---.--- 1 ~ --- -g

ariewr, St the Archbilhop of, remarkably cured of a
duao distemper, i. t9. the motives of bis oppo
tion to the Q. Regent, 16;. his great influence on the
bench of Bishops and weight in Parliament, 169. go.
verned the church with great moderation, 170. perse.
cutes the Reformer, 171. is imprisoned for celebrating
Mass, Ilo.

ruinu Q. Mary's affair by his imprudent condut,

ii. t18. i taken prisoner in Dumbarton Cafle, and

. haged, 198.
-- the catle of, demolilhed by the French, i. 19.
- the prior of, promotes a treaty between the Q.

Rewt and theReformers, L 8;. is provoked to leare
the court, 186. is one of the chief promoters of the
reformation, o2t. some account, and a charader of
him, 202. aful endeavours used to undermine him,
ibid. presumption of his innocence of the design charged
on him, ibid. is feat by the convention to invite the
Queen to Scotland, 2zs. is received by her with con.
fidence and afedion, 260. restrains the turbulent spirit
of the people aainR popery, 27S. is sent to retrain the
icatiou praices of the borderers, n8g. execute his
commifion with vigor and prudence, ibid. a coanpiracy
agint him discovered, 291. is created Earl of ar, z91.
becomes obnoxiou to the Earl of Huntley, ib. See Mar
and Jlrray.
Agvar, Gilbert de Umfraville, Earl of, was the only mla

who aterted the independency of his country, L is.
.- Douglas Earl of, assumes the Regency during the

minority of K. James V. L 8.. s. i unable to gin
his affedions, ibid. is attainted and flies into England, 66.
- - obtains leave ~p return into Scotland, ii. 178. fur-

renders himself to IK James VI. 288. he with fcvenl
others seize the cattle of Stirling to.oppofe Aran, 292.
they are forced to fly into England at the approach of
the King with a aarmy, 29. he is attainted and hi
estate forfeited, ;1o.
- is concened in I plot in favor f Spi, iii 7.

is seized and committed prisoner to the caRle of Edinr
burgh, 8. escapes and flies to the mountains, 9. offers
to fubmic to a trial, sj. sentence is pronounced againl
him, i+. he refuses to fubmir, s5.
Aujou, Duke of, a marriage proposed between him and

Q: Elizabeth, ii. 2os.
|»ne, a Princess of Denmark, married to K. James VL

i. )87.
.- Hler arrival in Scotland and coronation, iii. x. heads
a party that opposes the chancellor, i r.
rcbb:lbopr, Bisbopr, Dtans and Cbapters revived in
Scotland during the King's minority, ii. 222, 22z. this
gives great offence to many of the clergy, ibid. an act
of aiTembly against these offices, 271, 272. Bilhope
made Lubjedt to presbyteries and assemblies, 324. a grea
ftruke given to their authority, o70, 71.
- None of them present at the Queen's coronation

iil. 1.

Argyl, Earl of, is appointed to carry the crown matri

moial to the Dauphin of France, i. 169. uses his in.
terest with the Reformers to make a treaty with the
Queen Regent, I8;. leaves her court in resentment of
hrr treachery, i86.

- refuses to accede to a treaty with Murray the Re.
gent ii. 161. is soon after forced to fubmir, 16z. adC
as iieutenant to the Queen after the Regent's murder,
186. is prevailed on to join the King's party, 201,
quarrels with .qthole, 24o. confederates with him againRi
lMoAon, the Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid.
they rtmonftrate againit him to the King, 24t. they
raise firces against him, 249. negociate a treaty with
him bi th Inedidtien of Q. Elizabeth, 25o. is pro.
mlo:1 to the office of chancellor, 2 z.
- The Kig's authority delegated to him and Lord

F bes agar;n the popish Lards, iii. 18. his forces art
d:,eat.1 i- an engagement with them, ibid.
drltocs'aiy , pcdonmiult in Scodtand, i 272.

C c

Armada, Spanilh, preparations for it, ii 374, 3. ithi

defeated, 80o.
*rran, Earl, is appointed Regent during the minority o

Q. Mary, i. 99. his character, 0oo. consents to thi
schemes of England, which disgusts the public, 102. be
comes suspicious of the Earl of Lenox, 1o6. is force,
to renounce the friendship with England and declare so
France, 107. and to perfccute the Reformers, 109. publicl!
abjures the doctrines of the Reformers, ibid. is contemner
by one half and little trufed by the other part of the na
tion, I so. heads the partisans of France and defenders o
popery, I x . attempts in vain to seize the murderers o
cardinal Beatoun, 17. is forced to make a truce with the
confpirtors, i 8. his eldest son is conditionally excluded
all right of fucceflion, 120. his mean conceflion to the

: court of France, 12g, 129. gets the title of Chatelhe

Tault, 129. is undermined by the Q. Dowager, 1 6, 1 ,7
* proposals and arguments for his resignation, i 8. he con

sents to it, 139. retraAs by the influence of the Arch
bilhop of St Andrews, 14o. is at last prevailed on ant
gets advantageous terms, 141. See Cbatelberalt.
.--- eldest son of the Duke ofChatelherault, joins in an

afociation with the Reformers, i. 200. narrowiy efcap
intended ruin at the court of France, 201. is full of re
fentment againfi the French on that account, ibid. the
Congregation solicit Q. Elizabeth to marry him, so. his
reat imprudence with regard to Q. Mary, 28;. difcovcn
a conspiracy against the Queens favorite, 290.
-- lons his reason, ii. 252, 2,;. is imprisoned by

Morton, ibid.

,*-- late Capt. Stewart, gets that tide and eflate, ii. 266

is appointed to conduc Morton from Dumbarton to
Edinburgh, ibid. his infamous marriage with the Counters
of March, 269. his variance with Lenox, ibid. is ifr
t ated in an attempt to rescue the King at Ruthyen, 280.

. is confined prisoner to the castle of Stirling, ibid. regains

his liberty and the King's regard, 286. resumes his pawer
aLd arrogance, ibid. gets the Ruthiven conspirators declared

guilty of high treason, 289. is detested as author of a
persecution against the clergy, 29;. is gained over to Q.
Elizabeth's interest, 299. gets several forfeited elfites,
1o . his corruption and insolence, 107. is made chancellor
and has unlimited power, ibid. his venality is exceeded
by that of his wife, 1ot. his monstrous tyranny and op-
prefliol, o09. his power undermined by Wotton the
Englilh envoy, 320. is confined in the caRle of St. An.
drews, but soon recovers favor, z21. his interelt finks
much, ; 2 is fripped of his honors and spoils, and re.
duced to his original fiation, ibid.

Articles, Lords of, their origin and business, i. 4. by whort

chosen, 8;, 86. the subsequent variations and political use
made of this institution, 86, 87.

Artndel, Earl of, is appointed a commissioner to the con.

ference at Westminster, ii. i;o.

Asby, ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to Scotland, ii. 177.

his great promises to King James, ibid. his promites are
soon forgot, 81i. he is athamed and withdraws privately
from Scotland, ibid. l
jl.fajination, the frequency of it in Scotland, how accounted
for, ii. 22. several instances of it in France, 22, . . a:
flop put to it there and in Scotland, 23. several great meni
approve of it, 2 ,. 24.

- prevailed greatly afterwards, iii. 2.
AJenily of the church of Scotland, the first but feeble andc

ilregular, i. 2(7. another assembly, their demands fronm
the convention, 8; l, 2z4. two other assemblies in Vain
solicit an augmentation of their revenues, .;o2. they ad-
dress Q. Mary in high strains of complaints, I. 1 '

- an assembly proceeds at Glasgow notwithflanding the

Kiig's interdition, ii. 272 272 .

-- two assemblies yield many of the privileges of the
church to the King, iii. ?8, -9. declare it lawful for
ministers to fit in Parliament, 42. See Clergy.
.tociaion, formed in defence of Q. Elizabeth against-...

blary, ii. *o0.
AIole, Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel with the Earl

C c

of Argyll. ii. 24e. ioins with him in oppofng Morton tl
Regent, ib dies soon after an entertainment at Morton's
2C1 fufpicio.s of his being poisoned, 2c2.
.d.tigae, Lord de, second son of the Lord Lenox, arrive

in Scolandi from France, ii. 2 s . becomes loon a great fa.
vrite of K. James, ihid. high titles and oofis beflowec
on im, ibid. notes agaiRft him, Appendix, 19. Sec
L~.
dafiria family, their origin and power, i. 9o, 9,W.

B

ibdiHgt , Anthony, some account of him, ii. 124. the
rife of his conspiracy against 0 Elizabeth, 28g, :19.
the ames and scheme of operations of his alfociates,
;1o. they are betrayed. seized and executed, ;to, tr.
Bacon, Sir Nicholas, appointed one of the commissioners to

the confederares at Westminster, ii. j1o.
Bblo/, John, his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. lo.

is prefmd by Ed. I. 12 soon forced by him to resign, ib.

Ralard, a trafficking priefl. solicits an ivafion of England

from Spain, ii 1o2. joins in a conspiracy to murder Q Fli.
zabeth, t3o. is discovered and taken into cufltody, );t.
and executed, ibid.
Barom, their jurifdi&on very extensive, i. 22. the dilffice

between the geater and leser, whence, r. three hundred
of diem remonfirte against the conduo of the. Dowager,
ia7. the efler admitted by their reprtfentatives in Par.
lialnt, ii. 17;. petition of the lecer Barons to Paria.
*met, Append. 194- See oblea.
BfPicwo Dorew, book publilhed by King James V.

ftrengthas his interft in England, iii. 44.

Be&ato, Cardinal, made use of by K, James V. to mortify

the nobles, i. 70. 7 . his pretensions to the Regency Oi
the death of that Prince, 98. forges a tefament ofthelate
King, ib. his views how diappointed, ib. his charaer,
99. opposes the Earl ofArran, Regent, rol, 10l ct
ates m of the nation againf thieEongib, so;. teO

the young Queen and her mother, ib. cajol the Earl of
Lenox, ib. obliges the Regent to renounce England and
declare for France, o17. and to persecute the Reformers,
o19. engrolTes the chief diredion of affirs, i so. his
double dealing with the Earl of Lenox rerented, i r.
is murdered, 16. his death fatal to the Catholics, t ,7.
a vain attempt to revenge it, ibid. scandalous reports cone
cerning him, x;S.
Bedford, Earl of, comes as ambassador from Q. Elizabeth to

witness the baptism of James VI. ii. 44. his inftruions, 46.
his letters to Sir W. Cecil. Appendix, 22(. 2;2. 2aR.

Belendon, Sir Lewis, julice clerk, K. James's resident at

London, ii. i 8. joins in promoting Q: Elizabeth's interet
in Scotland, ibid. is sent with her envoy into that country,
ibid.
lack, Mr. David, minister at St. Andrews, his ridiculous
and seditious exprefions in the pulpit, iii, 28. being sap.
ported by the clergy, he declines the civil jurifdition, a9.
is condemned by the privy council, 3o. is sentenced by
the King to relide beyond Spey, ; r.

Blackadder, captain, and three others, executed for the

murder of Darnly, ii. 9;.
Bottbiu, Heitor, his hilfory ofScotland, some account of,

Bolton CaJlei, Q Mary confined a prisoner there, ii. 14.
Bonot, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney, i. s q.
Borderers, an attempt to retrain their licentious pradices,

i. $Tr.
- Q. Mary visits them, ii. 4. a fcuffe there, inwbhich
the English warden, &c. were made prisoners, sg8.
Bortbwick, Lord, affifs the Q. Regent in defending Lelth,

i. 219.

Botbwell, James Hepburn, Earl of, intercepts a fun of

money from England ta the Congregation, i. 2i8. fara
the Queen Regent, butrelides at his own house, 219. it
by the Earl of Murray summoned to a public trial, ; 6.
prevents it by leaving the kingdom, ibid. a fntene of

C 4

diwry against him pretented by the Quee, ibAd. i

penmitted to return, ;46.
-- escapes with her after the murder of Riio, ii. 17.

some account of his former behaviour, 26, 27. commences
a favorite of the Queen, 28. fie reconciles him to several
Lords, with whom he was at variance, i8, 29. he increates
in favor with her, r. cireuftances concurring in this,
ibid. he is wounded in attempting to seize one of the bor-
der, 14. the Queen's ettaordinary regard for bia on
this occaion, ibid. to secure adherents he obtains a par.
don for Mortan and his afiociates, 48. proposs the tefto.
ntion of the popish eccleftical jurididion, so. hii
views in this, r. is fufpeftd the author of DanlM's
murder, s8. is charged with it by Lenox, q9. buttill
favored by the Queen, 6 . appointed governor of Edin.
bwgh Cafile, 62. hit tril is hurried on, ibid. remarkable
partiality in hisfavor, 64. Lenox accues him openly, ibid.
comes to his trial with a great retinue, 6, is acquitted
by a jury, W. the trial niverflHy eenrured, 67.
challenges any that would accafe him, Ibid several afts of
Parliament paled in hi favor, 68. he procures a
ad in favor of the reformation, 69. p .ails on
several of the nobles tb teconmmend him a t husband to the
Queen, 1;. seizes the Queen on a journey from Stitling,
and carries her m Dunbar, 77, hhb lew in this, 78.
obtain a pardon under the St~ eal, bid. procures a
divorce from his wis, 79. carries theQeantio the cafle
of Edinburgh, 80. is created Duke of Orkney, 8. and
marrid to the Quetn, ibid. i not allowed the ttle of
iing, 82a. he watcdes the Qeen very cldoely, ibid.
cndeaurwn to get the Prine nto his e fulbd, 9; 84 i
larmed with an aflociation of the nobles againf the Qen
a·ndhim, , 86. cari ile en

the eo tllcaU eofBorth

d, 7. raises fbrces ag nit the tosd~rate Lords ibid.
he marches again them, i8. p.p i afhge conibat,
81- .sM bowprevented, 4o. tales his ift firewellofthe
Queeraad s stored to 4t,-ibid. fend for a cet of
ktters from Q;Mary to him, .9. they are intercepted by

the Earl of Morton, ibid. his miserable fate; ied, lo9,
retllelions on his conduct, o. copy of his divorce from
Lady Jean Gordon, Appendix 241.
Bo:lrlc/, Francis Stewart, created Earl ofBothwell, il. ;RI,,

- is imprisoned for consulting witches, iii. ;, 4. efcapet

and attempts to break into the King's pretence, ;. retires
to the north, ibid. he and his adherents are attainted, 7s
fails in an attempt to seize the King, ibid. is taken under
proreiion of Q. Elizabeth, who solicits for him, 9. seizes
the King's person, s r. forces him to dirmirs the chancellor,
and his other favorites, ibid. and to grant him a remifion,
ibid. his bold and insolent behaviour afterwards, 12. is
encouraged by the English ambassador, I . makes another
attempt to come at the King, 16. is repulsed and obliged
to fly to the north of England, 17. is abandoned by Q
Flizabeth, and forced to fly into Spain and Italy, 21.
remains in indigent obscurity, ibb and is never after re.
conciled to the King, ibid,

--- Adam, Biflop of Orkney, performs the ceremony of

marriage of Q. Mary to the Earl of Bothwell ii. 8 .

Bothn'ellhaugb. See Hamilton.
Bottlogne, wrelted by the French out of the hands of the

Englilh, i. 2Rs. they consent to restore it and its depend.
ercies to the French, rago
oawer, Envoy from Q. Elizabeth, accuses Lenox ofditurbing
the peace, ii. 2; . is refused an audience, ibid. is ent t6
encourage the conspirators at Ruthven, 278.
- sent to inquire about King James's correspondence with
the Pope, iii. 46.

Boyd, Lord, his ambitious views in the time of K. James

11i. frustrated, i. 37.

-- ' is prevailed on to join the King's party against Q

Alary, ii. 20o. joins the Ruthven conspirators, 27;s
Erienne, Count de, comes as ambassador from France tb

witness the baptism of K. James VL ii. 44.

Btrtce, Robert, his claim to the crown of Scotland, i. to.
his grandson afteru his right, and vindicates the honot

ds h c tr, 1 .1 he attempt to reduce dte pi
of the noles, 47, 48
&ba, priest, employed by the King of Spain to seduce

the Scotch noble, ii. 18.
- Mr. Robert, presbyterian minister, performs the

crmon y of the corona of K. James's Queen, iii. .

Edward, abbot of Kinlof, acquits himself with

addres and reputatio as abaador at the court of En.
ghnd, iii 43.
-- Mr. Robert, a minister, his resolution in refiuing

to publilh the Kings account of Gowrie's conpiracy,
ii. 68. is deprived and banified on that account, ibid.
scbhm , George, his biftory of Scotland, some account
of, i . .remart on his dialogue De Jme Regis, 18g.
- alone accufa Q. Mary of a criminal correspondence

with Rizio, ii. 2. approved of affnfination, 21. attends
the Regent into England when called on to accuse Q.
Mary, 8g. was one of the precept of L James VL 41.
-commended for his great genius, iii 1o2.
Brlighb. See Cecil
B'ohir,, when firt represented in Parliament, ii. ;7

C
Csr, John, a dearation of his in name of Q. Eli

zabeth to the Lords of Grange at Lethingon, Appendi
lo8.
Caitbhfr, Earl of, his protest at the trial of Bothwell for

the urder of Danly, ii. 7.
C4viw, the patron and reftorcr of pretbterian church.go

vmenent, i 2ss

Camd , some mistakes of his, ii. 4s, 46. 7S.
CumaSte, near Edinburgh, a Parliament held there, i. 19*
Caord , some account of him, L t9, 140. his retmark

able cure of the Bilhop of St. Andrew ibid.

CArrt, Sir George, ent ambafllador from Q. Elizabeth to
encorage the coniratots at Ruthyen, ii. s78.

carry; Robert, sent by Q. Elizabeth to sooth K James

after the death of his mother, ii )66. I not permitted
to enter Scotland, ibid.

-- was the sirs that brought K. James intelligence

of the death of Q. Elizabeth, iii. 9o.

Calskt of letters from Q, Mary to Bothwell, felled by

the Earl of Morton, ii. 95 her enemies avail them-
selves much of them, ibid.

Ca{f'!, Earl of, joins the King's party, ii. soa.
Caflelna , the French ambassador, is employed to pro.

cure the consent of his court to Queen Mary's marriage
with Darnly, i. a2g.

- he endeavours to make up the differences between

the Queen and him, ii o. hit intercefion in behalf
of Q. Mary, t ;.

Catherine of Medicis, assumes the government after the

death of Francis II. her son, i. 2;2. her harsh treat.
ment of Q. Mary, ibid. her views in behaving more
friendly to her, ;t;, ;r4.
--- bends her whole endeavours to destroy the Pro.

teRants, ii. so6. her artful conduf with that view, ib

Cecil, his great capacity as a minister, i. 2t7. 262. is

employed to negociate a peace with France, ibid. over.
reaches the French ambassador in the treaty of Edin.
burgh, ibid. a letter of his cited to Ihow that Q. Eli.
zabeth had no intention to intercept Q. Mary, in her
return to Scotland, 271.

- is appointed a commiflioner to the conference at

Westminster, ii. Io. is sent by Q. Elizabeth with pro.
porals to Q. Mary, g19. has an interview with her,
which excites Q. Elizabeth's jealousy, 2;5. is treated
harlhly by Q. Elizabeth for consenting to Q. Mary's
death, 165.
-- Sir Robert, ton to the former, heads the party

againlf Effex, iii. 72. his charater, 7;. his great
aliiduity, ibid. enters into a private correcpondence. with
K. James, 79.

Ceoiacy of the popih clergy, a chief engine of the&

policy, i. 148. 175.
Charles V. Emperor, his great power, i. 90. and unli.

mated ambition, 91, 92. is checked by Francis L 92.
--- LK of France makes a league with Q. Elizabeth,

iL 21;, 214.
.Cbat~lbterat, Duke of, that tide conferred on the Earl

of Arran, Regent of Scotland, i. 129. his right of
succession to the crown of Scotland maintained, 161.
enters a proteflation to fare his right, 166, 167. joint
the Reformers, in endeavonring to expel the French
army, 196. joins in association with them, 2oo. is
looked on as the head of the congregation, 201. Hii
pufdlanimity, 216. becomes obnoxious to Q. Mary,
282. deprived of his French pension, ;tr. is alarmed
at the Earl of Lenox's return to Scotland, ;22. ah
accommodation brought about by the Queen's influence,
ibid. adheres to Murray in opposing the Queen's mar.
riage, g48. is pardoned on his humble application,
but forced to reside in France, ; r.
--- his partisans grumble at Murray's being advanced

to the Regency, ii. xlt, t14. returns from France
and heads the Queen's adherents, 1g9. is made her
lieutenant.general, 16o. His refolutidn wavering, the
Regent commits him prisoner to the catle of Edinburgh,

i 6. is set at liberty by Kirkaldy, and joins the Queen's
party, 184. is proclaimed traitor by Lenox the new
- Regent, 189. is reconciled to Morton the Regent, 21o.

articles of a treaty between them, ibid. His death 2a8.
Ch/rcb of Scotland, revolutions in itafter the union of the

crowns, iii. 99, loo. See Ajembly, Clrgy.

Cbrcb LAndr annexed to the crown by Parliament, i. 71.
CaIu, the inftitunion and nature of, i. 28, 29.
~Sey, popilh, their great riches and power, i 69. 14¢.

were made use of by K. James V. to fuppres the nobles,

o7. made a conGldeable body in Parliament, i46. their
great influence over the laity, 147. they ingrofed leaniig,
ibid. and held many of the chief employments, 148.

their power increased by celibacy, ibid. they seized the
etates of the intellate, 149. and tried all matrimonial and
teltamentary causes, iso. become obnoxious to the laity,
ibid. their great corruptions, whence, si . those of Scot.
land particularly dissolute, ibid. their weak defence of their
tenets, is2. try in vain to impose faire miracles, i l.
their impolitic condudt to the Reformers, s72.

Cltrs, reformed, try in vain to recover the revenues of

the church, i. 2s8, 259, 26o. procure a demolition of
all relics of popery, 261. a new regulation concerning
their revenues, 28--288. they are no gainers by it, 289.
their Itipends, what in those days, ibid. are offended at
the moderation of their leaders, ; o. ocalfion a tumult
among the people, ibid. 3i. more complaints of their
poverty, 2 1.

are jealous ofQ. Mary, ii. 49. the small allowances

appointed to support them all, ibid. their application for
payment of their flipends of little effed, 1 3. fresh corn.
plaints of the deficiency of the funds for their maintenance,
175. are put off with fair words and promises, ib. 176.
archbilhops, &c. introduced among them by Morton, 222.
their grievances under his administration, 2 7. they approve
of the Ruthven conspirators, 279. by favoring them they
provoke the King, 290. severe laws made against them,
294, 295. they of Edinburgh fly into England, 29s.
as do several others that were molt eminent, ibid. more
vigorous measures against them, ;oi. they obtain no
redress on the restoration of the exiled Lords, J2;. re.
present their grievances to Parliament, 69. a maintenance
provided for them by Parliament, 371, 372.

they prevail to get Presbyterian government efab.

lifhed by law, iii. 5. their zeal against the Popilh Lords,
12, 13. 23. their ralh proceedings, 24, 25. they erec
a Itanding Council of the Church, 26. vindicate one of
their number who declined the civil jurifdidion, 28, 29.
their sanding Council ordered to leave Edinburgh , 3o.
this occasions a violent tumult there, ;o, Ii, 32. they
use their utmost efforts to spirit the people, 34. are de.

fated and fly to England, ;;. their power greatly
educed, ibid. are prevailed on to give up many of their
privileges, 18. are restored to a feat in parliament, 40.
this violently opposed by many of them, 41. but carried
in their general AHfembly, 42. those entitled to this pri.
vilege are laid under many regulations and reftridiont, 49.
they are brought under great fubjeedon, ibid. the revo.
lutios among them since the Union of the Crowns, 99, i oo.

C~uto, Lord, appointed a commissioner at the conference

atWeftminf~er, ii. o.

Cichaw, of Ormiffon, receives a supply of money from

the English to the congregation, i. 218. is intercepted
and robbed of it, ibid.

(C~ in Scotland, some account of, i. 211. s26.
Conmilari appointed to try causes in place of the Spiritual

Court, i 246.

---- they are deprived of all authority, ii. ,o.
COfJffor of faith by the Reformers, contented to by Par.

liament, i. 246.
COugregatio, the Protefants diflinguilhed by that name, i.

x79. their leaders enter into an association, i8o. are in.
voled in difficulties, a1s. apply to Q. Elizabeth for
* aftance, 216. money sent them by her, intercepted,
a s. make a rash and desperate attempt on Leith, and
are repulsed, 219. are no less unfortunate in a
icond fliah, 219. are quite dispirited and retreat to
Stirling, ibid. are joined by the body of the nobles, 220,
their army dwindles away, 221. are animated by Knox,
ibid. they apply again to Q. Elizabeth, 222. their parties
harass the French, 227. are assisted by a fleet from Eng.
land, 229. conclude a treaty at Berwick, with the 0. of
Norfolk, 2 o. the design and substance of this treaty,
ibid. negociate a peace with France, 218. articles of the
treaty, 240. they reap advantages from it , 241. See
Reformtiow.
Conviis, national, framed in defence of the King and

Government, i. 378 the nature and reafonablnef of
itS 379. the pI i of it since, ibid.

eourttfy of Scotland, what, i. 64.
Craig, a minister, boldly teftfies againfR Q. Mary's marriag

with Bothwell, ii. 8r.

Crawford, Capt. of Jordan Hill, surprises Dumbarton Caste,

ii. 19;, 196. the difficulties of that enterprise, ibid.

-- Earl of, one of the heads of the Spaniih fation

ii. ;77. ;82. offers his service to the K. of Spain, ibid.
joins in rebellion againt the King, 18 . is forced to submit
to him, and imprisoned a Ihort time, ibid.
Cricbto;, Regent during the minority of K. James IL his

barbarous policy, i. 4.
-- a Jesuit, a plot againt Q. Elizabeth discovered by
his means, ii. ;o0.

Criminals, a remarkable inltance of the difficulty of bringing

them to iuflice, i. 20, 21.

Croc, du, the French ambassador, refused to countenance

Q. Mary's marriage with Bothwell, ii. 81. attempts in
vain a reconciliation between the Queen and the confe.
derate Lords, g8, $9. mediates a truce between the
King and Queen's party in Scotland, 214.
Crown matrimonial of Scotland, rights conveyed by the

grant of, i. 164. is granted by Parliament to the Dauphin
of France, s66. deputies appointed to carry it, but are
prevented, 169.
-- is demanded by Darnley, ii. 9.
Cuningbam, Robert, appears at the trial of Bothwell in name

of the Earl of Lenox, i. 66. demands a delay, which is
refused, ibid.
iirle, one of Q. Mary's secretaries, is seized and carried

prisoner to London, ii. 3I;. is produced an cvidenee
againther, 34.

D.

Dmarly, Henry, Lord, proposed as a hsband to Q. Maryt

i. Ig. his right of succession confidered , 19. is
permitted to visit the court of Scotland, 32S. amier

there, and quickly gains the Queen's heart, It6. hh
charader, 28. disgusts several of the nobles, particulall
Murray, ibid. 329. cultivates a familiarity with David
Rizio, is despised on that account, ;o. growl
intolerably insolent and haughty, 1 8. schemes to alffa
finate Murray, 340. a plot to seize and fend him toEng.
land prevented by the Queen, ibid. evidences cf this,
34i, 342. his marriage with the Queen celebrated, 144,
is honored with the title of King of Scotland, 34;.

- is implacable with respect to the exiled nobles,- ii. 2.
losei the Queen's affection by his untoward behaviour, 8.
demands the Crown matrimonial, 9. becomes fufpidous
of Rizio's ill offices with the Queen, ibid. his refoludton to
be avenged of him encouraged by the nobles, r. articles
agreed on betwern them for that purpose, 1 . heads the
conspirators who perpetrate the murder, I . confines the
Queen after it is committed, 16. prohibits the meeting
of the Parliament, ibid. makes his escape with the Queen,
17. her hatred to him increases, 2S. is negleced by her
and treated with little refped by the nobles, 1o. refulves
to leave Scotland, t2. his wayward and capricious be.
haviour , ; . he writes the reasons of his conduct to the
Queen, ;4. his firange behaviour at the baptism of the
Prince, 4S. a false reason alledged for this confuted,
46. retires to his father at Glasgow, 48, falls Gck there, < i.
conjedores concerning his diftenper, ibid. is negleted
by the Queen, 52. The afterwards visits and expresses as
fetion for him, s 4. he is prevailed on by her to come to
Edinburgh, ;6. is lodged in a separate house, ibid. heis
murdered there, 57. his character, ibid. a proclamation
issued for discovering the murderers, 59. a remiss inquiry
made into it, c9. 67. Capt. Blackadder and three
others executed on that account, 9;. the confeflln o
Morton the Regent at his death concerning the murder,26?.
---- a dissertation concerning his murder, iii. 1o8. pa

of objections of the Court ofEngland againfi his ma
with Q. Mary. App. 2 2.
Dai/ L K. of Scotland, his profuflon to the church, i. 145

.Daid

David 11. troubles during his minority, i. ;;.
Davison, sent into Scotland by Q, Elizabeth, as a spy on

the French ambassador, ii. 282. is sent to gain Arran's in-
terest to Q. Elizabeth, 299. this he boon accomplilhes,
ibid. brings the warrant for Q, Mary's death atQ Elizabeth's
desire, 3 4. is charged by her with disobeying her orders
364. is imprisoned, tried, and fined, and loses all fa-
vor, ;6;. objections against him in the cause of the
lateScottilh Queen, App. 1;6.
Dife, Monsieur, is sent with a supply of forces to affli

the French against the Englih in Scotland, i. 1z7,
szg. his success there, ibid.

Discipline in the church, the sirs book of, composed,

i. 258. why objeted againf in a convention of the
States, ibid.
-- another attempt in favor of Church.difcipliae

frustrated, ii. 27o.

Douglas, the power and property of that family, i. 35.

they aspire to independency, ;6. Will. Earl of, mur-
dered by K. James II. q4. his ion endeavours to resent
it, 5. is forced to fly into England, ibid.
-- William, Q. Mary committed a prisoner to his

castle of Lochleven, ii. 94.
- George, brother to the above, alifRs the Queen

in making her escape, ii. 1 4, t 1.
- Archibald, one of Darnly's murderers, ii. 127.

undergoes a mock trial for that crime and is acquitted,
ibid. is sent ambassador to England, ibid. letter from
him to the Q. of Scotts, Appendix, 347. to the King,
1s8.

Drury, Sir William, enters Scotland with an army to

fopport the King's party, ii. tR6. they join him and
drive off the Queen's, ibid. he procures a truce between
the King and Queen's parties, 214. comes with forces
to alift Morton in besieging the castle of Edinburgh,
21t. which is forced to surrender t;2.

-- Sir Drue, Is appointed one of Q. Mary's keepers

ii. ;o;.
VOL. III.

Dd

Dudley, Lord Robert, recommended by Q. Elizabeth as;

husband to Q. Mary, i. ;l4. why a favorite of QO
Elizabeth's, ibid. is highly promoted by her, ;,I,
his fination extremdy delicate, ;16. becomes fufpi.
cious of Cecil, ; I.
,Dambarton Castle, surprised and taken in the King'

name by the Regem, ii. 19 - 19'. -
Dal , a miniier of Edinburgh, banifhedt from:his charge

by K. James for his free invectives against the courtiers,
ii 27t. after being retored, he is driven from it a
second time for approving the Raid of Ruthven, 290.

E
Edianrgb, is taken and burnt by the English, i. ir.

a great fray there between the French and, Scors, 1;2,
s;3. is seized by the Reformers, 9ro. its inhabitan
re terribly alarmed by the French, 218. a treaty there
with the French and Englifb, 238, 239. a loan de-
manded of it by Q. Mary, I .2. which is granted for
the superiority of Leith, ibid.
- the treaty of, insisted on by Q. Elizabeth, ii 46,

47. is poffeifed by the Queen's party, s 4. and ford.
sied by them, 199. the City and Catle hold out against
the King's forces, a 2. are reduced t. great flraits by
famine, 21a. are relieved by a truce, 214. the cii-
zens take up arms to promote the King's marriage,

. they rife again and ilfult the King and his minislers

on the murder of the Earl of Murray, iii. 4, . afflt
the King agiinft Huntly, t6. a violent tumult there on
account of the Clergy, ;o. t . they are severely punilh-
ed for it by the King, ;4. 1 . their ministers return
to their charges, $8 , 39. divided into' puilhes,
and number of minilters increased, 19. they decline
publislhig the account of Gowrie's conspiracy, 67. all

except one, who is banished, are persuaded by the King
to do it, 68.

Edward I of England , deRroyed the public archives of

Scotland, i. 4. is made umpire between Bruce and Baliol,
1r. his art to acquire the superiority of Scotland, ibid.
his wars with the Scots under Robert Bruce, r a, 1s. 47.
Eglinton, Earl of, is prevailed on to join the King's party,

ii. 202.

Eliwbetb, her peaceable acceflion to the Crown of England,

i. x69. supports the congregation in Scotland, 216.
is sparing in her supplies, z17. resolves to support
them on a second application, 222. her good condudt in
matters of importance, 22;. motives that determined
her to afiRft them, 22, 226. her deliberate and
resolute condut, 228, 229. fends a trong fleet to their
afiftance, 229. concludes a treaty with them, 2o0.
her right to the Crown of England alferted by Francis
and Mary, in France, 2;9. obtains advantageous terms
for the Scots, ibid. is solicited by the Parliament of
Scotland to marry the Earl of Arran, 250. this The de.
dines, 2 r. the feeds of her discontent with Q. Mary,
262, 26;. her jealousy of the succession, 264. 266. her
excefive vanity and jealousy of Mary's beauty, 267, 268.
her diflimulation to her, 269. refuses her a safe cor.
duc, ib. evidences that Ihe had no intention to moleR Mary
in her passage to Scotland, 27r. fends to congratulate
her arrival in Scotland, 277. refuses a conceflion made
by Q. Mary, 278. her jealousy of her right betrayed
her into mean aclions, 279. her resemblance to Hen.
VII, ibid. a personal interview with Q. Mary propored,
lot. fie artfully declines it, ;oz. her views in regard
toQ. Mary's marriage, 0o6, 307. assumes a disagreeable
authority, ibid. names one for a husband to Q. Mary,
ir4. the different qualifications ofhJer ministers and fa-
lorites, ;r . dilfembles with 0. Mary about her
marriage, ; x . 1 r7. and lilewife with regard to L.
Darnly, tzo. affronts Q Mary by her insinuation con-
cening Lenox, ib. is perplexed about the marriage

Dd

of the Scottish Queen, 324, 32c. permits Darnly tc
visit the court of Scotland, J25. affecs to declare againll
Q. Mary's marriage to him, 3 2. 3 . her reasons so
this conduc, 11;. 114. her great diflimulation in thai
affair, t 9. her harth and deceitful behaviour to Murraj
and his aflociates who had fled to her, 3(o.
li:2abtb, is firuck at hearing of the birth of James VL ii. 29,
corfents to fland godmother to him , ibid. the Parlia
ment address her to fettle the succession, 17. this greall
embarraffe her , 38 , t9. he sooths and gains hei
Parliament. 40. endeavours to accommodate her dif
ferences with Mary, 46. writes to delay the trial of Dam.
ly's murderers , 6;. interposes in her behalf when a
prisoner, 9-. her ambassador is refused accefi to Q,
Mary, 99. she offers afliftance to the other nobles, 1oo,
her deliberations concerning the disposal of Q. Mary on
her arrival in England, 123 , 124. resolves to de
tin her there, t2 . her motives to this conducft
s26. fends her letters of condolence, and gives orden
to watch her conduct, 127, 128. the gladly acceptl
the office of umpire between her and her subjects, 128,
129. receives a very prefing letter from Q. Mary, i1t
her precautions against her, 1 2. appoins commillionen
to hear Q. Mary and her accnfers, si8 her importanl
situation on that occalion, ib. her views in this affair.
140 , 14. receives the Regents demands, 14;. re
moves the conference to 'eftminfter, 147. her mea
artifices to get the evidence of Q. Mary's guilt from
the Regent, 1s4. treats her with greater rigor, [s.
writes a harsh letter to Q. Mary, r 6. she difmifles the
Regent without approving or condemning him, 157,
but secretly supports his party, tIg. makes proposal
to the Regent in her favor, s62. Norfolk's projet con.
cealed from her, '1s6. discovers and defeats a rebellion
in Q Mary's favor, 171, 172. resolves to deliver her
up to the Regent, 176. her great concern at his death,
igi. continues to encourage factions in Scotland, 182S
181. her political condu&t with regard tQ Lenox,

IS7 -i89. is excommunicated, and deprived of her
kingdom, &c. by the Pope, 188. supports the King's
party in Scotland, and names Lenox to be Regent, a89.
proposes a treaty of accommodation between Q. Mary and
her fubjeds, x90. procures a cessation of holtilities,
ib. fends proposals to Q. Mary, 191. her artifices in
the conduct of this affair, J92. appoints commis-
fioners to frame a treaty, 19J. finds a pretence to ren.
der their meeting fruitless, J9;. a marriage proposed
between her and the D. of Anjou, 20o. declares openly
against the Queen's party, s2 . concludes a treaty with
France, 213. her motives for negociating a peace be-
tween the two parties in Scotland, z26, 227. is
jealous of Cecil's interview with Q. Mary, 2;;. nego.
ciates a treaty between Morton and his adversaries, 2 o.
her anfiver to K. Jamas's demand of a poffTflion of an
etate in England, 2 t. a marriage between her
and the D. of Alencon propored, 2;4. interposes in
behalf of Morton, 2 9. her measures in order to save
him, 262, 26;. countenances the conspirators at Ruth.
yen, 278. is alarmed at a conspiracy againf her, 296,
597. the designs of Q. Mary's adherents aguinft her,
298. endeavours to recover her interest in Scotland,
and gains Arran to her interest, :99. anuses Q. Mary
with a fruitless negociation, 3o2. a new conspiracy
against her, ibid. an aflociation formed for her defence,
0;o, o04. her suspicions of Q. Mary, ibid. her life
endangered by a conspiracy, 3so. this how'difcovered
and prevented, ; i. occasions an extraordinary tatute
for her preservation, ib. is in a dangerous ficuation from
the progress of the holy league 1z6. endeavours to
form a confederacy of the Protestant Princes, ;17.
and to proceed with rigor against Q. Mary, ; g. advan-
ces her interest in Scotland, and propores a league with
it, 319. fettles a pension upon K. James, ibid.
concludes a treaty with Scotland, 32; account of lBa-
bington's conspiracy against her, ;28-l;;. her diffi-
mulation after Q. iary's conviction, 146, ;47. her

Dd

answer to K. James's intercefflon for her, .o. her far.
ther difimulation and anxiety, 5 2. signs the warran
for her execution, 3s4. her speech to Davison on thai
occafon, ib. assets to lament Q: Mary's death, 16;,
several marks of her artifice in that affair, 364, 316,
Ihe endeavours tc sooth K. James, 16q. provocationr
given by her to Spain, 374, P. prepares to meet iu
resentment, 376, 37'. endeavours to secure Scotland,
ibid. tries to prevent K. James's marriage, ;83.

Elizabetb, solicit him to treat conspirators against him with

rigor, iii. 9. evades the deciion of K. James's right o
fucceflfon to the Crown of England, 43, 44. is disgusted
at several of his proceedings, 45, 46. discovers his cor.
refpondence with the Pope, ibid. fresh grounds of her
suspicion, 72. her conduA with regard to the Earl of
EfTex, 78. her irresolution concerning his death, and
great concern after it, ibid. receives ambassadors from K.
James with regard, and increases his subsidy, 79. her last
illnefi, ;. conjectures concerning the causes of her me.
lancholy, 8-8g6. her death, t6. and charaer, 87.
declared the K. of Scots her successor, 89. some of her let-
ter, Appendix, 199. 227. 241, 242. 2,o. 264. 266.
282. to3.
Epbiwgjon, secretary to K. James VL deceives him into a

correspondence with the Pope, iii. 46. is tried and found
guilty of high treason , and pardoned on the Queen's
interceflion, ibid.
Eogland, the Englilh seize and detain King James 1. of

Scotland long a prisoner, i. t . the nobles there humbled,
39. had early two hoonfs of Parliament, 82. they invade
Scodand, 12. their depredations there, utt, s14. a
peace between England, France, and Scotland, 114.
invade Scotland again, 121. gain a great vidfory, 122,
121. it proves of little advantage to them, 12(. they force
the Scots into a dofer union with France, 126. conclude
a peace, £ o. an Englifi fleet arrives in Scotland to assist
the congregation, 228. a peace concluded between them,
229, 210. they enter Scotland and beliege the French in
Leith, 230. are several times repulsed, 212. causes oftheir

bad fucceCs, 21;. articles of a treaty of peace, 241.
they quit Scotland, 242. reflections on the right of Cuccef.
sion to their Crown, 264-267.
England, the Parliament favors Q. Mary's right offucceffion,

iii. ;7. a league between England and France, 2a . be.
tween England and Scotland, ;25. the national covenant
adopted in England, 379.

Entail;, with what view introduced, i. 21, 24.
Epifiopul government in the Church, some account of it,

i.2(4. an tttenpt to revive it, ii. 222. it is abolilhed by
the Affemhly, 271.
-- juirifdition abolilhed, iii. (. See Arcbbisbopr.
Errol, Earl of, one of the heads.of the Spanish faction, ii.

317. his offers of service to the (. of Spain, 382. ap-
pears in rebellion, ;84. is forced to submit to the King,
38 . imprisoned for a lhort time, ibid.

-- joins in another conspiracy, iii. 7. is summoned

by the King to surrender, 9. offers to submit to a trial,
x;. sentence pronounced against him, 14.

Erskine of Dun, is employed by the Queen Regent to deceive

the Protestants, i. t8o. his resentment ofthis usage, ibid.

-- Lord, governor of Edinburgh Castle, ats a neutral

part between the Queen Regent and the congregation, i.
220. receives the Queen Regent into the Castle, t 2.
is created Earl of Mar, 297. See MAar.

- Alexander has the chief direction of the education
of K. James VI. ii. 24. . admits some of the nobles to make
complaints to' him against Morton the Regent, 241. is
turned out of Stirling Cafile by his'nephew the Earl of Mar,
247.
firieval, the French Envoy, endeavours to ohftrud a-treaty.

between England and Scotland, ii. ;2(.

Ffix, Earl of, set up by the Englilh Papists as a candidate

for the Crown, iii. 20. heads a party in England, 72.
his character, ibid. is greatly distinguished by the Queen,
71 favors the K. of Scots, ibid. obtains the offices
of Lord Lieutenant and Commander in Chief in Ireland,
ibid. is unsuccessful in that expedition, ibid. receives a

Dd 4

harh letter from the Queen, 74. return to England
and is confined, ibid. is tried and censured, ibid. en-
dearoan to spirit up King James, 7S. his ralh and frantic
condad, 76. is again taken into cRftody, 77. hisdeat,
,8. his son and aflciates are restored to their honors
afterthe acceion of K. James, ibid.
Earo~, the Rate of, at the beginning of the sixteenth

century, i 87.
& m~aicaiou, a terible engine of the Popil Clergy,

i. xSo.
Fteto, an Englishman, fixes the Pope's excommunication

of Q. Elizabeth on the gates of the Bishop of London's
palace, ii g88.
Frlos, M. de h Motte, sent by the French King to inter.

pose for LK James when confned by the Ruthven con.
fpiratos, ii 292. is forced to return without facces, ibid.

Fmtal Govsenm a, its origin, and ariftocradcal genius,

i. is, 16, 17, caf e which limited the power of
feudal Monarchs, 17. feudal vassals liable to few taxes,

8g. a remrkable -inance of the feeblenceG of feudal
government, s1, 22. the most perfct idea of the feudal
fyflem, how attained, 4. ate of it in England, 80-82.
and in Scotand, 7g, 79, So.

Fife, a populous and powerful country, much devoted to

the congregation, i. 227. is defroyed and plundered by
the French, ibid.

the fynod of, excommunicates the Archbihop of

St. Andrew's for contumacy, ii. 24.

---- they excommunicate the Popili Lords, iii. 1.
Floadm, the battle of, i. 64.
Sorbeh, Lord, with the Earl of Argyle, is sent againR the

Popil Lords, iii. . are defeated by them, ibid.
Fordas, John de, his hifory of Scolnd when wrote, i 4.

Forjfer, Sir John, warden of the English borders, a scuffle

between him and the Scots, ii. ;2o.

Fotberingay Castle, Q. Mary's imprisonment, trial, and

death there, ii. 3 --;6o.

France, the consequences of the fibverlion of the feudal

government there, i 88. a body of French arrive in
Scotland to Cupport the Catholics, 119. they reduce the
catle of St. Andrew's, ibid. another party of them arrive
there, s27, as8. conclude a peace with England, ;1o.
their transactions there, xir. their politic conduft,
ibid. i; . they leave Scotland, ibid. their artifices in
a treaty of marriage between the Dauphin and the Q. of
Scots, 162, 16). the Protestants endeavour to expel the
French army out of Scotland, s95. another party of them
arrive there and fortify Leith, 204. they exasperate the
people by their insolence, ibid. they are sent against the
congregation, 226. they detroy and plunder Fife, and are
much harafled by parties of the congregation, 227, »28.
are greatly alarmed by the arrival of theEnglilh fleet, 228.
they return to Leith greatly haralfed and exhausted, 229.
arc besieged there by the English and the congregation,
232. they gain several advantages, 2z4. their motives for
concluding a peace, 236. negotiations for that purpose,
237, 2 8. articles of the treaty, 239, 240. they leave
Scotland, 242. the French advise Q. Mary to moderate
measures, 260. their proporals by an ambaflador reject.
ed, ibid. they agree to Q. Mary's marriage with Lord
Darnly, 328.

the licentiousness of their morals, ii. 55.
, King of, a copy of his diretions sent to Scot.

land, App. 322.
Francil I. gives a check to the ambitious projete of Char.

les V. i. 92. his fidelity to the Scots, r 14. his death, 1 i9.

-- II. comes to the crown of France, i. 199. his cha.

rafter, ibid. 2 i. is guided by the Duke of Guise and
Cardinal of Lorrain, ibid. he treats the Proteftanta with
great rigor, ;d6. his death, 2s5.

G
GiFords, Dotor and Gilbert, their notion concerning the

lawfulness of killing heretical excommunicated Princes, i.
;28. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q. Elizabeth, ib.
Gilbert being gained by Walsingham betrays his affo.
dates, o, ; ; . is employed to carry on foreign cor-
repondence with Q. Mary, 33 , ;;).

Glamir, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for witchcraft, i. 70.
- Lord, chancellor, intimates the King's order to

Morton to surrender the Regency, ii. 244. is killed in a
rencounter at Stirling, 246.

the tutor of, joins the conspirators of Ruthven, ii.

275. his bold speech to K. James, 276. he, with the
other conlpirators, seize the Cafie of Stirling and eret
their tlandard, 292. he is attainted, and his eltate for-
feited, loo.
Glasgow, Bishop of, a note of his concerning the Queen

of Scodand's dowry, Appendix i;.

CGlencai, Earl of, joins the Ruthven conspirators, i. 27 .
Glenliat, the battle of, iii. 19.
Gordon, Sir John, a scuffle in the streets of Edinburgh

between him and Lord Ogilvy, i. 294. being confined
for it, be makes his escape, 295. when ordered by the
Queen to surrender himself, he takes up arms againt
her, 296. is defeated, and together with his brother,
made prisoner, 299. he is beheaded and his brother pur
doned, ibid.
-- Lord, set at liberty, i. 346.

Sir Adam, exerts himself for the Queen's intered

in the north, ii. 21s. his character and good condud
as a soldier, a24, 21;.
Gowrri, Earl of, joins in a conspiracy to seize the King

at Ruthven, ii. 2a5. is visited and pardoned by the King
after his ecape, 28s. becomes fufpeted, and isordered
for France, 292. delays his voyage, and. it taken into
custody, ibid. he is tried and executed, 293.

Gowrie, John and Alexander, sons of the above, their cha.

racter and conspiracy, iii. (o. the Surprising circumstances
of that remarkable tranfadion, (1 - s 6. several different
conjectures concerning it, 56-68. their dead bodies
brought into Parliament and condemned, 68. their eflates
and honors forfeited, and name abolished for ever, ihid.
different accounts of this affair publilhed, but not satis-
factory, 69-71. See uttbven.

Graham, Sir David, of Fintry, accured of a conspiracy

with the popish Lords in favor of Spain, iii. 8. is con-
vided and beheaded, 9.
Gray, master of, some account of him, ii. ;o9. he b.e

comes a favorite of K. James VI. ibid. is gained to Q,
Elizabeth's interest, ib. betrays Q. Mary, 307. persuades
K. James to write a harsh and undutiful letter to her,
1 1 joins with others in promoting Q. Elizabeth's interest
in Scotland, ;)8. his treachery when sent to intercede
for Q. Mary, ;r2. his baseness discovered, he is dif.
graced, 368. his vain attempt against secretary Maitland,
369.

-- ads in Italy as a spy from the court of England,

iii. 4s. a memorial of his for his Majelty , Appendix,
361--69. to the secretary of hate, ;66.

CtGiJ, Duke of, his violent ccunfels with regard to the

Scots, i. 198, 199. is murdered at the fiege'of Orleans,
o3i.

- his intrigues against Q. Elizabeth, ii. 297, 298.

is a principal promoter of the holy league, ;16. 375.
drives the French King out of his capital, ibid.

H

Haddingtozt, seized and fortified by the Englilh, i. 126.

is relieved by the French, 128.

Hamilton, the rife of that family, i. 7. arbitrary pro.

ceedigs of Morton the Regent againft-it, ii. 252, 253.
See Cbatelberault.

amilt, of Bothwelhaugh, taken prironer at the battle of
Lagide, i. i . is tried and condemned for rebellion,
ibid obtais a pardon from Murray the Regent, by the
interceon of Knox, ibid. an account of his murdering
Murray, 176-179. makes his escape, 178. is recei.
wed in triumph at Hamilton , 18.
--- Mr. Patrick, the sift who offfered in Scotland for

the Proteant religion, i. 17o.
ts~ord; Iar of, invades Scotland with an Englilh army,
L ,i2. bun Edinburgh and Leith, ibid. is made Duke
ofSomrfet, and protector of England, S1. See Somfit.
t~tos, vice- mberlain of England, the argument by
which he prevailed on Q. Mary to plead at her trial, ii.
;19.
Bcry IL of France, fends forces to assist the Scots, L

119. a marriage propoed between his son the Dauphin
and the young Q. of Scots, 127, r28. excites the
Scots to invade England, 157. his infamous impotion
on Q. Mary in the treaty of marriage, 162, 161. per.
fuades his son and Q. Mary to aflume the tides of King
and Queen of England, t7;. his death, 197.

*- UIIL degenerates greatly on his accelion to the

crown of France, iiL 1s. enters into a private nego.
ciation with Q. Elizabeth, ;r8. interposes feebly in
behalfof Q. Mary, ;47, ;48.
-- -- VVlL of England, by his systen of reformation be-

comes formidable both to Papists and Protestants, i. 71
popofes an interview with King James V. ib. is difip.
pointed by him and declares war againit Scotland, 72,
7;. invades it, but is forced to retreat, 74. his im-
portance, as to the balance of power in Europe, 9;.
his inflence in Scotand how obtained, 95. his schemes
with regard to it on the death of Jam'es V. 1oo. were
i-condnded by himfdf, and odious to the Scots, 101.
his treacherous feizue of Scots ihips that took Ihelter in
his ports, o14. attempts to gain the Regency by great promi
fes, I06. invade Scodand, irn. this being illconduded
turns to no account, ibid. receives and rewards the Earl

of Lenox. it;. encourages the murderers of Cardinal
Beatoun, iS1. his death and charater, ibid. inconsistent
conduct, 174. excluded the Scotch line by his tetament, ib.

Herries, Lord, joins Chatelherault in oppoling the Regent,

ii. 168. comes to a treaty with him, ibid. he and the
Duke are committed prisoners to the cafle of Edinburgh,
169. intimates the King's order to Morton to resign the
Regency, 244. account of his behaviour in Parliament,
Appendix, 80. a letter from him to Lord Scroop and
Sir F. Knollis. 27;.

Hickford, secretary to the Duke of Norfolk, betrays him

by discovering his intrigues with Q. Mary ii. 208, 209.

Highlands and Isles, an attempt to civilize them by King

James VI. iii. 81. regulations for that purpose, ibid.
three towns endued with the privileges of royal boroughs
ordered to be built there, 82.

Hodffon, a priet of Rheims, maintained the lawfulness of

killing heretical excommunicated Princes, ii. ;28.

Horme, Alexander Lord, thwarts the, measures of the Duke

of Albany, Regent, i. 37.

- Lord, sent by K. James VI. with a fccret embassy

to the Pope, iii. 48.

Howard. See Norfolk.
Hunfdon, Lord, governor of Berwick, his interview with

Arran, ii. 299, o0o.

Hntly, Earl, though a catholic, joins the reformers in

opposing the French army, i. 196 aflifis them only
with fair promises, 219. his further concurrence with
them, 234. some account of that family, 292, 29t,
his enmity against the young Queen's ministers, ibid.
his reefntment inflamed by an accident, 294. appears
in an open rebellion against the Queen, 297. his plot
against her ministers disappointed, ibid. breaks out into
open rebellion, 298. trodden to death in a battle,
299. his family prosecuted with the utmost rigor, 0oo.
several anecdotes and conjeAures concerning his plot,
ibid. 3ot. is attainted by Parliament, 309.

~/t* , the attainder repealed, and the family reftord to

estate and honors, ii. 68.

---his attachment to Bothwell, ii 6,. »i. refufesto

submit to the Regent, 161. is forced to. do it, 162,
ats as lieutenant to the Queen after the Regent's mur.
der, 86. is proclaimed a traitor by Lenox the new Regent,
n19. receives Come money and promises of assistance
from Spain, 90o. agrees to I treaty with Morton
the Regent, 2o0. is one of the heads of the Spanil
fa*ion, 177. engages to the Prince of Parma to serve
the King of Spain, ;12. is imprisoned for aihort time,
IgS. ents a itandard of rebellion, ibid. but forced to
submit to the King,- 1R8. is again imprisoned, ibid. is
.. oon set at liberty, ibid.

--- receives a commiflion from the King, ii. 4. his
barbarous murder of the Earl of Murray, ibid. is rum.
moned to forreeder to jutice, . flies tothe mountains,
9. offers to submit to a trial, I . sentence pronounced
gainft him, 14. refuses to Cfbmit, iS. makes another
dceerate attempt, but is forced to fly, 17, ig.

I
Jmer I. was detained long a prisoner in England, i. ;.

troubles in Sotlauid during that time, 16. was much
improved by an Englith education, 49,. o. his policy
on hit return to Scotand, .o. his characer, 5s. fop.
preffe the power of the nobles, ibid. they being exa-
perated, conspire against, and murder him, S2, S1.
.---.-I troubles in Scotland during his minority, i. ;6, 7.

hiq attempts aRainf the nobles, 1, 54- murders the Earl
of Douglas, 4. procures several good laws to be pas-

* fed, , s, 6. reduoes the power of the nobles, j6. his

death, *7.

; 1I1. the fte of Scotland during his minority, i. ;.

his impolitic conduct, s7, 7 g. killsone of his.brothers,
and is nvaded by another, 8. is greatly insulted by his

nobles; 60. his despicable minions, ibid. was the first
that appointed a standing guard to his perron, 61. the
nobles are provoked to take arms against him, 62. is killed
in a battle against them ibid. his character, 6a.
James IV. his charater, i. 61. is killed in a battle against

the English at Flowden, 64.
-- V. his minority long and turbulent, i. ;T. tranf.
actions during that time, 64, 65. assumes the government
while very young, 66. his character, 67. his scheme
for humbling the nobles, 67-71. is diverted from it by
the clergy, 73, 74. takes arms for the defence of his
kingdom, 74. his nobles refuting to follow him, throws
him into a deep melancholy, 7 -77. which is increased
by a furpriling defeat of his forces, 76. his death, 77.
reflections on his condut, 78. he refused an alliance with
Charles V. Emperor, 94.

- VI. his birth, ii. 29. his haptifm, 44. the care

of him committed to the Earl of Mar, 6 . is by him
preserved from falling into the hands of Bothwell, 8;. is
crowned, o13. the nobles opprelfed by Morton the Re-
gent, turn their eyes to him for redress, 241. his edu.
cation and dispositions, 242. he becomes suspicious
of the Regent's power, ibid. discovers early a great at.
tachment to favorites, 25 . adopts two of different dif-
pofiions, ibid. enters Edinburgh with great solemnity, 257.
is by his favorites engaged in unpopular measures, 274,
27(. is seized by a party of nobles at Ruthven, 276.
and forced to receive complaints against his favorites, ib.
dilTfmbles with them, and banilhes Lenox, 278 is brought
to Stirling and Holyroodhoufe, 280. his concern for Le-
nox's death, and regard for his memory, 281. receives
the French ambassador with great refpedt, 282. makes
his escape from the conspirators, 28;. resolves to treat
them with moderation, 28s. visits Gowrie and grants him
a pardon, ibid. renews his fondneRs for Arran, 2X6. is
by him persuaded to violent measures against the confpi-
rators, ibid. his answer to a haughty letter from Q. Eli.
zabeth on their behalf, 87. is by her iaterpoition rea.

dered more vilet againit them, 28s. is rovoked by the
clergy, 290. his f to humble them, 29. his prof-
fionto Arran, os. fends a new favore to England against
the banifed lords, ;os. devolves the whole regal autho.
rity on Amran, o7 , 308. writes an undudfil letter to
is mother, 14. i thratenedto be difnherited by her,
ibid. recive a pension fromQ. lizabeth, 319. is recon.
ciled to the exied lords, 322. become popular by con.
cluding a treaty with ngland, ;2c, Ms6. his scandalous
behaviour with re d to Archd. Dough,) 27. bis endeavoun
to fae his mohs life after hr condemnation, 148,
;49. is grtly incensed at her death, 165. arguments
used by the English minifts to pacify him, ibid. 166.
is forced to Itif his resentment, 167. attempts to unite
the nobles, 369, 370. is coured both by Spain and
England, 176, 377. resolves vigorously t adhere to the
latter, 77. takes several feps with tht view, ibid. his
Ikill in the popilh controversy, )18. wrote a commentr
on the Revelations, ibid. his maxims with regard to po-
pery, 384. his exceflive lenity to conspirators againA
him, ibid. resolves to marry the Princess of Dermark,
18. arns nsed to prevent it, ibid. the marriage is con
summated in Norway, ;I.7 passes (everal months inDen-
mark, ibid. refletions on his condud there, 39S.
Ja~m, his arrival in Scotland with his Queen, ii. L. in

dnlges the Presbyterians, 2. the ill consequences of his
lenity . his zeal aginft witchcraft, ibid. is folioited by
Q. Elizabeth to treat the confpiratos against him wit
rigor, 9, ro. is fufpeded of connivig with them, o-.
is forprifed and Teized by Bothwell, a . and forced to
comply with his terms, ibid. his lenity to Bothwell abused
14. is fofpled of favoring the popifl Lords, s. is in
new danger from them, 16. delegates his authority to
Argyle and Porbes against them, 8. goes in person again
them, 9. wates their lands and garrifns their cafles,
ibid. his right of the fuccefflon to the crown of Englad
opposed by the papists, o2. hi leity to them incenfa
the dcrg and people, 4+, aS. is muh pwooked by tb

obinaacy

obstinacy of the clergy, z2. gives orders againl them,
1I. is much insulted, and in great danger at Edinburgh,
3 -. t1 leaves Edinburgh and proceeds with severity against
the citizens, 14-7-. acquires absolute dominion in eccle.
fiaftical affairs, 18, 9 strengthens his interest in par.
liament, by reltoring the feats of the ecclesiastics, 40-42.
endeavours with Cuccefs to gain a party in England, 4;.
increafcs his reputation by publilhing his Bafilicon Doron,
44. is accused by Q. Elizabeth of corresponding with the
Pope, 46. this he denies , and how accounted for, 47.
other reports concerning this, ibid. is at great pains to
gain the Roman catholics, 4(. his regulations with regard
to the church, 49, go. the mysterious affair of Gowrie's
conspiracy, 5o-71. his cautious behaviour in regard to
the Earl of Effex, 76. fends ambafladors to save him, 77.
they arrive too late, ibid. he restores his son and afro-
ciates to their honors after his accefflon, ibid continues
his intrigues in England, 79, go. his interest greatly
firergthened there, ibid. endeavours to civilize the high.
lands and ifes, g , 82. is proclaimed King in England,
after the death of Q. Elizabeth, 88. is proclaimed likewise
in Scotland, 90. prepares for his journey to England, 91.
enters London, and takes poffeflon of the throne, 92.
his character how different from that of Q. Elizabeth, ib.
a letter from him to Mr. Archibald Douglas, Append. 3 6.
curious letter to him from an unknown Englihi corre.
fpondent, 180.

lnverniel castle, refuses to surrender to Q. Mary, i 297.

it is forced, and the governor punilhed, ibid.
Ialy, the liberty of, how preserved, i 89.

K

Reitb, Sir William, rent to intercede for Q. Mary when

under sentence, ii. 349. letter from him to secretary Maitl
land, Appendix, 466.
e;nt, Earl of, appointed to fee the sentence against Q Mary
executed, ii. 3 $.
VOL. III. E e

Ker of Ferniherft, ravages England on the murder of Murray

the Regentc ii. 182. his design, 185. has a scuffle with
the Englif(, 3to.
---- Geo. brother to L. Newbattle, is discovered when

ready to fail to promote a plot in Spain, iii. 7. his scheme
opened, ibid. escapes outofprifon, o.
Killigrew, Henry, his declaration on the peace, Appendix,

311.
Kings, feudal, the molt limited of all Princes, i. i . general

caues of this, 17. their revenues were but small, ig. had
noranding armies, 19. and jurifdiftion limited, 20. means
used to extend the royal authority, 4o. their jurisdiction
enlarged, 42. the extraodinary influence of the Scottish
Kings in Parliament, 78. the reason of this, 84.
Kirkald. of Grange, one of the murderers of Beatoun, is

recalled by the Q. Dowager, i. 60o. his attainder reversed
inParliament, o9.
- offers to fight Bothwell in ingle combat, ii. 89. his

interview with Q. Mary, in name of the confederate Lords,
90. rescues Maitland from confinement, 17t. labors to
support the King's authority, and restore harmony after
the murder of the Regent, iS;, 184. accedes to the
Queen's party, 184. provides for a siege by increainghis
garrison and fortising Edinburgh, 198. proclaims Lenqx'
authority unlawful and usurped, 199. attempts in vain
to prevent a meeting of the Parliament, 200. forms a
scheme for forprifing the King's party, 20;. is at fut
successful. but afterwards defeated, 204. comes near to
an agreement with Mar the Regent, 219. a treaty with
ilorton breaks it off, 229-20o. fires upon Edinburgh
from the castle. 229. is besieged by the Regent, afifted
by the Englilh forces, 2; 1. is forced by a mutiny of the gar.
rifon to capitulate, 2 2 surrenders to Drry the Englih
general, ibid. is by order of Q. Elizabeth delivered up to
the Regenf, 2; 9. he and his brother are executed, ibid.
,Kiolly., Sir Francis, sent by Q. Elizabeth with lettes of

condolence to Q: Mary on her arrival in England, ii. a6.
some of hisltters, Appendix, 274-282-289.

tnox, John, a famous reformer, his charader, i. r14.

after beilg frnme time abroad, he is recalled by the per.
fecuted Protetants, R . inflames the multitude at Perth
with rage againfi the PapiRs, ibid. his notion concerning
the government of women whence, S8g. his residence
fixed in Edinburgh, 19;. complains of the lukewarmrers
of the reformers, 208. his opinion to the convention of
reformers that it is lawful to resist and deprive tyrannical
Princes, 210. animates and revives the desponding Con.
gregation, 221, 222. complains of the neglect of the
reformers in providing maintenance for their preachers,
248. recommends the Geneva model of Church Govern.
ment, 2¢6. proposes fuperintendantsin the church, 2S7.
composes the silt book of discipline, 2z8. renounces
friendship with the Earl of lurray for his moderation,; l o.
is tried for encouraging a mutiny among the people, and
acquitted, 112. popish judges concur in this decision,
ibid is publicly accused by Maitland of preaching seditious
do&rine concerning resistance, 124. charaaers of the two
disputants, ibid.

---. approved of Several instances of aflaffination, ii 2 t

agrees to some regulations concerning the eletion of
Bishops, 22;. specimen of his eloquence, 224. his
death and charater, 224, 225. his eulogium by Mor-
ton the Regent, 22z. articles fcnt by him to the general
afTembly, Appendix, o09.

L

LaRgfide, the battle of, ii. t g.
Ltnreir, cardinal, is Cent as a nuncio from the Pope with a

preent to Q. Mary of Scotland, ii. 4'. is flopped at Paris,2.
'Letlge, holy, a confederacy of Roman catholics so called,'ii.

16. was universally agreed to by them all over Europe, id.

Lar)iing, the revival of, promotes the reformation, i. 14;.
Leicetier, Earl of, appointed a commiflioner to the con.

'icence at 'Weftminlter, ii. o.

E-a

Leltb burnt by the Englilh, i. 2. fortified by the French

o24. besieged by the English, 2;0. .Q. Mary lands there
from France, 271. the superiority of it granted by her to
Edinburgh, S2z.

i-s seized and fortised by Morton the Regent, ii. l9~.
Lenox, Earl of, arrives in Scotland from France, i. o6.

it much courted by cardinal Beatoun, ibid. his pretensions
to the fucccfflon, how founded, 109. resents Beatoun's
deceitfulness to him, to. heads the reformers and the
advocates for the English alliance, i l . surprises the Re.
gent and cardinal, ibid. is outwitted by the Cardinal, ibid.
continues alone in the interef of England, ! 1 I . is forced
to fly to that court, where he is rewarded, ibid. is mar.
ried to a niece of K. Henry's, by which he became father
to a race of Kings, ibid. his claim to the succession, 3 8.
is imprisoned for a secret correspondence with Q Mary,
; 1 9. is invited secretly by her to return to Scotland, ibid.
arrives in Scotland, and is received with great familiarity
by her, 21, 122. his forfeiture is repealed, and he it
restored to his eflate and honors by the Parliament, 322.
his lady sent prisoner to the Tower of London, 314. and
treated with rigor, ;)9-

-- he infirs on the prosecution of his tor Darnly's

murderers, ii 60. charges Bothwell with it, ibid. the pro
fecution is hurried, 6z. he craves a delay, which is
refofed, 64. he is left alone in it, ibid. solicits Q. Eli-
zabeth's interest to obtain a delay, 6;. infifis on it by
proxy at the trial, but is over-ruled, 66. being appre.
henfive of danger he flies towards England. 68. his
countess accuses Q. lMary of the murder to Q. Elizabeth,
129. he appears at the conference at Wefminfter, and
accunes Q. Mary of the murder upon oath, 12. returns
to Scotland protected by an Englglh army, 186. is eleced
Regert, 189. his progrefsagainft the Queen's party, ib.
appoints commiflioners to frame a treaty with thole of
the Queen, 191. surprises Dumbarton catle, 195-- 97.
joins the Earl of Morton at Leith, a19'. holds a Parliacna

in the Canongate, ibid. another at Stirling, 202. he ;
surprised and killed there, 204.

Lnoox, Lord Aubigny, his character, ii. 2 S. joins with the

ling's other new favorite to undermine Morton, 76. re-
nounces Popery, 2;7. Q. Elizabeth demands him to be
removed from the privy council, 2z9. is accused by her
ambassador, 261. Arran tries in vain to supplant him.
269. is commanded by K. James at the request of the
nobles to leave the kingdom, 278. puts off his departure
on various pretences, 278, 2;9. returns unwillingly to
France, where he soon dies, 280. his memory vindicated
and much regarded by the King, 28 . died a Protelant, ib.
- Earl of, left as the King's lieutenant in the north

after dispersing the popish Lords, iii. 19.

Lttlie, Norman, murders Cardinal Beatoun, i. ir6. he and

his associates keep pofleflion of the cafile of St. Andrews,
1 7. makes a truce with the Regent, i 8. are encouraged
by Hen. VIII. ibid.
- Bfllop of Ross, is sent by the Catholics in Scotlan4

to engage Q. Mary in their intereff, i. 259. his proposal
to her rejefted, 260.
-- his negociations in- England in favor ofQ. Mary, ii,

0o,. is confined long in the Tower, and afterwards is
banilhed England, 210.
Lindsay, Lord, carries the proposal from the confederates to

Q. Mary, that she Ihould resign the government, ii. 103.
joins the Ruthven conspirators, 275.
Lochlevin castle, Q. Mary committed a prisoner there, ii. 94.

her escape from thence, 1i 4.
- Lord, letters to and from him, Append. ; 4.
Logan of Reftalrig, an alledged accomplice in Gowrie's con.

fpiracy, iii. C7, (8. is tried, and his estate forfeited long
after his death, (9.

Lords confederate, aflbciate against Bothwell and Q. Mary,

ii. 8. raise forces againIt them, 86. publilh the motives
of their conduct, 87. prevail on the Queen to surrender
to them, 9o. assume the title of Lords of the secret
council, and the royal authority, 94.

Eel

' Lordr, popilh, conflire against K. James, ii. ;2. are treated

.- h;in with great lenity 8*4
-- form a new confpiracv. iii. 7. the King Froceeds

ag;nll them. g. more of his lenity to them, 2. frelh
dangers from them, 6. they receive money from Spain,
r-. zeal of the clergy againfi them ibid. are declared
guilty of treason and their estates forfeited, is. defet
the King's army, 9. are dispersed on the King's approach,
a0 go abroad and give security to keep the peace, ibid.
rttprn to Scorldnd, and petition for leave to reGde in their
own houses. 2 C. this granted by a convention of efate4
Ibid. recant their errors and are absolved from excommut
nication, t9, relapse, and are again reconciled to the
church of Rome, ibid. are restored to their elates and
honors, 40.
orrau cardinal, gets some of the best benefices in Scot
land, i. i68.
-- Prines of, their ambitious views, i. r7?. inftigatt

the Dauphin and Q. Mary to take the titles of King and
Queen of England, 17 . resolve o invade England, 1,76,
and to check the Reformation in Scotland, ibid. the Car.
dinal's great influence over the young King, 199. drives
the Queen Regent of Scotland to violent measures, a2o,
their violences occasion a confipiray against them, a7,.
re forced to withdraw their troops from Scotland, ibid.
they infolt the Scottfh ambaflador, 250. have great
power over the young King and Queen, 2(s , 22. are
forced to contrat their views on the death of the King, 2 3.
Ltber, a bold and principal promoter of the Reformation,

i 143, he rapid progrcfs of his dofltine, 144.

M

Mifjor John, his history of Scotland, some account of, i. (.
MJf.;tlid of Lethington, fecrerary to Mary Queen Regent,

leaves her service and joins the Congregation, i. 220.
his charat r, ibid. ia . is sent by them ambafador to

Q. Elizabeth, 222. fends them afiurances of her pro-
tetion, 226. is sent by Q. Mary to the court of England,
277. makes a concession to Q. Elizabeth, 278. accom-
panies Q. Mary in a progrers to the north, 295. he is
employed by Q. Mary to desire a personal interview with
Q. Elizabeth, t;o. publicly accuses Knox of preaching
seditious doctrine concerning resistance, 124. intimates to
Q. Elizabeth the intention of Q. Mary to marry Darnly,
3; r. prudently conceals her resentment from Q. Elizabeth,
334.-

Jfaitland, proposes moderate measures with regard to Q. Mary

when imprisoned, ii. roo. attends the Regent when called
on to accuse her in England, 1 8. he disapproves of this
measure, ibid. his intrigue with the Duke of Norfolk
141. 1 6, 164. is imprisoned by the Regent, 1 70. is relieved
by Kirkdldy, and secured in the castle, 171. proposes
coalition of the two parties after the murder of the Regent,
18;. accedes tq the Queen's party, 184. is deprived of
his office of secretary, and proclaimed traitor, 189. is
attainted in a Parliament of the King's party , 290.
agrees with Mar, 219, 220. his views In refusing a re.
conciliation with Morton the Regent, 228, 2z9.'rejeds
overtures of a treaty 'ith him, ibid. is besieged by him
in the caltle of Edinburgh, 2z2. is forced to capitulate
and Surrender to the Engliff general a ibid. to avoid the
Regent's resentment he'difpatches himself, 234. several
of his letters, Appendix ii. ;oo. j;6.
- Sir John, is made secretary for Scotland , ii.

;18. concurs with others in promoting Q. Elizabeth's
interest there, ibid. attempts against him by Capt. James
Stewart, late Arran, 369. they prove abortive, and he
is advanced to be chancellor, ibid. an attempt to remove
him from that office, frultrated, 184.
- his death, iii. 22. a copy of veries in honor of him
wrote by the King, ibid.
ar,; Earl of, the title conferred on the Prior of St. Andrew's,
i 291. accompanies the Queen in a progress to the north,

E 4

29sq. he and his associates narrowly escape afafllnatin,
296, 297. is created Earl of Murray, 298. See Murray.

War the tide is conferred on L. Eifkine. i. 297.
- the pe son of the young Prince put into his hands,

ii. 6. his resolution in preserving him from Bothwell,

1. is chosen Regent, 204. labors to bring about a
genral peace, 2.8. is thwarted by Morton and his as.
focia~e, 220. dies of melancholy, ibid. his charader,
ibid. is merit and integrity was acknowledged by both
purs, ibid
-- the young Eal, being imposed on by Morton,
turns out his uncle from the catle ofStirling, ii 247.'
joins the Ruthyen conppirators, 27S. he with the others
eize Srtirlirg catle, and ere& their standard, 192. i
attainted and his estate forfeited, loo. i pardoned, and
restored to estate and honors, a12.
Jlrch, counters of, her infamous marriage with the Earl

of Arran, ii. 69.
ary of 'Guise. Q. Dowager of Scotland, takes a confder.
able Ihare in the government, i s26. is mpch addided
to the French intered, ibid. projecs a marriage of ber
daughter to the Dauphin of France, 17,. be;omes n-
frumental in.promoting the Reforsation, i 6. aspires
to the office of Regent, i';. piouotes irfaffe1ion to
the present one, and faivors the refrmcrs, 1i7, 18.
*ifits the court of France, is8, returpi to Scotand to
take pofcflion of the Regeiucy, i j, arter tuWe oppof-
tion, fih obtains it, 141. confers fCeeril o oof truf
upon Ifangers, m5 . proposes to lay a ta oupon land,
156. is forced to drop it, 157. tries in vain to excite
a war with England, ibid. the nobles vigorously oppose
her measures, s 9. treats the reformers with great re-
pest, 6o. obt.'ns a concession from the Padiament in
favor of the Dauphin, 166. her artful management of
the reformers, 167, 168. beflows the vacant benefices
on fpreigners, t6S. he altrrs her condud to the refor-
Iners, 1t. temonftrances against the violent mealures of
the Princes of Lorrain, 177. is persuadcd by them to

perfecate the reformers, 178. her ralh answer to their
remonstrance, 179. summons their preachers to appear
before her, ibid. breaks a promire she had made them,
iso marches with an army against them, 182 concludes
a treaty with them, 8il. this she again breaks, r14.
her leverity at Perth, ibid. her chbeme discovered, ibid.
186. lhe goes to attack them, ibid. has again recourre
to negociation, i 87. he is startled at their demands and
gets ime to answer them, 1S9. violates another treaty,
ibid. loses Perth and forced to. abandon Stirling and
Edinbugh, Ihe retires with precipitation to Dunbar, 190.
marches to attack the reformers at Edinburgh, s94.
gains time by her artifice, ibid. makes another treaty
with them, 9;.- her artifices to undermine the Prior
of St. Andrews, oz2. the absurdity of her scheme, 20).
gets a reinforcement of Frenoh troops, who fortify
Leith, 204. The _disregards a remonstrance of the re-
formers, 20;. is influenced by French counfelorn,-and
persuaded to violent measures, ibid. retires to Lelth
on the approach of the reformers army, 207. her pru-
dent and artful conduct there, ib. her haughty and
imperious answer to a frelh remonftranoe from them,
20S. is, by a convention of them, deprived of her
office of Regent, r s. the foundation of this sentence,
ibid. foments differences among them, 215. is deserted
by her principal secretary Maitland of Lethington, 2io.
fends French troops against the reformers, 226. retires
into the castle of Edinburgh on the approach of the
Englflh, 2 t. her death and charater, 234. repented
of her violent measures, sal. listened to the inltruc.
tions of a reformed preacher, a;6.

Jllay Queen of England, her persecuting reign, . 142.

her death, 169.

- Queen of Scots born, i. 97. a proposal to marry
her to fd. VI. oo. The is demanded by Henry VIII.
jot. her marriage to the Dauphin of France proposed,
127. a treaty for that purpose concluded, 28g, 129.
she is sent to be educated in France, 2zg. the ftal

confequece of this, ibid. is imposed on by the atti.
ices of the French in the treaty of marriage, 162.
ber marriage celebrated with great pomp, 16;. they
take the title of Kirg and Queen of England, i75.
lhe makes conctlions to the Congregation, 238, 2f9.
declares Q. Elizabeth's right to the crown of England,
2l9. The acquires an entire ascendant over her hus.
band, 2(s. lTe is overwhelmed with great afflition on
his death, and retires to Rheims, 21). Ihe is invited
by the convention to return to Scotland,: 2-g. an enlif.
fry. from the catholics in Scodand prdpoted violent

cafm a

r to her, 2z9. 1he is determined to moderation

by the French and the Prior of Ss. Andrew's, 26o. is
prevailed on to prepare for her return to Scotland, 26r.
the origin of the discord between her and Q. Eliiabeth,
262. her pretenions to the crown of- England, 261. is
envied on account of her beauty, 267. demands a rase
condut from Q. Elizabeth, which is refued, 269.
eaves France with great reluctance, 270. lands at
Leith, 271. is much affeCded by the change of her ftu.a
tion, ib. feverl disadvantages attending her acceflioh,
272, 273. Some circumstances to her advantage, 27i,
274. her accomplishments of body and mind, ib. the
ferants of her chapel insulted, 275. procures the frte
exercise of her religion, ibid. issues a proclamation in
favor of the Protestants, 76. employs thei solely in
the adminifIration, 277. attempts to gain Q. Elizabeth's
favor, ibid. makes a oonceffion to her, ri7. which is
rejfted, 279. she makes her public entry into Edin-
burgh, 2go. an insult offered to her religion on that
occasion, ib. discourages the attempts of the papists to
gain her favor, 282. her aversion to the family of Ha.
milton, ibid. makes a progress into the north, 295, 296.
her minister narrowly escape assassination, 296, 297.
is refuied access to the cafle of Inverness, 297. when
in the utmost conrfemation is relieved by the Monros
and other clans, ibid. her forces defeat Hnntly's rebel-
lion, 299. Jhe deftres an interview with Q. Elizabeth,

tot. negociations concerning her marriage, to. is rofi-
cited by different Princes, ;oj, o04. her deliberations
concerning it. ioC. is forced to bear the authoritative-
behav;our of Q. Elizabeth, ;to, 1og. to please her
subjects, determines against a foreign alliance, log. de-
termines not to ratify the treaty if Fdinburgh, 1o9.
further negnciations for her marriage, 1. discovers
the views of Catharine of Medicis, t14. Lord Robert
Dudley recommended to her as a hbiband by Q. Eliza-
beth, t 4. she is highly offended at this, Ir . dilfembles
with Q Elizabeth, 1 1 7. entertains thoughts of marryiig
LoAd Darnly, t I. she recalls Lenox, I t'9. is affronted
at a letter of Q. Elizabeth's, 120. her prejudice against
the reformed, and zeal for the catholic religion, ;2;.
is taken with Darnty at firt fight, 126. is greatly moved
at Q. Elizabeth's insulting craftiness, `27. negociates
with the court of Rome for a dispensation to marry
Darnly, ibid. and the consent of the court of France,
;2g. impores on Randolph, but applies to Q. Elizabeth
for consent to her marriage, ;;t. which she alfedts to
refute, 1l2. in resentment she proposes to fend an angry
message to Elizabeth, which Alaitland prevents, 314.
jufifies her conduct to the English ambassador, 3;;.
endeavours to get Murray's consent, 116. courts thi
pope's protedtion, and receives a subsidy from him,
117. her great address in gaining the consent of her
fubjets, 1 9, 40. prevents a plot againfl Darnly, ib.
summons her vassals to take arms againt Murray, ;42.
and him to appear before her, 144. her marriage with
Darnly celebrated, ibid. Ihe confers the title of King of
Scots upon him, 145. this ftep censured, ib. her re:
fentment against the malecontents, ;16. Ihe marches
againfl them, 147. rejedts the intercession of Q; Eliza-
beth in their behalf, 148. continues her march against
the rebels, ibid. her condut and courage bn that occa.
sion, ;49, drives them out of Scotland, ibid. her further
resentment againrt them, 35o, 3 , has recourse t

fe al devices to ranie money, l;s. her prosperity
prom~t her religion, c ;.
~Mi, her deliberations concerning the exiled Lords, ii. t.
detemines to treat them with lenity, ;. is diverted from
this by her rdigion and French influence, ,

4 . this the

source of her after. nisfortunes, 6. her intention to restore
popery, 7. is disgusted with DarIly's insolent behaviour, g.
her familiarit with Rizio offends the King, I. vindicated
frm any criminal coefpondence with Rizio, 12, t1. oues
her utmoR endeavours to prevent his murder, i . ihe is
conined by the conspirator, 16. ihe gains the King, and
escapes from them, i7. is reconciled to the exiled nobles,
a8. her hatredto Danly increaes, 2S. 26. and favor for
Bothwerl commences, 26. xtinguilies some dometic
fetds among the nobles, ai. is delivered of her son Jame
VL in the cafe of Edinburgh, 29. invites several foreign
princes to his bapdtm, 3o. continues to treat Darnly with
negled, ibid. her attachment to Bothwell increals, ; t.
pr.ents Darly's intended flight, 1, ;4. visits the borders,

4. an infance of her regard for Bothwell on that occasion,
ibid. how iherivalled Q. Elizabeth, ;6. her right of fuc-
ceflion favored by the Engliin parliament, 17. ihe
endearours to avail herself of that opportunity, 9, 40. .W
takes an extraordinary tep in favor of popery, 43.
receives a present from the pope, but flops his nuncio at
Paris, 42. endeavoun to procure a better fublifience for
the reformed clergy, 41. her aversion to the King excef-
ive, becomes melancholy, ibid. goes to Stirling to cele.
bate her son's baptism, 44. is greatly offended at the
Ring's behaviour on that occasion, 4 . restores the'popifh
ecclefaflical juifdiAion, so. her neglect of the King
during his ficknefG i 2. the breach between them becomue
irreparable, s;. Ihe visits him at Glasgow, ibid. the
motives of her difimulation on that occasion, $4, sC
prevails on .im to come to Edinburgh, 6. her suspicious
behvioor to him there, 5(. issues a proclamation for
discovering hi murderers, s. is supposed to have bern
accefary to it, 60. is charged with it abroad, as well s

at home, ibid. goes to visit her Con at Stirling, 77. is met
on her return by Bothwell, who seizes and carries her
to Dunbar, 78. this supposed with her consent, ibid. is
conducted to Edinburgh, o8. and married to Bothwell, 8 1.
fends an apology to the courts of France andEngland, 82.
her conduc causes a general indignation against her abroad,
84. is alarmed at a combination of the nobles against her
St. Ihe publishes a manifesto to vindicate her conduct,
86. is conducted to the castle of Borthwick, 87. marches
with Bothwell's forces against the confederate Lords, 88. an
attempt of an accommodation proves vain, 89. is forced
to surrender to the confederates, o9. is insulted by the
soldiers and mob, 91. is carried to Edinburgh, where
many abuses are offered her, ibid. is sent a prisoner to
Lochlevin Castle, 94. Q. Elizabeth interposes in her
behalf, 97. the Englilh ambassador is refused access to
her, 99. various proposals among the confederates con-
cerning her, zoo, 0lo. they oblige her to resign the
government, sot. different reasonings on this measure,
104-o17. is much moved with the freedom of the Earl of
Mlurray, o18. her party among the nobles become dif
pirited, 1 lo. her resignation of the Crown accepted by the
parliament, and her imprisonment declared lawful, l.
her letters to Bothwell read, and she declared accessary to the
King's murder, ibid. escapes from Lochlevin, 114, 115.
arrives at Hamilton, x5. is attended by many nobles and.
a numerous army, 1 S, 16. an association signed in her
defence, ibid. her imprudence in hazarding a battle, s 9g.
her army defeated by the confederates, ibid. her precipitate
flight into Galloway, o20. ralhly determines to retire to
England, 12i. goes thither againf the advice of her at.
tendants, 122. arrives at Carlisle, 2;. writes to Q. Eli-
zabeth, imploring her good offices, ibid. receives letters of
condolence from her, and demands admittance into her pre.
fence, 126, 127. this refused, and why, 127. offers to
submit her cause to Q. Elizabeth, ibid. is much deceived in
her expecation from this. s ;o. and offended on difcoveri ng
the artifices of Q. Elizabeth, i 1. earnetly foliciti to be

dmitted into her presence, ibid. (he is carried toBolton
Castle, 1 4- chagrined at finding herself a priloner, ibid.
agrees to an inquiry into her condud, ib. her dilicmulation
with regard to religion, r I;. commiflioners appointed to
appear inher name, I ;7. her chief view in this affair, 139.
conents to moving the conference to Weflminifer, 147.
the is carried to Tuthbury in Staffordlhire, ,1 48 is much
offended at the regard shown the Regent, and recals her
content to the conference, 149. the accusations against
her produced by the Regent, i o. is accused likewise by
the Earl of Lenox, iS2. her commissioners refuse to
answer, and demand a personal interview, m tt. they pro.
tet against future proceedings, ibid. a suspicious circlrm.
fiance against her, 5-4. her commissiones withdraw from
the meeting, ibid. her resolute answer to a harsh proposal
of Q. Elizabeth, 6. avoids any farther progress in the
inquiry, 5 7. is enraged at the proceedings, and proposes
desperate measures, is8, 1r9. spreads chimerical con.
jedures with that view, 1s9. proposes a divorce from
Bothwell, 162. is influenced by the D). of Norfolk's fche.
mec, 16;. exchanges many letters and love-tokens with
him, r64. contents to proposals from the Englilh nobles,
166. their views in this tranladion, 16 -167. a rebellion
by her adherents against Q. Elizabeth, 17 . is removed to
Coventry, , ;. Q. Elizabeth thinks of delivering her up
to the Regent, 7 S. this proje& how disappointed, 76.
accefflon of several to her party after the murder of the
Regent, ig , I86. they endeavour to foment a war with
England, ibid. her authority proclaimed at Linlithgow,

9i6. her parties defeated by the new Regent, g9, 190.
fle answers proposals by Q. Elizabeth, 91. attemptsin vain
to get foreign assistance, 192. appoints commiflioners to
frame a treaty for her liberation, 193. this proving fruit-
ks·4 the is more ftritly confined, 194. the invalidity of
her resignation declared in a parliament held by bet
adherents, 200. ad of parliament in England to curb her
and her party, 2of. she looks for protection from the
King of Spain, o6. is denied the privilege of an am.

baffador at the Court of England, 2 10. is more cfore
confined and watched, ibid. proceedings against her in
England, 21 (. her interest neglected by the French, ibid.
is hurt by the MafTacre at Paris, 217,2 218. her adherents
divided into two fafions, 227. one of them joins' with
Morton the Regent, 21o. review of the charaters of her
adherents and opponents, 21 , 234. her forlorn situation,
214. is carried to Buxton Wells, 231 . loses several of her
friends by death, 217. fends a letter and presents to her
son, 2t4. her messenger, why difmiTfed without feeing
him, ibid. her uneafnefs at his confinement by the Ruthven
conspirators, 28r. complains to Q. Elizabeth of her hard
usage, 282. and begs her interceffon for the King her
son, ibid. Throgmorton's conspiracy in her favot,296-298.
a fruidefs negociation with Q. Elizabeth, 3o2. is alarmed
at an association in defence of Q. Elizabeth, 104. is
committed to more severe keepers, ;to. betrayed by Lord
Gray the Scotch ambalTador, ;o6, 307. a statute for the
preservation of Q. Elizabeth, proves fatal to her, 1 . is
more rigorously treated, 3 2. her complaints to Q. Eliza-
beth disregarded, 3 i . is, by the French ambaflador's in.
terest, removed to Tuthbury, ibid. is undutifully treated
by the King her son, 314. her palfionate complaint to the
French ambassador on that occasion, ibid. threatens to
dilinherit him, ibid. several discoveries alledged against her,
312, 1;. Ihe is guarded with unusual vigilance, 114.
her domestics, papers, &c. are seized, ibid. she is con-
veyed to Fotheringay Caflle, s. deliberation concerning
the method of proceeding against her, 3 6, 3 3'. is fufpi-
cious of poison or private murder, 3 7. vindicates herself
to the D. of Guise, ibid. the commitifoners for trying
ier arrive at Fotheringay Caltle, 138. her spirited speech
when refusing to plead, ibid. is at length prevailed on,
319. fh: protests against the authority of the court, il.
the accusation againit her, 340. her defence, 340-341.
her sentence, 343. irregularities in her trial, 344. her
sentence is confirmed by parliament, 14¢. who demand.
the execution of it, ibid. France interposes feebly in her

behalf, t47. thefentence againf her published, 1 o. #he
is treted with the utmost rigor, ibid. her laR request to
Q Elizabeth, i. refutes the assistance of a Protestant
BIshop or Dean, ibid. artifices used to irflame the people
*gairfther, 1. her behaviour ather death, ;t6--36o.
fentimenta of historians concerning her, 60o. her character,

i6l, 162. bet petfon described, 162.' i buried first at
Peteboro and afterwards inWeftminflr-Abbey,363.
letter from her, Append 27l. 2?9. 4 1.her will, App. 34.
objetions against her by Walsingham, App. 11;. what
coore to be taken with her, ibid. a Difrtation on the
genuineness of her letters to Bothwell End of VoL iii.
Jsrr~e, Lord. arrives from Spain, and prepares forces

to join the Spaniards, ii. 77. his followe dispersed, he
is taken pifooer, ibid.
Jdloil is sent by the French King to observe the motions of

the Queen Regent and her aderfaries, i. r98. lent to
make up a difference between Elizabeth and Mary, ;2z.
brings about an appearance of friendlhip between them, ib.
--- is sent to inform Q. Elizabeth of the birth of LK

James VI. ii. 2 9 puts a letter into the Queen's hand againt
her marriage with Bothwell, 76. is forced to fly from
court, ib. adrifes K. James to moderate measures upon his
efiape from the Ruthven conspirators, 28q.
--- Mr. Andrew, a clergyman, h;s charabter, ii. 19.

ealoufly opposes episcopacy, ib. declines the civil jurif
dition in ecclesiastical matters, 290. is forced to fly into
England to avoid persecution, 291.
Jfehrile, Mr. James, minster of Anftlrther, his encomiim

on the eloquence of Knox the reformer, ii. 224.
-- - Sir Robert, sent by K. James to intercede with Q.

Elizabeth for Q. Mary while under sentence, ii. 12-.
executes his coBmillion with fidelity and zeal, ibid. a
memorial of his to tie King, Appendix, 167.
---- MMafer of the household to Q. Mary, takes his last

rfrewel of her, ii 1 8. her parting speech to him, ibid.
jMildme, Sir Walter, lent by Q. iizabet with propofili

to Q. Mary, ii 191.

MolxC ,

jlonluc, Bishop of Valence, employed by the Freneh, t(

conclude a peace with England and Scotland, i. 2 . trn
agreed to by him, 218-241,
Jloitgomter. appointed Archbishop of Glargow, ii. I2?; is

refused and excommunicated by the General Aflembly sot
his immoral life, ibid.
montmorenc,, Contable of France, endeavours to prevent
the Dauphin's marriage with Q. Mary, L. 6o. his prudene
advice to Henry II. 161
-- makes afiender appearance in faor of Q. Mary, ii. a s;
Jorton, Earl of, his irresolute condut as to the Refor,

marion, i. 220. accompanies Q. Mary in a progrei to the
North, 29s.
-- -infigates Darnly to be avenged of Rizio, i. 12.

takes the diretion of that enterprise, 14. is admitted
into the Queen's presence, who promises him a pardon,

7. is forced to fly into England, i8. obtains his pardon
on lothwell's intercefiion, 48. seizes a caflet with letters
from r Mary to Bothwell, g9. he is, by Q, Elizabeth's
interposition, in fator with the King's party, after the
murder of the Regent, 184. appointed one of the com.
missioners to treat witi the Queen's party, 19;. hia de-
mands frustrate the.meeting, 194. is entirely influenced
by the Court of England, 201. commands the King's forces
at Leith, 212. has several lcirmifhes with the Queen'e
forces, ib. closely befeges Edin&urgh, and commits great
cruelties, ib. a suspension procured by the Englifi and French
ambalfadors, 214. a coalition of parties prevented by
him, 220. he is chosen Regent, 221. his mercenary in.
gratitude to the Earl of Northumberland, ibid, obtains the
temporalities of the Alchbiihopric of St. Andrews, 222.
labors to procure a peace between the two panies, 226.
attempts in vain to gain Maitland and Kirkaldy, 228.
makes a treaty with Chatelheranlt and Hundy, 229. get
polTeflion of the Castle of Edinburgh, 23 2. his severity
to Kirkaldy and his brother, 214. his adminitration be.
comes odious, 2 6. his various methods of gratifying his
avarice, 37. connives at the dispute of the clergy, 23)
VOL. IlI; f

ie rites the nobles, 2;9. Argyll and Athel refre to
:- wer his summons, ibid. makes a vain attempt againit
Lord Claud Hamilton, 240. discovers the designs of thb
r: nblesiganthim, and proposes to resign his office, 241,

44. iis refignaoion accepted by the King gives universal
joy, 244, 245. obtains an approbation of his conduct,

- a apardon in ample form, 24;. continuae to watch
: the- modns of bis adverlries, 246. is forced to surrender

the Castle of Edinburgh, ib. resumes his authority, 249.

. ais the Cafle of Stirling, and a feat in the Privy Council,

-ibid.proue a meeting of the parliament at Stirling, ib.
-"ia f~aaity ratifed in ir,ib. forces are raised for and against
him, 2;0. he is reconcied to his adversaries by the inter.
celBon f Q.Eliiaheh, ibid. is fufpeded of foulplay at an
entrainmet a his own house, 252. hisillegalproceedings
' inftn the family of Hamilton, ib. the King's new favorites
undermine him, 2; 6, 2 7. he endavours to prevent them,
: .8. Q Elizabeth interposes in his favor,' 29. is charged

with being accefary to the late King's death, 260. he is
confined in different prisons, 26 . discourages an attempt
to refce him, 262. all his friends are turned out of office,
26. be is tried and condemned, 266. his resolute calm
behaviour and confelion before and t his death, 267, 168.
his body is treated with ignominy, ibid.
ss ,. :Earl of, late Prior of St. Andrew's, goes with a
handful of men again Hunly, i. 298. byhis great flil
and courage he gains a complete vidory, ibid. his grant
is conirmed by parliament, lo9. cabals againt him by
Lenooand Darnly, ;29. his averion to Darnly and other
Curt favorites, ;;s. calls Bothwell to and a trial, 16.
his reasons for opposing Darnly' marriage with the Quen,
ibid. he and his aflfciates are made the dupes of Q. Eli

abeth's policy, ;; 9. concerts to seize Darnly and cay
him to England, 4.o. this prevented by the Queen, ;4t.
avoids ffaffiaion intended him by Darnly, ;42, l41.
evidnces of these plots, ibid. the Queen's vaals are
called to arms agaift him, 142. he is summoned to ap
pear before her, 44 is again summoned and outlaved
on his nonappc ance, 346. is forced t fly with hbi

associates into Argylelhire, 14f; they are interceded for
by Q. Elizabeth, ibid. are pursued by the Queen, and
obliged to fly into England, -349. they meet with unex.
peted ill-treattnent from Q. Elizabeth, t;o.

-- courts Rizio to intercede with'the Queen for him,

ii. 2. many of his old friends solicit for him, ib. 3. the
Queen's favor how intercepted, ;4, . a parlidment is
called to attaint them 7, 7, this how prevented, 8. he
and his associates arrive at Edinburgh, 16. are graciously
received by the King and Queen, ib. are alarmed at
the Queen's escape , but soon reconciled to her, ig.
he is appointed Regent during the minority of K. James
VI. 107. his harlh hehaviour in t vfit to the Queen,

8og. the fuccef of his wife adminiftiation, o. procures

many of the Queen's party to join him,' 1l r' gets the
places of strength iito his hands, ibid. - h office-of'Re.
gent confirmed by parliament, 1 I. his Severe and hatigh
ty behaviour.difgufs several , irll his adherents ia
great confternaton at the Queen's escape from Lochlevin,
116. his prudent condut on that'occaion,'117. defeats
the Queen's.army' t Lringfide,' r19. he improves this
·itory, tl;. *hi lenity to the oprioriers, ibid. Ii cdalls
a parliament, r ;, is called upen by Q. Elizabeth to
vindicate his conduct, s7 . 'le arrives at York, 139.
lis views iarthis .affair, 140. c0mptLihOs-df the Queen's
commillioners againlt himy 141. he behaves with great
reserve on this occasion, 142. this part of his conduct
accounted for, 14; :.intrigues'with the Duke of Nbrfolk,
ibid. his demands from the Enelifltlbmmifiloners, 144,
14s. answers to ihe complaints. bs the Queen's commir .
fioners without touching on the' murder,' 146; t 47.
agrees to. have. the conferene 'moved- to Wetminfter,
147. is affecionately received by Q. Elizabeth, which.
offends Q. Mary, 149. is prevailed on by Elizabeth to
accuse Mary of the murder, s x. produces his evidences,
1 4. is difmified by Q. Elizabeth without approving or
condemning his conduct, 1s7, 58. his party is secretly
supported by heT, I 8. returns to Scotland, and by-bit

F f

vigoous condut blak the Queen' party, 160. he
receivs proposals both from Q. Elizabeth and Q Mary,
162. he diappoints Norfolk, 168, 169. an account of
his murder, 176- 178. his charaer, 1-8. his death
much lamented by Q. Elizabeth and the King's party,
J i. much anarchy the consequence of it, 182. pat of
a letter of his, App. 292.

his heir m dered by the Earl of Hnndy, ii 4.

ea, .Secetaryto :Q Mary, is sent by her ith a lett

and prtefnts to her son, ii 2; 4 why dismissed without

· feeing him, ibid. is sent with offera of hmble refigntion

to Q. Eliabeth ,: o4. is seized and lent prisoner to

, Lo doa, ;;;. is produced an evidence gainft her, 14.
Xiil. dcovers and prevents Parry's defig to murder Q.

Elizabeth, ii. ;l.
)J'otsJ, tbeir exten~ve power, i 22, 2;. becme turba.

lentand formidabl, 24. their pwer ter in Scodmnd
than in any other kingdom, 2. the .caes of this,
25-- 4. their.owr: or' long duration, 9, 40. it be
comes intoerab- 40o tbe Princet, ibid. they are hum.
bled in France and E.Qland, ibid. - but cominue igoarou
in Sotland, 40. discords among themencouragcd, ibid.
their uri(didtion.circumfcribed, 42. 're geady mortified
by Ring James V. 67-7 1. ar difapponud'in a fchbm
to show their refonent,.71. refule to attend the
K. King into England,- .4 they seize the revenues of the
. cburch, 247. reffe to part with them,.to.th reformed

dergy, t2.. 2q8. diffen'ions aron; them, 589, 290.
a convention of them approve the Queen's marriage to
;.parnly, 3;7.

reveral of them recommend Bothwel as a husband to her,
i. 7a,. 7. a firange combination of them on this oeca

\ lion, 74, 7s. a body of them aflbciate gains her Ind
boit i ll, 85. their.diferent views in.tis, ibid. a Pfr

of them favors the Queen, 96. they are much dispirited
by the good condudt of Murray, Iso, ia. they are
much provoked by Morton the Regent, 239. think of
redress from the King, 241. infuse suspicion of the Re-
gent's power into him, 242. a meeting of them by him,
241. a party of them confpireagainftthe King's favorites,
275. they seize his person and drive them off, 276,
277. their neglet of, and ingratitude to the clergy,
32 . the King attempts to reconcile their feuds and unite
them, 369. See Lords.

Norfolk, Duke of, appointed a commiflioner to hear the

cause between Queen Mary and her accusers, ii. ;1g.
forms a scheme of mounting the throne of Scotland, 142,

43t. intrigues with the Regent and Maitland with that
view, 144. he represents the demands of the Scots to
Q. Elizabeth, 14;, 146. his farther negociations with
refpedt to Q. Mary, 16;, 164. endeavours to conceal
his design from Q. Elizabeth, 164. is imposed on by
the artifice ofthe Regent, iz6. gets the consent of many
of the Englilh nobles, 166. his projet approved at
foreign courts, 167. is discovered and defeated by Q.
Elizabeth, s69, 170. flies to Norfolk, r7o. he fur-
renders on a second summons, and is sent prisoner to
the Tower, ibid. is let at liberty, and continues his in-
trigues with Q. Mary, 207. is betrayed by his secretary,
ibid. is seized with his dependants, and accused by them,
209. is executed, ibid.

Nortbumbtrland, Earl of, attempts a rebellion in avor of

Q. Mary, ii. i71. his scheme defeated, 172, 17;.
he is seized by the Regent, 174. is delivered up to
the governor of Berwick, and put to death at York, 221.
Xottiugbam, Counters of, some account of the tranfation
concerning the Earl of Essex's ring, iii. 84.

0

'taviaitr, their infitution and extensive powers, iii. 22.
they undermine th King's minifetrs, a . become odious,

f3

and a combination is formed againt them, ibid. being split
into fadions. and envied by the courtiers, they resign
their commiifon, 40.

Oglvie, Lord, has a scuffle with Sit John Gordon in the

fteets of Edinburgh, i. 294.

Olipbnta, Mater of, joins the Rutheen conspirators, ii. 27(.
Orange, Prince of, fends an agent into Scotland, ii. 264.

his inftruo;ons, ibid. is affaffiated, 1 7.

iOifrl, commander of the French troops in Scotland, n.

deavours to promote a war with England, i. i 8. his de.
sign frustrated, ibid. the number of troops under his corn.
mand, It . Instigates the Queen Regent toviolent measures
gainft the Reformers, 186. is sent by Q. Mary to demand
a faf- condut from Q. Elizabeth, during her voyage to
Scotlnd, 69.
Pdaley, Abbot of, arrives in Scotland, i. 1o6. creates a

suspicion of the Earl of Lenox in the Earl of Arran, Regent,
ibid. is made Archbifiop of Sr. Andrews, 120.
Pari, the massacre of, ii. 216, 217. rejoicings ofthePopilh

party on account of it, 21 7. the consternation and horror
of the Protestants, ibid.
parliament, the nature of their original conflitution, i. 79-82.

particularly that of Scotland, 82--96. 242. a parliament
held on an extraordinary occasion, 242. a difficulty farted
and answercd, 2t4. their proceedings with regard to
religion, 244.24¢. condemn the Popish and approve the
Reformed doctrines, 246. several other regulations of the
fame tendency, 247. their validity called in question, 248.
exceed tLeir powers, 249. their proceedings laid before
the King and Queen, 250.
- a parliament in fdvor of Bothwell, ii. 68. pal'es an
at in favor of the Reformation, 69. confirm the pro-
cee tings of the confederates, i 2. parliaments held both
by the King's and Queen's parties, 200. another of the
Quten's adherents, ibid. attaiat upward of 200 of their

opponents, 202. a parliament at Stirling by the King's
party, ibid. surprised by the Queen's adherents, o20.
another at Stirling, 248, 249. one at Edinburgh, 2s(7.
and on the King's being of age, ;69, o70. several new
laws made there, o70-371. the lesser Barons admitted
into parliament, 37 .

Parry, Doctor, undertakes to murder Q. Elizabeth, ii. I so.

is encouraged by and gets absolution from the Pope, ; 1 1.
his design how prevented, ibid. is executed, ibid.

parsons, a Jesuit, publishes a book in favor of the Infanta of

Spain's right of fucceflion to the Crown of England, ill. 2 1.

pajniinades and Pidures, accusing Bothwell of Darnly's

murder, ii. 9, 6o. 68. a law made against them, 69.

patten, William, his account of the Scottilh ancient military

discipline, i. 124, 12s.

Pai/rt, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q. Mary's keepers,

ii. ;o5. his rigid severity to her, i2, ; r. difcoversher
foreign correspondence, fl2. his rude treatment of her,
so(. refutes to be concerned in privately afalfinating her,
ibid. aletterfromhim, Appendix, ;(2.
Pellevd, Bilhop of Amiens, is appointed to support the popish

interest in Scotland, i. 206. drives the Queen Regent. to
violent measures against the Protestants, 207.

Perth, an infurretion of the Reformers there againfi the

Papists, i. l9s, 182. its inhabitants are severely treated
by the Queen Regent, 184. a French garrison placed
there, ibid. is besieged and taken by the Protestants, I 9o.

- a great tumult there on account of Gowrie's con.

fpiracy, iii. 5 .

Pbhlip II. of Spain, married to Mary Queen of England, L 1 4s

reinforces his army with her troops, r 7.
-- his great power, ii. 1 6. joins in the holy league, ibid.

resolves to invade and conquer England, 176. his pre-
parations for it dilatory, 380. his design frustrated, ibid.
meditates an invasion of England through Scotland, tg8.
intrigues with some Scottish Lords with that view, 312.
-remits money to them, iii. I7.
Piniry, the battle of, i 122.

F f

f V. Pope, excommnicates Q Elizabeth, deprives her of
.ber kingdom, and absolves her fhbjeas, ii. iSg.
poIy, one of Babington's conpiratos aginft Q. Elizabeth,

ii. 29. d~covs the plot, 1o,

t, a frntic zalot, ala~int the Duke ofGife at th

siege of Orlans, i ;o,
ps t, MI Robert, aminifter, andoneof the LordsofSdfion,

p sotb against laws oppreflive to the Church, ii. 294.
Pope~y, where ot o~ rOlin i, 144. what kind prevailed

incodnd, 14i. a prdlygraftedonfHeathenifn, 191.
i much hurt by the congregon, 4s. their dodrines
comndmned by Parliament, 246. the jurifditionof their
courts abolifled, ibid. their worship prohibited, ibid. -.
tempt in vain to gain Queen Mary's favor, 28g.
- the great influence of Popery, ii. ,

Powr, the balance of, the great conequence of preserving

it, i. 8, 90.
Prbte~ church.government eftabliled in Scotland,

i. 2a;.

-- .is confrmed by King James Vl. iiL .
iteafl r, in France, violently perecuted, L 2oo, 201.

we moderate on Q. Mary's arrival from France, 27 S. re
employed by her in the adminiftrtio, 77?.
-*- a scheme for fuppreflngthem all over Europe, ii. 4.
a ige 6mnedi rthat prpofe, t6. See ' formtiwe.

tfay, a favorite of K. James IlL narrowly ekapes he.
ing hanged with his afociates, i. 6o. is appointed Cap-
tain of the King's guard, and created Earl ofBothwell,
61. See Botbwu.
Sa iM, Sieur de, employed by the French to negotiate

a peace with England and Scotand, i s;. erm7. t grced
on by him, si8, g19.

Iudo/pb, tent to encourage the Congregation, L t7?
congranlatcs Q. Mt's arrival in Scotland. 377. g

the ratifiation of the treaty of Edinburgh, 278. is imposed
on by Q Mary in the affair of her marriage with Darnly,

sent into Scotland on the murder of Murray, ii.

182, 18;. interposes for Morton, 262, z6;. flies from
Scotland in the night, z65. is sent again there, and
concludes a treaty with England, ba6. several of his
letters, App. 188. 201. 20o. 220. 20o. 2l3. 237.

Ratclif See Suex.
leformation, its progrers in Scotland, L st;. account of

its firt preachers, ibid. is much influenced by England
I3;, r; . two remarkable instruments of promoting it,
ibid. it makes great progress, t4t. causes contributing
to promote it. 139. its advantages over popery, 14).
is favored by the Q. Regent, i'g. an instance of re-
gard for it in Scotland, 16 r, 162. the whole party not
chargeable with Cardinal Beatoun's murder, 170. a
prielt burnt for embracing it, 7r?. the reformers vio-
lently persecuted by the Archbilhop of St. Andrew's,
ibid. are protected by the Q. Regent, ibid. apply in vain
to the Popilh clergy, 172. a persecution against them
pushed on by the French interest, 177, t18. the preach.
ers summoned before the Regent, 179. they are de.
ceived and declared out-laws by her, 180. a riotous in-
furretion of them at Perth against the Papifs , 8st.
prepare to defend themselves against the Queen, 182,
s8;. conclude a treaty with her which Ihe presently
breaks, ig;, g14. they take arms against the Queen,
186, 187. infil on redressing civil as well as religious
grievances, 187. the influence of the Reformation on
liberty, ibid. they besiege and take Perth, 190. they
seize Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. commit great violen.
ces on churches and monasteries, ibid. their conduct how
accounted for, i9g. an instance of their moderation,
192. fix their relidence at Edinburgh, t9g. the Queen
prepares to attack them, 194. make another treaty
with her, ibid. are forced to abandon Edinburgh, &c.
but allowed the exercise of their religion, 195. demand

the e~polion of the French army, ihid. are aware of
their danger from France, 199. their pary strengthened,
ibid. remonstrate againf the French fortifying Leith,
sos. take arms in their own defence, 207. remonfirae
again to the Regent, 208. are highly incensed at her
imperious answer 209. by advice of a convention de.
prive the Queen Dowager of the office of Regent, 211.
the foundations of this condut, 212. examination of
the different principles on which it was conducted in
different countries, atg.

- the growth of it encouraged by parliament, ii.
1 2. t ;. See Cogregation.

Regalities, the ample jurildicion of, i 22.
Repledging, the privilege of, to whom belonging, i 22.
Eoewge, encouraged both by cuflom and law, i. 41.
Rtea~s of the church, proceedings of Parliament con-

cerning them, i. 247.
Ridolpbi, an agent for the Pope at London, negociates

for Q. Mary, ii. 26. his arguments with the D. of
Norfolk, 27, 28.
Wiao, David, some account of him and-his rife, i. ;29,
;3o. Darnly's connexion with him, ;;i.
--- his good offices courted by Murray, ii. 2. his

great interest and familiarity with the Queen, 9. incurs
the hatred of Darnly, ibid. and of the friends of the
exiled Lords, to. several concurring causes of this,
ibid. l . a combination formed to murder him, ibid.
he is murdered in the Queen's palace, 14, r5.
Ronm~r invade Britain, i. 2. give the earliest accounts

of the Scots, ibid.
Rofr, Bilhop of, zealously promotes Queen Mary's interft

at London, ii. 208, 209. is confined to the Tower,
and threatened with capital punishment, zlo, ttl. is
set at liberty and banished the kingdom, ibid. some
letters of his, Appendix. 281. ;o6.
Rnbay, a foreigner , made keeper of the great feal of

Scotland, i. a s.
rtkotm, Lord, the murder of Rizio proposed to him by

Darnly, ii. r . heads the conspirators againf him, i4.
his part in that tranfa~tion, i . is admitted into the
Queen's presence, who promires him a pardon, 17.
did not repent of it at his death, 24.

Eutboen created E. of Cowrie, he and his associates seize

the King, and remonstrate against his favorites, ii. 275,
276. drive them from him, 276. their conduct appro.
ved in an assembly of the lates, z79. the King efca-
pes from them, 28). by Arran's influence violent
measures are determined against them, 286. Q. Eliza.
beth intercedes in their behalf, 287. are declared guilty
of high treason, 289. take refuge in foreign countries,
ibid. are harshly treated by Q. Elizabeth, o07. a re.
conciliation with her brought about, 3ao, ;12. return
to Scotland, and are reconciled to the King, 322.
their moderation on being restored to their estates and
honors, 12;. their neglet of their friends the Clergy, ib.

-- that name abolilhed by Parliament, iii. 68. See

Govrie.
rutbven raid, what, ii. 277.

S

Sadler, Sir Ralph, his reprerentations of the resentment

of the Scots, for the seizure of their ships by Henry
VIII. i. 104, io0.

-- appointed a commiflioner to hear the cause between

Q. Mary and her accusers, ii. 138.

Sandilandr of Calder, Lord St. John, sent to lay the proceed-

ings of the congregation parliament before the King and
Queen in France, i. 249. is coldly received and dismissed
without a ratification by them, 2 o.

Savase, a Spanish officer, his desperate resolution to kill Q.

Elizabeth, ii. ;2g, ;29.

Scotland, its ancient history fabulous, i. r. the origin of the

Scots, 2. their history why remarkably obscure, 4. some
account of the writers ofsit, 4, S. is divided into four

periods, 5, 6. a review of the third era, 7. sone account
of the controversy concerning its independency. ,-12.
this the cause of great animolities and much bloodshed, i 3.
the fate of Scotland when Bruce began his reign, 14. it
begins to have an influence on the fate ofdiftant nations,
9;, 94. influence as to the balance of power, 9g. fate of
Scotland at the birth of Queen Mary, 98. is invaded
by the English, and several places burnt and plundered,
il, 112. much alienated from the Englilh, 11;, 114. a
pace concluded between England, France, and Scotland,

14. comp tion of damages done by the Englilh in Scot.
and, 1 1 . a new breach with England, 12o. is invded by
great Englifi army, 2 . the Scots are defeated with

great laughter, a22, 12;. their manner of fighting
at that time, 1x4, i2;. a marriage agreed of their oung
Queen and the Dauphin of France, a28, t29. they soon
repent this ftep, i 1. a fray at Edinburgh occasions their
utter aversion to the French, 1; 21 1 ;. this inflamed by
another incident, i , s 6. they decline a war with England,
aC7. fend representatives to witness Q. Mary's marriage,
161. their care as to the marriage articles, ib. they refuse
consent to the demands of the French, 6;. four of their
deputies fufpeaed to be poisoned, ibid. which much in-
creases the aversion, 166. grant the crown matrimonial to
the Dauphin, ibid. they apply to the English for allfiance
against the French, 216. 222. anEnglifh fleet arrives for
that purpose, 228. conclude a peace with England and
receive an English army, 229, 210. all parties agree in
detfting the French, 24. a treaty between England,
France, and Scotland, 2 6, 217. both Englifi and French
armies leave Scotland, 242. they rejoice much at the death
of the young King of France, s . fend to invite the Queen
to Scotland, a g. reject proposals of an ambassador from
France, 260. fate of Scotland on Q. Mary's return from
France, 272. great zeal of the nation againit Popery, 2j7.
--- the Scots brought into contempt by Q. Mary's con-

duct, i. 84. in a miserable condition after the murder of
Murray the Regent, 2oo. fate of fitions at that time in it,
: o t. a league concluded between Scotland; d England, 3 5.

_-- a view of the revolutions of Scotland since the acce&

sion of James VI. iii. 9t-107. of the policy of the fate,
9--99. and of the church, 99, zoo. of the genius
and taste as to learning, 1 o t 107.

Scott of Buccleugh enters and ravages England after the

murder of Murray the Regent, ii 182. the delign of
this, 8g;.

Scroop, Lord, sent to condole with, and watch Q. Mary

on her arrival in England, ii. 126. she is committed to
his custody at Bolton cafle, 114. Why his fidelity i
diltrufted, and the Queen removed, 148.

SelIon, Lords and court of, by whom first appointed, i.

44. the President and one half of their number of the
Clergy, 148.

Seton, Lord, asiRs the Queen Regent in defending Leith

i. 219.

Sbrersbury, Earl of, the charge of Q. Mary's person

committed to him, ii. 148. why removed from that office,
321. is appointed to fee the sentence again her
executed, ; s. letter from him and the Earl of Kens
concerning her death, Appendix. 70o.

Sinclair, Bishop of Ross, a zealous Papist, concurs, as

President of the Seflion, in acquitting Knox of a charge
of treason, i. ; ii.

Somef:et, Duke of, enters Scotland with a powerful army,

i. 121. is reduced to a very critical situation, 122.
defeats the Scots with great slaughter, czt. this victory
why of little advantage, 12s. cabals against him at the
court of England, force him to return, s26. is ruined
by his enemies, i;o

Spain, great warlike preparations there, ii. t37, 376.

Sec Armada.
- - The infanta of, set up as candidate for the crown

of England, iii. 21.

Spanisb ambassadors ordered to leave England, for in.

triguing in favor of Q. Mary, ii. 210. 299.

Sprot, his discoveries concerning Gowrie's conspiracy,
ii. 5i-60. is executed, 60.

Stsorm, the frir of impifoned for celebrting mast, L

* -o.

FUlwu, a minister, declares for lefane and deprivation
* of tyranical ren, i.o. . lcaled to attend the Q.

Dowager on her dea bed, 216 .
irsbarf, George, his illegal executon revenged, i. vtS
Witccraft, vigorously profected by K James VI. in Scot-
, land, iii. ;.

eVorow, dean of Canterbury, employed to negociate a
peace with Fnce, i. 238.
I-- Sir Edward, Gnt by Q Elizabeth into Scotland,

ii. ;g. his character, ibid. soon geu into high favor
with K James, ibid. procures a league between the two
kngdoms, ib. 1t9. undermines Arran's power, 2;o,
;)2. forms a plot on King James, and is soed to with.
dra without taking leave, 321, 322.

Y
Tork, die conferences there concerning Q Mary, Si 1s

Z

cbe, Lord, feut ambaflador by Q, Bizbeth, to re.
moatnhae atat K. James's lenity to the Popiih lordi,
iii s' istrac y n that occaon, ibid.

THE END.
