he Situation of the J//orld at the Time
of CHRIST'S Appearance, and its Con-
nexion with the SucceJs of his Reliion,
coifidered.

A
SE RMON

Preached before

he SOCIETY in Scotland for propaga.
ting CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,

At their ANNIVERSARY MEETING,
In the HI-GH CHURCH of EDINBURGH,

On MAond, yamrinl 6. 1755.

[Publifled at their Desire.]
By WILLIAM ROBERTSON,

Pinifter of the Gospel at G!adi:;ir.
ro which is subjoined, a short Account of tlr-

present State of the SOCIETr.

E D I N B U R G H:
Printed by HAMILTON, BALFOUR., and N.Et,.

.! I CCT.l..'

# COLOSS. i. 26. Even the Mystery, which hath been hid from Ages, and Generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints.

A
SERMON

UPON
Tle Situation of the World at the Trimie

of CHRIST'S Appearance, &c.

COLOSS. i. 26.

Even the Myf/ery, which bath been hid fromi Ages,

and Generations, but now is made 7manifej to
Iis Saints.
TfH E R E is no employment more de-

lightfiul to a devout mind, than the
contemplation of the divine wis-

dorm, in the government of this world. The
civil history of mankind opens a wide field
for this pious exercise. Careful observers

may

[ 4

may often, by the light of reason, form pro.
bable conjedures with regard to the plan of
God's providence, and can discover a fkil.
ful hand, directing the revolutions of hu.
man affairs, and compafling the best ends,
by the most effeAtual and furprizing means:
But sacred hiltory, by drawing aside that
veil which covers the councils of the Al-
mighty, lays open his designs to the view
of his creatures; and we can trace the iteps
which he taketh towards them, with more
certainty, and greater pleasure. The fats
which inspired writers relate, are no less in-
firuative, than the doctrines which they
teach. The latter inform us, that God is
powerful, and wife, and good; tie former
discover these perfections brought forth into
adion, and confirm speculative opinions,
by real and striking examples.
THE publicationl and efiablifmnent ofChri-
!tianity in the '- orld, is a remarkable event
of this kind, and contributes greatly to il-
lufsrate and magnify the divine power and
vwifdom. From beginnings the molt incon-
fiderable, and by inrftruments the mofi un-
likely, the Almighty, with incredible sac-

litv,

L 5 3
E5]

lity, raised that glorious fabric of his Church,
vhich hitherto hath withstood all the rage
of his enemies, and the gates of bell, we be-
lieve, fall not prevail againfl it '. Accord-
ing to our Saviour's beautiful image, The
Il of allseeds grew zip, and waxed a great
tri, and spread out its branches, and filld the
,',th-t-. The hand of God lheltered this
feeble plant from the form, and by his
care it was reared, and cultivated, and
brought to maturity. The wisdom and
oowler of men united to oppose the dotrine
of God: But it confounded the one, and o-
vercame the other. Neither the bigotry of
the Jews, nor the superstition of the Hea-
then, could resist its progress; and in vain
did lHerod and Pontius Pilate, witb the Gentiles,
nl.d people of Israel, gather thenfelves together
,aint/ the Lord and his Anoizntd +.
MANY circumstances concurred in procu-

ring for Chriflianity such a favourable rece-
ption and firm eftabliflhment in the world.
iiWhoever reflecs upon the situation of man-

kind

M* atth. xvi. 18.

t Mark iv. '.
t As.s iv. 27.

6 ]

kind in that period, will find abundant re.
son to admire the divine wisdom, which dif.
posed these circumstances with so much art,
and improved them with such ikill and fuc-
cess. The text naturally leads me to confi-
der the conduct and adminifiration of Provi-
dence, in this particular light. The icord
of God, faith the Apostle, the %nyftery hil
from ages, andjrom generations, is now mnade
manijeIf to his faints. Why was the gospel
of Christ so long concealed from the world?
Why was it published at that time ? What
do we find in that particular juncdure to ren-
der the discovery of the Christian religion
more necessary, or its propagation more fuc.
cefsful?

IN the following discourse, I shall endea-

vour to account for this part of the divine
ceconomy, by selecting, in the situation of
mankind, some remarkable circumstances,
which prove God to have mnanifefed the mlv-
fiery of the gospel, at a time when the world
flood most in need of such a revelation, and
was best prepared for receiving it.

THE appearance of Christ, in so late an
age, was an objection raised, by his antient

adversaries,

[ 7

adversaries, against the truth of his mission,
and modern infidels have not failed to receive
and urge it, with their usual confidence and
triumph. But, if we can establish the truth
of our general proposition, this cavil falls
to the ground, and the divine conduct is fully
vindicated.

I. ABOUT the time of Christ's appearance,

there prevailed a general opinion, that the
Almighty would fend forth some eminent
messenger, to communicate a more perfect
discovery of his will to mankind. The fu-
preme Being conducteth all his operations
by general laws. It seems to be one among
these, that no perfection of any kind, can be
attained of a sudden. The motion, by which
his works advance towards their finished and
compleat Rate, is gradual and progressive,
This holds, with regard to all the produti-
ons in the natural, and all the changes in the
moral world. The fame principle appears to
have regulated the dispensations of religion.
The light of revelation was not poured in up-
on m.nkind all at once, and with its full
Plendor. The ohrcurity of the divn went
before the brightness of the noon-day. The

will

[ g ]

will of God was at first made known by rc.
velations, useful indeed, but dark and my.
fterious. To these, succeeded others more
clear and perfed. In proportion as the situ-
ation of the world made it necessary, the Al.
mighty was pleased farther to open and un-
fold his scheme. And men came by degrees
to underhtand this progressive plan of Provi-
dence, and to conceive how systems tempo.
rary and incompleat might serve to introduce
that concluding and perfect revelation, which
would declare the whole council of God tf
man

THE dignity of the person employed to pu.

blifh this revelation, the virtues of his cha-
racter, the glory of his kingdom, and the
signs of his coming, were described by the
antient Prophets with the utmost perspicuity,
Guided by thisfire iword of prophecy, the Jews
of that age, concluded the period predeter-
mined by God, to be then compleated; and
that thefJll/nel of time being come, the pro-
mifed Messiah would suddenly appear. De-
vout perfuns among them, waited day aid
night or the coflialio of l'fraiel t ; and the

whole
* Aets xX. 27. *j- Luke ii. 25, 38.

9 ]

whole nation, groaning undo' the Roman
yoke, and stimulated by the desire of liberty
and vengeance, expeted their Deliverer,
with the most anxious impatience.

NoR were these expectations peculiar to
the Jews. By their dispersions among so ma-
ny nations, by their conversation with the
learned men among the Heathens, and the
translation of their inspired writings into a
language almost universal; the principles of
their religion were spread all over the East:
and it became the common belief that a Prince
would arise at that time in YJu(ea, who would
change the face of the world, and extend his
empire from one end of the earth to the o.
ther.
IN this due time, did the wisdom of God fend
forth his Son, not to assume any strange chara-
cer, or to claim any new and unknown digni-
t), but to fulfil all that had beaen Jfoken by the
,' h los his holy Prophbets si.c? the world bhega'
While the eyes of men were employed in search
of the promised Mefliah, while they watch-
ed every sign that could indicate his coming,
and obfcrved and calculated every circum-

B fiance
* /'.s iii. 7 .

[ io 3

tlance which could lead them to discover him,
while the earnfl expectation of all creatzlrej
waited for the revelation of God; at that hap.
py and favourable juncture, was the rny/ey
hid from ages manifetfed to the world. No
wonder, the YJc's fould receive our Saviour,
on his firif appearance, not only without pre-
judice, but even with eagerness and applause:
No wonder the Gentiles should gather together
unto him, who had so long been the desire of
all nations *. Had ChrifR been manifeited at
a more early period, the world would not have
been prepared to meet him with the fame
fondness and zeal: Had his appearance been
put off for any considerable time, men's expe-
Etations would have begun to languilh, and
the warmth of desire, from a delay of grati-
fication, might have cooled and died away.

II. BUT, it is not only from circumstances

peculiar to the Jews and neighbouring nati-
ons, that we conclude the Christian religion
to have been published at the most proper time:
WVre propose to bring a farther confirmation of
this truth, from a survey of the condition and
circumfances of mankiind in general. Let

us
' Gen. xlix. Io. Hag. ii. 7,

[ II ]

us venture then into this large field, and take
a view of the political, of the moral, of the
religious, and of the domellic state of the
world.
WE begin, by confidering the political state
of the world about the time of our Saviour's
appearance. The world, in the most early a-
ges, was divided into small independent states,
differing from each other in language, man-
ners, laws, and religion. The (hock of so
many opposite interests, the interfering of so
many contrary views, occasioned the most vio-
lent convulsions and disorders. Perpetual dif-
cord subsisted between these rival states; and
hofrility and bloodshed never ceased, during
that turbulent and restless period. Commerce
had not hitherto united mankind, and opened
the communication of one nation with ano-
ther. The world may now be confidered as
one vast society, closely cemented by mutual
wants; each part contributing its share to-
wards the subsistence, the pleasure, and im-
provement of the whole. But in those more
simple ages, the intercourse between nations
was extremely inconsiderable. Voyages into
remote countries, in quest either of wealth or

knowlcdgc,

1[ 2 ]

knowledge, were very rare. Men moved in
a narrow circle, little acquainted with any
thing beyond the limits of their own small
territory, and utter firangers to the condition
and. character of distant nations.

AT last the Roman ambition undertook the

arduous enterprize of conquering the world,
and conduted it with such refined policy, ir.
resistible courage, and inimitable perseverance,
as, in the end, crowned the attempt with fuc-
cess. They trode down the kingdoms, according
to Daniel's prophetic description; by their
exceeding Jtrength, they devoured the whole
earth *. However, by enslaving the world,
they civilized it; and while they oppressed
mankind, they united them together. The
fame laws were everywhere eltablified, and
the fame languages understood. Men ap.
proached nearer to one another in sentiments
and manners; and the intercourse between
the mob distant corners of the earth was
rendered secure and agreeable. Satiated with
victory, the first Emperors abandoned all
thoughts of new conquests. Peace, an un-
known blessing, was enjoyed thro'out all that

" Dan. vii. 7, 23.

[ '3 ]

Yaft empire; or if a flight war was waged on
an outlying and barbarous frontier, far from
difrurbing the tranquillity, it scarce drew the
attention of mankind.

SUCH was the political slate of the world,
when Chriflianity made its fir?. appearance;
and, fiom this rrefreentation of it, many cir-
cumftances occur to jufify the divine wis-
dom, in chufing that particular conuunciure,
topubli'h it. During the period, which I
firit described, the propagation of any new
religion, must have been extremely flow and
uncertain. How could it have forced its way,
thro' innumerable difficulties, arising from
the unsettled state of the world, from the
fierceness and animosity of hostile and divi-
ded nations ? The power of God, no doubt,
could have surmounted all there obtfacles:
But it is observable, that this power is never
exerted but on the molt necessary occasions.
The Almighty seldom effects, by supernatural
means, any thing, which could have been
accompliihed by such as are natural. And
were we to judge by maxims merely human,
the propagation of Christianity, in these cir-

curmfiances,

[ I4

cumftances, would have proved not only
a dangerous, but an impossible enterprize.

BUT, favoured by the union and tranquillity

of the Roman empire, the disciples of Chrifi
executed their commission to great advantage.
The success and rapidity, with which they
diffused the knowledge of his name over the
world, are aftoniflling. This epistle to the
Colofians, was writ about thirty years after
our Saviour's ascension; and even then, thea.
poftle could assert, that the gospel had been{
preached to every creature, which is under h,'a.
ven *, i. e. thro' the whole extent of the
Roman empire. Nations were then acceffi-
ble, which formerly had been unknown,
Under this situation, into which the provi-
dence of God had brought the world, the
joyfzul jound, in a few years, reached those re-
mote corners of the earth, into which it
could not, otherways, have penetrated for
many ages.

Tiis view of our subjed, presents to us

an idea of the Christian religion, equal to the
greatest and most magnificent conception of
the human mind. The noblest people, that

ever
'* Col, i. 2.,

[ is 3

ever entered upon the stage of the world, ap-
pear to have been only instruments in the di-
vine hand, for the execution of wife pur-
poses, concealed from themselves. The Ro-
mian ambition and bravery paved the way,
and prepared the world for the reception of
the Christian doarine: They fought and con-
quered, that it might triumph with the greater
ease. Howbeit, they meaned notfo, neither did
tiir heart think so; but it ewas in their heart to
deflroy and cut off nations not a few B. By
means of their victories, the over-ruling wis-
dom of God eftablifled an empire, which
really possesses that perpetuity and eternal du-
ration, which they vainly arrogated to their
own: He erected a throne which stall conti-
nue for ever -, and of the increaje of that go-
serinent there Jhall be no end +.

III. LET us confider the state of the world,
with regard to morals. We cannot expeEt
to find pure and undefiled virtue, among
those people who were deffitute of the in-
fruEtions, the promises, and affifiance of di-
vine revelation. Unenlightened reason often

errs

* fa, x. 7.
+ Heb. i. 8.
-1a.iC

t i6 ]

errs: UndireEed virtue always deviates fi'ol
the right path: -But, even in those less fa.
voured ages, righteousness had not altogether
perished frorm he earth; and the nations which
had not the law, did by nature, in some degree,
the thin: s contained in the law `. These virtu.
ous but feeble efforts of the human mind,
were encouraged and Ieconded by several
happy circumstances, in the situation of the
world, owing in appearance to the sagacity
of men, but ordained in reality by the wis.
dom of God. One of these was of a fingu-
lar nature, and well deserves our particular
attention.

WE have already mentioned the early di.

vision of the world into finall independent
states. These states, unbroken by the refine-
ments of luxury, and animated with the no°
blest of human pafiions, struggled for liberty,
and obtained it. Lawgivers, intimately ac-
quainted with human nature, deep politicians,
and lovers of mankind, arore in different
places, and founded thoft equal and happy
governments, which have been the admira-
tion and envy of all succeeding ages. Tem-

perance,
* Rom. ii. 14,

[ 17 ]

perance, frugality, decency, public spirit,
jo0e to their fellow-citizens, magnanimi-
tv: These are the virtues which flourish
ed under such wife infiitutions. At the fame
time, in these firall commonwealths, the
condudt of every citizen was subjected to the
eye of the magistrate ; and the nature of the
government obliged him, to infpet their
manners, with severity. The fmallefl crimes
could not escape observation . Even dange-
rous virtues were exposed to censure. On
this foundation of public liberty, did antient
virtue reft; an effect of government little
known in modern times, wherein the views
of legislators are confined to inferior objects.
But from this source, were derived all those
splendid actions among the heathens, which,
on the one hand, have been so invidiously
mentioned by infidels, as a reproach to our
holy religion, and on the other, so justly ce-
lebrated by Christians, in order to rouze the
zeal and ermulaticn of a degenerate age.

VIRTUE, however, did not long enjoy this
'nemporary and precarious support. These
t'ife institutions were the works of men, and
mortal like their authors. Some of them pe-

C ifhed

E Is I

rimled by the malignity of internal diseases
And, if a vigorous conffitution and more kilful
management prolonged the period of others,
they yielded at last to the violence of exter.
nal injuries. It was impossible either to di-
vert or resist the torrent of Roman power: It
gathered strength from opposition, and bore
down all nations before it. But, by fubdu.
ing the world, the Romans loft their own li-
berty. Many causes, which it is not our pre..
sent business to explain, concurred in pro-
ducing this effect: Many vices, engenderedi
or nourifled by prosperity, delivered theml
over to the vileRf race of tyrants that ever as-
slided or disgraced human nature.

THE alliance betwixt morals and govern-

ment was now broken; and an influence hi-
therto so friendly to virtue, became altogether
malignant, and was exerted with molt fatal
success, to poison and debase the human
mind. Along with despotic power, entered
all those odious vices, which are usually found
in its train ; and in a short time, they grew to
an incredible pitch. The colours are not
too strong, which the Apoftie employs in
drawing the character of that age: Cotem-

porary

[ s9 1

porary historians justify him, when he de-
scribes it to be alienatedfrom the lfe of God,
Malking in vanity tbro' the blind.,efi of their
)iinlds; and, being pal feeling, were given up to
lciiviolu(efi, and to work all uncleannels with
greedin e/s *.

IN this time of universal corruption, did
the wisdom of God manifest the Christian re-
velation to the world, not to re-efablill vir-
iue upon the fame insecure foundation of ci-
vil government; but to erect it upon the e-
ternal and immoveable basis of a religion,
which teacheth righteousness by the authori-
ty of God. What the wisdom of men could
do for the encouragement of virtue in a cor-
rupt world, had been tried during several
ages: and all human devices were found, by
experience, to be of very small avail: So that
no juncture could be more proper for publifi-
inga religion, which, independent on hu-
man laws and inflitutions, explains the prin-
ciples of morals with admirable perspicuity,
and enforces the practice of them by most
persuasive arguments. Had not Christianity
cppeared to check and mitigate the pernicious

effes. i
Fp1ef. iv. 17, IS, 19.

[ 20 ]

effeats of despotic unlimited empire, 'tis hat
to fay, how far they might have gone toward
extinguishing the name and exercise of virtue
among men. This we know, that in a mofl
dissolute age, and under the wsort govern.
ment, the primitive Christians attained, in e.
very virtue, to an eminence, of which there
is no example in the history of mankind. The
spirit of their religion, superior to the cor.
rupt genius of the age, continued pure and
vigorous; and men saw with admiration,
that when every other foundation of virtue
was overthrown, the foundation of God /od
sure, immoveable amidst the floods wbich
came, the rains that descended, and the winds
that blew and beat upon it '.
IV. LET US confider the world with regard
to its religious slate. The national charader
of the Jews, seems to have been deeply tin-
ftured with superstition. Their early educa-
tion in Egypt, the example of neighbouring
nations, influence of the climate, but above
all the perverseness of their own disposition,
rendered this impression indelible. ObRinate
against all the endeavours employed by their

divinv
q Matth. vii. z5

[ 21 1

divine Lawgiver to repress or extirpate it, this
superstitious spirit broke out on every occa-
sion. Delighted with the ceremonial pre-
scriptions of the law, the Jews utterly ne-
glected the moral: And, fond of such rites
as please the imagination, they undervalued
those duties which improve the heart. This
unhappy biass was greatly increased by the
dodtrine of the Pharisees, which reduced the
prejudices of their countrymen into a regular
system of superstition. By their vain tradi-
tions, they added to the load of ceremonies:
By their wretched interpretations of the law,
they abridged the number of moral precepts.
They openly preferred the former before the
latter; and substituted observances frivolous
and insignificant, in the place of the weighty
natters in the law, judgment, mercy, and
faith '.

WHILE the Pharisees undermined religion,
cnthe one hand, their rivals the Sadducees
carried on, from another quarter, a more bold
and impious attack against it. By denying the
immortality of the foul, they wounded reli-
gion in a vital part; and overturned the doo

,.rinc

ctrine of future rewards and punishments/
which hath been, and must ever be, the chief
foundation of virtuous obedience. The pra.
ctice of these two contending sets, was per-
fectly suitable to their principles: The fol-
lowers of the one, were scandalous libertines;
the disciples of the other, notorious hypo-
crites: And between them, the knowledge
and power of true religion were intirely de-
firoyed. It was high time then for the wis-
dom of God to vindicate his injured law, and
to revive languishing and decayed religion, a-
mong his antient people. To recal the Jews
from their former wanderings, the Almighty
had with success employed the ministry of his |
holy Prophets: But the malignant distempers
of that age, would not have yielded to any
common remedy: A conceited and perverse
generation would have listened to no inferior
messenger; and therefore, the great Prophet
was sent forth in this due time, to explain, to
extend, and to perfect the law, and tofill Z!iM
with judgment and rightecufilcfs *.

BUT the deplorable situation of the heathen
world with regard to religion, called still more

loudly
* faT, sxuxiii, r

[ 23 1

loudly for an immediate interpofal of the dic
vine hand. I flall not mention the chara-
ters of the heathen deities, infamous for the
most enormous crimes; nor describe their
religious worship, consisting frequently in the
vilest and most shameful rites. Certain it is,
the more any man honoured such gods, the
worse himself was; and the oftner he ser-
ved them, the more wicked he would be-
come.

IT is the spirit and genius of heathen reli-

gion which I shall endeavour to represent.
These, according to the Apostle's observation,
were in all things too m!ch fiJpej/itious". State-
ly temples, expensive sacrifices, pompous ce-
remonies, magnificent festivals, with all the
other circumltances of fiLew and splendour,
were the objects which false religion present-
ed to its votaries: But juRf notions of God,
obedience to his moral laws, purity of heart,
and fantity of life, were not once mentioned
,s ingredients in religious service. Superfti-
tion never prevailed among any people, but
at the expence of morals. The heathen fu-
perittion, far from giving any aid to virtue,

seems
B: Afts xviii. zs,

4 ]

teems not to have had the least connexit
with it. No repentance of past crimes, no
future amendment of condiat, are ever pre.
fcribed by it, as proper means of appeasing
the offended deities "11 Sacrifice a chosen vi-
Sim, bow down before an hallowed image,
be initiated in the sacred mysteries; and the
wrath of the gods will be averted; and the
thunder drop from their hands." Suitable to
these sentiments, is the behaviour of Banl/
King of Moab, described by the Prophet Mi-
cab. That Prince had provoked the God of
Israel; and in order to regain his favour,
thought of the fame means, which fuperftiti-
on employs to mitigate the rage of its false
gods. Wijerewvith, fays he, fall I come before
the Lord, and bow mi)yfef before the high God?
SSall I comile before him wi~th burnt-offering s, wilt
calves ofa year old ? Will te Lord be /:crSJ
wizh thol/tanzds of rams, or with ten thoziads of
rivers of oil? Shall Igive my fijfl-horn; for J
tranifgrefion, thle /fri of my body, for thefin (f
my foul' ? To do jfily, to love mer-cy, and to
valk humbiy with God, were acceptable services,

which
* Micah vi, 6, 7, 8.

[ 2s ]

bVhich made no part in the system of heathen
religion.

HAPPILY, the wisdom and simplicity of an-
tient government, checked the progress of
this infedious principle, and corrected, in some'
degree, its poisonous and deftrudtive quali-
ties. But, no sooner had the tyranny of the
Rolian Emperors removed this restraint, by
subverting liberty, than superstition made its
advances on the world by sudden and migh-
ty feps, and exercised an uncontrouled do-
minion in every corner of the earth. Tyran-
ny and superstition, like those other deitroy-
ers of mankind, famine and pestilence, are
nearly allied. Superiftion breaks the spirit,
and prepares it for servitude. Tyranny, for
this reason, encourages superstition, and em-
pioys it as an useful auxiliary to illegal power.
Accordingly, Rome adopted the gods of al-
moPL every nation, whom fie had conquer-
ed; and opened her temples to the grossest
:fperfitions of the most barbarous people.
ier jfoiJfb heart being darkened, lhe changed
ve ,1orv qo the uncorruptible Cod, into an imnag

D made

[ 26 ]

made like to corruptible man, and to bidd,
and four-footed beafis, and creeping thingss

AT this time, therefore, did a good God,

in pity to his deluded creatures, publifi the
Christian revelation. By it, the God of truth
was made known ; and the idols of the naltios
were moved at his prefiece t- Rational and
sublime in its doctrines, humane and beneft.
cent in its precepts, pure and simple in its
worship ; no religion was ever so well calca-
lated as Christianity, to repress the inroads of
superstition, and to establish an acceptable and
manly devotion, consisting in /pirit and in}
truth +. No period can be mentioned, when
inftrucion in these important articles, would
have been more seasonable or necessary. The
absurd fictions, and abominable practices of
superstition, had gone near to extinguish the
natural sentiments of the human mind, con-
cerning the supreme Being, and to banish his
name and worflip from the earth. No won-
der, men, under these circumfiances, fiould
liften, with joy, to the Chritfian revelation,

which
* Rom. i. 2I, 23.

h

Ifa. xix. x.
: John iv. 24.

[ 27 ]

which delivered them from that hateful yoke,
and taught them, toferve God 'qitotl: featr,
in, bolilnef, and ribteozfnefi before bim .

V. LET US confider the world with regard
to its domestic situation: A view, perhaps,
!ess extensive and magnificent than those,
which hitherto have engaged our attention;
but not less important. The private and do-
meftic situation of mankind, is the chief cir-
cumftance, which forms their character, and
the great source of their happiness or misery.
Any poison in this fountain, communicates
itself to the manners of men ; any bitterness
there, infects all the pleasures of life. Many
circumrftances, of the most fatal influence on
domerfic virtue and happiness, occur to at-
tentive observers of the period under re-
view.

DOMESTIC society is founded in the union
betwixt huiband and wife. Among all civi-
lized nations, this union hath been elteemed
ficred and honourable ; and from it are de-
rived those exquisite joys or sorrows, which
can imbitter all the pleasures, or alleviate all
the pains in human life. In the antient world,

there

[ 28 ]

there prevailed two pradices equally pernici.
ous to the peace and happiness of the married
slate. From the most early times, polygamy
seems to have been universal among the east.
ern nations; and men married as many wives,
as their fancy willied for, or their fortune
could maintain. Now, this practice not on-
ly appears to be contrary to the intention of
the Almighty, who at firfi created but one
person of each fcx, and hath since preserved
an admirable proportion betwixt the number
of males and females, whom he fends into the
world; but by it likeways, were banified
from domestic life, all those enjoyments which
sweeten and endear it. Friendihip, social in-
tercourfe, confidence, and the mutual care
of children, were utterly unknown: On
the one hand, rigour, voluptuoufnefs, jea-
lousy; on the other, fubjetion without love,
fidelity, or virtue. One half of the human
species became the property of the other;
and the husband, instead of being the friend
and protedor of a wife, was no better than
the master and tyrant over a slave. The en-
vty and discord which were introduced into the
families of becob and Elkanhal by a plurali-

[ 29 ]

ty of wives, are but imperfec pidures of the
enormities occasioned by the fame pracice,
under mafcers less virtuous, and in ages more
dissolute and luxurious. Where-ever the
Christian religion is efiablifhed, an end hath
been put to an institution so inconsistent with
the felicity of domestic life. Marriage suitable
to the ordinance of God, is rendered a friend-
ly and undiffoluble alliance betwixt two per-
sons; and tranquillity, confidence, and joy
bless an union, begun and cemented by mu-
tral love.

IN the western parts of the world, the ma-
xims with regard to marriage were more con-
formable to nature: One man was confined
to one woman: But at the fame time, their
laws allowed a practice, which introduced the
most fatal disorders into domestic life. The
Almighty, becazife of the hardnzefs of their hearts,
permitted the Jews, on certain occasions, to
give a writing of divorcement to their wives *.
According to their usual custom, the Jews
Itretched this indulgence to most extravagant
lengths; and, defining the cafes in which they
pretended divorces to be lawful, with a mi-

nute
4 Mark x, 49 5

[ 0o 1

uute and over-curious accuracy, they altoge.
ther perverted the institution of God. Their
DoEtors permitted divorces for causes so tri.
vial and ridiculous, as cannot be mentioned in
a grave discourse. The utmost dissolution of
manners, was the effect of such licentious o-
pinions: And our Saviour found the abuses
to be grown so enormous, as to render the
Itriceft and most precise limitations of the
Mosaic precept absolutely necessary.

NOR was this matter on any better footing

among the heathen nations. Divorces, on
very flight pretences, were permitted both by
Greek and Romanz legislators. And tho'the
pure manners of these republics, refrained,
for some time, the operation of such a per-
nicious institution; tho' the virtue of private
persons seldom abused the indulgence which
the laws allowed them : Yet no sooner had
the progress of luxury, and the establishment
of despotic power, vitiated the taste of men,
than the law with regard to divorces, wuas
found to be amongst the worfi corruptions
which prevailed in that abandoned age. The
facility of reparation rendered married persons
careless of obtaining or praCtising those virtues

whichl

[ I ]

which render domestic life tranquil and de-
lightful. The education of children, was utter-
ly neglected by parents, who often met toge-
ther, with a scheme of separation in both their
thoughts. Marriage, intfead of refiraining,.
added to the violence of irregular desire ; and
under a legal name, became the vilest and
moll fiamelefs prostitution. From all these
causes, the married slate fell into difreputa-
tion and contempt; and it became neceflary,
by penal laws, to force men into a society
where they expected no secure and lasting
happiness. Among the Romzans, domestic cor-
ruption grew, of a sudden, to an incredible
height; and perhaps, in the hiflory of man-
kind, we can find no parallel to the undifgui-
fed impurity and licentiousness of that age .
It was in a good time, therefore, that our Sa-
viour abolished a pradice, which had been
one of the roft fertile sources of these difor-
ders. The bonds of the marriage-union were,
by him, rendered almost indissoluble; and the
ccra's ot love were drawn the closest possible.
Political proje&tors may please themselves
with imaginary advantages, resulting fiom the

liberty
R Rom. i. 26, &c.

[ 32

liberty of divorces; but reason, as'well as the
experience of mankind, justify the wifdiom of
the divine decree concerning them. If the
manners of men be not extremely pure and
limple, the least indulgence in this article
hath always proved fatal to the peace and vir-
tue of domestic life; and whatever remains
of these we now find in a dissolute age, must
be intirely ascribed to that regulation in the
gospel , which superficial reasoners represent
as a grievance, tho' it be in truth the greatest
blessing to mankind.
IF the vices of those, who are at the head of
domestic society, needed reformation; the
sufferings of those who were fubjeEt to them
merited relief.

So many are the wants of human society,
that far the greater part of mankind is con-
demned to constant toil and labour in order to
supply them. In the antient world, the con-
dition of this numerous and useful race of
men, differed widely from that, wherein they
are now placed. They were not freemen,
but slaves, who occupied the inferior, tho'
necessary, station in human life. Their la-

bour,
* Matth. v. 32,

[ 33 ]

bour, was nota voluntary duty to the foci-
ety, which intitled them to a reward ; it was
an hard task, imposed without their consent,
and exated with the utmost rigour. The
number of persons, reduced to this unhappy
condition, was immense. In those parts of
the world, whose history and situation are beit
known, above two thirds of the whole inha-
bitants are computed to have been in a state of
slavery. The persons, the goods, the chil-
dren of these slaves were the property of their
masters, disposed of at pleasure, and trans-
ferred, like any other possession, from one
hand to another. No inequality of condition,
no superiority in power, no pretext of con-
sent, can justify this ignominious depression
of human nature, or confer upon one man,
the right of dominion over the person of ano-
thcr: But not only doth reason condemn this
infitution as unjut ; experience proved it to
be pernicious both to masters and slaves. The
elevation of the former, in!pired into them
pride, insolence, impatience, cruelty, and
:'vouptuoufiefs: The dependent and hopeless
irate of the latter, dejected the human mind,
iBld extinguiihed every generous and noble

E ;principle

[ S4 ]

principle in the heart. Were I to mention the
laws and regulations of the most civilized states
among the antients, concerning these unfortu-
nate sufferers ; were I to relate the treatment
which they met with, from persons the most
renowned for their virtue; maxims so inhu-
mane, and adions so barbarous, would excite
the frrongeft pity and indignation, in an age,
which never beheld the tyranny of the op-
pressor, nor heard the groans of the ca.
ptive.

'TIS true, while men enjoyed those wife

institutions of government, which we former-
ly described, the state of servitude did not be-
come altogether intolerable; many expedi-
ents were used for mitigating the rigour of
command, and lightening the yoke of obedi-
ence: But, upon effablifhing despotic go-
vernment in the Roman Empire, domestic ty-
ranny rose, in a short time, to an afloniflh-
ing height. In that rank foil, every vice,
which power nouriflles in the great, or op-
prefion engenders in the mean, thrived and
grew up apace.

HERE then is an object worthy the atten-
tion of that merciful God, who delivereth the

fil/

[ 35 ]

foll of the afjliSed from violenlce, who bearr'tb the
c'y of the needy, and him who bath no he.per.
The groans of such an innumerable multitude
of his reasonable creatures, bereaved of the no-
blest privilege of their nature, liberty and in-
dependence, would not, we may believe, be
uttered in vain. He could not always keep i-
lckle and be fill, when he beheld their wretch-
ed situation, so deftrutive of happiness, and
so fatal to virtue. At last, the divine wisdom
interposed; and when the evil had become
intolerable, and seemed to be pail cure, the
promulgation of Christianity brought an es-
feaual and timely remedy.

IT is not the authority of any tingle detach-

ed precept in the gospel, but the spirit and
genius of Christian religion, more powerful
than any particular command, which hath
abolihed the practice of slavery thro' the
world. The temper, which Christianity in-
spired, was mild and gentle; and the doctrines
it taught, added such dignity and luffie to hu-
man nature, as rescued it from the dishonour-
able servitude into which it was funk. All
mnen, of every condition, are declared to be

th
5 Pfal. Ixxil. i:.

[ 36 1

the offspring of the fame God, and the heirs
of the fame heavenly inheritance: One Savij
our redeemed them from iniquity by his death,
and one Spirit worketh powerfully in their
hearts. Where-ever such opinions prevail,
no human creature can be regarded as altoge-
ther insignificant and vile; even the meanest
acquire dignity, exterior diftintions disappear,
and men approach nearer to that original e-
quality, in which they were at first placed,
and are Rfill viewed by their impartial Crea-
tor.

WHAT a wonderful and blessed change

hath Chriflianity produced in the face of the
world ! Along with the knowledge of it, li-
berty, humanity, and domestic happiness, dif-
fused themselves over every corner of the
earth. It is deemed a virtue, to admire and
praise those illustrious personages, who deli-
vered mankind from the rage of tyrants, and
vindicated the violated laws -and conflitutioi
of their country: And is no admiration due
to the generous spirit of that religion, which
reflored liberty, not to one nation or society a-
lone, but rescued from the worst servitude,
far the greater number of the human race, and

acquired

[ 37 1

acquired for them that happy freedom, which

they fill enjoy ? When we behold Chriffia-
tily making its progress thro' the world, and
working, every where, such an important
lteration in the condition of mankind ; we
may well apply to a temporal deliverance,
what the Prophet spoke concerning a spiritual
salvation: Bebold the acceptable year of the Lord
i; come ! Liberty is procl?imed to the captive,
ct! the opening of the prison to them that are
b,!d; theyj'all reft from their foirr1w, and
fio their fear, and from the hard bondage
z'erein they were made to serve *.
THE abolition of domefric slavery was the
occasion of another change in the manners of
men, which is no less remarkable. Captives
taken in war, were, in all probability, the
first persons fubjeOted to perpetual servitude:

And

* I. Ixi. I. . xiv. 3.
The praQice of slavery in our American colonies, is a
fiecious, not a real objetion againfl the rcafoning under
tris head. The genius and tendency of any religion are
known by the operations of its vigorous, not of its decli-
ningage: And if avarice hath revived, in a degenerate
world, an infiitution, which Chriltianity had utterly abolifl-
ed; this, like many other vices which prevail among Chri-
sians, mulf be charged upon the corruption of the human
Pw, not upon that religion, which tdctifies against it.

[ 38 ] l

And when the necessities or luxury of man;
kind increased the demand for slaves, ever'?
new war recruited their number, by reducing
the vanquished to that wretched condition,
Hence proceeded the fierce and desperate
spirit, with which wars were carried on among
antient nations. While chains and slavery'
were the certain lot of the conquered, battles
were fought, and towns defended, with l
rage and obflinacy, which nothing but the
horror at such a fate could have inspired:
But by putting an end to the cruel inftitutiol'
of slavery, Christianity extended its mild ini.
fluences to the practice of war; and that bar-
barous art, softened by its humane spirit, cea.
fed to be so deftrudive. Secure, in every e¢.
yent, of personal liberty, the refiflance ofi
the vanquiflc-d became less obstinate, and tihe
triumph of the victor less cruel. Thus hulma.
nity was introduced into the trade of war, withl
which it appears to be almoff incompatiblc;,
and it is to the merciful maxims ofChriftianity,!
much more than to any other cause, that wc|
must ascribe the little ferocity and blood-flicd,
which accompany modern victories. Even
where the Dpaions of men are fiercest, and

[t 9

inof' highly inflamed, the powerful genius
of our religion interposes, and restrains the
furyofwar, and sets bounds to its destroy-
ing rage. The benevolent spirit of the go-
fpel, delivereth the captive from his fetters,
Ii;tb those who e'ere appointed to deat '', and
s!ith to bte sword which is ready to devoiur, Re-
!iun into tly /cabbard, and beflill t.
IT hath become a fafhiionable topic among
political reasoners, to celebrate the mildness
and humanity of modern manners, and to
prefer the characer of present times before
the antient: To what cause fihall we ascribe
this important revolution, in the sentiments
and dispositions of mankind? Not to the
influence of better instituted governments,
for in legislative wisdom the antients far ex-
celled us: Not to the effecds of a better-di-
iected education ; that duty, flhamefully neg-
leCted by us, was among them an object of
chief attention: Not to our superior refine-
ments in elegant and polite arts ; there we
muf: be content to equal, without pretending
io llfpafs the antients. The Christian reli-

glln,

Pfal. cii. 20.
t Jer. xlvii. 7.

t.4o j

gion, hid from ages, but now imanifefltd to tib
world, is the only cause capable to produce so
great an effect. Tbht wifJi'om which is fiom a.
bove, is pure, and peaceable, gentle, easy to l
intreated, full of mercy *. - Genuine Chrifia.
nity is diflinguilhed above all other religions,
by the mildness of its spirit: The enemy of
every practice which hardens the heart: The
encourager of every virtue, which renders
the characer humane. Where-ever it hath
been ef-ablifhed in purity, and pradifed with
zeal; kindness, long-fifering, imeeknefs, bciulss
of mercies, charity t, are the graces which
accompany it. Even the vices and inventions
of men, which have mingled themselves with
the truths of God, have not been able intire-
ly to destroy their effects. Under all difad-
vantages, the genius of the gospel exerts it-
self, civilizing the fiercest and most barbarous
nations, and inspiring a gentleness of difpo-
fition, unknown to any other religion, A-
long with the best spiritual bleflings, the mos
valuable temporal mercies have been conm
municated to the world, by Chrifianity. It

ase

* James iii. 17.
( Col. iii, A-..

[ 4' 1

not only fan&ifies our fouls, but refines our
manners; and while it gives the promises of
the next life, it improves and adorns the pre-
sent: That happy change, which the wis-
doin of man could not effect, God in his good
time accomplished by ianiJfeiing to the world
the iiyftery hid from ages and generations.

THESE observations, which we have made,
suggest many useful reflections, with regard
to the future and universal propagation of
Christian knowledge. At the time when
the disciples of Christ set out, in obedience to
their Lord's command, to teach all nations;
no undertaking could appear, in the judg-
ment of man, more wild and improbable:
But, besides the blessing of God, which ac-
companied them where-ever they went, we
have discovered several circumstances in the
situation of the world, which contributed
powerfully towards the success and facility of
their enterprize. Aided by these, the word of
Gcd increased, and the nllnber of difJiples mul-
tiplied greatly *. The weakness of God became
fraonger than men; and in a fJot time, he enabled
t'e foolifJ things of the world, to confoind the

|F .cAie;
"-' A~s vi. 7.

[ 42

wife ; the we'ak things of the world, to co fould
the things which are /irong; and things that are
not, to bring to nought things that are ~. That
the fame effetual blefling of God itill con-
tinueth to second every sincere and vigorous
attempt, to spread the knowledge of his name,
we have good reason to believe. What pow.
erful unknown causes may co-operate with
this blessing of the Almighty, we are not yet
permitted to discover. It cannot, however,
be more improbable, that the influences of
Chriltianity flmall reach farther, than it once
was, that they iould reach so far. And,
after we have seen the light of the gospel pe-
netrate into so many dark places of the earth;
why doeth it seem incredible, that its splendor
lhould, at lafi, fill the world, and scatter the
remainder of darkness which covereth the
nations ?

IT is obvious to observe one circumstance,

which cannot fail of introducing the gospel
into distant nations with great advantage
That part of the world, wherein Chriflianity
is effablitihed, infinitely fiurpaffes the reft in
all the sciences and improvements which

raise
;- Cor. i. 25, z7, zS.

[ 43 ]

raise one nation above another in reputation
or power. Of this superiority, the Europeans
have availed themselves to the utmost, in e-
very project for extending their empire or
commerce; and have brought a great part
of the globe into a dependence, either upon
their arts or arms. Now, these tfame attain-
ments in science or policy, might be employ-
ed to good purpose, on the fide of religion
And tho' hitherto subservient to the designs
ofintereft or ambition, may we not flatter our-
selves, that, at last, they ihall become noble
instruments in the hand of God, for prepa-
ring the world to receive the gospel ?

THIS glorious profpea may be distant ; but
it is not imaginary. Even in a degenerate
age, zealous and alive spirits have arisen,
and societies have been formed, upon the ge-
nerous plan of propagating the knowledge of
Christ to nations far o, which icb er learid his
fami, nor Jave set'el bis g/wr' :. What they
luve already done, encouracges the most fan-
ruine hopes of farther success. And, it it (fiall
pleafc God to increase the number, and.
/"i'thbc the 1hands, of such weil-fdifpofed per

[ 44 ]

sons: If he flall fee fit, to haJten his time iwhes
one Jhall become a thousand, and a Jinall cne
Jfronng *: Then might we expect that the know-
ledge of the Lord would fill the earth, as the va.
ters cover the sea t ; that the defart would blof.
Jbm as the rosie , and the wilderness become a
fruitful field l: Then might the spirit of
Christianity, which languifles so visibly in
those places where it hath long been planted,
revive with new vigour in unknown lands,
and thine with its firit splendor, among tie
people who now fit in darkness and in the regioni
andJhadow of death "'T: Then might the Jo-
litary place rejoice t--, the barren break firtb
into singing t, and the tongue of tbe duimb prai
the Lord 111.

BUT the conversion of distant nations, is

not the chief care of the Society for propaga-
ting Christian Knowledge: An objeCt nearer
at hand demands their more immediate atten-

ticn,
* Ifa. lx. 2.

I-b Ibid. xi. 9.

. Ibid. xxxv. i.
tI Ibid. xxxii. 1;.
** Matth. iv. i6.
-ti Ifa. xxxv. i.
:j.j Ibid. liv. i.
||lt Ibid. xxxv. 6,

[ 45 ]

tion. The Highlands and Islands of Scotland
present to us a scene, which we would little
expect in a nation where true religion and
polifled mannershave long flourished. There,
society still appears in its rudest and motl im-
perfedt form: Strangers to industry, averse
from labour, inured to rapine; the fierce in-
habitants scorn all the arts of peace, and s-and
ready for every bold and desperate action. At-
tached to their own customs, from ignorance
and habit, they have hitherto continued a fe-
parate people. And, tho' the religion efta-
blifhed among them be the fame which we
enjoy, its progress hath been imperfec; and
the fixed Pastors were never able to surmount
the disadvantages of their situation, or the ob-
ftinacy of their people. In this neglected
field, the enemies of our religion and liberty
have town the feeds of the worst superstition,
and the most pernicious principles of govern-
ment.

THIS field, the Society have occupied; and

endeavoured by their pious care, to render
many of their deluded countrymen good Chri-
tians and useful fubjeCls. Happily for
tbe-o, they do not labour alone in this noble

work,

[ 46 3

wotk. The reformation of the Highland.
was never totally negleced by the Legislature:
But rouzed by a late danger, it hath since me-
rited their more particular attention. Suitable
to this view, laws have been enaaed with a
most humane spirit, in order to retrieve that
part of the kingdom from ignorance and bar-
barifm, and to introduce the fame regular
government and independence which are the
bleflings of other Bii. flJ fubjeas. From these
salutary laws, the Society expeCt great assist.
ance, in the prosecution of their design.

IN the mean time, they adore the divine

goodness which hath opened the hearts of
many charitable persons among ourfeives and
neighbours, whose liberality hath put it in
their power to carry on their plan with vigour
and success ; enabling them nor only to be-
gin a good work, but in many places to bring
it to great perfertion. What a reproach will
it be to an age, wherein no hand is backward
to supply the nmof extravagant demands o0
luxury and pleasure, if this generous under-
taking iBall languif: and dec:y for want of
support! The pale:.fr.res after which a giddy
generation run, are unworthy to be compared

with

[ 47 1

with that sacred joy which fills the heart of
aChriftian who hath been instrumental in
rescuing an immortal foul from vice, in adorn-
ing it with virtue, in leafoning it with grace,
i, ilnaif

a flitng the myltclry f J'tbe-oJojei Jo thlrfejrom

w;,hom it was hid, and in feeding the hungry
with the bread of' lie. If we ourselves have
tilqed of the heavenly gift, if we have pased
from death to life, and not only heard the found,
but felt the power of the gospel ; the greater
will be our zeal in communicating the fame
glad tidings to others, that they also may be
persuaded to fly for rejuge to the cocfslations
iwhich are in ChriJ : If honour to our blessed
Redeemer be the leading principle in our
hearts, we will never reft satisfied, till bis glory
fill the earth, and every knee bow to his Jfcred
name. By endeavouring thus to bless others,
we fliall draw down the divine blessing upon
ourselves. CThey that be wife, jlall liine as the
b ,ghttnfis of the firmanment; aid tiey that turn
?many to righteozlnefs, as the flars for ever and
''er

P an. xii, ,.

# STATE OF THE SOCIETY IN SCOTLAND, For propagating CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE, for the Year 1754.

STATE

OF THE

SOCIETY IN SCOTLAND,
For propagating CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE,

for the Year 1754.

T HE piety and zeal of a few private per-
:J sons, gave rife to this Society, about
the year 1700. The propagation of Chri-
itian Knowledge, among their countrymen
in the Highlands of Scotland, was the only
object which they at fifft proposed to them-
selves. A design so laudable merited public
encouragement; and, in 1709, they were
ereced into a body corporate by letters-pa-
tent from Queen Anne. The donations,
which they have received since that time,
from charitable persons both among ourselves

G and

[ 50 3

and our neighbours, have enabled them to
carry on their scheme with considerable fuc-
cess.

BY fettling schools in the mot remote cor.

ners of the Highlands, where children are
inftruEted in the principles of true religion,
they have in a great measure defeated the
pernicious activity of the Popith missionaries:
By teaching the children under their care to
speak and read the EnlgiJh language, thiy
have made some progress towards incor-
porating those who spoke only the IriJj
tongue with the reft of the Island : By
instilling into their minds an early knowledge
of the Christian doctrines, they hope by de-
grees to reclaim them from that fierce and
barbarous course of life, which is lo contrary
to the humane and gentle spirit of the go-
fpel.

THE funds of the Societr are not confider-

able; but they have endeavoured to supply
this defeEt by the most frugal ceconomy,
which hath put it in their power to prosecute
their plan, to an extent far beyond what they
could have expected. Near 70,000 perfolns

have

t 5I' 1

have been educated by the Society since its
sirs commencement. At present, their
schools amount to the number of I 5, at
which no fewer than 5831 children are e-
ducated. These schools are under the im-
mediate infpeEtion of the Prefbyteries, in
wlhofe bounds they lie. Whoever is ac-
quainted with the geography of the country,
will find them to be situated in the wildest,
and least civilized places of theHighland-
Islands. And would the funds of the Socie-
ty pernit, schools might be opened with no
less advantage, in many other places of that
extensive country.

To change the manners of a whole people,
must be the work of unwearied perseverance
and attention. Attached by habit and ex-
ample to the customs of their ancestors, the
children educated by the Society were too
ready to forget the good principles which
they had been taught; and the love of idle-
ness and rapine often wore out the imprefli-
ons which religion and virtue had made in
their minds. In order to provide a remedy
for this, the Society applied for a new char-
ter, which they obtained in 1738 ; and by

it

[52 3

it they are impowered to infirud the chil.
dren under their care in the different parts of
agriculture, trade, and manufa&ures. To
the execution of that part of their plan, they
have reckoned themselves impowered to ap-
ply those fums, which, by the express defti.
nation of the Donor, are not appropriated for
the other ends of the Society. And now,
when there fums have amounted to some-
thing worth notice, they are beginning to lay
them out in this way. But those funds which
belonged to the Society previous to the date of
their new charter, and whatever new dona-
tions are granted them to be employed in the
religious education of youth, they still apply
with the utmost fidelity only to that purpote,
For these reasons, the progress of the Society,
in this part of their undertaking, must needs
be gradual. However, the attempts which they
make, have been attended with such success,
as abundantly juflifies the wisdom of the
scheme. Happily, these two branches of
their design are intimatelyconneded. Where-
ever true Christianity is efiablifiled, it im-
proves, adorns, and perfects human society.

R'ligiou

1 53 1

Religion and indufiry go hand in hand,
lrengthen and establish one anotlie,. Con-
formable to the spirit of their second p:'tent,
the Society, since the commencement of the
year 1755, have engaged to support a design,
which seems greatly to merit the public at-
tention and encouragement.

THE Honourable Board of Trustees for
imnproving th, manufactures and fisheries in
kotlalnd, have agreed to employ part of their
funds in fettling fimall colonies of linen-ma-
nufadturers in different parts of the High-
lands. The station of one of these colonies,
they have fixed at Lochcarron, a place which
by its situation appears to be very proper for
that purpose. The Trustees have already
provided a sufficient number of manufadtu-
rers for this new settlement, and have ap-
pointed skilful overseers to diret them. The
Proprietor of the lands of Lochcarron, who
hath given all the encouragement in his
power to this laudable undertaking, repre-
sented to the Trustees, that betides the diffe-
rent tradesmen employed by them, in the
linen-manufaAory, a schoolmaster well-qua-
lified for inftruting youth, a blacksmith, g

shoemaker,

[ 54 1

shoemaker, a cart-wright, and a ploughman
would be of great advantage to this infant.
colony. However much the Trustees ap.
proved this proposal, they could contribute
nothing towards the execution of it. The
funds under their management are appro.
priated by aft of Parliament for the encou.
ragement of the linen-manufadory and the
filieries; and they had no powers to em.
ploy them for any other purpose, however
necessary. But, by their direction, the Pro-
prietor applied to the Society for propaga.
ting Christian Knowledge, in order to obtain
their charitable affiflance to promote so good
a design.

THE Society, whose funds have been rai-

fed intirely by private contributions, were
not limited by the fame reftritions whichl
bound the Trustees. The design appeared
to them to be useful and well-concerted: It
is perfectly suitable to the spirit and intention
of their second patent: It tends evidently to
encourage religion, virtue, and induftryin
the Highlands. They resolved therefore,
to piomote it in the most effectual manner
that their funds would permit. For this

purpose,

[ 5s 3

purpose, besides a schoolmaster, whom they
have fettled at Loclcarrton, they agreed to al-
low considerable yearly salaries to a black-
filith, a shoemaker, a cart-wright, and a
ploughman, who are to be employed by
them for five years. The ploughman is to
instruct, gratis, all that offer themselves
and the others are obliged to infiruct a num-
ber of apprentices, and to give maintenance
at bed and board to them, if the Society finds
that expedient at a reasonable rate, to be paid
by the Society. And if, in other places of
the Highlands, the fame plan could be fol-
lowed out, the inhabitants, who have hi-
therto been burdensome to the nation, from
idleness, or formidable by their aativity,
might at last become useful, induflrious, and
valuable members of society.

BESIDES their endeavours towards the in.
tfrufting and improving the Highlands, the
Society have of late been engaged in a new
and more extensive undertaking. The late
Dr. Itil'iams, and some other sve!l-dilpofed
persons in England, confiding in the prudence
and fidelity of the Society, have committed
to their management certain fums which they

ordain

[ 56 ]

ordain to be employed for the inftrution f
the Indians in Aimerica. Conformable to their
pious intentions, the Society have dispatched
Missionaries into that country ; and tho', in
so wide and neglected a field, the industry
of a few labourers can produce no great or
sudden effect, yet, from their success, it is e.
vident, that, with proper cultivation, a blef-
fed and joyful increase might be expected.

THERE are indeed many obstacles, which

retard the propagation of Christianity in that
corner of the world. Among the ndians in
the neighbourhood of our colonies, focietyis
still in its simplest form; They lead the un.
fettled life of savages, who support them-
selves by hunting, and wander fiom one place
to another in quest of game: They are di
vided into many small tribes, differing from
each other in language and manners: At-
tached to their own superstitious rites, they
discover great aversion for the Chrifian reli-
gion, which is but ill-recommended to them
by the example of many who profess it.

NOTWITHS ANDING all these difadvan.

tages, the Society have the pleasure to hear
from Mi. Brainerd their Miflionary, that

manily

'57 ]

many among the Indians whom he hath form-
ed into a Christian congregation, still cond
tinue f/edfall and inlmoveable in the profession
ofthe gospel: And he is not without good
hlopes of adding to their number by his dili-
gence and care.

AT a time, when the friendship of the Ini
dien nations appears to be of so great con-
sequence towards the security and pre-
servation of our American colonies, no at-
tempt to inftrud them, however feeble,
ought to be regarded with indifference. E-
very person among them whom we gain o-
ver to the belief and pratice of true Chri-
ftianity, becomes from that moment the ally
of Britain, and is bound to its interest by a
powerful and sacred tie.

FROM this brief account of the intention
and management of the Society for propa.
gating Christian Knowledge, they flatter
themselves that the former will be esteemed
commendable, and that in the latter they can-
not justly incur the imputation either of imA
prudence or unfaithfulness.

H EVER ;

[ 58 ]

EVERY good man will bless God who hath

honoured the Society to be his initruments
for publishing the gospel of Christ to so ma.
ny persons who must otherways have peri.
edfJr lack of knowledge: And every man ca-
pable ofreflecting, will approve institutions
of this nature which contribute so much to
prepare the world for the full manifestation
of the myfleryy hid from ages and generations;
when the deafJhall hear the words of the lcokI,
and the eyes of the blind fhallfee out of obfcurit)
and out of darknejf; when the meek Jhall increaJi
teir joy in the Lord, and the poor among mizi!
z?.all rejoice in the Holy One of firael.

# The Tenor of the Society's second Patent is as follows, viz.

[ 59 1
The Tenor of the Society's second

Patent is asfollows, viz.
GEORGE, by the grace of God, King

of Great Britain, France and Ireland,

Defender of the Faith; forafimuchas, we
taking into our Royal consideration, that her
late Majesty Queen Anne, of blefied memo-
ry, did, upon the narrative of the charitable
inclinations of many of her fubjeqs, for rai-
sing a voluntary contribution, towards the
further promoting Christian Knowledge, and
the increase of piety and virtue in Scotland, by
her letters patent, bearing date at St. James's,
the 25th day of May I709, constitute, ap-
point, ordain and declare, the said contri-
buters, to be a legal Society and corporation,
by the name of The Socie , in Scotland for pro-
nagatinlg ChriJiiani Knowleedg,, with power to
them to receive subscriptions, to ereet and
maintain schools to teach to read, especially
the Holy Scriptures ; as also, to teach wri-
ting, arithmetic, and such like degrees of
knowledge as might be competent, as in the
said letters patent, containing divers other

clauses,

[ 60 ]

clauses, at more length is set forth: And we
taking likewise into consideration, the peti-
tion of the said Society for propagating Chri-
flian Knowledge, in their anniversary gene-
ral court, held at Edinburgh, upon T'hufday
the 7th of january last, setting forth the
said letters patent; and that it is found by
experience, that the breeding up of young
people to handy-labour, trades and manufa-
ctures, together with learning to read and
write, will be of great benefit, not onJ to
these young people, but likewise to thle na-
tion in general, and better answer the Incli-
nations of the contributers, for promoting
piety and virtue ; that the foresaid Society
are, by their said original patent, declared
able and capable, in law, to purchase and
enjoy lands, tenements, rents, and other pri-
vileges and jurifdiaions in fee and perpetuity,
not exceeding the yearly value of 2000 1. Ster-
ling ; but it may be doubted, whether, by the
said patent, they have power to fell and dispose
of lands once purchased: The said Society
therefore humbly prayed', we would be piea-
fed, not only to ratify and perpetually confirm
the foresaid letters patent, for the ends therein

mentioned,

[ 6I ]

mentioned, but also further to impower and
authorire the said Society, by all lawful means,
and according to rules by them to be efta-
blifled in that behalf, over and above the
purposes of their original patent, to cause
fich of the children, as they shall think fit,
tobe inftruded, and bred up to husbandry
and housewifery, or in trades and manu-
faicures, or in such like manual occupations
asthe Society shall think proper, and that in
such places, and in such manner, as the So-
ciety, or their diretors, shall think the most
practicable and expedient; and further, to
inpower the said Society, to fell and dispose
of such lands, tenements, rents, privileges,
and ur!ifdiaions, as they already have, or
fhal hereafter purchase, so often as they shall
jdge the fame expedient, and for the inter-
ell of the Society. Therefore we, from an
earnet desire for promoting the good of our
fubjeds, in all parts of our dominions, or-
dain letters patent to be made and past under
the feal appointed, by the treaty of union,
to be kept and made use of in Scotland, in
place of the great feal of Scotland, contain-

ing

[ 62 ]

ing our ratification, and perpetual confirma.
tion, of the foresaid letters patent, for the
ends and purposes therein mentioned; and
also, our full power and authority to the fid
Society, by all lawful means, and according
to rules by them to be eftablilhed in that be-
half, over and above the purposes of their
original patent, to cause such of the children
as they ihall think fit, to be infiruded, and
bred up to husbandry and housewifery, or in
trades and manufactures, or in such like ma.
nual occupations as the Society ihall think
proper, and that in such places, and in such
manner, as the Society, or their direcors for
the time being, ihall think the most prai-.
cable and expedient; and containing like-
wife our full powers to the said Society, to
fell and dispose of such lands, tenements,
rents, privileges and jurifdiEions, as they
already have, or shall hereafter purchase, as
often as they shall judge the fame expedi-
ent, and for the interest of the Society;
provided always, that such sale or disposal
of the foresaid lands, tenements, and others,
shall have the content and approbation of
our trusty and wellbeloved, the Lords Ja-

ftice

[ 63 1

liice-General, President of the Court of Sef-
sion, chief Baron of the Court of Exche-
quer, Juftice-Clerk, our Advocate, and So-
licitor for the time being, or any three of
them, &c. In teflimony whereof, we have
ordained our feal, appointed, by the treaty
of union, to be kept, and used in place of
the great feal of Scotland, to be hereto ap-
pended. At our Court at Kenington, the
6th day of June 1738, and of our reign the
Iith year.

L I S T

O F
SCHOOLS

MAINTAINED BY THE
SOCIETY IN SCOTLAND FOR PROPA-

GATING CHRISTIAN KNOW-
LEDGE. 1755.
NITo Places 'where, the PariJes. Prefyeries. Atrt

S.-hools are Jet- ber of
tied. Scho-

lars.

IS T. Kilda St. Kilda UIST 28
2 Kilbar Bara Ditto 16
3 rroooft Southuift Drtto 29
4 Taranfay Harris IDitto 18
5 Belloch Northuift Ditto 26
6 Barvas Barvas LEWIS 19
7 Keos Lochs Ditto 23
8 tLurnftod tKilmuir SKY 30
9 Egg and Cana iuck | Ditto 30
lo Slait Slait Ditto 29
aX Bracadale Bracadale [Do. new ererion

1 ^~~~~~

[ 66 ]
No Places where the Pari. p

Shool areset. P' PrejSteie. A
- tied. ;

Fort Augultus Bolletkine ABER TAR ar

'3Tomnacharrigh IKilmanivaig Dito 61
14 Pitgown I Lagan Ditto 20

1 S
Milto f Urquhart and Ditto
17 quh art 3 Glenmorifon 29
16 Maryburgh Kilmallie Ditto

7 eiginnataim Dres Do. new re Don 54

1 J}Levifie Glenmorifon Do. new eretion
19 Kirktoun of 9 [lo in Do.... new reon

Lochbroom 1 Lochbroom GAIRLOCH i

20 Ullapool Ditto Ditto
21 Lochcarron Lochcarron Ditto 15
22 Lyoll Glenelg Ditto
31 I J Ditto
23 Locha1f& Lochal& Ditto
24 Ratagan Glenihiel Ditto
25 Auchtihairn Galrloch Ditto
26 Moy Kinlochbuy MULL 16
27 Savarie Morvern Ditto 17
28 Keanvy Tiree Ditto 20
29 : orioife 1Kilninian Ditto '9
3o Strontain Ardnamurchan Ditto
3I Shilgrim Kilmichael INVERARY
32 Kilbranden Iilbranden LORN 6
33 Craiganifh Lifmnore and 32
34j1 Nuckairn Ardchattan i Ditto 2

andMalckairn l 32
35)Port Appine Lifmore and Ditto 2

Appine 2
36 Stron I Dunoon and ) jDUNOON 6

Kilmund 36

37 Kerflon Ditto
38 Garvie Kilmoddan Ditto 44
39 Auchinbreck Ditto Ditto 24
401Skipnefs iKilchalmonell KINTYRS
41 Scalafaig Collonfay and Ditto 3

42 Killearndale Ditto Ditto
43 Lagavuline Kildalton in llay Ditto |

862

[ 67 ]
ol Places wheere the Pari/hes. Pre/lyteries. Nunr

Schols are eft- ber. of
tied. Scha-

lars.

44 Culgaltrue. Kilberry KINTYRE 38
45 Barr. Killean Do. new eretion
46 Salachie Buchannan DUMBARTON 50
47 Muirland Lufs Ditto 89
48 Gartinitarry Drymen Ditto 66
49 Gartmore Port DUMBLANE 61
5o Blairvuck Aberfoyle Ditto 64
51 Anney Callender Ditto z6
52 Strathyre Balquhidder Ditto 41
53 Glenlednock Comrie AUCHTERARD. 50
54 Auchtermuthil Muthill Ditto 75
55 Glenartney Comrie Ditto 55
56 Glenalmond Monzie Ditto 25
57 Lochearn-End Comrie Ditto 49
58 Drumchatle Logierait DUNKELD 7

new eredion 5

59 Foss Dull Ditto 40
60 Pitcafle Logierait Ditto 47
61 F ulmuline Fortingall Ditto 40
62 Pitagown Blair Atholl Ditto 48
63 Grandtully Dull Ditto 43
64 Ardeonaiog Killine Ditto 57
65 Morinifh Kenmuir Ditto 56
66 Glenquaich Ditto Ditto 69
67 Glenfhee Kirkmichael! Ditto zz
68 Faulds of Derry Glenyla MEECLE 41
69 Drumfork Alyth and Ditto 68

;:I Ge r a[Lentrethan I
;o Glenprofan Cortachy and FR F 48

Clova

'Ii Glenfarquhar Glenbervie FORDOUN 58
7: Craig Craig BREECHINE

new ereation )
,3 Tullicairn. IGlentanner IKInARD1P E 1 57

I 0| O NIELL 5

74 Weftermicras Tllich Ditto
75 Inverchanlick |Crathie and 7 Ditto 60

Kindiochet 5
';6 Migvie Tarland Ditto 87

1595

[ 68 ]

NoI Plac s, ere ,, a Par,. Pre
tyterpier. [,

1&boob arefjet.

t /d. I-, G

771Belno -
- _ ia

71 GlenmiUCk KINCARD7NE )

I

787ja Brannock Kincardine 0 Ditto E } 5
79 Doubrich in I iil 57

C orgraph 3 trathdon AFOORD

So Broadley Ruthen
81 Portfoy' Rluthven
I FORDICE

S2 PRuthen iFordice I Ditto

SlRuth4en8

83 Kinnote Huntley STRATHBOGIE

2

84 Auchairn Hunt Ditto
.s Glenlivet Cairney Ditto 32
S6 Glenlirmnefs Inneraven ABER OUR 0

Dundurcas DittoU/
87 Inverlochie 3D

88 Skir~dvie Kirkmichael ABED ETHy

3

8 nVerlO~hj I DnrCaS ABERNETH Y I6

90j Inveruglafs K'ngujilie and LDtto 3
9'I Dallas Brughty Edvie 2i

9 Edinkilly

92IDunduffs Ditto D itto

FORE

93 presley Ditto I 31
94 Tllidivie Ditto Ditt
95 Cottertoun of Dke Ditto

Brodie 3 1 Ditto 7

96 Meviftoun Ditto D,
9 Raining School Inverness IVRNE |
i8

a .na-in Dess

g98[ alnain Dores RDitto I 1
99 Newton of Leys Croy Ditto

i^ ^ ^ ^

ckd Dallarafle Ditto

3

1c2 Glenconvent IJit, Ditto
°3 Dughgarrioch nvernet Ditto 3
i04/K irkhill DihttoO 35
oi Glenurquhart Chanonr, CHA 0
o6 AMilnton of 'OS

06 Reidcaln e KIllearnan Do. new ereaion 5

107 Drumcudden Cullicde Do. n ein
!08Blblair Ki!mo.r ack DoWe. ,

D

I 6644
lj66

[ 69 ]
oplaret wert th Pari/es, Prejfyieriei. Nlum

Sc hols areset- ! er of
ted. IScho-

lars.

I -'

Kinnahard Contane DIN WAL 63
blairninich Fodderty Ditto 2
Arean Urray Ditto 31
Inverchafley Creich DORNOCH 37
;Shiness Larg Ditto 2z
4 Afchelbeg Clyne Ditto 47
i Borible Ki!donnan Ditto 24
i Philine Affint Ditto 19
i Rivigil rong TONG 14
Humlean Duirnifh Ditto 1
Buckies and Ihurfo CAITHNESS 42

Emfter
Bualcrappie Latheron Ditto 28
Brabfter Reay Ditto 26
Quoyfdale Wick Ditto 37
Weather-Clate Ditto Ditto 25
Halkirk Thurfo Ditto 22
Stroma Cannefby Ditto 4$
, Milnton Latheron Do. new ereEtion
:lythes Ditto Do. new ereAion
Hairay Birfay & Harray CAIRSTON 104
Eithfion Stromnefs Ditto 77
Greny Birfay & Harray Ditto 32
ingfay Ditto Ditto 2Z
Marwick Ditto Ditto 30
: Gramfay Hoy & Graemfay Ditto 30
Hoy Ditto Ditto 29
Orphire Orphire Ditto 30
'Vails Ditto Ditto 34
'ennefs Firth & Stennefs Ditto 58
;Yarpha Dearness KIRKWALL 55
iback Evie and Rendal Di:to 40
Coflay Ditto Ditto 27
llidby Weftray NORTH ISLES 67
iCalfsound Edday Ditto 36
ilCrofs & Burness Cross & Burness NoRTH ISLEs

. /

I new erection
's}orien Roufay i Ditto z

zo4

[ 70 3

NO Placew twher the
t Pari/hes. PreAyleries,

Schools areset-
tked.

I45 Uphouie

Sandnefs }j)

146 Unit Dunrofenefs Ditto
147 Norbie Walls and Ditto

Sandnefs

148 Weifdale Tingwall Ditto
149 Cuningfburgh Dunrofenefs Ditto
!5o Gela in Fair Ditto Ditto

Isle
15I Whinyefter Walls and Ditto

Sandnefs 5

15iz Halfmorton Langholme LANGHOLME
153 Orphan Hifpital Edinburgh EDINBURGH
'54 Edinr. chari- ? IDitto Ditto

ty workhouse 5
1 Dalkeith cha- 1Dalkeith DALKIETH

rity workhouse 5

The total number of scholars educated at the Society

schools, exclusive of those lately ere&ed, from which no re
ports are come, amount to

N. B. The scholars in the Orphan-Hofpital of Edi,

charity workhouse there, and the charity workhouse at D
are also taught manufacures.

F I N I S,
