THE
HISTORY

O F
AME RICA.

By WILLIAM ROBERTSON, D.D.

PRINCIPAL OF THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH,
ANDHISTORIOGRAPHER TO HIS MAJESTY FOR SCOTLAND.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

D U B L IN:

Printed for Mefls. WHITESTONE, W. WATSON, CORCORAN, R. CROSS,

SLEATER, SHEPPARD, CHAMIIERi.AINE, POTTS, J. HOEY, FLIN,

FITZSIMONS, Exs11Aw, E. LYNCII, S. WATSON, W. COLL£ES

WILLIAMS, W. WI. SON, PORTER, WALKIER, M. HAY,

MONCRIEFFE, ARMITAGE, HALLHEAD, FAULKNER,
T. STEWART, Bu nNET,VAI,ANCE, SPOTSWOOD,

Gll.llERT, R. Sl' WAVR', MILLS, BEATTY,
J£NKIN, P. WILSON,E. CRoSK , WOGAN,

MACELRATII, HIOLY, IIILLARY,
WIIITEr, CGUREER, M'KENLY,

and MAOEE. MDCCLXXVII.

# BOOK V.

THE
HISTORY

O F
AMERICA.

BOOK V.

W HEN Grijalva returned to Cuba, he found B 0 0 K
the armament destined to attempt the conquest of V.
that rich country which he had discovered, almost s -

518.

complete. Not only ambitioln, but avarice, hadPreparati-
urged Velasquez to haften his preparations; and on:ot vela.

0- r i * rs* quez for in-

having such a pr6fpect of gratifying both, he had vauing New
advanced considerable furns out of his private for- spain.
tune towards defraying the expence. At the
fame time, he exerted his influence as governor,
in engaging the molt diftinguiflied persons in the
colony to undertake the service *. At a time
when the spirit of the Spanish nation was adven-
turous to excess, a number of soldiers, eager to
embark in any daring enterprise, soon appeared.
But it w.,as not so easy to find a person qualified to
take the command in an expedition of so much
importance; and the charater of Velasquez, ho
had the right of nomination, greatly increased the

VOL. 11. B difficulty

* See NOTE I,

B O O K difficulty of the choice. Though of most aspiring

v. ambition, and not destitute of talents for govern-

~'3 > ment, he possessed neither such courage, nor such
518. vigour and activity of mind, as to undertake in

person the condut of the armament which he was
preparing. In this embarrassing situation, he form-
ed the chimerical scheme not only of atchieving
great exploits by a deputy, but of securing to him-
self the glory of conqueits which were to be made
by another. In the execution of this plan, he fond-
ly aimed at reconciling contradictions. He was so-
licitous to chufe a commander of intrepid refolu-
tion, and of superior abilities, because he knew
there to be requisite in order to ensure success; but,
at the fame time, from the jealousy natural to little
minds, he wished him to be of a spirit so tame
and obsequious, as to be entirely dependant on his
will. But when he came to apply those ideas in
forming an opinion concerning the several officers
who occurred to his thoughts as worthy of being
entrufled with the command, he soon perceived
that it was impossible to find fucll incompatible
qualities united in one character. Such as were
diftinguifiled for courage and talents, were too
high-fpirited to be paflive inffruments in his hand.
Those who appeared more gentle and tradable,
were deflitute of capacity, and unequal to the
charge. This augmented his perplexity and his fears.
He deliberated long, and with much solicitude,
and was still wavering in his choice, when Ama-
dor de Lares, the royal treasurer in Cuba, and
Andres Duero, his own secretary, the two persons
in whom he chiefly confided, were encouraged by
this irresolution to propose a new candidate, and-
supported their recommendation with such aflidui-
ty and address, that, no less fatally for Velasquez
than happily for their country, it proved success-
ful *

THe

B. Diaz. c. 19. Gomiara Cron, c. 7. Herrcra, dec. 2.
lib, iii. c. i .

THE man whom they pointed out to him was B 0 0

Fernando Cortes. He was born at Medellin, a V.
small town in Efiremadura, in the year one thou- 8^
sand four hundred and eighty-five, and descend- He appoint
ed.from a family of noble blood, but of very mo- Coresco
derate fortune. Being originally destined by his
parents to the study of law, as the moit likely
method of bettering his condition, he was sent
early to the university of Salamanca, where he im-
bibed some tinEture of learning. But he was soon
disgusted with an academic life, which did not
suit his ardent and restless genius, and retired to
Medellin, where he gave himself up entirely to
acive sports and martial exercises. At this period
of life, he was so impetuous, so overbearing, and
so dissipated, that his father was glad to comply
with his inclination, and fend him abroad as an
adventurer in arms. There were in that age two
conspicuous theatres, on which such of the Spanifi
youth as courted military glory might display their
valour; one in Italy, under the command of the
Great Captain; the other in the New World.
Cortes preferred the former, but was prevented
by indisposition from embarking with a reinforce-
ment of troops sent to Naples. Upon this dif-
appointment he turned his views towards Ameri-
ca, whither he was allured by the profpet of the
advantages which he m;ght derive fiom the pa-
tronage of Ovando *, the governor of Hispaniola,
who was his kinsman. When he landed at St.
Domingo in one thousand five hundred and four,
his reception was such as equalled his most fan-
guine hopes, and he was employed by the go-
vernor in several honourable and lucrative stations.
These, however, did not satisfy his ambition;
and in the year one thousand five hundred and
eleven, he obtained permiflion to accompany
Diego Velasquez in his expedition to Cuba. In

B i this
* See NOTE II.

B O O K this service he diflinguifhed himself so much, that,

V. notwithstanding some violent contests with Velaf-
L;I-~8 qquez, occasioned by trivial events, unworthy of

51 remenbrance, he was at length taken into favour,

and received an ample concession of lands and of
Indians, the recompence usually bestowed upon
adventurers in the New World.-t

THOU GH Cbrtes had not hitherto aaed in high

command, he had displayed such qualities in fe-
veral scenes of difficulty and danger, as raised
universal expectation, and turned the eyes of his
countrymen towards him, as one capable of per-
forming great things. The turbulence of youth,
as soon as he found objects and occupations suited
to the ardour of his mind, gradually fubtided, and
fettled into a habit of regular indefatigable aaivi-
ty. The impetuosity cf his temper, when he
came to a&t with his equals, insensibly abated, by
being kept under restraint, and mellowed into a
cordial soldierly frankness. These qualities were
accompanied with calm prudence in concerting
his schemes, with persevering vigour in executing
them, and with what is peculiar to superior genius,
the art of gaining the confidence and governing
the minds of men. To all which were added the
inferior accomplishments that itrike the vulgar,
and command their refpet; a graceful person, a
winning aspet, extraordinary address in martial
exercises, and a constitution of such vigour as to
be capable of enduring any fatigue.

As soon as Cortes was mentioned to Velasquez

by his two confidents, he flattered himi'elf that he
had at length found what he had hitherto fought
in vain, a man with talents for command, but
not an object of jealousy. Neither the rank

11(1
' GComara Cron, c. 1, 2, 3.

nor the fortune of Cortes, as he imagined, wereB O O K
such that he could aspire at independence. He .
had reason to believe, that by his own readiness 1'"
to bury ancient animofities in oblivion, as well as
his liberality in conferring several recent favours,
he had already gained the good-will of Cortes, and
hoped, by this new and unexpeEted mark of con-
fidence, that he might attach him for ever to his
ntereft.
CORTES receiving his commiflion with theSoon be.

comes jea-

warmest exprefions of respect and gratitude to the ious of him.
governor, immediately ereeted his standard before Oaober 23.
his own house, appeared in a military dress, and
assumed all the ensigns of his new dignity. His
utmost influence and activity were exerted in per-
fuading many of his friends to engage in the ser-
vice, and in urging forward the preparations for
the voyage. All his own funds, together with
what money he could raise by mortgaging his
lands and Indians, were expended in purchasing
military flores and provisions, or in supplying the
wants of such of his officers as were unable to
equip themselves in a manner suited to their rank*.
Inoffensive, and even laudable as this conduct
was, his disappointed competitors were malicious
enough to give it a turn to his disadvantage:
They represented him as aiming already, with
little disguise, at establishing an independent au-
thority over his troops, and endeavouring to fe-
cure their respeCt or love by his ostentatious and
interested liberality. They reminded Velasquez
of his former dissensions with the man in whom
he now reposed so much confidence, and foretold
that Cortes would be more apt to avail himself
of the power, which he was inconliderately

pl)tting
, cc NOTE 111.

o0 OK putting in his hands, to avenge past inju,

V· ries, than to requite late obligations. These
i1.g insinuations made such impression upon the sus-

picious mind of Velasquez, that Cortes soon ob-
ierved some symptoms of a growing alienation
and distrust in his behaviour, and was advised by
his friends, Lares and Duero, to haften his de-
parture, before they should become so confirmed,
as to break out with open violence. Fully fenfi-
ble of this danger, he urged forward his prepara-
tions with such rapidity, that he set fail from St.
Jago de Cuba on the eighteenth of November,
Velasquez accompanying him to the Ihore, and
taking leave of him with an appearance of perfect
friendship and confidence, though he had secretly
given it in charge to some of his officers, to keep
a watchful eye upon every part of their comman-
der's conduat .

ndeavorurs CORTES proceeded to Trinidad, a small fettle-
him of his ment on the fame fide of the Island, where he was
'°mmiffin,joined by several adventurers, and received a

supply of provisions and military stores, of which
his flock was fill very incomplete. He had
hardly left St. Jago, when thejealoufy which had
been working in the breall of Velasquez grew so
violent that it was impossible to suppress it. The
armament was'no longer under his own eye and
direction; and he felt that as his power over it
ceased, that of Cortes became more absolute. Ima-
gination now aggravated every circumfiance,
which had formerly excited suspicion: the rivals
of Cortes industriously threw in refletions which
increased his fears; and with no less art than malice
they called superstition to their aid, employing the
predictions of an afirologer in order to complete
'the alarm; All thefe,by their united operation, pro-

duced
Gomara Cron. c. 7. B. Diaz. c. 20.

duced the desired effect. Velasquez repented bit- B O o K
terly of his own imprudence, in having committed V.
a trust of so much importance to a person whose '"
fidelity appeared so doubtful, and hastily di fpatch- ' 8.
ed inftrutions to Trinidad, empowering Verdugo,
the chief magistrate there, to deprive Cortes of his
commission. But Cortes had already made such
progress in gaining the efleem and confidence of
his troops, that, finding officers as well as soldiers
equally zealous to support his authority, he soothed
or intimidated Verdugo, and was permitted to de-
part from Trinidad without moleitation.

FROM Trinidad Cortes failed for Havana, in or- ,n to, ,y

der to raise more soldiers, and to complete the vic- hin, under
tualling of his fleet. There several persons of di- ""r'
ftintion entered into the service, and engaged to
supply what provisions were tfill wanting; Ibut as
it was necessary to allow them some time for per-
forming what they had promised, Velasquez, fen-
fible that he ought no longer to rely on a man of
whom he had so openly difcpvered his distrust,
availed himself of the interval, which this unavoid-
able delay afforded, in order to make one attempt
more to wrefft the command out of the hands of
Cortes. He loudly complained of Verdugo's con-
dudt, accifing him either of childiflh facility, or of
manifeff treachery, in suffering Cortes to escape
from Trinidad. Anxious to guard ageinfft a fe-
cond difippointmenr, he sent a person of confi-
dence to the Havanna, with p'eremptory injunCtion,
to Pedro Barba, his lieuteniant-governor in that co-
lony, inflantly to arreli Cottc's, to fT'nld him prii-
soner to St. Jago under a flronp gtu;!i, and to
countermand the departure ol tlie n rmnm lenl Intil
he Ihould receive Falrlher ordlcl.r he wrote like-
wife to thli prilcipal osict-rs, req;iiil1p tlie

I\

B O 0 K to assist Barba in executing what he had given him

V. in charge. But before the arrival of his messen-
158. ger, a Franciscan friar of St. Jago had secretly con-

veyed an account of this interesting tranfation to
Bartholomew de Olmedo, a monk of the fame
order, who acted as chaplain to the expedition.

Cortes de. CORTES, forewarned of the danger, had time
feats his
fchemes,and to take precautions for his own safety. His first
lcontinues Rep was to find some pretext for removing from
his prepara-.
tions. Havana Diego de Ordaz, an officer of great merit,

but in whom, on account of his known attach-
ment to Velasquez, he could not confide in this
trying and delicate jun&ure. He gave him the
command of a vessel, destined to take on board
some provisions in a small harbour beyond Cape
Antonio; and thus made sure of his absence,
without teeming to fufpe&t his fidelity. When he
was gone, Cortes no longer concealed the inten-
tionis of Velasquez from his troops; and as officers
and soldiers were equally impatient to set out on
an expedition, in preparing for which most of them
had expended all their fortune, they expressed their
astonishment and indignation at that illiberal jea-
lousy, to which the governor was about to facri-
fice, not only the honour of their general, but all
their sanguine hopes of glory and wealth. With
one voice they intieated that he would not aban-
don the important station to which he had such a
good title. They conjured him not to deprive
them of a leader whom they followed with such
well-founded confidence, and offered to shed the
last drop of their blood in maintaining his autho-
rity. Cortes was easily induced to comply with
what he so ardently desired. He swore that he
would never desert soldiers who had given him
such a signal proof of their attachment, and pro-

mifed

mifed instantly to conduct them to that rich coun- B O O K
try, which had been so long the object of their V.
thoughts and wiihes. This declaration was re- -S'
ceived with transports of military applause, ac- 158
companied with threats and imprecations against
all who should presume to call in question the
jurisdiction of their general, or to obftruEt the exe-
cution of his designs.

EVERY thing was now ready for their depar-Theamount

ture: but though this expedition was the unitedhisres
effort of the Spanish power in Cuba; though eve-
ry settlement had contributed its quota of men and
provisions; though the governor had laid out con-
fiderable fums, and each adventurer had exhaust-
ed his flock, or (trained his credit, the poverty of
the preparations was such as must astonish the
present age, and bore, indeed, no resemblance to
an armament defined for the conquefr of a great
empire. The fleet consisted of eleven vessels, the
largest of a hundred tons, which was dignified with
the name of Admiral, three of seventy or eighty
tons, and the reft small open barks. On board of
these were fix hundred and seventeen men; of
which five hundred and eight belonged to the
land service, and a hundred and nine were seamen
or artificers. The soldiers were divided into ele-
ven companies, according to the number of the
ships; to each of which Cortes appointed a cap-
tain, and committed to him the command of the
vessel while at sea, and of the men when on flore *.
As the use of fire-arms among the nations of
Europe was hitherto confined to a few battalions
of regularly-difciplined infantry, only thirteen
soldiers were armed with muskets, thirty-two were
crofs-bowmen, and the reft had swords and spears.

Inflcad
* See NOTE IV.

B O O K Infead of the usual defensive armour, which muff

v. have been cumbersome in a hot climate, they wore
"x' jackets, quilted with cotton, which experience had

taught the Spaniards to be a sufficient protection
againfi the weapons of the Americans. They
had only sixteen horses, ten small field-pieces,
and four falconets t.

Feb. so. WITH this slender and ill-provided train did
dp9.rturSCortes set fail, to make war upon a monarch
from Cuba. whose dominions were more extensive than all the

kingdoms subjet to the Spanish crown. As reli-
gious enthusiasm always mingled with the spirit
of adventure in the New World, and, by a com-
bination still more firange, united with avarice,
in prompting the Spaniards to all their enterprises,
a large cross was displayed in their standards, with
this inscription, Let us follow the cross; for under
this ign we jhall conquer.

So powerfully were Cortes and his followers

animated with both there paflions that, no less
eager to plunder the opulent country whither they
were bound, than zealous to propagate the Chris-
tian faith among its inhabitants, they set out, not
with the solicitude natural to men going upon
dangerous service, but with that confidence which
arises from security offuccefs, and certainty of the
divine protection.

Tnllchc) at As Cortes had determined to touch at every
coucil place which Grijalva had visited, he seered direEt-

ly towards the island of Cozumel; there he had
the good fortune to redeem Jerome de Aguilar, a
Spaniard, who had been eight years a prisoner
among the Indians. This man was perfecly
acquainted with a dialed of their language, under-

stood
-1 11. Dilz, c. 19.

Rfood through a large extent of country, andB O O K
poffefling betides a considerable share of prudence v.
and sagacity, proved extremely useful as an inter- 59.
preter. From Cozumel Cortes proceeded to the March 4.
river of Tabasco, in hopes of a reception as friend- andat Ts-
ly as Grijalva had met with there, and of finding
gold in the fame abundance; but the disposition
of the natives, from some unknown cause, was to-
tally changed. After repeated endeavours to con-
ciliate their good-will, he was confirained to have
recourse to viplence. Though the forces of the
enemy were numerous, and advanced with extra-
ordinary courage, they were routed, with great
slaughter, in several fucceflive actions. The loss
which they sustained, and fRill more the astonish-
ment and terror excited by the defirudive effec
of the fire-arms, and the dreadful appearance of
the horses, humbled their fierce spirits, and in-
duced them to sue for peace. They acknow-
ledged the king of Caffile as their sovereign, and
granted Cortes a supply of provisions, with a pre-
sent of cotton garments, some gold, and twenty
female slaves t.

CORTES continued his course to the westward, Arriveat

St. Juan dec

keeping as near the ihore as poflible, in order to Uliua.
observe the country; but could discover no pro-
per place for landing, until he arrived at St. Juan
de Ullua *. As he entered this harbour, a large ^pril 2.
canoe full of people, among whom were two who
seemed to be persons of difind.ion, approached
his ship, with signs of peace and amity. They
came on board without fear or distrust, and ad-
dressed him in a moit refpecful manner, but in
a language altogether unknown to Aguilar. Cortes

was

: See NOTE V.

B. Diaz c, 31-36. Gomara Cron. c. 18-23. Herrc-
ra, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. I , &c,

B o 0 K was in the utmofi perplexity and distress, at an

v. event of which he instantly foresaw all the confe-
i519. quences, and already felt the hesitation and uncer-

tainty with which he lhould carry on the great
schemes which he meditated, if, in his tranfafions
with the natives, he must depend entirely upon
such an imperfelt, ambiguous, and conjectural
mode of communication, as the ufe'of signs. But
he did not remain long in this embarrassing fitua-
tion: a fortunate accident extricated him, when
his own sagacity could have contributed little to-
wards his relief. One of the female slaves, whom
he had received from the cazique of Tabasco, hap-
pened to be present at the first interview between
Cortes and his new guests. She perceived his di-
ltrefs, as well as the confusion of Aguilar; and as
she perfetly understood the Mexican language,
she explained what they said in theYucatan tongue,
with whichAguilar was acquainted. This woman,
known afterwards by the name of Donna Marina,
and who makes a conspicuous figure in the history
of the New World, where great revolutions were
brought about by small causes and inconsiderable
infiruments, was born in one of the provinces of
the Mexican empire. Having been carried off a
captive by some hostile party, after a variety of
adventures she fell into the hands of the Tabaf-
cans, and had resided long enough among them
to acquire their language, without losing the use
of her own. Though it was both tedious and
troublesome to converse by the intervention of
two different interpreters, Cortes was so highly
pleased with having discovered this method of car-
rying on some intercourse with the people of a
country into which he was determined to penetrate,
that in the transports of his joy he confidered it as
a visible interpolition of Providence in his favour.'*

Hz

* B.Diaz.c. 37, 3,, 39. Gomara Cron. c.25, z6. -cr-
reri, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 4.

HE now learned, that the two persons whom B 0 0 K

he had received on board his ship were deputies V.
from Pilpatoe and Teutile; the one governor of "'"
that province, under a great monarch, whom they Lnds his
called Montezuma, and the other the commander troops.
of his forces there, and that they were sent to
inquire what his intentions were in visiting their
coast, and to offer him what afliffance he might
need, in order to continue his voyage. Cortes,
Cortes, struck with the appearance of those peo-
ple, as well as the tenor of the meiTage, assured
them, in refpeEtful terms, that he approached
their country with most friendly sentiments, and
came to propose matters of great importance to
the welfare of their prince and his kingdom, which
he would unfold more fully, in person, to the
governor and the general. Next morning, with-
out waiting for any answer, he landed his troops,
his horses and artillery; and having chosen proper
ground, began to ereCt huts for his men, and to
fortify his camp. The natives, initead of oppo-
sing the entrance of those fatal guests into their
country, assisted them in all their operations, with
an alacrity of which they had ere long good rea-
son to repent.

NEXT day, Pilpatoe and Teutile entered theHis f;n n-

Spanish camp with a numerous retinue; and Cor- terel'w
tes confidering them as the ministers of a great Mcxican,.
monarch, entitled to a degree of attention very dif-
ferent from that which the Spaniards were accuf-
tomed to pay to the petty Caziques, with whom
they had intercourse, received them with much
formal ceremony. He informed them, that
he came as ambassador firom Don Carlos of
Austria, king of Caflile, the greatest monarch
of the east, and wasintrufted with propositions of
such moment, that ie could impart them to none

but

B 0 K but the emperor Montezuma himself; and there-

v. fore required them to conduat him, without

"V'** loss of time, into the pretence of their master.
1519. The Mexican officers could not conceal their un-

easiness at a requeit, which they knew to be difa-
greeable, and which, they foresaw, might prove
extremely embarrassing to their Sovereign, whose
mind had been filled with many disquieting appre-
henfions, ever since the former appearance of the
Spaniards on his coasts. But before they at.
tempted to dissuade Cortes rfrom insisting on this
demand, they endeavoured to conciliate his good-
will, by entreating him to accept of certain pre-
sents, which, as humble slaves of Montezuma,
they laid at his feet. There were introduced with
great parade, and confifte- of fine cotton cloth,
of plumes of various colours; and of ornaments
of gold and silver to a considerable value; the
workmanship of which appeared to be as curious
as the materials were rich. The display of there
produced an effect very different from what the
Mexicans intended. Instead of satisfying, it in-
creased the avidity of the Spaniards, and render-
ed them so eager and impatient to become maiters
of a country which abounded with such precious
productions, that Cortes could hardly liften with
patience to the arguments which Pilpatoe and
Teutile employed to dissuade him from visiting
the capital, and in a haughty determined tone he
insisted on his demand, of being admitted to a
personal audience of their Sovereign. During this
interview, tome painters, in the train of the Mex-
ican chiefs, had been diligently employed in de-
lineating, upon white cotton cloths, figures of the
ships, the horses, the artillery, the soldiers, and
whatever else attracted their eyes, as singular.
When Cortes observed this, and was informed
that there pictures were to be sent to Montezuma,
in order to convey to him a more lively idea of
the strange and wonderful objecs now presented

to

to their view, than any words could communicate, B o o K
he resolved to render the representation fiill more -.
animated and interesting, by exhibiting such a -9 .
fpetacle asmight give both them and their mo-
narch ar Awful impreflion of the extraordinary
prowess of his followers, and the irresistible force
of their arms. The trumpets, by his order founded
an alarm; the troops, in a moment, formed in or-
der of battle, the infantry performed such mar-
tial exercises as were best suited to display the
effect of their different weapons; the horse, in
various evolutions, gave a specimen of their agility
and strength; the artillery, pointed towards the
thick woods which surrounded the camp, made
dreadful havoc among the trees. The Mvexicans
looked on with that silent amazement, which is
natural when the mind is firuck with objeEts,
which are both awful and above its comprehension.
But, at the explosion of the cannon, many of them
fled, some fell to the ground, and all were so
much confounded at the fight of men whose power
so nearly resembled that of the Gods, that Cortes
found it difficult to compose and re-assure them.
The painters had now many new fubjeets on
which to exercise their art, and they put their fancy
on the stretch in order to invent figures and cha-
racters to represent the extraordinary things which
they had seen.

MESSENGERS were immediately dispatched to Negotiations

Montezuma with those pictures, and a full ac-twe'ut2°"
count of every thing that had pailed since the
arrival of the Spaniards, and by them Cortes sent
a present of some European curiosities to Monte-
zuma, which though of no great value, he believed
would be acceptable on account of their novelty.
The Mexican monarchs, in order to obtain early
information of every occurrence in all' the corners
of their vafi empire, had introduced a refinement in

police,

B O K police, unknown, at that time, in Europe. They

v. had couriers pufted at proper stations along the

~C principal roads, and as these were trained to

agility by a regular education, and relieved one
another at moderate distances, they conveyed in-
telligence with surprising rapidity. Though the
capital in which Montezuma resided was above a
hundred and eighty miles from St. Juan de Ulua,
Cortes's presents were carried thither, and an an-
fwer to his demands was received in a few days.
The fame officers who had hitherto treated with
the Spaniards, were employed to deliver this an-
fwer; but as they knew how repugnant the de-
termination of their master was to all the schemes
and withes of the Spanish commander, they would
not venture to make it known until they had pre-
vioufly endeavoured to sooth and mollify him.
Hisprefcnts. For this purpose, they renewed the negociation

by introducing a train of an hundred Indians load-
ed with presents sent to him by Montezuma. The
magnificence of there was such as became a great
monarch, and far exceeded any idea which the
Spaniards had hitherto formed of his wealth.
They were placed upon mats spread on the
ground, in such order as shewed them to the
greatest advantage. Cortes and his officers viewed,
with admiration, the various manufactures of the
country, cotton fluffs so fine, and of fich deli-
cate texture as to resemble silk; pictures of ani-
mals, trees, and other natural objects formed with
feathers of different colours, disposed and min-
gled with such ktill and elegance, as to rival the
works of the pencil in truth and beauty of imi-
tation. But what chiefly attracted their eyes,
were two large plates of a circular form, one of
maflive gold representing the fun, the other of
silver, an emblem of the moon *. These were ac-

d companied

* See N 0 T E VI.

companied with bracelets, collars, rings, and B ,0 K
other trinkets of gold; and that nothing might V.
be wanting which could give the Spaniards a corn- 519.
plete idea of what the country afforded, with
some boxes filled with pearls, precious itones,
and grains of gold unwrought, as they had been
found in the mines or rivers. Cortes received all
these with an appearance of profound veneration
for the monarch by whom they were beflowed.
But when the Mexicans, presuming upon this, orbidsCo.r

tes to ap-

informed him that their mailer, though he de-proach his
fired him to accept of what he had sent as a to- capital.
ken of his regard for the prince whom he repre-
sented, would not give his consent that foreign
troops should approach nearer to his capital, or
even allow them to continue longer in his domi-
nions, Cortes declared, in a manner more resolute
and peremptory than formerly, that he must in-
sift on his first demand, as he could not without
dishonour, return to his own sovereign, until he
was admitted into the pretence of the prince
whom he was appointed to visit in his name.
The Mexicans, astonished at feeing any man dare
to oppose that will, which they were accustomed
to confider as supreme and irrefitible, yet afraid
of precipitating their country into an open rup-
ture with such formidable enemies, prevailed with
Cortes to promise, that he would not move from
his present camp, until the return of a meflknger,
whom they sent to Montezuma far farther infiruc-
tions *.

THE firmness with which Cortes adhered to his Sate of t'r

Mexicanem-

original proposal should, naturally, have brought pie ,,t ,.a,
the negociation between him and Montezuma to period.
a speedy issue, as it seemed to leave the Mexican
monarch no choice, but either to receive him with

VOL. II. C confidence

* B. Dial. c. 39. Gomara Cron, c. 27. Herrera, dec. 2.
lib. v. c. S, 6.

B-OOK confidence as a friend, or to oppose him openly

V- as an enemy. The latter was what might have

been expected from a haughty prince in possession
of extensive power. The Mexican empire, at
this period, was at a pitch of grandeur to which
no society ever attained in so ihort a period.
Though it had subsisted only a hundred and
thirty years, its dominion extended from the
North to the South Sea, over territories stretch-
ing about five hundred leagues from east to weft,
and more than two hundred from north to south,
comprehending provinces not inferior in fertility,
population, and opulence, to any in the torrid
zone. The people were warlike and enterprising;
the authority of the monarch unbounded, and his
revenues considerable. If, with the forces which
might have been suddenly assembled in such an
empire, Montezuma had fallen upon the Spa-
niards while encamped on a barren unhealthy
coast, unsupported by any ally, without a place
of retreat, and destitute of provisions, it is im-
poflible, even with all the advantages of their
superior discipline and arms, that they could have
flood the shock, and they mulf either have pe-
rifhed in such an unequal contefi, or have aban-
doned the enterprise.

thlraer of As the power of Montezuma enabled him to take
thmnontch. this spirited part, his own dispositions seemed na-

turally to prompt him to it. Of all the princes
who had swayed the Mexican sceptre, he was
the most hatighty, the most violent, and the most
impatient of controul. His sub jees looked up
to him with awe, and his enemies with terror.
The former he governed with unexampled rigour,
but they were impressed with such an opinion of
his capacity as commanded their refpett; and by
many victories over the latter, he had spread far
the dread of his arms, and had added several confi-
derable provinces to his dominions. But though

hi3

his talents might be suited to the tranfa&ions of B O O K
a Itate To imperfetly polished as the Mexican V.
empire, and sufficient to condut them while in ',
their accustomed course, they were altogether 1519
inadequate to a conjuncture so extraordinary, and
did not qualify him either to judge with the dif-
cernment, or to at with the decision, requisite in
such a trying emergence.

FROM the moment that the Spaniards appeared His' pete-

on his coast, he discovered symptoms of timidity ror-pon the
and embarrassment. Instead of taking such re- Sp'aialth
solutions as the consciousness of his own power,
or the memory of his former exploits, might have
inspired, he deliberated with an anxiety and he-
fitation which did not escape the notice of his
meanest courtiers. The perplexity and difcom-
pofure of Montezuma's mind upon this occasion,
as well as the general dismay of his subjects, was
not owing wholly to the impression which the
Spaniards had made by the novelty of their
appearance and the terror of their arms; its ori-
gin may be traced up to a more remote source.
There was an opinion, if we may believe the
earliest and most authentic Spanish historians, al-
most universal among the Americans, that some
dreadful calamity was impending over their heads,
from a race of formidable invaders who should
come from regions towards the rising fun, to
over-run and desolate their country. Whether
this disquieting apprehension flowed from the
memory of some natural calamity which had
afflited that part of the globe, and impressed the
minds of the inhabitants with superstitious fears
and forebodings, or whether it was an imagina-
tion accidentally suggested by the astonishment
which the firfi fight of a new race of men occa-
sioned, it is impollible to determine. But as the
Mexicans were more prone to fuperftitionthan any
people in the New World, they were more deeply

C 2 affected

B 0 IK affectd with the appearance of the Spaniards,

V. wh6omi their credulity instantly represented as the

5 ifirutents deftihed to bring about that fatal re-

volutioh which they dreaded. Under those cir-
cumfiances, it ceases to be incredible that a
handful of adventurers should alarm the monarch
of a great empire and all his subjects *.

Continuesto NOTWITHSTANDING' the influence of this
nesociat. imprefion, when the messenger arrived from the

Spanish camp with an account, that Cortes, ad-
hering to his original demand, refused to obey
the order enjoining him to leave the country,
Montezuma assumed tome degree of resolution,
and in a transport of rage, natural to a fierce
prince unaccustomed to meet with any opposition
to his will, he threatened to sacrifice those pre-
sumptuous strangers to his gods. But his doubts
and fears quickly returned, and instead of ifluing
orders to carry his threats into execution,
again called his ministers to confer and offer
their advice. Feeble and temporising measures
will always be the result when men assemble to
deliberate in a situation where they ought to at.
The Mexican council took no effecual measure
for expelling such troublesome intruders, and
were satisfied with issuing a more positive in-
jtintion, requiring them to leave the country;
but this they preposterously accompanied with a
present of such value, as proved a fresh induce-
ment so remain there.

A^xiety ,,id ME A NW I-I LE, the Spaniards were not with-
;ll'n,'toheout solicitude or a variety of sentiments, in de-
sr.,aiaii, liberating concerning their own future conduct.

From what they had already seen, many of them

formed

* Cortes Rc!Atione Sccunda, ap Ramus. iii. 234, 23g. Her-

rera, dcc. z. lib. iii. c. r. lib. v. c. i. lib. vii. c. 6. Goinara
Cron. c. 66. 92. i.1.

formed fuesh extravagant ideas concerning the B o00
opulence of the country, that, despising danger v
or hardihips when they had in view trea-
fures which appeared to be inexhaustible, they S5'9
were eager to attempt the conquest; Others
estimating the power of the Mexican empire by
its wealth, and enumerating the various proofs
which bad occurred of its being under a well-re-
gulated administration, contended that it would
be an at of the\wildeit frenzy to attack such a
state with a small body of men, in want of pro-
visions, unconnected with any ally, and already
enfeebled by the diseases peculiar to the climate,
and the loss of several of their number +. Cortes
secretly applauded the advocates for bold mea-
fures, and cherished their romantic hopes, as such
ideas corresponded with his own, and favoured
the execution of the schemes which he had form-
ed. From the time that the suspicions of Velaf-schcmes of
quez broke out with open violence in his attempt corte.
to deprive him of the authority which he had
conferred, he fay the necessity of dissolving a
connection which would obftrud and embarrass all
his operations, and watched for a proper oppor-
tunity of coming to a final rupture with him.
Having this in view, he had laboured, by every
art, to secure the etfeem and affeEtion of l:s
soldiers. With his abilities for command, it was
easy to gain their esteem; and his followers v ere
quickly satisfied that they might rely, with per-
feIt confidence, on the con:luit and courage of
their leader. Nor was it more difficult to acquire
their affecion. Among adventurers, nearly of
the fame rank, and serving at their own expence,
the dignity of command did not elevate a gene-
ral above mingling with thcfe who acted under
him. Cortes availed him fielf of this freedom of
intercoule, to insinuate himielf into their f'avour,

and
1| B. Diaz. c, 40.

BO O K and by his affable manners, by well-timed ats

V. of liberality to some, by inspiring all with vast
"''" hopes, and by allowing them to trade privately

1519. with the natives *, he attached the greater part

of his soldiers so firmly to himself, that they al-
most forgot that the armament had been fitted out
by the authority, and at the expence of another.

His addrers DURING those intrigues, Teutile arrived with
rin '"igthe present from Montezuma, and, together with it,

delivered the ultimate order of that monarch to de-
part inflantly out of his dominions; and when Cor-
tes, instead of complying, renewed his request of an
audience, the Mexican turned from him abruptly,
and quitted the camp with looks and gestures
which strongly expressed his surprise and resent-
ment. Next morning none of the natives, who
used to frequent the camp in great numbers, in
order to barter with the soldiers, and bring in
provisions, appeared. All friendly correfpon-
dence seemed now to be at an end, and it was
expeEed every moment that hostilities would
commence. This, though an event that might
have been foreseen, occasioned a sudden confter-
nation among the Spaniards, which embolden the
adherents of Velasquez not only to murmur and
cabal againfi their general, but to appoint one of
their number to remonitrate openly againit his
imprudence in attempting the corqueft of a
mighty. empire with such inadequate force, and
to urge the necessity of returning to Cuba, in
order to refit the fleet and augment the army.
Diego de Ordaz, one of his principal officers, whom
the malcontents charged with this commiflion,
delivered it with a soldiery freedom and bluntness,
affiuring him that he spoke the sentiments of the
whole army. Cortes listened to him without

any
* Sec NOTE VIIL

any appearance of emotion; and as he well knew B o o K
the temper and wishes of his soldiers, and foresaw v.
how they would receive a proposition fatal at once
to all the splendid hopes and schemes which they '5'9'
had been forming with such complacency; he
carried his dissimulation so far as to seem to re-
linquifh his own measures in compliance with the
request of Ordaz, and issued orders that the army
should be in readiness next day to reimbark for
Cuba. As soon as this was known, the difap-
pointed adventurers exclaimed and threatened;
the emissaries of Cortes mingling with them, in-
flamed their rage; the ferment became general;
the whole camp was almost in open mutiny; all
demanding with eagerness to fee their com-
mander. Cortes was not flow in appearing;
when, with one voice, they expressed their afto-
nifhment and indignation at the orders which
they had received. It was unworthy, they cried,
of the Castilian courage to be daunted at the first
asped of danger, and infamous to fly before any
enemy appeared. For their parts, they were de-
termined not to relinquish an enterprise, that had
hitherto been successful, and which tended so vi-
sibly to spread the knowledge of true religion,
and to advance the glory and interest of their
country. Happy under his command, they would
follow him with alacrity through every danger,
in quest of those settlements and treasures which
he had so long held out to their view ; but if he
chore rather to return to Cuba, and tamely give
up all his hopes of difiinction and opulence to an
envious rival, they would instantly chute another
general to conduct them in that path of glory
which he had not spirit to enter.

CORTES, delighted with their ardour, took no

offence at the boldness with which it was uttered.
The sentiments were what he himself had inspired,

and

B 0 0 K and the warmth of expression satisfied him that

v. his soldiers had imbibed them thoroughly. He
""9 Aaffeted, however, to be surprised at what he

heard, declaring that his orders to prepare for
embarking were issued from a persuasion that this
was agreeable to his troops; that, from defe-
rence to what he had been informed was their in-
clination, he had sacrificed his own private opi-
nion, which was firmly bent on establishing im-
mediately a settlement on the sea-coast, and then
on endeavouring to penetrate into the interior
part of the country; that now he was convinced
of his error; and as he perceived that they were
animated with the generous spirit which breathed
in every true Spaniard, he would resume, with
fresh ardour, his original plan of operation, and
doubted not to conduct them, in the career of
vitory, to such independent fortunes as their va-
lour merited. Upon this declaration, shouts of
applause testified the excess of their joy. The
measure seemed to be taken with unanimous con-
sent; such as secretly condemned it, being oblig-
ed to join in the acclamations, partly to conceal
their difaffetion from the general, and partly to
avoid the imputation of cowardice from their
fellow-foldiers *.

Eaibllcs a WITHOUT allowing his men time to cool or
foversmfcnt.to reflet, Cortes set about carrying his design

into execution. In order to give a beginning to
a colony, he assembled the principal persons in his
army, and by their suffrages elected a council and
magitfrates, in whom the government was to be
veited. As men naturally transplant the inflitu-
tions and forms of the mother-country into their
new settlements, this was framed upon the model
of a Spanish corporation. The magistrates were
distinguished by the fame names and ensigns of

office?
* B. Diaz. c. 40, 41, 42. Herrera, dec. z. lib. v. c. 6, 7.

office, and were to exercise a similar jurifdition. B O o X
All the persons chosen were moit firmly devoted v.
to Cortes, and the instrument of their eletion was W-
framed in the king's name, without any mention 1519
of their dependance on Velasquez. The two prin-
ciples of avarice and enthusiasm, which prompted
the Spaniards to all their enterprises in the New
World, seemed to have concurred in suggesting
the name which Cortes bestowed on his intended
settlement. He called it, Villa rica de la vera GCuz,
that is, The rich town of the true Cross.

THE firfl meeting of the new council was dif- Resigns Ii

tinguilhed by a tranfation of great moment. mili
As soon as it assembled, Cortes applied for leave
to enter; and approaching with many marks
of profound refpet, which added dignity to the
tribunal, and set an example of reverence for its
authority, he began a long harangue, in which,
with much art, and in terms extremely flattering
to persons just entering upon their new function,
he observed, that as the supreme jurisdiction over
the colony which they had planted was now
vested in this court, he confidered them as clothed
with the authority and representing the person of
their sovereign; that accordingly he would com-
municate to them what he deemed essential to the
public Safety, with the fame dutiful fidelity as if
he were addressing his royal master; that the fe-
curity of a colony fettled in a great empire,
whose sovereign had already discovered his hoflile
intentions, depended upon arms, and the efficacy
of these upon the subordination and discipline
preserved among the troops; that his right to
command was derived from a commiflion granted
by the governor of Cuba ; and as that had been
long since revoked, the lawfulness of his jirifdic-
tion mighlt well be queflioned ; that he seemed to

ac't

B 0 K a& upon a defective, or even a dubious title;

v. nor could they trust an army which might dif-
119
p pute the powers of its general, at a junture when

it ought implicitly to obey its orders; that, moved
by these considerations, he now resigned all his au-
thority to them, that they, having both right to
chute, and power to confer full jurifdi&tion, might
appoint one, in the king's name, to command the
army in its future operations; and as for his own
part, such was his zeal for the service in which they
were engaged, that he would most cheerfully take
up a pike with the fame hand that laid down the
general's truncheon, and convince his fellow fol-
diers, that though accustomed to command, he
had not forgotten how to obey. Having finished
this discourse, he laid the commififon from Velaf-
quez upon the table, and, after killing his trun-
cheon, delivered it to the chief magistrate, and
withdrew.

and is cho. THE deliberations of the council were not long,
ticeandchu as Cortes had concerted this important measure
tain-general. with his confidents, and had prepared the other

members, with great address, for the part which
he wished them to take. His resignation was ac-
cepted; and as the uninterrupted tenour of their
prosperity under his conduft afforded the moit
satisfying evidence of his abilities for command,
they, by their unanimous suffrage, elected him
chiefjuftice of the colony, and captain-general of
its army, and appointed his commission to be
made out in the king's name, with most ample
powers, which were to continue in f(;rce until the
royal pleafhre Ihould be farther known. That
this deed might not be deemed the machination
1f ajunto, the council called together the troops,
and acquainted them with what had been refolvel.
The foldle:s, with eager applause, ratified thc;i

choice,

choice; the air resounded with the name ofBO OK
Cortes, and all vowed to shed their blood in sup- V.
port of his authority. 1J

15,9.

CORTES having now brought his intrigues to Arerts his

the desired issue, and shaken off his mortifying hhrity
dependance on the governor of Cuba, accepted
of the commiflion, which veiled in him supreme
jurifdi&tion, civil as well as military, over the co-
lony, with mahy professions of refpe& to the
council, and gratitude to the army. Together
with his new command, he affiumed greater dig-
nity, and began to exercise more extensive powers.
Formerly he had felt himself to be only the de-
puty of a subje&t; now he afted as the reprefen-
tative of his sovereign. The adherents of Velaf-
quez, fully aware of what would be effect of this
change in his situation, could no longer continue
silent and passive fpetators of his ations. They
exclaimed openly against the proceedings of the
council as illegal, and againit those of the army
as mutinous. Cortes, instantly perceiving the
neceflity of giving a timely check to such seditious
discourse by some vigorous measure, arrested
Ordaz, Efcudero, and Velasquez de Leon, the
ringleaders of this faction, and sent them prison-
ers aboard the fleet, loaded with chains. Their
dependants, astonished and overawed, remained
quiet; and Cortes, more desirous to reclaim than
to punish his prisoners, who were officers of great
merit, courted their friendship with such afliduity
and addrcfs, that the reconciliation was perfetly
cordial; and, on the most trying occasions, neither
their connetion with the governor of Cuba, nor
the memory of the indignity with which they had
been treated, tempted them to swerve from an
inviolable attachment to his interest t. In this, as

well

*( B.. Dic. 42, 43. Gomara Cron. c. 30, 31. Herrera,
drc. 2 lib. . c. 7.

O O K well as his other negociations at this critical con-
V. juncture, which decided with refpee to his fu-
-'^0 ture fame and fortune, Cortes owed much of his
'5'9' success to the Mexican gold, which he distributed

with a liberal hand both among his friends and
his opponents. t.

His friend- CORTES, having thus rendered the union be-
(hip courted
by the Zer- tween himself and his army indissoluble by those
oallaRs. common aats of difobcdience, thought he might

now venture to quit the camp in which he had
hitherto remained, and advance into the country.
To this he was enconraged by an event no less
fortunate than seasonable. Some Indians having
approached his camp in a mysterious manner,
were introduced into his presence. He found that
they were sent with a proffer of friendship from
the cazique of Zempoalla, a considerable town at
no great distance; and from their answers to a
variety of questions which he put to them, accord-
ing to his usual pracice in every interview with
the people of the country, he gathered, that their
mafier, though fubjeEt to the Mexican empire,
was impatient of the yoke, and filled with such
dread and hatred of Montezuma, that nothing
could be more acceptable to him than any pro-
fpeet of deliverance from the oppreflion under
which he groaned; On hearing this, a ray of
light and hope broke in upon the mind of Cortes.
He saw that the great empire which he intended
to attack was not united, nor its sovereign be-
loved. He concluded, that the causes of difaf-
fetion could not be confined to one province, but
that in other corners there must be malcontents,
so weary of fibjection, or so desirous of change,
as to be ready to follow the flandard of any pro-
tecor. Full of those ideas, on which he began
to form a fchemre, that time, and more perfect

information

·1} B. Diaz .
c. 44.

informatio onconcerning the Ifate of the country, B O o K
enabled him to mature, he gave a moaf gracious V.
reception to the Zempoallans, and promised soon wow
to visit their cazique *. 519

IN order to perform this promise, it was not ne- zMarhesp.

ceffary to vary the route which he had already fixed
for his march. Some officers, whom he had em-
ployed to survey the coast, having discovered a
village named Quiabiflan, about forty miles to
the northward, which, both on account of the ser-
tility of the foil, and comnmodioufnefs of the har-
bour, seemed to be a more proper station for a
settlement than that where he was encamped,
Cortes determined to remove thither. Zempo-
alla lay in his way, where the cazique received
him in the manner which he had reason to expect;
with gifts and caresses, like a man solicitous to
gain his good-will; with refpee approaching al-
jnoft to adoration, like one who looked up to him
as a deliverer. From him he learned many par-
ticulars with refpet to the character of Montezu-
ma, and the circumstances which rendered his do-
minion odious. He was a tyrant, as the ca2ique
told him with tears, haughty, cruel, and fuipicious;
who treated his own fubjeEts with arrogance,
ruined the conquered provinces by excefiive ex-
afions, and often tore their sons and daughters
from them by violence; the former, to be offered
as victims to his gods; the latter, to be reserved
as concubines for himself or favourites. Cortes,
in reply to him, artfully insinuated, that one great
object of the Spaniards in visiting a country. so re-
mote from their own, was to redress grievances,
and to relieve the oppressed; and having encou-
raged him to hope for this interposition in due
time, he continued his march to Q(iabifatn.

TIHE
* B. Diaz, c. 41. Gonara Cron. c. 28.

B o O K THE spot which his officers had recommended

v. as a proper situation, appeared to him to be so
%5, well chosen, that he immediately marked out
Builsafor. ground for a town. The houses to be erected

were only huts; but these were to be surrounded
with fortifications, of sufficient strength to resist
the afaults of an Indian army. As the finishing
of those fortifications was essential to the existence
of a colony, and of no less importance in prose-
cuting the designs which the leader and his follow-
ers meditated, both in order to secure a place of re-
treat, and to preserve their communication with
the sea, every man in the army, officers as well
as soldiers, put his hand to the work, Cortes him-
self letting them an example of ativity and per-
severance in labour. The Indians of Zempoalla
and Qiabiflan lent their aid; and this petty fla-
tion, the parent of so many mighty settlements,
was soon in a slate of defence t.

Concludes a WHILE engaged in this necessary work, Cortes
formal ali had several interviews with the caziques of Zem-
ieveral ca-poalla and Qiabiflan; and availing himself of
ziques. their wonder and ailonifhment at the new objects

which they daily beheld, he gradually inspired
them with such an high opinion of the Spaniards,
as beings of a superior order, and irrefitlible in
arms, that, relying on their protection, they ven-
tured to insult the Mexican power, at the very
name of which they were accustomed to tremble.
Some of Montezuma's officers having appeared to
levy the usual tribute, and to demand a certain
number of human viatimes, as an expiation for their
guilt in presuming to hold intercourse with
those fitrngers whom the emperor had com-
manded to leave his dominions, instead of
obeying the order, they made them pri-

foners,

t B. Diaz. c. 45, 46, 48. Gomara Cron. . 31, 33, 37.
Herrera, dec. 2, lib. v. c. 8, 9.

foners, treated them with great indignity, and, as B O o K
their fuperitition was no less barbarous than that V.
of the Mexicans, they threatened to sacrifice them 5L9
to their gods. From this last danger they were
delivered by the interposition of Cortes, who ma-
nifefted the utmost horror at the mention of such
a deed. The two caziques having now been
pushed to an at of such open rebellion, as left
them no hope of safety but in attaching themselves
inviolably to the Spaniards, they soon completed
their union with them, by formally acknowledg-
ing themselves to be vassals of the fame monarch.
Their example was followed by the Totonaques,
a fierce people who inhabited the mountainous
part of the country. They willingly fubjefted
themselves to the crown of Caflile, and offered to
accompany Cortes, with all their forces, in his
march towards Mexico §.

CORTES had now been above three months in His mea-

fures to pro-

New Spain; and though this period had not been eureac0fi
diitinguifhed by martial enterprises, every moment mationofrhis
had been employed in operations, which, though ththkiog by
less splendid, were more important. By his ad-
dress in conduEting his intrigues with his own
army, as well as his sagacity in carrying on his
negociations with the natives, he had already laid
the foundations of his future success. But what-
ever confidence he might place in the plan which
he had formed, he could not but perceive, that as
his title to command was derived from a doubtful
authority, he held it by a precarious tenure. The
injuries which Velasquez had received, were such
as would naturally prompt him to apply for re-
dress to their common sovereign; and luch a re-
presentation might be given of his conduct, that
he had reason to apprehend, not only that he
might be degraded from his present rank, but sub-

jet':d

§ B. Diaz. c. 47. Gomara Cron. 35, 36. Herrera, dec. 2.
lib, v. c. 9, 1o, lz.

B O O K jeed to punishment. Before he began his mharch,

V. it was necessary to take the most effectual pre-
CVV cautions against this impending danger. With
'5'9. this view, he persuaded the magifirates of his

colony to address a letter to the king, containing
a long account of their own services; a pompous
description of the country which they had disco-
vered; its riches, the number of its inhabitants,
their civilization and arts; a view of the progress
which they had already made, in annexing several
extensive provinces of it to the crown of Castile,
and of .the schemes which they had formed, as
well as the hopes which they entertained, of re-
ducing the whole to subjection; and last of all,
they gave a minute detail of the motives which
had induced them to renounce all connection with
Velasquez, to fettle a colony dependant upon the
crown alone, and to veil the supreme power,
civil, as well as military, in the hands of Cortes;
humbly requesting their sovereign to ratify what
they had done by his royal authority. Cortes himself
wrote in a similar firain; and as he knew that
theSpanilh court accustomed to the exaggerated re-
presentations of every new country by its discover-
er, would give little credit to their splendid accounts
of New Spain, if they were not accompanied
with such a specimen of what it contained, as
would excite an high idea of its opulence, he
solicited his soldiers to relinquish what they might
claim as their part of the treasures which had hi-
therto been collected, in order that the whole
might be sent to the king. Such was the afcen-
dant which he had acquired over their minds,
and such their own romantic expectations of fu-
ture wealth, that an army of indigent and rapa-
cious adventurers was -capable of this generous
effort, and offered to their sovereign the richest
present that had hitherto been transmitted from
the New World *.

d Portocarrero

See N T E VIII.

Portocarrero and Montejo, the chief magistrates B O K
of the colony, were appointed to carry this pre- V.
sent to Castile, with express orders not to touch at h-
Cuba in their passage thither *. 59

WHI LE a vefel was preparing for their depar- A confpirac

i--, c'

.r " ·-{*

i againt Cwr-

ture, an unexpected event occasioned a generaltes.
alarm. Some soldiers and sailors, secretly attach-
ed to Velasquez, or intimidated at the profpea of
the dangers unavoidable in attempting to penetrate
into the heart of a great empire with such unequal
force, formed the design of seizing one of the bri-
gantines, and making their escape to Cuba, in
order to give the governor such intelligence as
might enable him to intercept the ship which was
to carry the treasure and dispatches to Spain.
This conspiracy, though formed by persons of low
rank, was conducted with profound secrecy; but
at the moment when every thing was ready for
execution, they were betrayed by one of their as-
fociates.

THOUGH the good fortune of Cortes interposed He defroy,

so seasonably on this occasion, the detection of thishs fleet
conspiracy filled his mind with moit disquieting
apprehensions, and prompted him to execute a
scheme which he had long revolved. He per-
ceived that the spirit of difaffedtion frill lurked
among his troops; that though hitherto checked
by the uniform success of his schemes, or kept
down by the hand of authority, various events
might occur which would encourage and call it
forth. He observed, that many of his men, weary
of the fatigue of service, longed to revisit their set-
tlements in Cuba; and that upon any appearance
of extraordinary danger, or any reverse of fortune,
it would be impoflible to restrain them from re-
turning thither. He was sensible that his forces,
VOL. II. D already

* B. Diaz c. 54. Gomara Cron. c. 40.

B O 0 K already too feeble, could bear no diminution, and

V. that a very small defetion of his followers would
5'9 oblige him to abandon the enterprise. After ru-

minating, oftnn, and with much solicitude, upon
those particulars, he saw no hope of success, but
in cutting off all poilibility of retreat, and reduc-
ing his men to the necessity of adopting the fame
resolution with which he himself was animated,
either to conquer or to perish. With this view, he
determined to defiroy his fleet; but as he durst
not venture to execute such a bold resolution by
his tingle authority, he laboured to bring his fol-
diers to adopt his ideas with respect to the propri-
ety of this measure. His addrefsin accomplishing
this was not inferior to the arduous occasion in
which it was employed. He persuaded rome,
that the ships had suffered so much by having been
long at sea, as to be altogether unfit for service;
to others he pointed out what a seasonable rein-
forcement of strength they would derive from the
junEtion of an hundred men, now unprofitably
employed as sailors; and to all he represented the
neceflity of fixing their eyes and wiihes upon what
was before them, without allowing the idea of a
retreat once to enter their thoughts. With uni-
verail content the ships were drawn ashore, and
after stripping them of their fails, rigging, iron-
works, and whatever else might be of use, they
werebroke in pieces. Thus, from an effort of
magnanimity, to which there is nothing parallel
in history, five hundred men voluntarily consent-
ed to be Ilhu up in a hoflile country, filled with
powerful and unknown nations; and having pre.
cluded every means of ecape, left themselves witll-
out any resource but their oxwn valour and pei-
severance i-.

NOTHI l(

*I Relat. di Cortes. Ramus. iii. 225. B. Diaz, c. 57, KS
H-errcra, dec, 2. lib. v. c. 14.

NOTHING now retarded Cortes; the alacrity O O K

of his troops and the disposition of his allies were V.
equally favourable. All the advantages, however, -
derived from the latter, though procured bymuch 9
afliduity and address, were well-nigh loft in a mo-
ment by an indiscreet rally of religious zeal, which,
on many occasions, precipitated Cortes into actions
inconsistent withthe prudence that diftinguilhes
his character. Though hitherto he had neither
time nor opportunity to explain to the natives the
errors of their own superstition, or to inftrut them
in the principles of the Christian faith, he com-
manded his soldiers to overturn the altars and to
destroy the idols in the chief temple of Zempo-
alla, and in their place to ereEt a crucifix and an
image of the Virgin Mary. The people beheld
this with astonishment and horror; the priests
excited them to arms; but such was the autho-
rity of Cortes, and so great the ascendant which
the Spaniards had acquired, that the commotion
was appeared without bloodshed, and concord per-
fettly re-established *;

CoRTEs began his march from Zempoalla on Advances

the sixteenth of August, with five hundred men, io the
fifteen horse, and fix field-pieces. The reft of
his troops, confining chiefly of such as from age
or infirmity were less fit for active service, he left
as a garrison in Villa Rica, under the command of
Efcalante, an officer of merit, and warmly at-
tached to his interest. The cazique of Zempoalla
supplied him with provisions, and with two hun-
dred of those Indians called 7l'amemes, whose office,
in a country where tame animals were unknown,
was to carry burdens, and perform all servile la-
bour. They were a great relief to the Spanilli
soldiers, who hitherto had been obliged, not only

D 2 to
* B. Diaz. c. 41,42. Hcrrcra, dec. z. lib. v. c. 3, 4.

B 0o K to carry their own baggage, but to drag along

v-, the artillery by main force. He offered likewise

a considerable body of his troops, but Cortes was
satisfied with four hundred; taking care, however,
to chufe persons of such note as might prove hof-
tages for the fidelity of their master. Nothing
memorable happened in his progress, until he ar-
rived on the confines of Tlafcala. The inhabi-
tants of that province, a warlike people, were im-
placable enemies of the Mexicans, and had been
united in an ancient alliance with the caziques of
Zempoalla. Though less civilized than the sub-
jests of Montezuma, they were advanced in im-
provement far beyond the rude nations of America,
whole manners we have described. They had
made considerable progress in agriculture; they
dwelt in large towns; they were not firangers to
some species of commerce; and in the imperfect
accounts of their institutions and laws, transmitted
to us by the early Spaniflh writers, we discern
traces both of di-ributive jufice and of criminal
jurifdc6tion, in their interior police. But still, as
the degree of their civilization was incomplete,
and as they depended for subsistence not on agri-
culture alone, but trusted for it, in a great measure,
to hunting, they retained many of the qualities
natural to men in this fiate. Like them, they
were fierce and revengeful; like them too, they
were high-fpirited and independant. In confe-
quence of the former, they were involved in per.
petual hostilities, and had but a slender and occa-
fional intercourse with neighbouring states. The
latter inspired them with such detefiation of fervi
tude, that they not only refuiled to ifoop to a so
reign yoke, and maintained an obstinate and fuc
cefsfuil contetl in defence of their liberty again1
the superior power of the Mexican empire, b11
they guarded with equal Solicitude against dome'
tic tyranny; and disdaining to acknowledge an

inallt:

maiter, they lived under the mild and limited ju- B 0 0 K
rifdition of a council ele&ed by their several V.
tribes. L_ 1

1519.

CORTES, though he had received information Hiswarwith

concerning the martial character of this people, the Tlafc-
flattered himself that his professions of deliveringlans
the oppressed from the tyranny of Montezuma,
their enmity to the Mexicans, and the example of
their ancient allies the Zempoallans, might induce
them to grant him a friendly reception. In order
to dispose them to this, four Zempoallans of great
eminence were lent ambassadors, to request, in his
name and in that of their cazique, that they would
permit the Spaniards to pass through the territo-
ries of Tlafcala in their way to Mexico. But in-
stead of the favourable answer which was expedt-
ed, the Tlafcalans seized the ambafadors, and,
without any regard to their public character, made
preparations for sacrificing them to their gods.
At the fame time, they aflembled their troops, in
order to oppose those unknown invaders, if they
should attempt to make their passage good by
force of arms. Various motives concurred in pre-
cipitating the Tlafcalans into this resolution. A
fierce people, shut up within its own narrow pre-
cincts, and little accustomed to any intercourse
with foreigners, is apt to conlider every stranger
as an enemy, and is easily excited to arms. They
concluded, from Cortes's proposal of visiting Mon-
tezuma in his capital, that, notwithstanding all his
profeflions, he courted the friendfliip of a monarch
whom they both hatcd and feared. The impru-
dent zeal of Cortes in violating the temples in Zem-
poalla, filled the Tlafcalans with horror; and as
they were no leTs attached to their fiiperflition than
the other nations of New Spain, they were inpa-.
tient to avenge their iniured godi-, olel to acquire

1ie

B 0 0 K the merit of offering up to them as victims those

v. impious men, who had dared to profane their al-
159. tars; the Spaniards, from the smallness of their

'9 number, were objects of their contempt; they

had not yet measured their own itrength with theirs,
and had no idea of the superiority which they de-
rived from their arms and discipline.

Aug. 30. CORTES, after waiting some days, in vain, for
uccfsofit. the return of his ambafladors, advanced into the

Tlafcalan territories. As the resolutions of peo-
ple who delight in war are executed with no less
promptitude than they are formed, he found troops
in the field ready to oppose him. They attacked
him with great intrepidity, and in the firit encoun-
ter, wounded some of the Spaniards, and killed
two horses; a lots, in their situation, of great mo-
ment, because it was irreparable. From this fpe-
cimen of the courage of his new enemies, Cortes
saw the neceflity of proceeding with caution. His
army marched in close order ; he chose the fiations
where he halted with attention, and fortified every
camp with extraordinary care. During fourteen
.days he was exposed to almost uninterrupted as-
faults; the Tlafcalans advancing with numerous
armies, and renewing the attack in various forms,
with a degree of valour and perseverance to which
the Spaniards had seen nothing parallel in the New
World. The Spanish hiflorians describe those
fuccellive battles with great pomp, and enter into
a minute detail of particulars, mingling many ex-
aggerated and inciedible circumstances * with
those v\ hich are real and marvellous. But no pow.
er of words can render the recital of a combat in-
terefling, where there is no equality of dangcr;
and when the narrative closes with an account of

thouifancl
*.Sec NOTIT IX.

thousands slain on the one fide, while not a single B o o K
person falls on the other, the most laboured de- v.
scriptions of the previous disposition of the troops, 1519.
or of the various vicissitudes in the engagement, S
command no attention.

THERE are some circumstances, however, in Some ingu-

this war, which are memorable and merit notice, ar circum-
as they throw light upon the character both of the
people of New Spain, and of their conquerors.
Though the Tlafcalans brought into the field such
vast armies as appear sufficient to have overwhelm-
ed the Spaniards, they were never able to make
any impreflion upon their fmali battalion. Singu-
lar as this may seem, it is not inexplicable. The
Tlafcalans, though addicted to war, were, like all
unpolifhed nations, firangers to military order and
discipline, and loft all the advantage which they
might have derived from their numbers, and the
impetuosity of their attack, by their conitant soli-
citude to carry off the dead and wounded. This
point of honour, founded on a sentiment of ten-
dernefs natural to the human mind, and firength-
ened by anxiety to preserve the bodies of their
countrymen from being devoured by their ene-
mies, was universal among tle people of New
Spain. Attention to this pio.us ofiice occupied
them, even during the heat of ccmbat I , brolek
their union, and diminifled the force of the imn-
preflion which they might have made by a joint
effort.

NOT only was their ftperioriny in i nm ber of

little avail, but the imperfel-ion of their military
weapons rendered their valour in a great meafilre
inoflcnfive. After tluee batli.s. and nmaln flir-
milhcs and assaults. not one Sp:nli.,ril wsv: killed in

tihe
II 11. Di1z. c. 6.:

B O K the field. Arrows and spears, headed with flint

V. or the bones of fishes, flakes hardened in the fire,
''*^ and wooden swords, though deftrutive weapons

5'9. among naked Indians, were easily turned aside by

the Spanish bucklers, and could hardly penetrate
the efcaupiles, or quilted jackets which the soldiers
wore. The Tlafcalans advanced boldly to the
charge, and often fought hand to hand. Many
of the Spaniards were wounded, though all slightly,
which cannot be imputed to any want of courage
in their enemies, but to the defect of the arms
with which they assailed them.

NOTW THSTANDING the fury with which the

Tlafcalans attacked the Spaniards, they seem to
have conducted their hoffilities with some degree
of barbarous generosity. They gave the Spa-
niards warning of their hostile intentions, and as
they knew that they wanted provisions, and ima-
gined, perhaps, like the other Americans, that they
had left their own country because it did not afford
them subsistence, they sent to their camp a large
lupply of poultry and maize, desiring them to eat
plentifully, because they scorned to attack an ene-
my enfeebled by hunger, and it would be an as-
front to their gods to offer them famished victims,
as well as disagreeable to themselves to feed on
such emaciated prey *.

WHEN they were taught, by the firfi encounter

with their new enemies, that it was not easy to ex-
ecute this threat; when they perceived, in the
subsequent engagements, that notwithstanding all
the efforts of their own valour, of which they had
a very high opinion, not one of the Spaniards
was slain or taken, they began to conceive

them
* Hcrrera, dec. . lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara Cron. c. 47.

them to be a superior order of beings, against B 0 0 K
whom human power could not avail. In this v.
extremity, they had recourse to their prieits, re-
quiring them to reveal the mysterious causes of J59'
such extraordinary events, and to declare what
new means they should employ in order to re-
pulse those formidabl invaders. The priests, as-
ter many sacrifices and incantations, delivered
this response: That these strangers were the o.f-
spring of the fun, procreated by his animating
energy in the regions of the east; that, by day,
while cherished with the influence of his parental
beams, they were invincible; but by night, when
his reviving heat was withdrawn, their vigour de-
clined and faded like the herbs in the field, and
they dwindled down into mortal men *. The( -
ries less plausible have gained credit with more
enlightened nations, and have influenced their
condut. In consequence of this, the Tlafcalans,
with the implicit confidence of men who fancy
themselves to be tinder the guidance of Heaven,
aced in contradiction to one of their most efta-
bliihed maxims in war, and ventured to attack the
enemy in the night-time, in hopes of destroying
them when enfeebled and surprised. But Cortes
had more vigilance and discernment than to be
deceived by the rude stratagems of an Indian
army. The centinels at his outiofts, obfler\in
tome extraordinary movement among the Tlafca-
lans, gave the alarm. In a mom nt the troops
were under arms, and sallying out, dispersed the
party with great slaughter, without allowing then
to approach the camp. Convinced, byi fad e -::;-
rience, that their priests had deluded them, and
satisfied that they attempted in vain, either to
deceive or to vanquish their enemies, the {ierce-
ness ol: the Tlafcalans abated, and they began to
incline feriouily to peace.

" B. Diaz. . 66.

B O K TH EY were at a loss however, in what man-

V. ner to address the firangers, what idea to form of

'"-'' their character, and whether to confider them as
The Tlrca. beings of a gentle or of a malevolent nature.
lans dilpofed There were circumstances in their condu&t which
to eace. seemed to favour each opinion. On the one hand,

as the Spaniards conflantly dismissed the prisoners
whom they took, not only without injury, but
often with presents of European toys, and re-
newed their offers of peace after every victory;
this lenity amazed people accustomed to the ex-
terminating f'flfem of war known in America,
and who sacrificed and devoured without mercy
all the captives taken in battle, and disposed
them to entertain favourable sentiments of their
humanity. But, on the other hand, as Cortes
had seized fifty of their countrymen who brought
provisions to his camp, and supposing them to
be spies, had cut off their heads *; this bloody
spectacle, added to the terror occasioned by the
fire-arms and horses, filled them with dreadful im-
prefions of their ferocity t. Accordingly, this
uncertainty was apparent in their mode of ad-
drefing the Spaniards. " If, said they, you are
divinities of a cruel and savage nature, we present
to you five slaves, that you may drink their blood
and ent their fleflh. If you are mild deities, acccpt
an offering of incense and variegated plumes. If
you are men, here is meat, bread and fruit, t,'
nourifl you :1.." The peace, which both partics
now delircd wvilh equal ardour, was soon conclud-
cCU],'CL. ed. The Tlafcalans yielded thenfelves as vat-

fals to tlhe crown of Castile, and engaged to
nflift Cortes in all his future operations. I-e tuol.
the republic under his protccion, and promit
to defend their pcrfons and poFlllions firom inj:"
ry or x'iolcii.c.

t ('oite: Relat. Ratrjul. iii. 2zf. . C. (orlnn Crnln c. I.

(ee1 N .

0 T E1' X :

.
;[.2 { . ca . 7,. Go; rainr Cio,
47. IeIrrcn, dec. 2. vii. vi c. -.

THIS treaty was concluded at a feafonabie B O 0 K

juncture for the Spaniards. The fatigue of ser- V.
vice among a small body of men, iurrounded by lr
such a multitude of enemies, was incredible. Advantages
Half the army was on duty every night, and even or it to the
they whose turn it was to refi, slept always upon SpanJaids.
their arms, that they might be ready to run to
their j5ofIs on a moment's warning. Many of
the nwere wounded, a good number, and among
there Cortes himself, laboured under the diftem-
per peculiar to the climate, and several had died
since they set out from Vera Cruz. Notwithftand-
ing the supplies which they received from the
Tlacalans, they were often in want of pro-
visions, and so destitute of the n-cefiaries most
requisite in dangerous service; that they had
no salve to dress their wounds, but what was
composed with the fat of the Indians whom
they had slain ¥. Worn out with lItch into-
lerable toil and hardships, many of tle soldiers
began to murmur, and when they refleSted on the
multitude and boldness of their enemies, more
were ready to despair. It required the utmo.nf
exertion of Cortes's authoiity and address to
check this spirit of despondency in its progrels,
and to reanimnate his followers with their wonted
lense of their own superiority over the enemies
with whom they had to contend --. The fiLbmif-
sion of the Tlaicalans, and their ownl triumphant
entry into the capital city, where they ;ere re-
ceived with the reverence paid to beings cf a fu-
perior order, b:nithed, at once, from tlhe minds
of the Spaniards all memory of pil: Ilitffcrings,
cirpellecl every anxious thoughlt wilhl ref)ect to
tlheir future operations, and fully lati.slied tlhem
that there was not now any puwer in America
able to witlifiand their arms -.

CORTES

* B.Daz. . 62. 6, .

6 '1 Cortes Relat. Rnn, iii. . 9. 13. Diaz.

c. 69. Goilalra Cr'on. c. 5 '[' Coit Relit. Rnliil: iii. 230.
B. Dia)i . c. 72.

B OO CORTES remained twenty days in Tlafcala,

V. in order to allow his troops a short interval of re-
. 9 poe after such a hard service. During that time,

Cortesfolici- he was employed in tranfacions and inquiries of
tu ton g great moment with refpea to his future schemes.
dence. In his daily conferences with the Tlafcalan chiefs,

he received information concerning every particu-
lar relative to the slate of the Mexican empire,
or to the qualities of its sovereign, which could
be of use in regulating his conduct, whether he
should be obliged to aat as a friend or as an
enemy. As he found that the antipathy of his new
allies to the Mexican nation was no less impla-
cable than had been represented, and perceived
what benefit he might derive from the aid of such
powerful confederates, he employed all his
powers of insinuation in order to gain their con-
fidence. Nor was any extraordinary exertion of
these necessary. The Tlafcalans, with the levity
of mind natural to unpolifhed men, were, of their
own accord, disposed to run from the extreme
of hatred to that of fondness. Every thing in
the appearance and conduc of their guests, was
to them matter of wonder'. They gazed at
whatever the Spaniards did with admiration, and
fancying them to be of heavenly origin, were
eager not only to comply with their demands,
hut to anticipate their wilhes. They offered, ac-
cordingly, to accompany Cortes in his march to
Mlexico, with all the forces of the republic, under
the cmrnmand of their most experienced captains.

WJlichIIel BUT, after beflowing so much pains on ce-
hi,. ;aln); menting this union, all the beneficial fruits of it
lO0 thy hi.
,l,> .. v.were on the point of being lolt, by a new es-

fusion of that intemperate zeal with which

CurtCs
Sec NOTE XI.

Cortes was animated, no less than the other adven- B O O K
turers of the age. They all confidered themselves V.
as instruments employed by Heaven to propagate
the Christian faith; and the less they were quali- 159'
fled either by their knowledge or morals for such
a function, they were more eager to discharge it.
The profound veneration of the Tlafcalans for the
Spaniards, having encouraged Cortes to explain to
some of their chiefs the doctrines of the Christian
religion, and to insist that they Ihould abandon
their own superstitions, and embrace the faith of
their new friends, they, according to an idea uni-
versal among barbarous nations, readily acknow-
ledged the truth and excellence of what he taught;
but contended, that the 7ieules of Tlafcala were
divinities no lets than the God in whom the Spa-
niards believed ; and as that being was intitled to
their homage, so they were bound to revere the
fame powers which their ancestors had worshipped.
Cortes continued, nevertheless, to urge his de-
mand in a tone of authority, mingling threats
with his arguments, until the Tlafcalans could
bear it no longer, and conjured him never to men-
tion this again, left the gods should avenge on
their heads the guilt of having listened to such a
proposition. Cortes, astonished and enraged at
their obltinacy, prepared to execute by force what
he could not accomplish by persuasion, and was
going to overturn their altars, and cast down their
idols with the fame violent hands as at Zempoalla,
if father Bartholomew de Olmedo, chaplain to the
expedition, had not checked his inconsiderate im-
petuofity. He represented the imprudence of such
an attempt in a large city newly reconciled, and
filled with people no less fuiperftitious than war-
like; he declared that the proceedings at Zempo-
alla had always appeared to him precipitate and
unjust; that religion was not to be propagated
by the sword, or infidels to be converted by vio-

lence;

B O O K lence; that other weapons were to be employed

V. in this ministry, patient inftruation must enlighten
iv- the understanding, and pious example captivate

5 19. the heart, before men could be induced to aban-

don error and embrace the truth *. Amidst
scenes, where a narrow-minded bigotry appears
in such close union with oppreflion and cruelty,
sentiments so liberal and humane, sooth the mind
with unexpe&ced pleasure; and at a time, when
the rights of conscience were little underflood in
the Christian world, and the idea of toleration
unknown, one is aflonifled to find a Spanish monk
of the sixteenth century among the first advocates
againfi persecution, and in behalf of religious li-
berty. The remonstrances of an ecclesiastic no
less refpctable for wisdom than virtue, had their
proper wxeight with Cortes. He left the Tlaf-
calans in the undisturbed exercise of their own
rites, requiring only that they should desist from
their horrid practice of offering human vitirns
in sacrifice.

Advancesto CORTES, as soon as his troops were fit for ser-
Cholua. vice, resolved to continue his march towards

Mexico, notwithstanding the earnest dissuasives
of the Tlafcalans, who represented his deftruc-
tion as unavoidable, if he put himself in the pow-
er of a prince so faithless and cruel as Montezuma.
As he was accompanied by fix thousand Tlafca-
lans, he had now the command of forces which
oa. ,3. resembled a regular army. They directed their

course towards Cholula; Montezuma, who had
at length consented to admit the Spaniards into
his presence, having informed Cortes, that lie
had given orders for his friendly reception there.
Cholula was a considerable town, and though
only five leagues diflant from Tlafcala, was
formerly an independent slate, but had been

lately
* P. Diaz. c. 77. p. 54. c. 83. p. 61.

lately filbjedted to the Mexican empire. This B0 OK
was confidered by all the people of New v.
Spain as a holy. place, the fantuary and chief
feat of their gods, to which pilgrims retorted fromrn
every province, and a greater number of human
vidims were offered in its principal temple than
even in that of Mexico *. Montezuma seems to
have invited the Spaniards thither, either from
some tuperftitious hope that the gods would not
susser this sacred mansion to be defiled, without
pouring down their wrath upon those impious
firangers, who ventured to insult their power in
the place of its peculiar residence, or from a be-
lief that he himself might there attempt to cut
them off with more certain success, under the im-
mediate protection of his divinities.

CORTrES had been warned by the Tlafcalans, The fe eri-
before he let out on his march, to keep a watch- py o ire

procedure

ful eye over the Cholulans. He himself, though there.
received into the town with much seeming respect
and cordiality, observed several circumitances in
their conduct which excited suspicion. Two of
the Tlafcalans, who were encamped at some dif-
tance from the town, as the Cholulans refused to
admit their ancient enemies within its precinLcs,
having found means to enter in difguife,acquainted
Cortes, that they observed the women and children
of the principal citizens retiring in great hurry every
night; and that fix children had been sacrificed in
the chief temple, a rite which indicated the exe-
cution of tome warlike enterprise to be approach-
ing. At the fame time, Marina the interpreter
received information from an Indian woman of
diftinEion, wvlhofe confidence she had gained, that
the destruCtion of her si lends was concerted; that

a body

* Torquenlnda Monar. Ind. i. 281, 282, ii 291. Gonlra.
Cron. c. 61. Herrera, dec. 2 lib. vii, c. z.

B O 0 K a body of Mexican troops lay concealed near the

V. town; that some of the fireets were barricaded,
1519. and in others pits or deep trenches were dug, and

slightly covered over, as traps into which the horse
might fall; that siones and missive weapons were
collected on the tops of the temples, with which
to overwhelm the infantry; that the fatal hour
was now at hand, and their ruin unavoidable.
Cortes, alarmed at this concurring evidence, fe-
cretly arrested three of the chief priests, and ex-
torted from them a confession that confirmed the
intelligence which he had received. As not a mo-
ment was to be loft, he instantly resolved to pre-
vent his enemies, and to inflict on them such
dreadful vengeance as might strike Montezuma
and his fubjedts with terror. For this purpose,
the Spaniards and Zempoallans were drawn up in
a large court, which had been allotted for their
quarters near the centre of the town; the Tlafca-
lans had orders to advance; the magifirates, and
several of the chief citizens, were sent for under
various pretexts, and seized. On a signal given,
the troops ruffled out, and fell upon the multitude,
destitute of leaders, and so much astonished, that
the weapons dropped from their hands, and they
flood motionless, and incapable of defence. While
the Spaniards pressed them in front, the Tlafcalans
attacked them in the rear. The ifreets were fill-
ed with bloodshed and death. The temples,
which afforded a retreat to the priefis and fomc of
the leading men, were set on fire, and they pe.
rifhed in the flames. This scene of horror con-
tinued two days; during which, the wretched in-
habitants suffered all that the deftrutive rage of
the Spaniards, or the implacable revenge of their
Indian allies, could inflict. At length the carnage
ceased, after the slaughter of fix thousand Cholu-
lans, without the loss of a single Spaniard. Cortes
then rcleafedthe magistrates, and reproaching them

d bitterly

bitterly for their intended treachery, declared, B OO K
that asjuftice was now appeased, he forgave the V.
offence, but required them to recall the citizens
who had fled, and re-establish order in the town. 59
Such was the ascendant which the Spaniards had
acquired over this fuperflitious race of men, and
so deeply were they impressed with an opinion of
their superior difcerirment, as well as power, that,
in obedience to this command, the city was in a
few days filled again with people, who, amidit
the ruins of their sacred buildings, yielded re-
fpetful service to men whose hands were stained
with the blood of their relations and fellow-citi-
zens *.

FROM Cholula, Cortes advanced direetly to-o. 29.
wards Mexico, which was only twenty leagues Advance
difant. In every place through which he pafled, Mexico.
he was received as a person poleffed of sufficient
power to deliver the empire from the oppression
under which it groaned; and the caziques or go-
vernors, with the unreserved confidence reposed
in superior beings, communicated to him all the
[grievances which they felt under the tyrannical
[government of Montezuma. When Cortes first
observed the feeds of discontent in the remote pro-
vinces of the empire, a ray of hope broke in upon
his mind; but when he discovered such symptoms
of alienation from their monarch near the feat of
government, he concluded that the vital parts of
he constitution were affected, and conceived the
tof sanguine expectations of overturning a slate
hose natural strength was thus divided and im-
aired. While those reflections encouraged the
eneral to persist in his arduous undertaking, the
Ildiers were no less animated by observations
Vo,. II. E more

* Cortes'Rclat. Ramus. iii. 231: B, Diaz. c. 83. Go-
raCron. c. 64. Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. i. 2. See

T E XII.

B O OK more obvious to their capacity. In descending

v. from the mountains of Chalco, across which the

road lay, the vait plain of Mexico opened gra-
Firit view dually to their view. When they firit beheld

it this profpet, one of the most striking and beau-

tiful on the face of the earth; when they ob-
served fertile and cultivated fields, itretching
farther than the eye could reach; when they saw
a lake refcmbling the sea in extent, encompafled
with large towns, and discovered the capital city
rising upon an iiland in the middle, adorned with
its temples and turrets; the scene so far exceeded
their imagination, that some believed the fanciful
descriptions of romance were realized, and that
its enchanted palaces and gilded domes were pre-
sented to their fight; others could hardly persuade
themselves that this wonderful fpetacle was any
thing more than a dream *. As they advanced,
their doubts were removed, but their amazement
increased. They were now fully satisfied that
the countiy was rich beyond any conception which
they lad formed of it, and flattered themselves, that
at length they fhculd obtain ,.n ample recompence
for all their services and fuiferings.

he inero- No enemy had yet appeared to oppose their
lution of Montzunlfa.progrefs, though several circumstances occurred

which lcd.them to fufpe&t that tome design was
formed to surprise and cut them off. Many mef.
fengers arrived fuccellively from Montezuma,
permitting them one day to advance, requiring
them on the next to letire, as his hopes or fears
alternately pievailed; and so wonderful was thil
infatuation, which seems to be unaccountable or
any furppofition but that of a fuperifitious dread o
the Spaniards, as being of a superior nature, tha
Cortes was, almofl at tlle gates of the capital, be
fore the monarch had determined whether to re
ceiRe him as a friend, or to oppose him as a

eneri)
See N 0 T E XIII,

enemy. But as no sign of open hostility appear- B O O K
ed, the Spaniards, without regarding the fluclua- v.
tions of Montezuma's sentiments, continued their ',-
march along the causeway which led to Mexico 1519.
through the lake, with great circumspeCtion and
the firiteft discipline, though without teeming to
fufpeEt the prince whom they were about to visit.

WHEN they drew near the city, about a thou- His firt in-

land persons, who appeared to be of diftinEtion, thrv,' .i
came forth to meet them, adorned with plumes,ailds.
and clad in mantles of fine cotton. Each of these,
in his order, passed by Cortes, and saluted him
according to the mode deemed most refpeAful
and submissive in their country. They announced
the approach of Montezuma himself, and soon as-
ter his harbingers came in fight. There appeared
first two hundred persons in an uniform dress,
with large plumes of feathers, alike in fashion,
marching two and two, in deep silence, barefooted
with their eyes fixed on the ground. These were
followed by a company of higher rank, in their
most showy apparel, in the mridft of whom was
Montezuma, in a chair or litter richly ornamented
with gold, and feathers of various colours. Four
of his principal favourites carried him on their
Slhoulders, others supported a canopy of curious
workmanship over his head. Before him marched
three officers with rods of gold in their hands,
which they lifted up on high at certain intervals,
and at that signal all the people bowed their
heads, and hid their faces, as unworthy to look on
so great a monarch. When he drew near, Cortes
difinounted, advancing towards him with officious
haite, and in a relpecIful polture. At the fame
time Montezuma alighted from his chair, and Ican-
ing on the arms of two of his near relations, ap-
proached with a flow and itately pace, his atten-
dants covering the ltrect with cotton cloths,

E 2 that

B O K that he might not touch the ground. Cortes ac-

v- costed him with profound reverence, after the
15,9. European faihion. He returned the salutation,

according to the mode of his country, by touching
the earth with 1is hand, and then kifling it. This
ceremony, the customary exprellion of reverence
from inferiors to ,ards thole who were above
them in rank, appeared such amazing condefcen-
sion in a proud monarch, who scarcely deigned to
confider the reft of mankind as of the fame fpe-
cies with himself, that all his fubjets firmly be-
lieved those persons, before whom he humbled
himfelfin this manner, to be something more than
human. Accordingly, as they marched through
the crowd, the Spaniards frequently, and with
much fatisfation, heard themselves denominated
7'eules, or divinities. Nothing material passed in
this first interview. Montezuma conducted Cortes
to the quarters which he had prepared for his re-
ception, and immediately took leave of him, with
a politeness not unworthy of a court more re-
fined. " You are now," fays he, "' with your
brothers, in your own house; refresh yourselves
after your fatigue, and be happy until I return *."
The place allotted to the Spaniards for their lodg-
ing was a house built by the father of Monte-
zuma. It was surrounded by a stone-wall, with
lowers at proper difiances, which served for de-
fence as vcll as for ornament, and its apartments
anld courts welte io large as to accommodate btlth
the Spaniards and their Indian allies. The fiui
care of Cuotcs was to tale precautions for his lccu:-
rity, by planting the aitillery so as to conmmand
lthe dilTercit avenues lwhich Ited to it, by appointing
a large divi;uon of his troops to be always ou
guard, and by pofling centinels at proper llations,
with injuncltions to observe the laime vigilant d1-l
cipline as if they were within fighl of an cneni 's
cam p.

" Cortes Relat. Ram. iii. 32-D235. c. c. --i
GConara Cron. c, 64, 65. H-Irrua, dec, 2. lib. vii. c. ?, 4, '

IN the evening Montezuma returned to visit his B O O K

guesss with the fame pomp as in their first inter- V.
view, and brought presents of such value, not only 79.
to Cortes and to his officers, but even to the private His idea of
men, as proved the liberality of the monarch to Sthpani'
be suitable to the opulence of his kingdom. A
long conference ensued, in which Cortes learned
what was the opinion of Montezuma with re-
fpeE to the Spaniards. It was an established tra-
dition, he told him, among the Mexicans, that
their ancestors came originally from a remote re-
gion, and conquered the provinces now subjed to
his dominion; that after they were fettled there,
the great captain who condu-ed this colony re-
turned to his own country, promiling, that at
some future period his descendants should visit
them, assume the government, and reform their con-
ftitultion and laws; that, from what he had heard and
seen of Cortes and his followers, he was convinced
that they were the very persons whole appearance
their tradition and prophecies taught them to ex-
pect; that accordingly he had received them, not as
firangers, but as relations of the fame blood and
parentage, and desired that they might confider
themselves as masters in his dominins; for both
himself and his subjects fllould be ready to com-
ply with their will, and even to prevent their
wishes. Cortes made a reply in his usual siile
with refpet to the dignity and power of his so-
vereign, and his intention in fending him into that
country; artfully endeavouring to to frame his
discourse, that it might coincide as much as pofli-
ble with the idea which Montezuma had foirmed
concerning the origin of the Spaniards, Next
morning, Cortes and some of his principal atten-
dants were admitted to a public audience of the
emperor. The three fulbfquent days wsere em-
ployed in viewing tlhe city ; the appearance of
'hdicb, so far fuperinr in Ith, order nof ils huil)dings

;anc1

B O O K and the number of its inhabitants to any place

V. the Spaniards had beheld in America, and yet so
C, little resembling the ftruature of an European

city, filled them with surprise and admiration.

ME X ICO, 7enuchtitlan, as it was anciently called

by the natives, is situated in a large plain, envi-
roned by mountains of such height, that though
within the torrid zone, the temperature of its cli-
mate is mild and healthful. All the moilture
which descends from the high grounds is collected
in several lakes, the two largest of which, of
about ninety miles in circuit, communicate with
each other. The waters of the one are fresh,
those of the others brackish. On the banks of the
latter and on some small islands adjoining to them,
the capital of Montezuma's empire was built.
The access to the city was by artificial causeways
or itreets, formed of tfones and earth, about thir-
ty feet in breadth. As the waters of the lake
during the rainy season, overflowed the flat coun-
try, these causeways were of considerable length.
That of Tacuba on the weft a mile and a half,;
that of Tezeuco on the northwelt three miles;
that of Cuoyacan towards the south fix miles.
On the east there was no causeway, and the city
could be approached only by canoes *. In each
of thele cateways were openings, at proper in-
tervals, through which the waters flowed; and
over there beams of timber were laid, which, be-
ipg covered with earth, the causeway or street had
every where an uniform appearance. As the ap-
proaches to the city were singular, its conitruc.
tion was remarkable. Not only the temple of
their gods, but the houfcs belonging to the mo-
narch, and to persons of diftintion were, of flicu
dimensions, that, in comparison with any other
buildings which had been discovered in America,
they might be termed magnificent. The habita-

tions

.
F. Toriibio MS.

tions of the common people were mean, resembling B O O K
the huts of other Indians. But they were all plac- V.
ed in a regular manner, on the banks of the canals 159.
which passed through the city, in some of its di-
striAs, or on the fides of the streets which inter-
feted it in other quarters. In several places were
large openings orfquares, one of which, allotted
for the great market, is said to have been so spa-
cious, that forty or fifty thousand persons carried
on traffic there. In this city, the pride of the New
World, and the noblest monument of the industry
and art of man, while unacquainted with the use
of iron, and destitute of aid from any dometfic
animal, the Spaniards, who are moss moderate in
their computations, reckon that there were at least
sixty thousand inhabitants *

BUT how much soever the novelty of those ob- Thcir dan-

jests might amuse or astonish the Spaniards, they gtioul.
felt the utmost solicitude with refpet to their own
situation. From a concurrence of circumstances
no less unexpeEted than favourable to their pro-
grefs, they had been allowed to penetrate into the
heart of a powerful kingdom, and were now lodg-
ed in its capital, without having once met with
open opposition from its monarch. The Tlafca-
lans, however, had earnestly dilfuaded them from
placing such confidence in Montezuma as to enter
a city of such a peculiar situation as Mexico, where
that prince would have them at mercy, shut up as
it were in a snare, from which it was irnpoflible to
escape. They assured him that the Mexican pi iells
had, in the name of the gods, counselled their so-
vereign to admit the Spaniards into the capital, that

lihe

* Cortes Relat. Ram. iii. 239. ). Rela;, della gran cilt, de

Mexico, par un Genrelhiiomo del C'oLtefe. Raia. ibid. 304.. E.
Herrera, dec. .. lib. vii. c. 14, &

B O 0 K he might cut them off there at one blow with per-

v. set security *. They now perceived, too plainly,
V~J' that the apprehensions of their allies were not de-
5 9' flitute of foundation; that, by breaking the bridges

placed at certain intervals on the causeways, or by
destroying part of the causeways themselves, their
retreat would be rendered impracticable, and they
mull remain cooped up in the centre of a hostile
city, surrounded by multitudes sufficient to over-
whelm them, and without a poflibility of receiving
aid from their allies. Montezuma had, indeed,
received them with distinguished refpe&t. But
ought they to reckjn upon this as real, or to confi-
der it as feigned ? Even if it were sincere, could
they promise on its continuance Their safety de-
pended upon the will of a monarch in whole at-
tachment they had no reason to confide; and an
order flowing from his caprice, or a word uttered
by him in paflion, might decide irrevocably
concerning their fate :.

Solicitudec T HEsE reflections, so obvious as to occur to the
and ot'Clr. meanest soldier, did not escape the vigilant sagacity

of their general. Before he set out from Cholula,
Cortes had received advice from Villa Rica 1-, that
Qualpopoca, one of the Mexican generals on the
frontiers, having assembled an army in order to at-
tack some of the people whom the Spaniards had
encouraged to throw off the Mexican yoke, Efca-
lante had marched out with part of the garrison to
uiJpp)orthis allies; that an engagement had ensued,
in which, though the Spaniards were vicorious,
Efcalante, with fevcn of his men, had been mor-
tally wounded, his horse killed, and one Spaniard
had been surrounded by the enemy and taken alive;
that the head of this unfortunate captive, after be-

ing

* B. Dinz. c. 85, 86. .1: bid. c. 9. - Cortes RlAat,
aim. iii. 235. C:

ing carried in triumph to different cities, in order B 0 0 K
to convince the people that their invaders were V.
not immortal, had been sent to Mexico . Cortes, -
though alarmed with this intelligence, as an indi- '5'9'
cation of Montezuma's hostile intentions, had con-
tinued his march. But as Coon as he entered
Mexico, he becamefenfible, that, from an excess
of confidence in the superior valour and discipline
of his troops, as well as from the disadvantage of
having nothing to guide him in an unknown
country, but the defective intelligence which he
received from people with whom his mode of com-
munication was very imperfect, he had pushed
forward into a situation, where it was difficult to
continue, and from which it was dangerous to re-
tire. Disgrace, and perhaps ruin, was the certain
consequence of attempting the latter. The fuc-
cess of his enterprise depended upon supporting
the high opinion which the people of New Spaint
had formed with respect to the irrefiflible power
of his arms. Upon the firit symptom of timidity
on his part, their veneration would cease, and Mon-
tezuma, whom fear alone restrained at present,
would let loose upon him the whole force of his
empire. At the fame time, he knew that the
countenance of his own sovereign was to be ob-
tained only by a series of victories, and that no-
thing but the merit of extraordinary ficcels could
cfreen his conduct from the cenfiie of irregllarity.
From all there considerations, it was necelliry to
,maintain his station, and to ext'icate himielf out
of the difficulties in which one bold ftep had in-
(volved him, by venturing upon another fill bold-
;er. The situation was trying, but his mind was
'eqtlli to it; and after revolving the matter with
deep attention, he fixed upon a plan no lels extra-
ordinary than daring. -le determined to lcize

Montezumi
' t. Dxiz, C, 9 1. c4. Jferrtra, dec. 2 lib. vUi. c. I.

B O O K Montezuma in his palace, and to carry him as a

V. prisoner to the Spanish quarters. From the super-

"'v -s ititious veneration of the Mexicans for the person
reroIve' to of their monarch, as well as their implicit fubmif-
seize Monte- son to his will, he hoped, by having Montzeuma
:rnra.

in his power, to acquire the supreme direEtion of
their affairs; or at least, with such a sacred pledge
in his hands, he made no doubt of being secure
from any effort of their violence.

His manner THIS he immediately proposed to his officers.
txecuting Thie timid flartled at a measure so audacious, and

raised objections. The more intelligent and refo-
lute, conscious that it was the only resource in
which there appeared any prospect of safety,
warmly approved of it, and brought over their
companions so cordially to the fame opinion, that
it was agreed intfantly to make the attempt. At
his usual hour of visiting Montezuma, Cortes went
to the palace, accompanied by Alvarado, Saudo-
val, Lugo, Velasquez de Leon, and Davila, five
of his principal officers, and as many truity ful-
diers. Thirty chosen men followed, not in regu-
lar order, but sauntering at some diltance, asif
they had no objeEt but curiosity; frnall parties
were pofled at proper intervals, in all the fireets
leading from the Spanilh quarters to the court;
and the remainder of his troops, with the Tlafcalan
allies, were under arms, ready to tally out on the
first alarm. Cortes and his attendants were ad-
mitted without suspicion; the Mexicans retiring,
as usual, out ofrefpect. He addressed the mona.rc'
in a tone very different from that which he lad
employed in former conferences, reproaching hirl
bitterly as the author of the violent aflault madl
upon the Spaniards by one of his officers, and de
manded public reparation for the loss which 1l
had fiutained by the death of some of his corn

panions

panions, as well as for the insult offered to the great B O o K
prince whose servants they were. Montezuma, v.
confounded at this unexpected accusation, and '
changing colour either from the consciousness of 1519.
guilt, or from feeling the indignity with which he
was treated, asserted his own innocence with great
earneitnefs, and, as dproof it, gave orders instantly
to bring Qualpopoca and his accomplices prisoners
to Mexico. Cortes replied, with 'eeming complai-
fance, that a declaration so refpeStable left no
doubt remaining in his own mind, but that some-
thing more was requisite to satisfy his followers,
who would never be convinced that Montezuma
did not harbour hostile intentions againit them,
unless, as an evidence of his confidence and attach-
ment, he removed from his own palace, and took
up his residence in the Spanish quarters, where he
Thould be served and honoured as became a great
monarch. The first mention of so strange a pro-
pofal bereaved Montezuma of speech, and almoit
of motion. At length, indignation gave him ut-
terance, and he haughtily answered, " That per-
sons of his rank were not accustomed vc;llntarily
to give up themselves as prisoners, and were he
mean enough to do so, his fhbjedts would not per-
mit'fuch an affront to be offered to their sovereign."
Cortes, unwilling to employ force, endeavoured
alternately to soothe and intimidate him. The
altercation became warm; and having continued
above three hours, Velasquez de Leon, an impe-
tuous and gallant young man, exclaimed with im-
patience, " Why waste more time in vain ? Let
us either seize him instantly, or stab him to the
heart." The threatening voice and fierce gestures
with which there words were uttered, tiruck Mon-
tezuma. The Spaniard's, hc was sensible, had
now proceeded so far, as left him no) hope that they
would recede. I-ls own danger was imminent,

the

B 0 0 K the necessity unavoidable. He saw both, and

V. abandoning himself to his fate, complied with their

V -' request.
1519. ontezuma His officers were called. He communicated

carriedto the
Spanish to them his resolution. Though aflonifhed and
quarters. afflited, they presumed not to question the will of

their master, but carried him in silent pomp, all
bathed in tears, to the Spanish quarters. When it
was known that the itrangers were conveying
away the emperor, the people broke out into the
wildest transports of grief and rage, threatening
the Spaniards with immediate deftruclion, as the
punishment juitly due to their impious-audacity.
But as soon as Montezuma appeared with a seem-
ing gaiety of countenance, and waved his hand,
the tumult was hulhed; and upon his declaring it
to be of his own choice that he went to reside for
some time among his new friends, the multitude,
taught to revere every imitation of their sovereign's
pleasure, quietly dispersed *.

THUS was a powerful prince seized by a few

strangers, in the midst of his capital, at noon-day,
and carried off as a prisoner without opposition or
bloodihed. History contains nothing parallel to
this event, either with refpe&t to the temerity of the
attempt, or the fiuccefs of the execution ; and were
not all the circumstances of this extraordinary
tran faction authenticated by the most unqcleloiin-
able evidence, they would appear so wild and ex-
travigant, as to go far beyond the bounds of tlint
verifirmilitude which muit be preserved even il
fititious narrations.

MO NTE Z U M A

* I' i)ia' .

e -. Conmira Cron. c. 83. Cortes RcInt.

Ram. iii 2 2.

p 2c tti, d cC.

i crc , dec .
l viii, c. 2, 3.

MONTEZUMA was received in the SpanifhB 0 K

quarters with all the ceremonious refpea which V.
Cortes had promised. He was attended by his-
own domeflics, and served with his usual slate. Rec,,ve
His principal officers had free access to him, and he wiuI al:a-
carried on all the funEtions of government as if he rcnt ried'
had been at perfect liberty. The Spaniards, how-
ever, watched him with all the scrupulous vigilance
natural in guarding such an important prize *, en-
deavouring, at the fame time, to sooth and re-
concile him to his situation, by every external de-
monfiration of regard and attachment. But fro:n
captive princes the hour of humiliation and susser-
ing is never far distant. Qialpopoca, his son, Subjied to
and five of the principal officers who served un- ci"i"'
der him, were brought prisoners to the capital, in Dec. 4.
consequence of the orders which Montezulma had
issued. The emperor gave them up to Cortes,
that he might inquire into the nature of their
crime, and determine their punishment. They
were formally tried by a Spanish court-martial; and
though they had ated no other part than what
became loyal subjects and brave men, in obeying
the orders of their lawful sovereign, and in oppof-
ing the invaders of their country, they were con-
demned to be burnt alive. The execution of such
atrocious deeds is seldom long ftifpended. The
unhappy victims were instantly led forlh. The
pile on which they were laid, was composed of
the weapons collected in the royal magazine for
the public defence. An innumerable miltititude of
Mexicans beheld, in silent afionilhmnent, the dou-
ble insult oferdec to the majesty of their empire
an officer of dilin(cion conmitted to the flames L,
the authority of ilrangers, for havin: clone what h'e
owed in duty to his natural ltb.'rcigLi; and the

alI'1i'1
e See NO' E XIV.

B o K arms provided by the foresight of their anceflors

V. for avenging such wrongs, consumed before their
5'9. eyes

BUT these were not the mofl shocking indigni-

ties which they had to bear. Cortes, convinced
that Qualpopoca would not have ventured to at-
tack Efcalante without orders from his mafler, was
not satisfied with infliCting vengeance on the in-
firument employed in committing that crime,
while the author of it escaped with impunity.
Just before Qialpopoca was led out to susser,
Cortes entered the apartment of Montezuma, fol-
lowed by tome of his officers, and a soldier carry-
ing a pair of fetters; and approaching the mo-
narch with a stern countenance, told him, that as
the persons who were now to undergo the punish-
ment which they merited, had charged him as the
cause of the outrage committed, it was necessary
that he likewise should make atonement for that
guilt; then turning away abruptly, without wait-
ing for a reply, commanded the soldiers to clap
the fetters on his legs. The orders were instantly
executed. The disconsolate monarch, trained up
with an idea that his person was sacred and invio-
lable, and confidering this profanation of it as the
prelude of immediate death, broke out into loud
lamentations.and complaints. His attendants,
speechless with horror, fell at his feet, bathing
them with their tears; and bearing up the fetters
in their hands, endeavoured with officious tender-
ness to lighten their pressure. Nor did their grief
and despondency abate, until Cortes returned
from the execution with a cheerful countenance,
and ordered the fetters to be taken off. As Mon-
tezuma's fpilits had funk with unmanly dejection,
they now rose into indecent joy, and, with an un-
becoming transition, he passed at once from t!:e

a nguill)

anguish of despair to transports of gratitude and B O O K
fondness towards his deliverers. v.

IN those tranfadtions, as represented by the Spa- i5s9.

nifh historians, we search in vain for the qualitiescortesscon.
which distinguish other parts of Cortes's condut.dua.
To usurp ajurifdition which could not belong to
a itranger, who assumed no higher character than
that of an ambassador from a foreign prince, and,
under colour of it, to inflit a capital punishment
on men whose conduct entitled them to esteem,
appears an as of barbarous cruelty. To put the
monarch of a great kingdom in irons, and, after
such ignominious treatment, suddenly to release
him, seems to be a display of power no less in-
considerate than wanton. According to their re-
presentation, no account can be given either of
the one action or the other, but that Cortes, in-
toxicated with success, and presuming on the as-
cendant which he had acquired over the minds of
the Mexicans, thought nothing too bold for him
to undertake, or too dangerous to execute. But,
in one view, these proceedings, however repug-
nant tojuftice and humanity, may have flowed
from that artful policy which regulated every part
of Cortes's behaviour. The Mexicans had con-
ceived the Spaniards to be an order of beings fu-
perior to men. It was of the utmost consequence
to cherish this illusion, and to keep up the vene-
ration it inspired. Cortes wished that thcdding
the blood of a Spaniard should be deemed the moit
heinous of all crimes; and nothing appeared bet-
ter calculated to establish this opinion, than to
condemn the first Mexicans who had ventured to
commit it, to a cruel death, and to oblige their
monarch himself to submit to a mortifying indig-
nity, as an expiation for being accessary to their
guilt. 'f'

Tu R
t See NOTE XV.

BOO K THE rigour with which Cortes punished the un-

v. happy persons who first presumed to lay violent
59. nhands upon his followers, seems accordingly to

The power have made all the impression that he had desired.
which Cor- The spirit of Montezuma was not only overawed,
res acquired.

,s1o. but subdued. During fix months that Cortes re-

mained in Mexico, the monarch continued in the
Spanifl quarters, with an appearance of as entire
satisfaction and tranquillity, as if he had resided
there not from constraint, but through choice.
His ministers and officers attended him as usual.
He took cognizance of all affairs; every order was
issued in his name. The external afpeft of go-
vernment appearing the fame, and all its ancient
forms being scrupulously observed, the people
were so little sensible of any change, that they
obeyed the mandates of their monarch with the
fame fubmiflive reverence as ever. Such was the
dread which both Montezuma and his fubjets
had of the Spaniards, or such the veneration in
which they held them, that no attempt was made
to deliver their Sovereign from confinement;.and
though Cortes, relying on this ascendant which
he had acquired over their minds, permitted him
not only to visit his temples, but to make hunt-
ing excursions beyond the lake, a guard of a few
Spaniards carried with it such terror as to intimi-
date the multitude, and secure the captive mo-
narch *.

THUS, by 1he fortunate temerity of Cortes in

seizing Montezuma, the Spaniards at once secured
to themselves more extensive authority in the Mex-
ican empire than it was poflible to have acquired
in a long course of time by open force; and they
exerciccd more absolute sway in the name of ano-
ther than they could have done in their own. The

,1 arts
* Cortes Relat. p. 236. E. B. Diaz. c. 97, 98, 99.

arts of polished nations in fubje&ting such as are B O o K
less improved, have been nearly the lame in every v.
period. The system of fcieening a foreign ufiurp'- -
ation, under the fanEtion of authority derived from I2
the natural rulers of a country, the device of em-
ploying the magifirates and forms already efta-
blifhed as infiruments to introduce a new domini-
on, of which we are apt to boast as sublime refine-
ments in policy peculiar to the present age, were
inventions of a more early period, and had been
tried with success in the Weft, long before they
were pra&ised in the East.

CORTES availed himself to the utinof of theure hich

he makes of

power which he pofReffed by this means. He sent it.
some Spaniards, whom he judged bell qualified
for such commiflions, into different parts of the
empire, accompanied by persons of diftination,
whom Montezuma appointed to attend them both
as guides and protectors. They visited most of the
provinces, viewed their foil and prbodudtions, fur-
veyed with particular care the difiriEts which yield-
ed gold or silver, pitched upon several places as
proper stations for future colonies, and endeavour-
ed to prepare the minds of the people for submitting
to the Spanish yoke. While they were thus em-
ployed, Cortes, in the name and by the authority
of Montezuma, degraded some of the principal
officers in the empire, whose abilities or indepen-
dent spirit excited his jealousy, and substituted in
their place persons less capable or more obsequious.

ONE thing fill was wanting to complete his fe-
curity. He wifled to have fiuch command of the
lake as might ensure a retreat, if, either from levity
or disgust, the Mexicans (hould take arms againfl
him, and break down the bridges or caufcways.
This too, his own address, and the facility of Mon-
tezuma, enabled him to accomplish. Having fre-
VoL. II. F quently

B 0 OK quently entertained his prisoner with pompous

V. accounts of the European marine and art of navi-
L "- gation, he awakened his curiosity to fee those mov-

ing palaces that made their way through the water
without oars. Under pretext of gratifying his
desire, Cortes persuaded him to appoint some of
his fubjeAs to fetch part of the naval flores depo-
fited at Vera Cruz to Mexico, and to employ others
in cutting down and preparing timber. With
their afliftance the Spanish carpenters soon com-
pleted two brigantines, which afforded a frivolous
amusement to the monarch, and were confidered
by Cortes as a certain resource, if he should be
obliged to retire.

Montezuma ENCOU R A GED by so many instances of the mo-
ladk" hm- narch's tame fubmiflion to his will, Cortes ventured
ftifa vatail to put it to a proof still more trying. He urged
O s'a.] Montezuma to acknowledge himself a vaflal of the

king of Castile, to hold his crown of him as fupe-
rior, and to fubje& his dominions to the payment
of an annual tribute. With this requisition, the
last and molt humbling that can be made to one
possessed of sovereign authority, Montezuma was
lo obsequious as to comply. He called together
the chief men of his empire, and in a solemn ha-
rangue, reminded them of the traditions and pro-
phecies which led them to expeEt the arrival of a
people sprung from the fame stock with themfelvcs,
in order to take poffeflion of the supreme power,
he declared his belief that the Spaniards were this
promised race; that therefore lie recognized the
right of their monarch to govern the Mexican em-
pire, would lay his crown at his feet, and obey him
as a tribuiary. While uttering thel'e words, Mon
li-nlna diicovered how deeply he was affected ii
nmtkini; fluch a sacrifice. Tears and groans fie
(uinlly interrupted his dilfourfe. Overawed ane
)lrokenl 'ls his spirit was, it 11ill retained tlclh

j' il

sense of dignity, as to feel that pang which piercesB3 O 0 K
the heart of princes when constrained to resign in- V.
dependent power. The firit mention of such a kz
resolution Itruck the assembly dumb with aftonilh- 520
ment. This was followed by a fullen murmur of
sorrow mingled with indignation, which indicated
some violent eruption of rage to be near at hand.
This Cortes foresaw, and seasonably interposed to
prevent it, by declaring that his mafler had no in-
tention to deprive Montezuma of the royal dignity,
or to make any innovation upon the constitution
and laws of the Mexican empire. This affiurance,
added to their dread of the Spanish power, and to
the authority of their monarch's example, extorted
a reluctant content from the assembly #. The aa
of fubmiflion and homage was executed with all
the formalities which the Spaniards were pleased
to prescribe t.

MONTEZUMA, at the desire of Cortes, accom- The amount

panied this profefiion of fealty and homage with f ehe trol.
a magnificent present to his new sovereign; and, ed by) he
after his example, his fubjeEts brought in very li- srP"i'"t.5
;beral contributions. The Spaniards now collected
iall the treasure which had been either voluntarily
beflowed upon them at different times by Monle-
zuma, or had been extorted fror his people under
ivarious pretexts; and having melted the gold and
ifilver, the value of these, without including jewels
and ornaments of various kinds, wlhich were pre-
served on account of their curious workmanihiIp,
iamounteci to fix hundred thousand pesos. The Di;,non f
soldiers were impatient to have it divided, and i,,n,"'t'" e
Cortes complied with their desire. A fifth of theo,.:,;i;nd'
whole was set apart as the tax due to tle king.
Another fifth was allotted to Cortes, as commander

F z in

Sce N 0 T E XVI. .

l Cnrtes Relnt. 238 D. B. Diaz.
c 1o. Gonmara Cron. c. 92. H-errera, dec. . lib. x. c. 4.

67

B O O K in chief. The fums advanced by Velasquez, by

v. Cortes, and by some of the officers, towards de-
1520 fraying the expence of fitting out the armament,

were then dcdueted. The remainder was divided
among the arry, including the garrison of Vera
Cruz, in proportion to their different ranks. After
so many defalcations, the share of a private man
did not exceed a hundred pesos. This fum fell so
far below their sanguine expectations, that some
soldiers rejected it with scorn, and others murmur-
ed so loudly at this cruel disappointment of their
hopes, that it required all the address of Cortes,
and no small exertion of h;s liberality, to appease
them. The complaints of the army were not al-
together deflitute of foundation. As the crown
had contributed nothing towards the equipment or
success of the armament, it was not without regret
that the soldiers beheld it sweep away so great a
proportion of the treasure purchased by their blood
and toil. What fell to the share of their general
appeared, according to the ideas of wealth in the
sixteenth century, an enormous fum. Some of
Cortes's favourites had fecrelly appropriated to
their own use several ornaments of gold, which
neither paid the royal fifth, nor were brought into
account as part of the common flock. It was,
however, so manifefly the interest of Cortes at
this period 'to make a large remittance to the king,
that it is highly probable those concealments were
not of great consequence.

T4HE total film amassed by the Spaniards bears

-,,(
oul no proportion to the ideas which might be formed,
in fciiinall either by refleting on the descriptions given b)

hifiorians of the ancient splendour of Mexico, 0
by confidering the produ&ions of its mines in mo
dern times. But, among the ancient Mexicans
gold and silver were not the standards by whic'

t1:

the worth of other commodities was estimated; and B o o K
deilitute of the artificial value derived from this V.
circumitance, were no farther in request than as J
they furnished materials for ornaments and trin-
kets. These were either consecrated to the gods
in their temples, or were worn as marks ofdiftinc-
tion by their princes and some of their most emi-
nent chiefs. As the consumption of the precious
metals was inconsiderable, the demand for them
was not such as to put either the ingenuity or in-
duftry of the Mexicans on the stretch, in order to
augment their store. They were altogether unac-
quainted with the art of working the rich mines
with which the country abounded. What gold
they had was gathered in the beds of rivers, native,
and ripened into a pure metallic state *. The ut-
most effort of their labour in iearch of it was to
wash the earth carried down by torrents from the
mountains, and to pick out the grains of gold
which subsided; and even this simple operation,
according to the report of the persons whom Cor-
tes appointed to survey the provinces where there
was a prospect of finding mines, they performed
very unfkilfullyt. From all those causes, the whole
mass of gold in poffeflion of the Mexicans was not
great. As silver is rarely found pure, and their
art was too rude to conduct the process for refining
it in a proper manner, the quantity of this metal
was fill less considerable T. Thus, though the
:Spaniards had exerted all the power vwhich they
pofeffed in Mexico, and often with indecent rapa-
city, in order to gratify their predominant paflion,
and though Montezumia had fondly exhausted his
lfores, in hopes of satiating rh r thi if for gold, the
produt of both, which probably inclndcd a great
part of the bullion in the empi e, did not rife in
:alue above what has been mentioned §.

Bu I

* Cortes Re;it. p 26, . F . Di;?. c. 102, 103. GonIlai

,roic, C. Dit c. 103. 1. I-tirrn, dec, 2. lib. ix,
,t4. § Sec NOTE, XV II.
1

B OOK BUT however pliant Montezuma might be in

v. other matters, with refpea to one point he was in-
5',L0 flexible. Though Cortes often urged him, with

Montezuma the importunate zeal of a miflionary, to renounce
in.efiblee his false gods, and to embrace the Christian faith,
toreligion he always rejected the proposition with horror.

Superflition, among the Mexicans, was formed
into such a regular and complete system, that its
inffitutions naturally took faif hold of the mind;
and while the rude tribes in other parts of America
were easily induced to relinquish a few notions and
rites, so loose and arbitrary as hardly to merit the
name of a public religion, the Mexicans adhered
tenaciously to their mode of worship, which, how-
ever barbarous, was accompanied with such order
and solemnity as to render it the object of venera-
tion. Cortes, finding all his attempts ineffectua!
to shake the constancy of Montezuma, was s.i
much enraged at his obstinacy, that in a transport
of zeal he led out his soldiers to throw down the
idols in the great temple by force. But the priefis
taking arms in defence of their altars, and the peo-
ple crowding with great ardour to support them,
Cortes's prudence overruled his zeal, and induced
him to desist from his rath attempt, after diflodg-
ing the idols from one of the shrines, and placing
in their fted.,an image of the Virgin Mary *.

Sihicmne of FROM that moment the Mexicans, who had per-
the Mexi- mitted the imprisonment of their Sovereign, and
Illy tle suffered the exacions of strangers without a
.'i1idió8. itruggle, began to meditate how they might expe

or destroy the Spaniards, and thought rhcmlelvec
called upon to avenge their infllted deities. Thi
priests and leading men held frequent consultation(

\ itl

1 See NOT1'J XVIII,
7o

with .Montezuma for this purpose. But as it mightB O 0 K
prove fatal to the captive monarch to attempt ei- V.
ther the one or the other by violence, he was will- 20
ing to try more gentle means. Having called 5z.
Cortes into his pretence, he observed that now, as
all the purposes of his embassy were fully accom-
plilhed, the gods had declared their will, and the
people signified their desire, that he and his fol-
lowers should instantly depart out of the empire.
With this he required them to comply, or una-
voidable defiruction would fall suddenly on their
heads. The tenor of this unexpected requisition,
as well as the determined tone in which it was ut-
tered, left Cortes no room to doubt that it was the
result of some deep Icheme concerted between
Montezuma and his fubjeEs. He quickly perceiv-
ed that he might derive more advantage from a
seeming compliance with the monarch's inclina-
tion, than from an ill-timed attempt to change or
to oppose it, and replied, with great composure,
that he had already begun to prepare for return-
ing to his own country ; but as he had destroyed
the vessels in which he arrived, tome time was re-
quifite for building other Ilips. This appeared
reasonable. A number of Mexicans were tent to
Vera Cruz to cut down timber, and some Spanifl
carpenters were appointed to superintend the work.
Cortes flattered himself that, during this interval,
he might either find means to avert the threatened
danger, or receive fuich reinforcements as would
enable him to despise it.

ALMOST nine months were clapsed fincc Por- AnxicryanJ

tocarrero and Montejo had failed with his di:f-1cor .
patches to Spain; and he daily expected their re-
turn with a confirmation of his authority from the
king. Without tils, hias condition was inlfccure
and precarious, and after all the great ihings which
le had done, it might be his (looml to bear lie nllille

and

B O O K and susser the punishment of a traitor. Rapid and

v. extensive as his progress had been, he could not
v""'' hope to complete the redu&tion of a great empire

with so small a body of men, which by this time
the diseases of the climate had considerably thin-
ned; nor could he apply for recruits to the Spanish
settlements in the islands until he received the
royal approbation of his proceedings,

ohe arrival WHILE he remained in this cruel situation,
of a new ar- *
mament, anxious about what was past, uncertain with re-

spect to the future, and, by the late declaration of
Montezuma, oppressed with a new addition of cares,
a Mexican courier arrived with an account of some
ships having appeared on the coast. Cortes, with
fond credulity, imagining that his messengers
were returned from Spain, and that the comple-
tion of all his wishes and hopes was at hand, im-
parted the glad tidings to his companions, who
received them with transports of mutual gratula-
tion. Their joy was not of long continuance.
A courier from Sandoval, whom Cortes had ap-
pointed to succeed Efcalante in command at Vera
Cruz, brought certain information that the arma-
ment was fitted out by Velasquez, governor of
Cuba, and, instead of bringing the aid which they
expected, threatened them with immediate de-
ftrudtion,
aitted out by THE motives which prompted Velasquez to this

violent measure are obvious. From the circum-
itances of Cortes's departure, it was impoflible not
tD fufpeHt his intention of throwing off all depend-
ence upon him. His neglecing to transmit any
account of his operations to Cuba, strengthened
this suspicion, which was atlaft confirmed, beyond
doubt, by the indiscretion of the officers whom
Cortes sent to Spain. They, fiom some motive,
which is not clearly explained by the contemporary

hiflorians,

73

hiflorians, touched at the island of Cuba, contrary B O O K
to the peremptory orders of their general *. By v.
this means Velasquez not only learned that Cortes 1520.
and his followers, after formally renouncing all con-
neeeion with him, had established an independent
colony in New Spain, and were soliciting the king
to confirm their proceedings by his authority; but
he obtained particular information concerning the
opulence of the country, the valuable presents
which Cortes had received, and the inviting prof-
pests of success that opened to his view. Every
paflion which can agitate an ambitious mind;
shame, at having been so grossly over-reached;
indignation at being being betrayed by the man
whom he had feletted as the objedt of his favour
and confidence; grief, for having wafted his for-
tune to aggrandize an enemy; and despair! of re-
covering tb fair an opportunity of eftabliflhing
his fame and extending his power, now raged in
the bosom of Velasquez. All thelfe, with united
force, excited him to make an extraordinary es-
fort in order to be avenged on the author of his
wrongs, and to reft from him his usurped autho-
rity and conquests. Nor did he want the ap-
pearance of a good title to juffify such an attempt.
The agent whom he sent to Spain with an ac-
count of Grijalva's voyage had met with a mofl
favourable reception; and from the specimens
which he produced, fich high expecations were
formed concerning the opulence of New Spain,
thatVelafquez was authorifdijto prolfcute the dif-
covery of the country, and appointed governor of
it during life, with more extenive power and pri-
vileges than had been granted to any adventurer
from the time of Columbus . Elated by this diftin-
guifhing mark of favour, and warranted to conli-
der Cortes not only as intruding upon hisjurifdic-

tion,

* n. Diaz. c. 54, 5 . Herrera, dec. 2. lib. v. c. 14. Gomaua
Cron. c, 96. -'l Hcrrcra, dec, . lib. iii. c. 1 .

B 0 0 K tion, but as disobedient to the royal mandate, he de-

v. termined to vindicate his own rights and the ho-
52o0 neur of his sovereign by force of arms *. His

Under the ardour in carrying on his preparations was fuich
commnd of as might have been expeted from the violence

of the passions with which he was animated ; and
in a short time an armament was completed, con-
fifiing of eighteen ships which had on board
fourscore hortemen, eight hundred foot soldiers, of
which eighty were muiketeers, and a hundred and
twenty crois-bow men, together with a train of
twelve pieces of cannon. As Velasquez's expe-
rience of the fatal consequence of committing to
another what he ought to have executed himself,
had not rendered him more enterprising, he veiled
the command of this formidable body, which, in
the infancy of the Spaniih power in America, me-
rits the appellation of an army, in Pamphilo de
Narvaez, with inftrudions to seize Cortes and his
principal officers, to fend them prisoners to him,
and then to complete the discovery and conquest
of the country in his name.

The pro. AFTrR a prosperous voyage, Narvaez landed
.N,..,.,or his men without opposition near St. Juan de'Ullua.

;). Three ioldiers, whom Cortes had lent to search

for mines in that difirict, immediately joined him.
By this accident, he not only receiv ed information
concerning the progress and situation of Cortes.
but asliheie soldiers had made some progress in
·the knowledge of the Mcxican lauguage, dhe ac-
quired interpreters, by whote means he was ena-
bled to lIold some intcrcourlf with the people ol
the country. But, according to the low cunning
of deserters, they framed their intelligence with
more atlcnlti(n to what they thought would b;
agreeable, tlian to what they knew to be true;

aIt n
See N OTLE XIX.

and represented the situation of Cortes to be so B O O K
desperate, and the difaffeEtion of his followers to v.
be so general, as increased the natural presumption '
and confidence of Narvaez. His firit operation, 520
however, might have taught him not to rely on
their partial accounts. Having sent to summon
the governor of Vera Cruz to surrender Guevara,
a priest whom he employed in that service, made
the requisition with such insolence, that Sando-
val, an officer of high spirit, and zealouly attach-
ed to Cortes, instead of complying with his de-
mands, seized him and his attendants, and sent
them in chains to Mexico.

CORTES received them not like enemies, but coteseep.

as friends, and condemning the severity of Sando- y ala.m-i.c
val, set them immediately at liberty. By this
well-timed clemency, seconded by caresses and
presents, he gained their conlidence, and drew
from them such particulars concerning the force
and intentions of Narvaez, as gave him a view of
the impending danger in its full extent. He had
not to contend now with half-naked Indians, no
match for him in war, and still more inferior in the
arts of policy, but to take the field againtl an army
in courage and martial discipline equal to his own,
in number far superior, acting tunder the fandtion
of royal authority, and commanded by an officer
of known bravery. He was informred that Nar-
vaez, more solicitous to gratify the resentment of
Velasquez, than attentive to the honour or inte-
reft of his country, had begun his intercourse with
the natives, by representing him and his followers
as fugitives and outlavws, guilty of rebellion against
their own fovereign,and ofinjuftice in invading the
Mexican empire, and had declared to them .nat
his sole objec in visiting the country was to pu-
nifh the Spaniards, and to rescue them from op-
preflion. lIe soon perceivcd that the fame unfa-

vou rahle

B BO K vourable representations had been conveyed to

V. Montezuma, and that Narvaez had found means
2 to afiure him, that as the condut of those who
1520. kept him under restraint was highly displeasing

to the king his mailer, he had it in charge not
only to rescue an injured monarch from confine-
ment, but to reinstate him in the pofeflion of his
antient power and independence. Animated with
this profpef of being set free from fubjetion to
itrangers, the provinces began openly to revolt
frc m Cortes, and to regard Narvaez as a deliver-
er no less able than willing to save them. Moil-
tezuma himself kept up a secret intercourse ith
the new commander, and seemed to court him as
a person superior in power and dignity to those
Spaniards whorn he had hitherto revered as the
firit of men a.

His delibera- SUCH were the various afpets of danger and
trnting his difficulty which presented themfel\es to the view
owiiondue.of Cortes. No situation can be conceived mele

trying to the capacity and firmness of a general,
or where the choice of the plan which ought to
be adopted was more difficult. If he should wait
the approach of Narvaez in Mexico, deftruaion
seemed to be unavoidable; for while the Spaniards
prelfed him fiom without, the inhabitants, whose
turbulent fpiiit he could hardly restrain with all
his authority and attention, would eagerly lay hold
on such a favourable opportunity of avenging all
their wrongs. If he should aband on the capital, ft
the captive monarch at liberty, and march out te
meet the enemy,he must at once forego the fruits o!
all his toils and victorics, and relinquilh advantagc!
vwhich couId not be recovered without extra

ird,;iaar; e-oirls, and infinite danger. 'If, in
1.cali;i, cinlol yinig I;'ce, he fhouldl have re

e.our!
* Sece NikTr XX.

course to conciliating measures, and attempt an B 0.0 K
accommodation with Narvaez; the natural V.
haughtiness of that officer, augmented by confci- -
1 oufnels of his present luperiority, sorbad him to S

cherish any sanguine hopes of success. After re-
volving every scheme with deep attention, Cortes
fixed upon that which, in execution was moit
hazardous, but, if successful, would prove most
beneficial to his country; and with the decisive
intrepidity, suited to desperate situations, deter-
mined to make one bold efifrt for vistory, under
every disadvantage, rather than sacrifice his own
conquests and the Spanish interest in Mexico.

BUT though he foresaw that the contest must His negocia-
be terminated finally by arms, it would have been tio, fh
not only indecent, but criminal, to have marched of NarNaez.
againfi his countrymen, without attempting to ad-
just matters by an amicable negociation. In this
service he employed Olmedo, his chaplain, to
whose characer the funtion was well suited, and
who possessed, betides, such prudence and address
as qualified him to carry on the secret intrigues in
which Cortes placed his chief confidence. Nar-
vaez rejeted, with scorn, every scheme of accom-
modation that Olmedo proposed, and was with
'difficulty refrained from laying violent hands on
'him and his attendants. He met, however, with
a more favourable reception among his followers.,
;to many of whom he delivered letters, either from
Cortes or his officers, their ancient friends and
companions. Cortes aitfully accompanied there
.with presents of rings, chains us gold, and other
trinkets of value, vwhich inspired thufe needy ad-
venturers with high ideas of the wealth that lie
liad acquired, and with envy of their good for-
tune who were engaged in his service. S;rnc, from
;Iopes of becoming Ihalers in those rich fp:iis, de-

dared

B O K dared for an immediate accommodation with

V. Cortes. Others, from public spirit, laboured to

prevent a civil war, which, whatever party ihould
1520. prevail, mufft hake, and perhaps subvert the Spa-

nifh power, iil a country where it was so imper-
feEtly etfablifhed. Narvaez disregarded both, and
by a public proclamation denounced Cortes and
his adherents rebels and enemies to their country.
Cortes, it is probable, was not much surprised at
the untraAable arrogance of Narvaez; and, after
having given such a proof of his own pacific difpo-
fition as mightjuftify his recourse to other means,
he determined to advance towards an enemy
whom he had laboured in vain to appease.

Marcls a- HE left an hundred and fifty men in the capi-
gainfl him
Smay. tal, under the command of Pedro de Alvarado,

an officer of diffinguifhed courage, for whom the
Mexicans had conceived a singular degree of re-
fpeEt. To thecuffody of this slender garrison he
committed a great city, with all the wealth he
had amafied, and, what was still of greater im-
portance, the person of the imprisoned monarch.
His utmoff art was employed in concealing from
Mcntezuma the real causes of his march. He la-
boured to persuade him, that the strangers who
had lately arrived were his friends and fellow-fib-
jeEts; and that, after a short interview with them,
they would depart together, and return to their
own country. The captive prince, unable to com-
prehend the designs of the Spaniards, or to recon-
cite what he now heard with the declarations of
Narvaez, and afraid to discover any symptom of
suspicion or diflruft of Cortes, promised to remain
quietly in the Spanish quarters, and to cultivate
the fame friendship with Alvarado which he had
uniformly maintained with him. Cortes, \itl
seeming confidence in this promise, but relyinf
principally upon the inli unions which he had give[

Al vnWrati

Alvarado to guard his prisoner with the molt BOOK

L scrupulous vigilance, set out from Mexico. v.

1 His strength, even after it was reinforced by 1520,
the juntion of Sandoval and the garrison of Vera i'"trops°f
"Cruz, did not exceed two hundred and fifty men.
As he hoped for success chiefly from the rapidity
,of his motions, his troops were not encumbered
'either with baggage or artillery. But as he dreaded
extremely the imprelion which the enemy might
rnake with their cavalry, he had provided against
this danger with the foresight and sagacity which
,'distinguish a great commander. Having observed
that the Indians in the province of Chinantla used
ifpears of extraordinary length and force, he armed
his soldiers with these, and accustomed them to
'that deep and compact arrangement which the
lufe of this formidable weapon, the belt perhaps
'that ever was invented for defence, enabled them
to assume.

; W TH this small but firm battalion Cortes ad- Continues to
yvanced towards Zempoalla, of which Narvaez" h"ijat" '
had taken poffefion. During his march he made
repeated attempts towards iome accommodation
vwith his opponent. But Narvaez requiring that
.Cortes and his followers flould instantly recog-
pize his title to be governor of New Spain, in
virtue of the powers which lie derived from Ve-
lhfquez, and Cortes refuting to submit to any
authority which was not founded on a commifliuo
from the emperor hlimfelf, under whole imme-
(liate prote(tion lie and his aJhelrents had placed
their infant colony, all the'e attempts proved
ruitlefs. The intercoulfe, however, which this
nccafioned between the two parties, proved es no
mall advantage to Coltes, as it aiffrded him
n opportunity of gaininr forme of Narvaez's
fficers by liberal presents, of fofiening others
y a semblance of moderation, :and of d;a:!zing all

by

B O O Kby the appearance of wealth among his troops,

V. most of his soldiers having converted their share
1i"0. of the Mexican gold into chains, bracelets, and

other ornaments, which they displayed with mili-
tary ostentation. Narvaez and a little junto of
his creatures excepted, all the army leaned towards
an accommodation with their countrymen. This
discovery of their inclination irritated his violent
temper almost to madness. In a transport of
rage he set a price upon the head of Cortes, and
of his principal officers; and having learned that
he was now advanced within a league of Zempo-
alla with his small body of men, he confidered
this as an insult which merited immediate chastise-
ment, and marched out with all his troops to
offer him battle.

AttackENar- BUT Cortes was a leader of greater abilities and
,at in the experience than to fight an enemy so far superior

in number, and so much better appointed, on
equal ground. Having taken his station on the
opposite bank of the river de Canoas, where he
knew that he could not be attacked, he beheld
the approach of the enemy without concern, and
disregarded this vain bravade. It was then the
beginning of the wet season *, and the rain had
poured down, during a great part of the day, with
the violence peculiar to the torrid zone. The fol-
lowers of Narvaez, unaccustomed to the hardihips of
military service, murmured so much at being thus
fruitlessly exposed, that from their unfoldier-like im-
patience, as well as his own contempt of his adver-
lary, their general permitted them to retire to Zem-
poalla. The very circumstance which induced
them to quit the field, engaged Cortes to form
scheme, by which he hoped at once to terminate
the war. He observed, that his hardy veterans

d . thougl
* Hackluyt, vol.. i 467. De Laet Defcr. Ind. Occid. 22z

though standing under the torrents, which con- B 0 0 K
tinued to fall, without a single tent or any shelter V.
whatsoever to cover them, were so far from re- 5
pining at hardships that were become familiar to
them, that they were still fresh and alert for ser-
. vice. Heforefaw that the enemy would naturally
' give themselves up to repose after their fatigue,

and that, judging of the conduc of others by
: their own effeminacy, they would deem themselves
.1 perfectly secure at a season so unfit for acion.
i He resolved, therefore, to fall upon them in the
dead of night, when the surprise and terror of this
unexpected attack might more than compensate
i the inferiority of his numbers. His soldiers, fen-
i fible that no resource remained but in some de-
fperate effort of courage, approved of the measure
with such warmth, that Cortes in a military orati-
Ion which he addrelfed to them before they began
Jtheir march, was more solicitous to temper than
ito inflame their ardour. He divided them into
;-three parties. At the head of firit he placed San-
-Idoval; entrusting this gallant officer with the
,lmoft dangerous and important service, that of
Sfeizing the enemy's artillery, which was planted
ijbefore the principal tower of the temple, where
iNarvaez had fixed his head-quarters. Chrifto-
jval de Olid commanded the second, with orders
Ito assault the tower, and lay hold on the general.
ACortes himself conducted the third and fmnallefi
division, which was to aa as a body of reserve,
and to support the other two as there should be
occasion. Having palred the river de Canons,
which was much swelled with the rain, not with-
out difficulty, the water reaching almost to their
hins, they advanced in profound lilence, without
beat of drum, or found of any warlike instrument;
ach man armed with his sword, his dagger, and
is Chinantlan spear. Narvaez, remiss in proporti-
n to his security, had pofied only two centinels to
X V,. II. G watch

B O O K watch the motions of an enemy whom he had such

V. good cause to dread. One of thefe.was seized by
iZo' tthe advanced guard of Cortes's troops, the other

made his escape, and hurrying to the town with
all the precipitation 'of fear and zeal, gave such
timely notice of the enemy's approach, that there
was full leisure to have prepared for their recepti-
on. But, through the arrogance and infatuation
of Narvaez, this important interval was loft. He
imputed this alarm to the cowardice of the cen-
tinel, and treated with derision the idea of being
attacked by forces so unequal to his own. The
shouts of Cortes's soldiers, rushing on to the as-
fault, convinced him at last, that the danger which
he despised was real. The rapidity with which
they advanced was such, that only one cannon
could be fired, before Sandoval's party closed with
the enemy, drove them from their guns, and be-
gan to force their way up the fleps of the tower.
Narvaez, no less brave in action than prefump-
tuous in conduct, armed himself in hafle, and by
his voice and example animated his men to the
combat. Olid advanced to sustain his compani-
ons; and Cortes himself, rushing to the front,
conducted and added new vigour to the attack.

and over- The compaStcrder in which this small body press-
uomcs lim. ed on, and the impenetrable front which they

presented withl their long spears, bore down all
opposition before it. They had now reached the
gate, and were struggling to burst it open, when
a soldier having set fire to the reeds with which
the tower was covered, compelled Narvaez to afl-
ly out. In the first encounter he was wounded
in the eye with a spear, and falling to the ground,
was dragged down the lReps and in a moment
clapt in felters. The cry of victory resounded
among the troops of Cortes. Tholfe who had
faliied out wxith thcir leader now maintained the
ccnfliEt feebly, or began to surrender. Among
the remainder of his Ibldiers, fiationed in tW\o

fiunllcr

smaller towers of the temple, terror and confusion B o 0 K
prevailed. The darkness was so great that they v.
E could not distinguish between their friends and 20r

ofes. Their own artillery was pointed againit
ilthm. Wherever they turned their eyes, they
beheld lights gleaming through the obscurity of
: night, which, though proceeding only fiom a va-
riety of shining infeas, that abound in moilt and
sultry climates, their affrighted imaginations re-
presented as numerous bands of musketeers ad-
vancing with kindled matches to the attack. As-
ter a ihort resistance, the soldiers compelled
their officers to capitulate, and before morning all
laid down their arms, andfubmitted quietly to
itheir conquerors.

THIS complete victory proved more accepta- The ef;'a

· a,

. *

. , i n *^i 11 js-L of this viclo-

ble, as it was gained almost without bloodshed, y.
0only two soldiers being killed on the fide of Cortes,
':and two officers with fifteen piivate men of the ad-
hverfe faction. Cortes treated the vanquished not
ilike enemies, but as countrymen and friends, and
offered either to fend them back directly to Cuba,
or to take them into his service, as partners in
jhis fortune, on equal terms with his own soldiers.
IThis latter propolition, seconded by.a seasonable
diflribution of some presents from Cortes, and
liberal promises of more, opened prospects so
lgreeable to the romantic expeclations which had
induced them to engage in this service, that all,
Fafew partizans of Narvaez excepted, cl)fed with
t, and vied with each other in profeflions of
'fidelity and attachment to a general vliofc recent
,fuccees had given them fulch a iliking proof o'F
J!lis abilities for command, Thus, by a ic}ies of
events no less fortunate than uncommon, Cortes
pot only escaped from perdition which feerued
inevitable, but, when he had leant reafbn to expect
t, was placed at the head of a thotuflncl Spaniarls,
'eady to follow wherever lie should lead them.

G 2 Whoever

BOOK Whoever reflets upon the facility with which

v. this victory was obtained, or confiders with what
L-l sudden and unanimous transition the followers of

520. Narvaez ranged themselves under the standard

of his rival, will be apt to ascribe both events
as much to the intrigues as to the arms of Cortes,
and cannot but fufpeEt that the ruin of Narvaez
was occasioned, no less by the treachery of his
own followers, than by the valour of his enemy *

The Mexi-
cans take BuT, in one point, the prudent conduct and
arns againrt good fortune of Cortes weie equally conspicuous,
the Spani-. f, by the rapidity of his operations after he be-
ards.

gan his march, he had not brought matters to such
a speedy iflue, even this decisive vitory would
have come too late to have saved his companions
whom he left in Mexico. A few days after the
discomfiture of Narvaez, a courier arrived with
an account that the Mexicans had taken arms,
and having seized and destroyed the two brigan-
tines, which he had built in order to secure the
command of thp lake, had attacked the Spani-
ards in their quarters, had killed several of them
and wounded more, had reduced to ashes their
magazine of provisions, and carried on hoftilitie
with such fury, that, though Alvarado and his mer
defended themselves with undaunted resolution
they mufl either be soon cut off by famine, o0
fink under the multitude of their enemies. Thi
revolt was excited by motives which rendered i
frill more alarming. On the departure of Corte
for Zempoalla, the Mexicans flattered themireivc,
that the long-expeted opportunity of reflorini
their Sovereign to liberty, and of vindicating tlei
country from the odious dominion of stranger!
was at length arrived; that while the forces c
their opprellbrs were divided, and the arms

on

* Cortes Rolat. 242. D. B. Diaz. c. I0o.-12'. lil
rera, dec. 2. lilb. ix, c. 18, &c. Gomara Cron. c. 97, &C

one party turned againit the other, they might B 0 0 K
triumph with greater facility over both. Con- V.
fultations were held, and schemes formed with k
this intention. The Spaniards in Mexico, con- 1520'
fcious of their own feebleness, fufpeeted and dread-
ed those machinations. Alvarado, though a gal-

I city, nor dignity of manners, by which Cortes
|;} had acquired such an ascendant over the minds of
. the Mexicans, as never allowed them to form a just
I estimate of his weakness or of their own strength.

Alvarado knew no mode of supporting his autho-

|< rity but force. Instead of employing address to
WA disconcert the plans or to sooth the spirits of the
1 Mexicans, he waited the return of one of their

folenmn feitivals, when the principal persons in the
empire were dancing, according to custom, in the
A court of the great temple; he seized all the ave-

nues which led to it, and, allured partly by the
| rich ornaments which they wore in honour of their

gods, and partly by the facility of cutting off at
once the authors of that conspiracy which he dread-
ed, he fell upon them, unarmed and unfufpicious
of any danger, and massacred a great number,
none escaping but fich as made their way over
the battlements of the temple. An ation so cruel
and treacherous filled not only the city, but the
whole empire, with indignation and rage. All
called aloud for vengeance; and regardless of the
safety of their monarch, whose life was at the mer-
cy of the Spaniards, or of their own danger in
aflaulting an enemy who had been fl long the ob-
je& of their terror, they committed all thole acts
of violence of which Cortes received an account.

To him the danger appeared fl immin.Snl, as He irTrcheC
to admit neither of deliberation nor delay. IIe set api't, ' "r
out inifantly with all his forces, and returnled fi'omI
Zempoalla with no Icfs rapidity tian he had ad-

vallcc-I

B O O K vanced thither. At Tlafcala he was joined by two

V. thoilfand chosen warriors. On entering the Mex-

ican territories, he found that difaffedtion to the
:520.

Spaniardswas not confined to the capital. The prin-
cipal inhabitarts had deserted the towns through
which he pafied; no person of note appearing to
meet him with the usual refpedt; no provision was
made for the subsistence of his troops; and though
he was permitted to advance without opposition,
the solitude and silence which reigned in every
place, and the horror with which the people avoid-
ed all intercourse with him, discovered a deep-
rooted antipathy, that excited the moit just alarrr.
But, implacable as the enmity of the Mexicarns
was, they were so unacquainted with the science
of war, that they knew not how to take the pro-
per measures, either for their own safety or the de-
ltruction of the Spaniards. Uninftructed by tleir
former error in admitting a formidable enemy ir-
to their capital, instead of breaking down the
causeways and bridges, by which they might have
inclosed Alvarado and his party, and have effec-
tually tfopt the career of Cortes, they again fuifer-
June 24. ed him to march into the city without moleflation,

and to take quiet pofeflion of his ancient itation.

l proper THi r transports of joy with which Alvarado anJ
Cordesl' his soldiers received their companions cannot be

exprelfed. Both parties were io much elated, the
one with their seasonable deliverance, and the other
with tlhe great exploits which they had atchieved,
that this intoxication of success seems to have lb
far reached Cortes himself, that he behaved on
this occasion neither with his usual sagacity nor Mat
tention. He not only negleted to visit Montc-
ilima, but embittered the insult by exprellions Iull
of contcmpt for that unfortunate prince and Iis
people. The forces of which he had now tlhe

commallnl,

g command, appeared to him so irrefiltible, that he B O O K

might assume an higher tone, and lay aside the V.
nimafk of moderation, under which he had hitherto

5o20.

concealed his designs. Some Mexicans, who un-
derftood the Spanifl language, heard the con-
temptuous words which Cortes uttered, and re-
porting them to their countrymen, kindled their
rage anew. They were now convinced that the
intentions of the general were equally bloody with
those of Alvarado, and that his original purpose
in visiting their country, had not been, as he pre-
tended, to court the alliance of their iovereign,
but to attempt the conquest of his dominions.
They resumed their arms with the additional fury Te vio"len
' which this discovery inspired, attacked a confide-tleMvl.,.
i able body of Spaniards who were marching to-""'
wards the great tquare in which the public market
was held, and compelled them to retire with tome
lots. Emboldened by this success, and delighted
i to find that their oppreflbrs were not invincible,
they advanced next day with extraordinary mar-
tial pomp to aifault the Spaniards in their quarters.
Their number wa.s formidable, and their undaunt-
ed courage till more so. Though the artillery
pointed against their numerous battalions, croud-
ed together in narrow fireets, swept off multitude?.
at every difchlarge; though every blow of the Spa-
nifh weapons fell with mortal efitc upon their
naked bodies, the impetluofity of the affnllt did
not abate. Frefl men rufnled forward to occupyl
the places of the slain, and meetinc with the fhnc.
fate, were succeeded by others no Ic's inlrepid ;inml
eager on vengeance. Tle lltllmu: i'li rts of Cor-
tes's abilities and experience, ffconidecl by tlhe lil'
ciplined valour of his troops, were hardly r fuliici-
ent to defend their fortifications, into w\vhich the
enemy were more than onc-r i.n l I.i point (,C forc-
iag their way.

' )R 1'J,.

B O O K CORTES beheld, with wonder, the implacable

V. ferocity of a people, who seemed at firit to sub-
i- mit tamely to the yoke, and had continued so long

DittSe of paflive under it. The soldiers of Narvaez, who
the5spani- fondly imagined that they followed Cortes to

hfare in the spoils of a conquered empire, were
astonished to find that they were involved in a
dangerous war, with an enemy whose vigour was
still unbroken, and loudly execrated their own
weakness, in giving such easy credit to the delu.
five promises of their new leader *. But surprise
and complaints were of no avail. Some immedi-
ate and extraordinary effort was requisite to extri-
cate themselves out of their present situation. As
soon as the approach of evening induced the Mex-
icans to retire, in compliance with their national
custom of ceasing from hostilities with the setting
fun, Cortes began to prepare for a rally, with filch
a considerable force, as might either drive the ene-
my out of the city, or compel them to liften to
terms of accommodation.

Corts at- HE conduced, in person, the troops destined
takhot fu-m for this important service. Every invention known
sCre. in the European art of war, as well as every pre.

caution, suggested by his long acquaintance with
the Indian mode of fighting, were employed to
ensure success. But he found an enemy prepared
and determined to oppose him. The force of the
Mexicans was greatly augmented by fresh troops,
which poured in continually from the country, and
their animosity was in no degree abated. They
were led by their nobles, inflamed by the exhorta
tions of their priests, and fought in defence of thei
temples and families, under the eye of their gods
and in pretence of their wives and children. Not

with
# B, Diaz. c. i 16.

withstanding their numbers, and enthufi iftic con- B 0 o K
tempt of danger and death, wherever the Spaniards V.
could close with them, the superiority of their '-r
discipline and arms obliged them to give way. 1520*
But in narrow fireets, and where many of the
bridges of communication were broken down,
they could seldom come to a fair rencounter, and
the Spaniards, as they advanced, were exposed to
showers of arrows and siones from the tops of the
houses. After a day of incessant exertion, though
vast numbers of the Mexicans fell, and part of the
city was burnt, the Spaniards, weary with the
slaughter, and harassed by multitudes which fuc-
ceflively relieved each other, were obliged at length
to retire, with the mortification of having accom-
plifhed nothing so decisive as to compensate the
unusual calamity of twelve soldiers killed, and
above sixty wounded. Another sally, made with
greater force, was not more effetual, and in it the
general himself was wounded in the hand.

CORTES now perceived, too late, the fatal error Montezum»

into which he had been betrayed by his own con- iiiln.
tempt of the Mexicans, and was satisfied that he
could neither maintain his present station in the
centre of an hostile city, nor retire from it with-
out the most imminent danger. One resource
still remained, to try what effect the interposition
of Montezuma might have to tooth or overawe
his fubjets. When the Mexicans approached
next morning to renew the aifault, that unfortunate
prince, at the mercy of the Spaniards, and reduc-
ed to the fad necellity of becoming the inftru-
ment of his own disgrace, and of the slavery of
his people '', advanced to the battlemenlts in his

royal
.t See NOTE XXL

B O O Kroyal robes, and with all the pomp in which he

v. used to appear on iolemn occasions. At fight of

'-"-' their sovereign, whom they had long been accuf-
1520. tomed to honour, and almost to revere as a god,

the weapons drc pt from their hands, every tongue
was silent, all bowed their heads, and many pro-
itrated themselves on the ground. Montezuma
addressed them with every argument that could
mitigate their rage, or persuade them to cease from
hostilities. When he ended his diifcourfe, a fullen
murmur of disapprobation run through the crowd;
te this succeeded reproaches and threats; and their
fury riling in a moment above every restraint of
decency or respect, flights of arrows and volleys
of siones poured in so violently upon the ramparts,
that before the Spanish soldiers, appointed to cover
Montezuma with their bucklers, had time to lift
them in his defence, two arrows wounded the un-
happy monarch, and the blow of a stone on his
temple struck him to the ground. On feeing him
fall, the Mexicans were so much aftonifiled, that,
with a transition not uncommon in popular tu-
nmults, they passed in a moment from one extremne
to the other, remorse succeeded to insult, and thli
fled with hio:ror, as if the vengeance of Heavcn
were pursuing the crime which they had commit-
ted. The Spaniards, without molestation, carrnic
Montezuma to his apartments, and Cortes hafltn-
ed thither to console him under his misfortune.
But the'unhappy monarch nowv perceived how Ir.v
!he was funk ; and the haughty spirit which fec(d
'11 have been bo long extintt, returning, he fcoinci.
to ifurvive this lafit humiliation, and to protract a:;
ignominious life, not only as the prisoner a'nd too(
of his tcn'imis, hut as tlie objeed of contempt (,r
dcteflation amonr; iis fiibjecs. In a tranlport (t'
rage:, he tore the baiiadges from his wounds, and
riof'lc(id, ;with tich obliiinacy, to take any nourill-

I1TICI: .

ment, that he soon ended his wretched days, re- B O O R
jeting with disdain all the solicitations of the Spa- v.
niards to embrace the Christian faith.

1520.
UPON the death of Montezuma, Cortes having

I New con,

loft all hope of bringing the Mexicans to any ac- flies.
commodation, saw no prospect of safety but in at-
tempting a retreat, and began to prepare for it.
But a sudden motion of the Mexicans engaged him
in new confliEts. They took poffeflion of a high
tower in the great temple which overlooked the
Spanish quarters, and placing there a garrison of
their principal warriors, not a Spaniard could stir
without being exposed to their niilfile weapons.
From this post it was neceflary to dislodge them
at any risk; and Juan de Elcobar, with a nume-
rous detachment of chosen soldiers, wv as ordered to
make the attack. But Efcobar, though a gallant
officer, and at the head of troops accuflomed to
conquer, and who now fought under the eyes of
their countrymen, was thrice repulsed. Cortes,
sensible that not only the reputation but the safety
of his army depended on the success of this alault,
ordered a buckler to be tied to his arm, as lie could
not manage it with his wounded hand, and ruthed
with his drawn sword into the thickelt of the com-
batants. Encouraged by the presence of their ge-
neral, the Spaniards returned to the charge with
fiich vigour, that they gradually forced their way
up the iteps, and drove the Mexicans to the plat-
form at the top of the tower. There a dreadful
carnage began, when two young Mexicans of
high rank, observing Cortes as he animated h)is
bolliers by his voice and example, rcf'lved to Ia-
crifice their own lives in order to cut off the author
of all the calamities which desolated their country.
They approached him in a fuipplica.nt pollure, as if
they had intended to lay ldowi their arms, and

icizing

9t

B O O K seizing him in a moment, hurried him towards the

v. battlements, over which they threw themselves

s l headlong, in hopes of dragging him along to be
15zo. dashed in pieces by the fame fall. But Cortes,

by his strength and agility, broke lose from their
grasp, and the gallant youths perished in this ge-
nerous, though unsuccessful, attempt to save their
country. As soon as the Spaniards became ma-
sers of the tower, they set fire to it, and, without
farther molef-ation, continued the preparations for
their retreat.

-The Spani- THis became the mote necessary, as the Mexi-
A.Jsab.indon cans were so much astonished at the last effort of
iic "ly' the Spanith valour, that they began to change their

whole system of holtility, and inifead of incessant
attacks, endeavoured, by barricading the streets,
and breaking down the causeways, to cut off the
communication of the Spaniards with the conti-
nent, and thus to ltarve an enemy whom they
could not subdue. The frit point to be deter-
mined was, whether they should march out openly
in the face of day, when they could discern every
danger, and fee how to regulate their own motions,
as well as how to refifl the assaults of the enemy;
or whether they should endeavour to retire secretly
in the night. The latter was preferred, partly from
hopes that their national fuperitition would reRrain
the Mexicans from venturing to attack them in the
night, and partly from their own fond belief in the
predictions of a private soldier, who, having ac-
quired universal credit by a smattering of learning,
and his pretenfious t' afirology, boldly assurcd
them of success, if they made their retreat in this
manner. They began to move, towards mid-
night, in three divisions. Sandoval led the van;
Pedro Alvarado, and Velasquez de Lcon, had( tlih
conduCt of the rear; and Cortes commanded il
the cmntre, where he placed the prisoners, amohnn

wvlhonw

whom were a son and two daughters of Monte- Bo o K
zuma, together with several Mexicans of difiinti- v.
on, the artillery, the baggage, and a portable bridge L
of timber, intended to be laid over the breaches in 1520.
the causeway. They marched in profound silence
along the causeway which led to Tacuba, because
it was shorter than any of the reft, and, lying most
remote from the road towards Tlafcala and the
sea coast, had been left more entire by the Mexi-
cans. They reached the first breach in it without
molestation, hoping that their retreat was undif-
covered.

BUT the Mexicans, unperceived, had not only Attackedby

watched all their motions with attention, but had he Mcxi-
made proper dispositions for a most formidable at-
tack. While the Spaniards were intent upon
placing their bridges in the breach, and occupied
in conducting their horses and artillery along it,
they were suddenly alarmed with the tremendous
found of warlike instruments, and a general shout
from an innumerable multitude of enemies; the
lake was covered with canoes; flights of arrows,
and showers of siones poured in upon them from
every quarter; the Mexicans rushing forward to
the charge with fearless impetuosity, as if they
hoped in that moment to be avenged for all their
wrongs. Unfortunately the wooden bridge, by
the weight of the artillery, was wedged so fast into
the stones and mud, that it was impollible to re-
move it. Dismayed at this accident, the Spaniards
advanced with precipitation towards the second
breach. The Mexicans hemmed them in on every
lide, and though they defended thernlelves wi!h
their usual courage, yet crouded as th!ey were on
a narrow causeway, their discipline and military
ikill were of little avail, nor did the oblfctrity of
the night permit them to derive great advantage
from their fire-arms, or the fpioriority of their

other

B 0 K other weapons. All Mexico was now in arms;

v. and so eager were the people on the deftruftion
C--' of their oppreflbrs, that they who were not near
1520. enough to annoy them in person, impatient of the

delay, pressed forward with such ardour, as drove
on their countrymen in the front with irresistible
violence. Frelh warriors inflantly filled the place
of such as fell. The Spaniards, weary with flaugh-
ter, and unable to sustain the weight of the torrent
that poured in upon them, began to give way. In
a moment the confusion was universal; horse and
foot, officers and soldiers, friends and enemies,
were mingled together; and while all fought, and
many fell, they could hardly distinguish from
v hat hand the blow came.

Their difaf- CORTES, with about a hundred foot soldiers
ers', and a few horse, forced his way over the two re-

maining breaches in the causeway, the bodies of
the dead serving to fill up the chasms, and reached
the main land. Having formed them as soon as
they arrived, he returned with such as were yet ca-
pable of service, to aflift his friends in their retreat,
and to encourage them, by his pretence and ex-
ample, to persevere in the efforts requisite to effect
it. He met with part of his soldiers, who had broke
through the enemy, but found many more over-
whelmed by. the multitude of their aggressors, or
perilhing in the lake ; and heard the piteous la-
mentations of others, whom the Mexicans, having
taken alive, were carrying off in triumph to be la-
crificed to the god of war. Before day, all who
had escaped assembled at Tacuba. But when the
morning dawned, and discovered to the view of
Cortes his Ihattered battalion, reduced to less than
half its number, the survivors dejected, and molt
of them covered with wounds, the thoughts of
what they had suffered, and the remembrance of

so

so many faithful friends and gallant followers, whoB 0 o K
had fallen in that night of lorrow *, pierced his v.
.' foul with such anguilh, that while lie was forming

their ranks, and issuing ibme nccefllry orders, his '50'

.; soldiers observed the tears trickling from his eyes,
: and remarked, with much fatisfation, that while
:: attentive to the duties of a general, he was not

insensible to the feelings of a man.

IN this fatal retreat 'many officers of distinction and iis.

perished I, and among thele Velasquez de Leon,
who having forsaken the party of his kinsman, the
governor of Cuba, to follow the fortune of his
cimpanions, was, on that account, as well as for
his superior merit, refpeaed by them as the second
person in the army. All the artillery, ammunition,
and baggage, were loft; the greater part of the
horses, and above two thousand Tlafcalans, were
killed, and only a very small portion of the treasure
which they had amassed was saved. This, which
. lad been always their chief objet, proved now a
great cause of their calamity; for many of the
' soldiers having so overloaded themselves with bars
of gold as rendered them unfit for aAion, and re-
', tarded their flight, fell, ignominiously, the victims
":of their own inconsiderate avarice. Amidit so
many difaffers, it was some consolation to find that
',Aguilar and Marina, wlofe function as inte preters
iwas of such effen:ial importance, had made tleir
.iefcape II.

THE sirss care of Cortes was to find some fliel- 15)1;1': ' **

(ter for his wearied troops; for ;'. the iViexicans in- .s ;l,,.'
'fested them on every fide, and the. ipeople of 'I.'cul-
ba began to take arms, lie could not continue in his

pielcnt
* Noche Trifle is the naleic by which it is fill diltiiguihedt l in

Iew Spain. *' See N.OTE f XXII. II Co(tcs Relat.

248. B. Diaz. c. 128 Gomara Cron. c. ;cg Hcrrcra,
tC, 2. lib. x. c. 1l, 1 2.

B OOK present flation. He direted his march towards

V. the rising ground, and having fortunately disco-
V'-s vered a temple situated on an eminence, took

. poffeffilon of it. There he found not only the

shelter for which he wished, but, what was no
less wanted, some provisions to refresh his men;
and though the enemy did not intermit their at-
tacks throughout the day, they were with little
difficulty prevented from making any impreflion,
During this time Cortes was engaged in deep
consultation with his officers, concerning the route
which they ought to take in their retreat. They
were now on the weft fide of the lake. Tlafcala,
the only place where they could hope for a friend-
ly reception, lay about fixty-four miles to the eafl
of Mexico *; to that they were obliged to go:
round the north end of the lak; before they could
fall into the road which led thither. A Tlafcalan
soldier undertook to be their guideand conduted
them through a country in some places marshy,
in others mountainous, in all ill-cultivated and
thinly peopled. They marched for fix days with
little respite, and under continual alarms, nume-
rous bodies of the Mexicans hovering around them,
sometimes harafling them at a distance with their
misfile weapons, and Sometimes attacking them
closely in front, in rear, in flank, with great bold-
ners, as they now knew that they were not invin-
cible. Nor were the fatigue and danger of those
incessant conflits the worfl evils to which they
were exposed. As the barren country through
which they passed afforded hardly any provisions,
they were reduced to feed on berries, roots, and
the falks of green maize; and at the very time
that famine was deprefling their spirits and s\waR
ing their strength, their situation required the mod
vigorous and unremitting exertions of courage
and acivity. Amidst thoif complicated ditlefles

d Oil
* Villa Scgnor Teatro Americano, lib. ii c. il.

one circumstance supported and animated the B O O K
Spaniards. Their commander sustained this fad v.
. reverse of fortune with unshaken magnanimity. 12
His pretence of mind never forsook him; his fa- 5
g acity foresaw every event, and his vigilance pro-
vided for it. He was foremost in every danger,
and endured every hardship with cheerfulness.
The difficulties with which he was surrounded
seemed to call forth new talents; and his soldiers,
though despairing themselves, continued to follow
:him with increasing confidence in his abilities.

ON the sixth day they reached Otumba, not Ba:le .f

''far from the road between Mexico and Tlafcala. O.tu!""
'"Early next morning they began to advance to-
wards it, flying parties of the enemy still hanging
ion their rear; and amidst the insults with which
they accompanied their hofilities, Marina remark-
ed that they often exclaimed with exultation,
," Go on, robbers; go to the place where you
:'fall quickly meet the vengeance due to your
:crimes." The meaning of this threat the Spaniards
'did not comprehend, until they reached the fum-
,nit of an eminence before them. There a fpaci-
;us valley opened to their view, covered vitll a
;aft army, extending as far as the eye could reach.
[rhe Mexicans, while with one body of their
roops they harafied the Spanialds in their retreat,
ad assembled their principal force on the other
ide of the lake; and marching along the road
Which led direcly to Tlafcala, polled it in the
lain of Otumba, through which they knew Cor-
s must paTs. At the fight of this incrcclible
ultitude, which they could furvcy at once from
ie rising ground, the Spaniards wcre allonilhccl,
neven the buldeft began to dcflpair. But Cor-
s, without allowing leilure for their fears to ac-
ire flrength by reflection, after warning them
iefly that no alternative now remained blut to
VoL. II. H conquer

B OO K conquer or to die, led them infRantly to the charge.

V. The Mexicans waited their approach with unusual
'VW~~~ fortitude. Such, however, was the superiority of

1520. the Spanifl diicipline and arms, that the impref-

sion of this fmill body was irrefitlible; and which-
ever way its force was directed, it penetrated and
dispersed the most numerous battalions. But while
thelei gave way in one quarter, new combatants
advanced from another, and the Spaniards, though
successful in every attack, were ready to fink un-
der those repeated efforts, without feeing any end
to their toil, or any thope of viEtory. At that
time Cortes observed the great standard of the
empire, which was carried before the Mexican
general, advancing; and fortunately recolleting
to have heard, that on the fate of it depended the
event of every battle, he assembled a few of his
bravefr officers, whose horses were itill capable of
service, and placing himself at their head, pulied
forvard towards the fiandard with an impetuosity
which bore down every thing before it. A ch(len
body of nobles, who guarded the fiandard, made
some refiloance, but were soon broken. Corts,
with a stroke of his lance, wounded the Mexican
general, and threw him to the ground. One of
his follo', ers alighting, put an end to his life, and
laid hold of the imperial fiandard. The momieni
that their leader fell, and the standard, toward!
which all directed their eyes, disappeared, an ulni
versal panic firuck the Mexicans, and, as if tli
bond which held them together had been dissol'
ed, eeery ensign was lowered, each soldier tlrcv
away his weapons, and fled with preci)pitltion i
the mountains. The Spaniards, unable to p!uiili
hcm far, returned to colle& the spoils of the fich
which were To valuable as to be tome comlpcnlh
lion for the wealth which they had loll in MexicC
for in the enemy's army were mofi of their pii

ci'

cipal warriors, dressed out in their richest orna- BOOK
ments, as if they had been marching to assured V.
vitory. Next day, to their great joy they enter- 52O.
ed the Tlafcalan territories . July 8.

Bu'r, amidst their fatisfation in having got be- RcceptionoF

yond the precincts of an hostile country, they could lCL spiar-
not look forward without solicitude, as they were lln

.

f till uncertain what reception they might meet with
from allies, to whom they returned in a condition
very different from that in which they had lately
let out from their dominions. Happily for them,
:the enmity of the Tlafcalans to the Mexican name
: was so inveterate, their desire to avenge the death
of their countrymen so vehement, and the alcend-
: ant which Cortes had acquired over the chiefs of
the republic so complete, that, far from enter-
.taining a thought of taking any advantage of the
. difirefied situation in which they beheld the Spa-
niards, they reccived them with a tenderness and
,cordiality which quickly diflipated all their fufpi-
cions.

SOME interval of tranquillity and indulgence wsas New delib-

*now absolutely necefiary; not only that the Spa- raion of
niards might give attention to the cure of their .
wounds, which had been too long neglected, but

oin order to recruit their strength, exhaufied by filch

a long fucceflion of fatigue and hardlhips. Dur-
ing this, Cortes learned tliat he and his compa-
nions were not the only Spaniards who had felt
hle effes of the Mexican enmitr. A conlider-
able detachment, which was marching from Zcm-
poalla towards the capital, had been cut off by
the people of Tepeaca. A smaller party, return-
lg from Tlafcala to Vera Cruz, with the flare of

H z the

Cortesrclat. p. 219. B. Diaz c. 128. Gomara Cron. c.
z. lerrera, idec. 2, lib. x. c. 2, 13.

B O O K the Mexican gold allotted to the garrison, had

v. been surprised and destroyed in the mountains.
'-" At a junture when the life of every Spaniard was
1520. of importance, such losses were deeply felt. The

schemes which Cortes was meditating rendered
them pecularly afflictive to him. While hisenemies,
and even many of his own followers, confidered
the disasters which had befallen him as fatal to the
progress of his arms, and imagined that nothing
now remained but speedily to abandon a country
which he had invaded with unequal force, his
mind, as eminent for perseverance as for enter-
prise, was still bent on accomplishing his original
purpose, of fibjeEting the Mexican empire to the
crown of Castile. Severe and unexpected as the
check was which he had received, it did not ap-
pear to him sufficient reason for relinquishing the
conquests which he had already made, or againlf
refuning his operations with better hopes of fuc-
cess. The colony at Vera Cruz was not only safe,
but had remained unmolested. The people of
Zempoalla and the adjacent diftrits had discover-
ed no symptoms of defection.. The Tlafcalans
continued faithful to their alliance. On their mar.
tial spirit, easily rouzed to arms, and inflamed
with implacable hatred of the Mexicans, he de-
pended for powerful aid. He had still the comn
mand of a body of Spaniards, equal in number to
that with which he had opened his way into the
centre of the empire, and had taken poffeflion of
the capital; so that with the benefit of greater ex-
perience, as well as more perfet knowledge of
the country, he did not despair of quickly reco.
vering all that he had been deprived of by untc-
wa d events.

The i.na. F FUILL of this idea, he courted the Tlal(al;i'
,kjle chi:fs with such attention, and diilributed aim>:l

II0

them so liberally the rich spoils of Otumba, that B O O K
he was secure of obtaining whatever he should V.
require of the republic. He drew a small supply S'' .
of ammunition, and two or three field-pieces, 520-
from his stores at Vera Cruz. He dispatched an
officer of confidence with four ships of Narvaez's
fleet to Hispaniola and Jamaica, to engage adven-
turers, and to purchase horses, gunpowder, and
other military flores. As he knew that it would
be vain to attempt the reduction of Mexico, unless
he could secure the command of the lake, he gave
orders to prepare in the mountains of Tlalcala
materials for building twelve brigantines, so as
they might be carried thither in pieces ready to
be put together, and launched when he flood in
need of their service ®.

BUT while, w\ith provident attention, he wasMuitinor!

taking those necelfary fieps towards the executi- rpiiit obfhi
on of his meafires, an obstacle arose in a quarter troop"'
where it was least fufpetted, but molf formidable.
The spirit of diicontent and mutiny broke out in
his own army. Many of Narvaez's followers were
planters rather than soldiers, and had accompanied
him to New Spain with sanguine hlopes of obtain-
ilig settlements, and little inclination to engage in
the hardships and diinge-rs of war. As the fahnm
motives had induced the m to enter into their new
engagements with Cortes, they no sooner became
acquainted with the nature of the service, than
they bitterly repented of their choice. Such of
them as had the good fortune to survive the peril-
ous adventures in which their own imprudence
had involved them, happy in having made their
escape, trembled at the thoughts of being expos-
ed a second time to similar calamities. As Toon as
they discovered the intclj'i(,n of Cortes, they beg,.i;

l;.'rc, tIv

*Cortes Rclit. p. ? F '.
E. mai. (` (q C U

B o O K secretly to murmur and cabal, and waxing gra-

V. dually more audacious, they, in a body, offered a
"- ev' remonstrance to their general againif the impru-

-0. dence of attacking a poverful empire with his

shattered forces, and formally required him to
lead them back directly to Cuba. Though Cor-
tes, long prafifed in the arts of command, em-
ployed arguments, entreaties, and presents, to
convince or to sooth them; though his own soldiers,
animated with the spirit of their leader, warmly
seconded his endeavours; he found their fears too
violent and deep-rooted to be removed, and the
utmost he could effect was to prevail x ith tlhen
to defer their departure for some time, on a pro-
nmife that he would, at a more proper juncure,
dismiss such as Ihould desire it.

Mfeans lie T 1 A T the malcontents might have no leisure io
ePvoes tCir brood over the causes of their difaffetion, le re-
confidence. solved instantly to call forth his troops into action.

He proposed to chaflife the people of Tepeac'
for the outrage which they had committed; and
as the detachment which they had cut off happen-
ed to be composed mostly of soldiers who haid
served under Narvaez, their companions, from t1:.
desire of vengeance, engaged more willingly i:l
AlsfIt. this war. He took the command in person, ac-

companied by a numerous body of Tlafcalii:,
and in the space of a few weeks, after varii;u
encounters, with great slaughter of the Tepeacain,
reduced that province to fubjcCtion. During tc-
veral months, while he waited for the fipplies ot
men and ammunilion which he exl:ected, an(l , ..
carrying on his preparations for conilrutilCiil ':
brigantines, lie kept his tro(op.- coniiantly emipl\-
ed in various expeditions againfl tlh adi:::;"'
provinces, all of which were condtclttd \vilti an
uniform tenour of ficccls. By these, hiii: Iln
became agcain acciiflonled to victory, and rli.('
ccd tleir wonted sens cf fupeiioriity; thle M:xi

C'1i"

can power was weakened; the Tlafcalan warriorsB o 0 K
acquired the habit of acting in conjunction with v.
the Spaniards; and chiefs of the republic delight- ''-
ed to fee their country enriched with the spoils 5'
of all the people around them, and astonished
every day vith fresh discoveries of the irresistible
prowess of their allies, declined no effort re-
quifite to filpport them.

AL L those preparatory arrangements, however, s.engthen-

though the most prudent and efficacious which the d '!) l;-veral
situation of Cortes allowed him to make, would mrnts.
have been of little avail, without a reinforccment
of spanish soldiers. Of this he \was so deeply fen-
jible, that it was the chief olbjet of his thoughts
and swihes; and yet his only profped of obtain-
ing it, from the return cf the officer whom he ' lad
1Lnt to the isles to solicit aid, was both diltant and
uncertain. BJit vwhat neither his own f:agaciry
nor power could have procured. he ov;ed to a
lEries of fortunate and unforeiecn incidc-,,s. The
governor of Cuba, to whom the success of Nar-
vaez appeared an event of infallible certainty,
having lent two small ihips after hinm wxilh new
inifrucdions and a fiupply of Inen and military
stores, tle officer whom Certes had appointed to
command on the coast, artfl'llv deco\ed tlhem
into the harbour of Vera Crnz, Icizcd the veielTs,
and easily perli'adcd rli IJdieirs to fullow tlhe
tsincdard of llnOre able le.aidr lthan him w\hom tlic
were deftine(l to, j,)i "*. Soon after, three (hlips ol
more eonfidcrible f;rce came into the lharboui
leparately. T'Iefe belonged to an lrmiamcnt fit--
led out by Francico de Garay, go\erno;, ol' jia
Inaica, who being poffcfled withl the :rage or di lco-
very and conq!,eft which aniirar:tld vcr'5 Spnl
niard fettled in Amtricai, hlad 1: n ?; il,..ld at in-

I i'(1irl:')·
' 1! Di,,;. c. ;i

B- O O K intruding into fbme diftrift of New Spain, and di-

V. viding with Cortes the glory and gain of annexing
'0 that empire to the crown of Castile. They unadvif-

edly made their attempt on the'northern provinces,
where the country was poor and the people fierce
and warlike; and, after a.cruel fucceflion of dif-
afiers, famine compelled them to venture into
o,,ber zS. Vera Cruz and cast themselves upon the mercy

of their countrymen. Their fidelity was not
proof against the splendid hopes and promises
which had seduced other adventurers, and, as if
the spirit of revolt had been contagious in New
Spain, they likewise abandoned the master whom
they were bound to serve, and enlisted under Co -
tes *. Nor was it America alone that furnished
such unexpected aid. A thip arrived from Spain,
freighted by some private merchants with milita-
ry ltores, in hopes of a profitable market in a
country, the fame of whose op:lence began t)
spread over Europe. Cortes eagerly purchased a
cargo which to him was invaluable, and the crew,
following the general example joined him at
Tlafcala t.

FROM those various quarters, the army of Cor-

tes was augmented with an hundred and eighty
men, and twenty horses, a reinforcement too
inconsiderable to produce any consequence which
would intitle it- to have been mentioned in the
history. of other parts of the globe. But in that
of America, where great revolutions were brought
about by causes which seem to bear no proporti .n
to their effects, such small events rife into imlx r-
tance, because they were tfufficient to decide With
refpec to the fate of kingdoms. Nor is it the l::ft
remarkable instance of the liisilar felicity c(!i-
fpicuous in any pafihges of Cortes's flory, that tile

txI )
sCortcs Rchat., z 5, P. P, Din.C. 1 33. Wcl Thid. c.

two persons chiefly infirumental in furnilhing him B o o K
with those seasonable supplies should be an avowed V.
enemy who aimed as his deftrution, and an en- JV
vious rival who wifled to supplant him. 1520.

THE firfi effect of the junction with his new Number of

followers was to enable him to difinils flich of bisforces.
Narvaez's soldiers as'remained with reluctance in
his service. After their departure, he frill muf-
tered five hundred and fifty infantry, of which
fourscore were armed with muflets or cross-bows,
forty horsemen, and a train of nine field-pieces *.
At the head of there, accompanied by ten thou-
land Tlafcalans and other friendly Indians, Cor-
tes began his march towards Mexico, on the
twenty-eighth of December, fix months after his
fatal retreat from that city--.

NOR did he advance to attack an enemy un- Prear3tion,

ol the Me.-

prepared to receive him. Upon the death of ians so,
Montezuma, the Mexican chiefs, in whom thelltei'rd'ence
riaglt of electing the emperor was veited, had in-
Itantly raised his brother Quetlavaca to the throne.
His avowed and inveterate enmity to the Spa-
niards, would have been sufficient to gain their
fifriages, although he had been less diltinguifhed
for courage and capacity. SHe had an imme-
diate opportunity of (hewing that he was worthy
oftlheir choice, by conducting in person, those
fierce attacks which compelled the Spaniards to
abandon his capital; anid ,s son as their retreat
afforded him any respite fr. m action, he took
measures for preventing their return to Mexico,
with prud-:nce equal to the Il)irit which he had
displayed in driving them out of it. As from

the

Cortes Rhl a
. 2 55, E, .1 RRekat. 2 5', A. 13. Diaz. c. 137.

B.o O K the vicinity of Tlafcala he could not be acquaint-

V. ed with the motions and intentions of Cortes, he
S'zo.' observed the itorm that was gathering, and be-

gan early to provide against it. He repaired
what the Spaniards had ruined in the city, and
strengthened it with such new fortifications as the
Ikill of his fubjetts was capable of erecting.
Beside filling his magazines with the usual weapons
of war, he gave direction to make long spears,
headed with the swords and daggers taken from
the Spaniards, in order to annoy the cavalry.
He summoned the people in every province of
the empire to take arms againfi their cppreffors;
as an encouragement to exert themselves w th
vigour, he promised them exemption from all the
taxes which his predecessors had impofd *. But
..,hat he laboured with the greatest 'earneftneis
was, to deprive the Spaniards of the advantass
which they derived from the friendship of the
Tlafcalans, by endeavouring to persuade that peo-
ple to renounce all connection with men who vere
not only avowed enemies of the gods whom they
worfihipped, but who would not fail to fulbject
them at last to the fame yoke, which they we'!
now inconfiderablv lending their aid to imp.re:
upon others. These representations, no lfis Ii.-
king than well-founded, were urged io f'rcil)ly
by his ambassadors, that it required all the ad-
dress of Cortes to prevent their making a dang.sr-
ous impreiflon --.

BUT while Q/etlavaca was arrangilg his 1 :'!

of defence, with a degree of foresight uncc'mnril
in an American, his days were cut ilort b ti!'
fiall-pox. Tlis dillemper which raged at tlat tim'
in New Spain with fatal malignity, was unnlkn;

(C rt

t . P..cl;ht. p. z e,, E. 2z4, A. B. Diaz. c. l,,y'.

l I;. ;

] itz, c. 1
Z9. it rrtra, dec. 2. lib. x. c.; 1.. I,m

in'that quarter of the globe, until it was introduced B O 0 K
by the Europeans, and may be reckoned among V.
the greatest calamities brought upon them by their &
invaders. In his stead the Mexicans raised to the 1520.
throne Guatirmozin, nephew and fon-in-law of
Montezuma, a young man of such high reputation
'for abilities and valour, that in this dangerous cri-
sis, his countrymen, with one voice, called him to
the supreme command *.

As soon as Cortes entered the enemy's territo- co;-ts ad.

1 '

,. , .n van[c¢s to-

ries, he discovered various preparations to obfiru. wa-dv Mcxi.
his progress. But his troops forced their way°o'
with little difficulty, and took ponililion of Te-
zeuco, the fccond city of the empire, situated on
the banks of the lake, about twenty miles from
Mexico t. Here he determined to e'tablilh his
head-quarters, as the most proper flation for
launching his brigantines, as well as for making
his approaches to the capital. In order to render
his residence there more secure, he deposed the
cazique or chief, who was at the head of that com-
munity, under pretext of some defect in his title,
and fubflituted in his place a person whom a sac-
tion of the nobles pointed out as the right heir of
that dignity. Attached to lim by this bcnefit, the
new cazique and his adherents served the Spaniards
with inviolable fidelity ;.

As the conflruction of the brigantines advanced His or'at.-

fiowly under the unflcilful hands of soldiers and cat.ioti.'
Indians, whom Cortes was obliged to employ in
allifting three or four carpenlers who happened
fortunately to be in his service, and as he had not
yet received the reinforcement which he expected

from

' D* c.

Dia. 30o. t Villa Senor Theatro Arncricano,

i, G56. :: Cortes Relat. 256, &c. 13. Diaz. c. 137. Go-
ulasa Cron. c. 12. Herrera, dec. 3. c. i.

B 0,0 K from Hispaniola, he was not in a condition to turn

V. his arms. directly against the capital. To have

'' '
t attacked a city io populous, so well prepared for

1521. defence, and in a situation of such peculiar strength,

must have exposed his troops to inevitable deftruc-
tion. Three months elapsed before the materials
for conftruting the brigantines were finiffied, and
before he heard any thing with respeCt to the fuc-
cess of his negociation in Hispaniola. This, how-
ever, was not a season of inaction to Cortes. He
attacked fucceflively several of the towns situated
around the lake; and though all the Mexican
power was exerted to obftruc his operations, he
either compelled them to submit to the Spanifl
crown, or reduced them to ruins. Other towns he
endeavoured to conciliate by more gentle means;
and though he could not hold any intercourie
with the inhabitants but by the intervention of in-
terpreters, yet, under all the disadvantage of tlat
tedious and imperfet mode of communication, lhe
had acquired such thorough knowledge of the state
of the country, as well as of the diipofitions (
the people, that he conducted his negociations mll
intrigues with aflonifhing dexterity and fIncces.
Most of the cities adjacent to Mexico were origi-
nally the capitals of small independent states; ial
some of thdm having been but lately annexeci to
the Mexican empire, liill retained the rlnmemb'r;;n:c
of their ancient liberty, and bore with impati:.ll:
the rigorous yoke of their new maflers. Crt::
llaving early obfcrved symptoms of their dilhilt-
tion, availed himflf of this knowledl e to !':::
:.leir confidence and friendllip. By ofiYrint, \vild
conidtlcce, to deliver them from tlhe odiouis dl
Ininion of the Mexicans, and l)y liberal pro(in;c:
o)i' Iore ilndulgent treatrment, if they woulil uliil
.'ili h11i11 againi1ft their olppiefinrs, he i)lCevilcl ii
tie pcol .1' oei everal colnfiderable dilliic-ts not ii
!o a,,koljvk'cd,;e tile king of Cafile as thlcr ;i'

r' . I,,'I

reign, but to supply the Spanilln camp with pro- B O O K
visions, and to strengthen his army with auxiliary V.
troops. Guatimozin, on the firit appearance of '""'-
defetion among his fubjcEts, exerted himself uwith
vigour to prevent or to punish their revolt; but in
spite of his efforts, the spirit continued to fpreid.
The Spaniards gradually acquired new allies; and
with deep concern he beheld Cortes arming again't
his empire those very hands which ought to have
been active in its defence, and ready to advance
against the capital at the head of a numerous body
of his own fubjets '*.

WHILE, by those various methods, Cortes was

gradually circumicribing the Mexican power with-
in fich narrow limits that his prorpe&t of overturn-
ing it seemed neither to be uncertain nor remote,
all his schemes were well nigh defeated, by a con-
fpiracy no less unexpected than dangerous. The
soldiers of Narvaez had never united perfectlv
with the original companions of Cortes, nor did
they enter into his measures with the fame cordial
zeal. Upon every occafi.)n that required any ex-
traordinary effort of courage or of patience, thlir
spirits were apt to fink; and now, on a near view
of what they had to encounter, in attempting to
reduce a city so inacceflible as Mexico, and de-
fended by a numerous army, the refolutioii even
of tlhole among them who had adlhered to Cortes,
when lie was delerted by their allbciates, began to
fail. Their fears led them to l)rcfiumptuLots and
unfoldier-like difcullions concerning the propriety
of their general's meafTi'ts, iund the improbability
of their liccefs. From thllce they proceeded ti
ccnfure and invectives, and nt lall began to delibe-
rate how they might provide for their own

fiafet),

* Cortes Relat. 256-260. B. Dl)i. . 137c-11. -i. .-
miara Cron, c. 122, 123. I-lerrera, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 1, z.

B 0 0 Kfafety, of which they deemed their commander tu

v. be totally negligent. Antonio Villefagna, a pri-
1-,J vate soldier, but bold, intriguing, and ltrongly at-
1521. t"

tached to Velasquez, artfully fomented this grow-
ing spirit of difaifeation. His quarters became the
rendezvous of the malcontents, where, after many
consultations, they could discover no method of
checking Cortes in his career, but by affaflinating
him and his most considerable oflicers, and confer-
ring the command upon some person who would
relinquish his wild plans, and adopt measures more
confilent with the general security. Despair in-
spired them with courage. The hour for perpe-
trating the crime, the persons whom they defined
as viIcims, the officers to succeed them in com-
mand, were all named; and the conspirators sign-
ed an association, by which they bound themselves
with most solemn oaths to mutual fidelity. But
on the evening before the appointed day, one of
Cortes's ancient followers, who had been seduced
into the conspiracy, touched with compunction at
the imminent danger of a man whom he had long
been accufiomed to revere, or struck with horror
at his own treachery, went privately to his general,
and revealed to him all that he knew. Cortes,
though deeply alarmed, discerned at once what
conduct was proper in a situation so critical. He
repaired instantly toVillefagna's quarters, accom-
panied by some of his molt trusty officers. The
altonifhnient and confusion of the man, at this un-
expected visit anticipated the confeflion of his guilt.
While his attendants seized him, Cortes snatched
from his bosom a paper containing the aflbciation,
signed by the conspirators. Impatient to know
how far the defection extended, he retired to read
it, and found there names which filled him with
surprise and sorrow. But aware how dangerous a
itriEt scrutiny might prove at such a juncture, 1ie

confinled

confined his judicial inquiries to Viilefagna alone. B3 u 0
As the proofs of his guilt were manr'i eI, he was
condemned after a short trial, and next morning , .
he was seen hanging before the door of the house
in which he had lodged. Cortes called his troops
together, and having explained to them the attro-
cious purpose of the conspirators, as well as the
justice of the punishment inflicted on Villeilana,
he added, with an appearance of fatisfactiuna, thar
he was intirely ignorant with refpeet to all the cir-
cumfiances of this dark transaction, as the traito-,
when arrested, had fuddenlv torn and swallowed
a paper, which probably contained an account of
it, and under the severest tortures pjftctTed filch
constancy as to conceal the names of his accom-
plices. This artfiul declaration restorcd tranquil-
lity to many a breast that was throbbing, x\ hile he
spoke, with c'nfcioufllefs of guilt and dread of
deteEtion; and by this prudent moderation, Cor-
tes had the advantage of having discovered and of
being able to observe such of his followers as were
difaffecaed; while they, flattering thernilves th;lt
their palt crime was unknown, endeavoured to
avert any suspicion of it, by redoubling their actl-
vity and zeal in his service

CORTES did not allow themC leitire to ruminnte lii;, !;li!'

on what ha.d happenedl; a nd as ,'he mol c,;lJ r iilil,
means of p:eventing tlhe returin of a imtiinois I;i-',i,:.
rit, he determined to call f;rth his rnroo)s imml r li-
ately to adtion. Forltinat'll ) , a piopcr. occafi )
for this occurred without his Ieemin; to cr)n iit.
He received intelligence, tlint thlc inl;inils for
building thle brigantincs \.cre at lin:: tl, complqetCl'
finiled, anid waited onlv f'r' a b'l,v .,f Sn;'n,;i:ds
to condlict them to T'T'ecu(o'. 'Thc c ,nm:!tnl of
this convoy, confifling of lxio lhundred s:ot

tfoIdicrs,

Corcts Relat. 283, C. B, Diaz,. c, 1i46 Hcrr e.n, (lec. 3.
ib, ic. i.

B 0 K soldiers, fifteen horsemen, and two field-pieces,

v. he gave to Sandoval, who, by the vigilance, asti-
-, .-V vity, and courage which he manifested on every
5z21. occasion, was growing daily in his confidence, and

in the effimation of his fellow-foldiers. The ser-
vice was no less singular than important; the
beams, the planks, the malts, the cordage, the fails,
the iron-work, and all the infinite variety of arti-
cles requisite for the conftruaion of thirteen bri-
gantines, were to be carried sixty miles over land,
through a mountainous country, by people who
were unacquainted with the ministry of domefiic
animals, or the aid of machines to facilitate any
work of labour. The Tlafcalans furnished eight
thousand Ta.,nenzes, an inferior order of men defiined
for servile tasks, to carry the materials on their
shoulders, and appointed fifteen thousand warriors
to accompany and defend them. Sandoval made
the disposition for their progress with great pro-
priety, placing the 'iamenes in the centre, one body
of warriors in the front, another in the rear, with
considerable parties to cover the flanks. To each
of these hejoined rome Spaniards, not only to allis
them in danger, but to accustom them to regula-
rity and subordination. A body so numerous,
and so much encumbered, advanced leisurely, but
in excellent. order; and in some places, where it
was confined by the woods or mountains, the lile
of march extended above fix miles. Parties ol
Mexicans frequently appeared hovering arounc
them on the high grounds; but perceiving no pro
IpeA of success in attacking an enem:; continu,ll]
on his guard, and prepared to receive them, the'
did not venture to molest hlim; and Sandoval li.
the glory of conduting iafely toTezeuco a coiiNv
on which all the future operations of his countr)
men depended *'.

d Til

* Cortes Relat. 260. C. E. B. Diaz, c. 14:0.
112

THIS was followed by another event of no lefsB O o K
moment. Four ships arrived at Vera Clruz from V.
Hispaniola, with two hundred soldiers, eighty "'7
horses, two battering cannon, and a considerable Receves a
frupply of ammunition and arms *. Elevated with new rein-
observing that all his preparatory schemes, either foLcemen
for recruiting his own army, or impairing the
force of the enemy, had now produced their full
effect, Cortes, impatient to begin the liege in form,
hastened the launching of the brigantines. To
facilitate this, he had employed a vast number of
Indians, for two months, in deepening the tmall
rivulet which runs by Tezeuco into the lake, and
in forming it into a canal near two miles in lengtht;
and though the Mexicans, aware of his intentions,
as well as of the danger which threatened them,
endeavoured frequently to interrupt the labourers,
or to burn the brigantines, the work was at last
completed f. On the twenty-eighth of April, all The brigan-
· , AO*n . . .1 -..i *r i r t~neslaunch-
the Span fh troops, together with auxiliary Indians, ed.
were drawn up on the banks of the canal; and
with extraordinary military pomp, heightened and
rendered more solemn by the celebration of the
noftfacred rights of religion, the brigantines were
launched. As they fell down the canal in order,
Father Olmedo blessed them, and gave each its
name. Every eye followed them with wonder
nd hope, until they entered the lake, when they
hoisted their fails, and bore away before the wind.
[ general shout of joy was railed; all admiring
hat bold inventive genius, which, by means so
[xtraordinary that their success almost ex-eeded
lief, had acquired the command of a fleet,
ithout the aid of which Mexico would have
VOL. II. I continued

[ Cortes Relat. 2z9. F. 26z, D. Gomara Cron. c, 129.
See NOTE XXIII. § B Diaz.c.149.
.

B O O K continued to set the Spanish power and arms at

V. defiance *

1521. CORTES determined to attack the city from
for tefege. three diferent quartcrs; from Tezeuco on the

east fide of the laike, from Tacuba on the weft, and
from Cuyocan towards the south. Those towns
were situated on the principal causeways which
led to tie capital, and intended for their defence.
He appointed Sandoval to command in the first,
Pedro de Alvarado in the second, and Chriftoval
de Olid in the third; allotting to each a numerous
body of Indian auxiliaries, together with an equal
division of Spaniards, who, by the junation of the
troops from Hilpaniola, amounted now to eighty-
fix horsemen, and eight hundred and eighteen
foot soldiers; of whom a hundred and eighteen
were armed with muikets or cross-bows. Their
train of artillery conifi-ed of three battering can-
non, and fifteen field-pieces . Hc reserved for
himself, as the fiation of greatest importance and
danger, the conduct of the brigantines, each armed
with one of his small cannon, and manned with
twenty-five Spaniards.
M:y 1o. As Alvarado and Olid proceeded towards the

pofis afligned them, they broke down the aque-
duds which the ingenuity of the Mexicans had
ere(ted for conveying water into the capital, and
by the distress to which this reduced the inlhbi-
t.inrs, gave a beginning to the calamities vwhich
they were destined to fiuffer 1. Alvarado and Olid
found the towns, of which they were ordered 1t
lake pollBefion, delcrted by their inhabitandts, \shl

hid

' Coitcs R'lat. 266, C. HTerrera, dcc. 3. iU. i. c. ';

inara Cron. c. 121.). I Cortes Iclat. z6o, C.

. (.

Rclat. 267, 11. I;, Diaz, c. 150. -kerreru, dec. 3. il, i. c
j

had fled for safety to the capital, where Guati-BO OK
mozin had collected the chief force of his empire, V
as there alone he could hope to make a successful 521'
fland against the formidable enemies who were
approaching to assault him.

THE firfl effort of the Mexicans was to destroy Mexican

the fleet of brigantines, the fatal effeEts of whole brigntines,
operations they foresaw and dreaded. Though
the brigantines, after [all the labour and merit of
Cortes in forming them, were of inconsiderable
bulk, rudely conffruted, and manned chiefly
with landmen, hardly poffffeed of skill enough to
condudt them, they muff have been objects of ter-
ror to a people unacquainted with any navigation
but that of their lake, and possessed of no vefie
larger than a canoe. Neceflity, however, urged
Guatimozin to hazard the attack ; and hoping to
supply by numbers what he wanted in force, he
assembled such a multitude of canoes as covered
the face of the lake. They rowed on boldly to
the charge, while the brigantines, retarded by a
dead calm, could scarcely advance to meet them.
But as the enemy drew near, a breeze fulddenly Rcpull,
sprung up; in a moment the fails were spread, and
the brigantines with irrefiilible impetuosity broke
through their feeble opponents, overset many ca-
noes, and diflipated the whole armanment with
such slaughter, as convinced the Mexicans, that
the progress of the Europeans in knowledge and
arts rendered their fupeionrity greater on this new
element than they had hitherto found it by land *.

FROM that time Cortes remained mailer of tlhe ;ng"ll'r.

lake; and the brigantines not only preserved a l'u^irgih'
communicatiol between the Spaniards in their "ie.'

I 2 different

* Cortes Relat. 267, C. 3. Diaz, c. 50o. Gomara Cron.
C13. Herrcra, dec. 3. lib. i c. 17.

B O O K different stations, though at considerable distance

V. from each other, but were employed to cover the
1V J causeways on each fide, and keep off the canoes,
1521. when the attemDted to annoy the troops as they

advanced towards the city. He formed the bri-
gantines in three divisions, allotting one to each
Ration, with orders to second the operations of the
officer who commanded there. From all the three
Rations he pushed on the attack against the city
with equal vigour; but in a manner so very dif-
ferent from that whereby sieges are conducted in
regular war, that he himself seems afraid that it
would appear no less improper than singular, to
persons unacquainted with his situation *. Each
morning his troops assaulted the barricades which
the enemy had erected on the causeways, forced
their way over the trenches which they had dug,
and through the canals where the bridges were
broken down, and endeavoured to penetrate into
the heart of the city, in hopes of obtaining some
decisive advantage, which might force the enemy
to surrender, and terminate the war at once; but
when the obstinate valour of the Mexicans render-
ed the efforts of the day incffectual, the Spaniards
retired in the evening to their former quarters.
Thus their toil and danger were, in some measure,
continually renewed; the Mexicans repairing in
the night what the Spaniards had destroyed through
the day, and recovering the ports from which they
had driven them. But necefity prescribed this
flow and untoward mode of operation. The
number of his troops was so small, that Cortes
durst not, with a handful of men, attempt to make
a lodgment in a city where he might be lilrroundcd
and annoyed by such a multitude of enemies,
The remembrance of what he had already fulTered
by the ill-judged confidence with which lie hadl

venturc(t
* CQrtcs Relat. 270, F.

ventured into such a dangerous situation, was tillB 0 0 K
fresh in his mind. The Spaniards, exhausted with V.
fatigue, were unable to guard the various pofls s.
which they daily gained; and though their camp
was filled with Indian auxiliaries, they durfl not
devolve this charge upon them, because they were
so little accustomed to discipline, that no confidence
could be placed in their vigilance. Besides this,
Cortes was extremely solicitous to preserve the
city as much as poflible from being destroyed,
both as he destined it to be the capital of his con-
quests, and wifhled that it might remain as a mo-
nument of his glory. From all these confiderati-
ons, he adhered obstinately, for a month after the
siege was opened, to the system which he had
adopted. The Mexicans, in their own defence,
displayed valour which was hardly inferior to that
with which the Spaniards attacked them. On
land, on water, by night and by day, one furious
conflic succeeded to another. Several Spaniards
were killed, more wounded, and all were ready to
fink under the toils of unintermitting service, which
were rendered more intolerable by the injuries of
the season, the periodical rains being now set in
with their usual violence *.

ASTONISHED and disconcerted with the length Endeavours

and difficulties of the siege, Cortes determined to ctl tbhe
make one great effort to get poffeflion of the city (orm.
before he relinquished the plan which he had hi-
therto followed, and had recourse to any other
mode of attack. With this view, he sent inftruc-
tions to Alvarado and Sandoval to advance with
their divisions to a general aflault, and took the
command in person of that pofled on the cause-
way of Cuyocan. Animated by his presence, and liy 3
the exlpetation of Tome decisive event, the Spa-'
niards puflted forward with irrefifible impetuosity.

They
1 B. ) C. 1 -, r1

B 0 0 K They broke through one barricade after another,

V. forced their way over the ditches and canals, and
152o having entered the city, gained ground inceflantly,

'in spite of the multitude and ferocity of their op-

ponents. Cortes, though delighted with the ra-
pidity of his progress, did not forget that he might
still find it necelfary to retreat; and in order to
secure it, appointed Julian de Alderete, a captain
of chief note in the troops which he had received
from Hispaniola, to fill up the canals and gaps in
the causeway as the main body advanced. That
officer, deeming it inglorious to be thus employed,
while his companions were in the heat of adion
and the career of victory, neglected the important
charge committed to him, and hurried on incun-
fiderately to mingle with the combatants. The
Mexicans, whose military attention and skill were
daily improving, no sooner observed this, than they
carried an account of it to their monarch.
ieulrfed GUATIMOZIN instantly discerned the cc-nfe-

quences of the error which the Spaniards iad comn
mitted, and, with admirable presence cf mind,
prepared to take advantage of it. He command-
ed the troops potled in the front to flacken iec
efforts, in order to allure the Spaniards to pufl fir-
ward, while he difplatched a large body of cholin
warriors through different fireets, some by l'i1d,
and others by water, towards the great bleach in
the causeway, which had been left 'ccll. Oa
signal which he gave, the priests in the great tem-
ple struck the great drum conr-i :catld to the god
of war. No sooner did the M:'; ins hear iti
doleful solemn found, calcilatecd to inflire tlhei
with contempt of death and cntllhfi:.flic ardtur
than they rufled upon the enemy ,.ith franli
rage. The Spaniards, unable to refifl men urgei
pn no less by religious fury than hope of lluccc!

bcgt

began to retire at first leisurely, and with a good B O O K
countenance; but as the enemy pressed on, and their V.
own impatience to escape increased, the terror and r
confusion became so general, that when they
arrived at the gap in the causeway, Spaniards
and Tlafcalans, hofemen and infantry, plunged
in promiscuously, while the Mexicans rushed up-
on them fiercely from every fide, their light ca-
noes carrying them through Ihoals which the bri-
gantines could not approach. In vain did Cortes
attempt to stop and rally his flying troops; fear
rendered them regardless of his intreaties or com-
mands. Finding all his endeavours to renew the
combat fruitless, his next care was to save some of
thofewho had thrown themfelvesinto the water; but
while thus employed with more attention to their
situation than to his own, fix Mexicain captains with confi-
suddenly laid hold of him, and were hurrying' ltl al; lo°is
him off in triumph; and though two of his officers
rescued him at the expence of their ox n lives, he
received several dangerous wounds before he
could break loose. Above sixty Spaniards perifl-
ed in the rout; and what rendered the dialiter
more afflicting, forty of there fell alive into the
hands of an enemy never known to Ihew mercy
to a captive '.

THE approach of night, though it delivered Thr'1 w;o

the dejedted Spaniards from the attacks of the sacrificed to
enemy, ulhered in, what was hardly less griev-h teole o>'
oils, the noise of their barbarous triumph, and w.'"
of the horrid festival with which they cele-
brated their viEtory. Every quarter of the city
was illuminated; the great temple fione with
ficl peculiar splendour, that the Spaniards could
plainly fee the people in motion, and the priests

bLfy

* Cortes Relar. p. 2.-3: . Di.z, c. ',z. Goniara Cron
C. 1.8. HC-rrcra, dec 3. lib i. c. 2,

BOO K busy in hafiening the preparations for the death

V. of the prisoners. Through the gloom they fan-
;2 cied that they difcered their companions by the

whiLenefs of their skins, as they were fiript nak-
ed and compelled to dance before the image
of the god to whom they were to be offered.
They heard the shrieks of those who were 1acri-
siced, and thought that they could distinguish each
unhappy victim, by the well-known found of
his voice. Imagination added to what they real-
ly saw or heard, and augmented its horror. The
most unfeeling melted into tears of compailion,
and the flouteft heart trembled at the dreadful
fpeaacle which they beheld *.

New schemes and CORTES, who, betides all that he felt in com-
efforts of mon with his soldiers, was oppressed with the ad-
thMex"- ditional load of anxious reflections natural to a

general on such an unexpected calamity, could
not like them relieve his mind by giving vent to its
anguish. He was obliged to afiilme an air of tran-
quillity, in order to revive the spirits and hopes of
his followers. ThejunSure indeed,required an ex-
traordinary exertion of fortitude. The Mexicans,
elated with their victory, sallied out next morn-
ing to attack him in his quarters. But they did
not rely on the efforts of their own arms alone.
They font the heads of the Spaniaids whom they
had sacrificed to the leading men in the adjacent
provinces, and assured them that the god of
war, appeased by the blood of iheir invaders,
which had been shed so plentifully on his al-
tars, had declared with an audible voice, tlht
in eight days time those hated enemies should be
finally deltroyed, and peace and prosperity re-
tltablifhed in the empire.

A prP.
' See NOTE XXIV,

A PREDICTION uttered with such confidence, B OOK

and in terms so void of ambiguity, gained uni- V.
versal credit among a people prone to fuperfIition. z i.
The zeal of the provinces which had already de-
clared against the.Spaniards augmented, and feve- Cortes de-
ral, which had hitherto remained inasive, took may of h;
arms with enthufiaflic ardour to execute theIndianallics.
decrees of the gods. The Indian auxiliaries who
had joined Cortes, accuitomed to venerate the
fame deities with the Mexicans, and to receive
the responses of their priests with the fame im-
plicit faith, abandoned the Spaniards as a race of
men devoted to certain deilru'tion. Even the
fidelity of the Tlafcalans was shaken, and the Spa-
nifh troops were left almost alone in their flations.
Cortes finding that he attempted in vain to dispel
the fuperititious fears of his confederates by ar-
gument, took advantage from the imprudence of
those who had framed the prophecy, in fixing its
accompliihment so near at hand, to gi ?e them a
striking demonstration of its falsity. He sus-
pended all military cperations during the period
marked out by the oracle. Under cover of the
brigantines which kept the enemy at a distance,
his troops lay in safety, and the fatal term ex-
pired without any disaster *.

His allies, ashamed of their own credulity, re- He regain.

turned to their fiation. Oiher tribes, judging ir'itl
that the gods, who had now deceived the Mexi-
cans, had decreed finally to withdraw their
protection from them, joined his standard; and
such was the levity of a simple people, moved by
every flight imprellion, that, in a short time after
such a general defection of his confederates, Cortes
saw himself, if we may believe his own account,
at the head of an hundred and fifty thousand In-

dians.
* B. Dina. c. r53. Gomara Cron. c, 138.

BO OK dians. Even with such a numerous army, he

V. found it necessary to adopt a new and more wary

'"'' ifyftem of operation. Inflead of renewing his at-
and adopts a tempts to become master of the city at once, by
new fytim such bold but dangerous efforts of valour as he had
of attac. already tried, he made his advances gradually,

and with every poflible precaution againit expo-
sing his men to any calamity similar to that which
they frill bewailed. As the Spaniards pushed for-
ward the Indians regularly repaired the causeways
behind them. As soon as they got pofleflion of
any part of the town, the houses were instantly
levelled with the ground. Day by day, the Mex-
icans, forced to retire as their enemies gained
ground, were hemmed in within more narrow
limits. Guatimozin, though unable to flop the
career of the enemy, continued to defend his ca-
pital with obstinate resolution, and disputed every
inch of ground. But the Spaniards, having not
only varied their mode of attack, but, by orders
of Cortes, having changed the weapons with
which they fought, were again armed with the long
Chinantlan spears, which they had employed mith
fich success againit Narvaez, and, by the firm array
in which this enabled them to range themselves,
they repelled, with little danger, the loose afslult
of the Mexicans: incredible numbers of them fell in
the conflits which they renewed every day*. While
war walled without, famine began to confl;mc
them within the city. The Spanish brigantincs,
having the entire command of the lake, rendered
it impollible to receive any flipply of provilioin:
by water. The vast number of his Indian auxili-
aries enabled Cortes to shut up the avenues to th1
city by land. The l.ores which Guatimozin I:nd
laid up were exhaufied by the multitudes whicl

croudclti
Cortc'i P'eat. ?7 , C. 27ó. F. JB, Dia'.. c. i5.

crouded into the capital, to defend their fovereignB o 0 K
and the temples of their gods. Not only the peo- V.
pie, but persons of the highest rank, felt the ut- "~J
most distresses of want. What they suffered 520.
brought on infectious and mortal distempers,
the last calamity that visits besieged cities, and
which filled up the measure of their woes *.

BUT, under the pressure of so many and such Courage and

various evils, the spirit of Guatimozin remained contlancy.
firm and unfubdued. He rejected with scorn,
every overture of peace from Cortes, and disdain-
ing the idea of submitting to the oppressors of his
country, determined not to survive its ruin. The
Spaniards continued their progress. At length all
the three divisions penetrated into the great Iquare July 27.
in the centre of the city, and made a secure lodg-
ment there. Three-fourths of the city were now
reduced, and laid in ruins. The remaining quar-
ter was so closely pressed, that it could not long,
withstand assailants who attacked it from their
new station with superior advantage, and more
afluired expectation of success. The Mexican no-
bles, solicitous to iave the life of a monarch
whom they levered, prevailed on Guatimozin to
retire from a place where reiiftancc was now vain,
that he might rouse the more distant provinces
of the empire to arms, and maintain there a more
successful firuggle with the public enemy. In
order to facilitate the execution of this measure,
they endeavoured to amuse Cortes with overtures
of fbmiflion, that, while his attention was em-
ployed in adjufling the articles of pacification,
Guatimozin might elcape unperceived. But they
made this attempt upon a leader of greatet sagacity
and discernment tlan to be deceived by their arts.
Cortes fufpeLing their intention, and aware of l hat

moment

Corten Relat. 2 76, E, z77. F. B, Diaz. 155. Gomara Cron.
I-. 141.

B o 0 K moment it was to defeat it, appointed Sandoval,

V. the officer on whose vigilance he could molt per-
'v-' feetly rely, to take the command of the brigantines

152X' with ftrid injunctions to watch every motion of the

enemy. Sandoval, attentive to the charge, ob-
serving some large canoes crouded with people
rowing across the lake with extraordinary rapidity,
instantly gave the signal to chace. Garcia Hol-
guin, who commanded the fleetest brigantine, soon
overtook them, and was preparing to fire on the
foremost canoe, which seemed to carry some per-
son whom all the reft followed and obeyed. At

pc is taken once the rowers dropt their oars, and all on board,
Prifuitr. throwing down their arms, conjured him with cries

and tears to forbear, as the emperor was there.
Holguin eagerly seized his prize, and Guatimozin,
with a dignified composure, gave himself up into
his hands, requesting only that no insult might be
offered to the empress or. his children. When
conducted to Cortes, he appeared neither with the
fullen fierceness of a barbarian, nor with the dejec-
tion of a supplicant. " I have done,'" aid he,
addrefing himself to the Spanish general, " what
became a monarch. I have defended my people
to the last extremity. Nothing now remains but
to die. Take this dagger," laying his hand on
one which Cortes wore, " plant it in my bre.lt,
and put an end to a life which can no longer be of
u fe .
All,, 3. As soon as the fate of their sovereign was known,

;c the resistance of the Mexicans ceased ; and Cortes

took ptnieflion of that small part of the capitln
which yet remained undeftroyrd. Thus termi nat-
ed the siege of Mexico, the most memorable event
in the conquest of America. It continued fexenty-

fivn

K Cortes Rel.n, 279). f[ Diaz, c. 156. Gonara Croi:
c. 14-. IOTcra. de, dec,3. il) ii. c. 7.

five days, hardly one of which passed without some B 0 o K
extraordinary effort of one party in the attack, or V.
of the other in the defence of a city, on the fate C
of which both knew that the fortune of the empire
depended. As the firuggle here was more obfti-
nate, it was likewise more equal, than any be-
tween the inhabitnats of the Old and New Worlds.
The great abilities of Guatimozin, the number of
his troops, the peculiar Situation of his capital, to
far counterbalanced the superiority of the Spani-
ards in arms and discipline, that they mutt have
relinquished the enterprise, if they had trusted for
success to themselves alone. But Mexico was
overturned by the jealousy of neighbours who
dreaded its power, and by the revolt of subjects
impatient to shake off its yoke. By their effec-
tual aid, Cortes was enabled to accomplish what,
without such support, he would hardly have ven-
tured to attempt. How much soever this account
of the reduction of Mexico may detrac, on the
one hand, from the marvellous relations of some
Spanish writers, by al`cribing that to simple and
obvious causes which they attribute to the roman-
tic valour of their countrymen, it adds, on the
other, to the merit and abilities of Cortes, who,
under every disadvantage, acquired such an as-
cendant over unknown nations, as to render them
instruments towards carrying his scheme into ex-
ecution .

THE exultation of the Spaniards, on accom--s ll:llliOf

plifling this arduous enterprize, was at firIn excef- til b,.ly,
five. But this was quickly daunped by the cruel pn,,,,,,n,
disappointment of those sanguine hopes, wlicilh ','hSi.-
had animated them amidfl lo many h:.rdllips and
dangeis. Instead of the inexhauflible weallth which
they expected from becoming maRlers of Montc-

zuma's
* See NOTE XXV.

B O K zuma's treasures, and the ornaments of so many

v. temples, their rapaciousness could collect only an
'v"' inconsiderable booty amidst ruins and desolation *.

1521. Guatimozin, aware of his impending fate, had

ordered what remained of the riches amassed by
his ancestors to be thrown into the lake. The In-
dian auxiliaries, while the Spaniards were engag-
ed in conflit with the enemy, had carried off the
most valuable part of the spoil. The fum to be
divided among the conquerors was so small, that
many of them disdained to accept of the pit-
tance which fell to their share, and all murmured
and exclaimed; some, against Cortes and his con-
sidents, whom they fufpeAted of having secretly
appropriated to their own use, a large portion of
the riches which flould have been brought into the
common flock; others, againfi Guatimozin, whom
they accused of obfiinacy, in refuting to discover
the place where he had hidden his treasure.

Guatimozin AS GUMENTS, entreaties, and promises, were
totured. employed in order to sooth them, but with so lit-

tle effect, that Cortes, from solicitude to check this
gro ing spirit of discontent, gave way to a deed
which tlained the glory of all his great actions.
Without regarding the former dignity of Guati-
mozin, or feeling any reverence for those virtues
which he had displayed, he fubjcted the unhappy
monarch, together with his chief favourite, to
torture, in order to force from them a discovery
of the royal treasures, which it was ftuppofed they
had concealed. Guatimc2in bore whatever the
refined cruelty of his tormentors could inflict,
with the invincible fortitude of an American wnr-
rior. His fellow-fufferer, overcome by the vio-

lencs

* The gold and silver, according to Cortcs, nimounted only to

120,000 pesos, Relat. 280, A. a tun: ,. inrciior to that which
the Spaniards had formerly divided in Mexico.

lence of the anguish, turned a dejeEted eye to- B 0 0 K
wards his master, which seemed to implore his v.
permission to reveal all that he knew. But the
high-fpirited prince, darting on him a look of au-
thority mingled with scorn, checked his weakness
by asking, ' Am I now reposing on a bed of
flowers?" Overawed by the reproach, he perse-
vered in his dutiful silence, and expired. Cortes,
ashamed of a scene so horrid, rescued the royal
vidim from the hands of his torturers, and pro-
longed a life reserved for new indignities and fils-
ferings '.

THE fate of the capital, as both parties had Allthe pro-

foreseen, decided that of the empire. The pro- ,tire ruh.
vinces submitted one after another to the conque- -mit.
rors. Small detachments of Spaniards marching
through them without interruption, penetrated, in
different quarters, to the great Southern Ocean,
which, according to the ideas of Colurnbus, they
imagined would open a short as well as easy pas-
sage to the East Indies, and secure to the crown of
Caitile all the envied wealth of those fertile regi-
onst; and the aftive mind of Cortes began al- Cortesforms

;~ _' '

,. . 0. . Ichemes of

ready to form ichemes for attempting this im-,,c w!itco-
portant discovery $. lries,

HE did not know, that during the progress of wiiic.l ir,
his victorious arms in Mexico, the very scheme of '1'l''

- b

i i i r ,- *i i ih) aMalcll.ia.

:which he began to form folne idea, had been un-
dertaken and accomplished. As this is one of the
most splendid events in the hliftory of the Spanifi
discoveries, and has been productive of effTets pe-
culiarly intereiling to those extensive provinces
:which Cortes had now fub.jedted to the crown of
Caffile, the accfunt of its rife and progress merits
a particular detail.

FERDINAND

i *. Diaz, c. 1 7. Gomara Cron. c. 146. lerrera, dec. 3.
lii i C. c8 Torquemn. Mon. Ind. i. 574-. (Cortes
ilclar. :8o, D, &c. B. Diaz, c. 157. c.: -eirera,
Ic. 3. lib. ii. c. 17. Goniara Croin .
c. 49

BOOK FERDINAND MAGALHAENS, or Magellan, a

V. Portuguese gentleman of honourable birth, having
Li S2 served several years in the East Indies, with diflin-

guifhed valour, under the famous Albuquerque,
demanded the recompence which he thought due
to his Cervices, with the boldness natural to a high-
spirited soldier. But, for some reason which is not
explained, both his general and his sovereign re-
jeEted his suit with a disdainful coldness, that was
intolerable to a man conscious of what he had
done, and of what he deserved. In a transport
of resentment, he formally renounced his allegi-
'5'7* ance to an ungrateful mailer, and fled to the

court of Castile, in hopes that there his worth
would be morejuffly effimated. He endeavoured
to recommend himself by proposing to execute a
scheme, the accomplishment of which, he knew,
would wound the monarch, against whom he was
exasperated, in the most tender part. He revived
Columbus's original and favourite project, of dif-
covering a passage to India by a westerly course,
and without encroaching on that portion of the
globe which was allotted to the Portuguese by the
line of demarcation. He founded his hopes of
success on the ideas of that great navigator, con-
firmed by many observations, the result of his
own naval experience, as well as that of his coun-
trymen, in their intercourse with the East. The
undertaking, he acknowledged, was both ardu-
ous and expensive, as it could not be attempted
but with a squadron of considerable force, and
victualled for at least two years. Fortunately, he
applied to a minister who was not apt to be deter-
red, either by the boldness of a design, or the ex-
pence of carrying it into execution. Cardinal
Ximenes, who at that time directed the affairs of
Spain, discerning at once what an increase of
wealth and glory would accrue to his country by
the success of Magellan's proposal, listened to il
with a most favourable ear. Charles V. on his

d arliva

A arrival in his Spanish dominions, entered into the B O O K

measure with no less ardour, and orders were iffu- V.
ed for equipping a proper squadron at the public '2'
charge, of which the command was given to Ma- 52.
gellan, whom the king honoured with the habit of
St. Jago and the title of Captain General *.

ON the tenth of August one thousand five hun- His voyage.
dred and nineteen, Magellan failed from Seville
with five fllips, which, according to the ideas of
the age, were deemed to be of considerable force,
though the burden of the largefi did not exceed
one hundred and twenty tons. The crews of the
whole amounted to two hundred and thirty-four
men, among whom were rome of the molt skilful
pilots in Spain, and several Portuguese sailors, in
whose experience, as more extensive, Magellan
placed still greater confidence. After touching at
the Canaries, he fro':d diretly ibuth towards the
equinoftial line along the coast of America, but
was so long retarded by tedious calms, and spent
fomuch time in searching every bay and inlet for
that communication with the Southern Ocean
which he '\ ilhed to discover, that he did not reach
the river De la Plata till the twelfth of Januaryr. 's2o
That spacious opening, through which its vail bo-
dy of water pours into the Atlantic, allured him
to enter; but, after failing up) it for some days, he
iconcluded, from the flallownefs of the Itream and
ithe freshness of the water, that the wifled-for
flirait was not situated there, and continued his
course towards the Ibuth. On the thirty-firii: of
March he arrived in the port of St. Julian, about
forty-eight degrees south of the line, where he
resolved to winter. In this uncomfortable ilation
lie loft one of his squadron, and the Spaniards sus-

VOL. II. K sered
* Herrera, dec. z. lib. ii. c. 19. lib. iv. c. 9. Gomara F-ill.

B 0 0 K sered so much from the exceflfive rigour of the

V. climate, that the crews of three of his ships, head-

5 ed by their officers, rose in open mutiny, and in-

sifted on relinquiihing the visionary projeft of a
desperate adventurer, and returning diretly to
Spain. This dangerous infurreEion Magellan
suppressed, by an effort of courage no less prompt
than intrepid, and inflided exemplary. punishment
on the ringleaders. With the remainder of his
followers, overawed but not reconciled to his
scheme, he continued his voyage towards the
south, and at length discovered, near the fifty-
third degree of latitude, the mouth of a strait,
into which he entered, notwithstanding the mur-
murs and remonstrances of the people under his
command. After failing twenty days in that
winding dangerous channel, to which he gave his
own name, and where one of his hips deserted
him, the great Southern Ocean opened to his
view, and with tears of joy he returned thanksto
Heaven for having thus far crowned his endea-
vours with success. *

BUT he was flill at a greater distance than he

imagined from the object of his wifles. He fail-
ed during three months and twenty days in an
uniform direction toss ards the north-west, without
discovering 'land. In this voyage, the longest
that had ever been made in the unbounded ocean,
he liuffred incredible distress. His flock of pro-
visions was almost exhauited, the water became
putrid, the men were reduced to the fliorleit al-
lowance with which it was i'~pofnible to futflain
life, and the scurvy, the most dreadful of all tlle
maladies with \ hicih sea-faring people are afflict
ed, began to spread among the crew. One cir
cumrnance alone afforded them rome consolation;
they enjoyed an uninterrupted course of fair wxca

thler

L errcra, dec. 2. lib. iv. c. o1. lib. ix. e. 10, &c. Go0lai;
IIil c. 92. Pigafetta Viaggio ap. Ramus. ii. p. 352, &c.

ther, with such favourable winds, that Magellan B O o K
bestowed on that ocean the name of Pacific, which V.
it flill retains. When reduced to such extremity
that they must have funk under their fifferinas,
they fell in with a cluster of finall but fertile
islands, which afforded them refreshments in such March c.
abundance, that their health was loon re-eftablifl-
ed, From there isles, to which he gave the name
of De los Ladrones, he proceeded on his voyage,
and tbon made a more important discovery of the
islands now known by the name of the Philippines.
In one of these he got into an unfortunate quarrel
with the natives, who attacked him with a nume-
rous body of troops well armed; and while he
fought at the head of his men with his usual va-
lour, he fell by the hands of those barbarians, to- Apiil a6.
gether with several of his principal officers.
THE expedition wasprofecuted under other com-

|manders. After visiting many of the smaller isles
|scattered in the eastern part of theIndian ocean,they
touched at the great island of Borneo, and at length NOv. 8.
landed in Tidore, one of the Moluccas, to the afto-
Inilhment of thePortuguefe, who could not compre-
lhend how the Spaniards, by holding a wetterly course
had arrived at that sequestered feat of their most
valuable commerce, which they themselves had
discovered by failing in an opposite diretion.
[here, and in the adjacent isles, they found a
people acquainted with the benefits of extensive

trade, and willing to open an intercourse with a
ew nation. They took in a cargo of the pre-
:ious spices, which are the dilfinguilfed producti-
n of those islands, and with that, as well as with
pecimens of the rich commodities yielded by the
'ther countries which they had visited, the Ft'rlorv,
'hich, of the two flhips that remained of the ltqlui- Jan ,
ron, was mofi fit for a long voyage, set fail for

K ? Europe,

B 0 0 K Europe, under the command of Juan Sebastian

V. del Cano. He followed the course of the Por-
'-"-' tugufe by the Cape of Good Hope, and, after

521. many disasters and sufferings, he arrived at St.

Lucar on the seventh of September one thou-
sand five hundred and twenty-two, having failed
round the globe in the space of three years and
twenty-eight days *.

THOUGH an untimely fate deprived Magellan

of the fatisfation of accomplishing this great un-
dertaking, his contemporaries, jufi to his memory
and talents, ascribed to him not only the glory of
having formed the plan, but of having surmount-
ed almost every obstacle to the completion of it;
and in the present age his name is still ranked a-
mong the highest in the roll of eminent and sic-
cefsful navigators. The naval glory of Spain now
eclipsed that of every other nation, and by a fin-
gular felicity she had the merit, in the course of a
few years, of discovering a new continent almost
as large as that part of the earth which was for-
merly known, and of ascertaining by experience
the form and extent of the whole terraqueous
globe.

THE Spaniards were not satisfied with the glory

of having firfi encompassed the earth; they ex-
peEed to derive great commercial advantages fiom
this new and boldest effort of their maritime f;ill.
The men of science among them contended, tlhat
the spice s islands, and several of the richest cotn-
tries in the East, wvere so situated as to belong f
right to the crown of Castile, in consequence uftlic
partition made by Alexander VI. The merclinn:,
without attending to this difcuflion, engaged eager-
ly in that lucrative and alluring commerce, which

w ilS

* I-en'rcra, dec. 3. lib. i. c. 3. 9. lib. iv. c. i. Gonara Cron
c. 93, &c. Pigaflcta ap. Railul. ii. p. 361, &c.

was now opened to them. The Portuguese, alarmed B o O K
at the intrusion of such formidable rivals, remon- V.
ftrated and negociated in Europe, while in Asia
they obftruaed the trade of the Spaniards by
force of arms. Charles, not sufficiently infiruted
with respect to the importance of this valuable
branch of commerce, or distracted by the multi-
plicity of his schemes and operations, did not as-
ford his subjects proper protection. At lait, the
low itate of his finances, exhausted by the efforts
of his arms in every part of Europe, together wirh
the dread of adding a new war with Portugal to
those in which he was already engaged, induced
him to make over his claim of the Moluccas to
the Portuguese for three hundred and fifty thou-
sand ducats. He reserved, however, to the crown
of Castile the right of reviving its pretensions on
repayment of that rum; but other objects engross-
ed his attention and that of his fuccefors, -arid
Spain was finally excluded from a branch of com-
merce in which it was engaging with sanguine
expectations of profit *.

THOUGH the trade with the Moluccas was re-
linquifhed, the voyage of Magellan was followed
by commercial effects of great moment in Spain.
Philip II. in the year one thouland five hundred
and fixty-four, reduced thole islands which he
di'covered in the Eastern Ocean to tfbjedtion, and
established settlements there; between which and
the kingdom of New Spain a regular intercourse,
the matter of which flall be explained in its pro-
per place, is carried on. I return now to the tranf-
actions in New Spain.

AT the time that Cortes was acquiring such vafl An order to
territories for his native country, and preparing the cli'pe

way
Herrera, dec. 3. lib. vii. c. 5, &c. dec. iv. lib. v 7. &c.

B 0 0 K way for future conquests, it was his singular fate

V- ,not only to be delkitute of any commission or au-

2 thority from the sovereign whom he was serving

with such successful zeal, but to be regarded as an
undutiful and ieditious fubjedt. By the influence
of Fonseca, bishop of Burgos, his conduct in as-
fuming the government of New Spain was de-
clared to be an irregular usurpation, 'in contempt
of the royal authority; and Chriftoval de Tapia
received a commiflion, impowering him to super-
fede Cortes, to seize his person, to confiscate his
effects, to make a ftri&t scrutiny into his proceed.
ings, and to transmit the result of his inquiries to
the council of the Indies, of which the bishop of
Burgos was president. A few weeks after the re-
duCtion of Mexico, Tapia landed at Vera Cruz
with the royal mandate to strip its conqueror of his
power, and to treat him as a criminal. But Son-
feca had chosen a very improper infirument to
wreak his vengeance on Cortes. Tapia had nei-
ther the reputation nor the talents that suited the
whkh he high command to whhch he was appointed. Cor-

tes, while he publicly expressed the moit refpet-
ful veneration for the emperor's authority, fccretly
took measures to defeat the effect of his commnif-
sion; and having involved Tapia and his followers
in a multiplicity of negociations and conferences,
in wlhilch he foblmeimes had recourse to threats, hut
more frequently employed bribes and promises,
he at leigth prevailed on that weak man to aban-
don a province ,\. hich he was unworthy of govern-

Applies g *

ain tothe BUT notwithtllanding the fortunate dexterity
T5'2.. with i ich lie had eluded this blow, Cortes was so
"'4y 's fenrlfib of the precarious tenure by which he held lis

power, that he di'patched deputies to Spain with a

pompous

Hecrrera, dec. 3. lib .

iii. c. 6 dec. iv. c. i. Cortes Relar.
;81. E. B. Diaz. c. 158.

pompous account of the success of his arms, with B O O K
farther specimens of the productions of the coun- -.
try, and with rich presents to the emperor, as the
earnest of future contributions from his new con-
quefl; requesting, in recompence for all his ser-
vices, the approbation of his proceedings, and that
he might be entrusted with the government of
those territories, which his conduct, and the valour
of his followers, had added to the crown of Castile.
The juncure in which his deputies reached the
court was favourable. The internal commotions
in Spain, which had disquieted the beginning of
Charles's reign were just aplpafed *. The mini-
fters had leisure to turn their attention towards
foreign affairs. The account of Cortes's victories
filled his countrymen with admiration. The ex-
tent and value of his conquests became the object
of vast and interesting hopes. Whatever slain he
might have contracted, by the irregularity of the
fleps which he took in order to attain power, was
so fully effaced by the splendor and merit of the
great ations which this had enabled him to per-
form, that every heart revolted at the thought of
inflicting any censur.e on a man, whose services
entitled him to the highest marks of diflinUtion.
The public voice declared warmly in favour of his
pretensions, and Charles arriving in Spain about
this time, adopted the sentiments of his fubjeds
with a youthful ardour. Notwithltanding the
claims of Velasquez, and the partial representations
of the bilhop of Burgos, he appointed Cortes andislnp

pointedCap-

captain-general and governor of New Spain, tin.generat
judging that no person was so capable of maintain- and Covcr-

nor of New

ing the royal anthority, or of eftablifling good spain.
order both among his Spanish and Indian IilbjeAs,
as the commander whom the former would will-

ingly
* Fsia ofCharlu. V. vol. ii. I,. iii.

B O K ingly obey, and the latter had been long accuftomn

V. ed to fear and to refpet *.

1l52.' EVEN before his jurifdition received this legal
and arrange.aantion, Corte 3 ventured to exercise all the powers
ncus. of a governor, and, by various arrangements,

endeavoured to render his conquest a secure and
beneficial acquisition to his country. He deter.
mined to establish the feat of government in its
ancient fiation, and to raise Mexico again from its
ruins; and having conceived high ideas concern-
ing the future grandeur of the Rfate of which he
wvas laying the foundation, he began to rebuild its
capital on a plan which hath gradually formed the
;noft magnificent city in the New World. At
the fame time, he employed skilful persons to
search for mines in different parts of the country,
and opened some which were found to be rclier
than any which the Spaniards had hitherto disco-
vered in America. He detached his principal of-
ficers into the remote provinces, and encouraged
them to fettle there, not only by beflowing upon
them large tracs of land, but by granting them{
the fame dominion over the Indians, and the fame
right to their service which the Spaniards had atl
fumed in the islands.

tInf5ur.2h IT was not, however, without difficulty that the

Mexicans, Mexican empire could be entirely reduced intollhe
,ad trul(y folm of a Spanish colony. Enraged and rendercd
niards. desperate by oppreflion, the natives often forgln

the fitperiority of their enemies, and run to arms in
defence of their liberties. In every contefl, hlo-
ever, the European valour and dilcipline prevaildl
But fatally for the honour of their country, the
Spaniards ftllied the gloy. redounding fromi theie
repeated victories by their mode of treating the

vaLnql iilll(l

Herrera, dec. lib. iv. c. 3. Gomara Cron. 164 , ,i
P Diaz. 167, t68,

vanquished people. After taking Guatimozin, and B o o K
becoming masters of his capital, they supposed v.
that the king of Castile entered on poffellion of all .-,-.
the rights of the captive monarch, and affedted to 1522.
confider every effort of the Mexicans to alTert their
own independence, as the rebellion of vassals
againit their sovereign, or the mutiny of slaves
against their mailer. Under the fanation of those
ill-founded maxims, they violated every right that
should be held sacred between hostile nations,
After every infurretion, they reduced the common
people in the provinces which they subdued, to
the mofi humiliating of all conditions, that of per-
fonal servitude. Their chiefs, supposed to be more
criminal, were punished with greater severity, and
put to death in the most ignominious or the moil
excruciating form, that the insolence or the cruelty
of their conquerors could devise. In almost every
province of the Mexican empire, the progress of
the Spanilh arms is marked with blood, and with
deeds so attrocious as disgrace the enterprising va-
lour that conducted them to success. In the pro-
vince of Panuco, sixty caziques, or leaders, and
four hundred nobles, were burnt at one time. Nor
was this flocking barbarity perpetrated in any
sudden sally of rage, or by a commander of infe-
rior note. It was the aA of Sandoval, an officer
'whose name is entitled to the second rank in the
annals of New Spain, executed after a solemn con-
fultation with Cortes; and to complete the horror
of the scene, the children and relations of the
wretched victims were assembled, and compelled
to be fpecaitors of their d ing agonies -I-. It ieems
hardly pollible to exceed in horror this dreadful
example of severity; but it was followed by
another, which affetted the Mexicans flill more

f enli

bly,
*[ Cortes Rclat. 291, C. Gonmara Cron. c. 155.

B 0 0 K sensibly, as it gave them a most feeling proof of

V. their own degradation, and of the small regard

'C^'3 that their haughty mailers retained for the ancient
1522' dignity and iplendor of their itate. On a flight

suspicion, confirmed by very imperfect evidence,
that Guatimozin had formed a scheme to ihake off
the yoke, and to excite his former fubjeets to take
arms, Cortes, without the formality of a trial, or-
dered the unhappy monarch together with the ca-
ziqucs of Tezeuco and Tacuba, the two persons
of greateil eminence in the empire, to be hanged;
and the Mexicans, with astonishment and horror,
beheld this ignominious punishment inflicted upon
persons, to whom they were accustomed to look
up with reverence, hardly inferior to that which
they paid to the gods themselves *. The example
ot Cortes and his principal officers, encouraged and
justified persons of subordinate rank to venture
upon committing greater excefies. Nuno de Guz-
man, in particular, stained an illustrious name by
deeds of peculiar enormity and rigour, in various
expeditions which he conducted t.

ONE circumstance, however, saved the Mexi-

cans from farther consumption, perhaps from one
as complete as that which had depopulated the
ifiands. The first conquerors did not attempt to
search for the precious metals in the bowels of tlhe
earth. They were neither sufficiently wealthy to
carry on the expensive works, which are requisite
for opening thole deep recesses where Nature has
concealed the veins of gold and silver, nor fi:!ti-
iently flkilFul to perform the ingenious operations
by which they ale fepa;ated from their reFpecrtiv
,4)cs. They were satisfied with the more fiminle

metlhod,

* Gomnra Cron. c. 170. B. D)i:l z. c, 177. I-errera, dec J
il,. vii. c. 9. See NOTE XXVI.

f i-lcireia, dec. . aiid panifl '

method, pradtifed by the Indians, of waffing theB O O K
earth carried down rivers and torrents from the v.
mountains, and collecting the grains of native J
metal deposited there. The rich mines of New 522.
Spain, which have poured forth their treasures with
tfuch profusion on every quarter of the globe were
not discovered for several years after the conquest §. 1552, &c.
By that time, a more orderly government and po-
lice were introduced into the colony; experience,
derived from former errors, had suggested many
useful and humane regulations for the protection
iand preservation of the Indians; and though it
then became necessary to increase the number of
i those employed in the mines, and they were en-
' gaged in a species of labour more pernicious to
ithe human conflitution, they suffered less hard-
: ship or diminution than from the ill-judged, but
less extensive schemes of the first conquerors.

THIS extraordinary mortality among the In-

:dians, disappointed the hopes of their new masters.
§Few seem to have derived any considerable wealth
ifrom their ill-conduated researches. According
`to the usual fate of firi: settlers in new colonies,
,it was their lot to encounter danger and to flruggle
;with difficulties; the fruits of their vi-tories and
toils were reserved for times of tranquillity, and
reaped by successors of greater induifry, but of
inferior merit. The early hiilorians of America
labound with accounts of the sufferings and of the
poverty of its conquerors $. In New Spain their
condition was rendered more grievous by a pe-
culiar arrangement. When Charles V. advanced
Cortes to the government of that country, he, ai
:he fame time, appointed certain commnilioners to

receive

I -Tcrrera, dec. 8. lib. c. ai. T Cortes Relat. 283. i'.
B DI. Caz. 209

B 0 0 Kreceive and administer the royal revenue there,

V. with independent j urifdiction . These men, cho-
'v"- fen from inferior fations in various depart-

1522. ments of public business at Madrid, were so much

elevated with their promotion, that they thought
they were called to aft a part of the first confe-
quence. But being accultomed to the minute
formalities of office, and having contracted the
narrow ideas suited to the sphere in which they
had hitherto moved, they were afionifhed, on ar-
is54. riving in Mexico, at the high authority which

Cortes exercised, and could not conceive that the
mode of adminifiration, in a country recently sub-
dued and fettled, mult be different from that which
took place in one where tranquillity and regular
government had been long established. In their
letters, they repreiented Cortes as an ambitious
tyrant, who having usurped a jurifdition superior
to law, aspired at independence, and by his exor-
bitant wealth and extensive influence, might ac-
complifll those disloyal schemes which he appa-
rently meditatedt. These insinuations made i.clh
deep imprellion upon the Spanish ministers, molt
of whom had been formed to bufincfs under the
jealous and rigid adminiltration of Ferdinand, that,
unmindful of all Cortes's pall services, and re-
gardlefs of what he was then fuifering in concludt-
ing that extraordinary expedition, in which he ad-
vanced fiom the lake of Mexico to the welicrn
extremities of Honduras 4:, they infused the fh'ime
ufpificions into the mind of their mailer, and pre-
vailed on him to order a solemn inquell 1, bI
made into his conduct, with powers to the liccn-
Sj3;. liite Ponce de Leon, entrusted withi that commil-

sion, to seize his person, if he should /find tihai
expedient, and fend him prisoner to Spain s.

Ti

* Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib. iv, c. 3. 1 d- I. dec. 3. ib. vl . c.

c
t Sec NOIT'E XXVII. i He-rrera, dec. 3. lib. viii, c. 14, 'I

THE sudden death of Ponce de Leon, a few B O O K

days after his arrival in New Spain, prevented V.
the execution of this commillion. But as the ob- '- J
jet of his appointment was known, the mind of 1525'
Cortes was deeply wounded with this unexpected
return for ser vices which far exceeded whatever
any subjet of Spain had rendered to his sovereign.
He endeavoured, however, to maintain his fta-
tion, and to recover the confidence of the court.
But every person in office, who had arrived from
Spain since the conquest, was a spy upon his con-
dut, and with malicious ingenuity gave an un-
favourable representation of all his adtions. The
apprehensions of Charles and his minilters in-
creased. A new commiflion of inquiry was issued, 15g.
with more extensive powers, and various precau-
tions were taken to prevent or to punish him, if
he should be so preiiumpuous as to attempt what
was inconsistent with the fidelity of a fubjeet t.
Cortes beheld the approaching crisis of his for-
tune with all the violent emotions natural to a
haughty mind, conscious of high desert, and re-
ceiving unworthy treatment. But though some
of his desperate followers urged him to aflert his
own rights against his ungrateful country, and,
with a bold hand, to seize that powver which the
courtiers meanly acculed him of coveting s, he
retained such felf-command, or was actuated with
such sentiments of loyalty, as to rejeCt theii dan-
gerous countels, and to chufe the only course in
which he could secure his own dignity, without
departing from his duty. He rctolved not to ex-
pose himself to the ignominy of a trial, in that
country which had been the scene of his triumphs
but, without waiting for the arrival of his judges,
to repair directly to Castile, and commit himself

and

*I HIcrrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. 1 . dec. 4. lib. ii. c. x. lib. iv.

c. 9. 10. B. Diaz. c. 172. 196. Gomara Cron. c. 166.
§ 3. Diaz. c. 194.

I41

B O O K and his cause to the justice and generosity of his

V. sovereign *.
1528. CORTES appeared in his native country with

the splendour that suited the conqueror of a mighty
kingdom. He brought with him a great part of
his wealth, many Jewels and ornaments of great
value, several curious producions of the country :,
and was attended by some Mexicans of the firi
rank, as well as by the most considerable of his
own officers. His arrival in Spain removed at
once every suspicion and fear that had been enter-
tained with refpea to his intentions. The em-
peror having now nothing to apprehend from the
designs of Cortes, received him like a person whom
consciousness of his own innocence had brought
into the pretence of his master, and who was in-
titled by the eminence of his services, to the high-
eft marks of diftintion and refpe:t. The order
of St. Jago, the title of Marquis del Valle de
Guaxaca, the grant of a vafi territory in New
Spain, were fucceflively bestowed upon him;
and as his manners were correc and elegant, al-
though he had passed the greater part of his life
among rough adventurers, the emperor ad-
mitted him to the fame familiar intercourse v, ith
himself, that was enjoyed by noblemen of the firlt
rank §.

BUT, amidst those external proofs of regard,

symptoms of remaining diffruft appeared. Though
Cortes earnestly solicited to be reinflated in the
government of New Spain, Charles, too sagacious
to commit such an important charge to a man
whom he had once suspected, peremptorily refuled
to invest him again with powers mwhich he might

filnd

* Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c, 8. 1 See NOTE XXVIII.

6 Herrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. i. lib. vi. c. .. B. Diaz, c, 19{.
Gorm. Cron . c. 18.

find it impossible to controul. Cortes, thoughl O IC
dignified with new titles, returned to Mexico with v.
diminished authority. The military department, L
with powers to attempt new discoveries, was left 1530-
in his hands; but the fipreme direction of civil
affairs v as placed in a board called Th/e Audience
of New Spain. At a subsequent period, when,
upon the increase of the colony, the exertion of
authority more united and extensive become ne-
ceffary, Antonio de Mendoza, a nobleman of high
rank, was sent thither as /iceroy, to take the
government into his hands.

THIS division of power in New Spain proved,

as was unavoidable, the source of perpetual dif-
fention, which embittered the life of Cortes, and
thwarted all his fchelnes. As he had now no op-
portunity to display his active talents but in at-
tempting new discoveries, he formed various
schemes for that purpose, all of which bear im-
preflions of a genius that delighted in what was
bold and splendid. He early entertained an idea,
that, either by fleering through the gulf of Flo-
rida along the east coait of North America, some
firait would be found that communicated with
the western ocean; or that, by examining the
iifhmus of Darien, some passage would be dilf
covered between the North and South SeasL:.
But having been disappointed in his expectations
with respect to both, ihe now confined his views
to fulch voyages of discovery as he could make
from the ports of New Spain in the South Sea.
Tlere lie fitted out tfccellively several finall
squadrons, which eitlier pliflied in the attempt,
or returned without malrini any discovery of
moment, Cortes, weary of certrultliniig IC coil-
duei of his operations to others, took the coin-

ill.'isli
1 Colt. Relat. Rain. iii. 294, 1.

B o o Kmand of a new armament in person, and, after

V. enduring incredible hardships, and encountering
-I"' dangers of every species, he discovered the large
1536. peninsula of California, and surveyed the greater

part of the gulf which ieparates it from New
Spain. The dilcover) of a country of such ex-
tent would hare reflected credit on a common
adventurer; but it could add little new honour
to the name of Cortes, nor satisfy the sanguine
expectations which he had formed $. Disgusted with
ill success, to which he had not been accustomed,
and weary of contesting is ith adversaries to whom
he confidered it as a dilg, ace to be opposed, he
once more fought for redreis in his native country.

BUT his reception there was very different from

that which gratitude, and even decency, ought to
have secured for him. The merit of his ancient
exploits was already, in a great meatire, forgot-
ten, or eclipsed by the fame of recent and more
valuable conquetfs, in an other quarter of Ameri-
ca. No service of moment was now expected
from a man of declining years, and who began to
be unfortunate. The emi eic(r behaved to him
with cold civility; his minifiers treated him,
sometimes with neglect, sometimes with infolnce.
His grievances received no redrels; his claims
were urged \vithout effect; and after several )eals
spent in fruitles application to ministers and jcu,'s,
an occupation the most irkfomc and mortif\ ng
to a man of high spirit, who had moved in a ,)ilcie
where he was more accuflomed to commi-ni( than
to solicit, Cortes ended his days on the fccuold
of December one thousand five hundred and fbrt¥-
seven, in the fixty-fecond year of his age. l-is

./1~~~~~~~~~~ t?~f;lte

U

1 I-Hcrrcra, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 9c 9 . t.ec. f. lib. vi. c. 14.

Venegas Hist. of'Califorl. i. z25. Lorcnzana -lif. p. 322,&c
I540.

fate was the fame with that of all the persons who B O o K
distinguished themielves in the discovery or con- V.
quest of the New world. Envied by his contem- ~3
poraries, and ill requited by the court which he 36
served, he has been admired and celebrated by
succeeding ages. Which has formed the mod
just estimate of his character, an impartial con-
fideration of his actions must determine.

VOL. II.

L

THE

# BOOK VI.

THE
HIS TO RY

O F
AMERICA.

B OOK VI.

FROM the time that Nugnez de Balboa disco- B O o K
vered the great Southern Ocean, and received VI.
thefirft obscure hint concerning the opulent coun-
tries with which it might open a communication, sc52h'e23
tlle wishes and schemes of every enterprising per- discovering
:fn in the colonies of Darien and Panama were Pvru
turned towards the wealth of those unknown re-
gions. In an age when the spirit of adventure
was so arduous and vigorous, that large fortunes
'ere wafted, and tle molt alarming dangers
braved, in pursuit of discoveries merely poflible,
the fhinteft ray of hope was followed with eager
expeitation, and the flightei information was sus-
ficient to inspire such perfed confidence, as con-
dluted men to the most arduous undertakings*.

L 2 ACCORDING I.Y,
* See NOTE XXIX.

B O K ACCORDINGLY, several armaments were fitted

VI. out in order to explore and take possession of the

153 countries to the east of Panama, but under the
unfccsrul condua of leaders whose talents and resources

fm were unequal te the attempt *. As their excursions

did not extend beyond the limits of the pro-
vince to which the Spaniards have given the name
of Tierra Firme, a mountainous region covered
with woods, thinly inhabited, and extremely un-
healthy, they returned with dismal accounts con-
cerning the distresses to which.they had been ex-
posed, and the unpromising aspea of the places
which they had visited. Damped by there tidings,
the rage'for discovery in that direction abated;
and it became the general opinion, that Balb)a
had founded visionary hopes, on the tale of an
ignorant Indian, ill understood, or calculated to
deceive.

,Unrtak, BU r there were three persons fettled in Panama,
by Pizano, on ,lwhom the circumstances which detered others
A!inaro, made so little impression, that, at the very mo-

d Lu.ment when all confidered Balboa's expetations of
1524. discovering a rich country, by fleering towards

the east, as chimerical, they resolved to attempt
the execution of his scheme. The names of
those extraordinary men were Francisco Fizarro,
Diego de Almagro, and Hernando Luque. Pi-
zarro was the natural son of a gentleman of an
honourable family by a very low woman, and,
according to the cruel fate which often attends
the offspring of unlawful love, had been so totally
negleEted in his youth by the author of his birth,
that he seems to have destined him never to Iife
beyond the condition of his mother. In conle-
qutice of this ungenerous idea, he let him, when
bordering on manhood, to keep hogs. Bult the

aspiring
"' Calanclis Cotonica, p. ioo.

aspiring mind of young Pizarro disdaining that B 0 K
ignoble occupation, he abruptly abandoned his vI.
charge, enlisted as a soldier, and after serving 5
forne years in Italy, embarked for America,
which, by opening such a boundless rage to ative
talents, allured every adventurer whose fortune
was not equal to his ambitious thoughts. There,
Pizarro early diitinguifhed himself. With a tem-
per of mind no less daring than the conffitution
of his body was robust, he was foremost in every
danger, patient under the greatest hardships, and
unfubdued by any fatigue. Though so illiterate
that he could not even read, he was soon con-
fidered as a man formed to command. Every
operation committed to his condud proved fuc-
cefsful, as, by a happy but rare conjunction, he
united perseverance with ardour, and was as cau-
tious in executing, as he was bold in forming his
plans. By engaging early into life, without any
resource but his own talents and industry, and
by depending on himself alone in his struggles to
emerge from obscurity, he acquired such a tho-
rough knowledge of affairs, and of men, that he
was fitted to afiume a superior part in conducting
the one, and in governing the other *.

ALMAGRO had as little to boast of his descent

as Pizarro. The one was a bastard, the other a
foundling. Bred, like his companion, in the
camp, he yielded not to him in any offoldierly
qualities of intrepid valour, indefatigable activity,
or insurmountable constancy in enduring the hard-
fllips inseparable from military service in the New
World. But in Almagro these virtues were ac-
companied with the openness, generosity, and

can-

* Herrera, dec. i & z, pariim, dec. 4. lib. vi. c. 107. Go-
mara Hilt.. c. 144. Z rate, lib. iv. c. ).

B OOK candour natural to men whose prdfeflion is

VI. arms; in Pizarro, they were united wish the ad-

dress, the craft, and the diflirulation of a politi-
I qz&. .. ... ....

cian, with the art of concealing his 'own puepo-
fes and with sagacity to penetrate into'thofe of
other men.

HErRNANDO DE. LuQUL was an ecclesiastic,

who acted both as priest and fchoolmafler at Pan-
ama, and, by means which the contemporary
writers have not described, had amassed riches
that inspired him with thoughts of rising to greater
eminence.

SUCH were the men destined to overturn one

of the most extensive empires on the face of the
earth. Their confederacy for this purpose was
authorised by Pedrarias, the governor of Panama.
Each engaged to employ his whole' fortune in the
adventure. Pizarro, the least wealthy of the three,
as he could not throw so large a fum as his associates
into the common flock, .engaged 'to take the
department.of greatest fatigue and danger, and
to command in person the armament which was
to go firit upon discovery. Almagro offered to
conduct the flipplies of provisions and reinforce-
ments of croops, of which Pizarro might fland
in need. Luque was to remain at Panama to ne-
gociate with the governor, and superintend what-
ever was carrying on for the general interest. As
the {pirit of enthuliafm uniformly accompanied
that of adventure in the New World, and by that
strange union both acquired an increase of force,
this confederacy, formed by ambition and avarice,
was confirmed by the moil solemn at of
religion. Luque (e'eberated mass, divided a con
fecrated holt into three, and reserving one parl
to himself, gave the other two to his aflociatc,
of which they partook; and thus, in name of llt

Pr'i.

Terms of
their affoi
tion.

1 --

Prince of Peace, ratified a contract of which plun- B O O K
der and bloodihed were the objects t. vl.

THE attempt was begun with a force more 1524.

suited to the humble condition of the three adven- attempt.
turers, than to the greatness of the enterprise in Nov. 4.
which they were engaged. Pizarro set fail from
Panama with a single vessel, of small burthen, and
a hundred and twelve men. But in that age, so
little were the Spaniards acquainted with the pe-
culiarities of climate in America, that the time
which Pizarro chose for his departure was the mofI
improper in the whole year; the periodical winds,
which were then set in, being direEtly adverse to
the course which he purposed to steer t. After
beating about for seventy days, with much dan-
ger and incessant fatigue, Pizarro's progress to- i2s.
wards the south-east was not greater than what a
skilful navigator will now make in as many hours,
He touched at several places on the coast of Tierra
Firmn, but found every where the fame uninviting
country which former adventurers had described;
the low grounds converted into swamps by the
overflowing of rivers; the higher, covered
with impervious woods; few inhabitants, and
those fierce and hostile. Famine, fatigue, and
frequent rencounters with the natives, and above
all, the distempers of a moif:, sultry climate, com-
bined in wafting his slender band of followers.
The undaunted resolution of their leader conti- Attended
nued, however, for rome time, to fiftain their w'h'tl.
spirits, although no sign had yet appeared of dif-
covering those golden regions to which he had
promised to condudt them. At length, lie was
obliged to abandon that inhospitable coast, and

retire

t Herrera, dec. 3. lib. vi. c. 3. Zarate, lib. i. c. ,
t Herrera, dec, 4. lib. ii. c. 8. Xerez. p. 179.

B O K retire to Chuchama, oppolite to the pearl islands,

v.l where he hoped to receive a supply of provisions

---. and troops from Panama.
£525.

Bu T Almagro having failed from that port with

seventy men, flood directly towards that part of
the continent where he hoped to meet with his
associate. Not finding him there, he landed his
soldiers, who, in searching for their companions,
underwent the fame diffreffes, and were exposed
to the fame dangers, which had driven them out
of the country. Repulsed at length by the Indians
in a sharp conflict, in which their leader loft
one of his eyes by the wound of an arrow, they
likewise were compelled to reimbark. Chance
led them to the place of Pizarro's retreat, where
they found tome consolation in recounting their
June 24. adventures, and comparing their sufferings. As

Almagro had advanced as far as the river St. Juan,
in the province of Popayan, where both the coun-
try and inhabitants appeared with a more pro-
miling aspet, that dawn of better fortune was
sufficient to determine lich sanguine projectors not
to abandon their scheme, notwithstanding all that
they had suffered in prosecuting it *.

They e- ALMAGRO repaired to Panama, in hopes of
fumeteun- recruiting their fliattered troops. But what he
icrtaking. and Pizarro had fiffered, gave his countrymen

such an unfavourable idea of the service, that it
was with difficulty he could levy fourscore mens.
Feeble as this reinforcement was, they did not
hesitate about refulming their operations. After
a long series of dilaiiers and disappointments, not
inferior to those which they had already experienc-
ed, part of the armament reached the Bay of

St.

* 1-Terrera, dec. 3. lib. viii. c. ir, 12. See NOTE XXX;
'I- Zarate, lib. i. c. i.

St. Matthew, on the coast of Q ito, and landed B 0 c K
at Tacamez, to the south of the river of Emeraulds, V.
they beheld a country more champaign and fertile L -v"
than any they had yet discovered in the Southern I526.
Ocean, the natives clad in garments of woollen or
cotton fluff, and adorned with several trinkets of
gold and silver.

BUT notwithstanding those favourable appear-
ances, magnified beyond the truth, both by the
vanity of those who brought the report from Ta-
camez, and by the fond imagination of those who
lifiened to them, Pizarro and Almagro durst not
venture to invade a country so populous with a
handful of men, enfeebled by fatigue and diseases.
They retired to the small island of Gallo, where
Pizarro remained with part of the troops, and his
aflociate returned to Panama, in hopes of bringing
such a reinforcement, as might enable them to
take poffefion of the opulent territories whose ex-
iftence seemed to be no longer doubtful *

BUT some of the adventurers, less enterprising, Pizarrorc-

or less hardy than their leaders, having fecretlycalled by t
conveyed lamentable accounts of their sufferings Pana, ..
and losies to their friends at Panama, Almagro
met with an unfavourable reception from Pedro
de los Rios, who had succeeded Pedrarias in the
government of that settlement. After weighing
the matter, with that cold economical prudence,
which appears the fir-st of all virtues to persons
whose limited faculties are incapable of conceiving
or executing great designs, he concluded an ex-
pedition, attended with such certain waste of men,
to be so detrimental to an infant and feeble co-
lony, that he not only prohibited the raising of

new
* Xcrez. 18r. HI-rrcra, dec. 3. Ib. viii. c. 13.

B O O K new levies, but dispatched a vessel to bring home

VI. Pizarro and his companions from the island of

tCV- ' Gallo. Almagro and Luque, though deeply as-
1526. seaed with these measures, which they could not

prevent and durst not oppose, found means of
communicating their sentiments privately to Pi-
zarro, and exhorted him not to relinquish an en-
terprife which was-the foundation of all their hopes
and the.only means of re-establishing their repu-
tation and fortune, that were both on the decline.
Pizarro's mind, bent with inflexible obfiinacy on
all its purposes, needed no incentives to persist in

Pcrfils in the scheme. He peremptorily refused to obey the
hisdcfign. governor of 'Panama's orders, and employed all

his address and eloquence in persuading his men
not to abandon him. Butthe incredible calami-
ties to which they had been exposed were frill so
recent in their memories, and the thoughts of re-
viliting their families and'friends after a long ab-
fence, ruffed with.fuch joy into their minds, that
when Pizarro drew a line upon the sand with his
fv;ord, ipermitting such as wished to return home
to pass over it, only thirteen of all the daring ve-
terans in his service had resolution to remain with
their cofimmander *.

THIS small, but determined band, whose names

the Spanill hifiorians record with deserved praifc,
as the perlons to whose persevering fortitude their
country is indebted for the mofi valuable of all its
American poffeflions, fixed their residence in the
island of Gorgona. This, as it was farther renmor-
ed from the coast than Gallo, and uninhabited,
they confidered as a more secure retreat, where,
unmolcflcd, they Iliight wait for iuplpllies from
Panma, hlicll they trutfed that the ;aCivity of

lheir

* T-errera, dec. 3. lit. x. c. 2, 3. Z'tatc, lib. i. c. 2. ^
rteL 18 . ;Golmara I-lift. c. Io

their associates there would be able to procure. B 0 K
Almagro and Luque ,were not inattentive or cold VI.
solicitors, and their.intcefant importunity was fe- 2
conded by 'the general voice of the colony, which
exclaimed loudly against the infamy of explofing
brave men,' engaged in the public service, and
chargeable with' no error but what flowed from an
excess of zeal and courage, to perish like the most
odious criminals in a defart island. Overcome by
those intreaties and expostulations, the governor at
ilaft consented to fend a small vessel to their relief.
But that helmight not seem to encourage Pizarro
to any new enterprise, 'he would not permit one
land-man to embark on board of it.

BY this -time, Pizarro and his companions had H.rtnial')1 he

remained five months in an island, infamous fore
the most unhealthy climate in that region of Ame-
rica*. During all this period, their eyes were
turned towards Panama, in hopes of succour from
their countrymen; but worn out at length with
fruitless expectations, and dispirited with fiffering
hardships of which they saw no end, they, in de-
fpair, came to a resolution of committing them-
selves to the ocean on a float, rather than continue
in that detestable abode. But,. on the arrival of
the vessel from Panama, they were transported
with fuchjoy, that all their sufferings were for-
gotten. Their hopes revived, and, with a rapid
transition, not unnatural among men accuflomed
by their mode of life to sudden viciflitudcs of for-
tune, high confidence fulcceeding to extreme de-
je.tion, Pizarro easily induced them to refumle their
former scheme with filelh ardour. Infead of re-
turning to Panama, they flood to\ward.; the louth-

earlt,
* See NOTh EXXSl

B OOK east, and, more fortunate in this than in any of

,vl. their past efforts, they, on the twentieth day after
1526. their departure from Gorgona, discovered the coast

Dikovers of Peru. After touching at some places of less
'eru. note, they landed at Tumbez, a place of some note,

above three degrees south of the line, distinguished
for its fiately temple, and a palace of the Incas or
sovereigns of the country t. There the Spaniards
feafled their eyes with the first view of the opu-
lence and civilization of the Peruvian empire.
They beheld a country fully peopled, and cultivat-
ed with an appearance of regular industry; the
natives decently clothed, and possessed of ingenu-
ity so far furpafling the other inhabitants of the
New World, as to have the use of tame domestic
animals. But what chiefly attrated their notice,
was such a show of gold and silver, not only in the
ornaments of their persons and temples, but in fe-
veral vefiels and utensils for common use, formed
of the fame precious metals, as left no room to
doubt that they abounded with profusion in the
country. Pizarro and his companions seemed now
to have attained to the completion of their most
sanguine hopes, and fancied that all their wifles
and dreams of rich domains, and inexhaiftible
treasures, would soon be realized.
Rcturns to Bu T with the slender force then under his co-,

mand, Pizarro could only view the rich country of
which he hoped hereafter to obtain poffeflion. He
ranged, however, for some time along the coast,
'-7' maintaining every where a peaceable intercourse

with the natives, no less aftoniflied at their newv
visitants, than the Spaniards were with ihe
uniform appearance of opulence and cultivation
which they beheld. Having explored the country

t Cnlancha, p. 103.

as far as was requisite to ascertain the importance B O O K
of the discovery, Pizarro procured from the inha- VI.
bitants some of their Llamas or tame cattle, to
which the Spaniards gave the name of sheep, some 27
vessels of gold and silver, as well as some fpeci-
mens of their other works of ingenuity, and two
young men, whom he proposed to inftruEt in the
Castilian language, that they might serve as inter-
preters in the expedition which he meditated.
With these he arrived at Panama, towards the
close of the third year from the time of his depar-
ture thence *. No adventurer of the age suffered
hardihips or encouraged dangers which equal those
to which he was exposed during this long period.
The patience with which he endured the one, and
the fortitude with which he surmounted the other,
exceed whatever is recorded in the history of the
New World, where so many romantic displays of
those virtues occur.

NEITHER the splendid relation that Pizarro gave 's5s.
of the incredible opulence of the country which hle ,,is of
had discovered, nor his bitter complaints on account the atbci.
of that unseasonable recall of his forces, which had a"e"
put it out of his power to attempt making any set-
tlement there, could move the governor of Panama
to fwverve from his former purpose. He frill con-
tended, that the colony was not in a condition to
invade such a mighty empire, and: refifed to au-
thorife an expedition mu hich'he foresaw would be so
alluring that it might ruin the province in which
he presided, by an effort beyond its itrength. His
coldness, however, did not in any degree abate
the ardour of the three associates; but they per-
ceived that they could not carry their fchclme into

execution

* lerrera. dec. 3. lib. x. c. 3-6. dec. 4. lib. ii. c. 7, 8.

Vcga, 2. lib. i.e. 10-14. Zarate,lib i. c. z. Benzo Hill.
Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. i.

B.O 0 K execution without' the countenance of superior

VI. authority, and mufl solicit their sovereign to

8
gn grant that permiflion which they could not extort

from his delegate. With this view, after adjufl-
ing among. themselves that Pizarro ihould claim
the station of Governor, Almagro that of lieute-
nant-governor, and Luque the dignity of bishop
in the country which they purposed to conquer,
they sent Pizarro as their agent to Spain, though
their fortunes were now so much exhausted by the
repeated efforts which they had made, that they
found some difficulty in borrowing the small fum
requisite towards equipping him for the voyage*.

Pizarro en t PIZARRO loft no time in repairing'to court,
n.goCiJc,. and, new as the scene might be to him, he appear-

ed before the emperor with the unembarraffed dig-
nity of a man, conscious of what his services me-
rited; and he conducted his negociations with an
insinuating dexterity of address, which could not
have been expected either from his education, or
former habits of life. His feeling description of
his own sufferings, and his pompous account of
the country which he had discovered, confirmed
by the specimens of its productions which he ex-
hibited, made such an impreflion both on Charles
and his miniflers, that they not only approved of
the intended expedition, but seemed to be inte-

Neglens his refted in the success of its leader. Presuming on
airocatc., ihofe dispositions in his favour, Pizarro paid little

attention to the interest of his associates. As the
pretensions of Luque did not interfere with his
own, he obtained for him, the ecclesiastical dig-
nity to which he aspired. For Almagro, lie claim-
ed only the command of the fortress which should
be erected at Tumbez. To hiimfelf he securcd

whatevc:
I Henrera, dec. 4. lib. iii. c. r. Vega, 2. lib. I.c. 14.

whatever his boundless ambition could desire. He B 0 0 K
was appointed governor, captain general, and ade- vl.
lantado of all the country which he had discover- 528.
ed, and hoped to conquer, with supreme autho- July 26.
rity, civil as well as military; and a full right to all and pro"cure
the privileges and emoluments usually granted to command
adventurers in the New World. Hisjurifditiont° limfel"
was declared to extend two hundred leagues along
the coast to the south of the river St. Jago, to be
independent of the governor of Panama; and he
had power to nominate all the officers who were to
serve under him. In return for those concefflons,
which cost the court of Spain nothing, as the en-
Jjoyment of them depended upon the success of
his own efforts, Pizarro engaged to raise two hun-
;dred and fifty men, and to provide the Ihips,
larms, and warlike stores requisite towards iub-
IjeEing, to the crown of Castile, the country of
which' the government was allotted him.

INCONSIDERABLE as the body of men was, SlendcrfolcC

-which Pizarro had undertaken to raise, his fundsto r.ai:e.
.and credit were so low that he could hardly com-
,plete half the number; and after obtaining his pa- , 9.
.tents from the crown, he was obliged to Iteal pri-
jvately but of the port of Seville, in order to elude
the scrutiny of the officers who had it in charge to
examine whether he had fulfilled the flipulations
in his contraSt*. Before his departure, how-
ever, he received some supply of money from
iCortes, who having returned to Spain about this
time, was willing to contribute his aid towards
enabling an ancient companion, with whole ta-
lents and courage he was well acquainted, to be-
.gin a career of glory similar to that which lie him-
:flf had finifled l-.

I-lI:
' Herrera, dec, 4, lib. vii. c. 9.

s I bid. lib vii. c. i o;

B O O K HE landed at Nombre de Dios, and marched

VI. across the iithmus to Panama, accompanied by his
L---- three brothers, Ferdinand, Juan, and Gonzalo, of

1529' whom the first was born in lawful wedlock, the

two latter, like himself, were of illegitimate birth,
and by Francisco de Alcantara, his mother's bro-
ther. They were all in the prime of life, and
of such abilities and courage, as fitted them to
take a distinguished part in his subsequent tranf.
actions.

53 . ON his arrival at Panama, Pizarro found Alma-

Uib reconci-
Jialioln ithh gro so much exasperated at the manner in which
Aimnago. he had conducted his negociation, that he not

only refused to act any longer in concert with a
man by whose perfidy he had been excluded from
the power and honours to which he had a just
claim, but laboured to form a new association, in
order to thwart or to rival his former confederaLe
in his discoveries. Pizarro, however, had more
wisdom and address than to susser a rupture bo ft-
tal to all his schemes, to become irreparable. By
offering voluntarily,to relinquish the office of adc-
lantado, and promising to concur in soliciting that
title, with an independent government for Al.
magro, he gradually mitigated the rage of an
open-hearted soldier, which had been violent, but
was not implacable. Luque, highly satisfied with
having beeri successful in all his own pretensions,
cordially seconded Pizarro's endeavours. A re-
conciliation was effected; and the confederacy re-
newed on its original terms, that the eiitcrpiile
ihould be carried on at the common expence of
the associates, and the profits accruing from it
lhould be equally divided among them *.

d EVEN

* Herrera, dec. 4. lib. vii, . . . Zarate. lib. i. c. 3. \Vca,
2. lib. i. . 14.

EvEN after their re-union, and the utmost efforts B O O K

of their interest, three small vessels, and a hundred VI.
and eighty soldiers, thirty-fix of whom were 53.;
horsemen, composed the armament which theyTiheirma.
wore able to fit out. But the afionifhing progretsn"'e"t
of the Spaniards in America had inspired them with
such ideas of their own superiority, that Pizarro
did not hesitate to fail with this contemptible force
to invade a great empire. Almagro was left at 1531.
Panama, as formerly, to follow him with what re- February-
inforcement of men he should be able to muller.
As the season for embarking was properly cholen,
and the course of navigation between Panama and
Peru was now better known, Piznrro completed
the voyage in thirteen days; though, by the force
of the winds and currents, he was carried above
an huudred leagues to the north of Tumbez, the
place of his destination, and obliged to land his
troops in the bay of St. Matthew. Without losing L,,,d, in
amoment, he began to advance towards the south, Icu-
taking care, however, not to depart far from the
fea-thore, both that he might easily effe&t ajunc-
tion with the supplies which he expecAed from Pa-
nama, and secure a retreat in cafe of any disaster,
y keeping as near as pofible to his ships. But as
he country in several parts on the coafi of Perul is
arren, unhealthful, and thinly peopled; as the
Spaniards had to pass all the rivers near their
outh, where the body of water is greatest; and
sthe imprudence of Pizarro, in a;tircking the na-
ives when he should have studied to gain their
onfidence, had forced them to abandn their
iaitations; famine, faigue, and difealis of va-
ioluskinds, brought upon hinm and his followers
lamities hardly inferior to those . uhich they lad
ndLred in their formcr expedition. What they
ow experienced co-rrcf 'ondinp f;, ill wirth tle a!-
ringdelcriltion of thl coun ;.y i '.n by Pi;izrrlo,
VOL. II. M tit

B0 0O K that many began to reproach him, and every soldier

VI. must have become cold to the service, if, even in
"''"° this unfertile region of Peru, they had not met

'53*. with some appearances of wealth and cultivation

which seemel tojuftify the report of their leader.
April 14. At length they reached the province of Coaque;

and having surprised the principal settlement of the
natives, they seized there vessels and ornaments of
gold and silver, to the amount of thirty thousand
pesos, with other booty of such value, as dispelled
all their doubts, and inspired the moit desponding
with sanguine hopes *.

His mce- PIZARRO himself was so much delighted with
lures for ob- this rich spoil, which he confidered as the first fruits
taining a re-
intfcment. of a land flowing with treasure, that he in.

flantly dispatched one of his ships to Panama,
with a large remittance to Almagro; and another
to Nicaragua, with a considerable fum to some per-
sons of influence in that province, in hopes of al-
luring adventurers, by this early display of the
wealth which he had acquired. Meanwhile, he
continued his march along the coast, and disdain-
ing to employ any means of reducing the natives
but force, he attacked them with such violence
in their scattered habitations, as compelled them
either to retire into the interior country, or to sub-
mit to his yoke. This sudden appearance of in-
vaders, whose aspet and manners were so strange,
and whose power seemed to be so irresistible, made
the fame dreadful impreflion as in other parts of
America. Pizarro hardly met with refifiance until
he attacked the island of Puna in the bay ofGuay-
quil. As that was better peopled than the country
through which he had passed, and its inhabitlans
fiercer and less civilized than those of the continent,
lhey defended themselves with such obflinate \a-

lour,
IIerrcra, dec. 4. lib. vii. c. 9. lib. ii. c. i. Xeres, 182.

lour, that Pizarro spent fix months in reducingB 0 o 1
them to fubjedion. From Puna he proceeded VI.
to Tumbez, where tie difiempers that raged -
among his men compelled him to remain for three 532
months *.
| WHILE he was thus employed, he began to

reap advantage from his own attention, to spread
I the fame of his first success at Coaque. Two dif- Receives
! ferent detachments arrived from Nicaragua, which, co°ne, and
t though neither exceeded thirty men, he confidered advance.

as a reinforcement of great consequence to his
i feeble band, especially as the one was under the
J command of Sebastian Benalcazar, and the other
' of Hernando Soto, officers not inferior in merit
< and reputation to any who had served in America.

From Tumbez he proceeded to the river Piura, My ,6.
iand, in an advantageous flation near the mouth
of it, he eitablifled the firit Spanish colony in
! Peru; to which he gave the name of St. Michael.

As Pizarro continued to advance towards the
centre of the Peruvian empire, he gradually re-

iceived more full information concerning its extent

jand policy, as well as the situation of its affairs at
that juncture. Without some knowledge of these,
lie could not have conduCed his operations with
propriety; and without a filitable attention to
these, it is impoflible to account for the progress
which the Spaniards had already made, or to un-
fold the causes of their subsequent ficcefs.

AT the time when the Spaniards invaded Peru, sate of .he
the dominions of its sovereigns extended in length, .er"vi"
from north to south, above fifteen hundred miles
along the Pacific Ocean. Its breadth, from eaff to
'eft, was much lets considerable; being uniformly

AM 2 boundel

, P. Sancho np Ramus. iii. p. 371, F. crrrcra, dec. 4.
,viic, 18. lib.ix,c. I. Zaratc,lib. ii. c 2, 3. X , .
c 15, &c.

B o O K bounded by the vast ridge of the Andes, firetching

VI. from its one extremity to the other. Peru, like the

1 reft of the New World, was originally pofleffed

by finall independent tribes, differing from eaci
other in manners, and in their forms of rude po-
licy. All, however, were so little civilized, that,
if the traditions concerning their mode of life, pre-
served among their descendants, deserve credit,
they mufl be classed among the mofi unimproved
savages of America. Strangers to every species
of cultivation or regular industry, without any
fixed residence, and unacquainted with those fen-
timents and obligations which form the firit bonds
of social union, they are said to have roamed about
naked in the forests, with which the country was
then covered, more like wild beasts than like men.
After they had struggled for several ages \\ ith the
hatdfhlips and calamities which are inevitable in this
barbarous state, and when no circumfiance seem-
ed to indicate the approach of any uncornmon
effort towards improvement, we are told that
there appeared, on the banks of the lake Titiaca,
a man and woman of majeffic form, and clothed
in decent garments. They declared themselves
to be the children of the Sun, sent by their bene-
ficent parent, who beheld with pity the mircries of
the human race, to inftrut and to reclaim them,
At their persuasion, enforced by reverence for the
divinity in whose name they were supposed to
speak, several of the dispersed savages united toge-
ther, and receiving their commands as heavenly
injunctions, followed them to Cuzco, wvhere they
fettlcd, and began to lay the foundations of a city.

MANCO CAPAC and Mama Ocollo, for fTlch

were the namces of tihofe extraordinary perfounges,
having thuls collectcd ibme wandering tribes,
fr.mned that f;j.cl :nion, which, by multiplying
tlle dclilcs, aild uiliting the efforts of the hum'an

species,

species, excites industry, and leads to improve- B 0 K
ment. Manco Capac inftruEted the men in VI.
agriculture, and other useful arts. Mama Ocollo r
taught the women to spin and to weave. By the 532'
labour of the one sex, utbfifience became less pre-
carious; by that of the other, life was rendered
more comfortable. After securing tlhe objects of
irft necessity in an infant fiate, by providing food,
raiment, and habitations for the rude people of
whom he took charge, Manco Capac turned his
attention towards introducing such laws and po-
licy as might perpetuate their happiness. By his
initutions, which shall be more particularly ex-
plained hereafter, the various relations in private
life were eflablifhed, and the duties resu:lting fiom
them prescribed with luch propriety, as gradually
formed a barbaroutt people to decncy of mranners.
In public adminiftra:ion, the fundtions of peribns
in authority were so precifcly defined, and the
subordination of th>rfe nder thli jtlliftliition
| maintained wilh fucll a fleady lh.nd, that tlie so-

ciety in v/hich lie presided loon ailin.cd the alscct
of a regular and well-governed state.

I THUS, according to the Indian nradition, was
founded the empire of tle Incars or Lords of Peru.
At first, its extent was linall. Tlhe territory of
Manco Capac did not reach above eihit leagues
Tfrom Cuzco. But within its narrow prccints, lhe
exelcil'ed absolute and uncontrolled aul orioty.
His ficceffors, as their dominions cxiand 'd, ar-
rogatcd a similar jurifdiEtion over tlicir l1'llecs :
tlle dci'otifn of Alia vwas not more complct".
Tlhe Incas were not only obeyed as monarchs,
but revered as divinities. Thleir blood \v:s held to
bolacred, and, by prohibiting inter'marria:;cs with
the peolle, was never contaminated by mixing
with lhlat of any otlher race. The family, thlua
separated from the reft of the nation, was diliin-

g ilillied

165

BO O K guifhed by peculiarities in dress and ornament,

VI. which it was unlawful for others to assume. The
i^. monarch himself appeared with ensigns of royalty

reserved for him alone; and received from his
fubjedts marks of obsequious homage and refpe:t,
which approached almost to adoration.

BUT, among the Peruvians, this unbounded

power of their monarchs is said to have been uni-
formly accompanied with attention to the good of
their fubjedls. It was not the rage of conquell,
if we may believe the accounts of their country-
men, that prompted the Incas to extend their do-
minions, but the desire of ditlfiing the biciiin;:
of civilization, and the knowledge of the a.":
which they polfefltd, among the barbarous people
whom they reduced. During a fuccellion of twelve
monarchs, it is said that not one deviated from this
beneficent character "

WHEN the Spaniards first visited the coast of

Peru, in the year one thousand five hundred and
twenty-fix, Huana Capac, the twelfth monarch
from the founder of the slate, was feated on the
thrine. He is represented as a prince diitinguifh-
ed net only for the pacific virtues peculiar to th.
race, but eminent for his martial talents. By his
vi&orious arms the kingdom of Quito was Iub-
jeded, a connqueft of filch extent and importance
as almost doubled the power of the Peruvian cm-
pire. 'He was fond of cfiding in the capital (f
that valuable province, lhiich head added to his
dominions ; and, liotwithltanding the ancien;t dii
fundamental law of the monarchy against pil!t-
ing the rcval blood by any foreign alliance, he
married the daughter of the vanquilhcd mo-
narch of Qt.ito. She bore him a obn n;med

Atahualpla,

* Cicca de Icon, Chron. c. 44. Ilerrera, dec. 3. lib. x. c, 4
dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 17.

Atahualpa, whom, on his death at Quito, which B 0 O K
seems to have happened about the year one VI.
thousand five hundred and twenty-nine, he ap- --1
pointed his successor in that kingdom, leaving 53z.
the reft of his dominions to Huafcar, his eldelt
son, by a mother of the royal race. Greatly as
the Peruvians revered the memory of a monarch
who had reigned with more reputation and fplen-
dour than any of his predecessors, the destination
of Huana Capac concerning the fucceflion, ap-
peared so repugnant to a maxim coeval with the
empire, and founded on authority deemed tacred,
that it was no sooner known at Cuzco than it
excited general difgufc. Encouraged by those
sentiments of his subjects, Huafcar required his
brother to renounce the government of Quito,
and to acknowledge him as his lawful superior.
But it had been the first care of Atahualpa to gain
a large body of troops which had accompanied
his father to Quito. These were the flower of
the Peruvian wan!ioirs, to whose valour Huana
Capac had been indebted for all his vi&ories. Re-
lying on their support, Atlihualpa first eluded his
brother's demand, and then marched against him
nhoftile array.

TI-rus the ambition of two young men, the

title of the one founded on ancient u'age, and
that of the other aflerted by the veteran troops,
involved Peru in civil war, a calamity, to which,
under a fucceflion of virtuous princes, it had hi-
llerto been a firanger. In such a contest, the i'-
fle was obvious. The force of arms triumphed
o\er the authority of laws. Atahualpa remained
victtrious, and made a cruel use of his vitory.
Conscious of the defect in hlis own title to the
Crown, he attempted to exterminate the royal
race, 1y putting to death all the children of the
Sull dlcllczdcd from l Manco Capac, lwhom he could

fcize

I67

BO K seize either by force or ifratagem. From a po-

VI. litical motive, the life of Ihis unfortunate rival
,. Huafcar, who had been taken prisoner in the

battle which decided the fate of the empire, was
saved for forr.e time, that, by ifluing orders in
his name, the usurper might more easily eftablifi
his own authority *.

Favourable WHEN Pizarro landed in the bay of St. Mat-
er th ',o - thew, this civil war raged between the two bro-
zarlo. thers in its greatest fury. Had he made any

hostile attempt in his former visit to Peru in the
year one thousand five hundred and twenty-li-
ven, he muff then have encountered tile force of
a powerful state, united under a monarch p1!'-
fefled of capacity and courage, and unembarraficd
with any care that could divert him from oppo-
sing his progress. But at this time, thc two
competitors, thousgh they received early accou:lrts
of the arrival ard violent proceedings of the Spa-
niards, were so intent upon the operations of a
war, which they deemed more interesting, that
they' paid no attention to the motions of an ene-
my, too inconfideiable in number to excite any
great alarm, and to whose career it would be
caty, as they imagined, to give a check, vw!:c:
more at leilure.

He a.ails BY this fortunate coincidence of events, where-
himif-'or it, of Pizarro could have no foresight, and of whlich,
nc.a '"v- from his defective mode of intercourse with the

people of the country, he remained long ignorant,
lie x .is pzrmitted to carry on his operations un-
molefltd, and advanced to the centre of a grcat
empire before one efioit of its power was e, erted
to flop its progress. During their progrel., the
Spanliaids had acquired some imperfea kn:,; ledge

* Zarate, lib i. c. Tr . Vcga, i. lib. ix. c. 12, andc 32-
40. llcirera, lec, 5. lib. i. c. z. lib. iii. c. 17.

of this struggle between the two contending sac- B OO 0K
rions. The first complete information, with rcidecdt VI.
to it, they received from some meffcngers whom 1."3
Huafcar sent to Pizarro, in order to follicit his aid
againef Atahualpa, whom he represented as a
rebel and an usurper *. Pizarro perceived at once
the importance of this intelligence, and forell'aw
so clearly all the advantages which might be de-
rived from this divided state of tie kingdom
which he had invaded, that, without waiting for
the reinforcement which hle expeted from IPan-
ama, he determined to push forward, wl'ile in-
teiline discord put it out of the power of the
Peruvians to attack him with their whole fJrce,
!nd while, by taking part, as circtlmlnltal.s lhould
incline him, with one of tlic comp!eirors, he
might be enabled with greater ease to crt;h both.
Enterprising as the Spaniards of that age were
in all their operations against Amcricnns, and
distinguished as Pizarro was among his country-
men for daring courage, we can hardly suppose,
that after having proceeded hither lowly, and
wirh much caution, he would have changed at
once his fyftemi of operation, and have ventured
upjn a measure so hazardous, withoi:t iomne new
mnotive or profpet to jufiify it.

As he was obliged to divide his troops, inStae of his

order to leave a garrison in St. Michael, sufficient "r'",
to defend a fiation of equal importance as a place
of retreat in cafe of any dlifaler, and as a port
for receiving any supplies which Ihouikl come fiom
P'anama, he began his march with a \xcry lender
and ill-accoutred train of followers. 'They con-
silted offixty-two horfemeni i, and a hlunmred and
two foot soldiers, of whom twenly \\cre Iarmed
with cross-bows, and tllrc witlh nmlkets. I-He
tlirec'ed his course towards Caxalmalc;a, a miall

tOwn

*I1 Sec NOTE NXXII.
' Zurite, lit). ii. C. 3.

B O O K town at the distance of twelve days march from

VI. St. Michael, where Atahualpa was encamped with
-1l
o a considerable body of troops. Before he had
1532. proceeded'far, an officer dispatched by the Inca

met him with a valuable present from that prince,
accompanied with a profer of his alliance, and
his assurances of a frendly reception at Caxamal-
ca. Pizarro, according to the usual artifice of
his country men in America, pretended to come as
the ambafiador of a very powerful monarch, and
declared that he was now advancing with inten-
tion to offer Atahualpa his aid against those en-
emnies who ditiputed his title to the throne- .

Idas of the As the obje-t of the Spaniards in entering their
Pcc'rvingn country was altogether incomprehensible to the
th;i deaegnS.Peruvians, they had formed various conjectures

concerning it, without being able to decide whe-
ther they flhould confider their new guelis as
beings of a superior nature, who had visited th.m
from some beneficent motive, or as formidable
avengers of their crimes, and enemies to their re-
pose and liberty. The continual profeflions of
the Spaniards, that they came to enlighten them
with the knowledge of truth, and lead them in
the way of happiness, favoured the forlmer opi-
nion; the outrages which they committed, thlir
rapacioulnel's and cruelty, were awful conlirnm-
lions of the latter. WVhile in this itate of uncer-
tainty, Pi2arro's declaration of his pacific inten-
tion~s to (sr removed all the Inca's fears, that
he determined to give him a fi'ielndlv rcccp-
tion. In conrequence of this refolutinl, tli
Spaniards !ere allowed to march in tranqnillity
acrol's the fay dyefert bSat .ibetween St. Mi-
chael and MIuILipC, where the most feeble eflbrt
of an enemy, added to the unavoidable (liflrellcs
wlich they fLiffered in panling tlhrough that

Hcrrr, dec.

v. ib. i. 3. Xcrcz, p. i oll
* Herrera, (Ice, v. llb. i. c. 3. Xerez, p. t tl9.

comfortless region, must have proved fatal to B 0 0 K
them*. From Montupe they advanced towards VI.
the mountains which encompass the low country ,
of Peru, and passed through a defile so narrow
and inacceliible, that a sex men might have de-
fended it against a numerous army. But here
likewise, from the fame inconfidcrate credulity
of the Inca, the Spaniards met witil no oppoli-
tion, and took qcuiet poffelion of a fort erOeded
for the security of that important fiation. As
they now ap;proached near to Caxamalca, Ata-
Ihualpa renewed his profeiicns of fricldihip ; and
as an evxdence of his sincerity, fcnt them prcfents
us greater value than the former.

ON entering Caxamalca, Pizarro took possesSion ,Ar ,a

of a large court, on one fide of wlich was a
house which the Spanifi historians call a pnlace
of the Inca, and on the other a temple of the
Sun, the whole surrounded with a firong ram-
part or wall of earth. When lie had polled his
troops in this advantageous flation, he di1i)atched
Hernando Soto, and his brother Ferdinand, to
ihe camp of Atahualpa, which was about a
league diffant from the town. He intrucded
them to confirm the declaration which he had
formerly made of his pacific disposition, and to
desire an interview with the Inca, that lie might
explain more fully the intention of the Spaniards
invifiting his country. 'They \\xcre treated with
all the rcfpeafill hospitality Ililral among the
Peruvians in the reception of( thelir molt cordial
friends, and Atahuallpa pron lsed to vilit the Spa-
nifh commander next day iin lis qmarte!s. The
decent deportment of the PeLrulvian monarch, the
order of his court, and the reverence with which
his fubjeds alproachecl his perllon and obeyed his
comniands, anonilhtd thlle Spaniardls, who had

nevrcT
' Sec NOT? XXXII!.

B O O K never met in America with any thing more dignifi-

VI. ed than the petty cazique of a barbarous tribe. But
.-v.-. their eyes were flill more powerfully attracted by
1532- the vast profusion of wealth which they observed

in the Inca's camp. The rich ornaments worn
by him and his attendants, the vessels of gold and
silver in which the repast offered to them was
served up, the multitude of utensils of every kind
formed of those precious metals, opened prof-
pets far exceeding any idea of opulence that a
European of the sixteenth century could form.

p:.fil.ionis ON their return to Caxamalca, while their minds
tchelme of were yet warm with admiration and desire of the
1'zarro. vealth which they had beheld, they gave such a

description of it to their countrymen, as con-
firmed Pizarno in a resolution which he had al-
ready taken. From his own observation of Ame-
rican manners during his long service in the New
World, as well as from the advantages which
Cortes had derived fromr seizing Montezuma, lie
knew of what consequence it was to have the
Inca in his power. For this putrpofe, he formcd
aplan as dai as it was perfidios. Notwith-
flandiing the character he had aftilmed of an ambaf-
fd.lor from a powerful monarch, who courted in
alliance with the Inca, and in violation of the
repeated offers which he had made to him of his
own friendship and aflifance, he deterlminccd t,
avail himself of the unfufpicious simplicity wili
which Atahualpa relied on his profeflions, anl to
seize his person during the interview to whlill he
had invited him. He prepared for the exccitti'nl
of his fclheme with the fame celiberate arrangement,
and with as little compuncion, as if it had rcflc-t-
ed no cdifgrace on himtelf or his country. I-c diidalcd

his

his cavalry into three small fqciladrons, under the B 0 0 K
command of his brother Ferdinand, Soto, and Be- vI.
nalcazar; his infantry was formed in one body, ex- LL-
cept twenty of most tried courage, whonm he kept 53
near his own person to support him in the dange-
rous service which he reserved for himself; the ar-
tillery, consisting of two field-pieces'* and the
crofs-bowmen, were placed opposite to the ave-
nue by which Atahualpa was to approach. All
were commanded to keep within the tquare, and
not to move until the signal for adtion was given.

EAR LY in the morning the Peruvian camp was -ov. r6.

all in motion. But as Atahualpa was solicitous to tho' Ica.
appear with the greatest fplendnur and magnifi-
cence in his firfl interview with the ifrangers, the
preparations for this were so tedious, that the day
was far advanced before he began his march. Even
then, left the order of the proceflion should be de-
ranged, he moved so ilowly, that the Spaniards
became impatient and apprehensive that some sus-
picion of their intention might be the cause of this
delay. In order to remove this, Pizarro dispatch-
ed one of his officers with fresh assurances of
his fiiendly disposition. At length the Inca ap-
proached. First of all appeared four hundred
men, in an uniform dress, as harbingers to clear
the way before him. He himself, iitting on a
throne or couch, adorned with plumes of various
colouis, and almost covered with plates of gold and
silver enriched with precious itones, was carried
on the floulders of his principal attendants. Bz-
hind him came some chief officers of his court,
carried in the fame manner. Sevcr.al bands of
fingers and dancers accomlpalied this cavalcade;
and the whole plain was covered with troops,
amountingto more tllnl thirl.) tholuflnd men.

As
* Xcrez, p. 194.

B O O I As the Inca drew near the Spanish quarters, fa-

VI. ther Vincent Valverde, chaplain to the expedition,
v advanced with a crucifix in one hand, and a bre-

1532.

Strang ha- viary in the other, and in a long discourse ex-
rangucofia- plained to him the doctrine of the creation, the
verde. fall of Adam, the incarnation, the sufferings and

refurredQion of Jesus Christ, the appointment of
St. Peter as God's vicegerent on earth, the tranf-
miflion of his apostolic power by fucceflion to the
popes, the donation made to the king of Castile
by pope Alexander of all the regions in the New
World. In consequence of all this, he required
Atahualpa to embrace the Christian faith, to ac-
knowledge the fupremejurifdiEtion of the pope,
and to submit to the king of Castile as his lawful
sovereign; promising, if he complied infiantly
with this requisition, that the Castilian monarch
would protect his dominions, and permit him to
continue in the exercise of his royal authority; but
if he should impiously refuse to obey this fum-
mons, he denounced war against him in his maf-
ter's name, end threatened him with the most
dreadful effects of his vengeance.

Reply of the THIS strange harangue, unfolding deep myfle-
Inca' ries, and alluding to unknown fats, of which no

power of eloquence could have conveyed at once
a diftinEt idea to an American, was so lamely
translated by an unflkilful interpreter, little ac-
quainted with the idiom of the Spanish tongue,
and incapable of exprefling himself with propriety
in the language of the Inca, that its general tenor
was altogether incomprehensible to Atahualpa.
Some parts in it, of more obvious meaning, filled
him with afionifhment and indignation. His re-
ply, however, was temperate. He began with
observing, that he was lord of the dominions
over which he reigned by hereditary fucceflion;

and

and-added, that he could not conceive how a so- B 0 K
Yeign priest should pretend to dispose of territories vl.
which did not belong to him; that if such a pre- '3
pofterous grant had been made, he, who was the
rightful possessor, refused to. confirm it; that he
had no inclination to renounce the religious infti-
tutions eftablilhed by his ancestors; nor would he
forsake the service of the Sun, the immortal divi-
nity whom he and his people revered, in order to
worlhip the God of the Spaniards, who was fib-
jec to death ; that with respeCt to other matters
contained in his discourse, as he had never heard
of them before, and did not now understand their
meaning, he desired to know where he had learn-
ed things so extraordinary. " In this book," an-
fwered Valverde, reaching out to him his breviary.
The Inca opened it eagerly, and turning over the
leaves, lifted it to his ear: " This," fays he, " is
silent; it tells me nothing;" and threw it with
disdain to the ground. The enraged monk, run-
ning towards his countrymen, cried out, " To
arms, Christians, to arms; the word of God is in-
fulted; avenge this profanation on those impious
dogs *."

PIZARRO, who, during this long conference, r',r;.,:7r-

had with difficulty restrained his soldiers, eager to t.al

, -,kl.-

leize the rich spoils of which they had now lb near
a view, immediately gave tle signal of alihult.
At once the martial mftic struck up, thle cannon
and mufcets began to fire, the honrie illlied out
fiercely to the charge, the i;lf]nrry rulhed o;i
sword in hand. The Peruvians, at;)nilhed at t!:e
fuiddenncfs of an attack which they did not ex--
pect, and dismayed will the delflril'tivc eiTects of
lhe fire-arms, and the irrefifible iinmpillion of' l:e
cavalry, fled with universal confl:iration on e;'ery
fide, without attempting cillter to) annoy the ene-
nmy, or to defend themlelves. Pizarro, at the head

us
' See NOTE XXXIV.

B O 0 K of his chosen band, advanced diretly towards the

Vl. Inca; and though his nobles crowded around him
15-3- with officious zeal, and fell in numbers at his feet,

while they vied one with another in sacrificing their
own lives, that they might cover the sacred person
of their sovereign, the Spaniards soon penetrated
the Inea. to the royal feat; and Pizarro seizing the Inca by

the arm, dragged him to the ground, and carried
him as a prisoner to his quarters. The fate of the
monarch increased the precipitate flight of his
followers. The Spaniards pursued them towards
every quarter, and with deliberate and unrelent-
ing barbarity continued to slaughter wretched fu-
gitives, who never once offered at resistance. The
carnage did not cease until the close of day. A-
bove four thousand Peruvians were killed. Not
a tingle Spaniard fell, nor was one wounded but
Pizarro himself, whose hand was slightly hurt by
one of his own soldiers, while struggling eagerly
to lay hold on the Inca *.

THE plunder of the field was rich beyond any

idea which the Spaniards had yet formed concern-
ing the wealth of Peru; and they were so transport-
ed with the value of the acquisition, as well as the
greatness of their success, that they passed the
night in the extravagant exultation natural to in-
digent adventurers on such an extraordinary
change of fortune.

Dejeiion of AT -firfi the captive monarch could hardly be-
the Inc. lieve a calamity which he so little expected to be

real. But lie soon felt all the misery of his fate,
and the deje&tion into which he funk was in pro-
portion t9 the height of grandeur from which he
had fallen. Pizarro, afraid of losing all the adl-
vantages which he hoped to derive from the pof-
fefllion of such a prisoner, laboured to cunll l him

d Mirt

* See NO TE XXXV,

with profeflions of kindness and refped, that cor-B O o K
responded ill with his aaions. By residing among vI
the Spaniards, the Inca quickly discovered their -
ruling paflion, which, indeed, they were no-wise
Solicitous to conceal, and by applying to that,
made an attempt to recover his liberty. He offer- ,Hu ortr o'
ed as a ransom what astonished the Spaniards,
even after all they now knew concerning the opu-
lence of his kingdom. The apartment in which
he was confined was twenty-two feet in length and
sixteen in breadth; he undertook to fill it with
vessels of gold as high as he could reach. Pizarro
closed eagerly with this tempting proposal, and a
line was drawn upon the walls of the chamber, to
mark the tfipulated height to which the treasure
was to rife.

ATAHU A LPA, transported with having obtain-
ed some profpeat of liberty, took measures in-
f iantly for fulfilling his part of the agreement, by
fending messengers to Cuzco, Quito, and other
places, where gold had been amafled in largest
quantities, either for adorning the temples of their
gods, or the houses of the Inca, to bring what
was necessary for completing his ransom directly
to Caxamalca. Though Atahualpa was now in
the custody of his enemies, yet so much were the
Peruvians vcullomed to refpe&t every mandate
ilfed by their sovereign, that his orders were ex-
ecuted with the greatest alacrity. Soothed with
hopes of recovering his liberty by this means, the
fubjeas of the Inca were afraid of endangering his
ife by forming any other scheme for his relief;
ad though the force of the empire was fIill entire,
o preparations were made, and no army alsem-
led, to avenge their own wrongs or those of their
on1arclh .
VOL. II. N THE

* Xerez, 205.
|

B O O K THE Spaniards remained in Caxamalca tranquil

VL. and unmolested. Small detachments of their
~V'r number marched into remote provinces of the em-
153z.

Th: Spa- pire, and instead of meeting with any opposition,
niards visit were every where received with marks of the most
province fubmiilive respect*.
Almagroar- INCONSIDERABLE as those parties were, and
rinforce- desirous as Pizarro might be to obtain some know-
rnent. ledge of the interior fiate of the country, he

could not have ventured upon any diminution of
December. his main body, if he had not about this time re-

ceived an account of Almagro's having landed at
St. Michael with such reinforcement as would al-
mofl double the number of his followers :. The
arrival of this long-expected succour was not more
agreeable to the Spaniards, than alarming to the
Inca. He saw the power of his enemies increase;
and as he knew neither the source whence they de-
rived their supplies, nor the means by which they
were conveyed to Peru, he could not foresee to
what a height the inundationthat pouredin upon his

1533. dominions might rife. While disquieted with such
Huda Putapprehenfions, he learned, that some Spaniards, in

their way to Cuzco, had visited his brother Huaf-
car in the place where he kept him confined, and
that the captive prince had represented to them the
justice of his own cause, and as an inducement to
espouse it, had promiscd them a quantity of trea.
1ure vastly exceeding what he had engaged to pay
for his ransom. If the Spaniards flould liften to
this proposal, he perceived his own dfeirution to
be inevitable; and fufte&ting that their inatiable
thirll for gold would tempt them to lend a favour'
able ear to it, he determined to sacrifice his bro-
ther's life, that he might save his own; and his or

der

* See NOTE XXXVI. I Xcrez, 204. Herrera, decc..
lib, iii. c. , 2.

ders for this purpose were executed, like all his o- 1B o K
ther commands, with scrupulous punctuality *. VL

MEANWHILE, Indians daily arrived at Caxa- 1533:
malca from different parts of the kingdom, loaded The Spa-

.,~~~~

 1 ' »niards make

with treasure. A great part of the tfipulated quan- a division of
tity was now amafled, and Atahualpa assured the the fpoi".
Spaniards, that the only 'thing which prevented
the whole from being brought in, was the remote-
ness of the provinces where it was deposited. But
such vast piles of gold, presented continually to
the view of needy soldiers, had so inflamed their
avarice, that it was impoflible any longer to re-
firain their impatience to obtain pofeffion of this
rich booty. Orders were given for melting down
the whole, except some pieces of curious fabric,
reserved as a present for the emperor. After set-
ting apart the fifth due to the crown, and a hun-
dred thousand pesos as a donative to the soldiers
which arrived with Almagro, there remained one
million five hundred and twenty-eight thousand
five hundred pesos to Pizarro and his followers.
The festival of St. James, the patron faint of
Spain, was the day chosen for the partition of this
vait fum; and the manner of conducEing it strong-
ly marks that strange alliance of fanaticism with
avarice, which I have more than once had occasion
to point out as a striking feature in the character
of the conquerors of the New World. Though
assembled to divide the spoils of an innocent peo-
ple, procured by deceit, extortion, and cruelty,
the tranfaEion began with a solemn invocation of
the name of God , as if they could have expe&-
ed the guidance of Heaven in diflributing thole
wages of iniquity. In this division above eight
thousand pelos, at that time not inferior in value

N, 2 to

*Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 6. Goimara Hiss. c. 1 . errera, dec 5.
ib, iii. c. 2. § Herrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 3.

B O K to as many pounds sterling in the present century,

Vl. fell to the share of each horseman, and half that
'T `' fum to each foot soldier. Pizarro himself, and his

533 officers, received dividents in proportion to the dig-

nity of their rank.

The effta THERE is no example in history of such a fud-
of it. den acquisition of wealth by military service, nor

was ever a fum so great divided among so small a
number of soldiers. Many of them having re-
ceived a recompence for their services far beyond
their most sanguine hopes, were so impatient to
retire from fatigue and danger in order to spend
the remainder of their days in their native coun-
try, in ease and opulence, that they demanded
their discharge with clamorous importunity. Pi-
zarro, sensible that from such men he could exped
neither enterprise in aEtion nor fortitude in susser-
ing, and persuaded that wherever they went, the
display of their riches would allure adventur-
ers, less opulent but more hardy, to his standard,
granted their suit without reluctance, and permit-
ted above sixty of them to accompany his brother
Ferdinand, whom he sent to Spain with an ac-
count of his success, and the present destined for
the emperor *.

The Inca THE Spaniards having divided among them
lemahib the treasure amassed for the Inca's ran.som, he in-
vain. ifted with them to fulfil their promise of setting

him at liberty. But nothing was farther from Pi-
zarro's thoughts. During hislong service in the
New World, he had imbibed thofeideas and max-
ims of his fellow-foldiers, which led them to con-
fider its inhabitants as an inferior race, neither wor-
thy of the name, nor intitled to the rights, of
men. In his compact with Atahualpa, he had no
other object than to amuse his captive with such a

profpet
* Hcrera,dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. . lib. i. c. 38.

profpe&t of recovering his liberty, as might induce B O o K
him to lend all the aid of his authority towards VI.
collecing the wealth of his kingdom. Having
now accomplished this, he no longer regarded his
faith; and at the very time when the credulous
prince hoped to be replaced on his throne, he had
secretly resolved to bereave him of life. Many
circumstances seem to have concurred in promot-
ing him to this action, the most criminal and at-
trocious that ifains the Spanish name, amidst all
the deeds of violence committed in carrying on
the conquest of the New World.

THOUGH Pizarro had seized the Inca, in imi-e and the

tation ofCortes's conduct towards the Mexicanmutually
monarch, lie did not pofrefs talents for carrying onjea'ous.
the fame artful plan of policy. Destitute of the
temper and address requisite for gaining the con-
fidence of his prisoner, he never reaped all the ad-
vantages which might have been derived from be-
ing master of his person and authority. Atahual-
pa was, indeed, a prince of greater abilities and
discernment than Montezuma, and seems to have
penetrated more thoroughly into the charater and
intentions of the Spaniards. Mutual ftll'picion
and diftrufR accordingly took place between them.
The strict attention with which it was necessary to
guard a captive of filch importance, greatly in-
creased the fatigue of military duty. The utility
of keeping him appeared inconsiderable; and Pi-
zarro felt him as an incumbrance, from which he
wished to be delivered ".

ALM ARO and his followers had made a de- Almagro

mand of an equal share in the Inca's ransom ; and anv hI.' i
though Pizarro had bellowed upon the private .a.nd hii
men the large gratuity which I have mentioned, ir'

and
* Herrera, dec. 5. lib. 3. c. 4.

B O o K and endeavoured to sooth their leader yprefents

VI. of great value, they fill continued di ftisfied.

- They were apprehensive, that as long as Atahual-

pa remained a prisoner, Pizarro's soldiers would
apply whatever tieafure should be acquired, to
make up what was wanting of the quantity ftipu-
lated for his ransom, and under that pretext ex-
clude ther from any part of it. They infited
eagerly on putting the Inca to death, that all the
adventurers in Peru might thereafter be on an
equal footing *.

Motives P AR RO himself began to be alarmed withac-
which in- counts of forces assembling in the remote pro-
duced Pi-
zartoon- vinces of the empire, and fufpeted Atahualpa ol
sent. having issued orders for that purpose. These

fears and suspicions were artfully increased by
Philippillo, one of the Indians whom Pizarro had
had carried off from Tumbez in the year one
thousand five hundred and twenty, and whom he
employed as an interpreter. The function which
he performed admitting this man to familiar inter-
course with the captive monarch, he presumed,
notwithitanding the meanness of his birth, to raise
his affetions to a Coya, or descendant of the Sun,
one of Atahualpa's wives; and feeing no prospect
of gratifying that passion during the life of the
monarch, he endeavoured to fill the ears of the
Spaniards with such accounts of his secret designs
and preparations, as might awaken their jealousy
and excite them to cut him off.

WHI LE Almagro and his followers openly de-

manded tho life of the Inca, andPhilippillo laboured
to ruin him by piivate machinations, that uniap-
py prince inadvertently contributed to hafien his
own fate. During his confinement he had at-

tachcd

* Zarate, lib. 2, c. 7. Vega, p, z. lib. 2. i. c. 7 Hcrer
dec. 5. lib. 3. c. 4.

tached himself with peculiar affeEtion to Ferdinand B O O K
Pizarro and Hernando Soto; who, as they were Vl.
persons of birth and education superior to the
rough adventurers with whom they served, were
accustomed to behave with more decency and at-
tention to the captive monarch. Soothed with
this refped from persons of such high rank, he de-
lighted in their society; but in the presence of the
governor he was uneasy, and overawed. This
dread soon came to be mingled with contempt.
Among all the European arts, what he admired
most was that of reading and writing; and he
long deliberated with himself, whether he should
regard it as a natural or acquired talent. In order
to determine this, he desired one of the Jbldiers,
who guarded him, to write the name of God on the
nail of his thumb. This he shewed fucceflively to
several Spaniards, asking its meaning; and to his
amazement, they all, without hesitation, returned
the fame answer. At length Pizarro entered; and
on presenting it to him, he bluflled, and with some
confusion was obliged to acknowledge his igno-
rance. From that moment, Atahualpaconfidered
him as a mean person, less inffruEted than his own
soldiers; and he had not address enough to con-
ceal the sentiments with which this dilcovery in-
spired him. To be the object of a barbarian's
scorn, not only mortified the pride of Pizarro, but
excited such resentment in his brealt, as added
force to all the other considerations which prompt-
ed him to put the Inca to death *.

BUT in order to give some colour of juflice to1i,1 tr'l.

this violent adion, and that he himself might be
exempted from ilanding singly responsible for the
commiflion of it, Pizarro resolved to try the Inca

with
* Herrera, dec. 5 lib. iii. c. 4. Vega, p. A. lib. i c. 38.

B1 O K with all the formalities observed in the criminal

VI. courts of Spain. Pizarro himself, and Almagro,
~"V" with two assistants were appointed judges, with
z533. full power to acquit or to condemn; an attorney-

general was named to carry on the prosecution in
the king's name; counsellors were chosen to affiff
the prisoner in his defence; and clerks were or-
dained to record the proceedings of court.. Be-
fore this strange tribunal, a charge was exhibited
still more amazing. It consisted of various arti-
cles; that Atahualpa, though a batlard, had dif-
possessed the rightful owner of the throne, and
usurped the regal power; that he had put his bro-
ther and lawful sovereign to death; that he was an
idolater, and had not only permitted, but com-
manded the offering of human sacrifices; that he
had a great number of concubines; that since his
imprisonment he had wafted and embezzled the
royal treasures, which now belonged of right to
the conquerors; that he had incited his subjects
to take arms againit the Spaniards. On these
heads of accusation, some of which are so ludicrous,
others so absurd, that the effrontery of Pizarro,
in making them the foundation of a serious pro-
cedure, is not less surprising than his injuflice, did
the court go on to try the sovereign of a great em-
pire, over whom it had nojurifdiction. With re-
fpedt to each of the articles, witnesses were exa-
mined; but as they delivered their evidence in
their native tongue, Philippillo had it in his power
to give their words whatever turn belt suited his
malevolent intentions. To judges predetermined
in their opinion, this evidence appeared sufficient

V,-. i con- They pronounced Atahualpa guilty, and condemn-
dcmned, ed him to be burnt alive. Friar Valverde profti-

tuted the authority of his sacred function to con-
firm this sentence, and by his signature warranted
it to be just. Aftonifled at his fate, Atahualpa
endeavoured to avert it by his tears, by promirfe,

;iln

and by entreaties, that he might be sent to Spain, B O O K
where a monarch would be the arbiter of his lot. VI.
But pity never touched the unfeeling heart of Pi- '
zarro. He ordered him to led instantly to execu- '5S3'
tion; and what added to the bitterness of his last
moments, the fame monk who had just ratified his
doom, offered to console, and attempted to con-
vert him. The most powerful argument Valverde
employed to prevail with him to embrace the
Christian faith, was a promise of a mitigation in
|i his punishment. The dread of a cruel death ex-

torted from the trembling victim a desire of re-
ceiving baptism. The ceremony was performed;
ind Atahualpa, instead of being burnt, was stran-.d eaecut-
i gled at the flake *.

HAPPILY for the credit of the Spanifhl nation, Several Sp-

even among the profligate adventurers which it, naftr pro-
sent forth to conquer and desolate the New World,
there were persons who retained some tincture of
the Castilian generosity and honour. Though,
before the trial of Atahualpa, Ferdinand Pizarro
| had set out for Spain, and Soto was sent on a fe-
parate command at a distance from Caxamalca,
this odious tranfaaion was not carried on without
censure and opposition. Several officers, and
among those some of the greatest reputation and
most refpe&able families in the service, not only
remonilrated, but protefled against this measure
of their general, as disgraceful to their country, as
repugnant to every maxim of equity, as a violation
of public faith, and an usurpation of jurifdidtion
over an independent monarch, to which they had
no title. But their endeavours were vain. Num-
bers, and the opinion of such as held every thing
tobe lawful which they deemed advantageous,

prevailed.

Zarate, rib. i. c. 7. Xerez, p. 231. Vega, p. i r. lib. i.

1 36, 37. Gomara Hist. c. l 17. Hcrrera, dec. 5. lib. iii. c. 4.
ii

B OOK prevailed. History, however, records even the

VI- unsuccessful exertions of virtue with applause; and
''r"-' the Spanish writers, in relating events where the

1533. valour of their nation is more conspicuous than its

humanity, have not failed to preserve the names of
those who made this laudable effort to save their
country from the infamy of having perpetrated
such a crime *.

Dissolution ON the death of Atahualpa, Pizarro irmefted one
",,andor- of his sons with the ensigns of royalty, hoping
der in Peru- that a young man without experience might prove

a more pailive initrument in his hands, than an
ambitious monarch, who had been accustomed to
independent command. The people of Cuzco,
and the adjacent country, acknowledged Manco
Capac, a brother of Huafcar, as Incat. But nci-
ther pofleffed the authority which belonged to a
sovereign of Peru. The violent convulsions into
which the empire had been thrown, first by the
civil war between the two brothers, and then by
the invasion of the Spaniards, had not only de-
ranged the order of the Peruvian government, but
.almost dissolved its frame. When they beheld
their monarch a captive in the power of firangers,
and at last filffering an ignominious death, the
people in several provinces, as if they had been let
free from every reitraint of law and decency, broke
out into the most licentious excefles T. So many
descendants of the Sun, after being treated with
the uimoft indignity, had been cut off by Atahu-
alpa, that not only their influence in the state di-
minifhed with their number, but the accustomed
reverence for that sacred race sensibly decreased
In consequence of this itate of things, ambitioun

ier

* Vcga, p. 1. lib. i. c. 37. Xcrcz, i. 235. H-cracra, dec

lib. iii. c. . 1'- Vega, p. 1 I. lib. ii. . 7. :t H-crrcra, dec. i
fib. ii. c. z12 lib. iii. c. 5.

men in different parts of the empire aspired to in- B O o K
dependent authority, and usurped juridiitioni to Vi.
which they had no title. The general who com- e 3
manded for Atahualpa in Quito, seized the brother 33
and children of his mafler, put them to a cruel
death, and diiclaiming any connection with either
Inca, endeavoured to establish a separate kingdom
for himself *.

THE. Spaniards, with pleasure, beheld the spirit P;zarro ad-

of discord diffusing itself, and the vigour of go- "cets to
vernment relaxing among the Peruvians. They
confidered thote disorders as s)ymptoms of a fiate
hastening towards its diflolution. Pizarro no lon-
ger hesitated to advance towards Cuzco, alnd he
had received filch considerable reinforcements,
that he could venture, with'little danger, to pene-
trate so far into the interior part of the country.
The account of the wealth acquired at Caxarmlca,
operated as he had foreseen. No sooner did his
brother Ferdinand, with the officers and soldiers,
to whom he had given their discharge after the
partition of the Inca's ransom, arrive at Panama,
and display their riches in the view of their aftlo-
nifhed countrymen, than fame spread the account
with such exaggeration through all the Spanish
settlements on the South sea, that the governors
of Guatimala, Panama, and Nicaragua, could
hardly restrain the people under their juriifiction,
from abandoning their poflseltions, and crowding
to that inexhauflible sburce of wealth which feern-
cd to be opened in Peru 1:. In spite of every clleck
and regulation, such numbers resortcd thither,
that Pizarro began his march at the head of five

hundred

* Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. Vega, p 11. lib. i. . 3, l.
t Gomnra His. c. 125. Veg,i, p. li. lib. ii. c. i. H, rrera,
5c. 5, lib. iii. c. 5.

BO 0 K hundred men, after leaving a considerable garri-

VI. son in St. Michael, under the command of Benal-
533. cazar. The Peruvians had assembled rome large

bodies of troops to oppose his progress. Several
fierce encounlers happened. But they termi-
nated, like all the actions in America; a' few
Spaniards were killed or wounded; the natives
were put to flight with incredible slaughter. At
length Pizarro forced his way to Cuzco, and took
quiet poffeflion of that capital. The riches found
there, even after all that the natives had carried off
and concealed, either from a superstitious venera-
tion for the ornaments of their temples, or out of
hatred for their rapacious conquerors, exceeded in
value what had been received as Atahualpa's ran.
fom. But as the Span ards were now accustomed
to the wealth of the country, and it came to be par-
celled out among a greater number of adventurers,
this dividend did not excite the fame surprise either
from novelty, or the largeness of the fum that fell
to the (hare of each individual t.

DURING the march to Cuzco, the son of Ata-

hulla whom Pizarro treated as Inca, died, and as
the Spaniards substituted no person in his place,
the title of Manco Capac seems to have been uni-
verfally recognized §.
QOito cMn. WVI L ' his fellow-foldiers were thus employed,

,l,~.. Benalcazar, governor of St. Michael, an able and

enterprising officer, was ashamed of remaining in-
adtive, and impatient to have his name di-
fiinguiffed among the discoverers and con-
querors of the New World. The seasonable arri-
val of a frefi body of recruits from Panama and Ni-
caragua, put it in his power to gratify this palion.

Leav ine

§ Herrera, dec. 5. lib. v. c.
·. See NOTZ XXXVII.

Leaving a sufficient force to protect the infant B o o K
fettlemept entrusted to his care, he placed him- VI.
self at file head of the reft, and set out to attempt "V
the relpution of Quito, where according to the 33
report of the natives, Atahulipa had left the
greatest part of his treasure. Notwithstanding the
vast distance of that city from St. Michael, the
difficulty of marching. through a mountainous
country covered with woods, and the frequent
and fierce attacks of the best troops in Peru,
commanded by a skilful leader, the valour, good
conduEt, and perseverance of Benalcazar fur-
mounted every obflacle, and he entered Qi-
to with his victorious troops. But they met with
a cruel mortification there. The natives, now
acquainted, to their sorrow, with the predominant
paflion of their invaders, and knowing how to
disappoint it, had carried off all those treasures,
the prospect of which had prompted them to un-
dertake this arduous expedition, and had support-
ed them under all the dangers and hardships
wherewith they had to struggle in carrying it on *

BENALCAZAR was not the only Spanish lea-Alvarado's
der who attacked the kingdom of Quito. The epedition.
fame of its riches attracted a more powerful ene-
|my. Pedro de Alvarado, who had distinguished
himself so eminently in the conquest of Mexico,
Shaving obtained the government of Guatimala as
a reccmpence for his valour, soon became dif-
gusted with a life of uniform tranquillity, and
longed to be again engaged in the bufile of mili-
tary service. The glory and wealtl acquired by
the conquerors of Peru heightened this paloion, and
gave it a determined direction. Believing, or
pretending to believe, that the kingdorn of

Quito

Z rate, lib. ii. c. 9. Vega, p. il. lib. ii. c. 9. Herrera,

c. ,

5 lib. iv. c. i , 1i . lib ,
v . 2, 3. lib. vi, c. 3.

B o K Quito did not lie within the limits of the province

VI. allotted to Pizarro, he resolved to invade it. The
t-"-^ high reputation of the 'commander allured volun-

l533. teers fiom every quarter. He embarked with five

hundred men, of whom above two hundred were
of such distinction as to serve on horseback. He
landed at Puerto Viejo, and without sufficient
knowledge of the country, or proper guides to
conduEt him, attempted to march directly to
Quito, by following the course of the riverGuay-
quil, and crossing the ridge of the Andes towards
its head. But in this route, one of the most im.
practicable in all America, his troops endured
such fatigue in forcing their way through forests
and marshes on the low grounds, and suffered
so much from excelfive cold when they began to
a!cend the mountains, that before they reached the
plain of Quito, a fifth part of the men and half
of their horses died, and the reft were so much
dispirited and worn out, as to be almost unfit for
service*. There they met with a body, not of
Indians, but of Spaniards, drawn up in hostile
array againfi them. Pizarro, having received an
account of Alvarado's armament,.had detached
Almagro with some troops to oppose this formi-
dable invader of hisjurifdiEtion; and there were
joined by, B'nalcazar and his victorious party,
Alvarado, though surprised at the fight of ene-
mies whom he did not expec, advanced boldly
to the charge. But by the interposition of some
moderate men in each party, an amicable ac-
commodation took place; and the fatal period,
when Spaniards suspended their conquefis to cm-
brue their hands in the blood of their country-
men, was pofiponed a few years. Alvarado en-
gaged to return to his government, upon Almna

groe
$ See NOTE XXXVIII.

gro's paying him a hundred thousand pesos, BO O K
to defray the expence of this armament. MolE VI.
of his followers remained in the country ; and v
an expedition, which threatened Pizarro and his 534
colony with ruin, contributed to augment its
firength *.

BY this time Ferdinand Pizarro had landed in Honours

...~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. »-~i * ' lconferred on

Spain. The immense quantities of gold and fil-tizarro ai
ver which he imported t, filled the kingdom withAlmag"ro
no less aflonifhment than they had excited in
Panama and the adjacent provinces. Pizarro
was received by the emperor with the attention
due to the bearer of a present so rich as to ex-
ceed any idea which the Spaniards had formed
concerning the value of their acquifitidns in Ame-
rica, even after they had been ten years masters
of Mexico. In recompence of his brother's ser-
vices, his authority was confirmed with new
powers and privileges, and the addition of
seventy leagues, extending along the coast, to the
southward of the territory granted in his former
patent. Almagro received the honours which he
had so long desired. The title of Adelantado,
or governor, was conferred upon him, with ju-
rifdition over two hundred leagues of a coun-
try, itretching beyond the southern limits of the
province allotted to Pizarro. Ferdinand himself
did not go unrewarded. He was admitted into
the military order of St. Jago, a diftintion al-
ways acceptable to a Spanilh gentleman; and
soon set out on his return to Peru, accompanied
by many persons of higher rank, than had yet
served in that country II.

SOME
So MS

Zarate, lib. 2. c. 0o-13. Vega, p. r. lib. ii. c. 1, 2, 9,

&c. Gomara Hist. c. 126, &c. Renlefal. HiRt. Guatimal. lib. iii.
c. 6, Herrera, dec. . lib. vi. c. 1, 2. 7, 8.

tSee NOTE XXXIX. 11 Zarate, lib. iii. c. 3. Vega,

p, ib. lib .
i c. 19. Horrera, dec. 5. lib. vi, c. r.

B OOK SOME account of his negociations reached Peru

VI. before he arrived there himself. Almagro no
L-+3 sooner learned that he had obtained the royal
Beginig ofgrant of an independent government, than, pre-
ieTntio; tending that Cuzco, the imperial refidencc of the
zarroandA. Incas, lay within it boundaries, he attempted
magro. to render himself master of that important flation.

Juan and Gonzalez Pizarro prepared to oppose
him. Each of the contending parties was Supported
by powerful adherents, and the dispute was on
the point of being terminated by the sword,
when Francis Pizarro arrived in the capital. The
reconciliation between him and Almagro had ne-
ver been cordial. The treachery of Pizarro in
engrossing to himself all the honours and emo-
luments, which ought to have been divided with
his aflociate, was always present in both their
thoughts. The one, conscious of his own perfidy,
did not expect forgiveness; the other, feeling
that he had been deceived, was impatient to be
avenged; and though avarice and ambition had
induced them not only to dissemble their senti-
ments, but even to aft in concert while in pursuit
of -wealth and power, no sooner did they obtain
poffeflion of these, than the fame paflions which
had formed this temporary union, gave rife to
jealousy and discord. To each of them was at-
tached a small band of interested dependents,
who, with the malicious art, peculiar to such
men, heightened their suspicions, and magnified
every appearance of offence. But with all those
feeds of enmity in.their minds,, and thus affidu-
oufly cherished, each was so thoroughly acquaint-
ed with the abilities and courage of his rival, that
they equally dreaded the consequences of an open
rupture. The fortunate arrival of Pizarro at
Cuzco, and the address mingled with firmness,
which he manifefied in his expaftulations with
Almagro and his partizans, averted that evil for
the present. Anew reconciliation took place; the chief

d article

article of which was, that Almagro lhould attempt B o o K
the conquest of Chili; and if he did not find VI.
in that province an eftabliifment adequate to his'--'"'
merit and expectations, Pizarro, by way of in- 1534.
demnification, should yield up to him a part of
Pera. This new agreement was confirmed with June :a.
the fame sacred folemnities as their firit contract,
and observed with as little fidelity ".

SOON after he concluded this important tranf-Regulations
a&tion, Pizarro marched back to the countries on0' Pizarro
the sea coast, and as he now enjoyed an interval
of tranquillity, undisturbed by any enemy, either
Spanilh or Indian, he applied himself with that
persevering ardour, which difinguifhes his cha-
rafter, to introduce a form of regular govern-
ment, into the extensive provinces subjet to his
authority. Though ill qualified by his education
to enter into any disquisition concerning the prin-
ciples of civil policy, and little accustomed by his
former habits of life to attend to its arrangements,
his natural sagacity supplied the want both of
science and experience. He difiributed the
country into various difiriEts; he appointed pro-
per magistrates to preside in each; and establish-
d regulations concerning the adminiitration of
uflice, the collection of the royal revenue, the
orking of the mines, and the treatment of the
ndians, extremely simple but well calculated to
romote the public prosperity. But, though, for
he present he.adapted his plan to the infant Rfate
f his colony, his aspiring mind looked forward
o its future grandeur. He confidered himself asFoundltion
Lying the foundation of a great empire; and de-of Lima
berated long, and with much solicitude, in what
lace he Ihould fix the feat of government. Cuzco,
VOL. II. O the

,Zaratc, lib. ii. c. 13. Vega, p. r i. lib. ii. c. 19. Benzo,
*iiiac, c. e. rrera, dec. 5. lib; vii. c. 8.

B O O K the imperial city of the Incas, was situated in a

VI. corner of the empire, about four hundred miles
'-" 'from the sea, and much farther from Quito, a

s34' province of whose value he had formed an high

idea. No other settlement of the Peruvians was
so cbnfiderabie as to merit the name of a town,
or to allure the Spaniards to fix their residence in
it. But, in marching through the country, Pi-
zarro had been tru.k with the beauty and fertility
of the valley of Rimac, one of the most extensive
and best cultivated in Peru. There, on the banks
of a small river, of the fame name with the vale
which it waters and enriches, at the dillance of
fix miles from Callao, the mofi commodious har-
bour in the Pacific Ocean, he founded a city
which he destined to be the'capital of his govern-

s1s5. ment. He gave it the name of Ciudad de los
Inuary 'B. Reyes, either from the circumt.ance of having

laid the firfi stone, at that season when the church
celebrates the festival of the Three Kings, or,
as is more probable, in honour of Juanna and
Charles, the sovereigns ofCaftile. This nameitt ill
retains among the Spaniards, in all legal and for-
mal deeds ; but'it is 'better known to foreigners
by that of Lima, a corruption'of the ancient ap-
pellation of the valley,' in which it is situated.
Under his infpedtion, the buildings advanced with
such rapidity, that' it oon assumed the form of
city, which, by a magnificent palace that he c
re&ed for himself, and by the flately houles buili
by 'everal of his officers, gave, even in its infancy,
some indication of its fubfequlent grandeur*.

Alrmgro in- IN consequence of what had been agreed witl
vades Chili. Pizarro, Almagro began his march towards Chilii

and as he poflffed in an eminent degree lie vir-

* Herrcra, dec. 5. lib. vi. c. Ic . 2 ib. vii. c. I . Calncl&
Coronica, lib. i.. 37, BUarnueuo, Lima fundada, ii. 24

tues most admired by soldiers, boundless liberality B O O K
and. fearless courage, his flandard was followed Vl.
by five hundred and seventy men, the greatest'-'
body of Europeans that had hitherto been assem- 35
bled in Peru. From impatience to finish the ex-
pedition, or from that contempt of hardship and
danger acquired by all the Spaniards who had
served long in America, Almagro, infead of ad-
vancing along the level country on the coart, chore
to march across the mountains by a route that was
Thorter indeed, but almost impracticable. In this
attempt his troops were exposed to every calamity
which men can susser, from fatigue, from famine,
and from the rigour of the climate in those elevat-
ed regions of the torrid zone, where the degree
of cold is' hardly inferior to what is felt within the
polar circle. Many of them perished; and the
survivors, when they descended into the fertile
plains of Chili, had new difficulties to encounter.
They found there a race of men very different
from the people of Peru, intrepid, hardy, inde-
pendent, and their bodily conflitution, as well as
vigour of spirit, nearly resembling the warlike
tribes in North America. Though filled with
wonder at the first appearance of the Spaniards,
and still more astonished at the operations of their
cavary an4 the effedts of their fire-arms, the Chi-
lefe soon recovered so far from their surprise, as
not only to defend themselves with obstinacy, but
to attack their new enemies with more determined
fierceness than any American nation had hitherto
discovered. The Spaniards, however continued
to penetrate into the country, and collected some
considerable quantities of gold; but were so far
from thinking of making any settlement amidst
such formidable neighbours, that, in spite of all
the experience and valour of their leader, the
final iffle of the expedition flill remained ex-
!'emely dubious, when they were recalled from

Oz i

B 0 O K it by an unexpe&ed revolution in Peru *. The

VI. causes of this I thall .endeavour to trace to their
'w source,
1535.

An infur- SO many adventurers had flocked to Peru from
treao of every Spanish colony in America, and all with
the Peru-
vians, such high expectations of accumulating indepen-

dent fortunes at once, that, to men possessed with
notions so extravagant, any mention of acquiring
wealth gradually, and by schemes of patient in-
duffry, would have been not only a disappoint-
ment, but an insult. In order to find occupati-
on for men who could not with safety be allowed
to remain ina&tive, Pizarro encouraged some of
the most distinguished officers who had lately join-
ed him, to invade different provinces of the em-
pire, which the Spaniards had not hitherto visited.
Several large bodies were formed for this purpose;
and about the time that Almagro set out for Chili,
they marched into remote diitrids of the country.
It rife, No sooner did Manco Capac, the Inca, observe

the inconsiderate security of the Spaniards in thus
dispersing their troops, and that only a handful
of men remained in Cuzco, under Juan and Gon-
zalez Pizarro, than he thought that the happy pe-
riod was at length come for vindicating his own
rights, avenging the wrongs of his country, and
extirpating its oppressors. Though firidly watch-
ed by the Spaniards, who allowed him to reside
in the palace of his anceflors at Cuzco, he found
means bs communicating his scheme to the per-
sons who were entrusted with the execution of it.
Among people accustomed to revere their fove-
reign as a divinity, every hint of his will carries
the authority of a command; and they them-
selves were now convinced, by the daily increase

in

. Zarate, lib. iii. c. i. GomaraHift c. 131. Vega, p. Z

lib ii. c. 2o. Ovalle Hist. de Chile, lib. iv. c. 15, &c. Her
rera, dec. 5. lib. vii. c. 9. lib, x. c. x, &c.

in the number of their invaders, that the fond B O K
hopes which they had long entertained of their Vl.
voluntary departure were altogether vain. All'"'v"-
perceived that a vigorous effort of the whole na- S35
tion was requisite to expel them, and the prepara-
tions for it were carried on with the secrecy and
silence peculiar to Americans.

AFrT R some unsuccessful attempts of the Incaand pro.

to make his escape, Ferdinand Pizarro happeninggre;(.
to arrive at that time in Cuzco, he obtained per-
mission from him to attend a great festival which
was to be celebrated a few leagues from the capital.
Under pretext of that solemnity, the great men
of the empire were assembled. As soon as the
Inca joined them, the tfandard of war was ered-
ed; and in a short time all the fighting men, from
the confines of Quito to the frontier of Chili,
were in arms. Many Spaniards, living securely
on the settlements allotted them, were massacred.
Several detachments, as they marched carelessly
through a country which seemed to be tamely sub-
missive to their dominion, were cut off to a man.
An army amounting (if we may believe the Spa-
nifh writers) to two hundred thousand men, at-
tacked Cuzco, which the three brothers endea-
voured to defend with only a hundred and seventy
Spaniards. Another formidable body invested
Lima, and kept the governor closely shut up.
There was no longer any communication between
the two cities; the numerous forces of the Pe-
ruvians spreading over the country, intercepted
every messenger; and as the parties in Cuzco and
Lima were equally unacquainted with the fate of
their countrymen, each boded the worfi concern-
ing the other, and imagined that they themselves
were the only persons who had survived the ge-
neral extinEtion of the Spanifi name in Peru *.

IT

Vega, p. i. lib. ii. c. 28. Zarate, lib. i. c. 3. Cieca de
tion,c. 82, Gomara Hilt. c. 35. Herrera, dc.v. libviii. c. 5,

B,O O K IT was at Cuzco, where the Inca commanded

V}. in person, that the Peruvians made their chief
v'_" - effort. During nine months they carried on the
1536..

s:e of siege with inceiffnt ardour, and in various forms >
euzco. and though they displayed not the fame undaunt-

ed ferocity as the Mexican warriors, they con-
dudted rome of their operations in a manner which
discovered greater sagacity, and a genius more
susceptible of iriprovement in the military art.
They not only observed the advantages which the
Spaniards derived from their discipline and their
weapons, but they endeavoured to imitate the
former, and turn the latter againfi them. They
armed a considerable body of their bravefl war-
riors with the swords, the spears, and bucklers,
which they had taken from the Spanish soldiers
whom they had cut off in different parts of the
country. These they endeavoured to marshal in
that regular compact order, to which experience
bad taught them that the Spaniards were indebted
for their irresistible force in aftion. Some appeared
in the field with Spanish mulkets, and had ac-
quired fkil and resolution enough to use them. A
few of the boldest, among whom was the Inca
himself, were mounted on the horses which they
had taken,. and advanced briskly to the charge
like Spanibh cavaliers, with their lances in the reft.
It was more by their numbers, however, than by
those .imperfeca essays to imitate European arts,
and employ European arms, that the Peruvians
annoyed the Spaniards *. In spite of the valour,
heightenecd by defpakr, with which the three bro-
thers defended C.2zco, Manco Capac recovered
possession of one half of his capital; and before the
Spaniards conld drive him out of it, they loft Juan
Pizarro, the belt beloved of all the brothers, to,
gether with some other persons of note. Worn

*Jr4~ See NT~O'~TE XL.~~ ou
* SeCNOTEXL.

out with the fatigue of incessant duty, diitretedB 0 0 K
with want of provisions, and despairing of being.,.
able any longer to resist an enemy whose numbers 136
daily ehceeafed, the soldiers becarie impatient to
abandon Cuzco, in hopes either of joining their
tountryinen, if any of them yet furyived, or of
forcing their way to the sea, and finding some
means of escaping from a country which had been
so fatal to the Spariifh name *. While they were
brooding over those desponding thoughts, which
their officers laboured in vain to dispel, Alma-.
gro appeared suddenly in the neighbourhood of
Cuzco;

THE accounts transmitted to Almagroconcern- Arrival of

ing the general infurreaion of the Peruvians,Ai"maro,
were such as would have induced him, without
hesitation, to relinquish the conquef of.Chili,
and basten to the aid of his countryrheq. But in and motives
this resolution lie was confirmed by a motive less

. sO"

generous, but more interefling. By the fame
messenger who brought him intelligence of the
Inca's revolt, he received the royal patent creating
him governor of Chili5 and defining the limits
of his jurifdition. Upon confidering the tenor
of it, he deemed it manifest beyond coritradition,
that Cuzco lay within the boundaries of his go-
vernment, and he was equally solicitous to pre-
vent the Peruvians from recovering pofIeflion of
their capital, and to wrest it out of the hands of
the Pizarros. From impatience to accomplish both,
he ventured to return by a new route; and in
marching through the sandy plains of the coast,
he suffered, from heat and drought, calamities
of a new 'species, hardly inferior to those in
which he had been involved by cold and famine
on the summits of the Andes:

His
- Herrera, dec. 5. lib. viii. c. 4.

B o.Q O His arrival at Cuzco was in a critical moment.

vI. The Spaniards and Peruvians fixed their eyes up-
L"-V~'on him with equal solicitude. The former, as he

sis i37opti.did not study to conceal his pretensions, were at
~. ' aa loss whether to welcome him as a deliverer, or.

to take precautions against him as an enemy. The
latter knowing the points in contest between him
and his countrymen, flattered themselves that they
had more to hope than to dread from his operati-
ons. Almagro himself, unacquainted with the
detail of the events which had happened in his ab-
fence, and solicitous to learn the precise posture
of affairs, advanced towards the capital slowly,
and with great circumfpeaion. Various negoci-
ations with both parties were let on foot. The
Inca condu&ed them on his part with much ad-
dress. At firfi he endeavoured to gain the friend-
ship of Almagro; and after many fruitless over-
tures, despairing of any cordial union with a Spa-
niard, he attacked him .by surprise with a nume-
rous body of chosen troops. But the Spanish dif-
cipline and valour maintained their wonted fupe-
riority. The Peruvians were repulsed with such
daughter, that a great part of their army dif-
perfed, and Almagro proceeded to the gates of
Cuzco without interruption.

Taketss Po TarE Pizarros, as they had no longer to make
curoi° head againrt the Peruvians, directed all their at-

tention towards their new enemy, and took mea-
fures to obftrudt his entry into the capital. Pru-
dence, however restrained both parties for some
time from turning their arms againfi one another,
while surrounded by common enemies, who
would rejoice in the mutual slaughter. Different
schemes of accommodation were proposed. Each
endeavoured to deceive the other, or to corrupt
his followers.

THE

THE generous, open, affable temper ofAmagro B o o K
gained many adherents of the Pizarros, who were V.
disgusted with their harlh domineering manners. 537.
Encouraged by this defection, he advanced to-
wards the city by Night, surprised the centinels,
or was admitted by them, and inverting the house
where the two brothers resided, compelled them,
after an obstinate defence, to surrender at difcre-
tion. Almagro's claim ofjurifdi&tion over Cuzco
was universally acknowledged, and a form of ad-
minifiration efiablified in his Name t

Two or three persons only were killed in thiscivi war

first at of civil hoflility 1 but it was soon followed udcecr of
by scenes more bloody. Francis Pizarro havingAtmagro,
dispersed the Peruvians who had invested Lima,
and received some considerable reinforcements
from Hispaniola and Nicaragua, ordered five hun-
dred men, under the command of Alonfo de Al-
varado, to march to Cuzco, in hopes of relieving
his brothers, if they and their garrison were not
already cut off by the Peruvians. This body,
which, in the infancy of the Spanish power in
America, must be deemed a considerable force,
advanced near to the capital before they knew that
they had any enemy more formidable than Indians
to encounter. It was with astonishment that they
beheld their countrymen ported on the banks of
the river Abancay to oppose their progress. Al-
magro, however, wished rather to gain than to
conquer them, and by bribes and.promifes endea-
voured to reduce their leader. The fidelity of
Alvarado remained unshaken; but his talents for
war were not equal, to his virtue. Almagro
amused him with various movements, of which he
did not comprehend the meaning, while a large de- July 12.

* Zarate, lib. iii c. 4. Vega, p. xi. lib, i. c. 29, 31.
Gomara Hift.'c. 134. Herrera, dec. 6. lib, ii. c. i-5.

tachment

B OO K tachment of chosen soldiers passed the river by

VI. night, fell upon his camp by surprise, broke his
V,~ troops befdre they had time to form, and took
'537° hin prisoner, together with his principal Officers *

but does not BY the sudden route of this Body, the contest
improve his
adantages. between the two rivals must have been decided,

if Almagro had known as well how to improve as
how to gain a victory. Rodrigo Orgognez, an
officer of great abilities, who having served under
the confiable Bourbon, when he led the imperial
Army to Rome, had been accuitomed to bold and
decisive counsels, advised him instantly to issue
orders for putting to death Ferdinand and Gon-
zola Pizarros, Alvarado, and a few other persons
whom he could not hope to gain, and to march
directly with his victorious troops to Lima, before
the governor had time to prepare for his defence.
But Almagro, though he discerned at once the
utility of the counsel, and had courage to have
carried it into execution, suffered himself to be
influenced by sentiments unlike those of a soldier
of fortune grown old in service, and by scruples
which suited not the chief of a party who had
drawn his sword in civil war. Feelings of huma-
nity retrained him from shedding the blood of
his opponents, and the dread of being deemed a
rebel deterred him from entering a province which
the king had allotted to another. Though he knew
that arms must terminate the dlfpute between
him and Pizarro, and resolved not to Ihun that
mode of decision, yet, with a timid delicacy pre-
pofterous at such a juncture, he was so solicitous
that his rival lhould be confidered as the ag-

greffor,

* Zarate, lib. iii. c. 6. Gorn. Hlit, c. 13.8. Vega, p
I I lib. ii. c. 33, 34. Ilcrrara, dec. 6, lib . c. 9.

greffor, that he marched quietly back to Cuzco, B 0 0 K
to wait his approach s Vl.

..· 1 5'37-

PIZARRO was fill unacquainted with all theD;irefsof

interesting events that had happened near Cuzco.P"'lro-
The Account of Almagro's return, of the loss of
the capital, of the death of one brother, of the
imprisonment of the other two, and of the de-
feat of Alvarado, were brought to him at once.
Such a tide of misfortunes almost overwhelmed a
spirit which had continued firm and erect under
the rudet shocks of'adverfity. But the necessity
of attending to his own safety, as well as the
desire of revenge, preserved him from finking
under it, He took measures for both with his
wonted sagacity. As he had the command ofHisartful
the sea-coast, and expected considerable fuppliescOndua&
both of men and of military fores, it was no less
his interest to gain time, and to avoid adion,
than it was that of Almagro to precipitate opera-
tions, and bring the contest to a speedy iffie.
He had recourse to arts which he had formerly
praftifed with success, and Almagro was again
weak enough to susser himself to be amused with
a profped of terminating their differences by
some amicable accommodation. By varying his
overtures, and shifting his ground as often as it
suited his purpose, sometimes teeming to yield
every thing that his rival could desire, and then
retrating all that he had granted, Pizarro dex-
teroufly protracted the negociation to such a
length, that though every day was precious to
Almagro, several months elapsed without coming
to any final agreement. While the attention of
Almagro, and the officers with whom he consult-
ed, was occupied in detecing and eluding the
fraudulent intentions of the governor, Gonzalo
Pizarro and Alvarado found means to corrupt the

soldiers
* Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. to, 11.

B 0.0 K soldiers to whose custody they were committed,

VI. and not only made their escape. themselves, but
V'v' persuaded sixty of the men who formerly guard-
537' ed them to accompany their flight*. Fortune

having thus delivered one of his brothers, the go-
vernor scrupled not at one act of perfidy more to
procure the release of the other. He proposed,
that every point in controversy between Almagro
and. himself hould be submitted to. the decision of
"i! their sovereign; that until his award was known,

each Ihould retain undilturbed possession of what-
ever part of the country he now occupied; that
Ferdinand Pizarro should be set at liberty, and
return instantly to Spain, together with the officers,
whom Almagro proposed to fend thither to repre-
sent the juflice of his claims. Obvious as the de-
sign of Pizarro was in those propositions, and fa-
miliar as his artifices might now have been to his
opponent, Almagro, with a credulity approaching
to infatuation, relied on his sincerity, mand con-
cluded an Agreement on these terms t.

is prepa- T HE moment that Ferdinand Pizarro recovered
wars. his liberty, the governor, no longer fettered in his

operations by anxiety about his brother's life,
threw off every disguise which his concern for it
had obliged him to afiume. The treaty was forgot-
ten; pacific and conciliating meafires were nomore
mentioned; it was in the field, he openly declared,
and not in the cabinet; by arms, and not by nego-
ciation, that it must now be determined who should
be mafier of Peru. The rapidity of his preparations
suited such a decisive resolution. Seven hundred men
1538. were soon ready to march towards Cuzco. The

command

* Zarate, lib. iii. c. 8. Herrera, dec. 6. lib. ii. c. 14.
+ Herrera, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 9. Zarate, lib, iii. c. 9
GomaraHitt.c. 140. Vega, p. iI. lib. ii. c. 35.

command tf tiefe was given to his two brothers, B o 0 K
in whom he could perfectly confide for the exe- VI.
cution of his imol violent schemes, as they were k5'
urged on not only by the enmity flowing from
family rivali'hip, but animated with a desire of
vengeance, excited by recollection of recent dif-
grace and sufferings. After an unsuccessful at-
tempt to cross the mountains in the dire&t road
between Lima and Cuzco, they marched to-
wards the south along the coast as far as Nafca,
and then turning to the left, penetrated through
the defiles in that branch of the Andes which
lay between them and the capital. Almagro,
instead of harkening to some of his officers, who
advised him to attempt the defence of those dif-
ficult pases, waited the approach of the enemy
in 'the plain of Cuzco. Two reasons seem to
have induced him to take this resolution. His
followers amounted hardly to five hundred, and
he was afraid of weakening such a feeble body,
by fending any detachment towards the moun-
tains. His cavalry far exceeded that of the ad-
verse party, both in number and discipline, and
it was only in an open country that he could avail
himself of that advantage.

THE Pizarros advanced without any obftruc-His army
tion, but what arose from the nature of the de-mhcs to
fert and horrid regions through which they
marched. As soon as they reached the plain,
both factions were equally impatient to bring
this long-protraEed contest to an ifTue. Though
countrymen and friends, the fubjets of the fame
sovereign, and each with the royal standard dif-
played; and though they beheld the mountains
that surrounded the plain in which they were
drawn up covered with a vast multitude of In-
dians, alembled to enjoy the speCtacle of their
rlitual carnage, and prepared to attack whatever

party

B O K party remained mailer of the field; so fell and

vI. implacable was the rancour which had taken pof-
.-W feflion of every breait, that not one pacific coun-

530. sel, not a single overture towards accommodation

proceeded from either fide. Unfortunately for
Almagro, he was so worn out with the fatigues of
service, to which his advanced age was unequal,
that, at this crisis of his fate, he could not exert
his wonted activitv; and he was oblived to com-
mit the leading of his troops to Orgognez, who,
though an officer of great merit, did not possess
the fame ascendant either over the spirit or as-
fetions of the soldiers, as the chief whom they
had long been accustomed to follow and revere.

April 16. THE conflict was fierce, and maintained by
deeate, each party with equal courage. On the fide of

Almagro, were more veteran soldiers, and a larger
proportion of cavalry; but these were counter-
balanced by Pizarro's superiority in numbers, and
by two companies of well-difciplined musketeers,
which, on receiving an account of the infurretion
of the Indians, the emperor had sent from Spain*.
As the use of fire-arms was not frequent among
the adventurers in America t, hitily equipped for
service, at their own expence, this miall band of
tbldiers, regularly trained and armed, was a no-
velty in Peru, and decided the fate of the day.
Wherever it advanced, the weight of a heavy and
well-fuftained fire bore down horse and foot be-
fore it; and Orgognez, while he endeavoured
to rally and animate his troops, having received
a dangerous wound, the route became general.
The barbarity of the conquerors fained the glory
which they acquired by this complete victory. The
violence of civil rage hurried on some to flaugh-
ter their countrymen with indiscriminate cruelty;
the meanness of private revenge infligated o-

thers
* Herrcra, dec. 6. lib. iii. c. 8. ' Zarate, lib. iii. c. i.

ehers to single out individuals as the objedts B OK
of their vengeance. Orgognez and several officers VI.
of diflindtion were massacred in cold blood i above'

173$.

a hundred and forty soldiers fell in the field; a
large proportion, where the number of combatants
was few, and the heat of the contest soon over.
Almagro, though so feeble that he could not bear
the motion of a horse, had infifed on being car-
ried in a litter to an eminence which overlooked
the field of battle. From thence, in the utmost
agitation of mind, he viewed the various move-
ments of both parties, and at last beheld the total
defeat of his own troops, with all the paflionate
indignation of a veteran leader long accustomed
to vicory. He endeavoured to save himself by and takea.
flight, but was taken prisoner, and guarded with
the firiaeft vigilance s

THE Indians, inflead of executing the refolu-

tion which they had formed, retired quietly after
the battle was over; and in the history of the
New World, there is not a more firiking intfance
of the wonderful ascendant which the Spaniards
had acquired over its inhabitants, than that after
feeing one of the contending parties ruined and
dispersed, and the other weakened and fatigued,
they had not courage *t6 fall upon their enemies,
when fortune presented an opportunity of attack-
ing them with such advantage :.

Cuzco was pillaged by the vi&torious troops,N~et' e.t-

who found there a considerable booty, confiting4it""
partly of the gleanings of the Indian treasures,
and partly of the wealth amaTfed by their antago-
nifis from the spoils of Peru and Chili. But so far did

this,

* Zarate, lib. iii. c. 1 , z. Vegn, p. j. lib. ii. c. 36-38.
Herrera, dec. 6. lib.iii. c. io-2z. lib. iv . . 1-5.

' Zarate, lib. iii. c. iI. Vega, p. , . lib. ii. c. 38.

B O O K this, and whatever the bounty of their leader could

vl. add to it, fall below the high ideas of the recom-

-'".pence which they conceived to be due to their
53. merit, that Ferdinand Pizarro, unable to gratify

such extravagant expectations, had recourse to the
fame expedient which his brother had employed
on a similar occasion, and endeavoured to find
occupation for this turbulent assuming spirit, in
order to prevent it from breaking out into open
mutiny. With this view, he encouraged his most
active officers to attempt the discovery and re-
duftion of various provinces which had not hither-
to submitted to the Spaniards. To every stand-
ard erected by the leaders who undertook any of
those new expeditions, volunteers retorted with
the ardour and hope peculiar to the age. Several
of Almagro's soldiers joined them; and thus Pi-
zarro had the fatisfation of being delivered both
from the importunity of his discontented friends,
and the dread of his ancient enemies *.

Atmiaro ALM A G R himself remained for several months
tried, in custody, under all the anguish of fufpence.

For although his doom was determined by the
Pizarros from the moment that he fell into their
hands, prudence constrained them to defer grati-
fying their vengeance, Unlil the soldiers who had
served under him, as well as several of their own
followers in whom they could not perfetly con-
fide, had left Cuzco. As soon as they set out up-
on their different expeditions, Almagro was im-
condemned, peached oftreafon, formally tried, and condemned

to die. The sentence astonished him; and though
he had often braved death with an undaunted spirit
in the field, its approach, under this ignominious
form, appalled him so much, that he had recourse

t0

* Zaratc, lib, iii. c. 12. Gom. Hist. c, 41. Hcrrera,
dec. 6. lib. iv. c. 7.

to abjec supplications, unworthy of his formerB o o K
fame. He befotight the Pizarros to remember the \V
ancient friendship between their brother and him, '"'8
and how much he had contributed to the success 53
and prosperity of their family; he reminded them
of the humanity with which, in opposition to the
repeated remonstrances of his own most attached
friends, he had spared their lives when he had
them in his power; he conjured them to pity his
age and infirmities, and to susser him to pass the
wretched remainder of his days in bewailing his
crimes, and in making his peace with Heaven:
The intreaties, fays a Spanish historian, of a man
so much beloved, touched many an unfeeling
heart, and drew tears from many a hard eye. But
the brothers remained inflexible. As focn as Al-
magro knew his fate to be inevitable, lie met it
with the dignity and fortitude of a veteran. Heand put to
was itrangled in prison, and afterwards publickly death.
beheaded. He suffered in the feventy-fifth year
of his age, and left one son by an Indian woman D '39;.
of Panama, whom, though at that time a prifonerons of the
in Lima, he named as successor to his govern- cnt of-
ment, pursuant to a power which the emperorrning the
had granted him . Pelu.

As, during the civil diflenfions of Peru, all in-
tercourfe with Spain was suspended, the detail of
the extraordinary tranfadtions there did not ,oon
reach the court. Unfortunately for the vitorious
fation, the first intelligence was brought thither
by Tome of Almagro's officers, who left the coun-
try upon the ruin of their cause; and they related
what had happened, with every circumntance un-
favourable to Pizarro and his brothers. Their nm-
bitiin, their breach of the most solemn engage-
ments, their violence and cruelty, were painted

VOL. II. P w\;ll

7 Zarnte, lib. iii. c. 12. Gor. Hiil. c. 14 . Vc n, p. 1 ..
ib. ii. c. 39. 1crcrr , dec, 6 lib. iv. c, 9. lib. v. c. i.

B o o K with all the malignity and exaggeration of party

VI. hatred. Ferdinand Piarro, who arrived soon as.

ter, and appeared in court with extraordinary
53' splendor, endeavoured to efface the impreflion

which their accusations had made, and to juflify
his brother and himself, by representing Almagro
as the aggreflor. The emperor and his ministers,
though they could not pronounce which of the
contending factions was most criminal, clearly
discerned the fatal tendency of their dissensions.
It was obvious, that while the leaders, entrulted
with the conduct of two infant colonies, employed
the arms which should have been turned against
the common enemy, in defiroying one another,
11 attention to the public good must cease ; and
there was reason to dread that the Indians might
improve the advantage which their disunion pre-
sented to them, and extirpate both the viaors and
the vanquished. But the evil was more apparent
than the remedy. Where the information which
had been received was so defective and suspicious,
and the scene of attion so remote, it was almost
impoflible to chalk out the line of conduct that
ought to be followed; and before any plan that
should be approved of in Spain could be carried
into execution, the situation of the parties, and
·the circumitances of affairs, might alter so entire-
ly as to render its effets extremely pernicious.

V"cadeCa- NOTHrINC therefore remained but to fend a
firo sent thi-
ther with person to Peru, vetted with extensive and difcre.
Ample row. tionary power, who, after viewing deliberately the

poilure of affairs with his own eyes, and enquir-
ing upon the spot, into the conduct of the dif-
ferent leaders, should be authorised to ettablifh the
government in that form which he deemed mol0
conducive to the interest of the parent state, and
t!e welfare of the colony. The man selected for
this important charge was Chri'iov.l Vaca de

.

'.. p ...
'OC 1afii,

CaRfro,, a j.dge in the court of royal audience atB o o K0
Valladolld-; and his abilities, integrity, and firm- VI.
nefs,jufiified the choice. His inftrudions, though ht39.
ample,. were not such as to fetter him in his ope-
rations, According to the different aspet of as-
fairs,, he had power to take upon him different
charaters. If he found the governor itill alive,
he was to affurne only the title of judge, to main-
tain the appearance of ating in concert with him,
and to guard against giving any just cause of of-
fence to a man who had merited so highly of his
country. But if Pizarro was dead, he was en-
trusted with a commission, that he might then
produce, by which he was appointed his fuccelbr
in the government of Peru. This attention to
Pizarro, however, seems to have flowed rather
from dread of his power, than from any approba-
tion of his measures; for at the very time that the
court seemed so solicitous not to irritate him, his
brother Ferdinand was arrested at Madrid, and
confined to a prison, where he remained above
twenty years *.

1540.
WHILE Vaca de Caitro was preparing for his Piarro di-

"-'

.

· i vides Peru

voyage, events of great moment happened in ,,mog ii
Peru. The governor, confidering himself, uponfolloe".'
the death of Almagro, as the unrivalled: poffeflor
of that vast empire, proceeded to parcel out its
territories among the conquerers; and had this
division been made with any degree of impar-
tiality, the extent of country which he had to be-
flow was sufficient to have gratified his friends,
and to have gained his enemies. But Pizarro con-
duEted this tranfacion not with the equity and
candour of a judge, attentive to discover and to
reward merit, but with the illiberal spirit of a party
leader. Large difirias, in parts of the country

P mollt

* Gomara Hist. c. 142. Vega, p. i i. lib. ii. c. 40o Hcr-
rera, dec, 6. lib. viii. c. o1, I. lib. x. c. i.

BO 0 K most cultivated and populous, were set apart as

VI. his own property, or granted to his brothers, his
"v1 '°adherents and favourites. To others, lots less

T540' valuable and inviting were assigned. The fol.

lowers of Alnagro, amongif whom were many
of the original adventurers, to whose valour and
perseverance Pizarro was indebted for, his success,
were totally excluded from any portion in those
lands, towards the acquisition of which they had
contributed so largely. As the vanity of every
individual sets an immoderate value upon his own
services, and the idea of each, concerning the
recompence due to them, rose gradually to a more
exorbitant height in proportion as their conquefls
extended, all who were disappointed in their ex-
pectations exclaimed loudly againfit the rapacious-
ness and partiality of the governor. The partisans
of Almagro murmured in secret, and meditated
revenge *.

Progress of R A I D as the progress of the Spaniards in South
the rianil America had been since Pizarro landed in Peru,

their avidity of dominion was not yet satisfied.
The officers to whom Ferdinand Pizarro gave the
command of different detachments, penetrated
into several new provinces, and though some of
them were exposed to great hardflips in the cold
and barren regions.'of the Andes, and others fulf-
sered diitrefs not inferior amidst the woods and
marshes of the plains, they made discoveries and
conquests which extended their knowledge of the
country, as well as added to their power, Pedro
de Valdivia re-.affumed Almagro's scheme of in-
vading Chili, and, notwithttanding the fortitude
of the natives in defending their poflellions,
made such Progress in the conquest of the' coun-
try, that he founded the city of St. Jago, lind
gave a beginning to the eilabliflment of the S1p-

nili)
* Vega, p. i. lib . iii. c. 2. I-Fkrcra, (icc. 6. lib, viii, C. i

hnii dominion there *. But of all the enterprifesB 0 0 K
undertaken about this period, that of Gonzalo vI.
Pizarrb was the most remarkable, The governor,

·he .ove r 1540o.

who seems to have resolved that no person in Peru Remarkable
Thould posiess any station of distinguished emi-expeditio°

· *. i .i r- r i * s .1 of Gonzale

nence or authority but those of his own family, izaro.
had deprived Benalcazar, the conqueror of Quito,
of his command in that kingdom, and appointed
his brother Gonzalo to take the government of it.
He instructed him to attempt the discovery and
conquest of the country to the east of the Andes,
which, according to the information of the In-
dians, abounded with cinnamon and other valu-
able spices. Gonzalo, not inferior to any of his
brothers in courage, and no less ambitious of ac-
quiring diltintion, eagerly engaged in this dif--
ficult service. He set out from Quito at the head
of three hundred and forty soldiers, near one half
of whom were horsemen, with four thousand In-
dians to carry their provisions. In forcing their
way through the defiles, or over the ridges of the
Andes, excess of cold and fatigue, to neither of
which they were accustomed, proved fatal to the
greater part of the wretched attendants. TheHarddips
Spaniards, though more robust, and inured to atheYcndu"'
variety of climates, suffered considerably, and loft
some men; but when they descended into the
low country, their distress increased. During two
months it rained incessantly, without any interval
of fair weather long enough'to dry their cloaths 1f.
The vast plains upon which they were now enter-
ing, either altogether without inhabitants, or oc-
cupied by the rudest and least induftriotis tribes
in the New World, yielded little ftbfiftence.
They could not advance a ftep but as they cut a
road through woods, or made it through marshes.

Such

& Zarate, lb. ii. c.

i 3. Ovale, 11). ;;, c. i, &S .
t Zarate, lib. iv. c. 2.

B o 0 K Such ,incessant toil, and continual £carcity of food,

'v!. seem more than sufficient to have exhausted and

"~dispirited any troops. But the fortitnde and per-
1540 everance :tfhhe Spaniards in the sixteenth century

were ':infperable. Allured *by frequent but false
accounts .f rich countries before them, they per-
sised in struggling on, until they reached the
'banks of.the Coca or Napo, one of the large rivers
whole waters pour into the Maragnon, and con-
.trjbut.e to its grandeur. There, with infinite la-
'bour, they built a bark, which they expected
would prove of great utility,. both in conveying
them over rivers, in procuring provisions, and in
exploring the country. This was manned with
fifty soldiers, under the command of Francis
Orenana, the officer next in rank to Pizarro.
The stream caxried.them down with such rapidity,
that they were soon far a-head of their countrymen,
who followed slowly and with difficalty by land.

Defersed by AT this diflance from his commander, Orellana,
oeln,.- a young rnan of an aspiring mind, began to

fanny thiittelf independent, and, transported with
the predonminant paflion of the age, he formed
the fclieme of diflinguiffling himself as a disco-
*verer, by following the conrfe of the Maragnon,
Until it joined the ocean, and by surveying the
vast regions through which it flows. This scheme
of Orellana's was as bold as it was treacherous.
For,- if' he be chargeable with the guilt of having
violated his duty to his commander, and with
having abandoned his fellow-foldiers in a pathless
desert, where they had hardly any hopes of fuc-
cess, or even of safety, but what were founded
on the service which they expected from the bark,
his crime is, in some measure, balanced by the
glory of having ventured, upon a navigation Qs
near two thousand leagues, through unknown na-
tions, in a vessel hafiily confiruded with green

timber,

-timber, and by very ulifkilful hands, without pro- B o o Kc
visions; without a cornpafs, or a pilot. but his VL
courage and alacrity supplied every defet. Com-'- 5
rnitting himself fearlessly to the guidance of thesaiLs, d
fiteam, the Napo bore him along to the south, the oMar"
until he reached the great channel of the Marag-
non. Turning with it towards the coast, he held
on his course in that direction. He made fre-
quent descents on both fides the' river, fornetimes
seizing by force of arms the provisions of the
fierce savages feated on its banks, and sometimes
procuring a supply of food by a friendly inter-
course with more gentle tribes. After a long fe-
rier o dangers, which he encountered with a-
tiazing fortitude, and of diftrefies which he sup-,
ported with no iefs magnanimity, he reached the
ocean X, where new perils awaited him. These
he likewise furrounted, and got Cafe to the Spa-
nilh:fettlement in the island Cubagua; from thence
he failed to Spain. The vanity natural to travei-
lers who visit regions unknown to the reit of
mankind, and the art of an adventurer, solicitous
to magnify his own merit, concurred in prompt-
ing him to mingle an extraordinary proportion of
the marvellous in the narrative of his voyage. He
pretended to have discovered nations so rich, that
the roofs of their temples were covered with plates
of gold; and described a republic of women so
warlike and powerful, as to have extended their
dominion over a considerable tract of the fertile
plains which he had visited. Extravagant as those
tales were, they gave rife to an opinion, that a
region abounding with gold, diflinguifhed by the
name of El Dorado, and a community of Ama-
2Ons, were to be found in this part of the New
World; and such is the propensity of mankind
to believe what is wonderful, that it has been
slowly, and with difficulty, that reason and obfcr-

vatirn
* See NOTE XLI.

B.O 0 K vation have exploded those fables. The voyage,

vI. however, even when stripped of every romantic
' '""'eembellifhment, deserves to be recorded, not only

540. as one of the most memorable occurrences in that

adventrous age-, but as the firfi. event that led to
any certain knowledge of those immense regions
that firetch eastward from the Andes to the ocean*.

Dilrers of No words can describe the consternation of
Pirrio. Pizarro, when he did not find the bark at the

confluence of the Napo and Maragnon, where he
had ordered Orellana to wait for him. He would
not allow himself to fufped that a man, whom he
had entrusted with such an important command,
could be so base and so unfeeling, as to desert him
at such a junture. But imputing his absence
from the place of rendezvous to some unknown
accident, he advanced above fifty leagues along
the banks of the Maragnon, expecting every mo-
ment to fee the bark appear with a supply of
i5 . provisions. At length he came up with an officer

whom Orellana had left to perili in the desert,
because he had the courage to remonfirate against
his perfidy. From him he learned the extent of
Orellana's crime; and his followers perceived at
once their own desperate situation, when deprived
of their only resource. The spirit of the ifouteit
hearted veteran funk within him, and all de-
manded to be led back instantly. Pizarro; though
he aflimed an appearance of tranquillity, did
not oppose their inclination. But he was now
twelve hundred miles fiom Quito; and in that
long march the Spaniards encountered hardships
greater than those they had endured in their
progress outward, without the alluring hopes

which

* Zarate, lib. iv. c. 4. Gonara Hist. c. 86. Vega, p. i

li. iii. c. 4. I-lericra, dec. 6. lib. ix. c. 2,-5. Rodrilguez
1El Mat'agnon y Anazonas, lib. i. c. 3.

which then soothed and animated them under their B 0 o K
sufferings. Hunger compelled them to feed on VI.
roots and berries, to eat all their dogs and horses, 54,
to devour the most loathsome reptiles, and even
to knaw the leather of their saddles and sword-
belts. Four thousand Indians, and two hundred
and ten Spaniards, perished in this wild difafirous
expedition, which continued near two years; and
as fifty men were aboard the bark with Orellana,
only four-score got back to Quito. These were
naked like savages, and so emaciated with famine,
or worn out with fatigue, that they had more the
appearance of speCtres than of men *.

BUT, inflead of returning to enjoy the repofeNnmbcr of

which his condition required, Pizarro, on entering mlcontenlr
Quito, received accounts of a fatal event that
threatened calamities more dreadful to him, than
those through which he had passed. From the
time that his brother made that partial division of
his conquefis which has been mentioned, the ad-
herents of Almagro, confidering themselves as
proscribed by the party in power, no longer en-
tertained any hope of bettering their condition.
Great numbers in despair resorted to Lima, where
the house of young Almagro was always open to
them, and the slender portion of his father's for-
tune, which the governor allowed him to enjoy,
was spent in affording them subsistence. The
warm attachment with which every person who
served under the elder Almagro devoted him elf
to his interests, was quickly transferred to his son,
who was now grown up to the age of manhood,
and possessed all the qualities which captivate the

affections

Zarate, lib. iv. c. 2-5. Vega, p. 1 . llb. iii. c. 3, 4, .;

14. Herrea, dec. 6. lib. viii. c. 7, 8. lib. ix. c. 2-5. dec. 7.
lib. iii. c .
1 Pizar. Varones Illuftr. 349, &CS

B oo', K affections: of soldiers. Of! sa gra'cefil appearance,

V'r dextrous at:all martial exereifes, bold, open, ge-
"er'nerous,. he seemed to be: formed for command;
Confider and as his father, conscious of his;own inferiority
young Al- from the total want of education,- had been ex-
tnagro as , _ i
their leader.tremely attentive to have him intruceed in every

science becoming a gentleman.; the accomplish-
ments which he had; acquired, heightened the re-
sped of his followers, as they gave hin' diftindtion
and eminence among illiterate adventurers. In
this young man the Almagrians found a. point of
union which they wanted, and looking upto him
as their head, were ready to undertake any thing
for his advancement. Nor was affection for Al-
magro their only incitement; they were urged on
by their owh diitreffes. Many of them, deftirute
of common necessaries*, and weary of loitering
away life, a burthen to their .chief,; or to such of
their associates as had saved fime remnant of their
fortune from pillage and confiscation, longed impa-
tiently for an occasion to exert their activity and
courage, and began to deliberate how they might
be avenged on the author of all their misery.

Conrpire a- Their frequent: cabals did not pass unobserved
gainit the
life of Pi- and the governor was warned to be on his guard
zarro, against men who meditated. some desperate deed,

and had resolution to execute it. But either from
the native intrepidity of his mind, or from con-
tempt of persons whose poverty rendered their
machinations of little consequence, he disregard-
ed the admonitions of his friends. " Be in no
pain, said he carelessly, about my life; it is per-
fectly safe, as long as every man in Peru knows
that I can in a moment put him to death who
dares to harbour a thought against it." Tils fe-
curity gave the Anmagrians full leisure to digeit
and ripen every part of their scheme; and Juan

de
* See NOTE LXII.

de .iHesada, an officer of great abilities, who hadB 0o K
the :eharge of Almagro's education, took the lead VI.
in-their confuiltations, with all the zeal which that
conneaion inspired, and with all the authority
which the ascendant that he was known to have
over the mind of his pupil gave him.

ON Sunday, the twenty-fixth of June, at mid-andkillhim.

day, the season of tranquillity and repose in all
sultry climates, Herrada, at the head of eighteen
of the most determined conspirators, sallied out
of Almagro's house in complete armour; and
drawing their swords, as they advanced hastily to-
wards the governor's palace, cried out, " Long
live the king, but let the tyrant die." Their as-
fociates, warned of their motions by a fignaf,
were in arms at different fiations ready to support
them. Though Pizarro was usually surrounded
by such a numerous train of attendants as suited
the magnificence of the most opulent fubje& of
the age in which he lived, yet as he was just risen
from table, and moil of his own domestics had
retired to their own apartments, the conspirators
pafled through the two outer courts of the palace
unobserved. They were at the bottom of the
stair-case, before a page in waiting could give the
alarm to his malter, who was converting with a
few friends in a large hall. The governor, whose
Rfeady mind no form of danger could appal,
fiarting up, called for arms, and commanded
Francisco de Chaves to make fast the door. But
that officer, who did not retain so much presence
of mind as to obey this prudent order, running
to the top of the stair-case, wildly asked the con-
pirators what they meant, and whither they were
going ? Instead of answering, they stabbed him
to the heart, and burst into the hall. Some of
the persons who were there threw themselves fiom
the windows; others attempted to fly; and a few

drawing

BOO K drawing their fworcls, followed their leader into

VI. an inner apartment. The conspirators, animated
-'-'with having the objeEt of their vengeance now in

1541. view, rushed forward after them. Pizarro, with

no other arms than his sword and buckler, de-
fended the entry, and supported by his half-bro.
ther A:lcantara, and his little knot of friends, he
maintained the unequal contest with intrepidity
worthy of his palt exploits, and with the vigour
of a youthful combatant. " Courage, cried he,
companions, we are yet enow to make those trai-
tors repent of their audacity." But the armour of
the conspirators protected them, while every thrufi
they made took effect. Alcantara fell dead at his
brother's feet; his other defendants were mortally
wounded. The governor, so weary that he could
hardly wield his sword, and no longer able ft
parry the many weapons furiously aimed at him,
received a deadly thruit full in his throat, funk to
'the ground, and expired.

Almngroac- As soon as he was flaiii, the aflaflins ran out
kTohli ed into the itreets, and waving their bloody swords,
cellbr. proclaimed the death of the tyrant. Above two

hundred of their associates having joined them,
they conducted young Almagro in solemn pro-
ceflion throulgh the city, and assembling the ma-
giftrates and principal citizens, compelled them to
acknowledge him as lawful fuccefbor to his father
in Iiis government. The palace of Pizarro, to-
geiher with the houses of several of his adherents,
were pillaged by the soldiers, who had the satis-
faciion at once of being avenged @n their ene-
nies, and of enriching themselves by the spoils of
ihofe through whose hands all the wealth of Peru
had passed'.

Ttis

c Zarate, lib. iv. c. 6-8. Gomara I-lifl. c. 144. , '4.

'Vcgn, p. 11. lib. iii. c. i-7. Herrera, dec. 6. ILb. x. c. 4--;
T1i arro Var. Illust. p. 18j.

THE boldness and success of the conspiracy, asB 0 0 K

well as .the name and popular qualities of Alma- vI.
gro, drew many soldiers to his fiandard. Every' ~
adventurer of desperate fortune, all who were dif-New54. '
satisfied with Pizarro, and, from the rapacious- earanceof
ness of his government in the latter years of his
life, the number of malcontents was confiderabie,
declared without hesitation, in favour of Alma-
gra, and he was soon at the head of eight hun-
dred of the most gallant veterans in Peru. As
his youth and inexperience disqualified him from
taking the command of them himself, he appoint-
ed Herrada to at as general. But though AI-
magro speedily collected such a refpetable force,
the acquiescence in his government was far from
being general. Pizarro had left many friends to
whom his memory was dear; the barbarous affaf-
fination of a man to whom his country was so
highly indebted,. filled every impartial person with
horror. The ignominious birth of Almagro, as
well as the doubtful title on which he founded his
pretensions, led others to confider him as an ufur-
per. The officers who commanded in some pro-
vinces refused to recognize his authority, until it
was confirmed by the emperor. In others, parti-
cularly at Cuzco, the royal flandard was erected,
and preparations made to revenge the murder of
their ancient leader,

THOS E feeds of discord, which could not have Arli\.al oi

lain long dormant, acquired greater vigour and ':i '
activity, when the arrival of Vaca de Cafiro was
known. After a long and difalfrous voyage, lie
was driven by firess of weather into a f-nall har-
bour in the province of Popayan; and proceeding
fiom thence by land, after a joulrnev no lets te-
dious than difficult, he reached Quito. In his
way he received accounts of Pizarro's death, ;nd
of the events which followed upon it. He in-

icdi. ;tely
st1

B o o Kmediately produced the royal commilfion, appoint

vi . ing him governor of Peru, with the fame privi.
,141. leges and authority and his juriflition was

who affumcsacknowledged, without hesitation, by Benalcazar,
hoe trtor Adelantado, or lieutenant-general for the emperor

in Popayan, and by Pedro de Puelles, who, in the
absence of Gonzalo Pizarro,. had the command of
the troops left at Quito. Vaca de Cafiro not only
assumed the supreme authority, but shewed that
he pofleffed the talents which the exercise of it at
that juncture required. By his influence and ad-
dress he soon assembled such a body of troops, as
not only set him above all fear of being exposed
to any insult from the adverse party, but enabled
him to advance from Quito with the dignity that
became his character. By dispatching persons of
confidence to the different Settlements in Peru,
with a formal notification of his arrival, and of his
commiflion, he communicated to his countrymen
the royal pleasure with respect to the government
of the country. By private emissaries, he excited
such officers as had discovered their disapprobation
of Almagro's proceedings, to manifest their duty
to their sovereign, by supporting the person ho.
noured with his commission. Those measures
were productive of great effec's. Encouraged by
the approach of the new governor, or prepared
by his machinations, the loyal were confirmed in
their principles, and avowed them with greater
boldners; the timid ventured to declare their fen-
timents; the neutral and wavering, finding it
necessary to chute a fide, began to lean to that
which now appeared to be the fafeit as well as the
noft just '.

Cendral of ALM A GRO observed the rapid progress of this
Amagro. spirit of difaffction to his caule, and, in order to

give

* Benzon, lib. iii. c. 9. Zarart, lib. iv. c. x.. Gomar,
c. 14,6, 147, Herrera, dec. 6. lib. x. c. I, 2, 3,7, &c.

givxean effe'tual check to it before the arrival of B O K
Vaca de Castro, he set out at the head of his troops
for .uzco, where the most considerable body of;~
opponents had erected the royal standard, under
the command of Pedro Alvarez Holguin. During
his march thither, Herrada, the ikilful guide of
his youth and of his counsels, died; and from
that time his measures were conspicuous for their
violence, but concerted with little sagacity, and
executed with no address. Holguin, with forces
far inferior to those of the opposite party, was de,
scending towards the coast at the very time that
Almagro was on his way to Cuzco. By a very
simple firatagem, he deceived his unexperienced
I adversary, avoided an engagement, and effected
a juntoion with Alvarado, an officer of note, who -
i had been the firfl tp declare against Almagro as
an usurper,

SOON after, Vaca de Castro entered the camp Progers of

V.ca de

with the troops which he brought from Quito, andCaare.
ereting the royal itandard before his own tent,
i he declared, that, as governor, he would dif-
charge in person all the functions of general of
their combined forces. Though formed by the
tenour of his pall life to the habits of a sedentary
and pacific profeflion, he at once affimed the adi-
vity and discovered the dicifion of an officer long
accustomed to command. Knowing his strength
to be now far superior to that of the enemy, he
was impatient to terminate the contest by a battle.
Nor did the followers of Almagro, who had no
hopes of obtaining pardon for a crime so atro-
cious as the murder of the governor, decline that
mode of decision. They met at Chupas, aboutsept. i6.
two hundred miles from Cuzco, and fought with
all the fierce animosity inspired by the violence of
4vil rage, the rancour of private enmity, the
Magerncls of revenge, and the last efforts of de-

fpair.

B K fpair. Vietory, after remaining long doubtful,

VI. declared at last for Vaca de Castro. The superior
N52 number of his troops, .his own intrepidity, and
Defeats Ai-the martial talents of Francisco de Carvajal, a ve-
iagpro. teran officer formed under the great captain in the

wars of Italy, and who on that day laid the foun-
dation of his future fame in Peru, triumphed
over the bravery of his opponents, though led on
by young Almagro with a gallant spirit,' worthy
of a better cause, and deserving another fate,
The carnage was great in proportion to the num-
ber of the combatants. Many of the vanquish-
ed, especially such as were conscious that they
might be charged with being accessary to the affaf-
fination of Pizarro, rushing on the swords of the
enemy, chose to fall like soldiers, rather than wait
an ignominious doom. Of fourteen hundred men,
the total amount of combatants on both fides, five
hundred lay dead on the field, and the numberof
the wounded was fill greater ,

Seveiky of I the military talents displayed by Vacade
tproeed-aCaftro, both in the council and in the field, fur-

prifed the adventurers in Peru, they were frill
more aflonifhed at his condut after the vicory.
As he was by nature a rigid dispenser of justice,
and perftiaded fhat it required examples of ex-
traordinary severity to restrain the licentious spirit
of soldiers so far removed from the feat of go-
vernment, he proceeded directly to try his P)ri-
ibners as rebels. Forty were condemned to iuffer
the death of traitors, others were banished from
Peru. Their leader, who made his escape from the
battle, being betrayed by some of his officers, was

publi!cy

i Zarate, lib. iv . c. 2-19. Gomnra, c. 148. \'cg1

p. . . lib. iii. c. 1-1 i- Y. I-lerrara, dec. 7. lib. i. c. 1 2,)
iib. iii. c. 1.i i.

publicly beheaded in Cuzco; and in him the B O K
name of Almagro, and the spirit of the party, was V
iextinct *.

ext md l~. l

~1542.

D Dt RING those violent convulsions in Peru, theconruitti-

emperor and his ministers were intently employed ons of the
: in preparing regulations, by which they hoped notnc rning
only to re-establish tranquillity there, but to intro-his domini-

onsin Ame*

duce a more perfec liyitem of internal policy intorica."
? all their settlements in the New World. Rapid
; and extensive as the Spanish conqueits in America
) had been, they were not carried on by any regular
, exertion of the national force, but by the occa-
! fional efforts of private adventurers. After fitting
out a few of the firfl armaments for discovering
new regions, the court of Spain, during the busy
reigns of Ferdinand and of Charles V. the former
the most intriguing prince of the age, and the
latter the moft.ambitious, was encumbered with
i such a multiplicity of schemes, and involved in
war with so many nations of Europe, that it had
not leisure to attend to diflant and less interesting
objects. The care of prosecuting discovery, or
of attempting conquest, was abandoned to indi-
viduals; and with such ardour did men pufli for-
ward in this new career, on which novelty, the
spirit of adventure, avarice, ambition, and the
hope of meriting heaven, prompted them with
combined influence to enter, that in less than half
a century almofi the whole of that extensive em-
pire which Spain now poflefles in the New World
was fubjeeted to its diminion. As the Spanilh court
contributed nothing towards the various expedi-
tions undertaken in America, it was not intitled
to claim much fiom their success. The fove-
reignty of the conquered provinces, with the fifth
us the gold and silver, was relerved for the

VOL. II. Q- crown ;

' Zaratc, lib. iv. c. 21. Comara, c. 150. IIerrera, dcc,

7 ) iii c. . ib. i.

c .

. i vi .
c.

B OO Kcrown; every thing else was seized by the aso..

1-. ciates as their right. The plunder of the coun-
St5. tries which they invaded served to indemnify them

'542. for what they had expended in equipping them-

ielves for the service; and the conquered terri-
tory was divided among them, according to rules
which custom had introduced, as permanent efta-
blifhments which their successful valour merited.
In the infancy of those settlements, when their
extent as well as their value were unknown,
many irregularities escaped observation, and it
was found necessary to connive at many excesses.
The conquered people were pillaged with de-
llrudive rapacity, and their country parcelled
out among its new maiters in exorbitant shares,
far exceeding the highest recompence due to their
services. The rude conquerors of America, in-
capable of forming their establishments upon any
general or extensive plan of policy,. attentive only
to private interest, unwilling to forego present
gain from the profped of remote or public benefit,
leem to have had no objeEt but to amass sudden
wealth, without regarding what might be the
consequences of the means by which they ac-
quired it. But when time at length discovered
to the Spanish court the importance of its Ame-
rican pofleflions, the neceflity of new-modelling
their whole frame became obvious, and in place
of the maxims and practices prevalent among
military adventurers, it was found requisite to
fubniltute the inflitutions of regular government.

ONE evil in particular called for an immediate

remedy. The conquerors of Mexico and Peri
imitated the fatal example of their countrymen
fettled in the islands, and employed themfclves in
searching for gold and silver with the fame in.
considerate eagerness. Similar effects followed
, The natives employed in this labour by mailers

\vh(

who in imposing their talks had no regard eitherB 0 0 K
to what they felt or to what they were able to V.
perform, pined away and perished so fafl, that'"'°
lthere was reason to apprehend that Spain, instead 54.
of poffefling countries peopled to filch a degree as
to be susceptible of progressive improvement,
would soon remain proprietor only of a vail un-
inhabited defart.

THE emperor and his miniflers were so sensible

of this, and so solicitous to prevent the extintion
of the Indian race, which threatened to render
their acquisitions of no value, that from time to
time various laws, which I have mentioned, had
been made for securing to that unhappy people
more gentle and equitable treatment. But the
distance of America from the feat of empire, the
feebleness of government in the new colonies,
the avarice and audacity of soldiers unaccustomed
to retiraint, prevented there salutary regulations
from operating with any considerable influence.
The evil continued to grow, and at this time the
emperor found an interval of leisure from the
affairs of Europe to take it into attentive confider- .
ation. He consulted not only with his miniftersThe pefon.
and the members of the council of the Indies,h 'hdv'e...
but called upon several persons who had resided
long in the New World, to aid them with the re-
silt of their experience and obfirvation. Fortu-
nately for the people of America, among there si
was Bartholomew de las Casas, who happened to : ,
be then at Madrid on a million from a chapter of
his order at Chiapa *. Though, since the mif-
carriage of his former schemes for the relief of the
Indians, he had continued shut up in his cloilter,
or occupied in religious funftions, his zeal in
behalf of the former objeEts of his pity was bo far
from abating, that, from an increased knowledge

02 of'
* Renifii.l Hii,. de Chiapa, p. 1,16.

B 0 0 K of their sufferings, its ardour had augmented,

VI. He seized eagerly tihis opportunity of reviving his
r5 2favourite maxims concerning the treatment of
1542. the Indians, With the moving eloquence na-

tural to a. naft on whose rrind the scenes which
he had beheld had made a deep impreflion, he
described the irreparable wafre of the human
species in the New World, the Indian race al-
most totally swept away in the islands in less than
fifty years, and hastening to extinction on the
continent with the fame rapid decay. With the
decisive tone of one firongly prepoffefied with the
truth of his own system, he imputed all this to a
tingle cause, to the exations and cruelty of his
countrymen, and contended that nothing could
prevent the depopulation of America, but the
declaring of its natives to be freemen, and treat-
ing them as fubje8ts, not as slaves. Nor did he
confide for the success of this proposal in the
powers of his oratory alone.' In order to enforce
them, he composed his famous treatise concern-
ing the deftrution of America *, in which he
relates, with many horrid circumfiances, but with
apparent marks of exaggerated description, the
devastation of every province which had been
visited by the Spaniards.

fli folici- TH ecmperor was deeply afficted with the re"
tUoduce a cital of so many actions lhocking to humanity.
gencra rI- But as his views extended far beyond those of Las
°,ei1 ,,^t fCafas, he perceived that relieving the Indians

fromr oppreflion was but one ftep towards ren-
dering his poffeiions in the New World a valua-
ble acquisition, and would be of little avail, un-
less hle could circumscribe the power and ufur-
pations of his own subjects there. The con-
querors of America, however great their merit
had been towards their country, were rroflly per-

sons
R Remcefal, p. 192. 19g.

tons of fiuch mean birth, and of fich abjet rank B o o K
in society, as give no diftin-tion in the eye of a VI.
monarch. The exorbitant wealth with which -'-'
some of them returned, gave umbrage to an age 1542
not accustomed to fee men in inferior condition
elevated above their level, and rising to emulate
or surpass the ancient nobility in fp!endour. The
territories which their leaders had appropriated to
themselves were of enormous extent * ; and if
the country should ever be improved in propor-
tion to the fertility of the foil, they muff grow
too wealthy and too powerful for fubjeEt. It
appeared to Charles, that this abuse required a
remedy no less than the other, and that the re-
gulations concerning both muif be enforced by
a mode of government more vigorous than had
yet been introduced into America.

WITH this view he framed a body of laws,New regu-

containing many salutary appointments with re-h'is^pu, fe,
fpeA to the conltitution and, powers of the fu-
preme council of the Indies; concerning the
iation and jurifdidion of the royal audiences in
different parts of America, the administration of
juflice, the order of government, both ecclesia-
ftical and civil. These were approved of by all
ranks of men. But together with them were
iflihed the following regulations, which excited
universal alarm, and occasioned the most violent
convulsions: -- " That as the repnar-lt'nluos or
shares of land seized by several persons appeared
to be exceflive, the royal audiences are empower-
ed to reduce them to a moderate extent: That
lpon the death of any conqueror or planter, the
lands and Indians granted to him ihall not de-
lcend to his widow or children, but return to the
crown: That the Indians shall henceforth be cx-
'mpted from personal service, and fall not be

compelled
* See NOTE XLIII.

B OOK compelled to carry the baggage of travellers, td

VI. labour in the mines, or to dive in the pearl
: 4. fisheries: That the itated tribute due by them to

their superiors shall be ascertained, and they shall
be paid as servants for any work they voluntarily
perform: That all persons who are or have been
in public offices, ecclefiaflics of every denomina-
tion, hospitals and monafleries, shall be deprived
of the lands and Indians allotted to them, and
there be annexed to the crown : That every person
in Peru, who had any criminal concern in the
contefis between Pizarro and Almagro, should
forfeit his lands and Indians *."

His mni- ALL the Spanish miniiters who had hitherto
tratesmanfbeen entrusted with the diredtion of American
them. affairs, and who were best acquainted with the

fiate of the country, remonstrated againfi those
regulations, as ruinous to their infant colonies.
They represented, that the number of Spaniards
who had hitherto emigrated to the New World
was so extremely small, that nothing could be
expected from any effort of theirs towards im-
proving the vale regions over which they were
scattered; that the success of every scheme for this
purpose must depend upon the ministry and ser-
vice of the Indians, whose native indolence and
aversion to labour, no profpet of benefit or pro-
mise of reward could surmount; that the moment
the' right of imposing a tafl, and exaEting the
performance of it was taken from their mailers,
every work of induetry must cease, and all the
sources from which wealth begun to pour in upon
Spain must be flopt for ever. But Charles, tena-
cious at all times of his own opinions, and (l
much impressed at present with the view of the
disorders which reigned in America, that he wai

v'illinc

f Hcrrcra, dec. 7. lib. vi. e. 5. Fcrnandcz Hilt. Jib. .c
I1 2.

willing to hazard the application even of a danger- H 0 0 K
ous remedy, perfilted in his resolution of publish- Vl.
ing the laws. That they might be carried into "-v
execution with greater vigour and authority, he
authorised Francisco Tello de Sandoval to repair
to Mexico as vifitador or fupierintendent of that
country, and to co-operate with Antonio de Men-
doza, the viceroy, in enforcing them. He ap-,A viceroy
pointed Blasco Nugnez Vela to be governor of'p'ointr
Peru, with the title of Viceroy; and in order to 1543.
strengthen his adminifiration, he eflablifled a
court of royal audience in Lima, in which four
lawyers of eminence were to preside as judges *.

THE viceroy and superintendent failed at ihe 154i.

fame time ; and an account of the laws which they 'ea" of
were to enforce reached America before thcm.tionin'-New
The entry of Sandoval into Mexico was viewed spai'
as the prelude of general ruin. The unlimited
grant of liberty to the Indians affetted every Spa-
niard in America without diftintion, and there
was hardly one who might not on tome pretext
be included under the other regulations, and fils-
ser by them. But the colony in New Spain had
now been so long accustomed to the refiraints of
law and authority under the fieady and prudent
administration of Mendoza, that how much 1hcvcIr
the (pirit of the new flatutes was deltefld and
dreaded, no attempt was made 10 o()blhtl.l tli.
publication of them by any at of violnc-re lunbc-
coming subjects. The magiffrates and princip;i
inhabitants, however, presented dititlitl addrel'l.
to the viceroy and filperintendent, rcprctcntinf
the fatal consequences of enforcing them. -i;p>'
pily for them, Mendoza, by long residence in dlict
tiontry, was so thoroughly acquainted with it;
state, that he knew what was for its inleret :1:

v cli

* Znratc, lib. iii. c. 24. Gomnira, c. 151. VCeg, p. z.
lib, ii. C. 20.

o 0 0 K well as what it could bear; and Sandoval, though

VI. new in office, displayed a degree of moderation
'" 'seldom pofieffed by persons just entering upon the
.544 exercise of power. They engaged to suspend, for

some time, the execution of what was offensive in
the new laws, and not only conrented that a de-
putation of citizens should be sent to Europe to lay
before the emperor the apprehensions of his sub-
jedts in New Spain with respect to their tendency
and effects, but they concurred with them in sup-
porting their sentiments. Charles, moved by the
opinion of men whose abilities and integrity in-
titled them to decide concerning what fell imme-
diately under their own view, granted such a re-
laxation of the rigour of the laws as re-established
the colony in its former tranquillity '.
In Peru. IN Peru the storm gathered with an aspect fill

more fierce and threatening, and was not so soon
dispersed. The conquerors of Peru, of a rank
much inferior to those who had fubjeted Mexico
to the Spanish crown, farther removed from the
inspection of the parent state, and intoxicated with
the sudden acquisition of wealth, carried on all
their operations with greater licence and irregula-
rity than any body of adventurers in the New
World. Amidff the general subversion of law and
order, occasioned by two fucceflive civil wars,
when each individual was at liberty to decide for
himself, without any guide but his own interest or
passions, this turbulent spirit rose above all fenfc
of subordination. To men thus corrupted by
anarchy, the introduction of regular government,
the power of a viceroy, . nd the authority of a
refpedable court of judicature, would have ap-
peared formidable restraints, to which they would

have

F* ernandez His.t lib . C. c. , 4, 5 .

V , p. . lib. iii

r. 21, z2. Hcrrera, dec. 7. lib. v. c. 7. lib. vii, c. 14, [.
'Iorqucro Mon. Inld. lib. v. c. 13.

have submitted with reluctance. But they revolt- B O 0 K
ed with indignation against the idea of complying , ,I
with laws, by which they were to befiripped at 544.
once of all they had earned so hardly during many
years of service and suffering. As the account of the
new laws spread successively through the different
settlements, the inhabitants run together, the wo-
men in tears, and the men exclaiming against the
injultice and ingratitude of their sovereign, in de-
priving them, unheard and unconvicted, of their
pofleffions. " Is this, cried they, the recompence
due to persons, who, without public aid, at their
own expence, and by their own valour, have sub-
jeded to the crown of Castile territories of such
vast extent and opulence ? Are there the rewards
beflowed for having endured unparalleled difirefs,
for having encountered every species of danger
in the service of their country ? Whose merit is so
great, whose conduct has been so irreproachable,
that he may not be condemned by rome penal
clause in regulations, conceived in terms as loose
and comprehensive, as if it had been intended
that all should be entangled in their snare ? Every
Spaniard of note in Peru has held some public of-
fice, and all, without diftintion, have been con-
strained to take an aftive part in the contest be-
tween the two rival chiefs. Were the former to
be robbed of their property becauif they had done
their duty ? Were the latter to be punilhed on ac-
count of what they could not avoid ? Shall the
conquerors of this great empire, instead of receiv-
ing marls of diftinótion, be deprived of the natu-
ral consolation of providing for their widows and
children, and leave them to depend for fiibfiflence
on the scanty supply they can extort from unfeel-
ing courtiers * ? We are not able now, continued
slley, to explore unknown regions in quest of
more secure settlements ; our constitutions, debili-

tated
$ Hcrrero, dec. 7. lib: i. c. 14., 14.

B o o K tated with age, and our bodies covered with woundp,

vl. are no longer fit for ative service; but still we posT
^^^ .lfefs vigour sufficient to afiert our just rights, and

'544 we will not tamely susser them to be wrested

from us*."

An nrurrec- By discourses of this fort, uttered with vele-s
,vend by mence, and listened to with universal approbation,
the modera-their paflions were inflamed to such a pitch, that
tion of Car- ·
ton they were prepared for the most violent meafuresi

and began to hold consultations in different places,
how they might oppose the entrance of the vice-
roy and judges, and prevent not only the execu-
tion but the promulgation of the new laws. From
this, however, they were diverted by the address
of Vaca de Cafiro, who flattered them with hopes,
that, as soon as the viceroy and judges should
arrive, and had leisure to examine their petitions
and remonfirances, they would concur with them
in endeavouring to procure some mitigation in
the rigour of laws which had been framed with-
out due attention either to the Rate of the coun-
try, or to the sentiments of the people. A great-
er degree of accommodation to there, and even
some concessions on the part of government, were
now become requisite to compose the present ser-
ment, and to sooth the colonifis into fiubmiflion,
by inspiring them with confidence in their filpe-
riors. But without profound discernment, con-
ciliating manners, and flexibility of temper, fich

The Lirit a plan could not be carried on. The viceroy pof-
tion increar-feffed none of these. Of all the qualities that fit
ed by the men for high command, lie was endowed only
vlcroy. with integrity and courage ; the former harsh and

uncomplying, the latter bordering so frequently on
rafltnefs orobftinacy,that in hisfituation, they verle
March 4, defects rather than virtues. From the moment tli;1

he

* Gomara, c. 2. Hcrrera, dcc. 7. lib. vi. c. to, tli
Vega, p. It. lib. li. c. o, 22. lib.iv . c. 3, 4.

he landed at Tumbez, Nugnez Vela seems to haveB O O K
confidered himself merely as an executive officer, V.
without any discretionary power; and, regardless'" -'
of whatever he observed or heard concerning the
state of the country, he adhered to the letter of
the regulations with unrelenting rigour. In all the
towns through which he pafied, the natives were
declared to be free, every person in public office
was deprived of his lands and servants; and as
an example of obedience to others, he would not
susser a single Indian to be employed in carrying
his baggage in his march towards Lima. Amaze-
ment and confiernation went before him as he ap-
proached; and so little solicitous was he to pre-
vent them from augmenting, that on entering the
capital, he openly avowed that he came to obey
the orders of his sovereign, not to dispense with
his laws. This harsh declaration was accompanied
with what rendered it still more intolerable, haugh-
tiness in deportment, a tone of arrogance and de-
cifion in discourse, and an insolence of office
grievous to men little accustomed to hold civil
authority in high refpet. Every attempt to pro-
cure a suspension or mitigation of the new laws,
the viceroy confidered as flowing from a spirit of
difaffedtion that tended to rebellion. Several per-
sons of rank were confined, and some put to
death, without any form of trial. Vaca de Caflro
was arrested, and notwithfianding the dignity of
his former rank, and his merit in having prevent-
ed a general infilrrclion in the colony, he was
loaded with chains, and shut up in the common
jail*.

BUT however general tch indignation wasagain si Te ,m.i-
filch proceedings, it is probable that the hand of"cli ^,,.

utlorit) zalo 'i7 Jrr

tn Ihe tlh ir
leader.

* Zaratc, lih. iv. c. 23, 24, .. C(oninra, c. l - 1 l5.
Vega, p. xi. iib. iv. c. 4., . I''cnr ndrle, lil. . c. 6)- ,.

1 0 0 K authority would have been strong enough to sup-

Vl. press it, and to prevent its bursting out with open
'--^'violence, if the malcontents had not been pro-

544 vided with a leader of credit and eminence to

unite and to direct their efforts. From the time
that the purport of the new regulations was
known in Peru, every Spaniard there turned his
eyes towards Gonzalo Pizarro, as the only person
able to avert the ruin with which they threatened
the colony. From all quarters, letters and addrefles
were sent to him, conjuring him to fland forth as
their common proteetor, and offering to support
him in the attempt with their lives and fortunes.
Gonzalo, though inferior in talents to his other
brothers, was equally ambitious, and of courage
no lets daring. The behaviour of an ungrateful
court towards his brothers and himself, dwelt con-
tinually on his mind, Ferdinand a state prisoner
in Europe, the children of the governor in cuflo-
dy of the viceroy, and sent aboard his fleet, him-
self reduced to the condition of a private citizen
in a country, for the discovery and conquest of
which Spain was indebted to his family. These
thoughts prompted him to seek for vengeance,
and to assert the rights of his family, of which he
now confidered himself as the guardian and the
heir. But as no Spaniard can easily surmount that
veneration for his sovereign which is interwoven
in his frame, the idea of marching in arms againfi
the royal flandard filled him with horror. He
hesitated long, and was flill unresolved, lwhen the
violence of the viceroy, the univcrfal call of his
countrymen, and the certainty of becoming. soon
aviaimn himself to lhe fcvcrity of the new laws,
moved him to quit his residence at Chluquifaca dela
Plata, and repair to Cuzco. All the inhabitants went
out to meet him, and received him with tranliolts
ofjoy, as the deliverer oflihe colony. In the fervour
of their zeal, they elevted him procurator general

ot

bs the Spanish nation in Peru, to solicit the repealB 0o K
of the late regulations. They authorised him to VI.
lay their remonfirances before the royal audiencetl-'
in Lima, and upon pretext of danger from the
Indians, authorised him to march thither in arms.
Under fandion of this nomination Pizarro took
polieflion of the royal treasure, appointed officers,
levied soldiers, seized a large train of artillery
which Vaca de Caitro had deposited in Guaman-
ga, and set out for Lima, as if he had been ad-
vancing against a public enemy. Difaffectior
having now assumed a regular form, and being
united under a chief of such a diflinguifhed
name, many persons of note retorted to his itan-
dard; and a considerable part of the troops raised
by the viceroy to oppose his progress, deserted to
him in a body *.

BEFORE Pizarro reached Lima, a revolutionDiirentioan

had happened there, which encouraged him to°f thevice-
proceed with almost a certainty of success. Thecourt ofau-
violence of the viceroy's adminiirration was not die"'n
more formidable to the Spaniards of Peru than his
overbearing haughtiness was odious to his aflbci-
ates, 'the judges of the royal audience. During
their voyage from Spain, some symptoms of cold-
ness began to appear t. But as soon as they en-
tered upon the exercise of their respective offices,
both parties were so much exasperated by frequent
conteits, arising from interference of jurifdilion
and contrariety of opinion, that their mutual dif-
gust soon grew into open enmity. The judges
thwarted the viceroy in every measure, set at li-.
berty prisoners whom he had confined, juflified
the malcontents, and applauded their remon-
ftrances; At a time when both departments of

government

*Zarate, lib. v. c. i. Gomara, c. 56, r 5. Vegn, p. I .

lib. iv. c. 4-12. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 2-17. llcrrcea, dec,
7. lib. vii. c. 18, r&c. lib. viii. c. I - 5. t' Gon!ira, c. 171.

B O O K government fould have united againfi the ap-

VI. proaching enemy, they were contending with each
4 '-Aother for superiority. The judges at length pre-

The viceroy vailed. The viceroy, universally odious, and a-
impriloned. bandoned even by his own guards, was seized in

his palace, and carried to a desert illand on the
coast, to be kept there until he could be sent
home to Spain.
views of THE judges, in consequence of this, having as-

fumed the supreme direction of affairs into their
own hands, iflied a proclamation suspending the
execution of the obnoxious laws, and sent a mef-
sage to Pizarro, requiring him, as they had already
granted whatever he could request, to dismiss his
troops, and to repair to Limawith fifteen or twenty
attendants. They could hardly expect that a man
so daring and ambitious would tamely comply with
this requisition. It was made, probably, with no
such intention, but only to throw a decent veil over
their own conduct; for Cepeda, the president of
the court of audience, a pragmatical and aspiring
lawyer, seems to have held a secret correspondence
with Pizarro, and had already formed the plan,
which he afterwards executed, of devoting himielf
to his service. The imprisonment of the viceroy,
the usurpation of the judges, together with the
universal confusion and anarchy consequent upon
events to singular and unexpeced, opened new\
and vast profpeLs to Pizarro. He now beheld the
lupreme power within his reach. Nor did he
want courage to puih on towards the object which
fortune presented to his view. Carvajal, the
prompter of his resolutions, and guide of all his
actions, had long fixed his eye upon it as the on-
ly end at which Pizarro ought to aim. Inflead of
the inferior finetion of procurator for the Spanifli
settlements in Peru, lie openly demanded to be
governor and captain general of the whole pro-

vince,

vince, and required the court of audience to grant B o o K
him a commission to that effect. At the head of VI.
twelve hundred men, within a mile of Lima, where'--'"'
there was neither leader nor army to oppose him, 544
such a request carried with it the authority of a com-
mand. But the judges, either from unwillingners
to relinquish power, or from a desire of preserving
some attention to appearances, hesitated, or seemed
to hesitate, about complying. Carvajal, impatient He aflume,
of delay, and impetuous in all his operations, march-the govcrn-
ed into the city by night, seized several officers ofT!sl
diftin&ion obnoxious to Pizarro, and hanged them
without the formality of a trial. Next morning the
court of audience issued a commiflion in the empe-
ror's name, appointing Pizarro governor of Peru,
with full powers, civil as well as military, and he en-
tered the town that day with extraordinary pomp,
to take possession of his new dignity *.

Bu T amidst the disorder and turbulence that ac- oa. is.

companied this total dissolution of the frame ofgo-reov,,re h,,
vernment, the minds of men, set loose from the or- librty.
dinary restraints of law and authority, adted with
such capricious irregularity, that events no less ex-
traordinary than unexpected followed in a rapid
ficceflion. Pizarro had scarcely begun to exercise
the new powers with which he was invested, when
he beheld formidable enemies rife up to oppoCe him.
The viceroy having been put on board a vefiel by
the judges of the audience, in order that he might
be carried to Spain under cuflody of Juan Al-
varez, one of their own number ; as soon as thev
ivere out at sea, Alvarez, either touched with rc;-
morfeor moved by fear, fell at the ifet of his pri-
soner, declared him from that momenlt to be free,

and

* Zrare, lib. v. c. 8-io. Vega, p. 1i. 1i. iv. c. 13-
19. Gomara, c. 159-163. Ferrnandez, lib. i. c. 18-25.
Herrera, dec. 7. lib. vi'i. c. 10-20,

B O O K and that he himself, and every person in the ihip,

vI. would obey him as the legal representative of
--''"their sovereign. Nugnez Vela ordered them to

'544 steer to Tumbez, and landing there, erected the

royal tfandard, and resumed his functions of vice-
roy. Several persons of note, to whom the con-
tagion of the seditious spirit which reigned at Cuz-
co and Lima had not reached, instantly avowed
their resolution to support his authority *. The
violence of Pizarro's government, who observed
every individual with the timid jealousy natural to
usurpers, and punished every appearance of dif-
affection with rigour, soon augmented the number
of his adherents, as it forced some leading men in
the colony to fly to him for refuge. While he
was gathering such itrength at Tumbez, that his
forces began to assume the appearance of what
was confidered as an army in America, Diego
Centeno, a bold and active officer, exasperated bv
the cruelty and oppression of Pizarro's lieutenant-
governor in the province of Charcas, formed a
conspiracy against his life, cut him off, and de-
clared for the viceroy t.

1545. PIZARRO, though alarmed with those appear-

mrach a- ances of hostility in the opposite extremes of the
gainft him. empire, was not disconcerted. He prepared to as-

fert the authority to which he had attained, with
the spirit and condu&t of an officer accustomed to
command, and marched diretly against the vice-
roy as the enemy who was nearest as well as moli
formidable. As he was mafier of the public reve-
nues in Peru, and mofi of the military men were
attached to his family, his troops were so nume-
rous, that the viceroy, unable to face theln, re-

treated

'* Zaratc, lib. v. c. 9. Grnmra, c. 165. Fernandez, lili.

c. 23. 1-errern, dec. 7. lil. viii. c. 15. 1- Zarate, li;)
v. c. X . Goniara, c, t69. t I rrcra, dec. 7. lib. ix. c. 27.

treated towards Quito. Pizarno followed him, ahdB 0 o K
in that long march, through a wild mountainous V1.
country, both suffered hardihips and encountered ci'
difficulties, which no troops but those accustomed 54
to serve in America, could have endured or fur-
mounted *. The viceroy had scarcely reached
Quito, when the van-guard of Pizarro's forces ap-
peared, led by Carvajal, who, tlxough near four-
fcdrce, was as hardy and active as any young fol-
dier under his command. Nugnez Vela infiantly
abandoned a town incapable of defence, and with
a rapidity more resembling a flight than a retreat,
marched into the province of Popayan. Pizarro
continued to pursue, but finding it impoflible to
overtake him, returned to Quito. From thence
he dispatched Carvajal to oppose Centeno, who
was growing formidable in the southern provinces
of the empire, and he himself remained there to
make head against the viceroy t.

BY his own ativity, and the affiflance of Be-Thevicerol
nalcazar, Nugnez Vela soon ailembled four hun-defated'
dred men in Popayan. As he retained, amidit
all his disasters, the fame elevation of mind, and
the fame high sense of his own dignity, he reje-t-
ed with disdain the advice of some of his foi-
lowers, who urged him to make overtures of ac-
commodation to Pizarro, declaring that it was
only by the sword that a contefi with rebels could
be decided. With this intention he marched back 1546.
to Quito. Pizarro, relying on the superior num-
ber, and flill more on the discipline and valour of
his troops, advanced resolutely to meet him. The Jan) I,.
battle was fierce and bloody, both parties fighting
like men who knew that the pofleflion of a great

VOL. II. R empire,

* See NOTE XLIV. T. Zirnie, lib. v. c. 15, 16-24.
Gonra c. , . 67..

V c ,

P . li . libl. iv. c 25-28. IFenall-
rz, lib. i,. c. 34. 40. I-lerrera, dec. 7. lib. viii. c. 1 6. 2o0- 27.

B O O K empire, the fate of their leaders, and their own

VI. future fortune, depended upon the iffile of that
'i-' day. But Pizarro's veterans pushed forward with

u54 ch regular and well-direted force, that they
soon began to make impreflion on their enemies.
Thle viceroy, by extraordinary exertions, in
which the abilities of a commander and the cou-
rage of a soldier were equally displayed, held vic-
and lain. tory for some time in suspense. At length he fell,

pierced with many wounds ; and the rout of his
followers became general. They were hotly pur-
sued. His head was cut off, and placed on the
public gibbet in Q.ito, which Pizarro entered in
triumph. The troops aflembled by Centeno were
dispersed soon after by Carvajal, and he himself
compelled to fly to the mountains, where he re-
mained for several months concealed in a cave.
Every person in Peru, from the frontiers of Po-
payan to those of Chili, submitted to Pizarro;
and by his fleet, under Pedro de Hinojofa, he had
not only the unrivalled command of the South-
Sea, but had taken pofeflion of Panama, and
placed a garrison in Nombre de Dios, on the op-
pofite fide of the isthmus, which rendered him
master of the usual avenue of communication be-
tween Spain and Peru *.
Pizarro ad- AFTER this decisive vidory, Pizarro and his

.um'he oar- followers remained for some time at Quito, and

vereignty ofduringlthe firfl transports of their exultation, they
Peru. ran into every excess of licentious indulgence,

with the riotous spirit usual among low adven-
turers upon extraordinary success. But, amidfl
this diflipation, their chief and his confidents were
obliged to turn their thoughts sometimes to what

was

* Zarate, lib, v. C. 31, 32. GoMara, C. 170. Vcga, p. it

llb iv. c. 33, 34. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 51-54. Herrer
(ec. 7. lb. x, c. . 12. 19-zz. dcc. 8. lib. i. c. 1-3. LC"nz
'lib. iii. c. Iz.

Was serious, and deliberated with much folicitudeB O O K
concerning the part that he ought now to take. V
Carvajal, no less bold and decisive in counsel than k'"
in the field, had from the beginning warned Pi- 4
zarro, that in the career on which he was entering,
it was in vain to think of holding a middle course;
that -he must either boldly aim at all, or attempt
nothing. From the time that Pizarro obtained
poffeflion of the government of Peru, he inculcat-
ed the fame maxim with greater earnestness.
Upon receiving an account of the vicory at Quito,
he remonfirated with him in a tone fill more pe-
remptory. " You have usurped (said he, in a let-
ter written to Pizarro on that occasion) the fu-
preme power in this country, in contempt of the
emperor's commiflion to another. You have
marched, in hostile array, against the royal stand-
ard; you have attacked the representative of your
sovereign in the field, have defeated him, and cut
off his head. Think not that ever a monarch will
forgive such insults on his dignity, or that any re-
conciliation with him can be cordial or sincere.
Depend no longer on the precarious favour of
another. Assume yourself the sovereignty over a
country, to the dominion of which your family
has a title founded on the rights both of disco-
very and conquefl. It is in your power to attach
every Spaniard in Peru of any consequence invio-
lably to your interefl by liberal grants of lands and
of Indians, or by instituting ranks of nobility,
of creating titles of honour similar to those which
are courted with so much eagerness in Europe.
By establishing orders of knighthood, with pri-
vileges and difiin¢tions resembling those in Spain,
you may bellow a gratification upon the officers in
your service, suited to the ideas of military men.
Nor is it to your countrymen only that you ought
to attend; endeavour to gain the natives. By
marrying the Coya, or daughter of the Sun next in

R 2 fuccel-

B O o Kfucceflion to the crown, you will induce the In-

vI. dians, out of veneration for the blood of their an-
"'-ócient princes, to unite with the Spaniards in sup-

5 port of your authority. Thus, at the head of the

principal Inhabitants of Peru, as well as of the
new settlers there, you may set at defiance the
power of Spain, and repel with ease any feeble
force which it can fend at such a distance." Ce-
peda, the lawyer, who was now Pizarro's confi-
dential counsellor, warmly seconded Carvajal's ex-
hortations, and employed whatever learning he
poflfeled in demonfirating, that all the founders
of great monarchies had been raised to pre-emi-
nence, not by the antiquity of their lineage, or
the validity of their rights, but by their own en-
terprifing valour and personal merit *.

But churcs P i Z A R o liitened attentively to both, and could
toi nheglianot conceal the satisfaction with which he contem-
couit of plated the object that they presented to his view.
Spain. But happily for the tranquillity of the world, few

men possess that superior strength of mind, and
extent of abilities, which are capable of forming
and executing such daring schemes, as cannot be
accomplished without overturning the efiablifhed
order of society, and violating those maxims of
duty which men are accufiomed to hold sacred.
The mediocrity of Pizarro's talents circumscribed
his ambition within more narrow limits. Inflead
of aspiring at independent power, he confined
his views to the obtaining from the court of Spain
a confirmation of the authority which he now
poffefled; and for that purpose, he sent an officer
of diftindtion thither, to give such a reprefenta-
tion of his conduct, and of the state of the coun-

try,

: Vega, p. i . lib. iv. c. 40. Fernandez, lib. i. c. 34. lih
ii. c. 3.49. Herrera, dec. 8. lib. ii. c. 0o.

try, as might induce the emperor and his mi- B 0 K
nifters, either from inclination or from necelfity, V.
to continue him in his present fiation. 6

WHILE Pizarro was deliberating with refpectconrultati.
to the part which he should take, confultationsos of the

Spauish ml-

were held in Spain, with no lets solicitude, con-niPcrs.
cerning the measures which ought to be pursued
in order to re-establish the emperor's authority
in Peru. Though unacquainted with the lafi ex-
cefles of outrage to which the malcontents had
proceeded there, the court had received an ac-
count of the infurreftion againfi the viceroy, of
his imprisonment, and the usurpation of the go-
vernment by Pizarro. A revolution so alarming,
called for an immediate interposition of the em-
peror's abilities and authority. But as he was
fully occupied at that time in Germany, in con-
ducting the war against the famous league of
Smalkalde, one of the most interefling and ar-
duous enterprises in his reign, the care of provid-
ing a remedy for the disorders in Peru devolved
upon his son Philip, and the counsellors whom
Charles had appointed to assist him in the govern-
ment of Spain during his absence. At firit view,
the actions of Pizarro and his adherents appeared
so repugnant to the duty of filbjets towards their
sovereign, that the greater part of the ministers
infifled on declaring them infiantly to be guilty
of rebellion, and on proceeding to punish them
with exemplary rigour. But when the fervour
of their zeal and indignation began to abate, in-
numerable obstacles to the execution of this mea-
sure presented themselves. The veteran bands
(f infantry, the strength and glory of the Spa-
nilh armies, were then employed in Germany.
Spain, exhaulled of men and money by a long
series of wars, in which she had been involved by

the

B O O K the restless ambition of two successive monarchs,

vl. could not easily equip an armament of sufficient
t"~ force to reduce Pizarro. To transport any re-

1546' fpetable body of troops to a country so remote as

Peru, appeared almost impossible. While Pizar-
ro continued master of the South-Sea, the direct
route by Nombre de Dios and Panama was im-
practicable. An attempt to march to Quito by
land through the new kingdom of Granada, and
the province of Popayan, across regions of vail
extent, desolate, unhealthy, or inhabited by fierce
and hostile tribes, would be attended with unfur-
mountable danger and hardships. The passage
to the South-Sea by the Straits of Magellan was
so tedious, so uncertain, and so little known in
that age, that no confidence could be placed in
any effort carried on in a course of navigation so
remote and precarious. Nothing then remained
but to relinquish the system which the ardour of
their loyalty had sirss suggested, and to attempt
by lenient measures what could not be effeced
by force. It was manifest from Pizarro's folici-
tude to represent his conduct in a favourable light
to the emperor, that, notwithstanding the exce'fes
of which he had been guilty, he fuill retained fen-
timents of veneration for his sovereign. By a
proper application to there, together with some
such conceflions as should discover a spirit of mo-
deration and forbearance in government, he might
be yet reclaimed, or the ideas of loyalty natural
to Spaniards might so far revive among his fol-
lowers, that they would no longer lend their aid
to uphold his usurped authority.

arca np- THE success, however, of this negociation, no
epir cto less delicate than it was important, depended en-
Peru as pre-tirely on the abilities and address of the person to
tdeqt. whom it should be committed. After weighing

with much attention the comparative merit (l'

various

various persons, the Spanish ministers fixed with B O O K
unanimity of choice, upon Pedro de la Gafca, a VI.
priest in no higher tlation than that of counsellor "'"
to the inquisition. Though in no public office,
he had been occasionally employed by govern-
ment in affairs of trufi and consequence, and had
conduded them with no lets skill than fiiccefs,
displaying a gentle and insinuating temper, ac-
companied with much firmness; probity, fupe-
rior to any feeling of private interest; and a cau-
tions circumspection in concerting measures, fol-
lowed by such vigour in executing them, as is
rarely found in alliance with the other. These
qualities marked him out for the funtion to
which he was destined. The emperor, to whom
Gafca was not unknown, warmly approved of the
choice, and communicated it to him in a letter,
containing expressions of good-will and confi-
dence, no less honourable to the prince who
wrote, than to the fubjest who received it. Gas-
ca, notwithstanding his advanced age and feeble
conflitution, and though, from the apprehensions
natural to a man, who, during the course of his
life, had never been out of his own country, he
dreaded the effects of a long voyage, and of an
unhealthy climate *, did not hesitate a moment
about complying with the will of his sovereign.
In order to ihew that it was from this principleHigm.c
alone that he acted, he refused a billopric which'"ti°"
was offered to him, in order that he might bear a
more dignified character; he would accept of no
higher title than that of president of the court cf
audience in Lima; and declared that he would
receive no salary on account of his discharging the
duties of that office. All he required was, that
the cxpence of supporting his family should be
defrayed by the public, and as lie was to go like

a minificr
* Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 17.

B 00 K a minister of peace with his gown and breviary,

VI. and without any retinue but a few domestics, this
'"~'6 would not load the revenue with any enormous
54 6. burden *.

The powers BU T while he discovered such difinterefled mo-
o hmmted deration with refpea to whatever related person-

ally to himself, he demanded his official powers irn
a very different tone. He insisted, as he was to
be employed in a country so remote from the feat
of government, where he could not have recourse
to his sovereign for new infiruaions on every
emergence; and as the whole success of his ne-
gociations must depend upon the confidence
which the people with whom he had to treat
could place in the extent of his powers, that he
ought to be invested with unlimited authority,
that his jurifdition must reach to all persons and
to all causes; that he mutl be empowered to par-
don, to punish, or to reward, as circumfiances
and the behaviour of different men might require;
that, in cafe of refifance from the malcontents,
he might be authorised to reduce them to obe-
dience by force of arms, to levy troops for that
purpose, and to call for afliftance from the go-
vernors of all the Spanish settlements in America.
These powers, though manifestly conducive to
tie great objecs of his miflion, appeared to the
Spanish miniflers to be inalienable prerogatives
of royalty, which ought not to be delegated to a
fabjet, and they refused to grant them. But the
emperor's views were more enlarged. As from
the nature of his employment, Gafca must be en-
trusted with discretionary power in several points,
and all his efforts might prove ineffecual if he was

circum-

Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6. Gomara, c. 174. Fernandcz, lib.

ii. c. I4- 16. Vega, p. Il. lib. v. c. x. H-Irrcra, dec. S.
lib. i. c. 4, 4;c.

circumscribed in any one particular, Charles fcru- B 0 0 K
pled not to invest him with authority to the full VI.
extent that he demanded. Highly satisfied with y-'
this fiefh proof of his master's confidence, Gafca
hafiened his departure, and without either money
or troops, set out to quell a formidable rebellion *. May z6.

ON his arrival at Nombre de Dios, he found J'Iyz7.

·

Ir ~1

_ Hin arrival

Hernan Mexia, an officer of note, posted there, t l'nama,
by order of Pizarro, with a considerable body of
men, to oppose the landing of any hostile forces.
But Gafca appeared in such pacific guise, with a
train so little formidable, and with a title of no fulch
dignity as to excite terror, that he was received
with much refpec. From Nombre de Dios he
advanced to Panama, and met with a similar re-
ception from Hinojofa, whom Pizarro had en-
truited with the government of that town, and
the command of his fleet fiationed there. In.
both places he held the fame language, declaring
that he was sent by their sovereign as a messenger
of peace, not as a minister of vengeance; that
he came to redress all their grievances, to revoke
the laws which had excited alarm, to pardon past
offences, and to re-establish order and justice in
the government of Peru. His mild deportment,
the simplicity of his manners, the fanaity of his
profeflion, and a winning appearance of candour,
gained credit to his declarations. The veneration
due to a person clothed with legal authority, and
acting in virtue of a royal commiflion, began to
revive among men accufiomed for some time to
nothing more refpeEtable than an ufilrped jurifdic-
tion. Hinojofa, Mexia, and several other of-
ficers of diftinLtion, to each of whom Gafca ap-
plied separately, were gained over to his interest,

andp
O' Fcrnandez, lib. ii. c. x 6-i8,

B O O K and waited only for rome decent occasion of de-

V. claring openly in his favour *.
I546.

Violent pro. THIS the violence of Pizarro soon afforded
ceedings of them. As soon as he heard of Gafca's arrival at

Panama, though he received at the fame time an
account of the nature of his commission, and was
informed that he offered to render every Spaniard
in Peru easy concerning what was past, by an
aft of general oblivion; and secure with refpedt
to the future, by repealing the obnoxious laws;
inflead of accepting with gratitude his sovereign's
gracious conceiflons, he was so much exasperated
on finding that he was not to be continued in
his flation as governor of the country, that he
infiantly resolved to oppose the president's entry
into Peru, and to prevent his exercising any ju-
rifdition there. To this desperate resolution he
added another highly preposterous. He sent a
new deputation to Spain to justify this conduct,
and to insist, in name of all the communities in
Peru, for a confirmation of the government to him-
self during life, as the only means of preserving
tranquillity there. The persons entrusted with
this strange commiflion, intimated the intention
of Pizarro to the president, and required him, in
his name, to depart from Panama and return to
Spain. They carried likewise secret inftru&ions
to Hinojofa, directing him to offer Gasea a pre-
sent of fifty thousand pesos, if he would comply
voluntarily with what was demanded of him; and
if he should continue obstinate, to cut him off
either by aflaflination or poison t.

MANY

* Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 21, &c. Zarate, lib. vi. c. 6, 7.

eoimara, c. 175. Vega, p. 1 . lib. v. c. 3. + Zarate, !;h
vi. c. 8. Fernandecz, lib. ii. c. 33, 34. Herrera, dec. 8. li .
ii. c. 9, 1 o.

MANY circumstances concurred in puffling on B 0 O K

Pizarro to those wild measures. Having been VI.
once accustomed to the pre-eminence of supreme 6.
command, he could not bear the thoughts ofcarca gaii
descending to a private fiation. Conscious of his's fleet.
own demerit, he suspeCted that the emperor flu-
died only to deceive him, and would never par-
don the outrages which he had committed. His
chief confidents, no less guilty, entertained the
fame apprehensions. The approach of Gafca
without any military force excited no terror.
There were now above fix thousand Spaniards
fettled in Peru *; and at the head of these he
doubted not to maintain his own independence,
if the court of Spain should refuse to grant what
he required. But he knew not that a spirit of de-
fertion had already begun to spread among those
whom he trusted most. Hinojofa, amazed at his
precipitate resolution of setting himself in oppo-
fition to the emperor's commission, and disdain-
ing to be his initrument in executing the odi-
ous crimes pointed out in his secret infitrutions,
publicly recognized the president as his only law-
ful fiperior. The officers under his command did
the fame. Such was the contagious influence of
the example, that it reached even the deputies
who had been sent from Peru; and at the time
when Pizarro expected to hear either of Gafca's
return to Spain, or of his death, he received an
account of his being master of the fleet, of Pa-
nama, and of the troops flationed there.

IRRITATrD almofi to madness by an eventpirarro r,

so unexpected, he openly prepared for war; and 1lve"
in order to give some colour of jufiice to hisw' '4
arms, he appointed the court of audience in Li-

ma
* HIcrrcra, dec. 8. lib. iii. c. i.

B O O. K ma to proceed to the trial of Gafca, for the crimes

VI. of having seized his ships, reduced his officers,

"''and prevented his deputies from proceeding on
1547' their voyage to Spain. Cepeda, though acting

as a judge in virtue of the royal commifflon, did
not scruple to proflitute the dignity of his funtion
by finding Gafca guilty oftreafon, and condemn-
ing him to death on that account *. Wild, and
even ridiculous, as this proceeding was, it im-
posed on the low illiterate adventurers, with
whom Peru was filled, by the semblance of a
legal sanCtion, warranting Pizarro to carry on
hoflilities againfl a convicted traitor. Soldiers ac-
cordingly retorted from every quarter to his ftan-
dard, and he was soon at the head of a thousand
men, the best equipped that had ever taken the
field in Peru.

Preparations GA S C A, on his part, perceiving that force must
f Gafca. be employed in order to accomplish the purpose

of his mission, was no less assiduous in collecting
troops from Nicaragua, Carthagena, and other
settlements on the continent; and with such fuc-
cess, that he was loon in a condition to detach a
squadron of his fleet with a considerable body of
.April. soldiers, to the coast of Peru, Their appearance

excited a dreadful alarm; and though they did
not attempt for Come time to make any descent,
they did more effeEtual service, by setting ashore
in differefit places, persons who dispersed copies
of the aa of general indemnity, and the revoca-
tion of the late edicts; and who made known
every where the pacific intentions, as well as mild
temper of the president. The effeEt of spreading
this information was wonderful. All who were
dissatisfied with Pizarro's violent administration,

all

* Fernandcz, lib. ii. c. 55. Vega, p. lib. b .

v . .
Ierrn ra, dec. 8. lib. iii, c. 6.

all who retained any sentiments of fidelity to their B 0 0 K
sovereign, began to meditate revolt. Some open- vl.
ly deserted a cause which they now deemed to be 1547-
unjust. Centeno, leaving the cave in which he lay Infurreaion
concealed, assembled about fifty of his former ad-°fCeatcn°
herents, and with this feeble half-armed band ad-
vanced boldly to Cuzco. By a sudden attack in
the night-time, in which he displayed no less mili-
tary skill than valour, he rendered himself master
of that capital, though defended by a garrison of
five hundred men. Mofi of these having ranged
themselves under his banneis, he had soon the
command of a respectable body of troops *.

PIZARRO, though astonished at beholding oneagainf

enemy approaching by sea, and another by land, h1

z '

at a time when he trusted to the union of all Perumaiche,,
in his favour, was of a spirit more undaunted,
and more accustomed to the viciflitudes of for-
tune, than to be disconcerted or appalled. As
the danger from Centeno's operations was the
most urgent, he instantly set out to oppose him.
Having provided horses for all his soldiers, he
marched with amazing rapidity. But every morn-
ing he found his force diminished by numbers who
had left him during the night; and though he be-
came suspicious to excess, and punished without
mercy all whom he suspected, the rage of defer-
tion was too violent to be checked. Before he
got within fight of the enemy at Huarina, near
the lake Titiaca, he could not muster more than
four hundred soldiers. But there he jufily con-
fidered as men of tried attachment, on whom he
might depend. They were indeed the boldest
and mors desperate of his followers, conscious
like himself of crimes for which they could hardly

expecl

* Zarate, lib. vi. c. 13-16. Gomara, c. r80, 181. Ser-
nandez, lib. ii. c. 28. 64, &c.

0B O K expet forgiveness, and without any hope but in
VI. the success of their arms. With these he did not
''"'hesitate to attack Centeno's troops, though double
1547. obera5o. to his own in number. The royalilts did not de-

cline the combst. It was the most obstinate and
bloody that had hitherto been fought in Peru. At

and defeats length the intrepid valour of Pizarro, and the fu-
"m' periority of Carvajal's military talents, triumphed

over numbers, and obtained a complete victory.
The booty was immense , and the treatment of
the vanquished cruel. By this signal success the
reputation of Pizarro was re-established, and be-
ing now deemed invincible in the field, his army
increased daily in number t.

BUT events happened in other parts of Peru,

which more than counterballanced the splendid
victory at Huarina. Pizarro had scarcely left Li-
ma, when the citizens, weary of his oppreflive
dominion, erected the royal fiandard, and Alda-
na, with a detachment of soldiers from the fleet,

Cafca landstook poffeflion of the town. About the fame
i Peru. time T, the president landed at Tumbez with five

hundred men. Encouraged by his pretence, eve-
ry settlement in the low country declared for the
king. The situation of the two parties was now
perfectly reverted; Cuzco and the adjacent pro-
vinces were pbffeffed by Pizarro; all the reft of
the empire, from Quito southward, acknowledg-
ed the jurisdiction of Gafca. As his numbers
augmented fait, Gafca advanced into the interior
part of the country. His behaviour still conti-
nued to be gentle and unassuming; he exprefled,
on every occasion, his ardent with of terminating
the contest without bloodfled. More solicitous to

reclaim

* See NOTE XtV. I' Zarate, lib. vii. c. 2, 3.

Goniara, c. 181. Vega, p. Il.lib. v. c. 8, &c. Fernandez,
lib. ii. c. 79. Herrcra, dec, 8, lib. iv. c. i, z. Zaratc,
lib. vi. c, 17.

reclaim than to punish, he upbraided no man sorB O 0 K
palt offences, but received them as a father re- VI.
ceives penitent children returning to a sense of'f"'
their duty. Though desirous of peace, he did '547.
not flacken his preparations for war. He appoint-
ed the general rendezvous of his troops in the
fertile valley of Xauxa, on the road to Cuzco -.
There he remained for. some months, not only Aivanee
that he might have time to make another attempt t'ard
towards an accommodation with Pizarro, but that C
he might train his new soldiers to the use of arms
and accustom them to the discipline of a camp,
before he led them againfi a body of victorious
veterans. Pizarro, intoxicated with the success
which had hitherto accompanied his arms, and
elated with having again near a thousand men un-
der his command, refused to liften to any terms,
although Cepeda, together with several of his of-
ficers, and even Carvajal himself t, gave it as
their advice, to close with the president's offer of a
general indemnity, and the revocation of the ob-
noxious laws I. Gafca having tried in vain every
expedient to avoid imbruing his hands in the blood
of his countrymen, began to move towards CuzcoDeC. ,9.
at the head of sixteen hundred men.

PI AR R O, confident of victory, suffered the Both parties

royalists to pass all the rivers that lie betweenp pre for
Guamanga and Cuzco without opposition, and to
advance within four leagues of that capital, flat- '548.
tering himfeif that a defeat in such a situation as
rendered a retreat impracticable would at once
terminate the war. He then marched out to
meet the enemy, and Carvajal chore his ground, Aprilg.
and made the disposition of the troops with the
discerning eye, and profound knowledge in the

art

* Zarate, lib. vii. c. i. Fcrnandez, lib. ii. c. 77. 82.
1' See N O T E XLVI. :I' Zarate, lib. vii. c.. 6.
Vega, p. I . lib, v. c. 27.

B O OK art of war, conspicuous in all his operations. As

VIL the two armies moved forward slowly to the
.t-5 charge, the appearance of each was singular. In

that of Pizarro composed of men enriched with
the fjioils of the most opulent country in America,
every officer, and almost all the private men were
clothed in luffs of Silk, or brocade, embroidered
with gold and silver and their horses, their arms,
their flandards, were adorned with all the pride
of military pomp *. That of Gafca, though not
lb fpleldid, exhibited what was no less firiking.
He himself, accompanied by the archbishop of
Lima, the bishops of Quito and Cuzco, and a great
number of ecclefiaflics, marching along the lines,
blefling the men, and encouraging them to a re-
lblute discharge of their duty.

Pizarro de- WH EN both wereju't ready to engage, Cepeda
i5rted by hiset spurs to his horse, galloped off, and surrender-

ed himself to the president. Garcilaffo de la Ve-
ga, and other officers of note, followed his exam-
ple. The revolt of persons in such high rank
firuck all with amazement. The mutual confi-
dence on which the union and firength of armies
depend, ceased at once. Difiruft and confterna-
tion spread from rank to rank. Some fklently
flipped away, others threw down their arms, the
greatest number went over to the royalifis. Pi-
zarro, Carvajal, and tome leaders, employed au-
thority, tlreats, and intreaties to stop them, but
in vain.' In less than half an hour, a body of
men, which might have decided the fate ofthe
Peruvian empire, was totally dilperfed. Pizarro
feeing all irretrievably loft, cried out in amaze-
ment to a few officers who still faithfully ad-
hered to him, " What remains for us to do ?"
" Let us rufl, replied one of them, upon the
enemy's firmest battalion, and die like Romans."
Dejected with such a reverse of fortune, he

had
* Zarate, lib. vi, c. 1 l,

had not spirit to follow this soldierly counsel, and B 0 o I
with a tameters disgraceful to his former fame, he VI.
surrendered to one of Gafca's officers. Carvajal,~-"J
endeavouring to escape, was overtaken and seized. tke54

GASCA, happy in this bloodlefi vidtory, didand Put iy

not ltain it with cruelty. Pizarro, Carvajal, andath
a tmall number of the mofi distinguished or noto-
rious offenders, were punished capitally, Pizarro
was beheaded on the day after he surrendered,
He submitted to his fate with a composed dignity,
and seemed desirous to attone by repentance for
the crimes which he had committed. The end
of Carvajal was suitable to his life; On his trial
he offered no defence. When the sentence ad-'
judging him to be hanged was pronounced, he
carelessly replied, "One can die but once." Dur-
ing the interval between the sentence and eXecu-
tion, he discovered no sign either of remorse for
the past, or of solicitude about the future; scoff-
ing at all who visited him, in his usual farcatlic
vein of mirth, with the fame quickness of repar-
tee and gross pleasantry as at any other period of
his life. Cepeda, more criminal than either,
ought to have shared the fame fate; but the me-
rit of having deserted his aflbciates at such a cri-
tical moment, and with such decisive effet, saved
him from immediate punishment. IHe was sent,
however, as a prisoner to Spain, and died in co.-'
finement *.

IN the minute detail which the contemporary
historians have given of the civil dissensions that
raged-in Peru, with little interruption, during terl
years, many circumfiances occur so striking, and

VoL. II. S which

Zarate, lib. vii. c. 6. 7. 8. Gomnra, c. 18 , 186. Vega,

p. 1!. lib. v. c. 30, &c. Fernandez, Iib. ii. 6. 86, &c. litt-
rcra, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 14, &°.

1 o o Kwhich indicate such an uncommon state of man-

VI. ners, as to merit particular attention.
o548- THOUGH the Spaniards who firfi invaded Pe.
NO merce-
nary foiliersru were of the loweit order in society, and the
in thecivil greater part of thoe who afterwards joined them
kars of Pe- 0 .... ,
r». were persons of desperate fortune, yet in all the

bodies of troops brought into the field by the dif-
ferent leaders who contended for superiority, not
one man afted as a hired soldier, that follows his
flandard for pay. Every adventurer in Peru con-
fidered himself as a conqueror, entitled, by his ser-
vices, to as effablifhment in that country which
had been acquired by his valour. In the contests
between the rival chiefs, each cllhfe his fide as he
was directed by hig own judgment or affections.
He joined his commander as a companion of his
fortune, and disdained to degrade himself by re-.
ceiving the wages of a mercenary. It was to
their swords, not to pre-eminence in office, or no-
bility of birth, that most of the leaders whom
they followed were indebted for their elevation;
and each of their adherents hoped, by the fame
means to open a way for himself to the poffeflion
of power and wealth *.

Armies im- Buyr tioughl the troops in Peru served without
,",nfivy: an y regular pay they were raised at immense ex-

pence. Among .men accustomed to divide the
J)ioils of an opulent country, the desire of ob-
taining wealth acquired incredible force. The ar-
dour of pursuit augmented in proportion to the
hiope of success. Where all were intent on the
fame object, and under the dominion of the fame
pailion, there was but one mode of gaining men
or of securing their attachment. Officers of name
and influence, besides the promise of future efln-
blillments, received in hand large gratuities frollm

the
* Vega, p. II. 1b, iv. c. 38. 41.

.he chief with whom they engaged. Gonzalo Pi-B 0 o K
2arro, in order to raise a thousand men, advanc- VI.
ed five hundred thousand pesos *. Gafca expend- d'
ed on the troops which he led against Pizarro nine 1548.
hundred thousand pesos t; The diflribution of
property, bellowed as the reward of success, was
still more exorbitant. Cepeda, as the recompenceAnd im-
of his perfidy and address, in persuading the court mense re,
of royal audience to give the fanEtion of its autho-dividulis.
rity to the usurped jurifdidlibn of Pizarro, received
a grant of lands which yielded an annual income
of a hundred and fifty thoufahd pesos T. Hino-
jofa, who, by his early defecion from Pizarro,
and surrender of the fleet to Gafca, decided the
fate of Peru, obtained a diftria of country as-
fording two hundred thousand pesos of yearly
value§. While such rewards were dealt out to
the principal officers, with more than royal muni-
ficence, proportional shares were conferred upon
those of inferior rank.

Su c H a rapid change of fortune produced its na-Theirproru.

tural eff'ets. It gave birth to new wants, andfl°"la"dtx"
new desires. Veterans long accuflomed to hard-
Ship and toil, acquired of a sudden a tafle for pro-
uife and inconsiderate diflipation, and indulged
in all the excesses of military licentiousness. Th.e
riot of low debauchery occupied some; a reli/h
for expensive luxuries spread among others |l.
The meanest soldier in Peru would have thought
himself degraded by marching on foot, and at a
time when the prices of horses in that country
were exorbitant, each insisted on being furnished
with one before he would take the field. But

S 2 though

Pernandei, lib. ii. c. 54.

1' Zarate, lib. vii. c. io. Ilerrera, dec. 8. lib. v. c. 7.
tC Goinaia, c. 164.

'egn, p. I. lib. vi. c. 3.
I lle;t rra, dec. 5' lib, ii. c. 3. dec. 8. lib. viii. c. to,

B °0 Kthough less patient under the fatigue and hard.

_v m. ships of service, they were ready to face danger
-548. and death with as much intrepidity as ever, and

animated by the hope of new rewards, they never
failed, on the day of battle, to display all their
ancient valour.

erocicy ToC E T fT E R with their courage, they retained
with which all the ferocity by which they were originally dif-
their con-
cen.. were tinguifhed. Civil difeord never raged with a more
artied un. fell spirit than among the Spaniards in Peru. To

all the passions which usually envenom contests
among countrymen, avarice was added, and ren-
dered their enmity more rancorous. Eagerness to
seize the valuable forfeitures expected upon the
death of every opponent, shut the door againit
mercy. To be wealthy was of itself sufficient to
expose a mnan to accusation, or to fubje& him to
punishment. On the slightest suspicions, Pizarro
condemned many of the most opulent inhabitants
in Peru to death. Carvajal, without searching for
any pretext to justify his cruelty, cut off many
more. The number of those who suffered by the
hand of the executioner, was not much inferior to
what fell in the field *; and, the greater part was
condemned without the formality of any kgal
trial.
And Want TaE violence with which the contending par-

fath. ties treated their opponents was not accompanied

with its ifual attendants, attachment and fidelity to
those with whom they ated. The ties of honour
which are held sacred among soldiers, and the prin-
ciple of integrity, interwoven as thoroughly in
the Spanish character as in that of any nation,
seem to have been equally forgotten. Even re-
gard for decency, and the sense of ihame, were

totally
: See NOT E XLVII.

totally loft. During their dilfenfions, there was B O O K
hardly a Spaniard in Peru who did not abandon VIL
the party which he had originally espoused, betray
the aflociates with whom he had united, and vio-
late the engagements under which he had come.
The viceroy Nugnez Vela, was ruined by the
treachery of Cepeda and the other judges of tile
royal audience, who were bound by the duties of
their funetion to have fiipported his authority.
The chief advisers and companions of Gonzalo
Pizarro's revolt, were the first to forsake him, and
submit to his enemies. His fleet was given up to
Gafca, by the man whom he had tingled out a-
mong his officers to entrust with that important
command. On the day that was to decide his
fate, an army of veterans, in fight of the enemy,
threw down their arms without firiking a blow,
and deserted a leader who had often conducted
them to victory, Infiances of such general and
avowed contempt of the principles and obligati-
ons which attach man to man, and bind them to-
gether in social union, rarely occur in history. It
is only where men are far removed from the feat
of government, where the restraints of law and
order are little felt, where the profpeft of gain is
unbounded, and immense wealth may cover the
crimes by which it is acquired, that we can find
any parallel to the levity, the rapaciousness, the
perfidy and corruption prevalent among the Spa-
niards in Peru.

ON the death of Pizarro, the malcontents in caf"cac-

every corner of Peru laid down their arms, andplloymnt
tranquillity seemed to be perfectlv re-eflablifled. r,-. his r01i
But two very interefling objects Rill remained to"'ie"
eccupy the president's attention. The one was
to find immediately filch employment for a multi-
tude of turbulent and daring adventurers withl

which

B O0 K which the country was filled, as might prevent

vI. them from exciting new commotions. The other
.'"^to bestow proper gratifications upon those to whose

54 loyalty and valour he was indebted for his success.

The former of these was in some measure accom-
plifhed, by appointing Pedro de Valdivia to pro-
fecute the conquest of Chili ; and by empower-
ing Diego Centeno to undertake the discovery of
the vaRt regions bordering on the river de la Plata.
The reputation of those leaders, and the hopes of
bettering theircpndition in a new country, allur-
ing many of the moit indigent and desperate fol-
diers to follow their tfandards, drained off no in-
considerable portion of that mutinous inflammable
spirit which Gafca dreaded.

;iis divirion THE latter was an affair of greater difficulty,
of the coun-
try houn- and to be adjusted with a more attentive and deli-
his follow- cate hand. The repartimientos, or allotments of

s lands and Indians which fell to be difiributed,

in consequence of the death or forfeiture of the
former pofi'efors, exceeded two millions of pelos
of yearly rent . Gafca, when now absolute maT-
ter of this immense property, retained the fame
disinterested sentiments which he had originally
professed, and refused to reserve the fmallell por-
tion of it for. himself. But the number of claim-
ants was great ; and whilt the vanity or avarice
of every individual fixed the value of his own
services, and eti mated the recompence x\hich he
thought due to him, the pretensions of each were
so extravagant, that it was impoifible to satisfy :ll.
Gafca liflened to them one by one, with the moll
patient attention, and that he might have leisure to
weigh the comparative merit of their several claims
with accuracy, he retired, with the archbilhop nl
Lima and a tingle secretary, to a village twelve

Icagns4 V
* Vega, p. Il, lb. vi. q. ,\.

leagues from Cuzco. There he spent several daysB o o K
in allotting to each a diftritt of lands and number Vl.
of Indians, in proportion to his idea of their paftl.-
services, and future importance. But that he
might get beyond the reach of the fierce foirm of
clamour and rage, which he foresaw would burst
out on the publication of his decree, notwilihfand-
ing the impartial equity with which le had framed
it, he set out for Lima, leaving the infirument of
partition fealed up, with orders not to open it for
some days after his departure.

THE indignation excited by publiChing the de- AUg.i 4.

cree of partition was not less than Gafca had ex-ten it occa-
peded. Vanity, avarice, emulation, envy, fhame,f°0"n
rage, and all the other paflions that most vehe-
mently agitate the minds of men when both their
honour and their interelt are deeply affedted, con-
spired in adding to its violence. It broke out
with all the fury of military insolence. Calumny,
threats, and curses were poured out openly upon
the president. He was accused of ingratitude, of
partiality, and of injustice. Among soldiers prompt
to action, such seditious discourse would have been
loon followed by deeds no less violent, and they
already began to turn their eyes towards some dif-
contented leaders, expecting them to hand forth
in redress of their wrongs. By some vigorous in-
terpofitions of government, a timely check was
given to this mutinous spirit, and the danger of
another civil war was averted for the present *.

GA s c A, however, perceiving that the flame was 1549.

filppreffed rather than extinguished, laboured withl.et''a-
the utmost assiduity to soothe the malcontents, byani g'overn-

beflow.mcnt,

Zarate, lib. vii. c. 9. Gomara, c. x87. Vega, p. i.

lib. vii c. i, &c. Fernnndez, p. gI. li. i.. . &c.

c . Her-
rera, dec. 8. lib. iv. c. 17, &c.

O 0 K beflowing large gratuities on some, by promising
VI. repartimientos, when they fell vacant, to others,

' and by carefling and flattering all. But that the
54 public security might reft on a foundation more

itaple than their good affecion, he endeavoured
to strengthen the hands of his successors in office,
by re-eflablifhing the regular administration of
justice in every part of the empire. He introduc-
ed order and simplicity into the mode of collecing
the royal revenue. He issued regulations concern-
ing the treatment of the Indians, well calculated
to protect them from opprelfion, and to provide
for their inflruetion in the principles of religion,
without depriving the Spaniards of the benefit ac-
cruing from their labour. Having now accom-
plifhed every object of his mifion, Gafca, long-
ing to return again to a private itation, commit-

1550. ted the government of Peru to the court of audi-
Feb. .- ence, and set out for Spain. As, during the a-

gnd sets out
for spain. narchy and turbulence of the four last years, there

had been no remittance made of the royal revenue,
he carried with him thirteen hundred thousand pe-
sos of public money, which the oeconomy and
order of his administration enabled him to save,
after paying all the expences of the war.

Pi« receptj. HE was received in his native country with uni-
a thoere versal adniiration of his abilities, and of his

virtue. Both. were, indeed, highly conspicuous.
Without army, or fleet, or public funds; with
a train so simple, that only three thousand ducats
were expended in equipping him *, he set out to
oppose a formidable rebellion. By his address
and talents he supplied all those defects, and
seemed to create infiruments for executing his de-
signs. He acquired such a naval force, as gave
him the command of the sea. He raised a body
of men able to cope with the veteran bands which

gave
Fcrnandcz, lib. ii. c. 18,

gave law to Peru. He vanquished their leader, on B O O K
whose arms vicory had hitherto attended, and in vI.
place of anarchy and usurpation, he established "'0
the government of laws, and the authority of
the rightful sovereign. But the praise bestowed
on his abilities was exceeded by that which his vir-
tue merited. After residing in a country where
wealth presented allurements which had reduced
every person who had hitherto poffefied power
there, he returned from that trying fiation with
integrity not only untainted but unfufpeeded. As-
ter diflributing among his countrymen pof'effionr
of greater extent and value than had ever been
in the disposal of a subjet in any age or nation,
he himfelfremained in his original ilate of pover-
ty; and at the very time, when he brought such
a large recruit to the royal treasury, he was obliged
to apply by petition for a small fum to discharge
some petty debts which he had contracted during
the course of his service *. Charles was not in-
sensible to such disinterested merit. Gafca was re-
ceived by him with the molt distinguished marks
of etfeem, and being promoted to the bishopric
of Palencia, he passed the remainder of his days
in the tranquillity of retirement, refpeated by his
country, honoured by his sovereign, and beloved
by all.

NOTWITHSTANDING all Gafca's wife regula-

tions, the tranquillity of Peru was not of long con-
tinuance. In a country, where the authority of
government was almost forgotten during the long
prevalence of anarchy and mis-rule, where there
were disappointed leaders ripe for revolt, and fe-
ditious soldiers ready to follow them, it was not
difficult to kindle combuflion. Several fucceflive
infurredtions debolated the country for some years.
But as those, though fierce, were only transient

forms,
* MS. penes me,

B OO K storms, excited rather by the ambition and tur-

v. bulence of particular men, than by general or

-'public motives, the detail of them is not the ob-

e55' je of this history. These commotions in Peru,
like every thing of extreme violence, either in the
natural or political body, were not of long dura-
tion, and by carrying off the corrupted humours
which had given rife to the disorders, they contri-
buted in the end to strengthen the society which
at first they threatened to destroy. During their
fierce contests, several of the first invaders of Peru,
and many of those licentious adventurers whom
the fame of their success had allured thither, fell
by each other's hands. Each of the parties, as
they alternately prevailed in the struggle, cleared
the country of a greater number, by executing,
proscribing, or banishing their opponents. Men
less enterprising and desperate, and more accuf-
tomed to move in the path of fober and peaceable
indufiry, fettled in Peru; and the royal authority
was gradually efiablifhed as firmly there as in the
other Spanish colonies.

THE

# BOOK VII.

THE
HISTORY

o
AMERIC A

BOOK VII.

A S the conquefi of the two great empires of 3 o o K
Mexico and Peru forms the mofi splendid and in- Vii.
tereiting period in the history of America, a view-v--'
of their political institutions, and a description of
their national manners, will exhibit the human
species to the contemplation of intelligent obfer-
vers in a very singular stage of its progress *.

WHEN compared with other parts of the NeWMjcx;O .,d

World, Mexico and Peru may be confidered asi'lei more
poliflied states. Instead of small, independent, c,:,L p',It
hloftile tribes, firuggling for subsistence amidfio' Amricar.
woods and marshes, firangers to induflry and
arts, unacquainted with subordination, and al-
most without the appearance of' regular govern-
ment, we find countries of great extent fill-
jeted to the dominion of one sovereign, the in-
habitants colleted together in cities, the wifdomn

an (.
S See NOTE XLVIII.

B O O K and foresight of rulers employed in providing for

VIi. the maintenance and security of the people, the
'-'* empire of laws in some measure eflablifhed, the

authority of religion recognized, many of the arts
essential to life brought to some degree of matu-
rity, and the dawn of such as are ornamental be-
ginning to appear.

Their infe- BUT if the comparisons be made with the peo-
,h'on to ple of the ancient continent, the inferiority of
of the an- America in improvement will be conspicuous, and
ientco neither the Mexicans nor Peruvians will be en-

titled to rank with those nations which merit the
name of civilized. They, like the rude tribes
around them, were totally unacquainted with
the useful metals, and the progress which they
had made in extending their dominion over the
animal creation was inconsiderable. The Mexi-
cans had gone no farther than to tame and rear
tuikeys, ducks, a species of small dogs, and rab-
bits *. By this feeble eflay of ingenuity, the
means of subsistence were rendered somewhat
more plentiful and secure, than when men de-
pend solely on hunting; but they had no idea of
attempting to subdue the more robust animals, or
of deriving any aid from their minifiry in carry,
ing on works of labour. The Peruvians seem
to have neglected the inferior animals, and had
not rendered any of them domestic except the
duck; but they were more fortunate in taming the
Llama, an animal peculiar to their country, in
form resembling a camel, and of a size fomewhlt
larger than a sheep. Under the protection of
man, this species multiplied greatly. Its wool
furnished the Peruvians with clothing, its fleih
with food. It was even employed as a beait of
burden, and carried a moderate load with much

paticnca
* Herrera, dec. ii. lib. vii. c. ig.

patience and docility *. It was never used for B O C K
draught; and the breed being confined to the VII,
mountainous country, its service, if we may judge
by incidents that occur in the early Spanish writers,
was not very extensive among the Peruvians in
their original state.

IN tracing the line by which nations proceed

towards civility, the discovery of the useful me-
tals, and the acquisition of dominion over the
animal creation, have been marked as steps of
capital importance in their progress. In our con-
tinent, society continued in that state which is
denominated barbarous, long after men had at-
tained both. Even with all that command over
nature which these confer, many ages elapse, be-
fore industry becomes so perfet as to render sub-
fiftence secure, before the arts that supply the
wants and fuirnifh the accommodations of life are
invented, and before any idea is conceived of the
various institutions requisite in a well-ordered so-
ciety. The Mexicans and Peruvians, without
knowledge of the use of metals, or the aid of
domeRfic animals, laboured under disadvantages
which mufl have greatly retarded their progress,
and in their highefi state of improvement, their
power was so limited, and their operations so fee-
ble, that they can hardly be confidered as having
advanced beyond the infancy of civil life.

AFTER this general observation concerning theview or the

mort singular and distinguished circumfiance inin!,ituti""'
the itate of both the great empires in America, Icf ach.
lhall endeavour to give such a view of the confiitu-
tion and interior police of each, as may enable us to
ascertain their place in the political lcale, to allot
them their proper flation between the rude tribes
in the New World, and the polilhed flates of the

ancirent,
*e Vega, p. I. lib. viii. c. 16. Zaratc, lib. i. c. 14.

' 0o0 K ancient, and to determine how far they had riferi

VI.1 above the former, as well as how much they fell
--v'""'below the latter,

Imperfee MEXICO was firfi subjected to the Spanish
information crown. But our acquaintance with its laws and
concerning
thboc of manners is not, from that circurmtance, more
tzeico. complete. What I have remarked concerning

the defective and inaccurate information on which
we must rely, with refpeat to the condition and
customs of the savage tribes in America, may be
applied likewise to our knowledge of the Mexican
empire. Cortes, and the rapacious adventurers
who accompanied him, had not leisure or capacity
to enrich either civil or natural history with new
observations. They undertook their expedition in
quest of one objeac, and seem hardly to have
turned their eyes towards any other. Or, if
during some short interval of tranquillity, when
the occupations of war ceased, and the ardour of
plunder was suspended, the institutions and man-
ners of the people whom they had invaded drew
their attention, the inquiries of illiterate soldiers
were conducted with so little sagacity and preci-
lion, that the accounts given by therm of the po-
licy and order eItablifhed in the Mexican mo-
narchy are fipelficial, confuted and inexplicable.
It is rather from incidents which they relate occa-
fionally, than fiom their own deductions and re-
miaiks, that we are enabled to form some idea of
the genius and manners of that people. The ob-
fcurity in which the ignorance of its conquerors
involved the annals of Mexico, was augmented
by the fupcrifition of those who succeeded ihenl.
As the memory of palt events was preserved
among the Mexicans by figures painted on flkin.,
on cotton cloth, or on the bark of trees, tle early
miiionaries, unable to comprehend their mean-
ing, and fluck with their uncouth forms, con-

ceived

:tived them to be monuments of idolatry which 00 o K
ought to be destroyed, in order to facilitate the vlI.
conversion of the Indians. In obedience to an J
edic issued by Juan de Zummaraga, a Franciscan
monk, the first bishop of Mexico, all those records
of the ancient Mexican flory were collected and
committed to the flames. In consequence of this
fanatical zeal of the monks who first visited New
Spain, and which their fuccefibrs soon began to
lament, whatever knowledge of remote events
such rude monuments contained was entirely loft,
and no information remained concerning the an-
cient revolutions and policy of the empire, but
what was derived from tradition, or from some
fragments of their historical paintings that es-
caped the barbarous researches of Zummaraga*.
From the experience of all nations it is manifest,
that thi memory of past tranfaEions can neither
be long preserved, nor be transmitted with any
fidelity by tradition. The Mexican paintings,
which are supposed to have served as annals of
their empire, are few in number, and of ambi-
guous meaning. Thus amidst the uncertainly of
the former, and the obscurity of the latter, we
muf{ glean what intelligence can be collected from
the scanty materials scattered in the Spanish writers.

ACCORDING to the account of the Mexicans ori;inofrthe

o

rong Mexican

ihemfelves, their empire was not of long dura-imonr
tion. Their country, as they relate, was origi-
nally possessed, rather than peopled, by small in-
dependent tribes, whole mode of life and man-
ners referibled those of the rudefl savages which
we have described. tut about a period corre-
fponding to the beginning of the tenth century in
the Clriftian aera, several tribes moved in fucceflive
migrations from unknown regions towards the

north

* Acofta, lib. vi. c. 7. Torquenn. Proen. lib. ii. lib, i;i. c. 6.
lib. xiv, c, 6.

B OO K north and north-weft,.and fettled in different pro-

VII. vinces of Anabac, the ancient name of New Spain,
u'-'"C These, more civilized than the original inhabi-

tants, began to form them to the arts of social life.
At length, towards the commencement of the
thirteenth century, the Mexicans, a people more
polished than any of the former, advanced from
the border of the Californian gulf, and took pof-
feflion of the plains adjacent to a great lake near
the centre of the country. After residing there
about fifty years, they founded a town, since
diflinguifhed by the name of Mexico, which from
humble beginnings soon grew to be the moit con-
fiderable city in the New World. The Mexicans,
long after they were established in their new pof-
sessions, continued, like other martial tribes in
America, unacquainted with regal dominion, and
were governed in peace and conducted in war by
such as were entitled to pre-eminence by their
wisdom or their valour. But among them, as in
other states whose power and territories become
extensive, the supreme authority centered at last
in a tingle person i and when the Spaniards under
Cortes invaded their country, Montezuma was the
ninth monarch in order who had swayed the Mexi-
can sceptre, not by hereditary right, but by
election.
Veryrecent. SUCH is the traditional tale of the Mexicans

concerning the progress of their own empire. Ac-
cording to this, its duration was very short. From
the firfi migration of their parent tribe, they can
reckon little more than three hundred years. From
the eflabliflment of monarchical government not
above a hundred and thirty years, according to
one account*, or a hundred and nincty-feven,
according to another computation --, had elap'd.
If, on one hand, we suppose the Mexican liale to

hlave

* Acoft. I-li.

H ib. vii. c. 8, &c.
i' Purchas Pilgr. iii. p. o168, &c.

have been of higher antiquity, and to have sub- B O O K
lified during such a length of tine as lthe Spa- vl
nilh accounts of its civiliwation would naturally
lead us to conclude, it is difficult to conceiv how,
among a people who poietfid the art of recording
events by pictures, and lwho confidered it as an
effenaial part of their national education, to teach
their children to rep:at the hillorical ftngs which
celebrated the expl(oits of tlIeir ancefiors *, the
knowledge of past trarn!lcaions fhlould be if
llender and limited. If, on ille othlr haud, we
adopt the r own f-s1e:r with refp- tlo th:e anti-
quities of their nation, it is no less difficult to ac-
count either for tliat improved state of society, or
for the extensive dominion to whicl their empire
had attained, when firi visited by the Spaniards.
The infancy of nations is so long, and, even when
every circumstance is favourable t.o tlhir progress,
they advance so fowly towards any nia:.trity of
strength or policy, lthat the recent origin of the
Mexicans seem to be a firong prcfilmption of ex:-
aggeration, in the fi)lendid ditlcliptiols which have
been given of their govrnment an!d nanners .

BUT it is not by theory or con jc 'tures that his- FrO

lory decides, witli r.g:.ard to the tlat or cihrala.ter "'''ih
of nations. It prcdlcesfaAs as the foundlation of pr,.t L;,,
cvery judgment wiilch it ventures to pronounce. z "i'
In collecting [tlole which m'n t reg!.lat. our opilion
in the present inq',ir-y, some noccur that fuiggell an
idea of confidtraible progress in civilization in the
M:.xican empire, and others wllich fecml to indi-
cate tlat it had advancl d but little b1)yond tle fa-
v;lge tribes around it. BEth (ha:l! be: exhibited to
tlle view of the read:er, that, from conmparing
theml, he may delennine on which file t!-e cvi-
(ence preponderates.

THr.i right of private propcrty ws pcrf.:cly Trlic ,ri,
underilood, and eftablillced in its full extent.°, 'P'ol,,:

Vo L. . T Among IJilJll,,,
' HIerIr ca, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 18.

BOOK Among several savage tribes, we have seen, that

VIl. the idea of a title to the separate and exclusive

possession of any oojeft was hardly known; and
that among all it was extremely limited and ill-
defined. But in Mexico, where agriculture and
industry had made some progress, the diftindion
between real and moveable poffeflions, between
property in land and property in goods, had taken
place. Both might be transferred from one per-
son to another by sale or barter; both might de-
scend by inheritance. Every person who could
be denominated a freeman had property in land.
This, however they held by various tenures.
Some possessed it in full right, and it descended to
their heirs. The title of others to their lands
was derived from the office or dignity which
they enjoyed ; and when deprived of the latter,
they loft poffeflion of the former. Both there
modes of occupying land were deemed noble,
and peculiar to citizens of the highest class. The
tenure by which the great body of the people
held their property, was very different. In every
diftri&t a certain quantity of land was measured
out, in proportion to the number of fanilics.
This was cultivated by the joint labour of the
whole; its produce was depositcd in a common
storehouse; and divided among them according to
their refpeaive exigencies. 'I he members of the
Cilpulleel, or aflociations, could not alienate, their
flhare of the common eilate; it was an indivifibik
permanent property, defined for the support ot
their families *. In corf-quence of this difiribution
of the territory of lie slate, every man had an inte-
reft in its welfiar, and the hapnlrnefs of the indivi-
du;:l was connic.Ld with the publ:- security.

The num. TIn . nu-mber and pgreatnefs of the cities in the
iat,,of Mexican empire is one of the molt striking cir-
their citiee. circuil-

* Herrern, dec. 3. lib. iv, c. '5. Torquem. Mon. Ind.li.
xiv. c. 7. Corita, MS.

cimftances. that distinguish it from those nations B O O K
in America vwhich we have already described. VIIl
While society continues in a rude slate, the wants
of men are so few, and they fland so little in need
of mutual allithnce, that their inducements to
crowd together are extremely feeble. Their in-
duitry at the fime time is so imperftr, that it can-
not secure fuilbfience for any considerable number
of families fettled in one spot. They live disperscd,
at this period from choice as well as from n:cellity,
or at the utmloft affembl. in linall hamlets on the
bank of the river which supplies tlhel with
food, or on the border of some plain left open by
nature, or cleared by their own labour. The
Spaniards, accultomed to this mnode of habitation
among all the savage tribes with which they were
then acquainted, were astonished, on entering
New Spain, to find the natives residing in towns
of such extent as resembled thole of Europe. In
the first fervour of their admiration, they com-
pared Zempoalla, though a town only of the fe-
cond or third fie, to cities of greatest note in
their own coiuntry. When, afterwards, they vi-
fited in fuccellion Tlafctala, Cholula, Tacuba, Te-
zeuCo, and Mexico itfilf, their amazement in-
creased so much, that it led them to convey
ideas of their magnitude and p)oplloutneiie bo,-
dering on wht is incredible. Even wliere there
is Icifire f-or observation, and no ilitirefl that leaJs
to deceive, conjeditral eflimatcs of the number of
polple in cities are extremely lootfe, and usually
miuchl exaggerated. It is not firprizirg, then,
that Cortes and his conlpanions, little accuflomed
to such compulations, and powerfully t-empted to
magnify, in order to exalt the metit of their
own discoveries and conqLucits, thould have bern
betrayed into this common error, and h;ave railed
their descriptions considerably above truth. F1r
this reason, some considerable abatement ought to

T 3 be

275

BOOK be made from their cal ulation of the number

VI. of inlabitants in the Mexican cities, and we may
.~,',, fix the fiandard ,f thlir populati',n much lower

tlhan they have done; but ill they will appear
to be cities of such confequlen c, as are not to be.
so' nd but among people vho l ive made It-me
ccnfiderable progrcfs in the arts of social life .
1'e rp.l- TnE re paration of professions among the Mexi-

'iLj. cans is a ffymptom of irrprovenent no less re-

marki.ble. Arts, in tbe a:ly ,ges of fociet), are
so few and so fii ple, lhat t;c:-l man is fufficicntly
maitlr of them all, to gratify every demand of
llis own limited d fires. Thl savage cai form
his bow, point his arrows, r.ar his hut, and hollow
his canoe, without calling in the aid of any hand
more skilful than his own. Time mufl have aug-
mented the wants of men, and ripened their inge-
nuity, before the produEtions of art become io
complicated in their Cf rL:.ure, or so curious in their
fabric, that a particular course of education i.
requisite towards forming the artificer to expert-
nt's in contrivance and wormanfhlip. In pro-
portion as refinement spreads, the diftintion of
profcflions increafts, and they branch out into
more numerous and minute fubdlvifions. Among
the M xicans, tills fepar:tion of the aits necefi,'r
in life hail taken place to a confidcrable extent.
The functions of the m.fon, the weaver, the gold-
fimith, the painter, and of several oth- r crafts, were
carried on by differcnt pcrfons. Each was regu-
larly infiruted in Ilis calling. To it alone his in-
(lidfy w::.s confincd ; and by afliilduous application
to in: ol).eCL, tcgilchcr with the pcrfrevring I ati-
cnce pc.culi:lu to Americans, their artizans J;tain (d
to a degree of nc;ltncfs and pcrfc(tion in xwerk far
l:ecVond wlhat could have been expecd from the

rude

Sece N O ?T r XLIX.
276

rude tools lwhich tley employed. Their various BOOK
produciors were broughit iito commerce; and by Vii.
the exchange of them in the fiated markets held
in the cities their mutual wants were iupplield , in
such orderly intercourfc as cliara&ernzts an improv-
ed state of iociety.

THE diflinction of ranks ftlabl:]red in the 'nib .-

Mcxican empire is the next circumi'ance that 1inc-,,,.
rits attent on. In flurv:ying tll fav:..g triles o'
America, we observed, that ccnfciouilhcfs of C(u.-
lit)', and impatience of subordination, are senti-
ments natural to man in the infa:ny of civil life.
During pe.ce, the authlority of a fr ;erirr is hardli
felt am(ong them, and even in v.ar i s but ,ittle
acknowledged. Slr-n, .i-st the idea of propcrty,
the difference in condition icfu'ting from it is un-
known. Birth or titi.:s cenckr ino pre-eminencc;
it is only by personal merit and accon-.pi:.fhents
that it can be acquired. The form of fo-iety was
very different amolg the rvl-xicans. The great
body of the people wer in a mrcft huimnilialing
state. A confidc-rable nu!bl)er, known by the
rame of .].r'q:i..s, nearly rtlf';rled in con:e ition
those pcafants whi , undc r v;u'ius dencminations,
were confider d, dulrn te l-,rev.ll:ice of lth feu-
dal fyftc;, as inllru :ierts (of labour att!iched to
the foil. The M.irf.l.,/' con;d not change, thcir
p!ace of rcfid nce wit' out p-.rmnifion of t;:e filnc
rior on whom they dr-pend.cl. 'I't v were co;n-
veyecl, tgcrctler \vithl 1)' l.,n Is on v\hi:ch they vwere
fettlel, from one prrprietor to :.nrth r; r.n.l were
hound to cu!titv:t.' the grrund ,,nnd to lerf{trm
several kin ds r's : vil- worlk t. Oilh-rs w.ere redu-
ced to the lI'o,, form of ful-t Ct'",l, t!lt of do-
meftic fcrvitucc, arid silt the urln:C!l riz(tr of that

vwrctchcd

# Cnrtes Rc!ar. ap. Ralnni iii. 29 9, &c. C;ln. Cion. c,

79. 'Toqut.in. hli. xiii. c. c

i-lirrera, iec. z. lib. vil. c,

15, &c.
t llcrreri, dec, 3. lib. iv. c 17, Cyia, 5,

277

B O O K wretched state. Their condition was held to be

VII. so vile, and their lives deemed to be of so little va-

lue, that a peroln who killed one of those slaves
was not fubjeded to any punishment*. Even
those confidered as freemen were treated by thtir
haughty lords as beings of an inferior species.
The nobles possessed of ample territories, were di-
vided into various classes, to each of which peculiar
titles of honour belonged. Some of these titles,
like their lands, descended from father to son in
perpetual fucceflion. Others were annexed to
particular offices, or conferred during. life as marks
of personal diftintion t. The monarch, exalted
above all, enjoyed extensive power, and supreme
dignity. Thus the diftincion of ranks was com-
pletely established, in a line of regular fubordina-
tion, reaching from the highest to theloweft mem-
ber of the community. Each of these knew what
he could claim, and what he owed. The people,
who were not allowed to wear a dress of the lame
fashion, or to dwell in houses of a form similar to
those of the nobles, accolted them with the moll
submissive reverence. In the pretence of their
sovereign, they durst not lift their eyes from the
ground, or look him in the Lace i. The nobles
themselves, whin admitted to an audience of their
sovereign, entered bare-footed, in mean garments,
and, as his slaves, paid him homage approachling
to adoration. This rcfpeft due from inferiors tl
those above them in rank, was efiabliffled with
flch ceremonious accuracy, that it incorporated(
with their language, and influenced its genius ianl
idiom. The Mexican tongue abounded in cxprf-
sions of reverence and courtcfy. The flile ani
appellations, used in the intercourse between
equals, would have been so unbecoming in the

11101111 moutlh

* lerrera, dec. 3. lib. iv. c. 7. *1 HIcirera, dec. I.

lib, iv. c. 15. Corita, MS. I H-errera, dec. 3. lib. ii.
c. 14.
.-a7-8

mouth of one in a lower sphere, when he accosted B o o K
aperfon in higher rank, as to be deemed an in- VII.
fult*. It is only in societies, which time and the
infittution of regular government have moulded
into form, that we find such an orderly arrange-
rne;:t of men into different ranks, and such nice
attention paid to their various rights.

THE spirit of the Mexicans thus familiarized Their poli-

and bended to rubordination, was prepared for sub-'i~ ,ll"ti
mitting to monarchical government. But the de-
scriptions of their policy and laws, by the Spaniards
who overturned them, are so inaccurate and con-
tradidtory, that it is difficult to delineate the form
of their constitution with any precision. Some-
times they represent the monarchs of Mexico as
abbolute, deciding according to their pleafiure, with
refpeat to every operation of the state. On other
occasions, we discover the traces of eltablificd
cuitoms and laws, framed in order to circumscribe
the power of the crown, and we meet with rights
and privileges of the nobles which seem to be op-
posed as barriers against its encroachments. This
appearance of illconfi lency has arisen fro.n inat-
tention to the innovations of Montczum:i upon
tle Mexican policy. His aspiring ambition sith-
verted the ancient ryfleln of government, and
introduced a pure dcfpotifin. FH dilregarded tlhir
laws, violated their privileges, and reduced his
fubjeats of every order to the level of flives [.
The chiefs or nobles of the first rank, submitted to
the yoke with litch rluctance, that, firom impati-
ence to flakle it off, and hope of rcc.c-ering their
original rights many of them courted the proteetion
ofCortes, andjoined aforeign power again f1 theirdo-

mcllic

* See NOTE L. f- Hcrrera, dec. 3. lib, ii. c. 14.
Torquem.l lib. ii. c. 69.

metfic oppressor *. It is not then under the reign
of Montezuma, but under those of his predecef-
fors, that we can discover 'what was the original
form and genius of Mexican policy. From the
foundation of the monarchy to the eleAicn of
IJcntezuma, it seems to have subsisted with little
vwriaticn. That body of citizens, which may be
diflinguifhed by the name of nobility, formed the
chief and mot refpcEtable order in the state. They
were of various ranks, as has already been obfcrved,
and their honours were acquired and transmitted in
different manners. Their number seems to have
been great. According to an author accustomed
to examine with attention what he relatcs, there
were in the Mexican empire thirty of this order,
cach of whom had in his territories about a hun-
dred thousand people, andfubordinateto thefce there
were about three theufand nobles of a lower class -.
The territories belonging to the chiefs of TezeucQ
and Tacuba, were hardly inferior in extent to
those of the Mexican monarch t. Each of these
possessed complete territorial jurisdiction, an3 le-
vied taxes from their own vassals. But all fol-
lowed the standard of Mexico in war, f:rving with
a number of men in proportion to tleir domain,
and mos of them paid tribute to its monarch as
their superior lord.

IN tracing those great lines of the Mexican con-

titution, an image of feudal policy in its mot
rigid form rifcs to view, and we discern itS three
difiinmuifhing charaeteriflics, a nobilty pofT;fling
alm-ost independent authority, a peopl deprcfitIl
into the lowefl fate of fubjcdtion, and a kling -n-
trufled with the executive power of the Riatc. l:s

f .it

' Herrcra, ecc. z. lib. v. c. vo, t . Torquere , li . iv

c. 49. ' -l Herrera, dec. 2. lib. viii, c, 1. :t'I'orluta.
lib. ii. C. 57. Corikas, iMS.

spirit and principles seem to have operated in the B OO K
New World in the fame manner, as in the an- VI"
cient. The jurifdition of the crown was ex-
tremely llmited. All real and efflctive authority
was retained b tihe Mexican nobks in their own
hands, and the shadow of it only left to the kintg.
Jealous to excfel of their own rights, they guard-
ed with most vigilant anxiety against the encroach-
ments of their fov-reigns. By a fun iamental hw
of the elmpire, it was provided, that th:c king
should not determine concerning any pIinlt of gc-
neral importance, withlout the apprcbation of a
council comnpofed of the prime nobility.*. Unie s
he obtained their consent he could not engag-e the
nation in war, nor could he dispose of tile molt
considerable branch of the public revenlue at p!ea-
ilre, it was appropriated to certain lprG'pois from
which it could not be diveied by tle regal au-
thority t. In order to fecurc full cit&A to ihofe
conflitutional refiraints, the Mexican nobles did
not permit their crown to descend by inheritance,
but disposed of it by eleAion. 'Tle right of elec-
tion seems to have been originally vdcted in the
whole body of nobility, bult vas a!tcrwvards comlmit-
ted to fix electors, of whom the cl;iefs of Te-.u-
co and Tacuba were always two. From rcmte&
for the family of their monarchs, t',e choice fe'!
cgnerally upon oume perifon irung from it. Bit
as tile aclivity and valour of their prilnce w.ss of
greater nmoment to a people perpetually ensgagedc
in war, than a ftrlC adherence to the order of
birth, collaterals of mature age or difiingu.illlhe
merit were often prefcrred to those wh(o wcr.
nearer the throne in dired descent . To this

nlaximl-,

I* errcra, dec. 3. lit. ii. c. 19. Id. dec, '. ib. iv. .

G6. Corira, Mh.S. -f

l bid. c. 17. 1' Acoll,, lib.

. c 24. -errrcr a, dec. 3 lib, ii. c. I3. C r.t4,
, 1.

28t

B K maxim, in their policy, the Mexicans appear to

VI. be indebted. for ichl a fucceiTion of able and \ ar-

like princes, as raised their empire in a ihort
period to that extraordinarv height of power,
which it had attained when Cortes landed in New
Spain.

Power and WHILE the jurisdiction of the Mexican mo-
ftedour narchs continued to be limited, it is probable that
monarchs. it was cxercifed with little ofientation. But as

their authority became more extensive, the fplen-
dour of their government augmented. It was in
this last state that the Spaniards beheld it, and
firuck with the appearance of Montezuma's court,
they describe its pomp at great length, and with
much admiration. The number of his attendants,
the order, the silence, and the reverence with
which they served him; the vaRt extent of his
royal mansion, the variety of its apartments al-
lotted to different officers, and the orientation
with which his grandeur was displayed, when-
ever he permitted his fubjeas to behold himn,
seem to resemble the magnificence of the ancient
monarchies in Asia, rather than the simplicity of
the infant flates in the New World.

Order of Bu T it was not in the mere parade of royalty,
their go-
vernmet. that the Mexican potentates exhibited their power,

they manifefled it more beneficially in the order
and regularity with which they conduEittd the in-
ternal administration and police of their domi-
nions. Complete jurisdiction, civil :ir, well ag
criminal, over its own immediat, d.ills, was
veiled in the crown. Judges were apoint:.d for
each department, and if we may rely oin ilc:
account which the Spanish writers give of the
maxims and laws upon which they founded lihir
decisions with respect to the ditfribution of pro

pe rty

perty and the punifAment of crimes, justice was B O O K
adminifiered in the Mexican empire, with a de- vII.
gree of order and equity, resembling what takesvT-
place in societies highly civilized.

THEIR attention in providing for the support Provifirn

C1

. , i r r*

* s*r (or the (up-

of government was not less sagacious. Iax-spout ohit,h
were laid upon land, upon the acquisitions of in-
duftry, and upon commodities of every kind cx-
poled to sale in the public markets. These duties,
though considerable, were not arbitrary, or un-
equal. The.y were imposed according to elta-
blifhed rules, and each knew what fliare of the
common burden he had to hear. As the ife of
money was unknown, all the taxcs were paid in
kind, and thus not only the natural producttions of
all the different provinces in the empire, but.
every species of manufaature, and every work of
ingenuity and art were colleted in the public
florehoufes. From those tlle emperor supplied
his numerous train of attendants in peace, and his
armies during war, with food, with cloaths, and
ornaments People of inferior condition, neither
p6ofefling land nor engaged in commerce, wvere
bound to the performance of various lirvices. By
their Rated labour the crown lands u-ere cultivated,
public works were carried on, and the various
hloufes belonging to the emperor were built and
kept in repair*.

THE improved slate of government among the ,,; po

Mexicans is conspicuous not only in points ellen-licc.
tial to the being of a well-ordered society, but
in several regulations of inferior confLqiience with
rcfiped to police. The infiitution, which I have
already mentioned, of public couriers, 1tationed

at

* Hcrrera, (dec. z. lib. vii. c. ij. dec. 3. lib, iv, c. i6. 17.
See NOTE L1.

283

B 0 0 K at proper intervals to convey intelligence from

VII. on par! of t. e i nmpre to the ohler, vas a refire-

menlt in police not introduced into any kingdcm
of Europe at th.t period. The firuclure of the
captal cit) in a lake, with art ficial dykes, and
calie;ways of grei liength, which iLrved as avc-
nuts to it fromn ;'crecit quart'trs, crctdc in the
water wvlth nro klb ingenuity than labour, feemrs to
be an idea that ccUittd not hlave occurred to ainn
but a civilized peclel. The fame obtervatioi
may be applied to the ftrucurc of the aqucduts,
or conlnuits, by wliclh ihcl conveyed a itream of
frcfh water, frcrr a , oilfe.ra.ble dlfiance, into tl'e
city, alnong o oc ini' causeways *. The appoint-
ment of a cot fi.rable number of peiions to
clean the fir ets, to lgit tl!h by fires 'indl.d in
difflrent places, an4 to patrole as watchmen durine
the night 'i1, difcovcrs a degree cf attention whici
even poliflcd nations are late in acquiring.
Their arts. TE r prcgrefs of the Mexicans in various arts is

confide red as the most decisive proof of theiir I,-
perior refinement. Cortes, and the carly Spanifl
authors, deferibe this with rapture, and maintain,
that the most cclebrated European artliis could
not furp:.fs or. (vcn equal them in ingenuity and
neatncti of werkmanfalhip. They rcprcfcntcd
men, anan:als, and other obleds, by fuich a dil-
p(fitiAon '(f various coulolred lfathcrs, as is said
to hlave pr duccdall thc effRds of light and fnacle,
and to ha\ve imitated nature with truth and dc-
licacy. TI'hir orliamicnts of gold and silver have
been di:fcril.cd to be of a fabric no less curi-
cus. But in forming any idea from general
delcrilptions, conerning; : the flatc of arts among
nations inmplrfeltly poltflied, we are extrclemly

ready

'* ¢ec NOT'1E L1i. -lcrrera, dec. z. lib. viii. c. .
'1'orrib o, AMS,

ready to err. In examining the works of people P 0 0 K
whole advances in improvement are nearly the VI'i
fine with our ow:', we view h11m with a critical,
and often witl a: jealous eve. Whereas, 'swhea
conscious of our own fuplriori ly, we iurvry tie
arts of nations colmaratively rude, we are alto-
nifled at works execuht d by them unldr such ma-
iifelt ii difdvantag3 s, and in the warmth of our
admiiration, arc apt to reprclent tlhem as proluc-
tions more finl id than tiie re:ll; are. To the
influence of this illulion, w!thout luppoinrG any
intention to deceive, \we :Mly inmputeie th eagge-
ration of bo:ne Spanifli authors, in their accounts
of the Mxican arts.

IT is not from thcfe dclCiptionsI, but froml con-

fidering such fpccimens of their arts as are itil
preserved, that we nmuti decide coiinctrii n tleir
degree of merit. As tlhe ship in which Cortes
font to Charles V. the most curious l)odc.i&ons
of tihe M/xicanl arifans, wh'c1 we.re coli 'dt d by
the Spaniards when they fii'ft pillaged th.' em-
pire,' vws taken by a Fr.znnh corf.tir , the re-
mains of their inmnaily n: lets nu rnero'i; tlih:
thcfe of the Perlvialns. \Vllnher any of their
works with feathers, in i::mtl. ti ,; of paint :2., )e
still extalt in Spain, I have not !eirnbcl; but na-
ny of their ornaments in toli and f lver, as v'cll
as various ultn fls empli,),d iln Co'Tn:on life, are
de:-ofitl in thl maIni ficett ca1'in.t of natur;!
and artif ial produtions, lI ::cy oea:.' l l,,' tile
kin1, of Spain; and 1 am i'i'r:'nd hv p rC).s on
wlolf. juidgment and tlita J can r.l , tliit t!l lc
bal, ted eflbrts of t'i .ir art are uti:nut!i rdprferm-
.ltions of corn:nmo o!.jcc,, or very courlf i mailcs
of tle Irman and Iimi animal [rmis, d ltilitc
of grace and propriety l'. 'The juilncls of thli'c

* Relac. de Cort. Ramlur. iii. 2z)4, F. i See NOTE I.ilr.

obcrva .oris

B O O K observations is confirmed by infpeaing the wood-

VII. en prints or copper plates of their paintings, which
""~ have been published by various authors. In them

every figure of men, of quadrupeds, or birds, as
well as every representation of inanimated nature,
is extremely rude and aukward. The hardett
Egyptian ile, stiff and imperfect as it was, is more
elegant. The scrawls of children delineate ob-
jecs almost as accurately.

BUT however low the Mexican paintings may

be ranked, when viewed merely as works of art,
a very different Rfation belongs lo them, when
confidered as the records of their country, as
historical monuments of its policy and tranfac-
tions; and they become curious as well as inte-
refling objects of attention. Tile noblest and
most beneficial invention of which human inge-
nuity can boast, is that of writing. But the first
essays of this art, which hath contributed more
than all others to the improvement of the species,
were very rude, and it advanced towards perfec-
tion slowly, and by a gradual progrefflon. W\hcn
the warrior, eager for fame, wvifhcd to tranfinit
forne knowledge' of his .xpklits to succeeding
ages; when the gratitude of a people to their so-
vereign prompted them to hand down an account
of his beneficent deeds to pofiLrity; the firt mnc-
lhod of accomplifhirli this, that seems to have
occurred to them, was to delineate, in the bcft
manner they could, figurs reprefentng the ac-
tion of which they were solicitous to preferv-, the
memory. Of this, which has very properly been
called pi:ltrr-'w itrlg *, we find traces among fomenc
of the moilt fvage tribes of America. Whei :t
leader returns from the field, he flrips a tree of its
bark, and with red paInt scratches upon it tome
uncouth figures, which represent the order of his

marcl,
* Divine Legal, of Mofcs, iii. 73.

march, the number of his followers, the enemy B O K
whom he attacked, tile scalps and captives which VII.
he brought home. To those simple annals he trusts '
for renown, and footlies hirnfelf with hope that
by their means he (hall receive praise from the
warriors of future times ~*.

COM' ARED with tholr aukward eflays of their

savage countrymen, the paintings of the Mexicans
may be confidered as works of compnfition and
design. They were not acquainted, it is irue, with
any other method of recording tranfld,,ions than
that of delineating the o!)jcfts which they wished
to represent. Eut they coud exhibit a more com-
plex series of events in progrellive order, and
describe, by a proper difpjfil;uon of figures, the
occurrences of a king's reign from his acceflion
to his death; the progrels of an infant's educa-
tion from its birth until it attained to thc years
of maturity; the different recompences and marks
of distinction conferred upon warriors, in pro-
portion to the exploits which they had performed.
Some singular specimens of tlhis picture-vr;ting
have been preserved, which are jul,;y confider.d
as the most curious monuments of art brought
from the New \Vorld. The mcft valuable of thl-k
was publishcd by Purchas in fixty-fix plates. It is
divided into three parts. The first contains the
history of tle M..xican empire under its t'-n mo-
narchs. The lccond is a tribult-roil, reprf nt-
ing what each conquered toxn p aid into tile royal
treasury. Tlhetllirclis a cod;: of their inifitutions,
domestic, political, and miilit:ry. Anot'i r fpc-
cimen of Mexican painting lh.s b-cn I':lililhcd in
tllirty-two plates, by the pr.'f t arihbifhop of(
Toledo. To both are anncxe..d full expl;ina-

tion

* Sir W. JolhnFon Philof. Tranfnd. vol. !xili p. 1 t3. Mewr.
de lia 1-onta . ii. 191. Lafitau, MIleius lec ': v.. iJ. 4J.

287

B O O K tion of what the figures were intended to repre.

VII. sent, which was obtained by the Spaniards from

Indians well acquainted with their own arts. The
flyle of painting in all these is the fame. They
represent th nIs, not words. They exhibit images
to the eye, not ideas to the understanding. They
may, therefore, be confidered as the earliest and
most imperfeCt essay of men in their progress to-
wards discovering the art of writing. The dc-
feets in this mode of recording tranfa&ions mufi
have been early felt. To paint every occurrence
was, from its nature, a very tedious operation;
and as affairs became more complicated, and events
multiplied in any society, its annals must havt:
swelled to an enormous bulk. Besides this, no
objees could be delineated but those of sense ; the
conceptions of the mind had no corporeal form,
and as long as picture-writing could not convey an
idea of these, it must have been a very impcritc
ait. The necessity of improving it must have
roused and sharpened invention, and tlhe humnia
mind holding the fame course in the New World
as in tle Old, miight have advanced by the fame
fuccfflive lleps, first from an atual pictute t(o the
plain hieroglyphic ; nxt, to the allegorical symbol,
lhen to the arbitrary charatcer; until, at lenrtl,,
an alphabet of letters u as difiovered, capable
of cxprefiing all the variety of combinations o!
found employed in fpeeclh. In the paintings ol1
the Mexicans we, accordingly, perceivc, tlh;
this prrgrtes was begun among themn. Upon an
attentive infpcction of the platcs, which I !hce
mentioned, we may ojf:rve some approacli to
the plain or simple hicrnglyphlic, where fomc
principal part or circumi-tance in the fulbjit' is
made no (land for the lwhole. In the annals of
their kings, publifled by Punrlhas, tlh towns con-
quered by each arc uniformly reprcfcnted in the

flInc

fame manner by a rude delineation of a house; BOOK
but in order to point out the particular towns VIl.
-which submitted to their victorious arms, pecu-
liar .emblems, fometiines .natural objects, and
sometimes artificial figures, are employed. In the
tribute-roll, published by the archbishop of Tole-
do, the house, which was properly the picture of
the town, is omitted, and the emblem alone is
employed to represent it. They seem even to
have made some advances beyond this, towards
the use of the more figurative and fanciful hiero-
glyphic. In order to describe a monarch, who
had enlarged his dominions by force of arms,
they painted a target ornamented with darts, and
placed it between him and those towns which he
subdued. But it is only in one instance, the nota-
tion of numbers, that we diecern any attempt to
exhibit ideas which had no corporeal form. Theyr
had invented artificial marks, or figzs of convn-
tion, for this purpose. By means of thefc, they
computed the years of the kings reigns, as well
as the amount of tribute to be paid into the royal
treasury. The figure of a circle represented unit,
and in small numbers, the computation was made
by repeating it. Larger numbers were expressed
by a peculiar mark, and they had such as denot-
ed all integral numbers from twenty to eight
thousand. The short duration of their empire
prevented the lMexicans from advancing farther'
in that long course which conducts men from the
labour of delineating real objects, to the simplicity
and cafe of alphabetic writing. Their records,
notwithfianding rome dawn of such ideas as might
have led to a more perfect style, can be confidered
as nothing more than a fpccics of piuire-writing,
Co far improved as to mark their superiority over
thie savage tribes of America, but flill so def'edive
as to prove that they had not proceeded farbe-

VoL. II. U yondl

289

$ o 0 K yond the firIf stage in that progress which must be

vII. completed, before any people can be ranked among

polished nations *

Their mode THEIR mode of computing time may'be con-
of comput- fidered as a more decisive evidence of their pro-
ing time.  . . rn ,. . , . '

grefs in improvement. They divided their year
into eighteen months, each confining of twenty
days, amounting in all to three hundred and sixty.
But as they observed that the course of the fun
was not compleated in that time, they added five
days to the year. These, which were properly
intercalary days, they termed fJipernninerwaiy or
w fie; and as they did not belong to any month,
no work was done, and no sacred rite performed
on them; they were devoted wholly to feltivity
and pastime t. This near approach to philofophi-
cal accuracy is a remarkable proof that the Mexi-
cans had bestowed some attention upon inquiries
and speculations, to which men in a very rude slate
never turn their thoughts.

paa indi- SUCH are the most firiking particulars in the
caiing a manners and policy of the Mexicans, which exhi-
gr.tr i'ni- bit them to view as a people considerably refined.
vilization. From other, circumtfances, one is apt to fufrpec

that their charater and many of their inffitntions,
did not differ greatly from those of the other inha-
bitants of America.

Th;ei wars LIKE the rude tribes around them, the Mex-
contilcl icons were incefflnlly engaged in war, and the
nDUfmeloci-notives which prompted them to hoftilitv fecm

to have been the lame. They fought, in order to
gratify their vengeance, by fliedding the blood
of their enemies. In battle they were chiefly in-
tent on taking prisoners, and it was by the numn-

ber

S. Acofia, lib. vi, c. z.
(r See NOTE, LIV.

ber of these that they estimated the glory of vic-B O 0 K
tory. No captive was ever ranlbmed or spared. VII.
All were sacrificed without mercy, and their flesh --
devoured with the fame barbiArous joy as among
the fiercest favagcs. On some occasions it rose
to even wilder exceilcs. Their principal warriors
covered th'emfe!ves with the skins of the unhappy
vicims which thl;y had fl:in, and danced about
the streets, boasting of their own valour, and
exulting over their enemies*. T-Even in their civil
inflittions we discover traces of that barbarous"
disposition which their system of war intpired.
The four chief con'.' llors of the empire were dif-
tinguifhed by atrocious titles, which could have
been assumed only by a people who delighted in
blood t. This f.rucity of chara(ter prevailed- a-
mong all the nations of New Spain. The Tlaf-
calans, the people of Mechoacan, and other
fiates at enmity with the Mexicans, delighted
equally in war, and treated their prisoners with
the fame cruelty. In proportion as mankind com-
bine in social union, and live under the influence
of equal laws and regular policy, their manners
soften, sentiments of humanity arise, and the
rights of the fpci's come to be undccrtood. The
firrcenefs of war abatcs, and tven while cnga,-
ed in hoftillty, men remember what they owe
one to another. The faivae fights to defiroy,
the citizen to conquer. The former neither pities
nor spares, the latter has acqclired sensibility that
tempers his rage. To this sensibility the Mcxi-
:lans seen to have b.cn 1erfct firangcrs, and
among them war was ca:ried on with lo much of
its original barbarity, that we cannot but fufipe&
t'leir degree of civilization to have been very im-
prfecct.

*U 2 THElR

* Herrera, de,-. . lib. ii. c. 15. Gon. Cliron. c. 2(7.
' See NOTE LV.

BO OK THEIR funeral rites were not less bloody than

VII. those of the most savage tribes. On the death of

Their une- any distinguishcd personage, especially of the em-
ral rites. peror, a certain number of his attendants were

chosen to accompany him to the other world, and
those unfortunate viatims were put to death with-
out mercy, and buried in the fame tomb *.

Their agri- THOU H their agriculture was more extensive
culture im-
perfca. than that of the roving tribes who trufled chiefly

to their bow for food, it seems not to have sup-
plied them with such subsistence as men require
when engaged in efforts of active industry. The
Spaniards appear not to have been struck with any
superiority of the Mexicans over the other people
of America in bodily vigour. Both, according
to their observation, were of such a feeble frame
as to be unable to endure fatigue, and the flrength
of one Spaniard exceeded that of several Indians.
This they imputed to their scanty diet, on poor
fare, sufficient to preserve life, but not to give
firmness to the constitution t. Such a remark
could hardly have been made with respect to any
people furnished plentifully with the necessaries
of life. The difficulty which Cortes found in
procuring subsistence for his finall body of fol-
diers, who were often constrained to live on the
spontaneous producions of the earth, seems to
confirm the remark of the Spanilh writers, and
gives no high idea of the state of cultivation in
the Mexican empire.

A raroer A P R A CT IC r that was universal in New Spain
this. appears to favour this opinion. The Mexican

women gave fuck to their childred for fcveral

years,

H Herrcrn, dec. 3. 1b. ii. c. 18. Gorn. Chron. c. 2o2.
l l Relat. apR .

R MuC ii. 306. A. Herrera, dec. 3. lib. i,.
c. 7. dcc. .. lib. vi. c. 16.

years, and during that time they did not cohabit B O O K
with their husbands *. This precaution against a vII.
burdensome increase of progeny, though neceffa- "
ry as I have already observed, among savages,
who, from the hardships of their condition, and
the precariousness of their fubfitlence, find it im-
poilible to rear a numerous family, can hardly be
supposed to have continued among a people who
lived at ease and in abundance.

THE1 vans extent of the Mexican empire, which Doultscou-

has been confidered, and with jutfice, as the most elli,1lg 1th
decisive proof of a considerable progress in regu- til empire.
lar government and police, is one of those fads in
the history of the New World which seems to
have been admitted without due examination or
sufficient evidence. The Spanish hiflorians, in
order to magnify the valour of their countrymen,
are accufRomed to represent the dominion of Mon-
tezuma as stretching over all the provinces of New
Spain from the North to the Southern Ocean. Eut
a great part of the mountainous country was pof-
fefled by the Ot'ni/i's, a fierce uncivilized people,
who seem to have been the residue of the original
inhabitants. The provinces towards the north and
weft of Mexico were occupied by the ChliC!.h'asi. ,
and other tribes of hunters. None of these re-
cognized the Mexican monarch as their fhperior.
Even in the interior and more level country,
there were several cities and provinces which
had never fubmittzd to the Mexican yoke. Tlaf-
cala, though only twenty-one leagues fiom the
capital of the empire, was an independcnt and
hotlile republic. Cholula, though ltill nearer,
had been fubjeded only a fllort time before the
arrival of the Spaniards. Tepeaca at the ditlancc
* Gom. Chron. c. 2oS. -Herrcra, dtcc. 3. lib. iv. c. 16.

BOO t of thirty leagues from Mexico, seems to have

Vii. been a separate slate, governed by its own laws .

Mechoacan, the'fiontier of which extended within
forty leagues of Mexico, was a powerful kingdom,
remarkable for its implacable enmity to the Mexi-
can namet. By these hostile powers the Mexican
empire was circumscribed on every quarter, and
the high ideas which we are apt to form of it from
the description of the Spanish historians should be
considerably moderated.

Littleintel- IN consequence of this independence oF feve-
mng its e-ral flates in New Spain upon the Mexican empire,
vera pro. there was not any considerable intercourse between
vinces.

its various provinces. Even in the interior coun-
try, not far distant from the capital, there seem
to have been no roads to facilitate the communi-
cation of one diftrit with another; and when the
Spaniards first attempted to penetrate into it, they
had to open their way through forests and marthes i.
Cortes, in his adventrous march from Mexico to
Honduras in 1525, met with obfiructions and ien
dured hardihips little inferior to those with blichl
he must have firuggled in the moRt uncivilized re-
gions of America. In some places, he coe,,l!
hardly force a paftage through impervious woods,
and plains overflowed with water. In others, 1:i
found so little cultivation, that his troops \t''
frequently in danger of perishing by famin'
Such fats correspond ill with the pompous defcril
lion which the Spanish writers give of \Mexican
police and indu'try, and convey an idea of :
country nearly similar to that pofieflcd by tlth In1
dian tribes in North America. Here and tiherl

· * lear.din2,

? I-Ierrera, dec. 2. lib. x. c. r1. 1L. LDi:z. c. i
1' IHerrcin, dec. 3. lib. ii. c. 1o.
t 11. Diaz. c. i66. c. j 16.

a trading or a war-path, as they are called in North B 0 O K
America, led from one settlement to another, Vll.
but generally there appeared no sign of any efta-
blifhed communication, few marks of industry, and
no monument of art.

A NO k-ss firiking proof of this imperfeation Farther

in their commercial intercourse is their want ofprOfofftl"'
money, or fbone universal flandard by which to
estimate the value of commodities. The disco-
very of this is among the fleps of greatcfi confl-
quence in the progr-fs of nations. Until it has
been made, all their tranfaaions mult be so auk-
ward, so cprole, and so limited, that we may
boldly pronounce that they have advanced. but a
little way in their career. The invention of such
a commercial standard is of fich high antiquity in
our hemisphere, and rifes so far beyond the ara of
authentic hiflory, as to appear almofl coeval uith
the exifence of society. The precious metals
seem to have been early employed for this pur-
pose, and from their permanent value, their divi-
fibility, and many other qualities, they are better
adapted to fcrve as a common flandard, than any
other fubfiancc e of which Nature has given us the
command. But in the New World, where thcfe
metals abound monl, the use of them was not
known. The exig,;ncies of rude tribes, or of
monarchies imperfectly civilized, did not call for
it. All thllir commerciial intercolrfe was carried
on by bartkr, and their ignorance of any com-
mon flandard by which to facilitate that exchange
of commodities which contributes so much to-
wards the comforl of life, my be justly menti-
oned as nn evidence of the infant fttae of their po-
licy. But even in tlie New World the inconveni-
ence of wanting some general infirument of com-
merce began to be felt, and some efibrts were

nmale
* Heircia, dec. 3. lib. vii. c. 8.

BO 0 K made towards supplying that defet. The Mex-
vin icans, among whom the number and greatness of

their cities gave rife to a more extended commerce,
than in any part of America, had begun to em-
ploy a common standard of value, which render-
ed smaller tranfaftions much more easy. As cho-
colate was the favourite drink of persons in every
rank of life, the nuts or almonds of cacao, of
which it is composed, were of such universal con-
fumption, that, in their flated markets, these were
willingly received in return for commodities
of small price. Thus they came to be confidered
as the infitrument of commerce, and the value of
.what one wished to dispose of, was estimated by
the number of nuts of the cacao, which he might
exped in exchange for it. This seems to be the
utmoit length which the Americans had advanced
towards the discovery of any expedient for sup-
plying the use of money. And if the want of
it is to be held, on one hand, as a proof of their
barbarity, this expedient for supplying that want,
thould be admitted on the other, as an evidence
no less satisfying, of the superior progress which
the Mexicans had made in refinement and civili-
zation.

Doubts con- IJ such a rude tfate were many of the Mexican
cerning the
fate of provinces when firit visited by their conquerors.
their cities. Even their cities, extensive and populous as they

were, seem rather to be the habitation of men juit
emerging from barbarity, than the residence of
a polishcd people. The description of Tlafeala
nearly resembles that of an Indian village. A
number of low firuggling huts, cfattered about irre-
gularly, according to the caprice of each proprie-
tor, built with turf and stone, and thatched with
reeds, without any light but what they received by
a door, so low that it could not be entered upright *.

In

Herrera, dec. 2. lib. vi. c. x2.
296

In Mexico, though from the peculiarity of its fitua- B 0 0 K
tion, the disposition of the houses was more orderly, VII.
the ftrufture of the greater part was equally mean.
Nor does the fabric of their temples and otherTemple,
public edifices seem to have been such as entitled
them to the high praises bestowed upon them by
many Spanish authors. As far as one can gather
from their obscure and inaccurate descriptions, the
great temple of Mexico, the most famous in New
Spain, which has been represented as a magnifi-
cent building, raised to such a height, that the
ascent to it was by a flair-cafe of a hundred and
fourteen steps, was a solid mass of earth of a
square form, faced partly with flone. Its base on
each fide extended ninety feet, and decreasing
gradually as it advanced in height, it terminated
in a quadrangle of about thirty feet, where were
placed a shrine of the deity, and two altars on
which the viaims were sacrificed *. All the
other celebrated temples of New Spain exacly re-
fembled that of Mcxico t. Such ftru&tures convey
no high idea of progress in art and ingenuity; and
one can hardly conceive that a form more rude
and simple could have occurred to a nation, in its
.first efforts towards erecing any great work.

GREATER skill and ingenuity were dili)!ayed, ind .,'her

if we may believe the Spanish historians, in the P'",,"
houses of the emperor and in thof: of the principal
nobility. There, fime elegance of design was
viible, and a commodious arrangement of the
apartments was attended to. But if buildings cor-
rc ponding to fich descriptions had ever cxifled in
the Mexican cities, it is probable that fiome remains
of theln would till be vifiblV. From the manneir in
which Cortes conduced the si gc of Mlxico,we can,

indeed,
* -Ierrera, dec. 2. lib. vii. c. 17.

-1. See NOT'E LVI.

BO O K indeed, easily account for the total deftrudion of

vII. whatever had any appearance of splendor in that
-,"' capital. But as only two centuries and a half

have elapsed since the conquet[ of New Spain, it
seems altogether incredible; that in a period bo short,
every vefrige of this boasted elegance and grandeur
should have disappeared; and that in none of the
other cities, particularly in those which did not ful-
ser by the defirutive hand of the conquerors, there
are not any ruins, which can be confidered as mo-
numents of their ancient magnificence.

EVEN in a village of the rudest Indians there

are buildings of greater extent and elevation than
common dwelling houses. Those which are dc-
ftined for holding the council of the tribe, and in
which all assemble on occasions of public feilivity,
may be called flately edifices, when compared ith
the reft. As among the Mexicans the diliindion
of ranks was eflabliffied, and property was une qually
divided, the number of difiinguiflled firuAures in
their towns, would of course be greater than in
other parts of America. But these seem not to have
been either so solid or magnificent as to merit these
pompous epithets which some Spanish authors em-
ploy in describing them. It is probable that,
though more ornamented, and built on a larger
scale, they were ereOed with the fame flight mate-
rials which the Indians employed in their commoli
buildings'*, and time, in a space much less than t',',o
hundred and fifty years, may have swept away all
remains of them l-.

FROM this enumeration of fails, it seems, uponl

the whole, to be evident, that the slate of focicty ;in
Mexico was considerably advanced beyond ih:;.

(i'
rr See NOTE LVIL.

.;,See NOTE U\111,

of the savage tribes which we have delineated. B O O K
But it is no less manifest, that with respect to many vu.
particulars, the Spanish accounts of their prcgrets ,
appear to be highly embelliQed. There is not a
more frequent or a more fertile source of deception
in describing the manners and arts of savage na-
tions, or of such as are imperfetly civilized, than
that of applying to them the names and phrases
appropriated to the inflitutions and refinements of
polised life. When the leader of a small tribe, or
the head of a rude community, is dignified with
the title of king or emperor, the place of his refi-
dence can receive no other name but that of his
palace; and whatever his attendants may be, they
must be called his court. Under such appella-
tions they acquire an importance and dignity which
does not belong to them. The illusion spreads,
and giving a false colour to every part of the n.r-
rative, the imagination is ib much carried away
with the resemblance, that it becomes difficult to dif-
cern objects as they really are. The Spaniards,
when they fiift touched on the Mexican coast,
were so much struck with the appearance of at-
tainments in Fpolicy and in the arts of life, far fil-
perior to thole of the rude irib.s with which they
were hitherto acqu inted, that they lfncied they
had at length discovered a civilized people in t!ec
New V\Woril. This comparif:n betv':cn t!'c Xc(-
pie of Mnexico and their uncultivated neigl;b,.;ii,:
they fcemn to have kept coifilanrly in view, and o.'-
firving with adm ilrati,)n many till;s w.hich marked
thl.ir pi')c-cllCin nce, tilcy ellmploy in d icri i.gr
thiir iln)perfi: t a)(iic

'
; tid inf',it arls, filC'c t.rmns .s

are applicable to the inftitu'iois of meln far b,'yon:-
them in improvcncitl. B-3.,j theilt cl:' :t,'i ,c.;
concur in dlttradti'nii from 1i'e ':r.:lit dtii to lte ea.riy
Spanifhl cdtcriptio.1s of lcxica.n maia lem . E','
drawing a parallel bet l.ven tlin-i ;iand ii:ofe o:
people so inch ls civ\il:ed, ihl:y r;i;'.l lh. :i

OV.'W)

B O K own ideas too high. By their mode of describing

VII_ them, they conveyed ideas to others no less exalted

above truth. Later writers have adopted the style
of the original historians, and improved upon it.
The colours with which De Solis delineates the
character of Montezuma, the splendor of his court,
the laws and policy of his empire, are the fame that
he must have employed in exhibiting to view the
monarch and institutions of an highly polished
people.

Bu T though we may admit, that the warm ima-

gination of the Spanish writers has added rome em-
bellilhment to their descriptions, this will not juflify
the decisive and peremptory tone, with which several
authors pronounce all their accounts of the Mexican
power, policy, and laws, to be the fidions of men
who wished to deceive, or who delighted in the
marvellous. There are few historical fats that can
be ascertained by evidence more unexceptionable,
than may be produced in support of the material
articles, in the description of the Mexican conftitu-
tion and manners. Eye-witnesses relate what they
had beheld, men who had resided among the Me-
xicans both before and after the conquefl, describe
inllitutions and. culloms which were familiar to
them, perions of such different profelfions that
obj¢cts muit have presented themselves to their view
under every various afpedt, soldiers, prieils, and
lawyers, all concur in their tftirnony. Had Cortes
ventured to imprfe upon his sovereign, by exhibit-
ing to him a piLture of imaginary manners, there
wanted not enemies and rivals who were quali-
sied to detct his deceit, and who would have re-
joiced in cxpcfing it. But according to the jutl
remark of an author, whose ingenuity has i lut rated,
and whose eloquence has adorned the hiiftory of
America*, this supposition is in itself as iinproba-

ble,
* M. 'Abbe Raynal I-Iit. Philof. & Polit. &c. iii. 127.

ble, as the attempt would have been audacious. 13B0 K
Who, among the destroyers of this great empire v(i.
was so enligltened by science, or so attentive to the W
progress and operations of men in social life, as to
frame a fictitious fy(tem of policy, so well combined
and so confiflent, as that which they delineate, in
their accounts of the Mexican government ? Where
could they have borrowed the idea of many inti-
tutions iii legislation and police, to which, at that
period, there was nothing parallel in the nations
with which they were acquainted ? If here was not,
at the beginning of the sixteenth century, a regular
establishment of pofis for conveying intelligence
to the sovereign of any kingdom in Europe. The
fame observation will apply to what they relate,
with refpeit to the ltructure of the city of Mexico,
the regulations concerning its police, and various
laws established for the adminillration of jullice,
or securing the happiness of the community. Who-
ever is accustomed to contemplate the progrcls of
nations, will often, at very early stages of it, discover
a premature and unexpected dawn of tc(.fe ideas,
which give rife to infiitttions, that are the pride
and ornament of its most advanced period. Even
in a slate as imperf-e.tly poliflied as thle icxicaa
empire, the happy genius of some sagacious ob-
server, excited or aided by circum-tlances unknown
to us, may have introduced infttiltions vw.lch are
seldom found but in focictics highly refined. Blt
it is almofl impofibleh that tlh illit;.rate con:l;uro;s
of tle New World should have fornrsd in any
one instance a conception of cuitoms an.l law\s,
beyond the flanIard of improvement in lleir own
age and countiry. Or if Corts andl his fllovw':rs
had been caplible of this, what in.liuc.zinent ha.l
tlio[L by whom t'iey were (flperl.d d to con:inua
the deception ? Why Ihmuld Corit., or N.ct;!liii,.,

O ,

V T 1 Cl "
a ^ Th X<

T a A / 4r T'T'n T, T A

B 0 K or Acofia, have amused their sovereign or their

VII. fellow-citizens with a tale purely fabulous?
ut V-yuj

IN one, particular, however, the guides whom

we must follow have represented the Mexicans to
be more barbarous perhaps than they really were.
Their religious tenets, and the rites of their worship,
are defcrlbed by them as wild and cruel in an ex-
treme degr :e. Religion, which occupies. no con-
fiderable place in the tlhou'ghts of a savage, whose
conceptions of any fup-rio pow' er are obscure, and
his sacred rites few and {imple, was .ormcd, among
the Mexicans, into a regular system, wIth its com-
plete train of priests, temples, victims, and fefti-
vals. This, of itself, is a clear proof that the tfate
of the Mexicans was very diftfrcnt from that of the
ruder American tribes. But from the extravagance
of their religious notions, or the barbarity of their
rites, no conclusion can be drawn with certainly
concerning the degree of their civilization. For
nations, long after thle!r ideas b:.gn to enlarge, and
their manners to refine, adhere t(. ;', :nms of super-
fiilion, founded on the rude conceptions of early
ages. From tie genius of the Mexican religion,
we may, however, form a mofL jult conclusion
with refpea to'its influence upon the characer of
the people. The aspect of fuperfiitio n

in Mexico

was glomnv nil atrocious. Its divinities were
cloathed with terrcr, and d: li ..tc. in v ngeance.
They were exhibite: to the peop!l u nder de-
testable forms that created horror. Th!e figures
of ser ents, of tygers, and of other diftrluiive
animals, decorated their tcmplhs. Fear was the
only principle that inspired their votaries. Fafls,
morlific.ations, and penances, all rigid, and many
of them excruciating to an extreme degree, were

the

Religion
of the
Mexicans

the means which they employed to appease their B o o K
wrath, and they never approached their altars Vi l.
without sprinkling them with blood drawn from
their own bodies. But, of all offerings, human
sacrifices were deemed the most acceptable. This
religious belief, mingling with the implacable spirit
of vengeance, and adding new force to it, every
captive taken in war was brought to the temple,
was devoted as a victim to the deity, and sacrificed
with rites no less solemn than cruel *. The heart
and head were the portion consecrated to the gods;
the warrior by whose prowess the prisoner had been
seized, carried off the body to feast upon it with his
friends. Under the impreflion of ideas so dreary
and terrible, and accustomed daily to fcen-s of
bloodshed rendered awful by religion, the heart of
man must harden, and be fleeled to every senti-
ment of humanity. The spirit of the Mexicans
was accordingly unfeeling and atrocious. The ge-
nius of their religion so far counterbalanced the in-
fluence of policy and arts, that, notwithflanding
their progress in both, their manners, inf:ead of
foftenin,, became more fierce. To what circum-
fiances it was owing that fuperflition assumed such
a dreadful form among the Mexicans, we have not
fuflicient knowledge of their hifiory to determine.
But its influence is visible, and produced an effect
that is singular in the history of the human species.
The manners of the people in the New World,
who had made the greate-st progress in the arts of
policy, were the mofi ferocious, and the barbarity
of ft)me of their cuftons exceeded even tlofe of
the savage fiat: .

'ri-i empire of Peru boafls of an higher anti- pt*,nfi"o,

quity than that of Mexico. According th t

t ra- an hIigh n-
ditionary accounts colle&ctd by tle Spaniard s it lhad iluit)'

fubfisied

*Cnrt. Relni. np. Raniuf. iii. 240, &c. 1. Diaz, c. 8z.

Acolla, lib. v. c. 13, Hc. -lerrerL , (!cr. 3. lib. ii . c 15, &c.
Goutra Chron. c. C8, &c. 80e NOTCE LX,

3o03

B O 0 K subsisted four hundred years, under twelve fuccef-

VII. five monarchs. But the knowledge of their ancient

fory, which the Peruvians could communicate to
their conquerors, must have been both imperfect
uncertain. and uncertain *. Like the other American nati-

ons, they were totally unacquainted with the art of
writing, and destitute of the only means by which
the memory of patl tranfadions can be preserved
with any degree of accuracy. Even, among people
to whom the use of letters is known, the gera where
the authenticity of history commences, is much
posterior to the introduction of writing. That
noble invention continued long subservient to the
common business and wants of life, before it was
employed in recording events, with a view of con-
veying information from one age to another. But
in no country did ever tradition alone carry down
historic knowledge, in any full continued fiream,
during a period of half the length that the monar-
chy of Peru is said to have subsisted.

Defets in THE tip9s, or knots on cords of different co-
ther re- lours, which are celebrated by authors fond of the
Qoipos. marvellous, as if they had been regular annals of

the empire, imperfectly supplied the place of
writing. According to the obscure description of
them by Acofta t, which Garcila[fo de la Vega has
adopted with little variation, and no improvement,
the quipos seem to have been a device for render-
ing calculation more expeditious and accurate.
By the various colours different olbieds were de-
noted, and by each knot a diflinct number. Thus
an account was taken, and a kind of reoifier kept,
of the inhabitnnts in each province, or ol the several
produtions colle"ted there for public use. But is
there knots howcver varied or combined no imoral or

abilrta
* See NOTE LX.

.1. Isislt. lib. v!. c. 8.

iabfraft idea, no operation or quality of the mindB o o K
could be represented, they contributed little to- VII
wards preserving the memory of ancient events
and inflitutions. The Mexican paintings and sym-
bols, rude as they were, conveyed to them more
knowledge of remote tranfadtions, than the Peru-
vians could derive from their boafled quipos. Had
they been even of more extensive use, and.better
adapted to supply the place of written records, they
perished so generally, together with the other mo-.
numents of the Peruvian ingenuity, in the general
w\reck occasioned by the Spanish conqueit, and the
civil wars subsequent to it, that no acceflion of light
or knowledge comes from them. All the zeal of
Garcilaffo de la Vega for the honour of that race
of monarchs from whom he descended, all the in-
dullry of his researches, and the superior advanta-
ges with which he carried them on, opened no
source of information unknown to the Spanilh au-
thors who wrote before him. In his Roy i Cm.;neii-
t.ies, he confines himself to illufirate what they
had related concerning the antiquities and inllitu-
lions of Peru *; and his illustrations, like their ac-
counts, are derived entirely from the tradition ry
tales current among his countrymen.

VERY little credit then is due to the minute de-

tails which have been given of the exploits, the
battles, the conquefis, and private charaEter of the
early Peruvian monarchs. We can reft upon no-
lliing in their Rtory, as authentic but a few fairlis,
lb interwoven in the system of their religion and
lpolicy, as preterved the memory of them from
bding loft; and upon the description of such
cuifloms and inffitutions as continued in force
at the time of the conquellt, and fell under the

VOL. II. X inmmediate

* Lib. i, c. Io.

B OOK irmmediate observation of the Spaniards. By at-

VII, tending Carefully to there, and endeavouring to

separate them from what appears to be fabulous,
or of doubtful authority, 1 have laboured to form
an idea of the Peruvian government and manners.

Origin of THE people of Peru, as I have already obferv-
their civil ed, had not advanced beyond the rudest form of
policy.

r savage life, when Manco Capac, and his consort

Mama Ocollo, appeared to inftrut and civilize
them. Who these extraordinary personages were,
whether they imported their system of legislation
and knowledge of arts from some country more
improved, or, if natives of Peru, how they ac-
quired ideas so far superior to those of the people
whom they addressed, are circumstances with re-
fpe& to which the Peruvian tradition conveys no
information. Manco Capac and his consort, tak-
ing advantage of the propensity in the Peruvians
to superstition, and particularly of their veneration
for the Sun, pretended to be children of that
glorious luminary, and to deliver their infirutions
in his name and authority. The multitude listened
and believed. What reformation in policy and
manners the Peruvians ascribe to those founders of
their empire, and how, from the precepts of the
Inca and his consort, their anceflors gradually ac-
quired some knowledge of those arts, and some re-
lifh for that indufiry, which render subsistence fe-
cure, and life comfortable, hath been formerly re-
lated. Those bleflings were originally confined
within narrow precints; for the authority of the
firIt Inca did not reach many leagues beyond Cuzco.
But, in process of time, his successors extended their
dominion over all the regions that stretch to tihl

wdel
* Book vi. p. 163, &c.

weft of the Andes from Chili to Quito, eltablifh- B o O K
ing in every province their peculiar policy and re- vli.
ligious institutions.

THE mos singular and flriking circumstance in Founded in

the Peruvian government, is the influence of rcli- religion.
gion upon its genius and laws. Religious ideas
make such a feeble impression on the mind of a
savage, that their effec upon his sentiments and
manners are hardly perceptible. Among the
Mexicans, religion reduced into a regular fyilem,
and holding a considerable place in their public
institutions, operated with conspicuous efficacy in
forming the peculiar character of that people. But
in Peru, the whole system of civil policy was
founded on religion. The Inca appeared not only
as a legislator, but as the mefenger of Heaven.
His precepts were received not merely as the in-
junlmions of a superior, but as the mandates of the
Deity. His race was held to be sacred; and in
order to preserve it diftin&, without being polluted
by any mixture of inferior blood, the sons of Manco
Capac married their own fillers, and no person was
ever admitted to the throne who could not claim it
by fich a pure descent. To those Ch/.;irei.i f ihe
S/n, (for that was the appellation bestowed upon
ail the offspring of the firtl Inca) the people looked
up with the reverence due to beings of a fizperior
order. They were deemed to be under the im-
mediate protection of the deity fiom whom they
*iflued, and by him every order of the reigning
Inca was supposed to be dictated.

FItOM those ideas two consequences resulted. T'wor.
The authority of the Inca, was unlimited and abfo- mlrkal;le

....i~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* ies

r * r~rs clw of

lute, in the mofi extensive meaning of the words. il,.
Whenever the decrees of a prince are cgnfidered as
the commands of the Divinity, it is not only an

X ^ adt

B O OK at of rebellion, but of impiety, to dispute or oppoft

. his will. Obedience becomes a duty of religion;

The abfo- and as it would be profane to controul a monarch
lute pow under ner the guidance of Heaven, and presumptuous

toadvife him, nothing remains but to labmit with
implicit refpee. This rmuft neccefirily be the cf-
feet of every government established on prcten-
sions of intercourse with superior powers. Such
accordingly was the blind fubmiflon which the Pe-
ruviahs yielded to their sovereigns. The persons
of highest rank and greatest power in their domi-
nions acknowledged them to be of a more exaltcd
nature, and in testimony of this, when admitted
into their presence, they entered with a burden
upon their shoulders, as an emblem of their fervi-
tude, and willingness to bear whatever the Inca
was pleased to impose. Among their subjects,
force wes not requisite to second their commands.
Evtry officer entrusted with the execution of them
was revered, and, according to the account of an
intelligent observer of Peruvian manners*, mighi
proceed alone from one extremity of the empire to
another, without meeting opposition; for, on pro-
ducing a fringe from the royal Borla, an ornamen!t
peculiar to the reigning Inca, the lives and fortunes
of the people were at his disposal.

All cires ANOTH ER confcquence of establishing govern-
pnitnall. ment in Peru on the foundation of religion, was,

that all crimes were punished capitally. They
were. not confidered as tranfgreflions of human
laws, but as infilts offered to the Deity. Each,
without an" diftiintion between such as were
flig!i and fc':h.'as were atrocious, called for venge-
ancef and 'outi lL bexpiated only by the blood of
the offcndei. Consonantly to the fame ideas, pu-
nifhment followed the trelpafs with inevitable cer-

tain)y,
* Zarate, lib. i. c. 13.

tainty, because an offence againfi Heaven was BOOK
deemed inch an high enormity as could not be par- vi.
doned *. Among'a people of corrupted morals, _."
maxims ofjuriftrtidence so severe and unrelenting,
by rendering men ferocious and desperate, would
be more apt to hmultiply crimes than to restrain
them. But the PEruvians, of simple manners and
unfuifpicious faith, were held in such awe by this
rigid discipline, that the number of offenders were
extremely finall. Veneration for monarchs, en-
lghltened and direted, as they believed, by the
divinity whom they adored, prompted them to
their duty; the dread of punilhmenr, wwhich they
were taught to confider as unavoidable vengeance
infliced by offended Heaven, withheld them from
evil.

THE system of fuperflition on which the Incas Mnil(iigniu

ingrafted their pretensions to such high authority, " thetr lc
was of a genius very different from that eftabliflled
among the Mexicans. Manco Capac turned the
veneration, of his followers entirely towards na-
iural objects. The Sun, as the great source of light,
ofjoy, and fertility in the creation, attracted their
principal homage. The Moon and Stars, as co-
opleraling with him, were entitled to secondary ho-
nours. Wherever the propensity in the human
mind to ackno wledge and to adore some fulpcrior
power, takes this direclion, and is employed in con-
telnplating the order and bencficence that really
cxift in nIlmure, the fipirit of filerltitiol is mild.
Wherever imaginary beings, created by the fancy
and the fears of men, are iflppofed to preside in
nature, and become the oibjecs of v orfllip, super-
Itilion always affiumes a wildcr and more atrocious
form, Of the latter we have an example among

the
* Vega, lib. ii. c. 6,

0 0 K the Mexicans, of the former among the people of
VI. Peru. They had not, indeed, rhade such progress

' in observation or inquiry, as to have attained jull

conceptions of the Deity; nor was there in their
language any proper name or appellation of the
Supreme Power, which intimated that they had
formed any idea of him as the Creator and Gover-
nor of the World *. But by directing their vene-
ration to that glorious luminary, which, by its
universal and vivifying energy, is the best emblem
of divine beneficence, the rites and obfervanccs
which they deemed acceptable to him were inno-
cent and humane. They offered to the Sun a part
of those producions which his genial warmth had
called forth from the bosom of the earth, and reared
to maturity. They sacrificed, as an oblation of
gratitude, some of the animals who were indebted
to his influence for nourishment. They presented
to him choice fpecimenls of those works of inge-
nuity which his light had guided the hand of man
in forming. But the Incas never fained his altars
with human blood, nor could they conceive that
their beneficent father the Sun would be delighted
with such horrid victims t. Thus the Peruvians,
unacquainted with those barbarous rites which ex-
tingu'h sensibility, and suppress the fe lings of
nature at the fight of human sufferings, were form-
ed, by ihle spirit of the fuperflition which they had
adopted, to a national character more gentle than
that of any people in America.

til,,,- I'r s influence operated even upon their civil infii-
vli i,! c,, t utions, and tended to correct in them any thing that

vwas advcrfe to gentleness of charactr. The domini-
io of the Incas, though the most absolute of all
dcipctifirms, was mitigated by its alliance with reli-

gion.
'I Acoila, lib. v. c. 3.

.t See NOTE LX1.

gion. The mind was not humbled and depressed B 0 0 K
by the idea of a forced fubjeaion to the will of a VI1.
superior; obedience, paid to one who was believed V
to be cloathed with divine authority, was willingly
yielded, and implied no degradation. The fove-
reign, conscious that the fubmillive reverence of
his people flowed from their belief of his heavenly
descent, was continually reminded of a di.fti;ntion
which prompted him to imitate that beneficent
power which he was supposed to represent. In
consequence of those impreflions, there hardly oc-
curs in the traditional hiflory of Peru, any inflance
of rebellion againfi the reigning prince, and,
among twelve successive monarchs, there was not
one tyrant.

Ev E.N the wars in which the Incas engaged, were and use on

carried on with a spirit very different from that oftheirmili-
other American nations. They fought not, like try e.
savages, to defiroy and exterminate; or, like the
Mexicans, to glut ,blood-thirfly divinities with hu-
man sacrifices. They conquered, in order to re-
claim and civilize the vanquished, and to diffuse
the knowledge of their own institutions and arts.
Prisoners seem not to have been exposed to the in-
fults and tortures, which were their lot in every
part of the New World. The Incas took the
people whom they subdued under their protection,
and admitted them to a participation of all the ad-
vantages enjoyed by their original fubjets. This
practice, so repugnant to American ferocity, and
resembling the humanity of the most polifled na-
tions, must be ascribed, like other peculiarities
which we have observed in the Peruvian manners,
to the genius of their religion. The Incas, confi-
dering the homage paid to any object but the hea-
venly powers which they adored, as impious, were
fond of gaining proselytes to their favourite sys-

tem.

B O K ,tern. The idols of every conquered province were

Vl. carried in triumph to the great temple at Cuzco*,

and placed there as trophies of the superior power
of the divinity who was the protector of the em-
pire.' The people were treated with lenity, and
.infitruted in the religious tenets of their new maf-
ters t, that the conqueror might have the glory of
having added to the number of the votaries of his
father the Sun.

Peciuliar THE tIate of property in Peru, was no less fin-
state of pro- gular than that of religion, and contributed, likc-

wife, towards giving a mild turn of character to
the people. All the lands capable of cultivation
were divided into three ihares. One was confc-
crated to the Sun, and whatever it produced was
applied towards the eretion of temples, and fur-
nifhing what was requisite towards celebrating the
public rites of religion. The other belonged to
the Inca, and was set apart as the provision made
by the community for the support of government.
The third and largest hare was reserved for the
maintenance of the people, among whom it was
parcelled out. No person, however, had a right of
exclusive property in the portion allotted to him.
He pofficffd it only for a year, at the expiration of
which a new division was made in proportion to
the rank, the number, and exigencies of each fa-
mily. All those lands were cultivated by the joint
indufiry of the community. The people, fium-
moned by a proper officer, repaired in a body to
the fields, and performed their common tafl<, hile
forgs and musical infrurnents cheered them to

Fr .a:of their labour :[. By this singular difiribution of ter-
,i.. ritory, as well as by the mode of cultivating it, the

idea of a common interest, and of mutual fubfcr-

vieny

* IIetrcra, dec. 5. lib. iv. c. 4. Veng. lil. v. c. 1z
t I-leriella, lhrc 5. lb. iv. c. 8. . I-crlerra, .ec.
5.lib. iv. c. z. Vega, lib, . c. 5.

viency was continually inculcated. Each indivi- BOOK
dual felt his connecion with those around him, VIi.
and knew that he depended on their friendly aid for
what increase he was to reap. A state thus con-
ftituted may be confidercd as one great family, in
which the union of members was so complete, and
the exchange of good offices To perceptible, as to
create fironger attachment, and to bind man to
man in closer intercourse, than filbfilled under any
form of society cftablifhed in America. From this
resulted gentle manners, and mild virtues un-
known i'n the savage slate, and with :vhich the
Mexicans were little acquainted.

BUT though t!e infiitutions of the Incas were incl,1a!ity

so framed as to fitrengthen the bonds of afdettion"' ',"."'
among their lubdjcts, there was great inequality in
their condition. The diifinction of ranks w\.s
filly established in Peru. A great body of the
inhabitants under the denomination of Ynm, t o;-:s,
\ere held in a state of servitude. Their garb and
houses were of a form different fronm tlofe of frce-
men. Like the 'T/imnews of Mexico, they w-re:
employed in carrying burdens, and in plcrfcrm iw
every other work of drudgery *. N.xt to tlhrn in
rank, were such of the people as were frecc, hut
diflinguiLhed by no cfficial or hereditary honour'.
Above them were raised, tliofi wholl tlh SIpani-
ardscall )Ortj !cs, from the orll ancnls wiorn n

nl tlir

cars. Thley formed what may l, denoninalcd ti'c
order of nobles, and in peace, as well ;s w;\r,
held every ofice of power r

or (rultl ''. A1 tle

head of all were the childrenl of (lie S.in who, by
llicir high dercent, ann peculiar privilegcs, were

as

I-LcrCrei, (dec. 5. lih. iii. c. li. ib. x. c. 8. l tcr
r'ia, dcc. 5. lb. iv. c. i.

B O O Kas much exalted above the Orejones as these were

V1. elevated beyond the people.

Stte of Su c a forri of society, from the union of its
,mt.i members, as well as from the difinuion in their

ranks, was favourable to progress in the arts.
But the Spaniards, having been acquainlted with
the improved state of various arts in Mexico, feve
ral years before they discovered Peru, were not i)
much firuck with what they observed in the latter
country, and describe the appearances of ingenuity
there with less warmth of admiration. The Peru-
vians, nevertheless, had advanced far beyond the
Mexicans, both in the neceflary arts of life, and
in such as have some title to the name of ele-
gant.

Improved IN Peru, agriculture, the art of primary neceilitv
state of a- prm
grL,ulure. in social life, was more extensive, and carried on

with greater skill than in any part of America.
The Spaniards in their progress through the coun-
try, were so fully supplied with provisions of every
kind, that in the relation of their adventures we
meet with none of those dismal scenes of distress
occasioned by famine, in which the conquerors of
Mexico were so often involved. The quantity of
foil under cultivation was not left to the discretion
of individuals, but regulated by public authority
in proportion to the exigences of the community.
Even the calamity of an unfruitful season was but
little felt, for the produtl of the lands conf(cratcd
to the Sun, as well as those set apart for the Inc.,
being deposited in the 'an.b'sc,'r public flore-
houses, it remained there as a stated provision for
times of scarcity *. As the extent of cultivalion
was determined with such provident attention to

the

Zarate, lib. i. c. 14. Voga, lib. i. c. 8.

St4
411

the demands of the fiate, the invention and indus- B O K
try of the Peruvians were called forth to extraordi- vl
nary exertions, by certain defects peculiar to their -
climate and foil. All the vast rivers that flow from
the Andes take their course eastward to the Atlantic
Ocean. Peru is wattered only by some Ereams
which rush down from the mountains like torrents.
A great part of the low country is sandy and bar-
ren, and never refreihed with rain. In order to
render such an unpromising region fertile, the in-
genuity of the Peruvians had recourse to various
expedients. By means of artificial canals, con-
ducted, with much patience and considerable art,
from the torrents that poured across their country,
they conveyed a regular supply of moisture to their
fields*. They enriched the foil by manuring it
with the dung of sea-fowls, of which they found
an inexhaustible flore on all the islands scattered
along their coasts t. In describing the cufloms of
any nation thoroughly civilized, such pratices
would hardly draw attention, or be mentioned as
in any degree remarkable, but in the hiflory of the
improvident race of men in the New World, they
are entitled to notice as singular proofs of indufiry
and of art. The use of the plough, indeed, was
unknown to the Peruvians. They turned up the
earth with a kind of mattock of hard wood I. Nor
was this labour deemed to degrading as to be de-
volved wholly upon the women. Both sexes joined
in performing this neceifary work. Even the
children of the Sun set an example of industry, by
cultivating a field near Cuzto with their own
hands, and they dignified this frincion by de-
nominating it their triumph over the earth §.

Zarate, lib. i. c. 4. Vega, lib. v . . . & 24. f- Acolln ,

l. iv, c. 37 Vega, lib. v. c. . See N OT E LX!I.
t Zarate, lib. i. c. 8. 5 Vega, lib. v. c. 2.

B O0 K THE superior ingenuity of the Peruvians is oh-

vious, likewise, in the conftrut&ion of their houfrs

Their and public buildings. In the. txlenfive pl]n!is
buildings, which firetch along the Pacific Ocean, .where tih=

sky is perpetually serene, and the climate mild,
their houses were very properly of a fabric o:-
tremely flight. But in the higher regions, whl-,ce
rain falls, where the vicifitude of seasons is n(,\, n,
and their rigour felt, they were construEed r, it!
greater solidity. They were generally of a fquara
form, the walls about eight feet high, built wvith
bricks hardened in the fun, the door low and strait,
and without any windows. Simple as these firuc-
tures were, and rude as the materials may feein to
be of which they were formed, they wcre so dura-
ble, that many of them it ill ifbfift in different parts
of Peru, long after every monument that might
have conveyed to us any idea of the domeitic slate
of the other American nations has vanished from
the face of the earth. But it was in the templt.
conf&crated to the Sun, and in the buildings detlin-
cd lor the rfidclnce of tllir monarchs, that lhe
Pern\ ians displaycd the utmofl extent of their ,.rt
and contrivance. The descriptions of them by
flch ol the Spanifli writeis as had an opportunity
of contemplating litin while, in foime meafture,
entire, nmight hai: appeared highly c-xagg:clatld,
if the ruli's 'hicli fill remain, did not vouch llhe
truth! of th'ir r(lations. These ruins of sacrcd or
r.y;ul buildings are found in every province of tihe
cm)olirc, and by their frequency de'monstrate Ilh't
Illcy are monuments of a powerful popli, \1'i)
mull have fiillb ned, during a period of tbme e:-
tent, in a ilate of no inconsiderable improven, ant.
They appear to have been edifices various in t1 cir
dhnienfions. Some of a moderate size, mm;!ly o'l
immense etcnt, all remarkab!e for solidity, ;ind
recellbling each other in the fiile.of architc&riuc.
Tlhe temple of Pachacamac, togethcr with a p;l;ac

us
3!6

of the Inca, and a ftotrlfs, were so connected to- B 0O iR
geth:r as to soir olne great firuture, above half a ,\'.
.iag'lb in crcLit. in tlli;s prodigious pile, the fame

i

figular taite irn building is confpiciouis as in other
v;orks ,of the Peruvians., As they were unac-
quaintcd with the use of th2 pulley, and other me-
chanical powers, and could not elevate the large

)sones and bricks which they emploh ed in building
to any confiderablc h .ight, the walls of this edifice,
in whicll they leem to have made their grcateft
effort towards magnificence, did not rifi above
twelve feet fro.n the ground. Though they had
not discovered the ufc of mortar or of any other
cementin building, the bricks or ftonts were joined
with so much nicety, that the seams can hardly )e
difccrnetd . The apartinents, as far as the dit-
tribution of them can be traced in the ruins, were
ill-dillofied, and afforded little acconlmod(ltion.
There was not a single window in any part of the
building; and as no light could enter but by the
door, all the apartments of largcll dimenfiin mult
either have been perfedly dark, or illulniialcd by
some other means. EBt with all thcfe ind Imanny
other imperfetions that might he mentioned, ii
thcir art of building, thle works of thl; P.- rivians
which ltill remain mull be coniderlc, :Ss flupen-
dous efforts of a people unacquainted with th: use
of iron, and convey to us an high idl a of thle po\w-
er pofl'lted by their ancient monarchs.

Ti-i s i., however, were not lhe noblest or most h

Th'i pilr,-

if:full works of the Inn:as. The l) grv.al rolis
from Cuzco to Qn;to, exten lin; :nin art nnint,?rrlllt-
c Ifret el abo)ve si v lire

i le. ulces, are entitlf lt )
still hliilcherraif. Tile on: was c nlicti :.'l ' throuih

tlhe
* See NOTE LXtlI.

B0 K the interior and mountainous country, the other

VII. through the plains on the sea-coast. From the
WsYV language of admiration in which some of the early

writers express their astonishment when they firfi
viewed those roads, and from the more pompous
descriptions of later writers, who labour to support
some favourite theory concerning America, one
might be led to compare this work of the Incas to
the famous military ways which remain as monu-
ments of the Roman power: But in a country
where there was no tame animal except the Llama,
which was never used for draught, and but little as
a beast of burden, where the high roads were seldom
trod by any but a human foot, no great degree of
labour and art was requisite in forming them.
The Peruvian roads were only fifteen feet in
breadth *, and in many places so slightly formed,
that time soon effaced every vestige of the course
in which they ran. In the low country little more
seems to have been done, than to plant trees or to
fix poits at certain intervals, in order to mark the
proper route to travellers. To open a path through
the mountainous country was a more arduous talk.
Eminences were levelled, and hollows filled up,
and, for the preservation of the road, it was fenced
with a bank of turf. At proper distances, Tlanibs,
or storehouses, were ereaed for the accommodati-
on of the Inca and his attendants, in their progress
through his dominions. From the manner in
which the road was originally formed. in this high-
er and more impervious region, it has proved more
durable; and though, from the inattention of the
Spaniards to every object but that of working their
mines, nothing has been done towards keeping it
in repair, its courle may still be traced ''. Such

*Cieca, c. 6. + Xerez, p. 189. 19t. Zarnte, lib

i. c. 13, c4. Vega, lib. ix, c. 13. Bvuguer Voyage, Ir
105. Ulloa Entretencmiientos, p. 365.
ji8

was the celebrated road of the Incas; and even B 0O K
from this description, diverted of every circum- VII
fiance of manifest exaggeration, or of suspicious
aspet, it mull be confidered as a firiking proof of
an extraordinary progress in improvement and po-
licy. To the savage tribcs of America, the idea of
facilitating communication with places at a distance
had never occurred. To the Mexicans it was
hardly known. Even in the most civilized coun-
tries of Europe, men had advanced far in refine-
ment, before it became a regular object of national
police to form such roads as render intercourse com-
modious.

THE formation of those roads introduced ano- "td blidge.

thcr improvement in Peru equally unknown over
all the reft of America. In its course from south to
north, the road of the Incas was interf,:ted by all
the torrents which roll from the Andes towards the
Western Ocean. From the rapidity of their course,
as well as from the frequency and violence of their
inundation, these were unnavigable. Some expe-
dient, however, was to be found for patsing them.
The Peruvians, from their unacquaintance with
the use of arches, and their inability to work in
wood, could not con'lruct bridges either of flone
or timber. But neceflity the parent of invention
suggested a device which supplied that defect.
They formed cables of great flrength, bv twisting
together some of the pliable withs or osiers, with
which their country abounds; fix of which they
firetched across the fiream parallel to one anothefr,
and made them salt on each fide. Tlhefe they
bound firmly together by interweaving tmialler
ropes so close, as to form a com-npact piece of net-
work, which, being covered witj bra.nches of trees

and

B o O K and earth, they. passed along it with tolerable fecu.

VI. rity *. Proper persons. were appointed to attend

at each bridge, to keep them in repair, and to afli!t
passengers t. In the level country, where the rivers
became deep and broad and still, they are paied in
Balza', or floats; in the conftrution, as well as
navigation of which, the ingenuity of the Peruvi-
ans appears to be far superior to that of any people
in America. These had advanced no farther in
naval tiill than the use of the paddle, or oar; the
Peruvians ventured to raise a maf, and spread a
fail, by means of which their Balzas not only went
nimbly before the wind, but could veer and tack
with great celerity t.

Mole of NOR were the ingenuity and art of the Peruvi-
reniiOg fil- ans confined solely to objects of essential utility.

They had made some progress in arts, which may
be called elegant. They possessed the precious
metals in greater abundance than any people ol
America. They obtained gold in the fame manner
with the Mexicans,-by searching in the channels ol
rivers, or wafling the earth in which particles of it
were contained. But in order to procure filvcr,
they exerted no inconfidcrable degree of lkill ani
invention. They had not, indeed, attained lth
art of finking a shaft into the bowels of the carth,
and'penetrating to the riches concealed there; but
they hollowed deep caverns on the banks of river!,
and the fides of mountains, and emptied such veins
as did not dip suddenly beyond their reach. I1
other places, where the vein lay near the surface,
they dug pits to such a depth, that the person who
worked below could thow out the ore, or hand it
up in baskets §. They had difovered the:.It

of

* NOTE LX1V. - Sancho ap. Ram. iii. 367, B. Za'

rate, lih. i. c 1i.. Vega, lib. iii. c. 7, 8. H lerier i, dec. '
lih. iv. c. 3, 4, t Ulloa Voy. i. 176, &c. § 1annluli0,
iii. 414, A.
320

of smelting and refining this, either by the simple B o OK
application of fire, or where the ore was more VII.
stubborn, and impregnated with foreign fubflan- rv"
ces, by placing it in small ovens or furnaces on
high grounds, so artificially conftruded, that the
draught of air performed the function of a bellows,
a machine with which they were totally unac-
quainted. By this simple device, the purer ores
were smelted with such facility, that the quantity
of silver in Peru was so considerable, that many of
the utensils employed in the functions of common
life were made of it *. Several of those vessels
and trinkets are said to have merited no small de-
gree of estimation, on account of the neatness of
the workmanship, as well as the intrinsic value of
the materials. But as the conquerors of America
were well acquainted with the latter, but had
scarcely any conception of the former, most of
them were melted down, and rated according to
their weight and fineness in the division of the
spoil.

IN other works of mere curiosity, or orna- Wor oof

ment, their ingenuity has been highly celebrated. elegance
Many of these have been dug out of the Guacas,
or mounds of earth, with which they covered the
bodies of the dead. Among there are mirrors of
various dimensions, of hard shining stones highly
polished; vessels of earthen ware of different
forms; hatchets, and other instruments, rome
destined for war, and others for labour. Some
were of flint, some of copper, hardened to such a
degree by an unknown process, as to supply the
place of iron on several occasions. Had the use
of there tools formed of copper been general, the
progress of the Peruvians in the arts might have

VOL. II. Y been

* Acoflt, lib. iv. c, 4, 5. Vega, p. i. lib. viii. c. 25.
Ullka Entretcn. 258.

32r

B o K been such, as to emulate that of more cultivated'

Vli. nations. But either the metal was so rare, or the
L^ " operation by which it was, hardened so tedious,

that their infirunments of copper were few, and so.
extremely fmally that they seem to have been
employed only in' flighter works. But even to
such a circumscribed use of this irnperfet metal,
the Peruvians vrere indebted for their superiority
to the other people of America in various arts *.
The fame observation, however, may be applied
to them, which I formerly made with refpea to
the arts of the Mexicans.. From several. fpeci-
mens of Peruvian utensils and: ornaments, which:
are deposited in the royal cabinet in; Madrid, and,
from some preserved in different colletions in.
other pa.ts of Europe, I have reason to believe,
that the workmanship is more to be admired on-
account of the rude tools with which it was exe-
cuted, than on account of its intrinsic neatness
and elegance; and that the Peruvians, though the
most improved of all the Americans, were not
advanced beyond the infancy of arts.

Animnper- BUT notwithitanding si many circumflances,
^tioCnV which seem to indicate an high degree of improve-

ment in Peru, others occur that suggest the idea
of a society still in the fir.tI iages of its transition.
from barbarism- to civilization. In all the do-

No ities minions of the Incas, Cusco was the only place
butCufco. that had the appearance, or was entitled to!

tle name of a city. Every where else,. the
people lived moltly in detached habitations, dif-
peried over the country, or, at- the utmofi, set-
tled together in small villages t. But until men
are brought to assemble in numerous bodies,
and incorporated in such close union, as to
enjoy frequent intercourse, and to feel mu-
tual dependence, they never imbibe perfectly

the

* Ullon Vov. torn i. 381, &c. Id. Entrcten. p. 369, &c.
i' Zaratc, lib. i. c, 9. lerrcra, dec. v. lib. vi. c 4.

the spirit, or assume the manners of focialB O K
life. In a country of immense extent, with only Vli
one city, the progress of manners, and the im-
provement either of the necessary or more resin-
ed arts, rhus have been so flow, and carried on
under such disadvantages, that it is more surprising
the Peruvians should have advanced so far in
refinement, than that they did not proceed far-
ther.

IN consequence of this slate of imperfec union, No perfea

the reparation of profeflions in Peru was not so separation of
complete as among the Mexicans. The less proso
closely men alrociate, the more simple are their
manners, and the fewer their wants. The crafts
of common and most necessary use in life do not,
in such a slate, become fb complex or difficult,
as to render it requisite that men should be trained
to them by any particular course of education.
All those profeflions were accordingly exercised by
every Peruvian indiscriminately. None but the
artists, employed in works of mere curiosity or
ornament, conflituted a separate order of men,
or were diftinguiihed from other citizens e.

FROM the want of cities in Peru, another con- Little com-

sequence followed. There was little commercial mcrciai in-
intercourse among the inhabitants of that great em-ercou
pire. The activity of commerce is coeval with
the foundation of cities; and from the moment
that the members of any community fettle in
considerable numbers in one place, its operations
become vigorous. The citizen must depend for
fubfiflence on the labour of those who cultivate
the ground. They, in return, mufl receive some

Y z equivalent.

Acofna, lib. vi. c. 15. Vtga, lib. v. c. 9. Herrera,
lec. v. lib. iv. c, 4.

, B 0 O K equivalent. Thus mutual intercourse is establish-

vI". ed, and the produtions of art are regularly ex-

changed for the fruits of agriculture. In the towns
of the Mexican empire, fiated markets were
held, and whatever could supply any want or de-
fire of man was an objet of commerce. But in
Peru, from the singular mode of dividing pro-
perty, and the manner in which the people were
fettled, there was scarcely any species of com-
merce carried on between different provinces *,
and the community was less acquainted with that
ative intercourse, which is at once a bond of uni-
on, and an incentive to improvement.

Unwarlike BUT the unwarlike spirit of the Peruvians was
spirit of the
Peiuvjans, the most remarkable, as well as the moit fatal

defect in their characters -. The greater part of
the rude nations in America, opposed their invad-
ers with undaunted ferocity, though with little
conduc or success. The Mexicans maintained
the itruggle in defence of their liberties, with
such persevering fortitude, that it was with diffi-
culty the Spaniards triumphed over them. Peru
was subdued at once, and almost without refi-
ance; and the most favourable opportunities of
regaining their freedom, and crushing their op-
pressors, were loft through the timidity of the
people. Though the traditional history of the
Peruvians represents all the Incas as warlike
princes, frequently at the head of armies which
they led to vitory and conquest; few symptoms
of such a martial spirit appear in any of their ope-
rations subsequent to the invasion of the Spaniards.
The influence, perhaps, of those inflitutions

which

* Vega, lib. vi. c. 8. - Xerez, 190. Sancho
ap. Ram. iii. 372. Hcrrera, dec, v. lib. i. c. 3.

which rendered their manners gentle, gave their s O O K
minds this unmanly softness; perhaps, the con- Vll.
slant serenity and mildness of the climate may
have enervated the vigour of their frame; per-
haps, some principle in their government, un-
known to us, was the occasion of this political
debility. Whatever may have been the cause,
the fad is certain, and there is not an inflance in
hiitory of any people so little advanced in refine-
ment, so totally dellitute of military talents and
enterprize. This character hath descended to their
poiterity. The Indians of Peru are now more
tame and depressed than any people of America.
The feeble spirits, relaxed in lifeless inaftion,
seem hardly capable of any bold or manly exer-
tion.

BUT, besides those capital defecs in the poli-

tical fRate of Peru, some detached circumfiances
and facts occur in the Spanish writers which
discover a considerable remainder of barbarity in
their manners. The fame cruel cuftrm, that
prevailed in some of the most savage tribes, sub-
lifted among the Peruvians. On the death of the
Incas, and of other eminent persons, a confider-
able number of their attendants were put to
death, and interred around their Guaca, that they
might appear in the next world with their former
dignity, and be served with the fame refpet.
On the death of Huana-Capac, the most power-
fiul of their monarchs, above a thouland vitims
were doomed to accompany him to the tomb *.
In one particular, their manners appear to have
been more barbarous than those of most rude
tribes. Though acquainted with the use of fire
in preparing maize, and other vegetables for food;
They devoured both flesh and fifl perfetly raw,

and
*Acona, lib, v. c ,.

o 0 ; and aitonifhed the Spaniard, with a pra&ice re-
vn. pugnant to the ideas of all civilized people *.

Qtherdomi- Bur though Mexico and Peru are the poffefi-:
Spi in ons of Spain in the New World, which, on ac-
Americn. count both of their ancient and present state,

have attracted the greatest attention; her other
dominions there are far from being inconfidera-
ble, either in extent or value. Most of them
were reduced to fubjetion during the firfI part of
the fixteeenth century, by private adventurers,
who fitted out their small armaments either in
-lifpaniola, or in Old Spain, and were we to fol-
low each leader in his progress, we mould disco-
ver the fame daring courage, the fame persevering
ardour, the fame rapacious desire of wealth, and
the fame capacity of enduring and surmounting
every thing in order to attain it, which distinguish-
ed the operations of the Spaniards in their greater
American conquests. But, inltead of entering
into a detail, which, from the similarity of the
tranfations, would appear almost a repetition of
what has been already related, I shall satisfy my-

A brief fur- felf'with fuch'a view of those provinces of the
y''"th"m. Spanish empire in America, which have not hi-

therto been mentioned, as may convey to my
readers a more adequate idea of its greatness, ser-
iility, and opulence.

Such as are I BE GIN with the countries contiguous to tile
theepir two great monarchies, of whose hifiory and in-
of Mexico. Ritutions I have given some account, and flal

then briefly describe the other diffrics of Spanifi
America. Thejurifdidtion of the viceroy of New
Spain extends over fexeral provinces, which were
not 'ubjeEt to the dominion of the Mexicans.

cinalon and The countries of Cinaloa and Sonora, that firetcl
onora, . along the cait fide of the Vermilion sea, or gul

ci

* Xcrcs,p. 19o. Sancbo, Ram. iii. 372. C. IJT ir:
dec. v. lib. i. c. 3.

of California, as well as the immense kingdoms B 0 0 K
of New Navarre and New Mexico, which bend Vli.
towards the weft and north, did not acknowledge
the sovereignty of Montezuma, or his predeccirors.
These regions, not inferior in magnitude to all the
Mexican empire, are reduced' more or leTs com-
pletely under the Spanifli yoke. The extend

.

through the most delightful part of the temperate
zone; their foil is, in general, remarkably fertile,
and all their produ.ions, whether animal or se-
getable, are mort perseEt in their kind. They
have all a communication either with the Pacific
Ocean, or with the Gulf of Mexico, and are wa-
tered by such rivers as not only enrich them, but
may become subservient to commerce. The
number of Spaniards fettled in those vast coun-
tries, is indeed extremely small. They may be
said to have subdued, rather than to have occupied
them. But if the population in their ancient efia-
blilhments in America shall continue to increase,
they may gradually spread over those difrids, of
which, however inviting, they have not hitherto
been able to take poffeflion.

ONE circemJlance may contribute to tlie speedy Rai min,.

population of some difirifts. Very rich mines
both of gold and silver have been discovered in
many of the regions which I have mentioned.
Wherever these are opened, and worked with
success, a multitude of people resort. In order
to supply them with the neceflaries of life, culti-
vation must be increased, artisans of various kinds
must afiemble, and jnduitry as well as wealth
will be gradually diftfued. Many examples of
this have occurred in different parts of America
since they fell under the dominion of the Spani-
ards. Populous villages and large towns have
liddenly arisen amidit uninhabited wilds and
mountains; and the woiking of mines, though
ar from being the moR. proper oje'.l towards

which

3 2'

B o 0 K which the attention of an infant society should

VII. be turned, may become the means both of pro-

moting useful activity, and of augmenting the

A ecent number of people. A recent and singular in-
nl remark- fiance of this has happened, which, as it is but lit-

dlry.o tie known in Europe, and may be productive of

great effeEts, merits attention. The Spaniards
fettled in the provinces of Cinaloa and Sonora,
had been long disturbed by the depredations of
some fierce tribes of Indians. In the year I765,
their incursions became so frequent, and so de-
firuEtive, that the inhabitants, in despair, applied
to the Marquis de Croix, viceroy of Mexico, for
such a body of troops as might enable them to
drive those formidable invaders from their places
of retreat in the mountains. But the treasury of
Mexico was so much exhaulted by the vast furms
drawn from it, in order to support the late war
againit Great Britain, that the viceroy could afford
them no aid. The refpeat due to his virtues, ac-
complifhed what his official power could not effet.
He prevailed with the merchants to advance
about two hundred thousand pesos for defraying
the expence of the expedition. The war was con-
ducted by an officer' of abilities; and after being
protraated for three years, chiefly by the difficulty
of pursuing the fugitives over mountains and
through defiles which were almoit impassable, it
terminated in the year 177 I,in the final fubmiflion
of the tribes, which had been so long the object of
terror to the two provinces. In the course of this
service, the Spaniards marched through countriec
into which they seem not to have penetrated be-
fore that time, and discovered mines of fiuch va.
lue, as was altonifhing even to men acquainted
with the riches contained in the mountains of tl(
New World. At Cineguilla, in the province o
Sonora, they entered a plain of fourteen leagulc
in extent, in which they found gold in grains, l

ill
328

the depth of only sixteen inches, of such a size, B O O K
that some of them weighed nine marks, and in VII.
such quantities, that in a short time, with a few
labourers, they collected a thousand marks of
gold in grains, even without taking time to wash
the earth that had been dug, which appeared to
be so rich, that persons of skill computed that it
might yield what would be equal in value to a mil-
lion of pesos. Before the end of the year 1771, Probable
above two thousand persons were fettled in Cine- effeas of
guilla, under the government of proper ma-
giftrates, and the infpeaion of several ecclefi-
aftics. As several other mines, not inferior in
riches to that of Cineguilla, have been discover-
ed, both in Sonora and Cinaloa *, it is probable
that these neglected and thinly inhabited pro-
vinces, may soon become as populous and valua-
ble as any part of the Spanish empire in America.

THE peninsula of California on the other fide California,

of the Vermilion sea, seems to have been less its ate
known to the ancient Mexicans, than the pro-
vinces which I have mentioned. It was discovered
by Cortes in the year 1536 ( See Book V. )
During a long period it continued to be so little
frequented, that even its form was unknown, and
in most charts it was represented as an illand, not
as a peninsula t. Though the climate of this
country, if we may judge from its situation, must
he very desirable; the Spaniards have made finall
progress in peopling it. Towards the close of the
last century, the Jeffiits, who had great merit in
exploring this neglected province, and in ci-
vilizing its rude inhabitants, imperceptibly ac-
quired a dominion over it as complete as that
iwhich they possessed in their millions in Paraguay,

and

S Sec NOTE LXVI.
* See NOTES LMV

B O0 K and they laboured to introduce into it the fame

VII. policy, and to govern the natives by the fame

maxims. In order to prevent the court of Spain
from conceiving any jealousy of their designs and
operations, they seem studiously to have depre-
ciated the country, by representing the climate as
so disagreeable and unwholesome, and the foil as so
barren, that nothing but their zealous desire of
converting the natives, conld have induced them
to fettle there *. Several public-fpirited-citizens
endeavoured to undeceive their sovereigns, and to

bilityof its give them a better view of California; but in
improve- vain. At length, on the expulsion of the Jesuits
iclse from the Spanish dominions, the court of Ma-

drid, as prone at that jun&ure to fufpeft the
purity of the Order's intentions, as formerly to
confide in them with implicit trust, appointed
Don Joseph Galvez, whose abilities have since
raised him to the high rank of minister for the In-
dies, to visit that peninsula. His account of the
country was favourable; he found the pearl fish-
cry on its coasts to be valuable, and discovered
mines of gold of a very promising appearance t.
From its vicinity to Cinaloa and Sonora, it is pro-
bable, that if the population of these provinces
shall increase in the manner which I have supposed,
California .may, by degrees, receive from them
filch a recruit of inhabitants, as to be no longer
reckoned among the desolate and useless difiriCt
of the Spanish empire.
yuatan and ON the eait of Mexico, Yucatan and Hondu-

ras are comprehended in the government of Ney
Spain, though anciently they can hardly be said
to have formed a part of the Mexican empire.
These large provinces, firetching from the Bay of
Campeachy beyond Cape Gracias a Dios, do not,

like

c Venegas Hiti. of California, i. 26.
t Lorcnzano, 3J9, 350,

like the other territories of Spain in the New B 0 0 K
World, derive their value either from the fertility vI1
of their foil, or the richness of their mines, but
they yield in greater abundance, than any part of
America, the logwood tree, which, in dying
some colours, is so far preferable to any other ma-
terial, that the consumption of it in Europe is
considerable, and it has become an article in com-
merce of great value. During a long period, so
European nation intruded upon the Spaniards in
those provinces, or attempted to obtain any share
in this branch of trade. But after the conquest
of Jamaica by the English, it soon appeared what
a formidable rival was now feated in the neigh-
bourhood of the Spanish territories. One of the
first objects that tempted the English, was the
great profit arising fiom the logwood trade, and
the facility of wresting some portion of it from
the Spaniards. Some adventurers from Jamaica Their de,
made the firit attempt at Cape Catoche, the south-
east promontory of Yucatan, and by cutting log-
wood there, carried on a gainful traffic. When
most of the trees near the coast in that place were
felled, they removed to the island of Trift, in
the Bay of Campeachy ; and in latter times, their
principal flation has been in the Bay of Honduras.
The Spaniards, alarmed at this encroachment,
endeavoured by negociation, remonftranccs, and
Open force, to prevent the Englifl from obtaining
any footing on that part of the American conti-
nent. But after firuggling againtl it for more
than a century, the disasters of lail war extorted
from the court of Madrid a reluctant consent to
tolerate this settlement of foreigners in the heart
of its territories '. The pain which this humbling
conceflion occasioned, seems to have fuggeiled a
mnethod of rendering it of little confcquence,

more
* Treaty of Paris, Art. xviii.

B O O K more effectual than all the efforts of negociation

VII. or violence. The logwood produced on the weft
"h' Ccoaft of Yucatan, where the foil is drier, is in

quality far superior to that which grows on marshy
nd revival. grounds where the English are fettled. By en-

couraging the cutting of this, and permitting the
importation of it into Spain without paying any
duty *, such vigour has been given to this declin-
ing branch of commerce, and the logwood which
the English bring to market has funk so much in
value, that their trade to the Bay of Honduras has
gradually declined t since it obtained a legal fanc-
tion; and,it is probable, will foonbe finally aban-
doned. In that event, the provinces of Yucatan
and Honduras will become possessions of confider-
able importance to Spain.

cosa R;ca STILL farther east than Honduras lie the two
ad Vera provinces of Costa Rica and Veragua, which like-

wife belong to the vice-royalty of New Spain;
but both have been so much negleted by the
Spaniards, and are apparently of such small value,
that they merit no particular attention.
Chili. THE most important province depending on

the vice-royalty of Peru, is Chili. The Incas
had established their dominion in some of its fou-
thern diitrits; but in the greater part of the
country, its gallant and high-fpirited inhabitants
maintained their independence. The Spaniards,
allured by the fame of its opulence, early at-
tempted the conquest of it under Diego Almagro;
and after his death, Pedro de Valdivia refurned
the design. Both met with fierce opposition. The
former relinquished the enterprize in the manner
which I have mentioned :. The latter after hav-

ing

* Real Cedula, Campomancs, iii. 145.
1 See NO''E LXVII. t Book vi.

ing given many displays, both of courage and B o o K
military fiill. was cut off with a considerable vIi.
body of troops under his command. Francisco
de Villagra, his lieutenant, by his spirited con-
duOt, checked the natives in their career, and sav-
ed the remainder of the Spaniards from defirusti-
on. By degrees, all the champaign country along
the coast was fubjeated to the Spanish dominion.
The mountainous country is fiill poffeifed by the
Puelches, Araucos, and other tribes of its origi-
nal inhabitants, formidable neighbours to the
Spaniards; with whom, during the course of two
centuries, they have been obliged to maintain
perpetual hostility, suspended only by a few inter-
vals of insecure peace.

THAT part of Chili then, which may properly Excellence

be deemed a Spanish province, is a narrow dif- of its ci-
trit, extending along the coalt from the desert mateand
of Atacamas to the island of Chiloe, above nine
hundred miles. Its climate is the most delicious
of the New World, and is hardly equalled by that
of any region on the face of the earth. Though
bordering on the Torrid Zone, it never feels the
extremity of heat, being screened on the east by
the Andes, and refreshed Irom the weft by cool-
ing fea-breezes. The temperature of the air is
so mild and equable, that the Spaniards give it
the preference to that of the southern provinces
in their native country. The fertility of the foil
corresponds with the benignity of the climate,
and is wonderfully accommodated to European
productions. The most valuable of these, corn,
wine and oil, abound in Chili, as if they had
been native to the country. All the fruits
imported from Europe attain to full maturity
there. The animals of our hemisphere not only
multiply, but improve in this delightful region.
The horned cattle are of larger size than those

of

B O O K of Spain. Its breed of horses surpasses, both in

VII. beauty and in spirit, the famous Andalufian race,
'->,-' from which they sprang. Nor has nature ex-

haufled her bounty on the surface of the eaith
she has fiored its bowels with riches. Valudble
mines of gold, of silver, of copper, and of lead,
have been discovered in various parts of it.

caue of its A COUNTRY distinguished by so many bless-
beingne- ings, we may be apt to conclude, would early
the epanbY become a favourite ltation of the Spaniards, and
ards. must have been cultivated with peculiar predi-

leAion and care. Instead of this, a great part of
it remains unoccupied. In all this extent of coun-
try, there are not above eighty thoufald white
inhabitants, and about three times that number of
negroes and people of a mixed race. The most
fertile foil in America lies uncultivated, and some
of its most promising mines remain unwrought.
Strange as this neglect of the Spaniards to avail
themselves of advantages, which seemed to court
their acceptance, may appear, the causes of it can
be traced. The only intercourse of Spain with
its colonies in the South Sea, was carried on during
two centuries by the annual fleet to Porto-bello.
All the produce of the colonies, were Ihipped in
the ports of Callao, or Arica in Peru, for Pana-
ma, and carried from thence across the isthmus.
All the commodities which they received from the
mother-country, were conveyed from Panama to
the fame harbours. Thus both the exports and
imports of Chili passed through the hands of the
merchants of Peru. These had of course a profit
on each; and in both tranfations the Chilefe felt
their own subordination; and having no direct in-
tercourfe with the parent fiate, they depended
upon another province for the disposal of their
producions, as well as for the supply of fthir
wants. Under such discouragements, popula-

tion

tion could not increase, and indufiry was defii- B 0 K
tute of one chief incitemeat. But now that Spain, VII.
from motives which I {hall mention hereafter, has pto .
adopted a new system, and carries on her corn- its improvc-
merce with the colonies in the South Sea, by ships m"'nt
which go round Cape Horn, a direct intercourse
is opened between Chili and the Mother-country.
The gold, the silver, and the other commodities
of the province will be exchanged in its own
harbours for the manufactures of Europe. Chili
may speedily rife into that importance among the
Spanish settlements to which it is entitled by its
natural advantages. It may become the granary
of Peru, and the other provinces along the Paci-
tie Ocean; it may supply them with wine, with
cattle, with horses, with hemp, and many other
articles for which they now depend upon Europe.
Though the new system has been eitablifhed only
a few years, those effects of it begin already to
be observed *. If it shall be adhered to with any
fleadinefs for half a century, one may venture to
foretell, that population, industry and opulence
will advance in this province with rapid progress.

To the east of the Andes, the provinces of Provinces ao

'Tucuman and Rio de la Plata, border on Chili, T",,ma,
and like it were dependent on the vice-royalty of la Plata.
Peru. These regions of immense extent firetch Northern
in length from north to south above thirteen hun- dii,"oh"
dred miles, and in breadth more than a thousand.
This country, which is larger than most European
kingdoms, naturally forms itself into two great
divisions, one on the north, and the other on the
south of Rio de la Plata. The former compre-
hends Paraguay, the famous miflions of the Je-
filits, and several other diftrits. But as disputes
l1ve long subsisted between the courts of Spain

and
r Campomines, ii. 157.

B OO K and Portugal, concerning its boundaries, which,

VII. it is probable, will be soon finally ascertained,
%_J V-either amicably, or by the decision of the sword,

I chufe to reserve my account of this northern di-
vision, until I enter upon the hitlory of Portu-
guefe America, with which it is intimately con-
neted; and, in relating it, I shall be able from
authentic materials, supplied both by Spain and
Portugal, to give a full and accurate description
of the operations and views of the Jesuits, in
rearing that singular fabric of policy in America,
which has drawn so much attention, and has been
so imperfectly underflood. The latter division
of the province contains the governments of Tu-
cuman and Buenos-Ayres, and to there I shall at
present confine my observations.

view of the THE Spaniards entered this part of America
latter, by the river De la Plata, and though a fucceflion

of cruel disasters befell them in their early attempts
to establish their dominion there, they were en-
couraged to persist in the design, at firfi by the
hopes of discovering mines in the interior coun-
try, and afterwards by the neceflity of occupying
it, in order to prevent any other nation from set-
tling there, and penetrating by this route into their
rich poffeflions in Peru. But except Euenos-
Ayres, they have made no settlement of any
consequence in all the vast space which I have
mentioned. There are, indeed, scattered over
it, a few places on which they have bestowed the
name of towns, and to which they have endea-
voured to add some dignity, by erecting them in-
to bifhopricks; but they are no better than paltry
villages, each with two or three hundred inhabi-
tants. One circumfiance, however, which was not
originally foreseen, has contributed to render this
difirid, though thinly peopled, of considerable iml
portance. The province of Tucuman, together
with the country to the south of the Plata, infleald 0

being
336

being covered with wood like other parts of Ameri- B O 0 K
ca, forms one valt open plain, almoit without a tree. -v-.
The foil is a deep fertile mold, watered by many
streams descending from the Andes, and clothed
in perpetual verdure. In this rich pafiurage, the
horses and cattle imported by the Spaniards from
Europe have multiplied to a degree which almost
exceeds belief. This has enabled the inhabitants
not only to open a lucrative trade with Peru, by
supplying it with cattle, horses, and mules, but
to carry on a commerce no less beneficial, by the
exportation of hides to Europe. From both the
colony has derived great advantages. But its
commodious situation for carrying on contraband
trade, has been the chief source of its prosperity.
While the court of Madrid adhered to its ancient
fyfiem, with refpe&t to its communication with
America, the river De la Plata lay so much out of
the course of Spanish navigation, that interlopers,
almost without any rifque of either being observed
or obftruated, could pour in European manufac-
tures in such quantities, that they not only sup-
plied the wants of the colony, but were conveyed
into all the eastern diftrits of Peru. When the
Portuguese in Brasil extended their settlements to
the banks of Rio de la Plata, a new channel was
opened, by which prohibited commodities flowed
into the Spanish territories, with fill more faci-
lity, and in greater abundance. This illegal
traffic, however detrimental to the parent fiate,
contributed to the increase of the settlement,
which had the immediate benefit of it, and Buenos
Ayres became gradually a populous and opulent
town. What may be the effect of the alteration
lately made in the government of this colony, the
nature of which shall be described in the fibfe-
quent Book, cannot hitherto be known.

VOL. II.

AtL,
z

B OO K ALL the other territories of Spair in the New

VII World, the islands excepted, of whose difeovery
Otc- and redution I have formerly given an account,
Titorie of are comprehended under two great divisions; the
spain. former denominated the kingdom Tierra Firme,

the provinces of which stretch along the Atlantic,
from the eastern frontier of New Spain to the
mouth of the Orinoco; the latter, the New King-
com of Granada, situated in the interior country.
With a Ihort view of these I shall close this part
of my work.
oDtien. To the east of Veragua, the last province sub-

jeet to the viceroy of Mexico, lies the isthmus of
Darien. Though it was in this part of the con-
tinert, that the Spaniards first began to plant co-
lonies, they have made no considerable progress in
peopling it. As the country is extremely moun-
tainous, deluged with rain during a good part of
the year, remarkably unhealthful, and contains
no mines of great value, they would probably
have abandoned it altogether, if they had not
been allured to continue by the excellence of the
harbour of Porto-bello on the one sea, and that of
Panama on the other. These have been called
the keys to the communication between the north
and south sea, between Spain and her most va-
luable colonies. In consequence of this advan-
tage, Panama has become a considerable and
thriving town.. The peculiar noxiousness of its
climate has prevented Porto-bello from increasing
in the fame proportion. As the intercourse with
the settlements in the Pacific Ocean, is now car-
ried on by another channel, it is probable that
both Porto-bello and Panama will decline, when
no longer nourished and enriched by that com-
merce, to which they were indebted for their pro-
fperity, and even their exiflencec

TuB

THE provinces of Carthagena and Santa Mar- B 0 0 K

tha, firetch to the eastward of the isthmus of Da- v r
rien. The country still continues mountainous,Carthagena
but its vallies begin to expand, are well watered, and Sanct
and extremely fertile. Pedro de Heredia fub-Mar"th
jeted this part of America to the crown of Spain,
about the year I532. It is thinly peopled, and
of course ill cultivated. It produces, however, a
variety of valuable drugs, and some precious
tfones, particularly emeralds. But its chief im-
portance is derived from the harbour of Cartha-
gena, the safest and best fortified of any in the
. American dominions of Spain. In a situation so

favourable, commerce soon began to flourish. As
] early as the year 544, it seems to have been a
i town of some note. But when Carthagena was
i chosen as the port in which the galeons should firit

begin to trade on their arrival from Europe, and
to which they were directed to return, in order to
i prepare for their voyage homeward, the com-
merce of its inhabitants was so much favoured by
this arrangement, that it Coon became one of the
A most populous, opulent, and beautiful cities in
America. There is, however, reason to appre-
hend, that it has reached its highell point of ex-
?i altation, and that it will be so far affected by the
change in the Spanifl system of trade with Ame-
rica, which has withdrawn from it the desirable
"visits of the galeons, as to feel at least a temporary
:idecline. But the wealth now collected there,
jmuft find or create employment for itself, and
[Imay be turned with advantage into tome new
channel. Its harbour is so safe, and so conveni-
ently situated for receiving commodities from
'Europe, its merchants have been so long accuf-
tomed to convey these into all the adjacent pro-
vinces, that it is probable they will still retain
this branch of trade, and Carthagena continue to
he a city of great importance.

~1 ~ Z 2 Tn E

339

B O OK THE province contiguous to Santa Martha on

11ii. the east, was first visited by Alonfo de Qjeda, in
en,,zua. the year I499 *; and the Spaniards, on their

landing there, having observed some huts in an
Indian village built upon piles,. in. order to raise
them above the Ragnated water which-covered the
plain, were led to beflow upon it the name of Ve-
nezuela, or little Venice, by their usual propen-
fity to find a resemblance, between what they dif.
covered in America, and the objects which were fa-
miliar to them in Europe. They made some at-
tempts to fettle there, but with little success. The
final reduction of the province was accomplished
by means very different from those to which Spain
was indebted for its other acquisitions in the New
World. The ambition of Charles V often en-
gaged him in operations of such variety and extent,
that his revenues were not sufficient to defray the
expence of carrying them into execution. Among
other expedients for supplying the deficiency of
his funds, he had borrowed large fums from the
Velfers of Augfburgh, the mofi opulent merchants
at that time in Europe. By way of retribution for
these, or in hopes, perhaps, of obtaining a new
loan, lie bestowed upon them the province of Ve-
nezuela, to be held as an hereditary fief of the
crown of Caflile, on condition that within a li-
mited time they should render themselves mailers
of the country, and eftablifl a colony there. Un-
der the direction of such persons, it might have
been expected, that a settlement would have been
established on maxims very different from those of
the Spaniards, and better calculated to encourage
such useful indufiry, as they might have known to
be the only certain source of prosperity and opu-
tence. But unfortunately they committed the
execution of their plan, to some of those soldiers

of

* Book IT.
34o

of fortune with which Germany abounded in the B 0 0 K
sixteenth century. These adventurers, impatient vii.
to amass riches, that they might speedily aban-'v
don a flation which they soon discovered to be
very uncomfortable, initead of planting a colony
that might have cultivated and improved the coun-
try, wandered from difirid to district in search of
mines, plundering the natives with unfeeling ra-
pacity, or opprefling them by the imposition of
intolerable talks. In the course of a few years,
their avarice and exa&iohs, in comparison with
which those of the Spaniards were moderate, de-
solated the province so completely, that it could
hardly afford them fubfifilerce, and the Veilers re-
linquiihed a property, from which the inconfi-
derate conduct of their agents left them no hope
of ever deriving any advantage *. When the
wretched remainder of the Germans deserted Ve-
nezuela, the Spaniards again took poffeflion of it;
but, notwithstanding many natural advantages,
it is one of their moit languishing and unproduc-
tive settlements.

THE provinces of Caraccas and Cumana are Caraccas

the lafi of the Spanish territories on this coast ; but mana.
in relating the origin and operations of the mer-
cantile company, in which an exclusive right of
trade with them has been veiled, I shall hereafter
lhave occasion to confider their Rate and produc-
tions.

THE New Kingdom of Granada is entirely an Newl"tg-

dom of Gria-

inland country of vail extent. This important nada.
addition was made to the dominions of Spain
about the year 5.36, by Sebaltian de Benalcazar
and Gonzalo Ximenes de Qel'hda, two of the
bravest and molt accomplished officers employed

Ill
' Ovie,,,o v Hlignos 1-ill de \exeztcz 'C2 , p. r i ,'.

341

B 0 K in the conquest of America. The former, who

VII. commanded at that time in Q(ito, attacked it
·-'"' from the south the latter made his invasion from

Santa Martha on the north. As the original in-
habitants of this region were farther advanced in
improvement, than any people in America but
the Mexicans and Peruvians *, they defended
themselves with great resolution and good con-
dua. The abilities and perseverance of Benal-
cazar and Quefada surmounted all opposition,
though not without encountering many dangers,
and reduced the country into the form of a Spa-
nifh province,

THE New Kingdom of Granada is so far ele-

vated above the level of the sea, that though it
approaches almost to the equator, the climate is re-
markably temperate. The fertility of its vallies is
not inferior to that of the richet diftriCs in Ame-
rica, and its higher grounds yield gold and pre-
cious 9tones of various kinds. It is not by dig-
ging into the bowels of the earth that this gold is
found ; it is mingled with the foil near the surface,
and separated from it by repeated waffing with
water. This operation is carried on wholly by
negroe slaves; for though the chill subterranean
air has been discovered, by experience, to be so fa-
tal to them, that they cannot be employed in the
deep silver mines, they are more capable of per-
forming the other species of labour than Indians.
As the natives in the New Kingdom of Granada
are exempt from that service, which has wailed
their race so rapidly in other parts of America, it
is remarkably populous. Some diftriEts yield gold
with a profuion no less wonderful than that in the
vale of Cineguilla, which I have formerly menli.
oped, and it is often found in pepitas, or grain:,

whiil:
* B.Iok IV.

which manifest the abundance in which it is pro- B o o K
duced. On a rising ground near Pamplona, fin- VII
gle labourers have collected in a day what was-
equal in value to a thousand pesos *. A late go-
vernor of Santa Fe brought with him to Spain a
lump of virgin gold, eitimated to be worth seven
hundred and forty pounds sterling. But without
founding any calculation on what is rare and ex-
traordinary, the value of the gold usually collect-
ed in this country, particularly in the provinces of
Popayan and Choco, is of considerable amount.
Its towns are populous and flourishing. The num-
ber of inhabitants in almost every part of the
country daily increases. Cultivation and industry
of various kinds begin to be encouraged, and to
prosper. A considerable trade is carried on with
Carthagena, the produce of the mines, and. other
commodities, being conveyed down the great ri-
ver of St. Magdalen to that city. On another
quarter, the New Kingdom of Granada has a
communication with the Atlantic by the river Ori-
noco; but the country which stretches along its
banks towards the east, is little known, and im-
perfectly occupied by the Spaniards.

Piedrahita Hist. del N. Reyno, p. 481. MS. penes me.

T' H K

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HIST O R Y

F
AMERICA.

BOOK VIII.

AFTER tracing the progress of the Spaniards B O K
in their discoveries and conquefis during more V
than half a century, I have conducted them to view ofth
that period when their authority was established poliy and

trade of the

over almost all the vast regions in the New World Spanish co.
still subjed to their dominion. The effeCt of their lonie'-
settlements upon the countries of which they took
possession, the maxims which they adopted in
forming their new colonies, the interior structure
and policy of these, together with the influence of
their progreflive improvement upon the parent
itate, and the commercial intercourse of nations,
are the objects to which we now turn our attenti-
on, and they are no less interetfing than impor-
tant.

THi firfi visible consequence of the efiablifh- Depoplai.
nents made by the Spaniards in America, was the rica the fir

diminution tet of

thcul.

B O O K diminution of the ancient inhabitants, to a degree

VIII. equally astonishing and deplorable. I have al-
~'^^ ready, on different occasions, mentioned the dif-

afirots influence under which the connection of
the Americans with the people of our hemisphere
commenced, both in the islands, and in several
parts of the continent, and have touched upon
various causes of their rapid consumption. Where-
ever the inhabitants of America had resolution to
take arms in defence of their liberty and rights,
many perished in the unequal contest, and were
cut off by-their fierce invaders. But the greatest
desolation followed after the sword was Iheathed,
and the conquerors were fettled in tranquillity.

Causofthis It was in the islands, and in those provinces of
intheifands
and some the continent which firetch from the Gulf of Tri-

ntls of the nidad to the confines of Mexico, that the fatal

effeEts of the Spanilh dominion were first and
most sensibly felt. All those were occupied either
by wandering tribes of hunters, or by such as had
made but small progress in cultivation and indus-
try. When they were compelled by their new
masters to take up a fixed residence, and to apply
to regular labour; when talks were imposed up-
on them disproportioned to their strength, and
were exacted with unrelenting severity; they pof-
sensed not vigour either of mind or of body to
sustain this unusual load of oppression. Dejection
and despair drove many to end. their lives by vio-
lence. Fatigue and famine destroyed more. In
all those extensive regions, the original race of
inhabitants wafted away; in some it was totally
extinguished. In Mexico, where a powerful and
martial people diftinguiflled their opposition to the
Spaniards, by efforts of courage worthy of a better
fate, great numbers fell in the field; and there, as
well as in Peru, still greater numbers perished un-
der the hardships of attending the Spanish armies
in their various expeditions and civil wars, worn

Olll

out with the incessant toil of carrying their bag- B OO K
gage, provisions, and military stores. VIIT.

BuT neither the rage nor cruelty of the Spa-In New

niards were so defirutive to the people of Mexico Prn an"
and Peru, as the inconsiderate policy with which
they eftablilhed their new settlements. The for-
mer were temporary calamities, fatal to indivi-
duals; the latter was a permanent evil, which,
with gradual consumption, wafted the nation.
When the provinces of Mexico and Peru were di-
vided among the conquerors, each was eager to
obtain a diftrit, from which he might expeEt an
inflantaneous recompence for all his services. Bold
adventurers, accuflomed to the carelessness and
diflipation -of"a military life, had neither industry
to carry on any plan of regular cultivation, nor
patience to wait for its flow, but certain returns.
Inltead of fettling in the vallies occupied by the
natives, where the fertility of the foil would have
amply rewarded the diligence of the planter, they
chose to fix their flations in some of the moun-
tainous regions, frequent both in New Spain and
in Peru. To search for mines of gold and silver,
was the chief object of their adivity, The vast
proftpets which this opens, and the alluring hopes
which it continually presents, correspond wonder-
filly with the spirit of enterprize and adventure
that animated the firit emigrants to America in
every part of their conduct. In order to push
firward those favourite projecs, so many hands
were wanted, that the service of the natives be-
came indispensably requisite. They were, accord-
ingly, compelled to abandon their ancient habi-
tations in the plains, and driven in crowds to the
mountains. This sudden transition from the sultry
climate of the vallies, to the chill penetrating air
peculiar to high lands in the torrid zone the fa-

tigru:

O O K tigue of exorbitant labour, scanty or unwholesome
VIIT. nourishment, and the despondency occasioned by
~-,-.a species of opprefion to which they were not ac-

customed, and of which they saw no end, affected
them nearly as much as their less industrious coun-
trymen in the islands. They funk under the unit-
ed pressure of those calamities, and melted away
with almoit equal rapidity *. In consequence of
this, together with the introduction of the small-
pox, a malady unknown in America, and ex-
tremely fatal to the natives t, the number of peo-
ple both in New Spain and Peru was so much re-
duced, that in a few years the accounts of their
ancient population appeared almost incredible J.

uot the an SUCH are the most considerable events and
yftem of causes, which, by their combined operation, con-
poJicy. tributed to depopulate America. Without at-

tending to there, many authors, astonished at the
suddenness of the desolation, have ascribed this
unexampled event to a scheme of policy no less
profound than atrocious. The Spaniards, as they
pretend, conscious of their own inability to occupy
the vast regions which they had discovered, and
foreseeing the impossibility of maintaining their
authority over a people infinitely superior to them-
selves in number, in order to preserve America,
resolved to exterminate the inhabitants, and by
converting it into a defart, endeavoured to secure
their own dominion over it §. But nations seldom
extend their views to objeets so remote, or lay their
plans so deep; and, for the honour of humanity,
we may observe, that no nation ever deliberately
formed such an execrable scheme. The Spanilh

monarchs,

Torquemada, i. 613. t B. Diaz, c. izt.
Herrera, dec. ii. lib. x. c. 4 Ulloa Entreten, zo6.

t Torqule, '65. 642, 63. Se NOTE' LXVIII.
§ Sec NOTE LXIX.
348

monarchs, far from acting upon any such system B O O K
of deftrution, were uniformly solicitous for the VIII.
preservation of their new subjeCts. With Isabella, 'v'J
zeal for propagating the christian faith, and the
desire of communicating the knowledge of truth,
and the consolations of religion, to people destitute
of spiritual light, were more than ostensible mo-
tives for encouraging Columbus to attempt his
discoveries. Upon his success, she endeavoured to
fulfil her pious purpose, and manifeited the mofi
tender concern to secure not only religious in-
firuction, but mild treatment, to that inoffensive
race of men fubjeted to her crown *. Her fuc-
ceffors adopted the fame ideas; and, on many
occasions, which I have mentioned, their autho-
rity was interposed in the most vigorous exertions,
to proteEt the people of America from the oppref-
sion of their Spanish fubjeds. Their regulations
for this purpose were numerous, and often repeat-
ed. They were framed with wisdom, and dic-
tated by humanity. After their poffeflions in the
New World became so extensive, as might have
excited some apprehensions of difficulty in retaining
their dominion over them, the spirit of their regu-
lations was as mild as when their settlements were
confined to the islands alone. Their solicitude to
protect the Indians seems rather to have augment-
ed as their acquisitions increased; and from ardour
to accomplish this, they enacted, and endeavour-
ed to enforce the execution of laws, which ex-
cited a formidable rebellion in one of their colo-
nies, and spread alarm and disaffection through
all the reft. But the avarice of individuals was
too violent to be controuled by the authority of
laws. Rapacious and daring adventurers, far re-
moved from the feat of government, little ;c:-

cuflonme
* Sec NOTE LXX.

B OO K cuflomed to the restraints of military discipline

vIII. while in service, and still less disposed to respect
Luv'J the feeble jurifdiation of civil power in an infant

colony,. despised or eluded every regulation that
set bounds to their exactions and tyranny. The
parent- slate, with persevering attention, issued
edics to prevent, the oppression of the Indians;
the colonists, regardless of these, or trutling to
their distance for impunity, continued to confider,
and treat them as slaves. The governors them-
selves, and other officers employed in the colo-
nies, several of whom were as indigent and rapa-
cious as the adventurers over whom they pre-
fided, were too apt to adopt their contemptuous
ideas of the conquered people; and, instead of
checking, encouraged or connived at their ex-
cesses. The desolation of the New World should
not then be charged on the court of Spain, or be
confidered as the effect of any fyitem of policy
adopted there. It ought to be imputed wholly
to the conquerors and first planters of America,
who, by measures no less inconsiderate than un-
just, counteracted the edi&s of their sovereign,
and have brought disgrace upon their country.

nor the es. WITH fill greater injuflice, have many au-
sea of reli-thors represented the intolerating spirit of the
ton". Roman Catholic religion, as the cause of exter-

minating the Americans, and have accused the
Spanish ecclefiafiics of animating their country-
men to the slaughter of that innocent people, as
idolaters and enemies of God. But the sirs mif-
fionaries who visited America, though weak and il-
literate, were pious men. They early espoused
the defence of the natives, and vindicated their
character from the aspersions of their conquerors,
who, describing them as incapable of being formed
to the offices of civil life, or of comprehending tll
doctrines of religion, contended, that they were

a A lI)-

a subordinate race of men, on whom the hand of B O K
nature had set the mark of servitude. From the VIII.
accounts which I have given of the humane and '-
persevering zeal of the Spanish miflionaries, in
protecting the helpless flock committed to their
charge, they appear in a light which reflets
lustre upon their function. They were ministers
of peace, who endeavoured to wrest the rod from
the hands of oppressors. To their powerful in-
terpofition, the Americans were indebted for eve-
ry regulation tending to mitigate the rigour of
their fate. The clergy in the Spanish settlements,.
regular as well as secular, are fAill confidered by
the Indians as their natural guardians, to whom
they have recourse under the hardships and exac-
tions to which they are too often exposed *.

BUT, notwithstanding the rapid depopulation The nu,

of America, a very considerable number of the be of Indi'
native race fiill remains both in Mexico and Pe- maiing,
ru, especially in those parts which were not ex-
posed to the firit fury of the Spanish arms, or de-
solated by the firit efforts of their industry, fill
more ruinous. In Guatimala, Chiapa, Nicaragua,
and the other delightful provinces of the Mexican
empire that firetch along the south-sea, the race
of Indians is still numerous. Their settlements
in some places are so populous, as to merit the
name of cities t. In the three audiences into
which New Spain is divided, there are at leaf
two millions of Indians; a pitiful remnant, in-
deed, of its ancient population, but such as still
forms a body of people 'uperior in number to that
of all the other inhabitants of this vafi country i.
In Peru several diftriAs, particularly in the king-
domn of Quito, are occupied almost entirely by
Indians. In other provinces, they ore mingled

with

* Sec NOT E LXXI. ' I See N OT E LXXI.
Sec NO ' E LXXIII.

B o o K With the Spaniards, and in many of their fettle-

VIII. ments pratife the mechanic arts, and fill most of

r"'-' the inferior stations in society. As the inhabitants,

both of Mexico and Peru were accustomed to a
fixed residence, and to some degree of regular
indufiry, less violence was requisite in bringing
them to some conformity with the European modes
of civil life. But wherever the Spaniards fettled
among the savage tribes of America, their at-
tempts to incorporate with them have been al-
ways fruitless, and often fatal to the natives. Im-
patient of restraint, and disdaining labour as a
mark of servility, they either abandoned their
original feats, and fought for independance in
mountains and forefis inaccessible to their oppref-
fors, or perished when reduced to a Rate repug-
nant to their ancient ideas and habits. In the
difirits adjacent to Carthagena, to Panama, and
to Buenos-Ayres, the desolation is more general
than even in those parts of Mexico and Peru, of
which the Spaniards have taken most full posses-
sion.

,eneral idea BUT the establishments of the Spaniards in the

ofthepolicy New World, though' fatal to its ancient inhabi-
of Spain in
its coloni. tants, were made at a period when that monarchy

was capable of forming them to best advantage.
By the union of all its petty kingdoms, Spain was
become a powerful fiate, equal to so great an un-
dertaking. Its monarchs, having extended their
prerogative far beyond the limits which once cir-
cumfcribed'the regal power in every kingdom of
Europe, were hardly subjea to controul, either in
concerting, or in executing their measures. In eve-
ry wide extended empire, the form of government
must be simple, and the authority of the sovereign
absolute; tht his resolutions may be taken witl
promptitude, and pervade the whole with undimi-
nifhed force. Such was the power of the Spanill

monarchs,
.352

monarchs, when they were called to deliberate B 0 K
concerning the mode of eflablilhing their domini- vI.
on over the most remote provinces, that had ever
been subjected to any European Itate. In this de-
liberation, they felt themselves under no conftitu-
tional reltraint, and that as independent matiers
of their own resolves, they might issue the edicts
requisite for modelling the government of the new
colonies, by a mere aft of prerogative.

THIS early interposition of the Spanifll crown, Early ter-

in order to regulate the policy and trade of its co- poEition of
lonies, is a peculiarity which distinguishes their therega
progress from that of the colonies of any other
European nation. When the Portuguese, the
English, and French, took poffellon of those re-
gions in America which they now occupy, the
advantages which they promised to yield were
so remote and uncertain, that they were suffered
to firuggle through a hard infancy, almost with-
out guidance or protection from the parent
slate. But gold and silver, the firfl productions
of the Spanish settlements in the New World,
were more alluring, and immediately attraeted
the attention of their monarchs. Though they
had contributed little to the discovery, and almost
nothing to the conquest of the New World, they
inflantly assumed the funtion of its legislators;
and having acquired a species of dominion for-
merly unknown, they formed a plan for exer-
ciing it, to which nothing similar occurs in the
history of human affairs.

THE fundamental maxim of Spanish jurifpru- All po

dence with refpeat to America, is to confiderand proper.
what has been acquired there as veiled in tehe Ycrown
crown, rather than in the slate. By the bull of
Alexander VI. on which, as its great charter,
Spain founded its right, all the regions that had

VOL. II A a been,

353

B O K been, or should be discovered, were beflowed as

vII-. a free gift upon Ferdinand and Isabella. They
'L~ --r- and their successors were uniformly held to be the

universal proprietors of the vast territories, which
the arms of their fubjeets conquered in the New
World. From them, all grants of land there
flowed, and to them they finally returned. The
leaders who conduced the various expeditions, the
governors who presided over the different colo-
nies, the officers of jultice, and the ministers of
religion, were all appointed by their authority,
and removable at their pleasure. The people
who composed infant settlements were intitled to
no privileges independent of the sovereign, or
that served as a barrier against the power of the
crown. It is true, that when towns were built,
and formed into bodies corporate, the citizens
were permitted to elet their own magistrates, who
governed by laws which the community enacted.
Even in the most despotic fiates, this feeble spark
of liberty is not extinguished. But in the cities
of Spanifll America, this jurifdition is merely
municipal, and is confined to the regulation of
their own interior commerce and police. In what-
ever relates to public government, and the gene-
ral interefi, the will of the sovereign is law. No
political poiver originates from the people. All
centres in the crown, and in the officers of its
nomination.

All the new WHEN the conquells of the Spaniards in Ame-
frsin rica were completed, their monarchs, in forming
fitiacd l

to the plan of interior policy for their new domnini-

two vice.
rya. ons, divided them into two immense govern-

ments, one subject to the viceroy of New Spain,
the other to the viceroy of Peru. Thejurifditio)n
of the former extended over all the provinces be-
longing to Spain in the northern division of the
American continent. Under that of the latter,

ss
*`C

was comprehended whatever she possessed in South B O O K
America. This arrangement which, from the VIII.
beginning, was attended with many inconveni-
encies, became intolerable when the remote pro-
vinces of each viceroyalty began tq improve in in-
dufiry and population. The people complained
of their fubjetion to a superior, whose place of
residence was so diflant, or so inacceflible, as al-
most excluded them from any intercourse with the
feat of government. The authority of the vice-
roy over diftrits so far removed from his own eye
and observation, was unavoidably both feeble
and ill-direted. As a remedy for those evils, a
third viceroyalty has been etiablifhed in the pre-
sent century, at Santa F6 de Bogota, the capital
of the new kingdom of Granada, the jurifdi&lion
of which extends over the whole kingdom of
Tierra Firme, and the province of Quito *. Those Their pow-
viceroys not only represent the person of their "''
sovereign, but possess his regal prerogatives within
the precinEts of their own governments, in their
utmost extent. Like him they exercise iipreme
authority in every department of government,
civil, military and criminal. They may preside
in every tribunal. They have the iole right of
nominating the persons who hold many offices of
the highest importance, and the occasional privi-
lege of supplying such as are in the royal gift, un-
til the fucceflor appointed by the king flall arrive.
The external pomp of their government is suited
to its real dignity and power. Their courts are
formed upon the model of that at Madrid, with
horse and foot guards, a household regularly efta-
blifhed, numerous attendants, and cnfigns of com-
mand, displaying filch magnificence, as hardly re-
tains the appearance of delegated authority t.

Aa 2 Bur

*Voy. dc. Ullk, i. 23. 2z5.
l Ullon, Vo. i. 4 32. ('rJZ. ;.

1BO O K Bu T as the viceroys cannot discharge in person.

VIIi. the fun&ions of a supreme magistrate in every

Cos of part of their extensive jurifdiation, they are aided
Audience, in their government by officers and tribunals fimi-

lar to those in Spain. The conduc of civil affairs
in the various provinces and diitrits, into which
the Spanifl dominions in America are divided, is
committed to magiitrates of various orders and
denominations; some appointed by the king,
others by the viceroy, but all subjet to his com-
mand, and amenable to his jurifdition. The
administration of juitice is veiled in tribunals,
known by the name of Audiences, and formed up-
on the model of the court of Chancery in Spain.
These are eleven in number, and dispense justice
to as many diltri&ts, into which the Spanish domi-
nions in America are divided *. The number of
judges in them is various, according to the ex-
tent and importance of their jurifdiftion. The
flation of a judge in the court of Audience is no
less honourable than lucrative, and is commonly
filled by persons of such abilities and merit, as
renders this tribunal extremely refpeEtable. Both
civil and criminal causes come under their cogni-
zance, and for each peculiar judges are set apart.
Theirjurif- Though it is only in the most despotic govern-

mients, that the Sovereign exercises in person the
formidable prerogative of adminifieringjuitice to
his ilbjeets, and in absolving, or condemning,
consults no law but what is deposited in his own
breast; though in all the monarchies of Europe,
judiciall authority is committed to magiirates,
whole decisions are regulated by known laws and
eflaibliafed forms, the Spanish viceroys have often
atltepted to intrude themlelves into the feat of
jultice, and with an ambition which their difiance
from the controul of a llperior, rendered bold,

have
4 See N 0 T LXX1V.

357

have aspired at a power which their master does B o o K
not venture to assume. In order to check an ufur- v.
pation which must have annihilated juflice and
lecurity in the Spanifll colonies, by hubjeting the
lives and property of all to the will of a single
man, the viceroys have been prohibited, in the
most explicit terms, by repeated laws, from in-
tersering in the judicial proceedings of the courts
of Audience, or from delivering an opinion, or
giving a voice with refpea to any point litigated
before them *. In some particular cafes, in which
any question of civil right is involved, even the
political regulations of the viceroy may be brought
under the review of the court of Audience,
which, in those inflances, may be deemed an in-
termediate power placed between him and the
people, as a conflitutional barrier to circumscribe
hisjurifdition. But as legal refiraints on a per-
son who represents the sovereign, and is clothed
with his authority, are little suited to the genius
of Spanish policy ; the hesitation and reserve with
which it confers this power on the courts of Au-
dience, are remarkable. They may advise, they
may remonltrate, but in the event of a direct col-
lifion between their opinion and the will of the
viceroy, what he determines mufl be carried into
execution, and nothing remains for them, but to
lay the matter before the king and the council of
the Indiest--. But to be intitled to remonfirate,
and inform againfi a person, before whom all
others mufl be silent, and tanely fitbmit to his
decrees, is a privilege which adds dignity to the
courts of Audience. This is farther augmented
by another circumilance. Upon the death of a
viceroy, without any provision of a filcccfbor by

the

Recop. ib,. ii. tit. xv. 1. 35. 38 441 lib. iii. it. iii, .

1 . .
37.

It SolQrz. De jure Ind. lib. iv c. c5 . 3 , o, 41. RCo,). li,.

ii. tit. xv. 1. 36. lib. iii. tit. iii, 1. . 3 Libl. v i,

i .
i. 1. .

B O O K the king, the supreme power is vested in the court

VIII. of Audience resident in the capital of the viceroy-

alty, and the senior judge, assisted by his brethren
exercises all the functions of the viceroy while the
office continues vacant *. In matters that come
under the cognizance of the Audiences, in the
course of their ordinary jurifdiftion, as courts of
justice, their sentences are final in every litigation
concerning property of less value than fix thou-
sand pesos; but when the subjet in dispute ex-
ceeds that fum, their decisions are fubje& to re-
view, and may be carried by appeal before the
royal council of the Indies t.
Council of IN this council, one of the most considerable in

hee. the monarchy for dignity and power, is veiled the

fiupreme government of all the Spaniih dominions
in America. It was firil etfablifhed by Ferdinand,
in the year i 5 1I, and brought into a more per-
feet form by Charles V. in the year 1524. Its
Itp power. jurifdition extends to every department, ecclesia-

ftical, civil, military, and commercial. All laws
and ordinances relative to the government and
police of the colonies originate there, and must be
approved of by two-thirds of the members, be-
fore they are ililed in the name of the king. All
the officers, of which the nomination is reserved
to the crown, are conferred in this council. To
it each person employed in America, from the
viceroy'downwards, is accountable. It reviews
their conduct, rewards their services, and inflicts
the punifimnents due to their malversations t. Be-
fore it, is laid whatever intelligence, either public
or secret, is received from America, and every
icheme of improving the acdminiltration, the po-
lice, or the commerce of the colonies, is rubmitted

* Rcconp. lib. ii. tit. xv. I. i-, &c.
t Rlecop. lil. v tit. xiii. i . 1, &c.

c Recop. lib, ii. iL. ii. 1. i. Z, &c.

to its consideration. From the firit intfitution of B O

O K

the council of the Indies, it has been the conitant VIll.
object of the catholic monarchs, to maintain its au-
thority, and to make such additions from time to
time, both to its power and its splendor, as might
render it formidable to all their fubjeAs in the
New World. Whatever degree of public order
and virtue fill remains in that country, where so
many circumstances conspire to relax the former,
and to corrupt the latter, may be ascribed in a
great meafire to the wife regulations and vigilant
infpetion of this refpeaable tribunal %.

As the king is supposed to be always present in Casa de

Contrata-

his council of the Indies, its meetings are held in cion.
the place where he resides. Another tribunal has
been inflituted, in order to regulate such commer-
cial affairs, as required the immediate and perfo-
ial infpe&ion of those appointed to superintend
them. This is called Casa de L Contratacion, or
the house of trade, and was established in Seville,
to whose port commerce with the New World was
confined, as early as the year 1531. It may be Its func.
confidered both as a board of trade, and as a court tions
of judicature. In the former capacity, it takes
cognizance of whatever relates to the intercourse
of Spain with America, it regulates what commo-
dities should be exported thither, and las the in-
fpection of such as are received in return. It de-
cides concerning the departure of the fleets for the
Weft Indies, the freight, and burthen of the ships,
their equipment, and deflination. In the latter
capacity, it judges with refpedt to every queflion,
civil or commercial, or criminal, arising in confe-
quence of the tranfadions of Spain with Ameri-
ca; and in both there departments, its decilions

ale
V 1Solorz. de Jure Ind. Jib. iv. i. z .

B0 K are exempted from the review of any court but

viii. that of the council of the Indies *

SUCH is the great outline of that fyfrem of go-

vernment, which Spain has eftablilhed in her
American colonies. To enumerate the various
Subordinate boards and officers employed in the
administration of justice, in collecting the public
revenue, and in regulating the interior police of
the country, to describe their different functions,
and to inquire into the mode and effeEt of their
operations, would prove a detail no less intricate
than minute and uninteresting.

Firfobjea, THE first object of the Spanifll monarchs was to
x cluci a Sfecure the productions of the colonies to the pa-
trade. rent Rtate, by an absolute prohibition of any in-

tercourfe with foreign nations. They took pof-
feflion of America by right of conquest, and con-
fcious of the feebleness of their infant settlements,
and aware of the difficulty in establishing their
dominion over such vast regions, or of retaining
so many reluEtant nations under the yoke, they
dreaded the intrusion of firangers; they even
shunned their infpetion, and endeavoured to keep
them at a difiance from their coasts. This spirit
of jealousy and exclusion, which at first was natu-
ral, and perhaps necessary, augmented as their
poffeflions in America extended, and the value of
them came to be more fully underitood. In con-
sequence of it, a system of colonizing was intro-
duced, to which there had hitherto been nothing
similar among mankind. In the ancient world, it
was not uncommon to fend forth colonies. But
they were of two kinds only. They were either
migrations, which served to disburden a Rate of
its ftperfluous fuiljects, when they multiplied too

fitli

R Rccop. lib. ix. tit. i. Vcitia Norte de la Contratacion,

lib. i. c. i.
360

fast for the territory which they occupied: or they B o o K
were military detachments stationed, as garritbns, viii.
in a conquered province. The colonies of rome

r 'n

Greek republics, and the swarms of northern bar-
barians which fettled in different parts of Europe,
were of the first species. The Roman colonies
were of the second. In the former, the connec-
tion with the mother-country quickly ceased, and
they became independent itates. In the latter,
as the disjunction was not complete, the depen-
dence continued. In their American fcttlements, Regulations
the Spanish monarchs took what was peculiar to p.or.th
each, and fludied to unite them. By fending co-
lonies to regions so remote, by eltablifhing in
each a form of interior policy and adminifiration,
under distinCt governors, and with peculiar laws,
they disjoined them from the mother-country. By
retaining in their own hands the rights of legiflati-
on, as well as that of imposing taxes, together
with the power of nominating the persons who
filled every department, civil or military, they fe-
cured their dependence. Happily for Spain, the
situation of her colonies was such, as rendered it
poflible to reduce this new idea into practice. Al-
molt all the countries which fie had discovered
and occupied, lay within the tropics. The pro-
dtltions of that large portion of the globe, are
different from thote of Europe, even in its molt
southern provinces. The qualities of the climate
and of the foil naturally turn the indufiry of those
who fettle there into new channels When the
Spaniards firfi took poffeflion of their domains in
America, the precious metals which they yielded,
were the only object that attracted their attention.
Even when their efforts began to take a better di-
rection, they employed themselves almost wholly
in rearing fihch peculiar productions of the climate,
is, from their rarity or value, were of chief de-
mand in the mother-countlry. Allured by vafi

p'ro spects

36i

B 0 0 K profpeds of immediate wealth, they disdained to

VIII. waste their industry on what was less lucrative, but
'^V^" of superior moment. In order to render it impof-

fible to correat this error, and to prevent them
from making any efforts that might interfere with
those of Spain, the establishment of several species
of manufactures, and even the culture of the vine,
or olive, are prohibited in the colonies *, under
revere penalties t. They muff trust entirely to
the mother-country for the objects of primary ne-
ceffity. Their clothes,-their furniture, their in-
ftruments of labour, their luxuries, and even a
considerable part of the provisions which they
consume, were imported from Spain. During a
great part of the sixteenth century, Spain possess-
ing an extensive commerce and flourishing manu-
factures, could supply with ease the growing de-
mands of her colonies, from her own flores. The
produce of their mines and plantations was given
in exchange for these. But all that the colonies
received, as well as all that they gave, was convey-
ed in Spanish bottoms. No vessel belonging to
the colonies was ever permitted to carry the com-
modities of America to Europe. Even the com-
mercial intercourse of one colony with another,
was either absolutely prohibited, or limited by
many jealous reflridions. All that America yields
flows into the ports of Spain; all that it consumes
must ifue from them. No foreigner can enter
one of its colonies without express permiflion ; no
veflel of any foreign nation is received into their
harbours; and the pains of death, with confifca-
tion of moveables, are denounced againfi every in-
habitant who presume to trade with them t. Thus
the colonies are kept in a ltate of perpetual

pupillage;

Sec N OT F. I XXV\. 1- 13 Ulloa Rctab. dc.

Manrut. &c. p. 206. 1. Reco il, lib. ix. tit. xxvii. Il. . , ,
&c.

pupillage; and by the introdution of this corn- B O O K
mercial dependence, a refinement in policy of vIi.
which Spain set the first example to the European r
nations, the fuprenmacy of the parent itate hath
been maintained over remote colonies during two
centuries and a half.

Su c H are the capital maxims to which the Spa- slow pro-

nifh monarchs seem to have attended in forming gres ofr po-
their new settlements in America. But they could from Eu-
not plant with the fame rapidity that they had de- rope'
firoyed; and, fiom many concurring causes, their
progress was extremely flow, in filling up the im-
mense void which their devailations had occasion-
ed. As soon as the rage for discovery and adven-
ture began to abate, the Spaniards opened their
eyes to dangers and difirelfes, which at first they
did not perceive, or had despised. The numerous
hardlhips with which the members of infant co-
lonies have to struggle, the diseases of unwhole-
some climates, fatal to the conflitution of Euro-
peans ; the difficulty of bringing a country, co-
vered with forests, into culture; the want of
hands necessary for labour in tome provinces, and
the flow reward of industry in all, unless where
the accidental discovery of mines enriched a few
fortunate adventurers, were evils universally felt
and magnified Discouraged by the view of
thele, the spirit of migration was so much damped,
that sixty years after the discovery of the New
World, the number of Spaniards in all its pro-
vinces is computed not to have exceeded fifteen
thousand *.

THE mode in which property was difiributed in DiIourJcn

the Spanifli colonies, and the regulations efla- o'ol,,:
Plifled with reflic t to the tranfinilion of it, whe-

ther
* Sec \(.)Tl LXXVI.

363

Bo o K ther by descent, or by sale, were extremely un-

V111. favourable to population. In order to promote

a rapid increase of people in any new settlement,
property in land ought to be divided into small
shares, and the alienation of it should be rendered
extremely easy *. But the rapaciousness of the Spa-
nifh conquerors of the New World paid no re-
gard to this fundamental maxim of policy; and,
as they possessed power, which enabled them to
gratify the utmost extravagance of their wishes,
many of them seized diitricts and provinces of
vast extent, and held them as enconiendas. By
degrees they obtained the privilege of converting
a part of there into Mayorafgos, a species of fief,
introduced into the Spanish system of feudal jurif-
prudence --, which can neither be divided nor alie-
nated. Thus a great portion of landed property,
under this rigid form of entail, is withheld from
circulation, and descends from father to son un-
improved, and of little value either to the propri-
etor or to the community. In the account which
I have given of the redudtion of Peru, various
examples occur of enormous tracts of country
occupied by some of the conquerors T. The ex-
cefies in other provinces were similar, for as the
value of the lands which they acquired, was ori-
ginally efiimated according to the number of In-
dians which lived upon them, America was in ge-
neral.fo thinly peopled, that only diflrits of great
extent could afford such a number of labourers,
as might be employed in the mines with any prof-
pet of considerable gain. The pernicious es-
feEts of those radical errors in the difiribution and
nature of property in the Spanifl settlements, are
felt through every department of industry, and
may be confidered as one great cause of a pro-

grey

* Dr. Smith's Inquiry, ii. r66.
!I Rtcop. lib. iv.lit, iii. 1. 24. . Book VI.
364

grefs in population so much flower than thatB ° K
which has taken place in better constituted co- ,vit.
lonies *.

To this we may add, that the support of the and the na-

enormous and expensive fabric of their ecclefiafli-tccefifi
cal etablifhment, has been a burden on the Spa- policy.
nifh colonies, which has greatly retarded the
progress of population and indufiry. The pay-
ment of tithes is a heavy tax on indultry; and if
the exaction of them be not regulated and cir-
cumfcribed by the wisdom of the civil magif-
trate, it becomes intolerable and ruinous. But,
inflead of any restraint on the claims of eccle-
fiafiics, the inconsiderate zeal of the Spanish le-
giflators admitted them into America in their full
extent; and at once imposed on their infant colo-
nies, a burden which is in no flight degree oppref-
five to society even in its most improved fate. As
early as the year I501, the payment of tithes in
the colonies was enjoined, and the mode of it re-
gulated by law, and every article of primary ne-
ceflity, towards which the attention of new set-
tiers must naturally be turned, was subjected to
that grievous exaction t. Nor were the demands
ofthe clergy confined to articles of simple culture.
Its more artificial and operose productions; such
as sugar, indigo, and cochineal, were soon de-
clared to be tytheable ; and thus the industry of
the planter was taxed in every stage of its pro-
grefs, from its rudelt essay to its highefl improve-
ment. To the weight of this legal imposition,
the bigotry of the American Spaniards has made
many voluntary additions. From their fond de-
light in the external pomp and parade of religion,
arid from iilperilitious reverence for ecclefiallics
of every denomination, they have befllowed pro-

fuse

See NOTE LXXVI. f't Rccop, lib. i. tit. xvi. l.z.
t Ibid. 1. 3. and .

B 00 K fuse donatives on churches and monasteries, and

VIII. have unprofitably walled a large proportion of
'v' that wealth, which might have nourished and given

vigour to productive labour in growing colonies.

Various op BUT so fertile and inviting are the regions of
ple in the America, which the Spaniards have occupied,
colonies. that notwithfianding all the circumflances, which

have checked and retarded population, it has gra-
dually increased, and filled the colonies of Spain
with citizens of various orders. Among there,
the Spaniards, who arrive from Europe, diiin-
the r.ft." guifhed by the name of Chapetones, are the first in

rank and power. From the jealous attention of
the Spanish court to secure the dependence of the
colonies, every department of consequence is
filled by persons sent from Europe; and in order
to prevent any of dubious fidelity from being em-
ployed, each must bring proof of a clear descent
from a family of Old Chrlflians, untainted with any
mixture of Jewish or Mahometan blood, and never
disgraced by any censure of the Inquisition *. In
such pure hands, power is deemed to be safely
lodged, and almont every public function, from
the viceroyalty downwards, is committed to them
alone. Every person, who by his birth, or re-
fidence in America, may be fufpeted of any at-
tachment or interell adverse to the mother-coun-
try, is the object of difiruft to such a degree, a:
amounts nearly to an exclusion from all offices of
confidence or authority t. By this confpicuout
predilection of the court, the Chapetones are
raised to such pre-eminence in America, that thec
look down with disdain on every other order o
men.

THI

Rcc, p. lib. ix. tit, xxvi. 1. 15 6.

' See NOT' LXXV'III.
366

THE chara&er and state of the Creoles, or de- B o o K

fcendants of Europeans fettled in America, the Viii.
second class of fubjets in the Spanish colonies, Creoles the
has enabled the Chapetones to acquire other ad- second.
vantages, hardly less considerable than those which
they derive from the partial favour of govern-
ment. Though some of the Creolian race are de-
scended from the conquerors of the New World;
though others can trace up their pedigree to the
noblert families in Spain; though many are
possesed of ample fortunes, yet, by the enervat-
ing influence of a sultry climate, by the rigour of
a jealous government, and by their despair of at-
taining that diftintion to which mankind naturally
aspire, the vigour of their minds is so entirely
broken, that a great part of them waite life in
luxurious indulgences, mingled with an illiberal
fuperfiition till more debating. Languid and
unenterprizing, the operations of an active ex-
tended commerce would be to them so cumber-
some and oppreflive, that in almost every part of
America they decline engaging in it. The interi-
or traffic of every colony, as well as its trade with
the neighbouring provinces, and with Spain it-
self, are carried on chiefly by the Chapetones *;
who, as the recompence of their industry, amass
immense wealth, while the Creoles, funk in sloth,
are satisfied with the revenues of their paternal
estates.

FROM this fiated competition for power and Rivl,"lh

between

wealth, between those two orders of citizens, and there.
the various paflions excited by a rivalhlip so inte-
refling, their hatred is violent and implacable.
On every occasion, symptoms of this aversion
break out, and the common appellations which
each bellows on the other, are as contemptuous as

those
' Voy. de Ullon, i. 27, 2 1. Voy. de Frezier, 227.

B O O K those which flow from the molt deep-rooted nati-

VllI. onal antipathy *. The court of Spain, from a re-

finement of difirufiful policy, cherishes those feeds
of difcord,and foments this mutual jealousy, which
not only prevents the two most powerful classes of
its fubjets in the New World from combining
against the parent slate, but prompts each with the
moll vigilant zeal, to observe the motions and to
counteract the schemes of the other.

A mxed THE third class of inhabitants in the Spanish
race forms colonies is a mixed race, the offspring either of
the third or-
dr'ofciti- an European and a negroe, or of an European
zens. and Indian, the former called Mulattoes, the latter

Mestizos. As the court of Spain, solicitous to in-
corporate its new vassals with its ancient fubjets,
early encouraged the Spaniards fettled in America
to marry the natives of that country, several alli-
ances of this kind were formed in their infant co-
lonies t. But it has been more owing to licentious
indulgence, than to compliance with this injunc-
tion of their sovereigns, that this mixed breed has
multiplied so greatly, as to constitute a confidera-
ble part of the population in all the Spanish fettle-
ments. The several flages of descent in this
race, and the gradual variations of shade until
the African. black, or the copper-colour of Ame-
rica, brighten into an European complexion, are
accurately marked by the Spaniards, and each dif-
tinguifhed by a peculiar name. Those of the firfl
generation are now confidered and treated as In-
dians and negroes; but in the third descent, the
charafteriftic hue of the tbrmer disappears; and
in the fifth, the deeper tint of the latter is
io entirely effaced, that they can no longer
be diitinguifhed from Europeans, and are en-

titled

Gagc's Survey, p. 9. Frezier, 2z6.

t Recopil. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. z. Hterrcra, dec. i. lib. v. c. lz

Dec. iii. lib. vii (:. .
368

titled to all their privileges *. It is chiefly by this B O O K
mixed race, whose frame is remarkably robust and VIII.
hardy, that the mechanic arts are carried on, and
other a&ive fundions in society are .discharged,
which the two higher classes of citizens, from
pride, or from indolence, disdain to exercise t.

THE negroes hold the fourth rank among the Negroes

form the

inhabitants of the Spanish colonies. The intro-fourthorder,
dudtion of that unhappy part of the human fpe-
cies into America, together with their services and
sufferings there, shall be fully explained in another
place; here they are mentioned chiefly, in order
to point out a peculiarity in their situation under
the Spanish dominion. In several of their fettle-
ments, particularly in New Spain, negroes are
chiefly employed in domestic service. They form
a principal part in the train of luxury, and are che-
rifhed and careiTed by their superiors, to whose
vanity and pleasures they are equally subservient.
Their dress and appearance is hardly less splendid
than that of their maflers, whose manners they
imitate, and whose paflions they imbibe 5. Ele-
vated by this diflintion, they have assumed flch
a tone of superiority over the Indians, and treat
them with such insolence and scorn, that the anti-
pathy between the two races has become implaca-
ble. Even in Peru,where negroes are more nume-
rous, and employed in field-work as well as do-
meftic service, they maintain their ascendant over
the Indians, and their mutual hatred subsists with
equal violence. The laws have indufitrioufly so-
mented this aversion, to which accident gave rife,
and by moit rigorous injunctions, have endea-

VOL. II. B b voured

*Voy. de Ulloa, i. p. 27. T 1ld pl l . zp 9 .

!'

. V e.
Ilougucr, p. lol. Melnlcz, Teforos, Vcrladcros, i. 31.

CIGage, . 5s6. Voy. de Ulloa, i. 451.

B O O K voured to prevent every intercourse that might

VIiI. form a bond of union between the two races.
- -V- TThus, by an artful policy, the Spaniards derive

strength from that which is the weakness of other
European colonies, and have secured as associates
and defenders, those very persons who elsewhere
are objects of jealousy and terror *.

The Indians THE Indians form the last, and the most de-
foirn the
lat order of pressed order of men in that country, which be-
citizens, longed to their ancestors. I have already traced

the progress of the Spanish ideas with respeCt to
the condition and treatment of that people, and
have mentioned the most important of their more
early regulations, concerning a matter of so much
consequence in the administration of their new
dominions. But since that period to which I have
brought down the history of America, the infor-
mation and experience acquired during two cen-
turies, have enabled the court of Spain to make
such improvements in this part of its American
system, that a short view of the present condition
of the Indians may prove both curious and in-
terefling.

Their prc- BY the famous regulations of Charles V. in
setond I542, which have been so often mentioned, the

high pretensions of the conquerors of the New
World, who confidered its inhabitants as slaves,
to whose service they had acquired a full right of
property, were finally abrogated. From that
period, the Indians have been reputed freemen,
and intitled to the privileges of fubjets. When
admitted into this rank, it was deemed jufi, that
they should contribute towards the support and
improvement of the society, which had adopted

them

Recopil. lib. vii. tit. v. 1. 7. lerrera, dec. viii. lib. vii.

c . iz, Frczier, 24.4.
37°

HISTORY OF AMERICA.

them as members. But as no considerable bene- B O K
fit could be expeEted from the voluntary efforts of VI1.
men, unacquainted with regular indufiry, and '*--
averse to labour, the court of Spain found it ne-
ceffary to fix and secure, by proper regulations,
what it thought reasonable to exadt from them. Tax im-
With this view, an annual tax was imposed upon tPiem o
every male,from the age of eighteen to fifty ; and,
at the fame time, the nature as well as extent of the
services which they might be required to perform,
were ascertained with precision. This tribute va-
ries in different provinces, but if we take that paid
in New Spain as a medium, its annual amount
is nearly four Shillings a head, no exorbitant fum
in countries where, as at the source of wealth, the
value of money is extremely low *. The right of
levying it likewise varies. In America, every In-
dian is either an immediate vassal of the crown,
or depends upon some subject to whom the dif-
triA, in which he resides, has been granted for a
limited time, under the denomination of encormien-
da. In the former cafe, about three-fourths of
the tax are paid into the royal treasury; in the lat-
ter, the fame proportion of it belongs to the
holder of the grant. When Spain firit took pof-
feflion of America, the greater part of it was par-
celled out among its conquerors, or those who firfi
fettled there, and but a small portion reserved for
the crown. As those grants which were made for
two lives only f, reverted fuccellively to the so-
vereign, he had it in his power either to diffuse
his favours by grants to new proporietors, or to
augment his own revenue by valuable annexa-

B b 2 lions.

* Sec NOTE LXXIX. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. v. 1. 42.

-lHclkluyt, vol. iii. p. 461. -1t Recopil. lib. vi. tit. viii.
1.43. Solorz. die Inc. jure, lib. ii. c. 16.

B O OK tions *. Of these, the latter has been frequently

VllI. chosen: the number of Indians now depending

immediately on the crown, is much greater than
in the firit age after the conquest, and this branch
of the royal evenue continues to extend.
Thefcrvicm THE benefit arising from the services of the In-

ma. dians accrues either to the crown, or to the holder

of the encomienda, according to the fame rule ob-
served in the payment of tribute. Those services,
however, which can now be legally exated, are
very different from the servile talks originally im-
posed upon the Indians. The nature of the work
which they must perform is defined, and an equi-
table recompence is granted for their labour. The
Rated services demanded of the Indians, may
be divided into two branches. They are either
employed in works of primary necessity, without
which society cannot subsist comfortably, or are
compelled to labour in the mines, from which the
Spanish colonies derive their chief value and im-
portance. In consequence of the former, they
are obliged to assist in the culture of maize, and
other grain of necessary consumption; in tending
cattle, in ereting edifices of public utility, in
building bridges, and in forming high roads t;
but they cannot be confirained to labour in rai-
sing vines, olives, and sugar-canes, or any fpe-
cies of cultivation, which has for its object the
gratification of luxury, or commercial profit ó.
In consequence of the latter, the Indians are com-
pelled to undertake the more unpleasant tafl, of
extracting ore from the bowels of the earth, and

of

* See NOTE LXXX. + Recopil. liib vi. tit. xiii. 1.
19. Soldrz. tie Ind. jure, ii. lib. i. c. 6, 7, 9.

:t Recopil. lib. vi. tit. xiii. c. 1. 8. Solorz. lib. i. c. 7.
N°. 41, &c.

of refining it by successive procefies, no less un- B O O K
wholesome than operose *. VIII.

THE mode of exacting both there services is The mode

of exaiing

the fame, and is under regulations framed with a thee.
view of rendering it as little oppreflive as poflible
to the Indians. They are called out alternately ir
divisions, termed Mitas, and no person can be com-
pelled to go but in his turn. In Peru, the num-
bei called out mufi not exceed the seventh part of
the inhabitants in any diftrift t. In New Spain,
where the Indians are more numerous, it is fix-
ed at four in the hundred $. During what time
the labour of those Indians, who are employed in
agriculture, continues, I have not been able to
learn §. But in Peru, each Mita, or division, def-
tined for the mines, remains there fix months;
and while engaged in this service, a labourer ne-
ver receives less than two shillings a day, and of-
ten earns more than double that furnm . No Indian
residing at a greater distance than thirty miles from
a mine, is included in the Mita, or division em-
ployed in working it ; nor are the inhabitants, of
the low country exposed to certain destruCtion,
by compelling them to remove from that warm
climate, to the cold elevated regions where mine-
rals abound /i.

THE Indians who live in the principal towns, How go.

are entirely fibjeet to the Spanish laws and ma- v""ne
giftrates; but in their own villages, they are go-
verned by Caziques, some of whom are the de-
fiendants of their ancient lords, others are named
by the Spanith viceroys. Thele regulate the pet-

ty

* Sec N)'TE I.XXXI. I1 R1.conil. l vi. ti. xit ii.1,21.
T lhid(. I. 2. 22 See NOTE I ,.X1XI.
I Ullon intretcn. z65, z i6. qI Rec pil.lil).vi.rit.':ii.l.3.
!l|. Ibid. 1. ), nrI tci:. :. *. 13. Sec NJOTEr .X' .

B 0 0 K ty affairs of the people under them, according to

VIII. maxims of juilice tranfinitted to them by tradi-

V tion from their ancestors. To the Indians, this

jurifdiaion, lodged in such friendly hands, affords
some confolatin ; and so little formidable is this
dignity to their new matiers, that they often allow
it to descend by hereditary right *. For the farther
relief of men bt much exposed to oppreflion, the
Spanish court has appointed an officer in every
diitria, with the title of Proteeor of the Indians.
It is his function, as the name implies, to assert
the rights of the Indians, to appear in their de-
fence in the courts ofjutiice; and by the interpo-
fition of his authority, to set bounds to the en-
croachments and exations of his countrymen 't.
A certain portion of the reserved fourth of the
annual tribute, is destined for the salary of the
caziques and protectors, another is applied to the
maintenance of the clergy employed in the in-
firuation of the Indians T. Another' part seems
to be appropriated for their support, and the pay-
ment of their tribute in years of famine, or when
a particular difridt is affeEted by any extraordina-
ry calamity §. Betides this, provision is made by
various laws, that hospitals shall be founded in
every new settlement for the reception of Indians I).
Such hospitals have accordingly been ereted, both
for the indigent and infirm in Lima, in Cuzco,
and in Mexico, where the Indians are treated with
tendefrefs and humanity T.

Suci-i is the great outline of jurisprudence
and policy by which the Indians are now governed

inl

* Solorz. de jure Ind. lib. i. c. 26. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vii.
't Solorz. lib .

i . c27. p. zoi. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. vi.

t Kecopil. lib. . tit. v. I. 30. Tit. xvi. I. 1i- 15.
§ Recopil. lib. vi. tit. iv. 1.' 3. 11 Recopil. lib. i. tit. iv

1. k,, &c. i \'oy. tde Ullon, i. 429. 509. Churchill, iv
496.
374

in the provinces belonging to Spain. In those re- B O O K
gulations of the Spanish monarchs, we discover no VIII.
traces of that cruel system of extermination, which '
they have been charged with adopting; and if
we admit, that the neceflity of securing fubfiflence
for their colonies, or the advantages derived from
working the mines, give them a right to avail
themselves of the labour of the Indians, we must
allow, that the attention with which they regulate
and recompense that labour, is provident and fa-
gacious. In no code of laws is greater solicitude
displayed, or precautions multiplied with more
concern for the preservation, the security, and the
happiness of the subject, than we discover in the
collection of the Spanish laws for the Indies. But
those latter regulations, like the more early edicts
which have been already mentioned, have too often
proved ineffectual remedies againfi the evils which
they were intended to prevent. In every age, if
the fame causes continue to operate, the fame es-
sets must follow. From the immense distance
between the power entrusted with the execution of
laws, and that by whose authority they are en-
aced, the vigour even of the most absolute go-
vernment must relax, and the dread of a superior
too remote to observe with accuracy, or to punish
with dispatch, mutl insensibly abate. Notwith-
standing the numerous injunctions of the Spanish
monarchs, the Indians frill susser, on many occa-
sions, both from the avarice of individuals, and
from the exactions of the magifirates, who ought
to have protected them; unreasonable tasks are im-
posed; the term of their labour is prolonged, and
they groan under all the inihilts and wrdngs which
are the lot of a dependent people *. From tome
information on which I can depend, fuich op-
preltion abounds more in Peru, than in any other

colony.
0 cN 0 T," i' L N\ XN !V

B O O K colony. But it is not general. According to the

VIIL. accounts, even of those authors who are most ex-
l'i"^-' posed to exaggerate the sufferings of the Indians,

they, in several provinces, enjoy not only ease,
but affluence; they possess large farms; they are
mailters of numerous herds and flocks; and, by
the knowledge which they have acquired of Eu-
ropean arts and industry, are supplied not only
with the neceflaries, but with many luxuries of
life *.

Ecleriali- AFTER explaining the form of civil policy
CtConfitu- in the Spanish colonies, and the Rtate of the vari-
colonics. ouS orders of persons subjet to it, the peculiari-

ties in their ecclefiafiical conflitution merit confi-
deration. Notwithilanding the fuperflitious ve-
neration with which Spaniards are devoted to the
J-Ioly See, the vigilant and jealous policy of Ser-
dinand early prompted him to take precautions
againfi the introduction of the papal dominion

teftraints into America. With this view, he Solicited Alex-
nurtfdhe4on. ander VI. for a grant of the tythes in all the newly-

diicovered countries t, which he obtained on con-
dition of his making provision for the religious in-
itruation of the natives. Soon after, Julius II.
conferred on him the right of patronage, and ab-
lolute disposal. of all ecclefiallical benefices there t.
Both these pontiffs, unacquainted with the value
of what he demanded, bestowed those donations
with an inconsiderate liberality, which their fulc-
ceflors have often lamented, and wished to recall.
In consequence of those grants, the Spanish mo-
narchs have become, in effeCt, the heads of the
American. church. In them the adminilration of
its revenues is veiled. Their nomination of per-
sons to supply vacant benefices is inflantly con-

firmedl

* CGnpc'sSurvcy, p. 8S. 90. io0. 119, &c. t Fulln Ale x.

VI. A. U). I OC , ;ip. S lorz. dc ji Intl . ii. ep.

4 . 'l
jul:i, it. iiso3. lbn!. 50').

firmed by the pope. Thus, in all Spanish Ame- B o o K
rica, authority of every species centres in the vIII.
crown. There no collision is known between
spiritual and temporal jurifdiAion. The king is
the only superior, his name alone is heard, and
no dependence upon any foreign power has been
introduced. Papal bulls cannot be admitted into
America, nor are they of any force there, until
they have been previously examined, and approved
of by the royal council of the Indies * ; and if any
bull should be surreptitiously introduced, and cir-
culated in America without obtaining that appro-
bation, ecclesiastics are required not only to pre-
vent it from taking effect, but to seize all the co-
pies of it, and transmit them to the council of
the Indies t. To this limitation of the papal jurif-
dicion, equally singular, whether we confider the
age and nation in which it was devised, or the
jealous attention with which Ferdinand, and his
fucceirors, have fludied to maintain it in full
force $, Spain is indebted, in a great measure, for
the uniform tranquillity which has reigned in her
American dominons.

THE hierarchy is eflablilhed in America in the Form and

fame form as in Spain, with its full train of arch- c.nddOWf
hilhops, bishops, deans, and other dignitaries. church in
The inferior clergy are divided into three classes, h Spanim
under the denomination of Curas, Dotrinhros, and
MAIfioneros. The iirfl are parifh-priefts in thole
parts of the country where the Spaniards have
itttled. The second have the charge of such dif-
tricts as are inhabited by Indians, subjeCted to the
Spanill government, and living under its pro-
tcdtion. The third are employed in converting

and

i Rclcopii. lib. i. tit. ix. 1. z. and Autas del Confejo de las

Ildias, clxi. Recop. lib. i. tit. vii. I. 55. 1 Rcco)l
lib. i, allira,

377

B o o K and initruting those fiercer tribes, which disdain

VIII. submission to the Spanish yoke, and live in remote

or inacceflible regions, to which the Spanish arms
have not penetrated. So numerous are the eccle-
fiafiics of all those various orders, and such the
profuse liberality with which many of them are
endowed, that the revenues of the church in
America are immense. The superstition of Rome
appears with its utmost pomp in the New World.
Churches and convents there are magnificent and
richly adorned; and on high festivals, the display
of gold and silver, and precious siones, is such
as exceeds the conception of an European *. An
ecclefialtical efiablifhment so splendid and expen-
five, is unfavourable, as has been formerly ob-
served, to the progress of rising colonies; but in
countries where riches abound, and the people
are so. delighted with parade, that religion mufl
assume it, in order to attrat their veneration, this
propensity to ostentation has been indulged, and
becomes less pernicious.

Pernicious THE early inflitution of monasteries in the
effe&tstof Spanish colonies, and the inconsiderate zeal in
litutions. multiplying them, have been attended with con-

sequences more fatal. In every new settlement,
the first objea is to encourage population, and
to incite every citizen to contribute towards aug-
menting the strength and number of the commu-
nity. 'During the youth and vigour of society,
while there is room to spread, and fuifenance is
procured with facility, mankind increase with
amazing rapidity. But the Spaniards had hardly
taken poffelion of America, when, with a moii
preposterous policy, they began to erect convents
where persons of both iexes were fliut up, under
a vow to defeat the purpole of nature, and to

counteraict

* Voy. de Ullon, i. +')O.
378

counteract the first of her laws. Influenced by a B o O K
misguided piety, which ascribes transcendent me- VIlI.
rit to a fiate of celibacy, or allured by the prof-
ped of that listless ease, which, in sultry climates,
is deemed supreme felicity, numbers crowd into
those mansions of sloth and superstition, and are
loft to society. As none but persons of Spanish
extract are admitted into the monasteries of the
New World, the evil is more sensibly felt, and eve-
ry monk .or nun, may be confidered as an aftive
member withdrawn from civil life. The impro-
priety of such foundations in any situation where
the extent of territory requires additional hands to
improve it, is so obvious, that some catholic itates
have expressly prohibited any person in their co-
lonies from taking the monastic vows *. Even
the Spanish monarchs, on some occasions, seem to
have been alarmed with the spreading of a spirit so
adverse to the increase and prosperity of their colo-
nies, that they have endeavoured to check it t.
But the Spaniards in America, more thorough-
iy under the influence of superstition than their
countrymen in Europe, and directed by ecclesias-
tics more bigoted and illiterate, have conceived
such an high opinion of monastic fandtity, that no
regulations can refirain their zeal; and, by the ex-
cels of their ill-judged bounty, religious houses
have multiplied to a degree no less amazing than
pernicious to society :.

IN viewing the state of colonies, where the num- Chara.ter

her and influence of ecclesiastics is so great, the ,,t 'lekiaf.
character of this powerful body is an objet that nil. Amc.
merits particular attention. A considerable part 'ica
of the ecular clergy in Mexico and Peru are na-

tives

+ V)y. de Ullon, ii. 124. f I-Irrern, dec. v. llb. ix.

c. I, 2. Rccop. lib. i. ti. i. I. 1, 2. l'it. iv. c. 2. SJlur-,
lib iii, .
. 3. . See NOTE LXXXV.

B 00 K tives of Spain. As persons accustomed by their

VIIi. education to the retirement and indolence of aca-
' -1' demic life, are more incapable of aftive enter-

prize, and lefe disposed to strike into new paths,
than any order of men, the ecclesiastical adven-
turers by whom the American church is recruited,
are commonly such as, from merit or rank in life,
have little profpe& of success in their own coun-

es the fecu- try. Accordingly, the secular priefis in the New
ja'" World are flill less distinguished than their bre-

thren in Spain, for literary accomplishments of
any species; and though, by the ample provision
which has been made for the American church,
many of its members enjoy that ease and inde-
pendence, which is favourable to the cultivation
of science; the body of secular clergy has hard-
ly, during two centuries and a half, produced one
author whose works convey such useful informa-
tion, or polfefs such a degree of merit, as to be
ranked among those which attraft the attention of
enlightened nations. But the greatest part of the
ecclefiaflics in the Spanish settlements are regulars.
of the regu- On the discovery of America, a new field opened

to the pious zeal of the monastic orders; and,
with a becoming alacrity, they immediately sent
forth millionaries to labour in it. The firfi at-
tempt to instruct and convert the Americans, was
made by monks; and, as lbon as the conqueR of
any province was completed, and its ecclefiafii-
cal eitablifhment began to assume some form, the
popes, as a reward of their service, permitted the
mifionaries of the four mendicant orders, to ac-
cept of parochial charges in America, to perform
all spiritual functions, and to receive the tythes,
and other emoluments of the benefice, without
depending on the jurifdiaion of the bishop of the
diocese, or being subjea to his censures. In con-
sequence of this, a new career of usefulness, as
well as new objects of ambition presentcd them-

I'lvc;s.
380

selves. Whenever a call is made for a fresh fup-'B O O K
ply of miflionaries, men of the most ardent and VIII.
aspiring minds, impatient under the restraint of a
cloister, weary of its insipid uniformity, and fa-
tigued with the irkCome repetition of its frivolous
funEtions, offer their service with eagerness, and
repair to the New World in quefi of liberty and
difinEtion. Nor do they pursue them without
success. The higheR ecclesiastical honours and
most lucrative preferments in Mexico and Peru,
are often in the hands of regulars; and to them
chiefly the Americans are indebted for any por-
tion of science that is cultivated among them.
They are almost the only Spanish ecclefialtics,
from whom we have received accounts either of
the civil or natural history of the various provlnm
ces in America. Some of them, though deeply
tinged with the indelible filperitition of their pro-
feflion, have published books which give a favou-
rable idea of their abilities. The natural and
moral hiitory of the New World, by the Jesuit
Acofta, contains more accurate observations, per-
haps, and more found science, than are to be found
in any description of remote countries published
in the sixteenth century.

BUT the fame disgust. with monaflic life, to Dissolute

which America is indebted for forne infirutors of "manes of
worth and abilities, filled it with others of a very them.
different character. The giddy, the profligate, the
avaricious, to whom the poverty and rigid difci-
pline of a convent are intolerable, confider a mif-
sion to America as a release from mortification and
bondage. There they soon obtain rome parochial
charge, and far removed, by their situation, from
the inspection of their monastic superiors, and ex-
empt, by their character, from the jurifdiaion of
their diocesan*, they are hardly fubjedt to any con-

trou).
* Avenando Thef. Indic. ii. 253.

BO O K troul. According to the teflimony of the most

VIII. zealous catholics, many of the regular clergy in

V'^ the Spaniih settlements, are not only destitute of

the virtues becoming their profeflion, but regard-
less of that exLernal decorum and refpeat for the
opinion of mankind, which preserve a semblance
of worth, where the reality is wanting. Secure of
impunity, some regulars, in contempt of their vow
of poverty, engage openly in commerce; and are
so rapaciously eager in amafling wealth, that they
become the most grievous oppressors of the In-
dians, whom it was their duty to have protected.
Others, with no less flagrant violation of their vow
of chastity, indulge with little disguise in the moit
dissolute licentiousness *.

VARIOUS schemes have been proposed for re-

drefling enormities so manifefi and offeniive. Se-
veral persons no less eminent for piety than dif-
cernment, have contended, that the regulars, in
conformity to the canons of the church, ought to
be confined within the walls of their cloisters, and
should no longer be permitted to encroach on the
funations of the secular clergy. Some public-
spirited magistrates, from convicion of its being
necessary to deprive the regulars of a privilege be-
flowed at firil with good intention, but of which
time and experience had discovered the pernicious
effects, openly countenanced the secular clergy in
their attempts to assert their own rights. The
16x8. Prince D'Efquilache, viceroy of Peru under Philip

III. took measures so decisive and effectual for cir-
eumfcribing the regulars within their proper sphere,
as itruck them with general confiernation-t. Tlcy
had recourse to their usual arts. They alarmed

the

* See NOTE LXXXVI. f Sec NOTE LXXXVII.
382

the fuperfiitious, by representing the proceed- B 0 0O
ings of the viceroy as innovations fatal to religi- VIII.
on. They employed all the refinements of in-
trigue, in order to gain persons in power; and fe-
conded by the powerful influence of the Jesuits,
who enjoyed all the privileges which belonged to
the Mendiiant orders in America, they made a
deep impreflion on a bigoted prince, and a weak
ministry. The ancient practice was tolerated.
The abuses which it occasioned continued to in-
crease, and the corruption of Monks, exempt
from the restraints of discipline, and the infpec-
tion of any superior, became a disgrace to religi-
on. At las, as the veneration of the Spaniards
Itr the monastic orders began to abate, and the
power of the Jesuits was upon the decline, Ser-
dinand VI. ventured to apply the only effecual
remedy, by issuing an edict prohibiting regulars ue 3
of every denomination from taking the charge of 1757.
any parish with the cure of fouls ; and declaring,
that on the demise of the present incumbents,
none but secular priests, subjed to the jurisdiction
of their diocesans, shall be presented to vacant be-
nefices *. If this regulation is carried into exe-
cution with fleadinefs, in any degree proportional
to the wisdom with which it is framed, a very
considerable reformation may take place in the ec-
clefiaifical Rtate of Spanifll America, and the lecu-
lar clergy may gradually become a relpecdable
body of men. The deportment of many eccle-
fiaftics, even at present, seems to be decent and
exemplary, otherwise they would not be held in
such high estimation, and poisess filch a wonder-
ful ascendant over the minds of their countrymen,
throughout all the Spanish settlements.

EUT
* Real Ccdula IMS. penes nec.

383

B O O K BUT whatever merit the Spanish ecclesiastics in

VIII. America may possess, the success of their endea-
k "ro vours in communicating the knowledge of true
Small pro-
grefs in con- religion to the Indians has been more imperfect
Inting the than might have been expected, either from the
Chriftiani- degree of their zeal, or from the dominion which

they had acquired over that people. For this va-
rious reasons may be assigned. The first rriftiona-
ries, in their ardour to make proselytes, admitted
the people of America into the christian church,
without previous inftruEtion in the doftrines of re-
ligion, and even before they themselves had ac-
quired such knowledge of their language, as to be
able to explain to them the myiteries of faith, or
the precepts of duty. Refting upon a subtle di-
ilinction in scholastic theology, they adopted this
Strange practice no less inconsistent with the spirit
of a religion, which addresses itself to the under-
ifanding of men, than repugnant to the dictates
of reason. As soon as any body of people, over-
awed by dread of the Spanish power, moved by
the example of their own chiefs, incited by levity,
or yielding from mere ignorance, exprefled the
flightefi detire of embracing the religion of their
conquerors, they were instantly baptized. While
this rage of conversion continued, a tingle clergy-
man baptized in one day above five thousand
Mexicans, and did not desist until he was so ex-
haufted by fatigue, that he was unable to lift his
hands'*. In the course of a few years, after the
reduction of the Mexican empire, the facramcnt
of baptism was administered to more than four
millions t. Proselytes adopted with such inconfi-
derate haite, and whowere neither inftrutcd in the
nature of the tenets, to which it was filppofed they
had given assent, nor taught the absurdity of thole

which

* P. Torriblo, MS. Torquein. Mon. Ind. lib. xvi. c. 6.
t 1'. Torribio, Ibid. Touqucin. lib. xvi. c. 8.

*

which they were required to relinquish, retained B O O K
their veneration for their ancient fuperfiitions in V
full force, or mingled an attachment to its doc- ''r
trines and rites, with that slender knowledge of
Christianity which they acquired. These fcnti-
ments they tranliitted to their poflerity, into
whose minds they have funk so deep, that the
Spanish ecclefiaflics, with all their induflry, have
not been able to eradicate them. The religious
inrfitutions of their ancestors are fiill remembered,
and held in honour by the Indians, both in Mex-
ico and Peru; and whenever they think themselves
out of reach of inspection by the Spaniards, they
assemble and celebrate their idolatrous rites *.

BuT this is not the mofi unufrmountable ob-

flacle to the progress of Chritnianity among the
Indians. The powers of their unculltivated un-
derftandings are so limited, their observations and
reflections reach so little beyond the mere objec2s
offense, that they seem hardly to have the capaci-
ty of forming abftrat ideas, and potiefs not lan-
guage to express them. To fiuch men, the sub-
lime and spiritual doctrines of' Chriltianity muff
be incomprehensible. The numerous and fplen-
did ceremonies of popish worflip, as they catch
the eye, please and interest them but when their
infirustors attempt to explain the articles of faith,
with which those external observances are con-
neced, though they lifen with patience, they so
little conceive the meaning of what they hear, that
their acquiescence does not merit the name of be-
lief. Their indifference is fiill greater than their
incapacity. Attentive only to the present mo-
ment, and ingroifed by the objedts before them,
the Indians so seldom refle&t upon what is.pafl,

VoL. IL. C c or

* Vcy. dc Ulloa, i. 'l 'Il'' rium i li. xv. c. 23.
Lib. xvi. c. 23. (.; , 1 ,

385

B O O K or take thought for what is to come, that neither

VIII. the promises nor threats of religion, make much

- impreflion upon them; and while their foresight

rarely extends so far as the next day, it is almotl
impoflible to inspire them with solicitude about
the concerns of a future world. Astonished equal-
ly at their slowness of comprehension, and at
their inferrfibility, some of the early missionaries
pronounced them a race of men so brutish, as to
be incapable of understanding the firfl principles
of religion. A council held at Lima, decreed,
that, on account of this incapacity, they ought to
be excluded fror the sacrament of the Eucha-
rift *. And though Paul III. by his famous bull,
issued in the year I537, declared them to be ra-
tional creatures, entitled to all the privileges of
Christians t i yet, after the lapse of two centuries,
during which they have been members of the
church, so imperfect are their attainments in
knowledge, that very few possess such a portion
of spiritual discernment, as to be deemed worthy
of being admitted to the holy communion *. From
this idea of their incapacity and imperfet know-
ledge of religion, when the zeal of Philip II. efla-
blifhed the inquisition in America in the year
1570, the Indians were exempted from thejurif-
diEtion of that revere tribunal §, and fRill continue
under the inspection of their diocesans. Even as-
ter the most perfect instruCtion, their faith is held
to be feeble and dubious; and though some of
them have been taught the learned languages, and
have gone through the ordinary course of academic
education with applause, their frailty is flill so
much fufpe&ted, that no Indian is either ordained
a priefi, or received into any religious order II.

FROw

*Torquem. lb. xvi. c. a.

. 2. Toiqucm. lib. xvi. c
25. Garcia origcn.31 . 1 Voy. deUllon, i. 3.p1

§ Rtcop. lib. vi. tit. i. 1. S3 . 1I Tolquem. lib, xvii

c. 13. See NOTE LXXXVIII.
386

FROM this brief survey, some idea may be B 0 0 K

formed of the interior slate of the Spanish colo- v\T.
nies. The various productions with which they Prod ulons
supply and enrich the mother-country, and the of the Spa-
fyfiem of commercial intercourse between them, 'i 'les.°
come next in order to be explained. If the do-
minions of Spain in the New World, had been
of such moderate extent, as bore any proportion
to the parent state, the progress of her colonizing
might have been attended with the fame benefit
as that of other nations. But when, in less than
half a century, her inconsiderate rapacity had
seized on countries larger than all Europe, her in-
ability to fill such vafi regions, with a number of
inhabitants sufficient for the cultivation of them,
was so obvious, as to give a wrong direction to
all the efforts of the colonifis. They did not form
compact settlements, where indufiry, circum-
fcribed within limits, both in its views and ope-
rations, is conducted with that fober persevering
spirit, which gradually converts whatever is in its
poffeflion to its proper use, and derives from it
the greatest advantage. Inflead of this, the Spa-
niards, reduced by the boundless prospect which
opened to them, divided their poffeflions in Ame-
rica into governments of vast extent. As their
number was too small to attempt the regular
culture of the immense provinces, which they oc-
cupied rather than peopled, they bent their atten-
tion to a few objects, that allured them with hopes
of sudden and exorbitant gain, and turned away
with contempt fiom the humbler paths of indui-
try, which lead more slowly, but with greater cer-
tainty, to wealth and increase of national firength.

OF all the methods by which riches may be ac- Fom tlhe;r

quired, that of searching for the precious metals min..
is one of the most inviting to mlen,l who are ei-
lher unaccuflomed to the regular afliJuity with

C c , which

387

B O O K which the culture of the earth, and the operations

VIII. of commerce mufa be carried on, or so enterpri-
.., ifing and rapacious, as not to be satisfied with the

gradual returns of profit which they yield. Ac-
cordingly, ao soon as the several countries in Ame-
rica were fubjeaed to the dominion of Spain, this
was almost the only method of acquiring wealth
which occurred to the adventurers, by whom they
were conquered.. Such provinces of the continent
as did not allure them to fettle, by the profpet of
their affording gold and silver, were totally ne-
gleAed. Thole, in which they met with a dif-
appointment of the sanguine expectations they
had formed, were abandoned. Even the value ot
the ilands, the firfi fruits of their discoveries, and
the first object of their attention, iunk so much
in their eftination, when the mines which they
had opened there were exhausted, that they were
deserted by many of the planters, and left to be
occupied by more indufirious possessors. All
crowded to Mexico and Peru, where the vail
quantities of gold and silver found among: the na-
tives, who searched for them with little induilry,
and leis skill, promised an unexhauled store, as
the recompence of more intelligent and perfever-
ing efforts..

ffrloverofP- D U RIG several years, the ardour of their re-
tori and Sa- searches was kept up by hope, rather than success.
cotecas. At length, the rich silver mines of Potofi, in Peru,

were accidentally discovered in the year I545 ,
by an Indian, as lhe was clambering up the moun-
tain, in pursuit of a Llama whicl had' itrayed from
his flock. Soon after the mines of Sacotecas, in
New Spain, little inferior to the other in value,
were opened. From that time, fucceflive disco-
veries have been made in both colonies, and silver

nmines

*Fcrnandkz, p. i. lib. xi. c. I .
388

mines are now so numerous, that the working of B O O K
them, and of some few mines of gold in the pro- V!11
vinces of Tirra Fierma, and .the new kingdom of

o

Granada, has become the capital occupation of
the Spaniards, and is reduced into a system no
less complicated than intereiting. To dcfcribe
'the nature of the various ores, the mode of ex-
tracting them from the bowels of the earth, and
to explain the several processes by which the me-
tals are separated from the fubitances with which
they are mingled, either by the acticn of.fire, or
the attrascive powers of mercury, is the province
of the natural philosopher or chymiit, rather than
of the historian.

THE exuberant profusion with which the moun- Riches

tains of the New World poured forth their trea- 'ich Ih
fures, aftonifled mankind, accustomed hitherto
to receive a penurious supply of the precious mc-
tals, from the more scanty stores contained in the
mines of the ancient 'hemisphere. According to
principles of computation, which appear to be
extremely moderate, the quantity of gold and
silver that has been regularly entered in the ports
of Spain, is equal in value to four millions fter-
ling annually, reckoning from the year 1492, in
/hlich America was difcovcred to the present
time. This in two hundred and eighty-three
years, amounts to eleven hundred and thirty-two
millions. Iminenfe as this fum is, the Spanish
. writers contend, that as much more ought to be
added to it, in consideration of the trealire which
has been extraftcd from the mines, without paying
duty to lhe king. By this account, Spain has
drawn froml tie New World a fuplly of wealth,
amounting at leall to two thoullnmd millions of
p)'lundl s i .tlvlinl. t

Tn

' U,'.ain'i. Xh'ecor. v 'h1.:t. (ds C iNlOT 'ii ., c. . ,, X-\e,'l ?

.

&'c. viii. Jib. xi c. i[,. S,' . ': C !
i' 1 X 1x

238

BO O K THE mines, which have yielded this amazing

VJil quantity of treasure, are not worked at the ex-

Spirit to pence of the crown, or of the public. In order
which this to encourage private adventurers, the person who
ives rife, discovers a new vein, is intitled to the property of

it. Upon laying his claim before the governor of
the province, a certain extent of land is measured
off, and a certain number of Indians allotted him,
under the obligation of his opening the mine
within a limited time, and of his paying the cuf-
tomary duty to the king, for what it shall produce.
Invited by the facility with which such grants are
obtained, and encouraged by some firiking exam-
ples of success in this line of adventure: not only
the sanguine and the bold, but the timid and diffi-
dent enter upon it with astonishing ardour. With
va't objects always in view, fed continually with
hope, and expecting every moment that fortune
will unveil her stores, and give them up to iheir
wishes, they deem every other occupation insipid
and unintcrefling. The charms of this pursuit,

like the rage for deep play, is so bewitching, and
take fulch fill poffelion of the mind, as even to
give a new bent to the natural temper. Under its
influence, the cautious become enterprizing and
the covetous profuse. Powerful as tlis charm na-
turally is, its force is augmented by the arts of an
order of men known in Peru, by the cant name
of fJawchers, These are commonly persons of de-
iperate fortunes, who, availing themselves of some
skill in mineralogy, accompanied with the infinuat-
ing manner, and confident pretensions peculiar
to projectors, address the wealthy and the credu-
lous, By plausible descriptions of the appearances
which they have ditcovered of rich veins hitherto
unexplored ; by producing when requisite, fpcci-
mens of prumifing ore; by affirming, with an im-
posing allurance, that ifuccefs is certain, and that
ihe exp.nce mnufi be trifling ; they seldom fiil to

perfuadr.

persuade. An altociation is formed; a small um 'BO o K
is advanced by each co-partner; the mine is open- II
ed; the searcher is intrusted with the sole direc-
tion of every operation: unforeseen difficulties oc-
cur; new demands of money are made; but a-
midst a fucceflion of disappointments and delays,
hope is never extinguiihed, and the ardour of ex-
pedtation hardly abates. For it is observed, that
if any person once enter this seducing path, it is
almost impollible to return; his ideas alter, he
seems to be possessed with another spirit, viiions of
imaginary wealth are continually before his eyes,
and he thinks, and speaks, and dreams of nothing
else *,

SUCH is the spirit that must be formed, where- Fatalceafi

ever the active exertions of any society are chiefly of it
employed in working mines of gold and silver.
No spirit is more adverse to such improvements in
agriculture and commerce, as render a nation re-
ally opulent. If the system of administration in
the Spanish colonies had been founded upon the
principles of found policy, the power and ingenui-
ty of the legislature would have been exerted with
as much ardour, in restraining its fubjeats from
such pernicious induflry, as is now employed in
alluring them towards it. " ProjeCts of mining
"(fays a good judge of the political condut of
"nations) instead of replacing the capital em-
"ployed in them,. together with the ordinary
"profit of fiock, commonly absorb both capital
"and profit. They are the projecs therefore, to
"which, of all others, a prudent law-giver, who
"desired to increase the capital of his nation,
"would leatl chufe to give any extraordinary en-
"couragement, or to turn towards them a greater

1" lare
UJ oUP0 ".ntrcren. P. 22 ;

B o OCK " fare of that capital than would go to them of

Vl . " its own accord. Such, in reality, is the absurd
"V ~ " confidence which all men have in their own

" good fortune, that wherever there is the least
" probability of fuccels, too great a share of it is
" apt to go to them of its own accord *." But in
the Spanilh colonies government is studious to che-
rifb a spirit which it should have laboured to de-
p)ess, and by the fantion of its approbation aug-
ments that inconsiderate credulity, which has turn-
ed the acive indultry of Mexico and Peru into
such an improper channel. To this may be im-
puted the slender progress which they have made
during two centuries and a half, either in ufefuil
manufaEtures, or in those lucrative branches of cul-
tivation, which furnish the colonies of other nati-
ons with their fiaple commodities. In comparison
with the precious metals, every bounty of nature
is so much despised, that this extravagant idea of
their value has mingled with the idiom of the lan-
guage in America, and the Spaniards fettled there
denominate a country, rich, not from the fertility
of its foil, the abundance of its crops, or the exu-
berance of its paflures, but on account of the
minerals which its mountains contain. In quest
cfthefe, they abandon the delightful plains of Peru
and Mexico; and relbrt to barren and uncomfolr-
able regions, where they have built some of the
largefi towns which they poftefs in the New World.
As the activity and enterprise of the Spaniards
originally took this diretion, it is now so difficult
to bend them a different way, that although, fioml
various causes, the gain of working mines is much
decreascd; the fascination continues, and almnol
every person, who takes any active part in 11le
commerce of New Spain or Peru, is flill engaged
in some adventure of this kind *f.

.P,

: Dr.Smhih 's l:-'t;'v, F,

^' I.

r.
- Sec NO'T1', 1: C

BUT though mines are the chief object of at- B O O K

tention to the Spaniards, and the precious metals J,11
which they yield, form the principal article in their Other con-
commerce; the fertile countries which they pof- modities of

tile Spa-

fess, supply them with other commodities of such nifi co.o
value or scarcity, as to attra t a considerable de- ;'".
greeof attention. Cochineal is a prodution al-
moit peculiar to New Spain, of such demand in
commerce, that the sale is always certain, and it
yields such profit, as amply rewards the pains and
attention employed in rearing the curious infects
of which this valuable drug is composed, and pre-
paring it for the market Quinquina, or Jesuit's
Bark, the most salutary simple, perhaps, and of
most reitorative virtue, that Providence, in com-
paliion for human infirmity, has made known un-
to man, is found only in Peru, to which it affords a
lucrative branch of commerce*. The indigo of
Guatimala is superior in quality to that of any pro-
vince in America, and cultivated to a confidera-
ble extent. Cacoa, though not peculiar to the
Spanish colonies, attains to its highest itate of per-
section there, and from the great consumption of
chocolate in Europe, as well as in America, is a
valuable commodity. The tobacco of Cuba, of
more exquisite flavour tllan atny brought fiom t:h
New World; the figar railed in that ifla'id, in
Hilfpaniola, and in Nt:w Spain ; together with
drugs of various kinds, may he mentioned among
the natural productions of America, which enrich
the Spanilh commerce. To tllee mull be adldcl
an article of no inconsiderable account, the ex-
portation of hides ; lr which, as well as for many
of those which I have enumerated, the Spaniards
are more indebted to the wonderful fertility of th'.
country than to their own forcfight and indufriv.
The domellic anim;lls of Eu';ope, pa;rticularllv

hr(,,,,n d
.~Sc c N (I T'I ::XC' (.

B O O K horned cattle, have multiplied in the New World

VIII. with a rapidity which almost exceeds belief. A
>"V' few years after th& Spaniards fettled there, the

herds of tame cattle became so numerous, that
their proprietors reckoned them by thousands*.
Less attention being paid to them, as they conti-
nued to increase, they were suffered to run wild,
and spreading over a country of boundless extent,
under a mild climate and covered with rich pas-
ture, their number became immense. They range
over the vast plains which extend from Buenos
Ayres, towards the Andes, in herds of thirty or
forty thousand; and the unlucky traveller who
once falls in among them, may proceed several
days before he can disentangle himself from among
the crowd that covers the face of the earth, and
seems to have no end. They are hardly less nu-
merous in New Spain, and in several other pro-
vinces: these are killed merely for the fake of
their hides; and the slaughter at certain seasons is
so great, that the stench of the carcases which are
left in the field, would asset the air, if large packs
of wild dogs, and vast flocks of gallinazos, or
American vultures, the most voracious of all the
feathered kind, did not instantly devour them.
The number of those hides exported in every fleet
to Europe is'prodigious, and is a lucrative branch
of commerce '[.

ALMOST all those articles may be confidered as

staple commodities peculiar to America, and dif-
ferent, if we except that last mentioned, from the
produ&ions of the mother-country.

Advantac s WiHEN the importation into Spain of those va-
dhrveSin rious articles from her colonies, firit became ative
from her and considerable, her interior industry and manu-
colonie9. fadurc3

Oviedo np. Rnmuf. iii. iol. B. Hackluyt, iii. 466. 51 .

+ Acofta, hb. iii. c. 33. Ovallo Hilt. oi'Clhili. Chluici.

Cille&, iii. 47. fcp. Ibid. v. p. 680, 692. Letllrs l',. i
xiii. 235. Feuille, i. 249.
394

faaures were in a fiate so prosperous, that with B O 0 K
the product of there, she was able both to purchase vilI.
the commodities of the New World, and to an-
fwer its growing demands. Under the reigns of
Ferdinand and Isabella, and Charles V. Spain was
one of the most indufirious countries in Europe.
Her manufactures in wool, and flax, and silk, were
so extensive, as not only to furnish what was sus-
ficient for her own consumption, but to afford a
surplus for exportation. When a market for them,
formerly unknown, and to which she alone had
access, opened in America, file had recourse to
her domestic store, and found there an abundant
fipply *. This new employment must naturally
have added vivacity to the spirit of industry.
Nourished and invigorated by it, the manufac-
tures, the population, and wealth of Spain might
have gone on increasing in the fame proportion
with her colonies. Nor was the fiate of the Spa-
nifh marine at this period less flourishing than that
of its manufactures. In the beginning of the
sixteenth century, Spain is said to have possessed
above a thousand merchant Ihips t, a number
probably far superior to that of any nation in
Europe. By the aid which foreign trade aind do-
meftic industry give reciprocally to each other ill
their progress, the augmentation of both mufl
have been rapid and extensive, and Spain might
have received the fame acccllion of opulence and
vigour from her acquisitions in the New World,
that other powers have derived from their colonies
there.

BUT various causes prevented this. It is with wlhy le

nations as with inlividuals, when wealth flows in does ot
gradually, and with moderate increase, it feeds ther an.
and nourilhcs that activity which is friendly to

commerce,
t Cumpomnncs, ii, i4o.

395
" ec NO I' I. S'CII.

commerce, and calls it forth into vigorous and
well conduted exertions; but when it pours in
suddenly, and with too full a fiream, it overturns
all fober plans of industry, and brings along with
it a taste for what is wild, and extravagant, and
daring in buflnefs or in aftion. Such was the great
and sudden augmentation of power and revenue,
that the possession of America brought into Spain,
and some symptoms of its pernicious influence
upon the political operations of that monarchy
soon began to appear. For a considerable time,
however, the supply of treasure from the New
World was scanty and precarious, and the genius
of Charles V. conducted public measures with such
prudence, that the effects of this influence were
little perceived. But when Philip II. ascended the
Spanish throne, with talents far inferior to those of
his father, and remittances from the colonies be-
came a regular and vait branch of revenue, the
fatal operation of this rapid change in the irate of
the kingdom, both on the monarch and his peo-
ple, was at once conspicuous. Philip, possessing
that spirit of unceasing assiduity, which often cha-
raAerizesthe ambition of men of moderate talents,
entertained such an high opinion of his own refour-
ces, that he thought nothing too arduous for him
to undertake. Shut up himself in the solitude of
the Escurial, he troubled and annoyed all the na-
tions around him. He waged open war with the
Dutch and English; he encouraged and aided a
rebellious faction in France; he conquered Portu-
gal, and maintained armies and garrisons in !talv,
Africa, and both the Indies. By such a multipli-
city of great and complicated operations, pursucd(
with ardour during the course of a long reign,
Spain was drained both of men and money. 'Un-
der the weak administration of his fuccellbr, Phli-
lip III. the vigour of the nation continued to dc-
creAse, and funk into the lowell decline, when

tlu,

396

BOOK

VIII.
,-A_.

397

the inconsiderate bigotry of that monarch expel- B o O K
led at once near a million of his most industrious Vi.
fubjeas, at the very time when the exhausted itate '-s-
of the kingdom required some extraordinary ex- A. D. I6I.
ertion of political wisdom to augment its num-
bers, and to revive its strength. Early in the fe
venteenth century, Spain felt such a diminution
in the number of her people, that from inability
to recruit her armies, she was obliged to contract
her operations. Her flourihfing manufactures were
fallen into decay. Her fleets, which had been the
terror of all Europe, were ruined. Her extensive
.foreign commerce was loft. The trade between
different parts of her own dominions was inter-
rupted, and the flips which attempted to carry
it on, were taken and plundered by enemies,
whom they once defpiled. Even agriculture, the
primary object of industry in every prosperous state,
was negleted, and one of the most fertile coun-
tries in Europe hardly raised what was sufficient
for the support of its own inhabitants.

IN proportion as the population and manufac- Rapid de-

tures of the parent slate declined, the demands of line of It-
her colonies continued to increase. The Spaniards,
like their monarchs, intoxicated with the wealth
which poured in annually upon them, deserted
the paths of industry, to which they had been ac-
cuitomed, and repaired with eagerness to those:
regions from which this opulence itfued. By this
rage of emigration, another drain was opened,
and the flrength of the colonies augmented by ex-
hauiling that of the mother country. All thoi'
emigrants, as well as the adventurers who had at
firfi fettled in America, depended abfblutely upon
Spain for almost every article of necelliry confump-
tion. Engaged in more alluring and lucrative
pursuits, or prevented by restraints which govern-
ment imposed, they could not turn their own

attention

BOOK attention towards establishing the manufactures

VIII requisite for comfortable subsistence. They re-

ceived (as I have observed in another place) their
clothing, their furniture, whatever minifiers to
the ease or luxury of life, and even their inftru-
ments of labour from Europe. Spain, thinned of
people, and void of industry, was unable to sup-
ply their increaing demands. She had recourse to
her neighbours. The manufacures of the Low
Countries, of England, of France, and of Italy,
which her wants called into exifience, or animated
with new vivacity, furnished in abundance what-
ever she required. In vain did the fundamental
law concerning the exclusion of foreigners from
trade with America, oppose this innovation. Ne-
ceflity, more powerful than any statute, defeated
its operations, and confirained the Spaniards them-
selves to concur in eluding it. The English, the
French, and Dutch, relying on the fidelity and ho-
nour of Spanish merchants, who lend their names
to cover the deceit, fend out their manufactures to
America, and receive the exorbitant price for which
they are fold there, either in specie, or in the rich
commodities of the New World. Neither the
dread of danger, nor the allurement of profit,
ever induced a Spanish factor to betray or defraud
the person who confided in him *; and that probi-
ty, which is the pride and diftination of nation,
contributes to its ruin. In a short time, not above
a twentieth part of the commodities exported to
America was of Spanifl growth or fabric 'i. All
the reft was the property of foreign merchants,
though entered in the name of Spaniards. The
treasure of the New World may be said hence-
forward not to have belonged to Spain. Be-
fore it reached Europe, it was anticipated as the

price
Zavala Reprcfentacion, p.226. 1 Camj :csii. 3S

price of goods purchased from foreigners. That B O O K
wealth, which, by an internal circulation, would vli
have spread through each vein of indufiry, and
have conveyed life and activity to every branch of
manufacture, flowed out of the kingdom with
such a rapid course, as neither enriched nor ani-
mated it. On the other hand, the artisans of rival
nations, encouraged by this quick sale of their
commodities, improved so much in skill and
industry, as to be able to afford them at a rate
so low, that the manufatures of Spain, which
could not vie with theirs, either in quality or cheap-
ness of work, were frill farther deprefied. This
deftrucive commerce drained off the riches of
the nation faster and more completely, than even
the extravagant schemes of ambition carried on
by its monarchs. Spain was so much aflonifhed
and difireffed, at beholding her American trea-
fures vanish almost as loon as they were import-
ed, that Philip III. unable to supply what was
requisite in circulation, issued an edit, by which
he endeavoured to raise copper money to a value
in currency nearly equal to that of silver *; and
the lord of the Peruvian and Mexican mines was
reduced to a wretched expedient, which is the last
resource of petty impoverished states.

THUS the poffeflions of Spain in America have

not proved a source of population and of wealth
to her, in the fame manner as those of other na-
tions. In the countries of Europe, where the
spirit of industry subsists in full vigour, every
person fettled in such colonies, as are similar in
their situation to those of Spain, is supposed to
give employment to three or four at home in sup-
plying his wants- . But wherever the mother-

country
* Uztiriz, C. 104. t Child on trrde and cok(nnes.

B O 0 K country cannot afford this supply, every emigrant

VIII. may be confidered as a citizen loft to the commu-

nity, and strangers muff reap all the benefit of
answering his demands.

Increased by SUCH has been the internal fiate of Spain from
he guodenf the close of the sixteenth century, and such her
its inter- inability to supply the growing wants of her colo-
cofe Wth nies. The fatal effeds of this disproportion be-
America. T a

tween their demands, and her capacity of answer-.
ing them, have been much increased by the mode
in which Spain has endeavoured to regulate the
intercourse between the mother country and the
colonies. It is from her idea of monopolizing
the trade with America, and debarring her sub-
jedts there from any communication with foreign-
ers, that all her jealous and systematic arrangements
have arisen. These are so lingular in their nature
and consequences, as to merit a particular expla-
nation. In order to secure the monopoly at which
ihe aimed, Spain did not vest the trade with her
colonies in an exclusive company, a plan which
has been adopted by nations more commercial,
and at a period when mercantile policy was an
object of greater attention, and ought to have
been better underficod. The Dutch gave up the
whole trade with their colonies, both in the Eali
and Weft Indies, to exclusive companies. The
Englith, the French, the Danes, have imitated
their. example with respect to the East Indian com-
merce; and the two former have laid a similar re-
itraint upon iome branches of their trade with the
New World. The wit of man cannot, pelrhaps,
devise a method for checking the progrels ol
industry and population in a new colony more
effectual than this. The intere(t of the co-
lony, and the exclusive company, must in ev'-
ry point be diametrically opposite; and as
tle latter poffefies flich advantages in this in-
equal contetf, that it can prescribe at pleafrirc

the
400

the terms of intercourse, the former must not only B o o K
buy dear and fell cheap, but susser the mortifica- vii.
tion of having the increase of their surplus flock
discouraged by those very persons to whom alone
they are permitted to dispose of it *.

SPAIN, it is probable, was preserved from fall- Ths con-

fined to one

ing into this error in policy, by the high ideas port in
which she early formed concerning the riches of the Spain.
New Woild. Gold and silver were commodities
of too high value to veil a monopoly of them in
private hands. The crown wished to retain the
direction of a commerce so inviting; and in order
to secure that, ordained that the cargo of every
ship fitted out for America, thould be infpeaed by
the officers of the Casa de Contratt aci in Seville,
before it could receive a licence to m'ake the voy-
age; and that on its return, a repolt of the com-
modities which it brought should be made to the
fame board, before it could be permitted to land
them. In consequence of this regulation, all the
trade of Spain with the New World centred in the
port of Seville, and was gradually brought into a
form, in which it has been conducted, with little
variation, froim the middle of the iixteenth century
almotl to our own times. For the greater fecuri-
ty of the valuable cargoes sent to America, as well
as for the more easy prevention of fraud, the com-
merce of Spain with its colonies is carried on by
fleets, which fail under flrong convoys. These
fleets confilling of two squadrons, one diftinguifl-
ed by the name of Gallons, the other by that of
the Flota, are equipped annually. Formerly they
took their departure from Seville; but as the port
of Cadiz has been found more commodious, they
have failed from it since the year 1 720.

VOI 1. 1). d TiHE

401
* S i a i Ill's 111(111;I S,, ;I. 1 7 A

B O O K THE Galeons deltined to supply Tierra Firme,

VIii. and the kingdoms of Peru and Chili, with almost

Cie on every article of luxury, or necessary consumption,
by the Ga- that an opulent people can demand, touch first at
Itons, Carthagena, ard then at Porto-bello. To the for-

mer, the merchants of Santa Martha, Caraccas, the
New Kingdom of Granada, and several other pro-
vinces resort. The latter is the great mart for the
rich commerce of Peru and Chili. At the season
when the Galeons are expected, the produc of all
the mines in these two kingdoms, together with
their other valuable commodities, is transported by
sea to Panama. From thence, as soon as the ap-
pearance of the fleet from Europe is announced,
they are conveyed across the illhmus, partly on
mules, and. partly down the river Chagere to
Porto-bello. This paltry village whose climate,
from the pernicious union of excellive heat,
continual moisture, and the putrid exhalations
arising from a rank foil, is more fatal to life than
any perhaps in the known world, is immediately
filled with people. From being the residence of
a few negroes and mulattoes, and of a miserable
garrison relieved every three months, its fireets are
crowded with opulent merchants from every cor-
ner of Peru, and the adjacent provinces. A fair
is opened, the wealth of America is exchanged
for the maunfactures of Europe, and during its
prescribed term of fbrty days, the richest traffic on
the face of the earth is begun and finished, with
that simplicity of tranfatcion and unbounded con-
fidence, which accompany extensive commerce*.
dS rlota. The Flota holds its course to Vera Cruz. The

treasures and commodities of New Spain, and the
depending provinces, which were deposited at Los
Angeles in expectation of its arrival, are carried

thither,

* Sec NOTE XCII.
40z

thither, and the commercial operations of Vera B3 o K
Cruz, conducted in the fame manner with those of VIII.
Porto-bello, are inferior to them only in impor- '
tance and value. Both fleets, as soon as they have
completed their cargoes from America, rendezvous
at the Havanna, and return in company to Europe.

THE trade of Spain with her colonies, while Bad efre

thus fettered and reftrited, came necelfarily to be °' tlhis r
conducted with the fame spirit, and upon the fame
principles, as that of an exclusive company. Be-
ing confined to a tingle port, it was of course
thrown into a few hands, and almost the whole of
it was gradually engrofled by a linall number of
wealthy houses, formerly in Seville, and now inl
Cadiz. Thefc by combinations, which they can
easily form, may altogether prevent that competi-
tion which preserves commodities at their natural
price; and by acting in concert, to which they
are prompted by their mutual interest, they may
raise or lower their value at pleasure. In confe-
quence of this, the price of European goods in
America is always high, and often exorbitant. A
hundred, two hundred, and even three hundred
per cent. are profits not uncommon in the com-
merce of Spain with her colonies *. From the
fame ingrofing spirit it frequently happens, that
traders of the ifcond order, whose warehouses do
not contain a complete aflortment of commodities
for the American market, cannot purchase from
the more opulent merchants, fulch goods as they
want, at a lower price than that for which they are
fold in the colonies. With the faime vigilant jea-
lousy that an exclusive company guards again t
the intrusion of the free trader, thoie overgrown
monopolifis endeavour to check the progress of

D cl 2 every
* P. I.llon JIR bcr,. pail. pi. 1,. '9

403

HISTORY OF AMERICA.
B O O K every one whole encroachments they dread *. But

V111. this reitraint of the American commerce to one

port, not only assets its domestic fiate, but limits,
its foreign operations. A monopolist may acquire
more, and certainly will hazard less, by a confined
trade which yields exorbitant profit, than by an
extensive commerce in which he receives only a
moderate return of gain. It is often his interest
not to enlarge, but to circumscribe the sphere of
his activity; and instead of calling forth more vi-
gorous exertions of commercial induflry, it may
be the object of his attention to check and let
bounds to them. By some such maxim, the mer-
cantile policy of Spain seems to have regulated
its intercourse with America. Inflead of furnish-
ing the colonies with European goods in such
quantity as might render both the price and the
profit moderate ; the merchants of Seville andCa-
diz seem to have supplied them with a sparing
hand, that the eagerness of competition amongit
cufiomers obliged to purchase in a scanty market,
might enable their factors to dispose of their car-
goes with exorbitant gain. About the middle of
the last century, when the exclusive trade to Ame-
rica fiom Seville was in its molt flourishing fiate,
the burden of the two united squadrons of the Ga-
leons and Flota, did not exceed twenty-fcven
thousand five hundred tons t-. The supply which
such a. fleet could carry must have been very ina-
dequate to the demands of those populous and ex-
tensive colonies, which depended upon it for all
the luxuries, and many of the necefliries of life.
Re,,edies SPAIN early became sensible of her declenfior

prpf from her former prolperity, and many refpeCable

and

* Smith's Inquiry, ii. 171. Caniponianes, Edulc. Pulpu.
i. 438.

' Cnampomancs, Educ. Popul. i 43. ii5. 110o.

and virtuous citizens employed their thoughts in B O 0 K
devising methods for reviving the decaying indus- V111.
try and commerce of their country. From the
violence of the remedies proposed, we may judge
how desperate and fatal the malady appeared.
Some, confounding a violation of police with cri-
minality against the fiate, contended, that in order
to check illicit commerce, every person convited
of carrying it on, flould be punished with death,
and confiscation of all his effects *. Others, for-
getting the difiindion between civil offences and
acs of impiety, insisted, that contraband trade
should be ranked among the crimes reserved for
the cognizance of the Inquisition; that fuich as
were guilty of it might be tried and puniflhed, ac-
cording to the secret and summary form in which
that dreadful tribunal exercises its jurifdiCion -.
Others, uninfirutded by observing the pernicious
effects of monopolies in every country where they
have been eftablilhed, have proposed to vest the
trade with America in exclusive companies, whom
interefi would render the motl vigilant guardians
of the Spanish commerce againit the encroach-
mernts of interlopers t.

BESIDE these wild projects, many fcheines bet-

ter digested, at first without effect, and more be-
neficial, were fuiggefied. But under the feeble mo-
narchs, with whom the reign of the Aufirian line
in Spain closed, incapacity and indecision are con-
fiicuous in every department of government.
Inflead of taking for their model the ative admi-
nifiration of Charles V. they asseted to imitate the
cautious procrlallinating wisdom of Philip II. and
deflitute of his talents,' they deliberated perpetu-
ally, but determined nothing. No remedy was

applied

' . dc SanLtl Crtiz Coimerrcio Siiclto, p. 142.
1' JVltocal a I clh;iulacion politica de EIpagIna, p. 41
/u av;l '\i i nlo) l(ei)',l riltacio)l, &c. p. 19o.

405

B 0 0 K applied to the evils under which the national com-

VIII. hierce, domeflic as well as foreign, languished.
^''V- These evils continued to increase, and Spain, with

dominions more extensive and more opulent than
any European state, polfeffed neither vigour, nor
money*, nor induitry. At length, the violence
of a great national convulsion rouzed the slumber-
ing genius of Spain, and the efforts of the two con-
tending parties in the civil war, kindled by the
disputes concerning the fucceflion of the crown at
the beginning of this century, called forth in some
degree, the ancient spirit and vigour of the nation.
While men were forming, capable of adopting
more liberal sentiments, than those which had in-
fluenced the councils of the monarchy during the
course of a- century, Spain derived from an un-
expeded source the means of availing itself of their
talents. The various powers who favoured the
pretensions either of the Auitrian or Bourbon can-
didate for the Spanish throne, sent formidable fleets
and armies to their support. France, England
and Holland remitted immense fums to Spain.
These were spent in the provinces which became
the theatre of war. Part of the American trea-
lure of which they had drained the kingdom, flow-
ed back thither. From this ara, one of the moit
intelligent Spanish authors, dates the revival of the
monarchy; and, however humiliating the truth
may be, he acknowledges that it is to her enemies
his country is indebted for the acquisition of a fund
of circulating specie, in some measure adequate to
the exigencies of the public t.

Steps to- As soon as the Bourbons obtained quiet pof-
iroverment session of the throne, they discerned this change
bythcBuur- in the spirit of the people, and in the ltate of the
a:c,, nation, and took advantage of it; for although

that

,S.c NOTE XCIV.
406

-1 Campotrialles, i.

that family has not given monarchs to Spain re- B 0 O K
markable for superiority of genius, they have all' VI .
been beneficent princes, attentive to the happi-
ness of their fubjedts, and solicitous to promote it.
It was, accordingly the first object of Philip V.
to suppress an innovation which had crept in dur-
ing the course of the war, and overturned the
whole system of the Spanish commerce with Ame-
rica. The English and Dutch, by their fluperi- by exclud-
ority in naval power, having acquired such corn- ing foreign-

ers from

mand of the sea, as to cut off all intercourse be- trade with
tween Spain and her colonies, Spain, in order to Per',
furnish them those necessaries of life, without
which they could not exist, and as the only means
of receiving from thence any part of their trea-
sure, departed so far from the usual rigour of
its maxims, as to open the trade with Peru to her
allies the French. The merchants of St. Malo,
to whom Louis XIV. granted the privilege of this
lucrative commerce, engaged in it with vigour,
and carried it on upon principles very diffe-
rent from those of the Spaniards. They sup-
plied Peru with European commodities at a more
moderate price, and not in flinted quantity ; the
goods which they imported were conveyed to
every province of Spanilh America, in fuclh abun-
dance as had never been known in any former
period. If this intercourse had been continued,
the exportation of European commodities from
Spain must have ceased, and the dependance
of the colonies on the mother-country have been
at an end. The mofl peremptory injunccions ,I
were therefore ifflied, prohibiting the admillion of
foreign veflfls into any port of Pern or Chili *,
and a Spanish fq(ladron was employed to clear
ihe South Sea of intruders, whole aid was no
loIger necellary.

BUT

Frrcz.tr Vy. 256. 1. Ul!oa R'ctan. ii. i nl., "'
.\lccdo y -Icriera Aviif, &c. 236.

407

B O O K Bu T though, on the cessation of the war, which

VII. was terminated by the treaty of Utrech, Spain ob-
"Y ce tained relief from one encroachment on her corn-

bychecking
contraband mercial fyfiem, file was exposed to another which
trade, she deemed hardly less pernicious. As an in-

ducement that might prevail with Queen Anne to
conclude a peace which France and Spain desired

particularly with equal ardour, Philip V. not only conveyed
ot the Eng- to Great Britain the Ajiento, or contra&t for sup-
oli Asen- plying the Spanilh colonies with negroes, which

had formerly been enjoyed by France, but grant-
ed it the more extraordinary privilege of fending
annually to the fair of Porto-bello a ship of five
hundred tons, laden with European commodities.
In consequence of this, British factories were
etRablilhed at Carthagena, Panama, Vera Cruz,
Buenos Ayres, and other Spanish settlements.
The veil with which Spain had hitherto covered the
state and transaCtions of her colonies was remov-
ed. The agents of a rival nation, residing in the
towns of most extensive trade, and of chiefrefort,
had the best opportunities of becoming acquaint-
ed with the interior condition of their provinces, of
observing their stated and occasional wants, and
of knowing what commodities might be import-
ed into them with the greatest advantage. In
consequence of information so authentic and cx-
peditious, the merchants of Jamaica, and other
Englif colonies who traded to the Spanish main,
were enabled to alfort and proportion their cargoes,
so exactly to the demands of the market, that the
contraband commerce was carried on with a facility
and to an extent unknown in any former period.
This, however, was not the molt fatal confequenc(
of the Afliento to the trade of Spain. The agents
of the British South Sea Company, under cover
of the iniipoitcl ion which they were authorised to
make by the Ihiii) sent annually toPorto-bello, l)our-
ed in their commodities on the Spanilli continent,

witholut
408

without limitation or refiraint. Inflead of a ship B o o K
of five hundred tons, as flipulated in the treaty, VII.
they usually employed one which exceeded nine
hundred tons in burden. She was accompanied
by two or three other smaller veilEls, which moor-
ing in some neighbouring creek, supplied her
clandefiinely with fresh bales of goods to replace
such as were fold. The inspectors of the fair, and
officers of the revenue, gained by exorbitant pre-
sents, connived at the fraud *. Thus, partly by
the operations of the company, and partly by the
activity of private interlopers, almost the whole
trade of Spanish America was ingroffed by foreign-
ers. The immense commerce of the Galeons, for- 1737.
merly the pride of Spain, and the envy of other
nations, funk to nothing, and the squadron itself,
reduced from fifteen thousand to two thousand
ions t, served hardly any purpose but to fetch
home the royal revenue arising from the fifth on
silver.

WHILE Spain observed those encroachments, GuardaCo-

and felt so sensibly their pernicious effects, it was e for tPhi
impoflible not to make some effort to restrain them. purpof.
Her first expedient was to fiation (hips of force,
under the appellation of Giuwda Coftis, upon the
coalis of those provinces, to which interlopers
molt frequently retorted. As private interell con-
curred with the duty which they owed to the pub-
lic, in rendering the officers who commanded them
vigilant and activc, rome check was given to the
progress of the contraband trade, though in lo-
minions To extensive, and so accellible by lea, no
number of cruizers was sufficient to guard againfl
its inroads in every quarter. This interruption of
an intercourse, which had been carried on with so
much facility, that the merchants in the British co-

lonies

Sec NOT'L', XCV. 'I Alccdo y lecrrera, P.359.
C: ll;,,.e.:n lss , i. 436.

409

B O O K lonies were accustomed to confider it almost as an

VII1. allowed branch of commerce, excited murmurs
'"'3 ' and complaints. These authorised, in some mea-

sure, and rendered more interefiing, by several
unjustifiable aats of violence committed by the
captains of the Spanish Guarda Cofias, precipitat-
'739- ed Great Britain into a war with Spain, by which

the latter obtained a final release from the Aflien-
to, and was left at liberty to regulate the com-
merce of her colonies, without being restrained
by any engagement with a foreign power.

The use of As the formidable encroachments of the Eng-
introduce. lifh on their American trade, had discovered to

the Spaniards the vast consumption of European
goods in their colonies, and taught them the ad-
vantage of accommodating their importations to
the occasional demand of the various provinces,
they perceived the necessity of devising some me-
thod of supplying their colonies, different from
their ancient one, of fending thither periodical
fleets. This mode of communication was not
only uncertain, as the departure of the Galeons
and Flota was sometimes retarded by various acci-
dents, and often prevented by the wars which
raged in Europe, but was ill adapted to afford
America a regular and timely supply of what it
wanted. The scarcity of European goods in the
Spanish .settlements frequently became exceflive
their price role to an enormous height; the vigilant
eye of mercantile attention did not fail to ob-
serve this favourable opportunity, an ample supply
was poured in by interlopers from the English, the
French, and Dutch islands; and when the Galeons
at length arrived, they found the markets so glut-
ted by this illicit commerce, that there was no de-
mand for the commodities with which they were
loaded. In order to remedy this, Spain permitted
a considerable part of her commerce with Ameri-

ca,

4I"

ca, to be carried on by regfter Jhips. These are B o° K
fitted out, during the intervals between the flated \vll.
seasons when the Galeons and Flota fail, by mer-
chants in Seville or Cadiz, upon obtaining a licence
from the council of the Indies, for which they
pay a very high premium, and are deffined for
those ports where any extraordinary demand is
foreseen or expected. By this expedient, such a
regular supply of fresh commodities is conveyed
to the American market, that the interloper is no
longer allured by the fame profpeft of excessive
gain, or the people in the colonies urged by the
fame necefity to engage in the hazardous adven-
tures of contraband trade.

IN proportion as experience manifefied the ad- The galeons

vantages of carrying on trade in this mode, the aboli'ed.
number of register ships increased; and at length,
in the year 1748, the Galeons, after having been
employed upwards of two centuries, were finally
abolished. From that period there has been no in-
tercourfe with Chili and Peru but by single ships,
dispatched from time to time as occasion requires,
and when the merchants expect a market will open.
These fail round Cape Horn, and convey diretly
to the ports in the South Sea the productions and
manufactures of Europe, for which the people
fettled in those countries were formerly obliged to
repair to Porto-bello or Panama. There towns,
as has been formerly observed, must gradually de-
cline, when deprived of that commerce to which
they owed their existence. This disadvantage
however is more than compensated, for the whole
continent of South America receives supplies of
European commodities, with so much regularity,
and in such abundance, as must contribute greatly
to the happinels and prosperity of all the colonies
lettled there. But as all the rcgiftcr Ihips deflined
f;r the South Seas, mufl fiill take their departure

froll

B O O K from Cadiz, and are obliged to return thither *,

V11I. this branch of the American commerce, even in
t-.-- its new and improved form, continues subjet to

the restraints of a species of monopoly, and feels
those pernicious effects of it, which I have already
described.

Schemes for NOR has the attention of Spain been confined
reviving. to regulating the trade with its flourishing colo-

nies, it has extended likewise to the reviving com-
merce in those settlements where it was neglected,
or had decayed. Among the new taftes which the
people of Europe have acquired, in consequence
of their intercourse with the natives of those coun-
tries which they conquered in America, that for
chocolate is one of the most universal. The use
of this liquor made with a paste, formed of the nut,
or almond of the cacao tree, compounded with
various ingredients, the Spaniards firfi learned
from the Mexicans; and it has appeared to them,
and to the other European nations, so palatable, so
nourishing, and so wholesome, that it has become
a commercial article of considerable importance.
The cacao-tree grows spontaneously in several
parts of the torrid zone; but the nuts of the belt
quality, next to those of Guatimala, on the South
Sea, are produced in the rich plains of Caraccas, a
province of Tierra Filme. In consequence of
this acknov/ledged superiority in the quality of ca-
cao in ihat p-ovince, and its communication with
the Atlantic, vwlich facilitates the conveyance to
Europe, the clluture of the cacao there is more ex-
tensive than in any difiricd of America. But the
Dutch, by the vicinity of the fettlcments in the
finall islands of Curaooa and Buen-Ayre, to the
coast of Caraccas, gradually ingroffed the greatest
part of the cacao trade. The traffic with the mo-
ther-country for this valuable commodity ceased

almotl

* Campomancs, i. .434. .,Io
412

almofi entirely; and such was the supine negligence B O O K
of the Spaniards, or the defects of their commercial VIII.
arrangements, that they were obliged to receive -v-
from the hands of foreigners this production of
their own colonies, at an exorbitant price. In or-
der to remedy an evil no less disgraceful, than per-
nicious to his fubjeds, Philip V. in the year I728, by efablilh-
granted to a body of merchants, an exclusive ingthecom-
right to the commerce with Caraccas and Curnana, racc a.
on condition of their employing, at their own ex-
pence, a sufficient number of armed vessels to
clear the coast of interlopers. This society dif-
tingui/hed sometimes by the name of the Compa-
ny of Guipufcoa, from the province of Spain in
which it is ellablifhed, and Sometimes by that of
the Company of Caraccas, from the difiri&t of
America to which it trades, has carried on its ope-
rations with such vigour and success, that Spain
has recovered an important branch of commerce,
which (he had suffered to be wrested from her, and
is plentifully supplied with an article of extensive
consumption at a moderate price. Not only the
parent state, but the colony of Caraccas, has de-
rived great advantages from this inflitution; for
although, at the firit aspe6t, it may appear to be
one of those monopolies, whose tendency is to
check the spirit of indutfry, inilead of calling it
forth to new exertions, it has been prevented from
operating in this manner, by several salutary regu-
lations, framed upon forelight of such bad effects,
and on purpose to obviate them. The planters in
the Caraccas are not left to depend entirely on the
company, either for the importation of European
commodities, or the sale of their own productions.
The inhabitants of the Canary Iflandt have the
privilege of lending thither annually a register flail
of considerable burden; and from Vera Cruz in
New Spain, a free trade is permitted in every port
comprehended in the charter of the company. In

confequcnce

413

B OO K consequence of this, there is such a competition,

VIII. that both with respect to what the colonies pur-
^^'J chafe, and what they fell, the price seems to be

fixed at its natural and equitable rate. The com-
pany has not the power of raising the former, or
degrading the latter at pleasure; and accordingly,
since it was eftablilhed, the increase of culture, of
population, and of live flock, in the province of
Caraccas has been very considerable .

Enlarge- BUT as it is slowly that nations relinquish any
ommercial system which time has rendered venerable, or that
ideas in commerce can be diverted from the channel in
Spain. which it has long been accustomed to flow; Philip

V. in his new regulations concerning the American
trade, paid such deference to the ancient maxim
of Spain, concerning the limitation of all impor-
tation from the New World to one harbour, as to
oblige both the register ships which returned from
Peru, and those of the Guipufcoan Company from
Caraccas, to deliver their cargoes in the port of
Cadiz. Since his reign, sentiments more liberal
and enlarged begin to spread in Spain. The lpi-
rit of philosophical inquiry, which it is the glory
of the present age to have turned from frivolous
or abltrufe speculations, to the business and affairs
of men, has extended its influence beyond tlhe
Pirennees. In the researches of ingenious authors,
concerning the police or commerce of nations, the
errors and defects of the Spanish (fTftem with ref-
peEt to both met every eye, and have not only
been exposed with severity, but are held up as a
warning to other fates. The Spaniards, litung
with their reproaches, or convinced by their argu-
ments, and admonished by several enlightened
writers of their own country, seem at length to
have discovered the deftrudive tendency of tlhot

narr\o

* Sec NOT E XCVI.
414

narrow maxims, which, by cramping commerce B O O K
in all its operations, have fb long retarded its pro- VIiI.
grefs. It is to the monarch now on the throne, -
that Spain is indebted for the first public regulation
formed in consequence of these ideas.

WH ILE Spain adhered with rigour to her ancient Eflab-ilh-

maxims concerning her commerce with America, ment of re-
she was so much afraid of opening any channel, boats.
by which an illicit trade might find admifion into
the colonies, that the almost shut herself out from
any intercourse with them, but that which was
carried on by her annual fleets. There was no
establishment for a regular communication of ei-
ther public or private intelligence, between the
mother-country and its American settlements.
From the want of this necessary institution, the
operations of the itate, and the business of indi-
viduals, were retarded or conduted unflilfully,
and Spain often received from foreigners her first
information with refped to very interesting
events in her own colonies. But though this de-
set in police was sensibly felt, and the remedy for
it was obvious, that jealous spirit with which the
Spanish monarchs guarded the exclusive trade, re-
itrained them from applying it. At length Charles
III. surmounted those considerations which had de-
terred his predeceifors, and in the year 1764, ap-
pointed packet-boats to be dispatched on the firll
day of each month, from Corugna to the Havan-
na or Porto-Rico. From thence letters are con-
veyed in smaller vessels to Vera Cruz and Porto-
bello, and transmitted by poll through the king-
doms of Tierra Firm', Granada, Peru, and New
Spain. With no less regularity packet-boats fail
once in two months to Rio de la Plata, for the ac-
commodation of the provinces to the eall of the
Andes. Thus provision is made for a speedy and

certain

415

B O K certain circulation of intelligence throughout the

VIII. vast dominions of Spain, from which equal advan-

tages must redound to the political and mercantile
interest of the kingdom *. With this new arrange-
ment, a fcherre of extending commerce has been
more immediately connected. Each of the packet-
boats which are vessels of some considerable bur-
den, is allowed to take in half a loading of such
commodities as are the product of Spain, and most
in demand in the ports whither they are bound. In
return for these they may bring home to Corugna
an equal quantity of American produAions f-. This
may be confidered as the first relaxations of those
rigid laws, which confined the trade with the Newv
World to a tingle port, and the firfi attempt to ad-
mit the reft of the kingdom to some Share in it.

Free trade IT was soon followed by one more decisive. In
peerialed to the year 1765, Charles III. laid open the trade to
vinces. the windward islands, Cuba, Hispaniola, Porto

Rico, Margarita, and Trinidad, to his fubjeds in
every province of Spain. He permitted them to
fail from certain ports in each of these specified in
the edict, at any season, and with whatever cargo
they deemed most proper, without any other war-
rant than a simple clearance from the clufom-houfe
of the place whence they took their departure.
He released them from the numerous and oppref-
five duties imposed on goods exported to America,
and in place of the whole fubfiituted a moderate
tax of fix in the hundred on the commodities tlnt
from Spain. He allowed them to return either to
the fame port, or to any other where they might
hope for a more advantageous market, and there
to enter the homeward cargoe, on payment of
the usual duties. This ample privilege which

;t.

* Ponzr Vi;lgc lfe paglEf ln, vi. Prol. p. 15.
f Append. li. a la cEuc. Pop. p. 31.
416

once broke through all the fences, which the jea- B o o K
lous policy of Spain had been labouring for two V!m.
centuries and a half to throw round its commercial ~^
intercourse with theNewWorld, was loon after ex-
tended to Louisiana, and to the provinces of Yuca-
tan and Campeachy *.

THE propriety of this innovation, which may Benecial

be confidered as the molt liberal effort of Spanish 'haS of it
legislation, has appeared from its effects. Prior to.
the edid in favour of the free trade, Spain deriv-
ed hardly any benefit from its neglected colonies
in Hispaniola, Porto-Rico, Margarita, and Trini-
dad. Its commerce with Cuba was inconsiderable,
and that of Yucatan and Campeachy was ingroffed
almolt entirely by interlopers. But as soon as a
general liberty of trade was permitted, the inter-
course with those provinces revived, and has gone
on with a rapidity of progreflion, of which there
are few examples in the history of nations. In less
than ten years, the trade of Cuba has been more
than tripled. Even in those settlements, where
from the languishing state of indufiry, greater es-
forts were requisite to restore its activity, their com-
merce has been doubled. It is computed, that
such a number of ihips is already employed in the
free trade, that the tonnage of them far exceeds
that of the Galeons and Flora, at the moil flouriflh-
ing ara of their commerce. The benefits of this
arrangement are not confined to a few merchants,
eftablilhed in a favourite port. They are diffused
through every province of the kingdom ; and by
opening a new market for their various producti-
ons and manufactures, must encourage and add
vivacity to the indultry of the farmer and artificer.

VOL. II. Ee Nor

*Append, ii. a Ia Ednic I'op. 17. 5. [9'.

4I7

B O O K Nor does the kingdom profit only by what it ex.

VIE!I ports, it derives advantage likewise from what it

receives in return, and has the profpe& of being
soon able to supply itself with several commodities
of extensive consumption, for which it formerly
depended on foreigners. The consumption of
sugar in Spain is perhaps as great in proportion to
the number of its inhabitants, as that of any Euro-
pean kingdom. But though possessed of countries
in the New World, whose foil and climate are most
proper for rearing that valuable plant, though the
domeltic culture of the sugar-cane in the kingdom
of Granada was once considerable, such has been
the fatal tendency of its inflitutions in America,
and such the pressure of injudicious taxes in Eu-
rope, that Spain has loft almost entirely this branch
of industry, which has enriched other nations.
This commodity, which has now become an arti-
cle of primary necessity in Europe, the Spaniards
were obliged to purchase of foreigners, and had
the mortification to fee their country drained an-
nually of an immense fum on that account *.
But if that spirit, which the permission of free
trade has put in motion, shall persevere in its es-
forts with the fame vigour, the cultivation of fu-
gar in Cuba and Porto Rico, may increase so
much, that in a few years their growth may be
equal to the demand of the kingdom.

Free trade HER experience of the beneficial consequences
,,e'.tw he resulting from having relaxed somewhat of the
coloniee. rigour of her ancient laws with respect to the

commerce of the mother-country with the colo-
nies, has induced Spain to permit a more liberal
intercourse of one colony with another. By one
of the jealous maxims of the old system, all com-
munication between the various provinces situated

01.

* Uztariz, c. 94.
418

6n the South Seas, was prohibited under the most B O O K
revere penalties. Though each of there yield pe- VIII.
culiar productions, the reciprocal exchange of
which rmiight have added to the happiness of their
relpeative inhabitants, or have facilitated their
progress in industry, so solicitous was the Council
of the Indies, to prevent their receiving any supply
of their wants but by the periodical fleets from
Europe; that in order to guard against this, it
cruelly debarred the Spaniards in Peru, in.New
Spain, in Guatirmala, and the New Kingdom of
Granada, from such a correspondence with their
fellow subje&s, as tended manifestly to their mu-
tual prosperity. Of all the numerous refiridtions
devised by Spain for securing the exclusive trade
with her American Settlements, none perhaps was
more illiberal, none seems to have been more fenfi-
bly felt, or to have produced more hurtful effects;
This grievance, coeval with the settlements of
Spain in the New World, is at last redressed. In
the year 1774, Charles III. published an edit,
granting to the four vast provinces which I have
mentioned, the privilege of a free trade with each
other *. What may be the effeEts of opening
this communication between countries destined by
their situation for reciprocal intercourse, cannot
yet be determined by experience. They can
hardly fail of being beneficial and extensive.
The motives for granting this permiflion are ma-
nifefily no less laudable, than the principle on
which it is founded is liberal; and both discover
the progress of a spirit in Spain far elevated above
the narrow prejudices and maxims on which their
system for regulating the trade, and conducting
the government of their colonies, was originally
founded.

Ee . AT

* Real Ccdula penes me. Ponz. Viage de , fpiigna vi,
Prologo, p. 2. N T E XCVII.

419

B 0 0 K AT the fame time that Spain has been intent on

VIII. introducing regulations, suggested by more en-

Ne- -larged views of policy, into her fyitem of American
tions con- commerce, Ihe has not been inattentive to the in-
govenrthmt terior government of her colonies. Here too there
ofthecolo-was much room for reformation and improve-

ment, and Don Joseph Galvez, who has now the
direction of the department for Indian affairs in
Spain, has enjoyed the best opportunities not only
of observing the defeats and corruption in the po-
litical frame of the colonies, but of discovering
the sources of those evils. After being employed
seven years in the New World on an extraordina-
ry million, and with very extensive powers, as in-
fpetor-general of New Spain, after visiting in
person the remote provinces of Cinaloa, Sonora,
and California, and making several important al-
terations in the state of their police and revenue;
he began his ministry with a general reformation

Reformati- of the tribunals of justice in America. In confe-
on of the
courts f quence of the progress of population and wealth in
justice. the colonies, the business of the Courts of Audi-

ence has encreafed so much that the number of
judges of which they were originally composed,
has been found inadequate to the growing labours
and duties of the office, and the salaries fettled up-
on them, inferior to the dignity 'of the fiation.
As a remedy for botli, he obtained a royal edi&t,
efiablifhing an additional number ofjudges in each
court 6f Audience, with higher titles and more
ample appointments *.

New difri- To the fame intelligent minifler Spain is in-
gution debted for a new ditribution of government in its
government in its
ments. American provinces. Even since the eftablifl-

ment of a third viceroyalty in the New King-

dom

* Gazeta dc Madrid, 1z9h of March, 1776.
4z2

dom of Granada, so prodigious is the extent of the B 0 0 K
Spanish dominions in the New World, that feve- VII.
ral places subjed to the jurifdi-tion of each of the
viceroys, were at such an enormous diftaace fiom
the capitals in which they resided, that neither
their attention, nor their authority, could reach
them. Some provinces subordinate to the viceroy
of New Spain, lay above two thousand miles
from Mexico. There are countries subject to the
viceroy of Peru tiill farther from Lima. The
people in those remote diftrits, could hardly be
said to enjoy the benefit of civil government.
The oppreflion and insolence of its inferior mini-
fters they often feel, and rather submit to thelf
in silence, than involve themselves in the expence
and trouble of resorting to the diflant capitals,
where alone they can find redress. As a remedy New vice.
for this, a fourth viceroyalty has been ereded, to guYa 776,
the jurifdiEtion of which are fubjefted the pro- onRiodela
vinces of Rio de la Plata, Buenos-Ayres, Para-
guay, Tucuman, Potofi, Sta. Cruz de la Sierra,
Charcas, and the towns of Mendoza and St.
Juan. By this well judged arrangement, two ad-
vantages are gained. All the inconveniences
occasioned by the remote situation of those pro-
vinces, which had been long felt, and long com-
plained of, are removed. The countries moil dif-
tant from Lima arc separated from the vice-royalty
of Peru, and united uuder a fullerior, whose feat
of government at Buenos Ayres will be commo-
dious and acceflible. The contraband trade with
the Portuguese, which was become so extensive,
as must have put a final flop to the exportation
of commodities from Spain to her outlhern co-
lonies, may be checked more thoroughly, and
with greater facility, when the supreme magifirale,
by his vicinity to the places in which it is carried
on, can view its progrefi and effects with his own
eyes. Don Pedro Zevallos, who has been raised
to this new dignity, with appointments equal

to

B 0 0 K to those of the other viceroys, is well acquainted

VIiI. both with the slate and the interest of the countries
~,.- -w. over which he is to preside, having served in them

long and with distinction. By this dismember-
ment, succeeding that which took place at the
erection of the vice-royalty of the New Kingdom
of Granada, almofi two-third parts of the terri-
tories originally subjet to the vice-roys of Peru,
are now lopped off from their jurifdition.

New go- TTHE limits of the vice-royalty of New Spain
provinces of have likewise been considerably circumscribed,
Sosra, &c. and with no less propriety and discernment. Four

of its most remote provinces, Sonora, Cinaloa, Cali-
fornia, and New Navarre, have been formed into
a separate government. The Chevalier de Croix,
who is intrulted with this command, is not dig-
nified with the title of viceroy, nor does he en-
joy the appointments belonging to that rank, but
hisjurifditYion and authority is altogether inde-
pendent on the vice-royalty of New Spain. The
ere&tion of this last government seems to have
been suggested, not only by the consideration of
the remote situation of those provinces from.Mex-
ico; but by attention to the late discoveries made
there, which I have mentioned *. Countries con-
taining fucli riches, and which probably may rife
into such importance, required the immediate in-
fpection of a governor, to whom they were special-
ly committed. As every consideration of duty,
of interest, and of vanity, must concur in prompt-
ing those new governors to encourage such exer-
tions as tend to diffuse opulence and prosperity
through the provinces committed to their charge,
the beneficial effects of this arrangement may be
considerable Many difirits in America long
deprefied by the languor and feebleness natural to
provinces which compose the extremities of an

overgrown

* Book VII.
422

overgrown empire, may be animated with vigour B o O K
and adtivity when brought so near the feat of VIII.
power, as to feel its invigorating influence.

SUCH, since the acceflion of the Bourbons to the .Attempts to

throne of Spain, has been the progress of their re- ','c oli.
gulations, and the gradual expansion of their v' :.- cy
with respect to the commerce and govern i!it of
their American colonies. Nor has their *.tention
been so entirely engrossed by what .r, .ted to the
more remote parts of their domini,:!, ,: to render
them negle&ful of what was iii more impor-
tant, the reformation of domestic errors and de-
sets in policy. Fully sensible of the causes to
which the declension of Spain, from her former
prosperity, ought to be imputed; they have made
it a great object of their policy, to revive a spirit of
indufiry among their fubjets, and to give such ex-
tent and perfection to their manufactures, that they
may be ableto supply thedemands of America from
their own flock, and to exclude foreigners from
a branch of commerce which has been so fatal to
the kingdom. This they have endeavoured to
accomplish, by a variety of edicts iflued since the
peace of Utrecht. They have granted bounties for
the encouragement of rome branches of indut'ry;
they have lowered the taxes on others; they have
prohibited, or have loaded with additional duties,
such foreign manufaatures as come in competition
with them; they have instituteld ocieties for the
improvement of trade and agriculture; they have
planted colonies of husbandmen in rome uncul-
tivated difiridts of Spain, and divided among them
the wafle fields; they have had recourse to eve-
ry expedient devised by commercial wisdom, or
commercial jealousy, for reviving their own in-
dufiry, and difcountenancing that of other na-
tions. These, however, it is not my province to

explain,

423

B O o K explain, or to inquire into their propriety and es-

vii. feets. There is no effort of legislation more ar-

duous, no experiment in policy more uncertain,
than an attempt to revive the spirit of indufiry
where it has declined, or to introduce it where it is
unknown. Nations already possessed of extensive
commerce, enter into competition with such ad-
vantages, derived from the large capitals of their
merchants! the dexterity of their manufacturers,
the alertness acquired by habit in every depart-
ment of business, that the slate which aims at
rivalling, or supplanting them, must expect to
firuggle with many difficulties, and be content
to advance slowly. If the quantity of productive
industry now in Spain, be compared with that of
the kingdom under the listless monarchs of the
'Austrian line, its progress mufi appear confidera-
ble, and is sufficient to alarm the jealousy, and to
call forth the most vigorous efforts of the nations
now in possession of the lucrative trade which the
Spaniards aim at wrelYing from them. One cir-
cumfiance may render those exertions of Spain
an obje&t of more serious attention to the other
European powers. They are not to be ascribed
wholly to the influence of the crown and its mi-
nitiers. The sentiments and spirit of the people
'eem to second the provident care of their mo-
narchs, and to give it greater effect. They
have adopted more liberal ideas, not only with
refpet to commerce, but domeflic policy. In all
their later writers, defets in their arrangements
concerning both are acknowledged, and remedies
proposed, which pride would not have allow-
ed their anceitors to confers, and ignorance ren-
dered them incapable of discerning *. But after
all that the Spaniards have done, much remains
to do. Many pernicious inflitutions and abuses

deeply

Sec NOTE XCVIII.
424

deeply incorporated with the system of internal B o0 K
policy and taxation, which has been long efla- VIII.
blifled in Spain, must be abolished before indultry
and manufactures can recover an extensive adti-
vity.

Contraband

STILL, however, the commercial regulations ditr

of Spain with refpedt to her colonies, are too ri-
gid and systematical to be carried into com-
plete execution. The legislature that loads trade
with impositions too heavy, or fetters it by reftric-
tions %too revere, defeats its own intention; and,
in truth, is only multiplying the inducements to
violate its fiatutes, and proposing an high pre-
mium to encourage illicit traffic. The Spaniards,
both in Europe and America, circumscribed in
their mutual intercourse by the jealousy, or op-
prefed by the exations of the crown, have their
invention continually on the firetch how to elude
its edits. The vigilance and ingenuity of private
interelt discover means of effecing this, which
public wisdom cannot foresee, nor public authority
prevent. This spirit, counteracting that of the
laws, pervades the commerce of Spain with Ame-
rica in all its branches; and from the highelt de-
partments in government, descends to the lowelt.
'The very officers appointed to check contraband
trade, are often employed as inrtruments in car-
rying it on ; and the boards inflitited to restrain
;and punish it, are the channels through which it
flows. The king is fippofed to be defrauded by
various artifices, of more than one half of the re-
venue which he ought to receive from America *;
and as long as it is the interest of so many persons
:o screen those artifices fiom detection, the know-
ledge of them will never reach the throne. "How
"many ordinances, lays Corita, how many in-

" lliruions,
Soloz de Ind. jure, ij. 1.1. v.

425

BO O K" firutions, how many letters from our fove-

VIII. "( reign, are sent in order to corret abufes,andhow
i "' ' little are they observed, and what small advan-

"tage is derived from them! To me the old
" observation appears just, that where there are
" many physicians, and many medicines, there
" is a want of health; where there are many
"laws, and many judges there is a want ofjultice.
'" We have viceroys, prefidents,governors,oydors,
"corrigidors, alcades, and thousands of algua-
" zils abound every where; but notwithfianding
"all these, public abuses continue to multiply *."
Time has increased the evils which he lamented
as early as the reign of Philip II. A spirit of
corruption has infected all the colonies of Spain
in America. Men far removed from the feat of
government, impatient to acquire wealth, that
they may return speedily from what they are apt
to confider as a itate of exile in a remote un-
healthful country, allured by opportunities too
tempting to be resifted, and seduced by the ex-
ample of those around them, find their senti-
ments of honour and of duty gradually relax.
In private life, they give themselves up to a diffo-
lute luxury, while in their public conduct they
become unmindful of what they owe to their so-
vereign arid their country.

Tradebe. BEFORE I close this account of the Spanilh
twetn New trade in America, there remains one detached,
spbi", . but important branch of it, to be mentioned.
pines. Soon after his acceflion to the throne, Philip II.

formed a scheme of planting a colony in the
'564, Philippine islands, which had been negleced since

the time of their discovery t ; and he accomplilhed
it by means of an armament fitted out from New
Spain $. Manila, in the island of Luconia, was the

flation

* MS. penes me. + Book V.
t Torqucm. lib. v. c. 14.
4e6

flation chosen for the capital of this new establish- B O o K
ment. From it an active commercial intercourse V1II.
began with the Chinese, and a considerable number -v
of that industrious people, allured by the profpet
of gain, fettled in the Philippines under the Spanish
protedtion. They supplied the colony so amply
with all the valuable productions and manufac-
tures of the EaR, as enabled it to open a trade
with America, by a course of navigation the long-
eft from land to land on our globe. In the infan-
cy of this trade, it was carried on with Callao, on
the coast of Peru; but experience having discover-
ed many difficulties in this mode of communicati-
on, the staple of this commerce between the east
and weft was removed from Callao to Acapulco,
on the coast of New Spain.

AFTER various arrangements, it has been

brought into a regular form. One or two ships
depart annually from Acapulco, which may carry
out silver to the amount of five hundred thousand
pesos *, but have hardly any thing else of value on
board; in return for which, they bring back fpi-
ces, drugs, .china, and japan wares, callicoes,
chintz, muslins, silks, and every precious article
with which the benignity of the climate, or the
ingenuity of its people, have enabled the East to
supply the reft of the world. For some time the
merchants of Peru were admitted to participate
in this traffic, and might fend annually a /hip to
Acapulco, to wait the arrival of the vessels from
Manila, and receive a proportional share of the
commodities which they imported. At length, the
Peruvians were excluded by most rigorous edicts,
and all the commodities from the East reserved
solely for the consumption of New Spain.

IN
Recop. lib. ix . 45. 1. 6.

427

B 0 0 K IN consequence of this indulgence, the inhabi-

VIII. tants of that country enjoy advantages unknown

in the other Spanish colonies. The manufactures
of the East are not only more suited to a warm
climate, and more showy than those of Europe,
but can be fold at a lower price; while at the fame
time, the profits upon them are so considerable, as
to enrich all those who are employed, either in
bringing them from Manila, or vending them in
New Spain. As the interest both of the buyer
and feller concurred in favouring this branch of
commerce, it continued to extend in spite of re-
gulations, concerted with the most anxious jealou-
fy to circumscribe it. Under cover of what the
laws permit to be imported, vast quantities of In-
dia goods are poured into the markets of New
Spain *, and when the flota arrives at Vera Cruz,
it often finds the wants of the people already sup-
plied by cheaper and more acceptable commodi-
ties.

THERE is not in the commercial arrangements

of Spain, any circumtfance more inexplicable than
the permiflion of this trade between New Spain
and the Philippines, or more repugnant to its fun-
damental maxim of holding the colonies in perpe-
tual dependance on the mother-country, by pro-
hibiting any commercial intercourse that might
suggest to them the idea of receiving a supply of
their wants from any other quarter. This permif-
sion must appear still more extraordinary, from
confidering that Spain herself carries on no diret
trade with her settlements in tile Philippines, and
grants a privilege to one of her American colonies,
which she denies to her fuibjeEts in Europe. It is
probable, that the colonifis which originally took
pofleflion of the Philippines, having been Tent
out from New Spain, began this intercourse with a

country

Sec N O T E XCIX.
428

country which they confidered, in some measure, B o o K
as their parent slate, before the court of Madrid VIII.
was aware of its consequences, or could eflablifh s'i
regulations in order to prevent it. Many remon-
ftrances have been presented against this trade, as
detrimental to Spain, by diverting into another
channel, a large portion of that treasure which
ought to flow into the kingdom, as tending to
give rife to a spirit of independence in the colo-
nies, and to encourage innumerable frauds, against
which it was impossible to guard, in tranfations
so far removed from the infpecdion of government.
But as it requires no flight effort of political wis-
dom and vigour to abolish any practice, which
numbers are interested in supporting, and to which
time has added the fanation of its authority, the
commerce betwixt Acapulco and Manila seems to
be as considerable as ever, and may be confidered
as one chief cause of the elegance and splendor
conspicuous in this part of the Spanish dominions.

BUT notwithstanding this general corruption in Public re-
the colonies, and all the defalcations of the public venu'.frou

America.

revenue, by the illicit importation of foreign com-
modities, or by the fraudulent arts of its own
subje&s, the Spanith monarchs receive a very con-
fiderable fum from their American dominions. This
arises from taxes of various kinds, which may be
divided into three capital branches. The first con-
tains what is paid to the king, as sovereign, or
superior lord of the New World: to this class be-
longs the duty on the gold and silver raised from
the mines, and the tribute exated from the Indi-
ans; the former is termed by the Spaniards the
right of igniority, the latter is the duty of vassalage.
The second branch comprehends the numerous
duties upon commerce, which accompany and op-
press it in every ftep of its progress, from the
greatest tranfadions of the wholcfale merchant, to

the

429

B O O K the petty traffic of the vender by retail. The third

VIII. includes what accrues to the king, as head of the
-LrT church, and administrator of ecclesiastical funds in

the New World. In consequence of this he re-
ceives the fir't fruits, annats, spoils, and other
spiritual revenues levied by the apostolic chamber
in Europe; and is entitled likewise, to the profit
arising from the sale of the bull of Cruzado. This,
which is published every two years, contains an
absolution from past offences by the Pope, and,
among other immunities, a permiflion to eat fe-
veral kinds of prohibited food, during Lent, and
on meagre days. The monks employed in dif-
perfing those bulls, extol their virtues with all the
fervour of interested eloquence; the people, ig-
norant and credulous, lifen with implicit aflent;
and every person in the Spaniih colonies, of Eu-
ropean, Creolian, or mixed race, purchases a bull,
which is deemed essential to his salvation, at the
rate set upon it by government *
Its amount. WHAT may be the amount of those various

funds, it is almost impoflible to determine with
precision. The extent of the Spanish dominions
in America, the jealousy of government, which
renders them inacceflible to foreigners, the mylle-
rious silence which the Spaniards are accustomed to
observe with respect to the interior irate of their
colonies, combine in covering this fubjeft with a
veil which it is not easy to remove. But an ac-
count, apparently no less accurate, than it is cu-
rious, has lately been published of the royal reve-
nue in New Spain, from which we may form tome
idea with respect to what is collected in the other
provinces. According to that account the crown

does
* Sec NOTE C.

does not receive from all the departments of tax- B O O K
ation in New Spain, above a million of our mo- VIII.
ney; from which one half must be deducted as the
expence of the provincial establishment *. Peru,
it is probable, yields a fum not inferior to this,
and if we suppose that all the other regions of A-
merica, including the islands, furnish a third share
of equal value; we ihall not perhaps be far wide
from the truth, if we conclude, that the net pub-
lic revenue of Spain, raised in America, does not
exceed a million and a half flerling. This falls
far ihort of the immense fums, to which fuppofiti-
ons, founded upon conjecture, have raised the Spa-
nifh revenue in America t. It is remarkable, how-
ever, upon one account. Spain and Portugal are
the only European powers, who derive a direct re-
venue from their colonies as their quota towards
defraying the general expence of government.
All the advantage that accrues to other nations,
from their American dominions, arises from the
exclusive enjoyment of their trade; but betide
this, Spain has brought her colonies to contribute
to increase the power of the irate; and in return
for protection, to bear a proportional ihare of the
common burden.

AccORDINGLY, what I have computed as the
amount of the Spanish revenue from America,
comprehends only the taxes collected there, and is
far from being the whole of what accrues to the
king from his dominions in the New World. The
heavy duties imposed on the commodities exported
from Spain to America ., as well as what is paid
by those which she fends home in return; the tax
upon the negroe-flaves, with which Afiica supplies

the

* See NOTE CI. f Se NOTE CII.
t S8e NOTE C111.

BO 0 K the New World, together with .fveral smaller

VIII. branches of finance, bring large fums into the
L7-' - treasury, the precise extent of which I cannot pre-

tend to ascertain.

Expence of BUT if the revenue which Spain draws from
adlminilra- America be great, the expence of adminifiration in

her colonies bears proportion to it. In every de-
partment, even of her domestic police and sinan-
ces, Spain has adopted a system more complex,
and more encumbered with a variety of tribunals,
and a multitude of officers, than that of any Eu-
ropean nation, in which the sovereign possesses
such extensive power. From the jealous spirit
with which the watches over her American fettle-
ments, and her endeavours to guard againfi fraud
in provinces so remote from infpeation; boards
and officers have been multiplied there with still
more anxious attention. In a country where the
expence of living is great, the salaries allotted to
every person in public office muff be high, and
must load the revenue with an immense burden.
The parade of government greatly augments the
weight of it. The viceroys of Mexico, Peru, and
the New Kingdom of Granada, as representatives
of the king's person, among people fond of often-
tation, maintain all the state and dignity of royal-
ty. Their courts are formed upon the model of
that at Madrid, with horse and foot guards, a house-
hold regularly ellablifhed, numerous attendants,
and ensigns of power, displaying such pomp, as
hardly retains the appearance of a delegated autho-
rity. All the expence incurred by supporting the
external and permanent order of government is
defrayed by the crown. The viceroys have be-
fides peculiar appointments suited to their exalted
flation. The salaries fixed by law are indeed ex-
tremely moderate, that of the viceroy of Peru is
only thirty thousand ducats ; and that of the vice-

roy
432

roy of Mexico twenty thousand ducats *. Of late, B o o K
they have been raised to forty thousand. ViII.

THESE salaries, however, conflitute but a small

part of their revenue. The exercise of an abfo-
lute authority extending to every department of
government, and the power of disposing of many
lucrative offices, affords to them innumerable op-
portunities of accumulating wealth. To thefl,
which may be confidered as legal and allowed
emoluments, vast fums are often added by exac-
tions, which in countries so far removed from the
feat of government, it is not easy to discover, and
impossible to restrain. By monopolizing some
branches of commerce, bv a lucrative concern in
others, by conniving at the frauds of merchants,
a viceroy may raise filch an annual revenue, as no
subjet of any European mon;rch enjoys 1-. From
the tingle article of prcfents made to him on the
anniversary of his NaIt, re-day (which is always ob-
served as an high feitival), I am informed that a
viceroy has been known to receive sixty thousand
pesos. According to a Spanifl faying, the legal
revenues of a viceroy are known, his real profits
depend upon his opportunities and his confciencc.
Conscious of this, the kings of Spain, as I have
formerly observed, grant a conmmillion to their
viceroy only for a few years. This cir cunllance,
however, rendersthem often more rapacious, and
adds to the ingenuity and ardour v.herewith they
labour to improve every moment of power which
they know is haflening fall to a period ; and short
as its duration is, it ulially affords fiuficient time
for repairing a shattered fortune, or creating a
new one. But even in situations lb trying to hu-
man frailty, there are inflances of virtue that re-
main unfeduced. In the year 1772, the Marquis

VOL. II. F f de

1 Scee NOTE CIV.
'I ACCOP. lit). i)i (it. iii. C. -,z'.

B O O K de Croix finished the term of his viceroyalty in

VVI1. New Spain with unfufpe&ed integrity; and in-
'"- Read of bringing home exorbitant wealth, return-

ed with the admiration and applause of a grateful
people, whom his government had rendered
happy.

NOTES

LB C'

/ 1
/o/ ._: o. i

Cj 0

C).,,,,
-r----:------

----I
L - -

--'-- ----I------------'-' '
1 I'Issi -

N O

T E S

AND
ILLUSTRATIO N S.

Fs2

# NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.

N O T ES

AND
ILLUSTRATION S.

NOTE I. p. I.

O UR knowledge of the events which happened in
the conqueff of New Spain, is derived from sources of
information more original and authentic than that of any
transaction in the hitforyof America. The letters of
Cortes to the Emperor Charles V. are the most valuable
of there, and the first in order of time. As Cortes early
assumed a command independent of Velasquez, it became
necessary to convey such an account of his operations
to Madrid, as might procure him the approbation of his
Sovereign.

THE firn of his dispatches has never been made

public. It was sent from Vera-Cruz, July 16, 1519.
It must have come to the Emperor's hands while he was
in Germany, as he left Spain on the 22d of May in that
year, in order to receive the imperial crown. I have
made diligent search for a copy of this dispatch, both
in Spain and in Germany, but without success, This,
however, is of less consequence, as it could not contain
any thing very material, being written so soon after Cortes
arrived in New Spain. The second dispatch, dated

Oaober

October 30, 520, was published at Seville, A. D. 1 522,
and the third and fourth soon after they were received.
A Latin translation of them appeared in Germany
A. D. 1532. Ramufio soon after made them more ge-
nerally known, by inserting them in his valuable col-
le&ion. They contain a regular and minute history
of the expedition, with many curious particulars con-
cerning the policy and manners of the Mexicans. The
work does honour to Cortes; the style is simple and per-
fpicuous; but as it was manifestly his interest to repre-
sent his own ations in the fairefl light, his vicories are
probably exaggerated, his losses diminished, and his
aas of rigour and violence somewhat softened.

THE next in order is the Cronicade la Nueva Efpagna,

by Francisco Lopez de Gomara, publifled A. D. 1554,
Gomara's hiltorical merit is considerable. His mode of
narration is clear, flowing, always agreeable, and some-
times elegant. But he is frequently inaccurate and cre-
dulous; and as he was the domeflic chaplain of Cortes
after his return from New Spain, and probably composed
his work at his desire, it is manifest that he labours
to magnify the merit of his hero, and to conceal or ex-
tenuate such tranfa&ions as were unfavourable to his cha-
rader. Of this Herrera accuses him in one instance,
Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. n. and it is not once only that this is
conspicuous. He writes, however, with so much free-
dom concerning several measures of the Spanish court,
that the copies both of his Hiftoria de las Indias, and of
his Cronica, Were called in by a degree of the council
of the Indies, and they were long confidered as prohi-
bited books in Spain, though of late licence to print
them has been granted. Pinelo Biblioth. 589.

THE Chronicle of Gomara induced Bernal Diaz

del Castillo to compose his Hiftoria Verdadera de la
Conquilta de la Nueva Efpagna. He had been an
adventurer in each of the expeditions to New Spain,
and was the companion of Cortes in all his battles
and perils. When he found that neither he himself
nor many of his fellow-foldiers were once men-
tioned by Gomara, but that the fame of all their

exploits

exploits was ascribed to Cortes; the gallant old veteran
laid hold of his pen with indignation, and composed his
true history. It contains a prolix, minute, confused
narrative of all Cortes's operations, in such a rude vulgar
style as might be expeted from an illiterate soldier. But
as he relates tranfacaions of which he was witness, and
in which he performed a considerable part, his account
bears all the marks of authenticity, and is accompanied
with luch a pleasant naivete, with such interefling de-
tails, with such anmuing vanity, and yet so pardonable
in an old soldier who had been (as he boalDb) in a hun-
dred and nineteen battles, as renders his book one of the
mofl singular that is to be found in any language.

PET. MARTYR ab Angleria in a Treatise de Infulis

nuper inventis, added to his Decades de rebus Oceanicis
& novo orbe, gives some account of Cortes's expedition.
But he proceeds no farther than to relate what happened
after his firfl landing. This work, which is brief and
flight, seems to contain the information transmitted by
Cortes in his firfl dispatches, embelliihed with several
particulars communicated to the author by the officers
who brought the letters from Cortes.

BUT the book to which the greater part of modern hi-

florians have had recourse for information concerning the
conquefl of New Spain, is -ifl'oria de la Conquilla de
Mexico, per D. Antonio de Solis, fifft publiflled A. D.
1684. I know no author in any lai.guage whose litera-
ry fame has risen so far beyond his real merit. De So-
lIs is reckoned by his countrymen one of the purest wri-
ters in the Castilian tongue; and if a foreigner may ven-
ture to give his opinion concerning a matter of which
Spaniards alone are qualified to judge, he is entitled to
that praise. But, though his language be corre&, his
taste in composition is far from being just. -lis periods
are so much laboured as to be often tlifF, and sometimes
tumid; the figures, which he employs by way of orna-
ment, are trite or improper, and his observations super-
ficial. These blemishes, however, might easily be over-
looked, if he were not defecive with refpcEt to all the
great qualities of an hiflorian. Destitute of that patient
industry in research, which condutis to the knowledge of
truth; a firanger to that impartiality which weighs evi-

dence

445

dence with cool attention, and ever eager to establish his
favourite fyltem of exalting the character of Cortes into
that of a perfect hero, exempt from error, and adorned
with every virtue, he is less solicitous to discover what
was true, than tc relate what mght appear splendid.
When he attempts any critical difcuflion, his reasonings
are fallacious, and founded upon an imperfeCt view of
faCts. Though he sometimes quotes the dispatches of
Cortes, he seems not to have consulted them; and though
he sets out with some censure on Gomara, he frequently
prefers his authority, the most doubtful of any, to that
of the other contemporary historians.

BUT of all the Spanish writers, Herrera furnishes the

fullest and most accurate information concerning the con-
quest of Mexico, as well as every other tranfaaion in
America. The industry and attention with which he
consulted not only the books, but the original papers and
public records, which tended to throw any light upon
the subjec of his enquiries, were so great, and he usually
judges of the evidence before him with so much impar-
tiality and candour, that his decads may be ranked
among the most judicious and useful historical collections.
If, by attempting to relate the various occurrences in the
New World in a ftriC chronological order, the arrange-
ment of events in his work had not been rendered so per-
plexed, disconneCted, and obscure, that it is an unple.-
sant tafl to collet from different parts of his book, and
piece together the detached flireds of a story, he migih
jufily have been ranked among the mofl eminent hiftori.
ans of his country. He gives an account of the materi-
als from' which he composed his work, Dec. vi. lib. iii.
c. 19.

NOTE II. p. 3.

CORTES purposed to have gone in the train of O-
vando when he setout for his government in the year 1 502,
but was detained by an accident. As he was attempting
in a dark night to scramble up to the window of a lady's
bed chamber, with whom he carried on an intrigue, an
old wall, on the top of which he had mounted, gave way,
and he was so much bruised by the fall as to be unfit
for the voyage. Gomara, Cronica de la Nueva Efpag-
na, cap. I.

NOTE III. p. 5.

CO R T E S had two thousand pesos in the hands of
Andrew Duero, and he borrowed four thousand. These
fums are about equal in value to fifteen hundred pounds
tferling; but as the price of every thing was extremely
high in America, they made but a scanty flock when ap-
plied in this manner. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 2.
B. Diaz. c. 2o.

NOTE IV. p. 9.

T H E names of those gallant officers which will
often occur in the subsequent story, were Juan Velaf-
quez de Leon, Alonfo Hernandez Portocarrero, Fran-
cisco de Montejo, Chriftoval de Old, Juan de Efcalante,
Francisco de Morla, Pedro de Alvarado, 'rancifco de
Salceda, Juan de Efcobar, Gines de Nortes. Cortes
himself commanded the Capitana, or Admiral. Fran-
cisco de Orozed, an officer formed in the wars of Italy,
had the command of the artillery. The experienced
Alaminos acted as chief pilot.

NOTE

447
'*

NOTE V. p. ii.

IN those different conflics, the Spaniards loft only
two men, but had a considerable number wounded.
Though there be no occasion for recourse to any super-
natural cause to account either for the greatners of their
vitories, or the finallnefs of their loss, the Spanish
historians fail not to ascribe both to the patronage of
St. Jago, the tutelar Saint of their country, who, as
they relate, fought at the head of their countrymen,
and by his prowess gave a turn to the fate of the battle.
Gomara is the first who mentions this apparition of St.
James. It is amusing to observe the embarrassment of
B. Diaz de Caflillo, occasioned by the struggle between
his fuperfiition and his veracity. The former disposed
him to believe this miracle, the latter restrained him
from affirming it. " I acknowledge, fays he, that all
our exploits and vi&ories are owing to our Lord Jesus
Christ, and that in this battle there was such a number
of Indians to every one of us, that if each had thrown a
handful of earth they might have buried us, if by the
great mercy of God we had not been proteced. It
may be that the person whom Gomara mentions as
having appeared on a mottled grey horse, was the
glorious apostle Signor St. Jago or Signor St. Pedro;
and that I, as being a finner, was not worthy to fee
him. This I know, that I saw Francisco de Morla on
such a horse, but as an unworthy transgressor, did not
deserve to fee any of the holy apostles. It may have
been the will of God, that it was so as Gomara relates,
but until I read his Chronicle I never heard among any
of the conquerors that such a thing had happened."
Cap. 34.

NOTE VI. p. 16.

S E V E R A L Spanish hiforians relate this occur-
rence in such terms, as if they wished it should be-
lieved, that the Indians loaded with the presents, had
carried them from the capital in the fame fliort space of
time that the couriers performed that journey. This is

ilncrediblc ;
448

incredible; and Gomara mentions a circumrtance which
ihews, that nothing extraordinary happened on this oc-
cafion. This rich present had been prepared for Gri-
jalva, when he touched at the fame place some months
before, and was now ready to be delivered, as soon as
Montezuma sent orders for that purpose. Gomara,
Cron. c. xxvii. p. 28.

ACCORDING to B. Diaz del Castillo, the value of

the silver plate representing the moon, was alone above
twenty thousand pesos, about five thousand pounds
fierling.

o

NOTE VII. p. 22.

T H I S private traffic was directly contrary to the in-
firu&ions of Velasquez, who enjoined, that whatever
was acquired by trade should be thrown into the com-
mon flock. But it appears, that the soldiers had each
a private assortment of toys, and other goods proper
for the Indian trade, and Cortes gained their favour by
encouraging this underhand barter. B. Diaz, c. 41.

NOTE VIII. p. 32.

G M A R A has published a catalogue of the va-
rious articles of which this present consisted. Cron. c.
49. P. Martyr ab Asrgleria, who saw them after they
were brought to Spain, and who seems to have exa-
mined them with great attention, gives a description of
each, which is curious, as it conveys some idea of the
progress which the Mexicans had made in several arts of
elegance. De infulis nuper inventis liber, p. 354, &c.

NOTE IX. p. 38.

T H E R E is no circumrnance in the hiflory of the
conquest of America, which is more qucflionable than
the account of the numerous armies brought into the
field againfl the Spaniards. As the war with the Tlaf-

calans,

449

calans, though of short duration, was one of the mofl
considerable which they waged in America, the account
given of their forces merits some attention. The only
authentic information concerning this is derived from
three authors. Cortes, in his second dispatch to the
emperor, dated at Segura de la Frontera, Otober 30,
1520, thus eflimates the number of their troops: in
the first battle 6000; in the second battle 00oo,ooo: in
the third battle 15o,ooo. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. 228.
Bernal Diaz del Caflillo, who was an eye witness, and
engaged in all the actions of this war, thus reckons their
numbers: in the first battle 3000, p. 43; in the second
battle 6000,°ibid. in the third battle 50,000, p. 45.
Gomara, who was Cortes's chaplain after his return to
Spain, and published his Cronica in 1552, follows the
computation of Cortes, except in the second battle,
where hereckons the Tlafcalans at 80,000, p. 49. It
was manifefily the interest of Cortes to magnify his own
dangers and exploits. For it was only by the merit of
extraordinary services, that he could hope to atone for
his irregular conduct, in assuming an independent com-
mand. Bern. Diaz, though abundantly disposed to
place his own prowess, and that of his fellow-conquer-
ors, in the most advantageous point of light, had not
the fame temptation to exaggerate; and it is probable,
that his account of the numbers approaches nearer to the
truth. The assembling of an army of i50,ooo men
requires many previous arrangements, and flch provision
for their subsistence as seems to be beyond the foresight
of Americans. The degree of cultivation in Tlafcala
does not seem to have been so great, as to have furnish-
ed such a vail army with provisions. Though this pro-
vince was so much better cultivated than other regions
of New Spain, that it was called the country of bread,
yet the Spaniards in their march suffered such walnt,
that they were obliged to subsist upon Tinas, a species
of fruit which grows wild in the fields. Herrera, Dec.
ii. lib. vi. c. 5. p. 182.

NOTE

NOTE X. p. 42.

T H E S E unhappy vietims are said to be persons of
diflinction. It seems improbable that so great a number
as fifty (hould be employed as spies. So many prisoners
had been taken and dismissed, and the Tlafcalans had
sent so many messages to the Spanifl quarters, that
there appears to be no reason for hazarding the lives of
so many considerable people, in order to procure infor-
mation about the position and slate of their camp. The
barbarous manner in which Cortes treated a people un-
acquainted with the laws of war established among po-
lifhed nations, appears so shocking to the later Spanish
writers, that they diminish the number of those whom
he punished so cruelly. Herrera fays, that he cut off
the hands of fcven, and the thumbs of some more.
Dec. ii. lib. ii. c. 8. De Solis relates, that the hands
of fourteen or fifteen were cut off, and the thumbs of
all the reft. Lib. ii. c. 20. But Cortes himself, Relat.
p. 228, b. and after him Gomara, c. 48, affirm, that
the hands of all the fifty were cut off.

N O T E XI. p. 44.

T HE horses were objecs of the grcateft alonifli-
ment to all the people of New Spain. At first they
imagined the horse and his rider, like the centaurs of
the ancients, to be some monfirous animal of a terrible
form; and supposing, that their food was the fame as
that of men, brought flesh and bread to nourish them.
Even after they discovered their mistake, they believed the
horses devoured men in battle, and when they neighed,
thought that they were demanding their prey. It was
not the intcreft of the Spaniards to undeceive them.
Herrera, Dec. ii. lib. vi. c. I r.

NOT E

45z

NOTE XII. p. 49.

A CCORDI N G to Bart. de las Casas, there was
no reason for this massacre, and it was an a& of wan-
ton cruelty, perpetrated merely to firike terror in the
g people of New Spain. Relac. de la Deftruyc. p. 17,

&c. But the zeal of Las Casas often leads him to ex-
aggerate. In opposition to him Bern. Diaz. c. 83,
asserts, that the first miflionaries sent into New Spain
by the emperor, made a judicial inquiry into this tranf-
aaion; and having examined the prieits and elders of
Cholula, found that there was a real conspiracy to cut
off the Spaniards, and that the account given by Cortes
was exacly true. As it was the objet of Cortes at
that time, and manifestly his interelt, to gain the good-
will of Montezuma, it is improbable, that he would
have taken a flep which tended so visibly to alienate
him from the Spaniards, if he had not believed it to be
necessary for his own preservation. At the fame time,
the Spaniards who served in America had such contempt
for the natives, and thought them so little entitled to
the common rights of men, that Cortes might hold the
Cholulans as guilty upon flight and imperfed evidence.
The severity of the punishment was certainly excessive
and atrocious.

NOTE XIII. p. 50.

T H I S description is taken almofi literally from Ber-
nal Diaz del Castillo, who was so unacquainted with
the art of composition, as to be incapable ofembellifhing
his narrative. He relates, in a simple and rude style,
what passed in his own mind, and that of his fellow-
soldiers on that occasion ; " and let it not be thought
firange, fays he, that I should write in this manner of
what then happened: for it ought to be confidered, that
it is one thing to relate, another to have beheld things
that were never before seen, or heard, or spoken of
among men." Cap. 86. p. 64. b.

NOTE
452

NOTE XIV. p. 6X.

B. Diaz del Castillo gives us some idea of the fatigue
and hardships Ihey underwent in performing this, and
other parts of duty. During the nine months that they
remained in Mexico, every man, without any diflinaion
between officers and soldiers, slept on his arms, in his
quilted jacket and gorget. They lay on mats, or firaw
spread on the floor, and each was obliged to hold him-
self as alert as if he had been on guard. " This, adds
he, became so habitual to me, that even now in
my advanced age, I always sleep in my cloaths, and
never in any bed. When I visit my Encomienda, I rec-
kon it suitable to my rank, to have a bed carried along
with my other baggage; but I never go into it, but,
according to cuflom, I lie in my cloaths, and walk fre-
quently during the night in the open air, to view the
stars as I was wont when in service." Cap. ic3.

NOTE XV. p. 63.

C O RTES himself, in his second dispatch to the
emperor, does not explain the motives which induced
him either to condemn Qualpopoca.to the flames, or to
put Montezuma in irons. Ramus. iii. 236. B. Diaz
is silent with refped to his reasons for the former; and
the only cause he assigns for the latter was, that he
might meet with no interruption in executing the fen-
tence pronounced against lQualpopoca, c. xcv. p. 75.
But as Montezuma was his prisoner, and absolutely in
his power, the insult offered to that monarch could
have no effea but to irritate him unnecelffrily. Go-
mara supposes, that Cdrtes had no other ohjet than to
occupy Montczuma with his own diflrefs and sufferings,
that he might give less attention to what besel Qualpo-
poca. Cron. c. 89. Herrera adopts the fanme opinion.
)cc. ii. lib. viii. c. 9. But it feetns an odd expedient,
in order to make a person bear one injury, to load him
with another that is greater. De Solis imagines, that
Cortes had nothing clfc in view than to intimidate

Montczuma,

453

Montezuma, so that he might make no attempt to ref-
cue the vitims from their fate; but the spirit of that
monarch was so submissive, and he had so tamely giv-
en up the prisoners to the disposal of Cortes, that he
had little to dread from him. If the explanation which
I have attempted to give of Cortes's proceedings on this
occasion be not admitted, it appears to me, that they
must be reckoned among the wanton and barbarous acs
of oppression which occur too often in the history of the
conquest of America.

NOTE XVI. p. 67.

D E Solis asserts, lib. iv. c. 3, that the proposition
of doing homage to the King of Spain, came from Mon-
tezuma himself, and was made in order to induce the
Spaniards to depart out of his dominions. He ascribes
his conduEt on this occasion, as if it had been founded
upon a scheme of profound policy, and executed with
such refined address, as to deceive Cortes himself. But
there is no hint or circumstance in the contemporary
hiltorians, Cortes, Diaz, or Gomara, to juflify this
theory. Montezuma, on other occasions, discovered no
such extent of art and abilities. The anguish which he
felt in performing this humbling ceremony is natural, if
we suppose it to have been involuntary. But, accord-
ing to the theory of De Solis, it would have been pre-
pofterous, and. inconfiltent with his own design of de-
ceiving the Spaniards.

NOTE XVII. p. 69.

IN several of the provinces, the Spaniards, with
all their industry and influence, could colle& no
gold. Tn others, they procured only a few trin-
kets of small value. Montezuma aflured Cortes, that
the present which he offered to the King of Callile,
after doing homage, confifed of all the treasure
amafnred by his father; and told him, that he
had already ditlibuticd the reft of his gold and jewels

A,41'g roamnong

among the Spaniards. B. Diaz. c. o04. Gomara re-
lates, that all the silver colleced amounted to 500
marks. Cron. c. 93. This agrees with the account
given by Cortes, that the royal fifth of silver was ioo
marks. Relat. 239. B. So that the fum total of
silver was only 4000 ounces, at the rate of eight ounces
a mark, which demonflrates the proportion of silver to
gold to have been exceedingly small.

NOTE XVIII. p. 7o.

DE Solis, lib. iv. c. i. calls in queflion the truth of
this tranfaaion, from no better reason than that it was
inconfiRent with that prudence which distinguishes the
characer of Cortes. But he ought to have recolle&ed
the impetuosity of his zeal at Tlafcala, which was no
less imprudent. He asserts, that the evidence for it
refts upon the testimony of B. Diaz del Caltillo, of
Gomara, and of Herrera. They all concur, indeed,
in mentioning this inconsiderate Rtep which Cortes took,
and they had good reason to do so; for Cortes himself
relates this exploit in his second dispatch to the Em-
peror, and seems to glory in it. Cort. Relat. Ramus.
iii. 104. D. This is one infance, among many, of De
Solis's having consulted with little attention the letters
of Cortes to Charles V. from which the moil authentic
iiiformation with refpec to his operations mult be
derived.

NOTE XIX. p. 74.

HERRERA and De Solis suppose, that Velasquez
was encouraged to equip this armament againfr Cortes,
by the accounts which he received from Spain concerni-
ng the reception of the agents Tent by the colony of
'era Cruz, and the warmth with which Fonseca bishop
f Burgos had espoused his interest, and condemned
Ihe proceedings of Cortes. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. ix. c.
'8. De Solis, lib. iv. c. 5. But the chronological
rder of events refutes this fippofition. Portocarrero
and Montejo failed from Vera Cruz July 26, 15r9.
VOL. II. G g Herrera,

Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4. They landed at St. Lu-
car in Ocober, according to Herrera, ibid. But P.
Martyr, who attended the court at that time, and com-
municated every occurrence of moment to his corref-
pondents day by day, mentions the arrival of these
agents, for the first time, in December, and speaks of
it as a recent event. Epifl. 650. All the historians
agree, that the agents of Cortes had their firfi audi.
ence of the emperor at Tordefillas, when he went to
that town to visit his mother in his way to St.
Jago de Compoftella. Herrera, dec. ii. lib. v. c. 4,
De Solis, lib. iv. c. 5. But the emperor set out
from Valladolid for Tordefillas, on the i th of
March 1520 ; and P. Martyr mentions his having
seen at that time the presents made to Charles,
Epift. 665. The armament under Narvacz failed
from. Cuba in April I520. It is manifest then, that
Velasquez could not receive any account of what
passed in this interview at Tordefillas, previous to his
hostile preparations against Cortes. His real motives
seem to be those which 1 have mentioned. The patent
appointing him ddelantado of New Spain, with such
extensive powers, bears date November 13, 1519.
Herrera, dec. ii. lib. iii. c. 11. He might receive it
about the beginning of January. Gomara takes notice,
that as soon as this patent was delivered to him, he began
to equip a fleet and levy forces. Cron. c. 96.

NOTE XX. p. 76.

D E Solis contends, that as Narvacz. had no inter.
preters, he could hold no intercourse with the people of
the provinces, nor converse with them in any way but
by signs, and that it was equally impofrible for Iin'
to carry on any communication with Montc7,ezn
Lib. iv. c. 7. But it is upon the authority of Cortc
himself that I relate all the particulars of Narvae/'s cor
rerpondencc, both with Montezuma and with his fuhjca
in the maritime provinces. Relat. Ramus. iii. 24
A. C. Cortes affirms, that there was a mode of il
tercourfe between Narvaez and the Mexicans, but do0
not cxplain how it was carried on. Bcrnal Di;r/ futppli

tll
456

this defed, and informs us, that the three deserters
who joined Narvaez aced as interpreters, having ac-
quired a competent knowledge of the language, c. r lo.
With his utual minuteness, he mentions their names
and charaEters, and relates, in chapter 122, how they
were punished for their perfidy. The Spaniards had
now resided above a year among the Mexicans; and it is
not surprising, that several among thcm should have
made some proficiency in speaking their language.
This seems to have been the cafe. Herrera, dec. ii.
lib. x. c. i. Both B. Diaz, who was present, and
Herrera, the most accurate and belt informed of all the
Spanish writers, agree with Cortes in his account of the
secret correspondence carried on with Montezuma.
Dec. ii. lib. ix. c. 18, 19. De Solis seems to confider
it as a discredit to Cortes, his hero, that Montczuma
should have been ready to engage in a correlpondence
with Narvaez. He supposes that monarch to have con-
traEted such a wonderful affetion for the Spaniards, that
he was not solicitous to be delivered from them. After
the indignity with which he had been treated, such an
affection is incredible; and even De Solis is obliged to
acknowledge, that it muf be looked upon as one of the
miracles which God wrought to facilitate the con-
quest, lib. iv. c. 7. The truth is, Montezuma, how-
ever much overawed by his dread of the Spaniardso
was extremely impatient to recover his liberty.

N O T E XXI. p. 89.

T HESE words I have borrowed fiom the anony-
moius Account of the European Sctilemcnts in Ame-
rica, published by Dodflcy, in two volumes, 8vo. a
work of so much merit, that I ihould think there is
hardly any writer in the age who ought to be alhamicd
of acknowledging himself to be the author of it.

NOTE XXII. p. 95

HE contemporary hiflorians differ considerably

ith refpcCt to the loTs of the Spaniards on this occa-
on. Cortes, in his cfcond dilipatch to the emperor,

tkes the number only 50. Relat. ap. Rnmufl iii. p.

( g 219,

457

249, A. But it was manifestly his interest, at that
jun&ure, to conceal from the court of Spain the full
extent of the loss which he had sustained. De Solis,
always studious to diminish every misfortune that besel
his countrymen, rates their loss at about two hundred
men. Lib. iv. c. i9. B. Diaz affirms, that they loft
870 men, and that only 440 escaped from Mexico,
c. 128, p. 108. b. Palafox, bishop of Los Angeles,
who seems to have inquired into the early tranfations
of his countrymen in New Spain, with great attention,
confirms the account of B. Diaz with refpe& to the
extent of their loss. Virtudes del Indio, p. 22. Go-
mara states their loss at 450 men. Cron. c. 1og. Some
months afterwards, when Cortes had received several
reinforcements, he mustered his troops, and found them
to be only 590. Relat. ap. Ramus. iii. p. 255, E.
Now, as Narvaez brought 880 men into New Spain,
and about 400 of Cortes's soldiers were then alive, it is
evident, that his loss in the retreat from Mexico must
have been much more considerable than what he men-
tions. B. Diaz, solicitous to magnify the dangers and
sufferings to which he and his fellow-conquerors were
exposed, may have exaggerated their loss; but, in my
opinion, it cannot well be estimated at less than 600
men.

NOTE XXIII. p. 113.

SOME remains of this great work are Rill visible,
and the spot where the brigantines were built and
launched, is frill pointed out to firangers. Torquemada
viewed them. Monarq. Indiana, vol. i. p. 531.

N O T E XXIV. p. 120.

T HE flation of Alvarado on the causeway of Ta-
cuba was the nearest to the city. Cortes observes,
that there they could diftintly observe what passed
when their countrymen were sacrificed. Relat. ap.
Ramus iii. p. 273. E. B. Diaz, who belonged to
Alvarado's division, relates what he beheld with Iis
own eyes. C. 152. p. 148, b. 149, a. Like a man
whose courage was so clear as to be above suspicion, he

defcribci,
458

describes, with his usual simplicity, the impreflion
which this fpetacle made upon him. " Before, fays
he, I saw the breasts of my companions opened, their
hearts yet fluttering, offering to an accursed idol, and
their flesh devoured. by their exulting enemies, I was
accustomed to enter a battle not only without fear, but
with high spirit. But from that time I never advanced
to fight the Mexicans without a secret horror and anx-
iety, my heart trembled at the thoughts of the death
which I had seen them susser." He takes care to add,
that as soon as the combat began this terror went off;
and, indeed, his adventurous bravery on every occasion
is full evidence of this. B. Diaz, c. 156. p. 1 5 7, a.

NOTE XXV. p. 125.

O NE circumflance in this siege merits particular
notice. The account which the Spanish writers give of
the numerous armies employed in the attack or defence
of Mexico, seems to be incredible. According to Cor-
tes himself, he had at one time 1 50,000 auxiliary Indi-
ans in his service. Relat. Ramus. iii. 275, E. Goma-
ra asserts, that they were above 203,000. Cron. c.
136. Herrera, an author of higher authority, fays,
they were about 200,000. Dec. iii. lib. i. c. 19. None
of the contemporary writers ascertain explicitly the
number of persons in Mexico during the siege. But
Cortes, on.feveral occasions, mentions the number of
Mexicans who were slain, or who perished for want of
food; and, if we may rely on those circunftances, it
is probable, that above two hundred thousand must have
been shut up in the town. But the quantity of provi-
sions necessary for the fubfiifence of such vail multitudes
assembled in one place during three months is so great,
and it requires so much foresight and arrangement to col-
le them, so as to be certain of a regular supply, that
one can hardly believe that this could be accomplifled
in a country where agriculture was so inmperfec as in
the Mexican empire, where there were no tame ani-
mals, and by a people naturally so improvident, and

so

459

so incapable of executing a complicated plan as the most
improved Americans. The Spaniards, with all their
care and attention, fared very poorly, and were often
reduced to extreme distress from want of provisions.
B. Diaz, p. I49. Cortes Relat. 271. D. Cortes, on
one occasion, mentions slightly the subsistence of his
army; and after acknowledging, that they were often
in great want, adds, that they received supplies from
the people of the country, of fish, and of some fruit,
which he calls the cherries of the country, ibid. B.
Diaz fays, that they had cakes of maize, and cerafas
de la tierra; and when the seasons of there was over,
another fruit, which he calls Tunas; but their most
comfortable fubfillence was a root which the Indians use
as food, to which he gives the name of Quilites ; p.
l42. The Indian auxiliaries had one means of subsist-
ence more than the Spaniards. They fed upon the bo-
dies of the Mexicans whom they killed in battle.
Cort. Relat. 1 76, C. B. Diaz confirms his relation,
and adds, that when the Indians returned from Mexico
to their own country, they carried with them large
quantities of the flesh of the Mexicans salted or dried,
as a morl acceptable present to their friends, that they
might have the pleasure of feeding on the bodies of their
enemies in their festivals, p. 157. De Solis, who seems
to confider it as an imputation of discredit to his coun-
trymen, that they should aa in concert with auxiliaries
who fed upon human flesh, is solicitous to prove, that
they endeavoured to prevent their associates from eating
the bodies of the Mexicans, lib. v. c. 24. But he has
no authority for this from the original hiitorians. Nei-
thcr Cortes himself, nor B. Diaz, fees to have had
any such scruple; and, on many occasions, mention
the Indian repasts, which were become familiar to them,
without any mark of abhorrence. Even with this ad-
ditional itock of food for the Indians, it was hardly
poflible to procure fubfiftonce for armies amounting
to such numbers as we find in the Spanish wri-
ters. Perhaps, the belt solution of the difficulty
is, to adopt the opinion of B. Diaz del Castillo,
the motll arllefs of all the HI-toriadores priniti-
vos. " When Gomara, fays lie, on some occ.ifions
relates, that there were so many thousand Indians our
auxiliaries, and on others, that there were so many

tlhouran l

thousand houses in this or that town, no regard is to be
paid to his enumeration, as he has no authority for it,
the numbers not being in reality the fifth of what he
relates. If we add together the different numbers which
he mentions, that country would contain more millions
than there are in Castile." C. I 29. But though some
considerable deduation should certainly be made from the
Spanish accounts of the Mexican forces, they must have
been very numerous; for nothing but an immense fbpe-
riority in number, could have enabled them to with-
fland a body of nine hundred Spaniards, commanded by
a general of such abilities as Cortes.

NOTE XXVI. p. 138.

I[N relating the oppreflive and cruel proceedings of
the conquerors of New Spain, I have not followed B.
de las Casas as my guide. His account of them, Relat.
de la Deftruyc. p. I8, &c. is manifestly exaggerated.
It is from the tefiimony of Cortes himself and Gomara,
who wrote under his eye, that I have taken my account
of the punishment of the Panucans; and they relate it
without any disapprobation. B. Diaz, contrary to his
usual custom, mentions it only in general terms, c. 162.
Herrera, solicitous to extenuate this barbarous action
of his countrymen, though he mentions 60 caziques,
and 400 men of note, as being condemned to the flames,
asserts, that thirty only were burned, and the reft par-
doned. Dec. iii. lib. v. c. 7. But this is contrary to
the teltimony of the original hiflorians, particularly of
Gomara, whom it appears he had consulted, as he
adopts several of his cxprcflions in this passage. The
punifllmcnt of Guatimozin is related by the mofr au-
thentic of the Spanish writers. Torquemada has ex-
traced from a hisory of Tezeuco, composed in the
Mexican tongue, an account of this tranfa&ion, more
favourable to Guatimozin than that of the Spanifi au-
thors. Mon. Indiana, i. 575. According to that ac-
count, Cortes had scarcely a fiadow of evidence to
juflify such a wanton ait of cruelty. B. Diaz affirms,
lhat Guatimozin and his fcllow-fufferers aflerted their

innocence

461

innocence with their last breath, and that many of the
Spanish soldiers condemned this acion of Cortes as
equally unnecessary and unjuf[, p. 200, b. 20o, a.

NOTE XXVI[. p. 140.

T H E motive for undertaking this expedition was, to
punish Chriftoval de Olid, one of his officers who had
revolted against him, and aimed at eilablifhing an inde-
pendent jurifdiEcion. Cortes regarded this infurresion
as of such dangerous example, and dreaded so much the
abilities and popularity of its author, that in person he
led the body of troops destined to suppress it. He
marched, according to Gomara, three thousand miles,
through a country abounding with thick forests, rugged
mountains, deep rivers, thinly inhabited, and cultivated
only in a few places. What he suffered from famine,
from the hostility of the natives, from the climate, and
from hardships of every species, has nothing in hiflory
parallel to it, but what occurs in the adventures of the
other discoverers and conquerors of the New World.
Cortes was employed in this dreadful service above two
years: and though it was not diitinguifhed by any fplen-
did event, he exhibited, during the course of it, greater
personal courage, more fortitude of mind, more perse-
verance and patience, than in any other period or scene
in his life. Herrera, dec. iii. lib. vi, vii, viii, ix. Go-
mara Cron. c. 163-177. B. Diaz, 174-190.

N 0TE XXVIII. p. 142.

A CCORDING to Herrera, the treasure which
Cortes brought with him, confided of fifteen hundred
marks of wrought plate, two hundred thousand pesos of
fine gold, and ten thousand of inferior flandard, many
rich jewels, one in particular worth forty thousand pe-
sos, and several trinkets and ornaments of value. Dec.
iv. lib. iii. c. 8. lib. iv. c. i. He afterwards engaged
to give a portion with his daughter of a hundred thou-
sand pesos, Gomara Cron, c. 237. The fortune

which
462

which he left his sons was very considerable. But as
we have before related, the fum divided among the
conquerors on the firlt reducion of Mexico was very
small. There appears then to be some reason for sus-
pecing that the accusation of Cortes's enemies were
not altogether detfitute of foundation. They charged
him with having unjuliy applied to his own use a dif-
proportionate share of the Mexican spoils; with having
concealed the royal treasures of Montezuma and Gua-
timozin, with defrauding the king of his fifth, and
robbing his followers of what was due to them. Her-
rera, dec. iii. lib. viii. c. 15. dec. iv. lib. iii. c. 8. Some
of the conquerors themselves entertained suspicions of
the fame kind. B. Diaz, c. 1 57.

NOTE XXIX. p. 147.

IN tracing the progress of the Spanish arms in New
Spain, we have followed Cortes himself as our most
certain guide. His dispatches to the emperor contain
a minute account of his operations. But the unlettered
conqueror of Peru was incapable of relating his own ex-
ploits. Our information with refpe& to them is de-
rived, however, from contemporary and refpeaable au-
thors.

THE most early accounts of Pizarro's tranfa6tions in

Peru, was published by Francisco de Xerez, his fecre-
tary. It is a simple unadorned narrative, carried down
no farther than the death of Atahualpa, in 1533; for
the author returned to Spain in 534, and soon after he
landed, printed at Seville his flort Hiltory of the Con-
quest of Peru, addressed to the emperor.

DON Pcdro Sancho, an officer who served under
Pizarro, drew up an account of his expedition, which
was translated into Italian by Ramufio, and inferred in
his valuable collection, hnt has never been publithcd in
its original language. Sancho returned to Spain at the
fame time with Xcrez. Great credit is due to what
both those authors relate concerning the progress and

operations

463

operations of Pizarro, but the residence of the Spaniards
in Peru had been so short, at the time when they left
it, and their intercourse with the natives so slender, that
their knowledge of the Peruvian manners and cufroms
is very imperfect.

THE next contemporary hiflorian is Pedro Cieza de

Leon, who published his Chronica del Peru, at Seville
in 1553. If he had finished all that he proposes in the
general division of his work, it would have been the
most complete history which had been published of any
region in the New World, He was well qualified to
execute it, having served during seventeen years in
America, and visited, in person, most of the provinces
concerning which he had occasion to write. But only
the first part of his Chronicle has been printed. It
contains a description of Peru, and several of the adja-
cent provinces, with an account of the institutions and
curomrs of the natives, and is written with so little art,
and such an apparent regard for truth, that one muff
regret the loss of the other parts of his work.

THIS loss is amply supplied by Don Auguffine Za-

rate, who published, in J555, his Hifftoria del defcu-
brimiento y Conquefta de la Provincia del Peru. Za-
rate was a man of rank and education, and employed in
Peru as comptroller-general of the public revenue. His
history, whether we attend to its matter or compofiti-
on, is a book of considerable merit; as he had oppor-
tunity to be well informed, and seems to have been in-
quifitive .with refpet to the manners and tranfaslions of
the Peruvians, great credit is due to his testimony.

DON Diego Fernandez publifled his Hiftoria del

Peru in 1571. His sole objec is to relate the diffcn-
sions and civil wars of the Spaniards in that empire. As
he served in a public station in Peru, and was well ac-
quainted both with the country, and with the principal
acQors in those singular fcencs which he describes; as lie
possessed found undcrftanding, and great impartiality,
his work may be ranked among those of the hifforians most
diflinguifhed for their industry in research, or their capaci-
ty in judging with refpeEt to the events which they relate.

TI L
464

THE lafl author who can be reckoned among the

contemporary historians of the conquest of Peru, is
Garcilaflo de la Vega, Inca. For though the first part
of his work entitled, Commentarios Reaes del Origen de
los Incas Reines del Peru, was not published sooner than
the year 609, feventy-fix years after the death of Ata-
hualpa the last emperor, yet, as he was born in Peru,
and was the son of an officer of dillincion among the
Spanish conquerors, by a Caya, or lady of the royal
race, on account of which he always took the name of
Inca, as he was mafler of the language spoken by the
Incas, and acquainted with the traditions of his country-
men, his authority is rated very high, and often placed
above that of all the other historians. His work, how-
ever, is little more than a commentary upon the Spanish
writers of the Peruvian story, and composed of quotati-
ons taken from the authors whom I have mentioned.
This is the idea which he himself gives of it, lib. i. c.
Io. Nor is it in the account of fads only that he fol-
lows them servilely. Even in explaining the inltitutions
and rites of his anceflors, his information seems not to
be more perfect than theirs. His explanation of the
Quipos is almotf the fame with that of Acofla. He pro-
duces no specimen of Peruvian poetry, but that wretched
one which he borrows from Bias Valera, an early mif-
fionary, whose memoirs have never been published.
Lib. ii. c. 15. As for composition, arrangement, or a
capacity of diflinguifhing between what is fabulous,
what is probable, and what is true, one searches for
them in vain in the commentaries of Inca. His work,
however, notwithifanding its great defecs, is not alto-
gether dellitutc of ufc. Some traditions which he re-
ceived from his countrymen arc preservcd in it. His
knowledge of the Peruvian language has enabled him to
corret lome errors of the Spanish writers, and he has
inserted in it some curious faCts taken from authors
ulihofe works were never publiihed, and are now loll.

NOT
0 E

465

NOTE XXX. p. I52.

O N E may form an idea both of the hardships which
they endured, and of the sickliness of the regions which
they visited, from the extraordinary mortality that pre-
vailed among them. Pizarro carried out I 2 men,
Almagro 70. In less than nine months 130 of these
died. Few fell by the sword; most of them were cut
off by diseases. Xerez, p. 180.

NOTE .XXXI. p. 155.

T H I S island, fays Herrera, is rendered so uncomfort-
able by the unwholefomenefs of its climate, its impe-
netrable woods, its rugged mountains, and the multi-
tude of infelts and reptiles, that it is seldom any softer
epithet than that of infernal is employed in describing
it. The fun is almost never seen there, and through-
out the year it hardly ever ceases to rain. Dec. iii.
lib. x. c. 3. Dampier touched at this island in the
year I685; and his account of the climate is not more
favourable. Vol. i. p. 72. He, during his cruize on
that coat, visited molf of the places where Pizarro land-
ed, and his description of them throws light on the nar-
rations of the early Spanish historians.

NOTE XXXII. p. I69.

B Y this time horses had multiplied greatly in the Spa-
nifh settlements on the continent. When Cortes began
his expedition in the year I518, though his armament
was more considerable than that of Pizarro, and com-
posed of persons superior in rank to those who invaded
Peru, he could procure no more than sixteen horses.

NO TE

N O T E XXXII. p. I71.

IN the year i740, D. Ant. Ulloa, and D. George
Juan, travelled from Guayquil to Motupe, by the fame
route which Pizarro took. From the description of
their journey, one may form an idea of the difficulty of
his march. The sandy plains between St. Michael de
Piura and Motupe extend go miles, without water,
without a tree, a plant, or any green thing, on a
dreary firetch of burning sand. Voyage, tom. i. p.
399, &c.

N O T I XXXIV .

p. 75.

T HIS extravagant and unleafonable discourse of
Valverde has been censured by all historians, and with
juflice. But though he seems to have been an illiterate
and bigotted monk, nowile resembling the good Olmedo,
who accompanied Cortes, the absurdity of his address
to Atahualpa mufft not be charged wholly upon him.
His harangue is evidently a translation, or paraphrase of
that form, concerted by a junto of Spanifl divines and
lawyers in the year 509, for explaining the right
of their king to the sovereignty of the New World,
and for direcing the officers employed in America how
they should take possession of any new country. See
Vol. i. Note xxiii. The sentiments contained in Val-
verde's harangue must not then be imputed to the bigot-
ted imbecility of a particular man, but to that of the
age. Gomara and Benzoni relate one circumstance
concerning Valverde, which, if authentic, renders him
an object not of contempt only, but of horror. They
aftert, that during the whole ation, Valverde, con..
tinued to excite the soldiers to slaughter, calling to them
to firike the enemy not with the edge, but with the
points of their sw'ords. Gom. Cron) c. 1J3. Benz.
Hiltor. Nov. Orbis, lib. iii. c. 3. Such) behaviour was
very different from that of the Roman Catholic clergy
in other parts of America, where they uniformly exert-
ed their influence to protec the Indians, and to mode-
rate the ferocity of their countrymen.

NOTE

467

NOTE XXXV. p. r76.

T WO different fyitems have been formed concern-
ing the conduEc of Atahualpa. The Spanish writers,
in order to justify the violence of their countrymen, con-
tend, that all the Inca's professions of friendship were
feigned; and that his intention in agreeing to an inter-
view with Pizarro at Caxamalca, was to cut off him and
his followers at one blow; that for this purpose he ad-
vanced with such a numerous body of attendants, who
had arms concealed under their garments to execute this
scheme. This is the account given by Xerez and Za-
rate, and adopted by Herrera. But if it had been the
plan of the Inca to defiroy the Spaniards, one can
hardly imagine that he would have permitted them to
march unmolefled through the desert of Motupe, or have
negleaced to defend the passes in the mountains where
they might have been attacked with so much advantage.
If the Peruvians marched to Caxamalca with an inten-
tion to fall upon the Spaniards, it is inconceivable that of
so great a body of men, prepared for aaion, not one
ihould attempt to make resistance, but all tamely susser
themselves to be butchered by an enemy whom they
were armed to attack. Atahualpa's mode of advancing
to the interview, has the afpeat of a peaceable procef-
sion, not of a military enterprize. He himself, and his
followers, were in their habits of ceremony, preceded,
as on days of foleinnity, by unarmed harbingers. Though
rude nations are frequently cunning and false, yet, if a
scheme of deception and treachery muff be imputed ei-
ther to a monarch, that had no great reason to be alarmed
at a visit from strangers who solicited admiflion into his
presence as friends, or to an adventurer so daring, and
so little scrupulous as Pizarro, one cannot cefitate in de-
termining where so fix the prefumptionof guilt. Even
amidst the endeavours of the Spanifl writers to palliate
the proceedings of Pizarro, one plainly perceives, hll;l
it was his intention, as well as his intercfl, to seize tihe
Inca, and that he had taken measures for that pulI-
pose, previous to any suspicion of that monarch's
design.

GARCILASSO

GARCILASSO DE LA VEGA, extremely folicitoua

to vindicate his countrymen, the Peruvians, from the
crime of having concerted the dellruaion of Pizarro
and his followers, and no less afraid to charge the Spa-
niards with improper condua towards the Inca, has
framed another system. He relates, that a man of ma-
jeftic form with a long beard, and garments reaching to
the ground, having appeared in vision to Viracocha, the
eighth Inca, and declared that he was a child of
the Sun, that monarch built a temple in honour of
this person, and ere&ed an image of him, resembling,
as nearly as possible, the singular form in which he had
exhibited himself to his view. In this temple divine ho-
nours were paid to him, by the name of Viracocha. P.
i. lib. iv. c. 2r. lib. v. c. 22. When the Spaniards first
appeared in Peru, the length of their beards, and the
dress they wore, firuck every person so much with their
likeness to the image of Viracocha, that they supposed
them to be children of the Sun, who had descended
from heaven to earth. All concluded that the fatal pe-
riod of the Peruvian empire was now approaching, and
that the throne would be occupied by new possessors. Ata-
hualpa himself, confidering the Spaniards as mefTengers
from heaven, was so far from entertaining any thoughts of
resitting them, that he determined to yield implicit obe-
dience to their commands. From those sentiments flowed
his profeflions of love and refpeEt. To those were ow-
ing the cordial reception of Soto and Ferdinand Pizarro
in his camp, and the finbmiflive reverence with which he
advanced to visit the Spanish general in his quarters.
But from the gross ignorance of Philipillo, the inter-
preter, the declaration of the Spaniards, and his anrwcr
to it, were so ill explained, that by their mutual inability
to comprehend each other's intentions, the fatal rencoun-
ter at Caxamalca, with all its dreadful confcqucnces, was
occasioncd.

Ir is remarkable' that no traces of this fiipcrflitious

veneration of the Peruvians for the Spaniards, are to be
found either in Xercz, or Sancho, or Zarate, previous
to the interview at Caxmarnlca ; and yet the two former
fervedc under Pi,,arro at that time, and the latter visitcd
Peru soon after the conqucll. If cither the Inca limn-

self,

self, or his messengers, had addressed the Spaniards in
the words which La Vega put in their mouths, they
must have been firuck with such submissive declarations;
and they would certainly have availed themselves of
them to accomplish their own designs with greater
facility. La Vega himself, though his narrative of the
intercourse between the Inca and Spaniards, preceding
the encounter at Caxamalca, is founded on the fuppofi-
tion of his believing them to be Viracochas, or divine
beings, p. ii. lib. i. c. i 7. &c. yet, with his usual inat-
tention and inaccuracy, he admits in another place, that
the Peruvians did not recolle&t the resemblance between
them and the god Viracocha, until the fatal disasters sub-
sequent to the defeat at Caxamalca, and then only began
to call them Viracochas. P. i. lib. v. c. 21. This is
confirmed by Herrera, dec. v. lib. ii. c. 12. In many
different parts of America, if we may believe the Spa-
nifh writers, their countrymen were confidered as divine
beings who had descended from Heaven. But in this
inltance, as in many which occur in the intercourse be-
tween nations, whose progress in refinement is very un-
equal, the ideas of those who used the expression, were
different from the ideas of those who heard it. For,
such is the idiom of the Indian languages, or such is
the simplicity of those who speak them, that when they
fee any thing with which they were formerly unac-
quainted, and of which they do not know the origin,
they fay that it came down from heaven. Nugnez.
Ram. iii. 327, C.

THE account which I have given of the sentiments

and proceedings of the Peruvians, appears to be more
natural and confident than either of the two pre-
ceding, and is better supported by the fa&s related by
the contemporary historians.

AccoRDING to Xerez, p. 200, two thousand Pe-

ruvians were killed. Sancho makes the number of the
flainfix or seven thousand. Ram. iii. 274, D. By La
Vega's account, five thousand were massacred. P. ii. lib. i.
c. 25. The number which I have mentioned, being

the
470

471

the medium between the extremes, may probably be
nearest the truth.

NOTE XXXVI. p. 178.

NOTHING can be a more triking proof bs this,
than that three Spaniards travelled from Caxamalca to
Cuzco. The distance between them is fix hundred
miles. In every place throughout this vast extent of
country, they were treated with all the honours which
the Peruvians paid to their sovereigns, and even to their
divinities. Under pretext of amassing what was want-
ing for the ransom of the Inca, they demanded the
plates of gold with which the walls of the Temple of
the Sun in Cuzco were adorned; and though the prieffs
were unwilling to alienate those sacred ornaments, and
the people refused to violate the shrine of their God,
the three Spaniards with their own hands robbed the
Temple of part of this valuable treasure; and such
was the reverence of the natives for their persons, that
though they beheld this aa of sacrilege with afRoniflh-
ment, they did not attempt to prevent or difiurb the
commission of it. Zarate, lib. ii. c. 6. Sancho ap.
Ramus. iii. 375, D.

NOTE XXXVII. p. 188.

ACCORDING to Herrera, the spoil of Cuzco,
after setting apart the king's fifth, was divided among
480 persons. Each received 4000 pesos. This amounts
to 1,92o,ooo pesos. Dcc. v. lib. vi. c. 3. But as the
general, and other officers, were entitled to a part far
greater than that of the private men, the fim total
,muff have rifcn much beyond what I have mentioned.
oGornara, c. 123. and Zarate, lib. ii. c. 8. satisfy them-
selves with affcrting in general, that the plunder of
CCuzco was of greater value than the ransom of Ata-
lhualpa.
VOL. I. -I h NOTE

. .

NO TE XXXVIII. p. 190.

N O expedition in the New World was conducted
with more persevering courage than that of Alvarado,
and in none were greater hardships endured. Many of
the persons engaged in it were, like their leader, ve-
terans who had served under Cortes, inured to all the
rigour of American war. Such of my readers as have
not an opportunity of perusing the striking description
of their sufferings by Zarate or Herrera, may form
some idea of the nature of their march from the sea
coast to Quito, by consulting the account which D.
Ant. Ulloa gives of his own journey in t 736, nearly
in the fame route. Voy. tom. i. p. 178, &c. or that
of M. Bouguer, who proceeded from Puerto Viejo to
Quito, by the fame road which Alvarado took. lHe
compares hisown journeywith that of the Spanifhleader,
and, by the comparison, gives a most firiking idea of
the boldness and patience of Alvarado, in forcing his
way through so many obstacles. Voyage du Perou,
p. xxviii. &c.

NOTE XXXIX. p. 191.

A CCORDING to Herrera, there were entered
on the account of the king, in gold, 155,300 pesos,
and 54o0 maiks (each 8 ounces) of silver, besides fce
veral'veffels and ornaments, fume of gold, and othersof
silver; on account of private persons, in gold 499,0oo
pesos, and 54,ooo marks of silver. Dec. v.' lib. vi.
c. 13.

NOTE XL. p. r9(.

TIlH E Peruvians had recourse to other military arts
than those of the Spaniards. As the cavalry were the
chief objet of their terror, they cndeavoured to render
them incapable of acting, by throwing a long tholg
with a flone fastened to each end. This twifled about
the horse and its rider, entangled them so as to render

thell
472

them incapable of ating. Herrera mentions this as
an invention of their own. Dec. v. lib. viii. c. 4.
But as I have observed, vol. i. p. 375, this weapon is
common among several barbarous tribes towards the
extremity of South America; and it is more probable,
that the Peruvians had observed the dexterity with
which they used it in hunting, and on this occasion
adopted it themselves. The Spaniards were confider-
ably annoyed by it. Herrera, ibid. Another inflance
of the ingenuity of the Peruvians deserves mention.
By turning a river out of its channel, they overflowed
a valley, in which a body of Spaniards was polted, so
suddenly, that it was with the utmost difficulty they
made their escape. Herrera, Dec. v. lib. viii. c. 5.

NOTE XLI. p. 215.

HlERRERA's account of Orellana's voyage is
the mofi minute, and apparently the molt accurate. It
was probably taken from the journal of Orellana him-
self. But the dates are not diltin&ly marked. His
navigation down the Coca, or Napo, began early in
February 1541 ; and he arrived at the mouth of the
river on the 26th of Augufl, having spent near seven
months in the voyage. MI. de la Condamine, in the
year 743, failed from Cuenca to Para, a settlement of
the Portuguese at the mouth of the river, a navigation
much longer than that of Orellana, in lets than four
months. Voyage, p. 179. But the two adventurers
were very differenily provided for the voyage. This
hazardous undertaking, to which ambition prompted
Orellana, and to which the love of science led M. dc
la Condamine, was undertaken in the year 1769, by
Mladarne Godin des Odonais, from conjugal affecion.
The narrative of the lhardfhips which the suffered, of the
dangers to which fle was cxpofed, and of the difaflcrs
vhich besel her, is one of the morl singular and as-
seting stories in any language, exhibiting in her con-
duct a firiking piture of the fortitude which diltinguifl
the one sex, minglcd with the sensibility and tender-
ness peculiar to the other. Lettre de M. Godin, a M'.
de la Condaminc.

473

Hs h
1

N 0 T I,'

NOTE XLII. p. 218.

HERRERA gives a Itriking picture of their
indigence. Twelve gentlemen, who had been officers
of diflinlion under Almagro, lodged in the fame house,
and having but one cloak among them, it was worn
alternately by him who had occasion to appear in public,
while the reft, from the want of a decent dress, were
obliged to keep within doors. Their former friends
and companions were so much afraid of giving offence to
Pizarro, that they durst not entertain, or even con-
verse with them. One may conceive what was the
condition, and what the indignation of men once ac-
customed to power and opulence, when they felt them-
selves poor and derpifed, without a roof under which
to flelter their heads, while they beheld others, whose
merit and services were not equal to theirs, living with
splendor in sumptuous edifices. Dec. vi. lib. viii. c. 6.

NOTE XLIII. p. 229.

HT E R R E R A, the most accurate of the Spanilh
historians, aferts, that Gonzalo Pizarro poffeflcd
dominions ir the neighbourhood of Chuquefaca de la
Plata, which yielded him an annual revenue greatei
than that of the archbifiop of Toledo, the bellt en-
dowed-fcc in Europe. Dec. vii. lib. vi. c. 3.

N OT' E XLIV. p. 241.

ALL the Spanifl writers defcribc his marcli, and
the distresses of both parties very minutely. Zarate ob-
serves, that hardly any parallel to it occurs in hiltory,
either with refpcat to the length of the retreat, or the
ardour of the pursuit. Pizarro, according to his com-
putation, followed the viceroy upwards of three thou-
sand miles. Lib, v. c. 16. 26.

NOTF
474:

N O T E XLV. p. 254.

IT amounted, according to Fernandez, the best inform-
ed hiflorian of that period, to one million four hundred
thousand pesos. Lib. ii. c. 79.

N O T E XLVI. p. 255.

C A R V A J A L, from the beginning, had been an
advocate for an accommodation with Gafca. Finding
Pizarro incapable of holding that bold course which he
originally fuggefled, he recommended to him a timely
fubmiflion to his sovereign as the fafefr meaftre. Whea
the president's offers were firil communicated to Pizar-
ro, " By our Lady (laid he, in that strain of buffoonry
which was familiar to him) the priest ilfues gracious bulls.
He gives them both good and clieap; let us not only ac-
cept of them, but wear them as reliqucs about our necks."
Fernandez, lib. ii. c. 63.

N 0 T E XLVII. p. 260.

D U R I N G the rebellion of Gonzalo Pizarro, fcven
hundred men were killed inl battle, and three hundred
and eighty were hanged or beheaded. Herrera, dec.
viii. lib. iv. c. 4. Above three hundred of there were cut
off by Carvajal. Fernainde, lib. ii. c. 91. Zarate
makes the number of tholf put to a violent death five
hundred. Lib. vii. c. i.

N O T E XLVIII. p. 267.

IN my inquiries concerning the manners and policy of
the Mlc.xicans, I have received much information from
a large maluflcript of Don Alon!b de Corila, one of
the judges in the Court of Audicnce of Mexico. in
the year s553, Philip II. in ordcer that he might disco-

ver

475

ver the mode of levying tribute from his Indian fubjeds,
that would be motl beneficial to the crown, and least op-
preflive to them, addressed a mandate to all the Courts
of Audience in America, enjoining them to answer cer-
tain queries which he proposed to them, concerning the
ancient form of government established among the vari-
ous nations of Indians, and the mode in which they paid
taxes to their kings, or chiefs. In obedience to this man-
date, Corita, who had resided nineteen years in Ameri-
ca, fourteen of which he pafled in New Spain, composed
the work of which I have a copy. He acquaints his so-
vereign, that he had made it an object during his refi-
dence in America, and in all its provinces which he had
visited, to enquire diligently into the manners and customs
of the natives; that he had conversed, for this purpose,
with many aged and intelligent Indians, and consulted
several of the Spanish ecclesiastics, who understood the
Indian languages moftperfealy, particularly some of those
who landed in New Spain soon after the conquest. Co-
rita appears to be a man of some learning, and to have
carried on his inquiries with the diligence and accuracy
to which he pretends. Greater credit is due to his te-
flimony from one circumstance. His work was not
composed with a view to publication, or in support of
any particular theory, but contains simple, though full
answers to queries proposed to him officially. Though
Hcrrera does not mention him among the authors whom
he had followed as guides in his history, I hlould sup-
pose, from several taas of which he takes notice, as
well as from several expressions which he uses, that
this memorial of Corita was not unknown to him.

N O T E XLIX. p. 276.

T1HE early Spanifi writers were so halry and inaccu-
rate in cftimating the numbers of people in the provin-
ces and towns of America, that it is impofiible to as-
certain that of Mexico itfelfwith any degree of precision.
Cortes describes the extent and populousness of Mex-
ico in general terms, which imply, that it was not

inferior

inferior to the greatest cities in Europe. Gomara is
more explicit, and affirms, that there were 6o,ooo
hou'es or families in Mexico. Chron. c. 78. Herrera
adopts his opinion. Dec. ii. lib. vii. c. 33; and the ge-
nerality of writers follow them implicitly without inqui-
ry or scruple. According to this account, the inhabi-
tants of Mexico muff have been about 300,000. Tor-
quemada, with his usual propensity to the marvellous,
aflerts, that there were a hundred and twenty thousand
houses or families in Mexico, and consequently about
fix hundred thousand inhabitants. Lib. iii. c. 23. But
in a very judicious account of the Mexican empire, by
one of Cortes's officers, the population is fixed at
60,000 people. Ramufio, iii. 309, A. Even by this
account, which probably is much nearer the truth than
any of the foregoing, Mexico was a great city.

NOTE L. p. 279.

IT is to P. Torribio de Benavente, that Iam indebted
for this curious observation. Palafox, bishop of Los
Angeles, confirms and illuf-rates it more fully. The
Mexican (fays he) is the only language in which a termi-
nation indicating erfpec, filavas reverentiales y de cortfa,
may be affixed to every word. By adding the final
syllable zin or azin to any word, it becomes a proper
expression of veneration in the mouth of an inferior.
If, in speaking to an equal, the word Father is to be
used, it is Tatl; but an inferior fays Tatzin. One pricel
speaking to another, calls him Teopixque; a person of
inferior rank calls him Teopixca/tzin. The name of the
emperor who reigned when Cortes invaded Mexico,
was Montezuma, but his vaflals, from reverence, pro-
nounced it Monteztumazin. 'Torribio, MS. PalaI: Vir-
tudes del Indio, p. 65. The Mexicans had not only
reverential nouns, but rcverential verbs. 'he manner
in which these are formed from the verbs in common
ife, is explained by D. Jos. Aug. Aldaina y (uevara in
his Mexican Grammar, N°. 88.

NOTE

NOTE LI. p. 283.

FR 0 M comparing several passages in Corita and Her-
rera, we may collect with some degree of accuracy, the
various modes in which the Mexicans contributed to-
wards the support of government. Some persons of
the first order seem to have been exempted from the
payment of any tribute, and, as their only duty to the
public, were bound to personal service in war, and to
follow the banner of the sovereign with their vaflals.
2. The immediate vassals of the crown were bound not
only to personal military service, but paid a certain pro-
portion of the produce of their lands in kind. 3. Those
who held offices of honour or trult, paid a certain (hare
of what they received in consequence of holdingthefe.
4. Each Capullee, or association, cultivated some part
of the common field allotted to it, for the behoof of
the crown, and deposited the produce in the royal gra-
naries. 5. Some part of whatever was brought to the
public markets, whether fruits of the earth, or the
various produaions of their artists and manufacurers,
was demanded for the public use, and the merchants
who paid this were exempted from every other tax.
6. The Mayeques, or adfcripti gleber, were bound to cul-
tivate certiin diftri6ls in every province, which may be
confidered as crown lands, and brought the increase into
public storehouses. Thus the sovereign received some
part of whatever was useful or valuable in the country,
whether it was the natural prodution of the foil, or ac-
quired by the indufiry of the people. What each con-
tributed towards the support of government, seems to
have been inconsiderable. Corita, in answer to one of
the queries put to the Audience of Mexico, by Philip II.
endeavours to eflimate in money the value of what each
citizen might be supposcd to pay, and does not reckon it
at more than three or four reals, about eightecn-pencc or
two hillings a head.

N O T E LII. p. 284.

iCORTE.S, who seems to have been as much aflonifi-

ed with this, as with any inflance of Mexican ingenuity,
gives a particular dcfcription of it. Along one of the

causeways,
4a8

causeways, fays He> by which they enter the city, are
conduced two conduits, composed of clay tempered
with mortar, about two paces in breadth, and raised
about fix feet. In one of them is conveyed a fiream of
excellent water, as large as the body of a man, into the
centre of the city, and it supplies all the inhabitants
plentifully. The other is empty, that when it is necef-
fary to clean, or repair the former, the fiream of water
may be turned into it. As this conduit passes along two
of the bridges, where there are breaches in the causeway,
through which the salt water of the lake flows, it is.
conveyed over them in pipes as large as the body of an
ox, then carried from the conduit to the remote quarters
of the city in canoes, and fold to the inhabitants.
Relat. ap. Ramus. 241, A.

NOTE 'LIII. p. 289.

IN the armory of the royal palace of Madrid, are
Ihewn suits of armour, which are called Montezuma's.
They are composed of thin lacquered copper-plates. In
the opinion of very intelligentjudges they are evidently
eastern. The forms of the silver ornaments upon them,
representing dragons, &c. may be confidered as a con-
firmation of this. They are infinitely superior in point
of worknanfhip to any effort of American art. The
Spaniards probably received them from the Philippine
islands. The only unquestionable fpccimen of Mexican
art that I know of in Great Britain, is a cup of very fine
gold, which is said to have belonged to Montezuma. It
weighs 5 oz. 12 dwt. Three drawings of it were ex-
hibited to the Society of Antiquaries, June 10, 1 765. A
man's head is represented on this cup. On one fide the
full face, on the other the profile, on the third the back
parts of the head. The relievo is said to have been pro-
duced by punching theinfide of thecup, so as to make the
Ieprefentation of a face on the outside. The features are
rude, but very tolerable, and certainly too rude for Spanifli
wvorkmanfhip. This cup was purchased by Edward earl of
Orford, while he lay in the harbour of Cadiz with the
fleet under his command, and is now in the poffeflion
Of his grandson, Lord Archer. I am indebted for

this

this information to my refpe&able and ingenious friend
Mr. Barrington.

NOTE LIV. p. 290.

T HE learned reader will perceive how much I have
been indebted in this part of my work, to the guidance
of the bishop of Gloucefler, who has traced the fuc-
ceffive steps by which the human mind advanced in this
line of its progress, with much erudition and greater
ingenuity. He is the firfl, as far as I know, who form-
ed a rational and confilent theory concerning the various
modes of writing praaifed by nations, according to the
various degrees of their improvement. Div. Legation
of Moses, iii. 69, &c. Some important observations
have been added by the learned and intelligent author
of the Traite de la Formation Mechanique des Langues,
tom. i. 295, &c.

As the Mexican paintings are the morl curious mo-

numents extant of the earliest mode of writing, it will
not be improper to give some account of the means by
which they were preserved from the general wreck of every
work of art in America, and communicated to the Public.
For the most early and complete colletion of these, pub-
lifhed by Purchas, we are indebted to the attention of that
curious inquirer, Hakluyt. Don Antonio Mendoza,
viceroy of NewSpain, having deemed those paintings
a proper present for Charles V. the ship in which they
were sent to Spain, was taken by a French cruizer, and
they came into the poffcfilon of Thevet, the king's geo-
grapher; who having travelled himself into the New
World, and described one of its provinces, was a curious
observer of whatever tended to illulfrate the manners of
the Americans. On his death, they were purchased by
Hakluyt, at that time chaplain of the English ambaflador
to the French court; and, being left by him to Purchas,
were published at the desire of the learned antiquary Sir
Henry Spelman. Purchas, iii. o165.

TrEz fccond specimen of Mexican piaure-writing

was publiflicd by Dr. Francis Gemelli Carrcri, in two
copper-plates. The firfi is a map, or representation of

the
480

the progress of the ancient Mexicans on their first arrival
in the country, and of the various ifations in which they
fettled, before they founded the capital of their empire
in the lake of Mexico. The second is a Chronological
Wheel, or Circle, representing the manner in which
they computed and marked their cycle of fifty-two years.
The former was given to him by D. Chrilfoval de
Guadalajora, in the city of Los Angelos; the latter he re-
ceived from Don Carlos de Siguenza y Gongorra. But
as it seems now to be a received opinion (founded I know
not on what evidence) that Carreri was never out of
Italy, and that his famous Giro del Mundo, is an account
of a ficitious voyage, I have not mentioned these paint-
ings in the text. ' hey have, however, manifeffly the
appearance of being. Mexican producions, and are al-
lowed to be so by Boturini, who was well qualified to
determine whether they were genuine or fippofititious.
The style of painting in the former is confiderablymore
perfea than any other specimen of Mexican design; but
as the original is said to have been much defaced by time,
I fufpeE that it has been improved by some touches from
the hand of an European artist. Carerri, Churchil, iv.
p. 487. The chronological wheel is a jufi delineation
of the Mexican mode of computing time, as described
by Acofta, lib. vi. c. 2. It seems to resemble one which
that learned Jesuit had seen; and if it be admitted as a
genuine monument, it proves that the Mexicans had ar-
tificial, or arbitrary chara&ers, which represented fe-
veral things betides numbers. Each month is there re-
presented by a symbol expressive of some work or rite pe-
culiar to it.

THE third specimen of Mexican painting was disco-

vered by another Italian. In r736, Lorenzo Boturini
Benaduci set out for New Spain, and was led by several
incidents to fludy the language of the Mexicans, and to
collec the remains of their hiflorical monuments. He
perfifled nine years in his researches, with the enthufiafin
of a projeacor, and the patience of an antiquary. In
1746, he published at Madrid, Idea de una Ni]eva Hiif-
toria Gcneral de la America Septentrional, containing an
account of the result of his inquiries; and he added to it
a catalogue of his American Hit-orical Museum, ar-
ranged under thirty-fix different eicads. His idea of a

New

481

New HiRfory appears to me the work of a whimsical
credulous man. But his catalogue of Mexican maps,
paintings, tribute-rolls, calendars, &c. is amazing. Unfor-
tunately a ship, in which he had sent a considerable part of
them to Europe, vas takenby an English privateer in the
war before las ; and it is probable that they perished by
falling into the hands of ignorant captors. Boturini him-
self incurred the displeasure of the Spaniih court, and
died in an hospital at Madrid. The history, of which
the Idea, &c. was only a profpetus, was never published.
The remainder of his Museum seems to have been
dispersed. Some part of it came into the possession of
the present archbiihop of Toledo, when he was pri-
mate of New Spain, and he published from it that
curious tribute-roll which I have mentioned.

THE only other colletion of Mexican paintings, as

far as I can learn, is in the Imperial Library at Vienna.
By orderl of their Imperial Majesties, I have ob-
tained such a specimen of there as I desired, in eight
paintings, made with such fidelity, that I am informed
the copies could hardly be distinguished from the origi-
nals. According to a note in this Codex Mexicanus, it
appears to have been a present from Emanuel King of
Portugal to Pope Clement VII. who died A. D. 1533.
After pasing through the hands of several illultrious
proprietors, it fell into those of the cardinal of Saxe
Eisenach, who presented it to the emperor Leopold.
'hefe paintings are manifestly Mexican, but they are in
a ityle very different from any of the former. An en-
graving has been made of one of them, in order to gra-
tify fucl of my readers as may deem this an objet
worthy of their attention. Were it an objet of sus-
ficient importance, it might be pofllble, with some at-
tention, by recourse to the plates of Purchas, and the
archbishop of Toledo, as a key, to form plausible con-
je&ures concerning the meaning of this pi&ure. Many
of the figures are manifefily similar. A. A. are targets
and darts, almost in the fame form with those publifiled
by Purchas, p. 1070, 1071, &c. B. B. are figures
of temples, nearly resembling those which occur in
Purchas, p. lo09 and 1113, and in Lorenzana,
Plate II. C. is a bale of mantles, or cotton cloths,
the figure of which occurs in almoil every plate of

Purcha!

Purchas and Lorenzana. E. E. E. seem to be Mexican
captains in their war dress, the fantaflic ornaments of
which resemble the figures in Purchas, p. I I Io, 1 1 I,
1113. I should suppose this picture to be a tribute-roll,
as their mode of noting numbers occurs frequently.
D. D. D. &c. According to Boturini, the mode of
computation by the number of knots, was known to the
Mexicans as well as to the Peruvians, p. 85; and the
manner in which the number of units is represented in
the Mexican paintings in my possession, seems to confirm
this opinion. They plainly resemble a firing of knots on
a cord or rope.

NOTE LV. p. 291.

T HE first was called, the Prince of the deathful
Lance; the second, the Divider of Men; the third, the
Shedder of Blood; the fourth, the Lord of the Dark-
House. Acofta, Lib. vi. c. 25.

NOTE LVI. p. 297.

TH E Temple of Cholula, which was deemed more
holy than any in New Spain, was likewise the most con-
fiderable. But it was nothing more than a mount of
solid earth. According to Torquemada, it was above a
quarter of a league in circuit at the base, and rose to
the height of forty fathoms. Mon. Ind. Lib. iii. c. 19.

FROM infpecing various figures of Temples, which

occur in the paintings engraved by Purchas, there seems
to be some reason for futpeEting that all their temples
were conltruCed in the fame manner. Sec vol. iii. p.
I109, IIIO, 1113.

NOT E LVII. p. 298.

N OT only in Tlafcala, and Tepeaca, but even in
Mexico itself, the houses of the people were mere huts
built with turf, or mud, or the branches of trees. They
were extremely low and flight, and without any furni-
ture but a few earthen vcftcls. Like the rudefl Indians,

several

several families resided under the fame roof, without
having any separate apartments. Herrera, Dec. ii. lib.
vii. c. 13. lib. x. c. 22. Dec. iv. lib. iv. c. 17. Tor-
quem, lib. iii. c. 23.

N O T E LVIII. p. 298.

I AM informed by a person who resided long in New
Spain, and visited almost every province of it, that there
is not, in all the extent of that vast empire, any monu.
ment, or vestige of any building more ancient than the
conquest, or of any bridge, or highway, except some
remains of the causey from Guadaloupe to the gate of
Mexico, by which Cortes entered the city. M S. penes
me. The author of another account in manuscript ob-
serves, " That at this day there does not remain even
the smallest vestige of the existence of any antient Indian
building, public or private, either in Mexico or in any
province of New Spain. I have travelled, fays he,
through all the countries adjacent to them, viz. New
Galicia, New Biscay, New Mexico, Sonora, Cinaloa,
the New Kingdom of Leon, and New Santandero, with-
out having observed any monument worth notice, ex-
cept the ruins near an ancient village in the valley de
Casas Grandes, in lat. N. 30°. 46. longit. 258°. 24. from
the Island of Teneriffe, or 460 leagues N. N. W. from
Mexico. He describes this minutely; and it appears to
have been a paltry building of turf and stone, plaistered
over with white earth or lime. A missionary informed
that gentleman, that he had discovered the ruins of
another settlement similar to the former, about a hun-
dred leagues towards N. W. on the banks of the river
St. Pedro. MS. penes mo.

THOSE teflimonics derive great credit from one cir-

cumllance, that they were not given in support of any par.
ticular lfyfcm or theory, but as simple answers to que-
ries which I had proposed. It is probable, however,
that when there gentlemen aflert no ruins or monuments
of any ancient work whatever are now to be discovercd in
the Mexican Empire, they meant that there were no
such ruins or monuments, as conveyed any idea of gran-

dcur
484

deur or magnificence, in the works of its ancient inha-
bitants. For it appears from the testimony of several
Spanish authors, that in Otumba, Tlafcala, Cholula,
&c. some vestiges of ancient buildings are still visible.
Villa Segnor Theatro Amer. p. 143, 308, 353. D.
Fran. Ant. Lorenzana, formerly archbilhop of Mexico,
and now of Toledo, in his introdution to that edition
of the Cartas de Relacion of Cortes, which he published
at Mexico, mentions some ruins which are still visible in
several of the towns, through which Cortes passed in
his way to the capital, p. 4. &c. But neither of these
authors give any description of them, and they seem to
be so very inconsiderable, as to shew only that fomebuild-
ings had once been there. The large mount of earth at
Cholula, which the Spaniards dignified with the name
of temple, still remains, but without any fleps by which
to ascend, or any facing of flone. It appears now like
a natural mount, covered with grass and shrubs, and
poflibly it was never any thing more. Torquem. lib. iii.
c. 19. I have received a minute description of the re-
mains of a temple near Cuernavaca, on the road from
Mexico to Acapulco. It is composed of large flones,
fitted to each other as nicely as those in the buildings of
the Peruvians, which are hereafter mentioned. At the
foundation it forms a square of 25 yards; but as it rifes
in height, it diminirnes in extent, not gradually, but by
being contraEted suddenly at regular distances, so that it
muff have resembled the figure B in the Plate. It ter-
minated, it is said, in a spire.

N O T E LIX. p. 303.

T H E exaggeration of the Spanish Hiflorians, with
refpecQ to the number of human vitims sacrificed in
Mexico, appears to be very great. According to Go-
mara, there was no year in which twenty thousand hu-
man vi6aims were not offered to the Mexican Divinities,
and in some years they amounted to fifty thousand.
Cron. c. g29. The ikulls of those unhappy persons
were ranged in order in a building cre&ced for that pur-
poe ; and two of Cortes's officcrs, who had counted
them, informed Gomara that their number was a hun-

dred

485

dred and thirty .fix thousand. Ibid. c. 82. Herrera's
account is fill more inoredible, that the number of vic-
tims was fogreat, that five thousand have beenfacrificed
in one day, nay, on some occasions, no less than twenty
thousand. Dec. iii. lib. ii. c. 16. Torquemada goes
beyond both in extravagance, for he aferts that twenty
thousand chiliren, exclusive of other vitims, were
alaughtered annually. Mon. Ind. lib. vii. c. 21. The
snmo refpetable authority in favour of such high num-
bers is that of Zumurraga, the first bishop of Mexi-
co, who, in a letter to the chapter general of his order,
A. D. 1631, asserts that the Mexicans sacrificed annu-
ally twenty thousand viEtims. Davila. Teatro Eccles. 126.
In opposition to all these accounts, B. de las Casas ob-
serves, that if there had been such an annual waste of
the human species, the country could never have arriv-
ed at that degree of populousness, for which it was re-
markable when the Spaniards first landed there; and he
positively afterts, that the Mexicans never sacrificed
more than fifty or a hundred persons in a year. See his
dispute with Sepulveda, subjoined to his Breviffima Re-
lacion, p. Io5. Cortes does not specify what number
of vicims was sacrificed annually, but B. Daz del Caf-
tillo relates, that an inquiry having been made, with re-
fpet to this, by the Franciscan Monks, who were sent
into New Spain immediately after the conqueff, it was
found that about two thousand five hundred were facri-
siced every year in Mexico. c. 207.

'NOTE LX. p. 304.

IT is hardly ncceffary to observe, that the Peruvian
Chronology is not only obscure, but repugnant to con-
clufions deduced from the most accurate and extensive
observations, concerning the time that elapses during
each reign, in any given succession of princes. The
medium has been found not to exceed twenty years.
According to Acofta and Garcilaflo de la Vega, Huana
Capac, who died about the year 1527, was the twelfth
Inca. The duration of the Peruvian monarchy ought
not to have been reckoned above two hundred and forty
years; but they affirm that it had fubfifled four hundred
years. Acofta, lib. vi. c. 19. Vega, lib. i. c. 9. By
this account, each reign is extended at a medium to

thirty

thirty three years, instead of twenty, the number as-
certained by Sir Isaac Newton's observations; but so
imperfec were the Peruvian traditions, that though
the total is boldly marked, the number of years in each
reign is unknown.

NOTE LXI. p. 310.

M A N Y of the early Spanifl writers assert, that thc
Peruvians offered human sacrifices. Xerez. p. 9go. Za-
rate, lib. i. c. 1. Acofta, lib. v. c. 19. But Garci-
lasso de la Vega contends, that though this barbarous
practice prevailed among their uncivilized ancestors, it
was totally abolished by the Incas, and that no human
victim was ever offered in any temple of the Sun. This
afiertion, and the plausible reasons with which he con-
firms it, are sufficient to refute the Spanish writers,
whose accounts seem to be founded entirely upon re-
port, not upon what they themselves had observed.
Vega, lib. ii. c. 4. In one of their festivals, the Peru-
vians offered cakes of bread, moistened with blood
drawn from the arms, the eye-brows, and noses of
their children. Id. lib. vii. c. 6. This rite seems to
have been derived from their ancient practice.

NOTE LXII. p. 315.

TIH E Spaniards have adopted both those cufloms of
the antient Peruvians. They have preeirved rome of
the aqueducts or canals, made in the days of the Incas,
and have made new ones, by which they water every
field that they cultivate. Ulloa Voyagc, tom. i. 422,
477. They likewise continue to use guano, or the dung
of sea-fowls, as manure. Ulloa gives a delcription of
the almofl incredible quantity of it in the lfiall islands
tear the coast. Ibid. 481.

NOTE LXII. p. 17.

H E temple of Cayambo, the palace of the Inca at

Cllo in the plain of I acatunga, and that of Alun-
annar, are described by Ulloa, tom. i. 286, &c. who
lfpeEted them with great care. M. de Condamine pub-
led a curious memoir concerning thi ruins of Atun-
annar. Mem. de l'Academie de Berlin, A.D. 1 7 6,
VOL. I. Ii ,. -1

487

p. 435. Acofta describes the ruins of Cuzco, which
he had examined. Lib. vi. c. 14. Garcilaffo, in his
usual stile, gives pompous and confused descriptions of
several temples, and other public edifices. Lib. iii. c. i. 21.
lib. vi. c. 4. Don -- Zapata, in a large treatise
concerning Peru, which has not hitherto been published,
communicates some information with refpec to fevcral
monuments of the antient Peruvians, which have not
been mentioned by other authors. MS. penes me, Arti.
culo xx. Ulloa describes some of the antient Peruvian
fortifications, which were likewise works of great ex-
tent and lolidity. T'Iom. i. 391. Three circumfiances
firuck all those observers: the vast siz;e of the flones
which the Peruvians employed in some of their build.
ings. Acofla mealured one, which was thirty feet long,
eighteen broad, and fix in thickness; and yet, he adds,
that in the fortress at Cuzco, there were stones confi-
derably larger. It is difficult to conceive how the Pe-
ruvians could move these, and raise them to the height
even of twelve feet. The second circumstance is, the
imperfetion of the Peruvian art, when applied to work.
ing in timber. By the patience and perseverance natural
to Americans, flones may be formed into any flhapc,
merely by rubbing one againfl another, or by the use
of hatchets or other instruments made of sone ; but
with such rude tools, little progress can be made in
carpentry. The Peruvians could not mortize two beam.
together, or give any degree of union, or flability to
any work conpofed of timber. As they could not
form a cen:re, they were totally unacquainted with the
use of arches in building; nor can the Spaniflh authors
conceive how they were able to frame a roof for those
ample ftrulEtures which they raised.

TIIE third circumflance is a thriking proof, vwhliil

all the monuments of the Peruvians furniflm, of their
want of ingenuity and invention, accompanied with
patience no less afloniihing. None of the flones em-
ploycd in thole works were formed into any particu-
lar or uniobrm huape, that might render them lit
fur building. The Indians took them s tlhey Ifll
from the mountains, or were raised out of the quar-

ries.
488

ries. Some were square, some triangular, some convex,
some concave. Their art and industry were employed in
joining them together, by forming such hollows in the
one, as perfectly corresponded to the projections or ri-
sings in the other. This tedious operation, which might
have been so easily abridged, by adapting the surface of
the siones to each other, either by rubbing, or by their
hatchets of copper, would be deemed incredible, if it
were not put be;'ond doubt by infpecing the remains of
those buildings. It gives them a very singular appearance
to an European eye. There is no regular layer or ftra-
tum of building, and no one fione resembles another in
dimensions or form. At the fame time, by the perse-
vering, but ill-direaed induflry of the Indians, all are
joined with that minute nicety which I have mentioned.
Ulloa made this observation concerning the form of the
flones in the fortress of Atun-Cannar. Voy. i. p. 387.
Pineto gives a similar description of the fortress of
Cuzco, the mofl perse& of-all the Perlvian works. Za-
pataMS. penes me. According to M. de Condamine,
there were regular flrata of building in some parts of
Atun-Cannar, which he remarks as singular, and proof of
some progress in improvement.

N O T E LXIV. p. 320.

T HE appearance of those bridges, which bend with
their own weight, wave with the wind, and are confi-
derably agitated by the motion of every person who pal-
fs along them, is very frightful at firfi. But the Spa-
niards have found them to be the eafrefl mode of pafling
the torrents of Peru, over which it would be difficult
tothrow more solid firuCturcs cither of frone or timber.
They form those hanging bridges so flrong and broad,
hat loaded mules pals along them. All the tr.;ic of
Cuzco is carried on by means of such a bridge over the
ivr Apurimac. Ulloa, tom. i. 358. A more fiinple
oiltrivance was employed in pasing filaller ilrcains: a
ake!, in which the traveller was placed, bei,g ufl-
cnded from a firong rope firctched across the fiream,
t was pushcd or drawn from one fide to the other. Ibid.

1 i 3

N 0 TE

48g

NOT E LXV. p. 329.

M Y information with refpe& to those events is taken
from Noticia breve de la expedicion militar de Sonora y
Cinaloa, fu exito feliz, y vantojofo eftado, en que por
confecuencia de ello, fe han puefto ambas provincias,
published at Mexico, June i7th, 1771, in order to fa-
tisfy the curiosity of the merchants, who had furnished
the viceroy with money for defraying the expence of the
armament. The copies of this Noticia are very rare in
Madrid; but I have obtained one which has enabled me
to communicate these curious fats to the public. Ac-
cording to this account, there was found in the mine
Yecorato, in Cinaloa, a grain of gold of twenty-two ca-
rats, which weighed sixteen marks four ounces four
ochavas; this was sent to Spain as a present fit for the
king, and is now deposited in the royal cabinet at Madrid.

NOTE LXVI. p. 329.

T HE uncertainty of geographers with refpea to this
point is remarkable; for Cortes seems to have surveyed
its coafis with great accuracy. The archbihfop of T'o
ledo has published, from the original, in the pofeflion
of the Marquis del Valle, the descendant of Cortes, a
mnap drawn in 154T, by the pilot Domingo Caflill0,
in which California is laid down as a peninsula, firetch-
ing out nearly in the fame direction which is now given
to it in the best maps; and the point where Rio Co
lorado enters the gulf is marked with precision. Hid
de Nueva Efpagna, 327.

NOTE LXVII p. 332.

I AM indebted for this fa& to M. L'Abbc Raynal
tom. iii. 103; and upon consulting an intelligent pC
son, who having been long fettled on the Mofquit
fiore, has been engaged in the logwood trade, I h

tel
a49

that ingenious author has been well informed. The
logwood cut near the town of St. Francis of Campeachy,
is of much better quality than that on the other fide of
Yucatan, and the Englifl trade in the Bay of Hondu-
ras is almost at an end.

NO TE LXVIII. p. 348.

P. Torribio de Benevente, or Motolinea, has enu-
merated ten causes of the rapid depopulation of Mexi-
co, to which he gives the name of the ten plagues.
Many of these are not peculiar to that province. . The
introducion of the small-pox. This disease was first
brought into New Spain in the year 1520, by a negroe
slave, who attended Narvaez. Torribio affirms, that
one half of the people, in the provinces visited with
this distemper, died. To this mortality occasioned by
the small pox, Torquemada adds the defiruLtive effets
of two contagious diflempers which raged in the years
1545 and 1576. In the former 800,000, in the latter
above two millions perished, according to an exa&
account taken by order of the viceroys. Mon. Ind. i.
642. The small-pox were not introduced into Peru
for several years after the invasion of the Spaniards, but
proved very fatal to the natives. Garcia Origcn, p.
88. 2. The numbers who were killed, or died of
famine in their war with the Spaniards, particularly
during the siege of Mexico. 3. The great famine that
followed after the reduction of Mexico, as all the
people engaged, either on one fide or other, had ne-
gleced the cultivation of their lands. Something similar
to this happened in all the other countries conquered by
the Spaniards. 4. The grievous tasks imposed by the
Spaniards upon the people belonging to the Repar-
timientos. 5. The oppressive burden of taxes, which
they were unable to pay, and fiom which they could
hope for no exemption. 6. The numbers employed in
collecting the gold, carried down by the torrents from the
mountains, who were forced from their own habitations,
without any provision made for their fubfilltnce, and
fubjeced to all the rigour of cold in those elevated re-
gions. 7. The immtenfe labour of rebuilding Mexico,

whlli

49i

which Cortes urged on with such precipitate ardour, as
deflroyed an incredible number of people. 8. The
number of people condemned to servitude, under vari-
ous pretexts, and employed in working the silver
mines. 'I hfe, marked by each proprietor with a hot
iron, like his cattle, were driven in herds to the moun-
tains. 9. The nature of the labour to which they were
fubjeaed there, the noxious vapours of the mines,
the coldness of the climate, and scarcity of food
were so fatal, that Torribio affirms, the country round
several of those mines, particularly near Guaxago,
was covered with dead bodies, the air corrupted
with their stench, and so many vultures, and other
voracious birds, hovered about for their prey, that the
fun was darkened with their flight. Io. The Spani-
ards, in the different expeditions which they undertook,
and by the civil wars which they carried on, deflroyed
many of the natives, whom they compelled to serve
them as T'amcmes or carriers of burdens. This last
mode ot opprefilon was particularly ruinous to the
Peruvians. From the number of Indians who perifled
in Gonzalo Pizarro's expedition into the countries to
the east of the Andes, one may form some idea of
what they suffered, and how fats they wafted. Tor-
ribio, MS. Corita, in his Breve y Summaria Rclacien,
illustrates and confirms fevcral of Torribio's obfervatioun.
to which lie refers. MS. penes me.

N OTE LXX p. 348.

E VEN MIontcfqiuicu has adopted this idea, lib. vii;
c. 18. But the pafion of that great man for 'ydeii,,
fomclimes rcndercd. him inattentive to research ; iar
from his capacity to refine, he was apt, in some infanccs,
to overlook obvious and jut! caulcs.

N 0 Tl LXX. p. 3419

Strng proof of this occurs in the tcdillciit , li

lf:ilella, where fihe discovers the mnof tender ccinectr
for the humane and mild ufluge of the Indians. 'I hole
laudable fentiminenis of the queen lihae Iccn adlorpti

lIn(n
492

into thepublic law of Spain, and serve as the intro-
duCtion to the regulations contained under the title of
the good treatment of the Indians. Recopil. lib. vi. tit. x.

NOTE LXXI. p. 35r.

IN the seventh 7itle of the first book of the Recopi-
lacion, which contains the laws concerning the powers
and funEtions of archbilhops and bishops, almost a
third part of them relates to what is incumbent upon
them, as guardians of the Indians, and points out the
various methods in which it is their duty to interpose,
in order to defend thtm from oppreflion, either with
refpet to their person or property. Not only do the
laws commit to them this honourable and humane office,
but they actualiy exercise it.

INNUMERABLE proofs of this might be produced

from Spanilh authors. But I rather refer to Gage, as
he was not disposed to afcriba any merit to the popish
clergy, to which they were not fully entitled. Survey, p.
142, 192, &c. Henry Hawks, an Englifl merchant,
who relided five years in New Spain, previous to the year
I572, gives the fame favourable account of the popiflh
clergy. HIakluyt, iii. 466. By a law of Charles V.
not only bishops, but other ecclesiastics, are impowered
to inform and admonish the civil magifitates, if any Indian
is deprived of his just liberty and rights. Recopilac. lib.
vi. tit. vi. Icy. 14; and tlins were constituted legal pro-
teaors of the Indians. Some of the Spanish ecclefi-
aflics refused to grant absolution to such of their coun-
trymen as possessed Encomnierndas, and confidered the
Indians as slaves, or employed them in working their
mines. Gonz. Davil. Fiatro. Eccles. i. 157.

NOTE

493

N O T E LXXII. p. 351.

A C CO R D 1N G to Gage, Chiapa dos Indos con-
tains 4000 families, and he mentions it only as one of
the largest Indian towns in America. P. 104.

NOTE LXXIII. p. 351.

IT is very difficult to obtain an accurate account of
the itate of population in those kingdoms of Europe
where the police is most perfec, and where science
has made the grcateft progress. In Spanish America,
where knowledge is still in its infancy, and few men
have leisure to engage in researches merely speculative,
little attention has been paid to this curious inquiry.
But in the year 1741, Philip V. enjoined the viceroys
and governors of the several provinces in Amelica, to
make an acual survey of the people under their jurif-
diaion, and to transmit a report concerning their num-
ber and occupations. In consequence of this order,
the Conde de Fuen-Clara, viceroy of New Spain, ap-
pointed D. Jos. Antonio de Villa-Segnor y Sanchez,
to execute that commission in New Spain. From the
reports of the magitfrates in the several diftrias, as
·well as from his own observations, and long acquaint-
ance with most of the provinces, Villa Segnor pub-
lifhed the result of his inquiries in his Theatro Ameri-
tano. His report, however, is imperfect. Of the nine
dioceses, into which the Mexican empire has been
divided, he has publifhled an account only of five, viz.
the archbishopric of Mexico, the bishoprics of Los
Angeles, Mechoacan, Oaxaca, and Nova Galicia.
The bish oprics of Yucutan, Verapaz, Chiapa, and
Guatimala, arc entirely omitted, though the two latter
comprehend countries, in which the Indian race is
more numerous than in any part of New Spain. In
his survey of the extensive diocese of Nova Galicia,
the situation of the different Indian villages is dcfcrib-
cd; but he specifics the number of people only in a
(ma!l part of it. The Indians of that vast province,

in which the Spanish dominion is imperfecly established,
are not regiRtered with the fame accuracy as in other
parts of New Spain. According to Villa Segnor, the
a&ual fRate of population in the five dioceses above men-
tioned is, of Spaniards, negroes, mulattoes, and mefti-
zos, in the dioceses of

Mexico
Los Angeles
Mechoacan
OaxaciA
Nova Galicia

Families.

105,202
30c,600

- 30,S40
- 7,296

- 6,770

190,708
At the rate of five to a family, the

number is

total 953,540
Indian families

Mexico

Los Angeles
Mechoacan
Oaxaca
Nova Galicia

in the diocese of } 11

. 119,51I

- - - 88,240
- - - 36,r96

- - 44,222
- - - 6,222

294,391

AT the rate of five to a family, the total number is

1,471,955. We may rely with greater certainty on this
computation of the number of Indians, as it is taken from
the Matricula, or register, according to which the tri-
bute paid by them is collected. As four dioceses of
nine are totally omitted, and in that of Nova Galicia
the numbers are imperfeCtly recorded, we may conclude,
that the number of Indians in the Mexican empire cx-
ceeds two millions.

THIE account of the number of Spaniards, &c.

seems not to be equally complete. Of many places,
Villa Scgnor observes in general terms, that Icveral
Spaniards, negroes, and people of a mixed race,

reside

495

reside there, without specifying their number. If, there-
fore, we rnake allowance for there, and- all who reside in
the four dioceses omitted, the number of Spaniards, and
of those of a mixed race, may probably amount to a mil-
lion and a half. An some places, Villa Segnor dittinguifh-
es between Spaniards and the three inferior races of ne-
groes, Mulattos, and Mestizos, and marks their num-
bers separately. But he generally blends them together.
But from the proportion observable in those places, where
the number of each is marked, as well as from the account
of the fiate of population in New Spain by other authors,
it is manifest that the number of negroes and persons of
a mixed race far exceeds that of the Spaniards. Perhaps
the latter ought not to be reckoned above 500,000 to a
million of the former.

DEFECTIVE as this account may be, I have not been

able to procure such intelligence concerning the number
of people in Peru, as might enable me to form any con-
jeture equally satisfying with refpet to the degree of
its population. I have been informed, that in the year
- 761, the proteetor of the Indians in the vice-royalty of
Peru computed that 612,780 paid tribute to the king.
As all females, and persons under age, are exempted
from this tax in Peru, the total number of Indians ought,
by that account, to be 2,449,120. MS. penes me.

I SHALL mention another mode, by which one may

compute, or at least form a guess concerning the ifate of
population in New Spain and Peru. According to an
account which I have reason to confider as accurate, the
number of copies of the bull of Cruzada, exported to
Peru on each new publication, is 1,171,953; to New
Spain 2,649,326. I am informed, that but few Indi-
ans purchase bulls, and that they are fold chiefly to the
Spanish Inhabitants, and those of mixed race; so that
the number of Spaniards, and people of a mixed race,
will amount, by this mode of computation, at least
tp three millions.
496

THE number of inhabitants in many of the towns in

Spanish America, may give us Come idea of the extent
of population, and correc the inaccurate, but popular
notion entertained in Great Britain, concerning the weak
and desolate state of their colonies. The city of Mexico
contains at least 50,000 people. Los Angeles contains
above 60,000 Spaniards, and people of a mixed race.
Villa Segnor, p. 247. Guadalaxara contains above
3o,ooo, exclusive of Indians. lb. ii. 206. Lima con-
tains 54,000. D. Cofme Bueno Defcr. de Peru, 1 764.
Carthagena contains 25,00oo0. Potofi contains 25,000.
Bueno, 1767. Popayan contains above 20,000. Ul-
loa, i. 287. Towns of a second class are frill more nu-
merous. The cities in the most thriving fettlemcnts of
other European nations in America cannot be compared
with these.

THESE are such detached accounts of the number of

people in several towns, as I found scattered in authors
whom I thought worthy of credit. But I have obtained
an enumeration of the inhabitants of the towns in the
province of Quito, on the accuracy of which I can rely;
and I communicate it to the Public, both.to gratify cu-
riofity, and to recaify the mistaken notion which I have
mentioned. St. Francisco de Quito contains between
50 and 60,ooo people of all the different races. 13eides
the city, there are in the Corrcgimnicnto 29 curacies efta.-
blifhed in the principal villages, each of which has small-
er hamlets depending upon it. The inhabitants of there
are moflly Indians and Meflizos. St. Juan de Pallo has
between 6 and 8000 inhibitants, besides 27 dependent
villages. St. Miguel de Ibarra 7000 citizens, and ten
villages. The dillri&: of Havala between 8 and 20,000
people. The dillric of Tacunna between io and r2,000.
The diftri& of Ambato between 8 and lo,ooo, besides
i6 depending villages. The city of Riobainba between
16 and 20,000 inhabitants, and 9 depending vil-
lages. The diflriEt of Chimbo between 6 and 8000.
The city of Guaquil fiom 16 to 20,000ooo inhabi-
tants, anid 14 depending villages. The difiriCt of
Atuafi between 5 and 6000, and 4 depending vil-
lages. The city of Cuenza between 25 and 30,coo

inhlbitants,

497

inhabitants, and 9 populous depending villages. The
town of Laxa from 8 to 1o,ooo inhabitants, and 14 de-
pending villages. This degree of population, though
slender, if we confider the vast extent of the country, is
far beyond what is commonly supposed. I have omitted
to mention, in its proper place, that Quito is the only
province in Spanish America that can be denominated a
manufacuring country; hats, cotton fluffs, and coarse
woollen cloths, are made there in such quantities, as to
be sufficient not only for the consumption of the province,
but to furnish a considerable article for exportation into
other parts of Spaniffi America. I know not whether
the uncommon indufiry of this province should be confi-
dered as the cause or effec of its populousness. But
among the ostentatious inhabitants of the New World,
the passion for every thing that comes from Europe is so
violent, that I am told the manufacures of Quito are so
much undervalued, as to be on the decline.

N O T E LXXIV. p. 356.

H E S E are eflablifhed at the following places: St.

Domingo in the island of Hispaniola, Mexico in New
Spain, Lima in Peru, Panama in Tierra Firme, Santi-
ago in Guatimala, Guadalaxara in New Galicia, Santo
Fe in the New Kingdom of Granada, La Plata in the
country of Lot Charcas, St. Francisco de Quito, St. Ja-
go de Chili, Buenos Ayres. To each of these are sub-
je&ed fcveral large provinces, and some so far removed
from the cities where the courts are fixed, that they can
derive little benefit from their jurifdiaion. The Spa-
nifl writers commonly reckon up twelve courts of Au-
dience; but they include that of Manila in the Philip-
pine Islands.

NOTE
498

499

N O T E LXXV. p. 362.

O N account of the diffance of Peru and Chili from
Spain, and the difficulty of carrying commodities of such
bulk as wine and oil across the isthmus of Panama, the
Spaniards in those provinces have been permitted to plant
vines and olives. But they are Ilritly prohibited from
exporting wine or oil to Panama, Guatimala, or any
province in such a situation as to receive it from Spain.
Recop. lib. vi. tit. xviii. 1. 15-18.

N O T E LXXVI. p. 363.

T HIS computation was made by Benzoni, A. D.
5sco, fifty-eight years after the discovery of America.
Hist. Novi Orbis, lib. iii. c. 2I. But as Benzoni wrote
with the spirit of a malcontent, disposed to detra&c from
the Spaniards in every particular, it is possible that his
calculation may be too low.

N O T E LXXVI. p. 365.

M Y information, with refpec to the division and
transmission of property in the Spanish colonies, is im-
perseEt. The Spanish authors do not explain this fully,
and have not perhaps attended sufficiently to the effeds of
their own institutions and laws. Solorzano de jure Ind.
vol. ii. lib. ii. I. 16. explains in some measure the intro-
ducion of the tenure of Mayorafgo, and mentions
some of its effects. Villa Segnor takes notice of a fin-
gular consequence of it. He observes, that in some of
the befl situations in the city of Mexico, a good deal
of ground is unoccupied, or covered only with the ruins
of the houres once erecled upon it; and adds, that as
this ground is held by right of Mayorafgo, and cannot be
alienated, that desolation and thofc ruins become per-
petual. Theatr. Amer. vol. i. p. 34.

NOT E

NOTE LXXVIII. p. 366.

T HE RE is no law that excludes Creoles from of-
sices either civil or ecclesiastic. On the contrary, there
are many Cedulas which recommend the conferring places
of trust indiscriminately on the natives of Spain and
America. Betancurt y Figueroa Derecho, &c. p. 5, 6.
But notwithstanding such repeated recommendations,
preferment in almost every different line is conferred on
native Spaniards. A remarkable proof of this is
produced by the author last quoted. From the'dif-
covery of America to the year 1637, three hundred
and fixty-nine bishops, or archbishops, had been ap-
pointed to the different dioceses in that country, and
of all that number only twelve were Creoles, p. 40.

NOTE LXXIX. p. 371.

M ODERATE as this tribute may appear, such
is the extreme poverty of the Indians, in many pro-
vinces of America, that the exacring of it is intoler-
ably oppreflive. Pegna Itiner. par Parochos de Indios,
p. I92.

NOTE LXXX. p. 372.

IN New Spain, on account of the extraordinary
merit and services of the first conquerors, as well as the
small revenue arising from the country previous to the
discovery of the mines of Sacatecas, the encomiendas
were granted for three, and sometimes for four livcs,
Recopil. lib. vi. tit. ii. c. 14, &c.

N O T E
5oO

N O T E LXXX. p. 373.

D . Ant. Ulloa contends, that working in the mines
is not noxious, and as a proof of this informs us, that
many Meflizos and Indians, who do not belong to any
Repartimiento, voluntarily hire themselves as miners;
and several of the Indians, when the legal term of their
service expires, continue to work in the mines of
choice. Entreten. p. 265. But his opinion concern-
ing the wholesomeness of this occupation is contrary
to the experience of all ages; and wherever men are
allured by high wages, they will engage in any species
of labour, however fatiguing or pernicious it may be.
D. Hern. Carillo Altenirano relates a curious sac in-
compatible with this opinion. Wherever mines are
wrought, fays he, the number of Indians decreases;
but in the province of Campeachy, where there are
no mines, the number of Indians has increased more
than a third since the conquest of America, though
neither the foil nor climate be so favourable as in Peru
or Mexico. Colbert. Colle. In another memorial
presented to Philip III. in the year r609, Captain Juan
Gonzalez de Azevedo afTerts, that in every diflrit of
Peru, where the Indians are compelled to labour in
the mines, their numbers were reduced to the halt,
and in rome places to the third of what it was under
the vice-royalty of Don Fran. Toledo in 58r. Colb.
Colled.

NOT . LXXXT. p. 373.

As labour of this kind cannot be prefcrihel with
legal accuracy, the taflks seem to be in a great mcarfire
arbitrary, and like the services exat)cd 1b feudal fupe-
riors, in vinea, prato atit rmcfe, from thcir vaflals, are
extremely biirdenfomc, and often wantonly oppreflive.
Pegna Itincr. par Parochos de Indies.

N o T F1

50

NOTE LXXXIII. p. 373.

HE turn of service known in Peru by the name

of Mita, is called Tanda in New Spain. There it con-
tinues no longer than a week at a time. No person is
called to serve at a greater distance from his habitation
than 24 miles. This arrangement is less oppreflive to
the Indians than that established in Peru. Memorial of
Hern. Carillo Altamirano. Colbert. Collect.

NOTE LXXXIV. p. 375.

T HE strongest proof of this may be deduced from
the laws themselves.' By the multitude and variety of
regulations to prevent abuses, we may form an idea of
their number. Though the laws have, wifely, pro-
vided that no Indian shall be obliged to serve in any mine
at a greater distance from his place of residence than
thirty miles, we are informed in a memorial of D. Her-
nan Carillo Altimirano, presented to the king, that the
Indians of Peru are often compelled to serve in mines
at a distance of a hundred, a hundred and fifty, and
even two hundred leagues from their habitation. Col-
bert Collee. Many mines are situated iin parts of the
country, so barren and so distant from the ordinary
habitations 6f the Indians, that the necessity of pro-
curing labourers to work there, has obliged the Spanish
monarchs to dispense with their own regulations in fe-
veral inflances, and to permit the vice-roys to compel
the people of more remote provinces to resort to those
mines. Efcalona Gazophyl. Perub. lib. i. c. 16. But
in justice to them it should be observed, that they have
been studious to alleviate this oppreflion as much as poffi-
ble, by enjoining the viceroys to employ every method,
in order to induce the Indians to fettle in some part of
the country adjacent to the mines. Id. ibid.

NO T 1

NOTE LXXXV. p. 379.

TOR QU E M AD A, after a long enumeration, which
has the appearance of accuracy, concludes the iumber
of monasteries in New Spain to be four hundred. Mon.
Ind. lib. xix. c. 32. The number of monafleries in tile
city of Mexico alone was, in the year 1745, fifty-
five. Villa-Segnor. Theat. Amer. i. 34. Ulloa reckons
up forty convents in Lima; and mentioning those for
nuns, he fays, that a small town might be peopled out
of them, the number of persons shut up there is so
great. Voy. i. 429. Philip III. in a letter to the
viceroy of Peru, A. D. 162o, observes, that the number
of convents in Lima was so great, that they covered
more ground than all the refl of the city. Solorz. lib.
iii. c. 23. n. 57. Lib. iii. c. i6. Torquem. lib. xv.
c. 3. The first monatlery in New Spain was founded,
A. D. 1525, four years only after the conqueRt. Torq.
lib. xv. c. 16.

ACCORDING to Gil Gonzalez Davila, the complete

establishment of the American church in all the Spanifl
settlements was, in the year 1649, 1 patriarch, 6 arch-
bishops, 32 bishops, 346 prebendaries, 2 abbots, 5 royal
chaplains, 840 convents. Teatro. Ecclefiafiico de las
Ind. Occident. vol. i. Pref. When the order of Jcfuits
was expelled from all the Spanilh dominions, the col-
ltges, profJefed houses, and refidencies, which it pofTcflcd
in the province of New Spain, were thirty, in Quito
lixteen, in the New Kingdom of Granada thirteen, in
Peru seventeen, in Chili eighteen, in Paraguay eighteen,
in all a hundred and twelve. Colleccion General de
l'rovidencias hafta acqui tomadas fobre eflrtrainmlento,
&-c. de la Compagnia, part i. p. 19. The number of
Jesuits, priests and novices in all these amounted to
2245. S. pencr me.
VOL. II.

503
K k

IN the year 1644, the city of Mexico presented a

petition to the king, praying that no new monastery
might be founded, and that the revenues of those al-
ready eftablithed might be circumscribed, otherwise the
religious houses wtuld soon acquire the property of the
whole country. They request likewise that the bithops
might be laid under reflri&ions in conferring holy orders,
as there were at that time in New Spain above fix
thousand clergymen without any living. Ib. p. i6.
They mufl: have been enormous abuses indeed, when the
fuperflition of American Spaniards was shocked, and
induced to remonstrate againfl them.

NOT E LXXXVI. p. 382.

T HI S description of the manners of the Spanifl
clergy, I should not have ventured to give, upon the
tetfimony of protestant authors alone, as they may be
fufpe&ed of prejudice or exaggeration. Gage, in par-
ticular, who had a better opportunity than any proteffant,
to view the interior state of Spanilh America; describes
the corruption of the church, which he had forsaken,
with so much of the acrimony of a new convert, that
I flould have distrusted his evidence, though it commu-
nicates some very curious and striking fats. But Ben-
zoni mentions the profligacy of ecclefiafics in America
at a very early period after their settlement there.
I-lill. lib. ii. c. 19, 20. M. Frezier, an intelligent ob-
server, and zealous for his own religion, paints the dif.
solute manners of the Spanish ecclefiatlics in Peru, par-
ticularly the regulars, in stronger colours than I have
employed. Voy. p. 51. 215, &c. M. Gentil confirms
this account. Voy. i. 34. Correal concurs with both,
and adds many remarkable circumstances. Voy. i. 6i.
155. 16i. I have good realon to believe, that the
manners of the regular clergy, particularly in Peru, are
still extremely indecent. Acofla himself acknowledges,
that great corruption of manners had been the conlc-
quence of permitting monks to forsake the retirement

and

and discipline of the cloifier, and to mingle again with
the world, by undertaking the charge of the Indian pa-
rifhes. De procur. Ind. Salute, lib. iv. c. 13, &c.
He mentions particularly those vices, of which 1 have
taken notice, and confiders the temptations to them as
so formidable, that he leans to the opinion of those who
hold that the regular clergy should not be employed as
parish priefls. Lib. v. c. 20. Even the advocates for
the regulars admit, that many and great enormities
abounded among the monks of different orders, when
set free from the refiraint of monaflic discipline; and
from the tone of their defence, one may conclude that
the charge brought against them was not destitute of
truth. In the French colonies, the slate of the regular
clergy is nearly the fame as in the Spanifi settlements,
and the fame consequences have followed. M. Biet,
superior of the fecurar priefis in Cayenne, inquires,
with no less piety than candour, into the causes of this
corruption, and imputes it chiefly to the exemption of
regulars from the juritfli&ion and cenfires of their dio-
cefans; to the temptations to which they arc exposed;
and to theirengaging in commerce. Voy. p. 320. It is
remarkable, that all the authors, who cenfiure the licen-
tioufnefs of the Spanith regulars with greatest severity,
concur in vindicating the conduc of the Jefiits. Formed
under a discipline more perfect than that of the other
monastic orders, or animated by that concern for the
honour of the society, which takes such full pofTeflion
of every member, the Jesuits, both in Mexico and Peru,
it is allowed, have maintained a moil irreproachable de-
cency of manners. Frezier, 223. Gentil, i. 34. T'he
fame praise is likewise due to the bishops and most of
the dignified clergy. Frez. ibid.

NOTE

505
K k 2,

N O T E LXXXVII. p. 382.

SOLORZANO, after mentioning the corrupt
morals of some of the regular clergy, with that cauti-
ous reserve, which became a Spanish layman, in touch-
ing on a fubje& so delicate ; gives his opinion very ex-
plicitly, and with much firmness, againfl committing pa-
rochial charges to monks. He produces the testimony
of several refpeaable authors of his country,both divines
and lawyers, in confirmation of his opinion. De Jure
Ind. ii. lib. iii. c. 16. A ltriking proof of the alarm
excited by the attempt of the Prince d'Efquilache to
exclude the regulars from parochial cures, is contained
in the Colbert collection of papers. Several memorials
were presented to the king by the procurators for the
monafiic orders, and replies were made to there in name
of the secular clergy. An eager, and even rancorous,
spirit is manifest on both fides, in the conduct of this
dispute.

N O T E LXXXVIII. p. 386.

N 0 T only the native Indians, but the Mefiizos, or
children of a Spaniard and Indian, were originally ex-
cluded from the priesthood, and refused admission into
any religious order. But by a law issued Sept. 28th,
1 588,-Philip II. required the prelates of America to
ordain such mestizos born in lawful wedlock, as they
should find to be properly qualified, and to permit them
to take the vows in any monastery where they had
gone through a regular noviciate. Recopil. lib. i. tit. vii.
1. 7. Some regard seems to have been paid to this law
in New Spain; but none in Peru. Upon a reprefenta-
tion of this to Charles II. in the year 1697, he issued a
new ediQ, enforcing the observation of it, and prolefing
his deire to have all his fubjeas, Indians and mneli/.o.,
as vwell as Spaniards, admitted to the enjoyment of
the fame privileges. Such, however, was the avcrfion

el
5o6

of the Spaniards in America to the Indians, and their
race, that this seems to have produced little efect:; for,
in the year 1725, Philip V. was obliged to renew the
injunction in a more peremptory tone. But so unfur-
mountable are the hatred and contempt of the Indians
among the Peruvian Spaniards, that the present king
has been conltrained to enforcethe former edids anew
by a law, published September xI, I774. Real Ce-
dula, MS. penes me.

N O T E LXXXIX. p. 389.

U ZTARIZ, an accurate and cautious calculator,
seems to admit, that the quantity of silver that does not
pay duty may be stated thus high. According to HJer-
rera, there was not above a third of what was extrat-
ed from Potofi that paid the king's fifth. Dec. viii.
lib. ii. c. 15. Solorzano asserts likewise, that the quan-
tity of silver which is fraudulently circulated, is far
greater than that which is regularly Rtampcd, after
paying the fifth. De Ind. jure, vol. ii. lib. v. p. 846.

NOTE XC. p. 392.

W HEN the mines of Potofi were discovercd in
the year 1545, the veins were so near the furfacc, that
the ore was easily extraaed, and so rich, that ii
was refined with little trouble, and at finall expence,
merely by the action of fire. This simple node of
refining by fusion alone continued until the year 157.4,
when the uife of mercury in rcfining silver, as well
as gold, was difcovcred. ''hose mines having been
wrought without interruption for two centuries, the
veins are now funk so deep, that the expcnc
of extrating the ore is greatly incrca'c(l. Bc-
fides this, the richness of the ore, contrary to what
happens in mofl other mine;s, has become less as
the vein continued to dip, and has dirninifhcd to fiich
a degree, that one is amazed lihal the Spaniards ihoull

plerfllt

persist in working it. Other rich mines have been fuc-
ceflively discovered; but in general the value of the ores
has decreased so much, while the expence of extracing
them has augmented, that the court of Spain, in the year
1 736, reduced the duty payable to the king from a fifth
to a tenth. All the quicksilver used in Peru, is extracted
from the famous mine of Gunacabelica, discovered in the
year 1563. The crown has reserved the property of
this mine to itself; and the persons who purchased the
quicksilver, paid not only the price of it, but likewise a
fifth, as a duty, to the king. But, in the year 176i,
this duty on quicksilver was abolished, on account of the
increase of expence in working mines. Ulloa, Entre-
tenimientos, xii.-xv. Voyage, i. p. 505. 523. Any
of my readers who are desirous of being acquainted with
the mode in which the Spaniards conduct the working of
their mines, and the refinement of the ore, will find an
accurate description of it by Acolla. Lib. iv. c. i-
13.

NOTE XCI. p. 393.

I N consequence of this abolition of the fifth, and some
subsequent abatements of price, which became necessary
on account of the increasing expence of working mines,
quicksilver, which was formerly fold at eighty pesos the
quintal, is now delivered by the Icing at the rate of fix-
ty pesos. Campomanes Educ. Popul. ii. 132. Note.
The duty on gold is reduced to a twentieth, or five per
cent.

N O T E XCII. p. 395.

M ANY remarkable proofs occur of the advanced
state of induflry in Spain, at the beginning of the fix-
teenth century. The number of cities in Spain was con-
fiderablc, and they were peopled fat beyond the piroor-
tion that was cornmon in other parts of Europe. 'lihe
caufcs of this, 1 have explailcd, 1Hit. of Cha. V. i.
158. Wherever cities are populous, that species (l
induitry which is peculiar to them incrcafes, artificer,
ptjd manufacQurcrs abound. The effTec of the Anwmric;i

ltadl
5oS

trade in giving acivity to these is manifelt from a fin-
gular faEt. In the year 1545, while Spain continued to
depend on its own indultry, for the supply of its colo-
nies, so much work was bespoke from the manufaaurers,
that it was supposed they could hardly finifhl it in less
than fix years. Campom. i. 406. Such a demand muiff
have put much induitry in motion, and have excited ex-
traordinary efforts. Accordingly, we are informed.
that in the beginning of Philip Il's reign, the city of Se-
ville alone, where the trade with America centered, gave
employment to no fewer than 16,000 looms in silk oi
woollen work, and that above 1 30,000 persons had oc-
cupation in carrying on these manufacturcs. Camporn.
ii. 472. But so rapid and pernicious was the operation
of the causes which I fiall enumerate, that before
Philip III. ended his reign, the looms in Scville were
reduced to 400. Uztariz, c. 7.

N O T E XCIII. p. 402.

No bale of goods is ever opened, no chefR oftreafure
is examined. Both are received on the credit of the per-
sons to whom they belong; and only one inltance of
fraud is recorded, during the long period in which trade
was carried on with this liberal confidence. All the
coined silver which was brought from Peru to Porto-
bello in the year 1654, was found to he adtuleraled,
and to be mingled with a fifth part of base metal. The
Spanifi merchants, with their usual integrity, fuflained
the whole loss, and indemnified the foreigners, by whomt
they were employed. T''lie fraud was deeitelid, and the
treasurer of the revenue in Pern, the author of it, was
publicly burnt. B. Ulloa Retablif. de Manufl &Sc. h. i.
p. 102.

N O T E XCIV. p. 4r

M ANY flriking proofs occur of the scarcity of
money in Spain. Of all the imincnfc frums which have
heen imported from Amleic:, the arnount of which I
fihall afterwards hiave nccal'ion to mentiion, \Mnnoc.;iil.

*i1le t,l

asserts, that there did not remain in Spain, in 1619,
above two hundred millions of pesos, one half in coined
m6ney, the other in plate and jewels. Reftaur. de Es-
pagna, Disc. iii. c. i. Uztariz, who published his
valuable work in 1 724, contends, that in money, plate,
and jewels, there did not remain a hundred millions.
Theor. &c. c. 3. Campomanes, on the authority of
a remonstrance from the univerfitv of Toledo to Philip
III. relates, as a certain proof how scarce cafl had be-
come, that persons who lent money, received a third
part of the fum which they advanced, as interest and
premium. Educ. popul. i. 417.

N O T E XCV. p. 409.

TjH E account of the mode in which the factors of
the South Sea Company condu&ed the trade in the fair
of Porto-bello, which was opened to them by the As-
ficnto, I have taken from Don Alcedo y IHerrera, prefi-
dent of the court of Audience in Quito, and governor
of that province. Great credit is due to his testimony,
as he was an eyc-witnefs of the tranfaftions which he
relates, and often employed in detecing and authenti-
citing lie fiauds which he describes. It is probable,
however, that his rcprefentation being composed at the
comnmelccment of the war which broke out betwccn
( reat Bri.ain 'and Spain, in the year 1739, may, in
some inflanccs, be exaggerated. Ilis detail of fats is
curious; and even Englifli authors confirm it in some de-
gree, hy admitting both that various frauds were prac-
tifed in the tranfations of the annual ship, and that the
contraband trade from Jamaica, and other Eritifh colo-
nies, was become cnormoufly great. But for the credit
of the Engliil i:ation it may be observcd, tlat those
fraudulent operations are not to be confidercd as deeds of
the Company, but as the diflonourablc arts of their
il&cors and agents. The Company itself fuflained a con-
fiderable loss by the Afliento trade. Many of its servants
Jc(luired immcnfe fortunes. Andcrfon. Chronol. dedult.
ji. 388.

NOTE
51o

511

N O T E XCVI. p. 414.

SEVER AL sacs, with refpec to the institution, the
progress, and the effects, of this company, are curious,
and but little known to English readers. Though the
province of Venezuela, or Caraccas, extends four hun-
dred miles along the coast, and is one of the mofi ser-
tile in America; it was so much neglected by the Spa-
niards, that, during the twenty years prior to the efta-
blifhment of the company, only five ships failed from
Spain to that province ; and during sixteen years, from
1706 to 1722, not a single ship arrived from the Carac-
cas in Spain. Noticias de Real Companiade Caraccas,
p. 28. During this period Spain must have been fitp-
plied almofi entirely with the large quantity of cocoa,
which it consumes, by foreigners. Before the erection
of the company, neither tobacco nor hides were import-
ed from Caraccas into Spain. Id. p. 1 7. But since
the commercial operations of the company began in the
year 1731 the importation of cocoa into Spain has in-
creased amazingly, During thirty years subsequent to
1701, the number of fanegas of cocoa (each a hundred
and ten pounds) imported from Caraccas, was 643,2 5.
During eighteen years subsequent to 731, the number
offanegas imported was 869,247, and if we fupl'ofe
the importation to be continued in the fame proportion
during the remainder of thirty years, it will amount to
1,448,746 fanegas, which is an increase of 805,531
fanegas. Id. p. 148. During eight years subsequent to
1756, there had been imported into Spain by the Com-
pany 88,482 arrobas (each twenty-five pound) of lohac-
co; and hides to the number of 177,354. Id. 161.
Since the publication of the Noticias de Compania, in
1765, its trade seems to be on the increase. During
five years subsequent to 769, it has imported 179,1 56
fanegas of cocoa into Spain, 36,208 arrobas of tobac-
co, 75,496 hides, aid 221,4.32 pelosin Ipecic. Cam-
poniancs, ii. 162. ''hli lafi article is a proof of the
growing wealth of tlih colony. It receives cash from
Mexico in return for the cocoa, with which it filpplies

Ihat

that province, and this it remits to Spain, or lays out in
purchasing European goods. But besides this, the most
explicit evidence is produced, that the quantity of cocoa
raised in the province is double to what it yielded in
1731; the number of its live-flock is more than treble,
and its inhabitants much augmented. The revenue of
the bi(hop, which arises wholly from tythes, has in-
creased from eight to twenty thousand pesos. Notic. p.
69. In consequence of the augmentation of the quantity
of cocoa imported into Spain, its price has decreased
from eighty pesos for thefanega to forty. Id. 61.

N O T E XCVII. p. 419.

T H I S firfR experiment made by Spain of opening a
free trade with any of her colonies, has produced effects
so remarkable, as to merit some farther illustration. The
towns to which this liberty has been granted, are Cadiz
and Seville, for the province of Andalusia; Alicant and
Carthagena, for Valencia and Murcia; Barcelona, for
Catalonia and Arragon; Santander, for Castile; Co.
rugna, for Galicia; and Gijon, for Asturias. Append.
ii. a la Educ. Popul. p. 41. These are either the ports
of chief trade in their refpesive difirias, or those inof
conveniently situated for the exportation of their refpec-
tive producions. The following faas give a view of the
increase of trade in the settlements to which the new re-
gulations extend. Prior to the allowance of firee trade,
the duties collected in the custom-house at the Havanna
were computed to be 104,208 pesos annually. During
the five years preceding 17 74 they rose at a medium to
308,000 pesos a year. In Yucatan, the duties have
rifenfrom 8,ooo to i 5,000. In Hispaniola from 2,500
to 5,600. In Porto Rico from 1,200 to 7,000. 'lhe
total value of goods imported from Cuba into Spain, was
reckoned, in 1774, to be 1,500,000 pesos. Educ.
Popul. i. 450, &c.

N 0 Tr
512

N O T E XCVIII. p. 424.

T HE two Treatises of Don Pedro Rodriguez Cam-
pomanes, Fical del real conejo y Supremo (an office in
rank and power nearly similar to that of Attorney Ge-.
neral in England), and Director of the Royal Academy
of History, the one intitled, Difcurfo fobre el Fomento
de la Induifria Popular; the other Difcurfo fobre la
Educacion Popular de los Artefanos y fu Fomento; the
former publifled in 1774, and the latter in I775, as-
ford a iriking proof of this. Almost every point of
importance with refpe6E to interior police, taxation, a-
griculture, manufactures, and trade, domestic as well
as foreign, is examined in the course of these works;
and there are not many authors, even in the nations
most eminent for commercial knowledge, who have car-
ried on their inquiries with more thorough knowledge
of those various fubjeEts, and a more perfect freedom
from vulgar and national prejudices, or who have united
more happily the calm researches of philosophy, with
the ardent zeal of a public spirited citizen. These books
are in high etfimation among the Spaniards; and it is a
decisive evidence of the progress of their own ideas, that
they are capable of relifling an author whose senti-
ments are so liberal.

N O T E XCIX. p. 428.

T H

I- galeon employed in that trade, infead of the

fix hundred tons, to which it is limited by law, Rccop.
lib. xlv. 1. 15. is commonly from twelve hundred to two
thousand tons burden. The ship from Acapulco, taken
by Lord Aufon, inflead of the 500,000 pesos permitted
by law, had on board 1,313,843 pesos, befidlcs uncoincd
ilvcr cqual in value to 43,61r pcfos more. Anson's
\Voyagc, 384.

NOTE

513

NOTE C. p. 430.

H E price pair for the bull varies according to the

rank of different persons. Those in the lowest order,
who are servants or slaves, pay two reals of plate, or
one shilling; other Spaniards pay eight reals; and those
in public office, or who hold encomiendas, sixteen reals.
Solorz. de jure Ind. vol. ii. lib. iii. c. 25. According to
.Chilton, an English merchant who resided long in the
Spanish settlements, the bull of Cruzado, bore an high-
er price in the year 15 70, being then fold for four reals
at the lowelf. Hakluyt, iii. 461. The price seems to
have varied at different periods. That exaced for the
bulls issued in the last Predicacion, will appear from the
ensuing table, which will give some idea of the propor-
tional numbers of the different classes of citizens in New
Spain and Peru.

There were issued for New Spain,

o1 pesos each
2 pesos each
I peso each
2 reals each

- 4

-22,601

- 64,220

2,462,500

2,649,325

For Peru,

6 pesos 4 a reals each
3 pesos, 3 reals each
i peso, 5 1 reals
4 reals
3 reals

I4,202
78,822
410,325
668,6oi

I, 71,953

NOTE
514

Bulls at

at
at
at

at
at
at
at
at

515

NOTE CI. p. 431.

A Villa Segnor, to whom we are indebted for this
information, was accomptant-general in one of the morl
considerable departments of the royal revenue, and by
that means had access to proper information, his tefli-
mony with respect to this point merits great credit.
No such accurate detail of the Spanish revenues, in any
part of America, has hitherto been published in the
English language, and the particulars of it may appear
curious and interesting to tome of my readers.

FROM the bull of Cruzada, published every two years,
there arises an annual revenue in pesos 150,000

From the duty on silver
From ditto on gold
From tax on cards
From tax on Pulque, a drink

Indians

From tax on flamped paper
From ditto on ice
From drtto on leather
From ditto on gunpowder
From tax on salt

used

700,000
- - 60,ooo

70,000

by the

- i161 ,OOO
- 41,,000
- I5,522

- 2,500

- 7132,0
- 32,oo0

From ditto on copper of Mcchoacan
From ditto on alum
From ditto on Juego de los Gallos
From the half of ccclefiafical annats
From royal ninth of bishoprics, &fc.
FTrom tile tribute of Indians
From Alcavala, or duty on file of goods
From the Alrnmajoritafgo, cuflom-lioule
Froni the mint

I ,000
6,500
21,100

49,000

- 68,80
650,000
7 1,875
373,333
357,500
3, 552,680

THIS fum amounts to 819,16 11. Sterling, and if we

add to it the profit accruing from the sale of 5000 quin-
tals of quicksilver, imported from the mines of Almaden,
in Spain, on the king's account, and what accrues from
the Averia, and some other taxes which Villa Segnor
does not estimate, may well be reckoned above a mil-
lion pounds flerling money. Theat. Mex. vol. i. p. 38,
&c. According to Villa Segnor, the total produce of
the Mexican mines, amounts at a medium to eight mil-
lions of pesos in silver annually, and to 5912 marks of
gold. Ib. p. 44. Several branches of the revenue have
been explained in the course of the hiflory; rome,
which there was no occasion of mentioning, require a
particular illustration. The right to the tythes in the
New World is veiled in the crown of Spain, by a bull
of Alexander VI. Charles V. appointed them to be
applied in the following manner: One-fourth is allotted
to the bishop of the diocese, another fourth to the dean
and chapter, and other officers of the cathedral; the
remaining half is divided into nine equal parts. Two
of these, under the denomination of los dos novenos reales,
are paid to the crown, and constitute a branch of the
royal revenue. The other seven parts are applied to
the maintenance of the parochial clergy, the building
and support of churches, and other pious uses. Recopil.
lib. i. tit. xvi. Ley. 23, &c. Avendano Thefaur.
Indic. vol. i. p. 184.

THE Allcavala, is a duty levied by an excise on the

sale of goods. In Spain it amounts to ten per cent. In
America to four pel cent. Solorzano Polit. Indiana,
lib. vi. c. 8. Avendano, vol. i. 186.

TiiE A1inajorifafgo, or custom paid in America on

goods imported and exported, may amount on an average
to fifteen per cent. Recopil. lib. viii. tit. xiv. Ley. t.
Avendano, vol. i. t88.

THI. vet ia, or tax paid on account of convoys to

guard the ships failing to and from America, was firfl
imposed when Sir Francis Drake filled the New World
with terror by his expedition into the South Sea. It

amountt
516

amounts to 2 per cent. on the value of goods. Avendano,
vol. i. p. 189. Recopil. lib. ix. tit. ix. Ley. 43, 44.

I HAVE not been able to procure any accurate detail

of the several branches of revenue in Peru, later than the
year 1614. From a curious manuscript, containing a
state of that vice-royalty in all its departments, presented
to the Marquis of Montes-Claros, by Fran. Lopez Cara-
vantes, accomptant-general in the tribunal of Lima, it
appears, that the public revenue, as nearly as I can
compute the value of the money in which Caravantes
fates his accounts, that the revenue colleted, amounted
in ducats, at 4s. I X d. to 2,372,768

Expences of govei'^nent - ,242,992

Net free revenue 1,129,776

The total in flerling money - s. 583,303
Expences of government - 305,568

Net free revenue 277,735

BuT several articles appear to be omitted in this com-

putation, such as the duty on flamped paper, leather,
ecclefiaflical annats, &c. so that the revenue of Peru
may be well supposcd equal to that of Mexico.

IN computing the expence of government in New

Spain, I may take that of Peru as a flandard. There
the annual citablifliment for defraying the charge of
adminiltration, exceeds one half of the revenue col-
leted; and there is no reason for supposing it to be less
in New Spain.

I HAVE obtained a calciilaiion of the total amount
of the public revenue of Spain from America and the

Philippines,

517

Philippines, which, as the reader will perceive from the
two last articles, is more recent than any of the former.

Alcavalas (Excise) and Aduanas pesos

fuertes (Cultoms), &c. - 2,500,000

Duties on gold and silver - - 3,000,000
Duty on coinage of, at the rate of one

real de la Plata for each mark - 300,000

Bull of Cruzada - - ,000o,ooo
Tribute of the Indians - 2,000,000
By sale of quicksilver - - 300,000
Paper exported on the king's account,

and fold in the royal warehouses 300,000
Stamped paper, tobacco, and other small

duties - ,000,000
From the trade of Acapulco, and the

coasting trade from.province to pro-
vince - - - 500,000

Affiento of negroes - - - 200,000
From the trade of Mathe, or herb of

Paraguay, formerly monopolized by
the Jesuits - - 500,000
From other revenues formerly belonging

to that order - - 400,000

Total 12,000,000

Total in sterling money 2,000,000
Deduce half, as the expence of admi-

niftratioli, and there remains net free
revenue - - - 1 ,350,00(

NO T E CII. p. 431,

A N author, long conversant in commercial fpecula-
tion, has computed that from the mines of New Spain
alone, the king receives annually, as his fifth, the limn
of two millions of our money. Hlarris Collct. of Voy
ii. p. 164. According to this calculation, the total pro-
duce of the mines musl be ten millions flrling; a fum (u,

exorbitant,
518

exorbitant, and so little corresponding with all accounts
of the annual importation from America, that the in-
formation on which it is founded must evidently be er-
roneous. According to Campomanes, the total produEt
of the American mines may be computed at thirty mil-
lions of pesos, which, at four shillings and fix pence a
peso, amounts to 7,425,000 1. flerlmng, the king's fifth
of which (if that were regularly paid) would be
1,485,000 1. But from this fum the expence of admi-
niltration is to be deduced, which is very considerable,
as appears from the preceding note. Educ. Popular,
vol. ii. p. 131. note.

NOTE CLIL. p. 431.

ACCORDING to Bern. de Ulloa, all foreign
goods exported from Spain to America pay duties of
various kinds, amounting in all to more than 25 per
cent. As molt of the goods with which Spain supplies
her colonies are foreign; such a tax upon a trade so
extensive mull yield a considerable revenue. Retablif.
de Manus. & du Commerce d'Efp. p. i5o. He com-
putes the value of goods exported annually from Spain
to America, to be about two millions and a halt flerling,
p. 97.

NOT E CIV. p. 433.

T HE Marquis de Serralvo, according to Gage, by
a monopoly of salt, and by embarking deeply in the
Manilla trade as well as in that to Spain, gained annu-
ally a million of ducats. In one year he rsmitted a
million of ducats to Spain, in order to purchl:li from
the Conde Olivares, and his creatures, a prolorgation
of his government, p. 6X. IIe was fucccl'sful in his
suit, and continued in office fiom i624 to 1635, dou-
ble the ulual time.

SH ORT

519
VOL.. II.

L 1

# SHORT ACCOUNT OF What is contained in the LETTER sent to the EMPEROR, mentioned Preface, p. xi.

SHORT ACCOUNT

o F

What is contained in the LETTER sent to
the EMPEROR, mentioned Preface, p. xi.

T H I S letter is dated July 6th, I5I9. Cortes,
in his second dispatch, takes notice that it was
sent off on the I6th of July.

THE great object of the peribns who wrote this

letter, is to juflify their own conduct in efiablifh-
ing a colony independent on the jurisdiction of
Velasquez. With this view they endeavour to
detract from his merit, in fitting out the two for-
mer armaments under Cordova and Grijalva, re-
presenting there as equipped by the adventurers
who engaged in the expedition, not by the gover-
nor. They labour likewise to depreciate the ser-
vices, of Cordova and Grijalva, in order to exalt
the merit of their own exploits.

THEY contend, that the sole object of VelaC-

quez was to trade or barter with the natives, not to
attempt the conquest of New Spain, or the cfia-
blifhment of a colony there. This is frequcntly
I mentioned by B. Diaz del Cafillo, c. 19, 41, 4-2,
i&c. But if Velafqucz had not conqufll and Rct-
ttlement in view, there seems to have been no rca-
son for equipping such a confiderablc armamennlt.

Tri ,.v
L,1 2

THEY assert, that Cortes defrayed the greatest

part of the expence of fitting out the armament.
But this does not agree with the account of his
slender fortun - given by Gomara, Cron. c. 71. and
B. Diaz, c. 20, or what I have mentioned Note iii.
vol. ii.

THEY take notice, that though considerable

numbers were wounded in their different encoun-
ters with the people of Tabasco, not one of them
died, and all recovered in a short time. This
seems to confirm what I have observed, vol. ii. p.
39, concerning the imperfection of the offensive
weapons of the Americans.

THEY give some account of the manners and

institutions of the Mexicans. It is very short, and
as they had resided but a short time in the country,
and had but little intercourse with the natives, it
is both defective and inaccurate. They describe
minutely, and with great horror, the human facri-
sices offered by the Mexicans to their deities, and
affirm that some of their number were eye-witnesses
of those barbarous rites.

THEY fibjoin to their letter a catalogue and de-

scription of the presents sent to the emperor.
That published by Gomara, Cron. c. 29. seems to
have'been copied from it, and Pet. Martyr dc-
scribes many of the articles in his treatise De Inli-
lis nuper inventis, p. 354, &c.

A. CATA
r 2

# A CATALOGUE OF SPANISH Books and Manuscripts.

A
CATALOGUE

o F
SPANISH Books and Manuscripts.

A

A C A R E T E de Biscay, Relation des Voyages dans la
Riviere de la Plata, & dela par Terre au Perou. Exifat.
Recueil de Thevenot, Part. IV.

-A Voyage up the River de la Plata, and
thence by .and to Peru, 8vo. London, i698.

Acofta (Joseph de) Hiftoire Naturelle & Moral des Indes

tant Orientales qu' Occidentales, 8vo. Pa is, 16oo.

----- --_- Novi Orbis Hiftoria Naturalis & Moralis.
Exfl. in Collec. Theod. de Bry, Pars IX.

~--- --- De Natura Novi Orbis, Libri duo, & de pro-
curanda Indoruni Salute, Libri sex, Salniant, 8vo. 1589.

--- -- (Chriftov.) Tratado de las Drogas y Medc-

cinas de las Indias Occidentales, con sus Plantas Dibuxadas al
vivo, 4to. Burgos, 1578.

Acugna (P. Christoph.) Relation de la Riviere des Aina-
zones, zmno. Tom. ii. Paris, 168z.

----- --- A Relation of the great River of the

Amazones, in South America, 8vo. Lond. 1698.

Alarchon (Fern.) Navigatione a Scoprcre il Regno di fctte

Citta. Raniiufio, III. 363.

Albuquerque Coello (Duartc de) Memorial de Artes de la
Gucrra del iJrafil, 4to. Mad. 1634.

Alcafarado

Alcafarado (Franc.) An Historical Relation of the Discovery
of the Ifie of Madeira, 4to. Lond. 1675.

Alcedo y IIerrera (D. Dionyfio de) Avifo Hiftorico-Politico-

Geografico, co.n las Noticias mas particulares, del Pcru, Tierra
Firnle, Chili,y nuevo Revno de Granada, 4to. Mad. 1740.

CoCnpendio Hiilorico de la Provincia y Puerto de
Guayaquil, 4to. Miad . 1741.

A!dama v Guevar.; (D. Jos. Auguftin de) Arte de ]a Len-
gua Mcxicar:t, 1zn1o. Mexico, 1754.

Alvarado (Pedro de) dos Relaciones a Hern. Cortes Refe-

riendo!e sus Expediciones y Conqu:fas en varias Provincias de
N. Efpagna. Exfl. Barcia Hifioriad. Primit. tom. i.

--- - Lettere due, &c. Exist. Ramus. I11. 296.
Aranzcles Reales de los Minftros de la Real Audiencia de
N. Efpagna, fol. Mexico, 1727.

Argenfola (Bartolome Leonardo de) Conquifta de las Ifas
Malucas, fol. Mad. 16o9.

- Anales de Aragon, fol. Saragrofs, 1630.

Arriago (P. Pablo Jos. de) Extirpacion de la Idolatria del
Peru, 4to. Lima, 162r.

Avendagno (Didac.) Thesaurus Indicus ceu generalis In-

fruEtor pro Rcginine Confcientie, in is ifqua ad Indias spec-
tznit, fol. 2 vols. Antwerp, 166o.

B

Barcia (D. And. Gonzal.) Hifsoriadores Primitivos de Ila
India Occidentales, fol. 3 vols. Mad. 1749.

Barco-Gentineia (D. Martin di) Argentina y Conquifta ddl
Rio de la Plata Poemla. Ex/t. Iarcia Hiftorivd. Primit. IlI.

Barros (Joao de) Decades de Asia, fol. 4 vols. Lifboa, 1i23.
BelleCleros. (D. Thomas de) Ordenanzes del Peru, fol.
2 vols. Lima, 1685.

Benzo (Hicron.) Novi Orbis Hiftoria;-De Bry America,
Part IV, V, VI.

3etancurt y Figueroa (Don Luis) Derecho de las Iglefias
Metro Politanas de las Indias, 4to. Mad. 1637.

Blanco (F. Matias Ruiz) Conversion de Piritu de Indics
Cumnnagotos y otros, I zmo. Mad. 1690.

Boturini Benaduci (Loren.o) Idea de una nucva Hiltoria

general de la America Scptentrional, fundada fobre material
copiolf de Figuras, SynlbolasCaraceres, Cantares y Malnu-
fcritos de Autores Indios, 4to. Mad. 1746.

Botello de Moraes y Vafconcellos (D. Francisco (it)
El Nuevo Mundo I'ocma H-eroyco, 4to. Barcclone, 1701.

Botcro
524

Botero Benes (Juan) Description de Todas las Provincias,
Reynos, y Ciudades del Mundo, 4to. Girona, 1748.

Brietius (Phil.) Paralela Geographixa Veteris & Nove, 4to.
Paris, 1648.

C

Cabeza de Baca (Alvar Nugnez) Relacion de los Naufra-
gios. Exff. Barcia Hilt. Prim. Tom. i.

------ Examen Apologetico de la Hiftorica Nar-
ration de los Naufragios. Exft. ibid.

- Commentarios de lo fuccedido duarante fu
gubierno del Rio de la Plata. Exit. ibid.

Cabo de Vacca Relatione de. Exft. Ramufio, III. 31 o.
Cabota (Sebaft.) Navigazione de. Exft. Ramus. II. zI .
Calancha (F. Anton. de la) Cronica Iloralizada del Order
de San Auguffin en el Peru, fol. Barcelona, 1638.

California-Diario Hiftorico de los Viages de Mar y Tierra

hcchos en 1768, al Norte de California, di orden del Marques
de Croix, Vi-rey de Nueva Efpagna, &c. MS.

Calle (Juan Diaz de la) Memorial Informatorio de lo que a

fil Mageffad Provien de la Nueva Efpagna y Peru, 4to.
1645.

Caracas-Real Cedula de Fundacion de la real Compagnia
Guipufcoana de Caracas, 12mo. Mad. 1765.

Caraventes (Fr. Lopez de) Relacion de las Provincias que

tiene el Govierno del Peru, los Officios que en el fe Provien,
y la Hacienda que alli tiene fu Mageftad, lo que fe Gaita de
ella y le queda Libre, &c. &c. Dcdicado al Marques de
Santos Claros,Agno. de 16 1. MS.

Cardenas y Cano (Gabr.) Enfayo Cronologico par la His-
toria general de la Florida, fol. Mlad. 1733.

Caro de Torres (Franc.) Hifloria de las Ordenes Militares
de Sant lago, Calatrava y Alcantara, fol. Mad. 16z9.

Carranzana (D. Goncalcs) A Geographical Delcription of
the Coasts, &c. of the Spanifli Welt-Tndies, 8vo. Lond. 1740.

Casas (Bart. de las) Breviffila Relacion de la Deftruycion
de his Indias, 4to. 1552.

---- Narratio Iconibus lluiftata per Theod. de Bry.
4to. Oppent. 1614.

(Bart. de las) An Account of the sirss Voyages

and Difcoveiies of the Spaniards in America, Svo. Lond.

1693. Caflani (P. Joseph) Hliforia d. la lr'ovincia deCompagnia
de Jefis del Nuevo Reynocde Gilaln:d, Iuol Mad. 1741.

CaftI.nhella

Caftanheda (Fern. Lop. de) Hiltoria do Defcobrimento &
Conquitta de India pelos Portugueses, fol. z vols. Lifboa, 1552.

Caftellanos (Juan de) Primera Parte de las Elegias de Va-
rones Illuftres de Indias, 4t0. Mad. I589.

Castillo (Bernal Diaz del) Hiftoria Verdadera de la Con-
quifta de Nueva Efpagna, fol. Mad. 1632.

Cavallero (D. lol. Garcia) Brieve Cotejo y Valance de las

pefas y Medidas di varias Naciones, reducidas a las que Corren
en Caiilla, 4to. Mad. 1731.

Cieca de Leon (Pedro de) Cronica del Peru, fol. Sevill. 553.
Cil'neros (Diego) Sitio, Naturelez a y Propriedades de la
Ciudad de Mexico, 4to. Mexico, 1618.

Cogullado (P. Fr. Diego Lopez) Hiftoria de Yucatan, fol.
Mad. I688.

Collecao dos Brives Pontificos e Leyes Regias que forao

Expedidos y Publicadas defCle o Anno 1741, fobre a Liberdada
des Pelroas bcne a Comniercio dos Indos de Brefil.

Coloccion General de las Providencias hafta aqui tomadas

pcr el Gobierno fobre cl Eftragniinento, y Occupacion de
TemIpolalidades de los Regulares de la Compagnia, de E!pag-
na. Indias, &c. Partes IV. 4to. Mad. 1767.

Colon (D. Fernando) I_,a Hiftoria del Almirante, D. Chris-
toval Colon Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. I. x.

Coluimbus (Chriil:.) N.vigatio qua multas Regioncs haacer.us
incognitas invenit. Fxft. Nov. Orb. Grynaie, p. 90.

----- - (Ferd.) Lifei and Ations of his Father Ad-

iniral Christoph. Columbus. Exft. Churchill's Voyages, II
479.

Concilios Provinciales Primnero y Segundo celebrados cn la

muy Noble y inuy ie la Ciudad de Mexico en los Agnos dc
1555 & 1565. fol. Mexico, 1769.

Concilium Mexicanunl Plovinciale tertium celebratum
Mexici, Anno 1535, fol. Mexici. 1770.

Corita (Dr. Alonro) Breve y fumaria Relacion de los Seg-

nores, manera y Dilfereucia de ellos, que havia en la Nueva
EIfagra, y otrts Provincias lls Comarcanas, y de sus Leyes,
Ufos y Cothllbres, y de la Forma que tenian em Tributas sus
Vafallos en Tiempo de fu Gentilidad, &c. MS. 4to. pp. 307.

Coronada (Fr. V:fq. de) Soinnalio di due sue Lettere del

Viaggio fatto del Fra Marco da Nizza al fttte Citta de Cevola.
Exfl. Rainutio 11. 354.

--- _-- Relation del Viaggio alec fette Citta. Ramufio IIT.
359.

Cortes (lIeTn.) Quattro Cartas dirigidas al Emperador

Carlos V. en que ha Rclacion de sus Conquiflas cn la Nueva
Efpnrgna. Exil. Barcia -lift:. Prim. tomn. i.

Cortefii (Ferd.) De in'ulis nupcr inveitis Narrationcs ad
Ca-olunl V. fol. 1532.

Cortfc
526

Cortefe (Fern.) Relationi, &c. Exist. Ramufio III. zz5.
Cubero (D. Pedro) Peregrinacion del Mayor Parte del
Mundo Zaragoff. 4to. i688.

D

Davila Padilla (F. Aug.) Hiftoria de la Fundacion v DiT-
curfo de Provincia de St. Jago de Mexico, fol. Brufs. 1625.

----- (Gil. Gonzalez) Teatro Ecclefiaflico de la
Primitiva Iglefia de las Indias Occidentales, fol. z vols. 1649.

Documentos tocantes a la Perfccucion, que los Regulares

de la Compagnia fucitaron contra Don B. de Cardenas Obifpo
de Paraguay, 4to. Mad. 1768.

E

Echavari (D. Bernardo Ibagnez dc) El Reyno Jefuitico del

Paraguay. Exft. tom. iv. Colleccion de Doculimentos, 4to
Mad. 1770.

Echave y Aflu (D. Francisco dc) La Ef:rella de Lima con-
vertida en Sol fobre sus tres Coronas, fol. Amberes, 168.

Eguira el Egueren (D. Jo. Jos.) Bibliotheca Mexicana, five

Eruclitorumi Hiftoria Virorui' in America Boreali natoruml,
&c. tomn. Pll'i. fol. MIex. 1755. N. B. No nmore than one
volume of this work has been publilihed.

Ercilla y Zuniga (D. Alonzo de) La Araucana Poema
Eroico, fol. Mad. 1733.

Efcalona (D. Gaspar de) Ga;.ophylaciuiii Regium Peru-
Vicumn, fol. Mad. 1775.

F

Faria y Sousa (Manuel de) Hiiloria del Reyno de Portugal,
fol. Amber. 1730.

.--- , IHiftory of Portugal fiom tile firfl Ages to the
Revolution under John IV. Svo. Lond. 1698.

Fernandez (Diego) Hiftoria del lPeru, fol. Sevill. 571.
-- -. (P. Juan Patr.) Relacion lliftorial de las Mifliones
de los Indios que Claman Cliiquitos, 410. Mad. 1726.

Feyjoo (Bcnit. Geron) Espagnoles Americanos-Difcurfo
VI. del tom. iv. del Teatro Critico. Mad. 17(9.

,-
- - Solucion del gran Problemio Hiflorico, fobre la

Poblacion de la America-Difcurfo XV. del tonm. v. del Teatro
Critico.

.- . (D. Migucl) Rel.icion Defcriptiva de la cuidad y
Provincia de 'Truxillo del Peru, fol. Mad. 1763.

Freyre (Ant.) Piratas de Ia America, 4to.
Fraflo (D. PIeto) Dc Regio Patronati Indiarum, fol. 2 vols.
latriti, 1775.

Galvao

527

G

Galvao (Antonia) Tratado dos Defcobrimentos antigos y
Modernos, fol. Lifboa, 1731.

Galvano (Ant.) The Discoveries of the World from the first
Original unto the Yeai 1555. Osborne's Colleat. II. 354.

Garcia (Gregoria) Hiftoria Ecclefiaftica y Seglar de la India

Oriental y Occidental, y Predicacyon de la Santa Evangelia en
ella, izmo. Baeca, 1626.

(Fr. Gregorio) Origen de los Indios del Nuevo
Mundo, fol. Mad. 1729.

Godoy (Diego de) Relacion al H. Cortes, que trata del

Decubrimiiento de diverfas Ciudades, y Provincias y Guerras
que tuio con'lcs Indios. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tom. i.

---- - Lettera a Cortefe, &c. Exft. Ramnufio ITI.
300. 3oo.

Gornara (Fr. Lopez de) La Hifforia general de las Indias,
izmo. Any. 1554.

-------- Hiforia general de las Indias. Exi. Barcia
Hist. Prim. tom. ii.

--- Chronica de la Nueva Efpagna o Conquifta
de Mexico. Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tomn ii.

GJuiiilla (P. Jos.) Hiftoire Naturellc, Civile & Geographi-

quc de I'Orenoque. Traduite par M. Eidous, Izmo. ton. iii.
Avigi. 1758.

Gufinan (Nugno de) Relacion fcritta in Omitlan Provincia

de Mechuacan della maggior Spagna nell 1530. Exft. Ramufio
I1I. 331.

H

Henis (P. Thadeus) Ephcmerides belli Guaranici, ab Anno
1754. Ext. Colleccion general de Docum. tom. iv.

Hcrnandes (Fran.) Plantaruni, Animalium & Mineralium
Mcxicanorum Hiftoria, fol. Ron. i651.

Herrera (Anton. de) Hiftoria general de los Hechos de los

Caftellanos en las Iflas y Tieria Firma del Mar Oceano, fol.
4 vols. Mad. 1601.

·---- Hiftoria Gencral, &c. 4 vols. Mad. 1730.

General History, &c. Translated by Stephens, 8vo.
6 vols. Lond. 1740.

* - -Defcriptio India Occidentalis, fol. Anlm. 1622.

L

Leon (Fr. Ruiz. de) T-Hernandia Poema Heroyco de Con-
quilla de Mexico, 4to. Mad. 1755.

-- (Ant. de) Epitomne de la Bibliotleca Oriental y
Occidental, Nautica y Geografica, fol. Mad. 1737.

l_.ill1,

Lima, A true account of the Earthquake which happened

there zSth Ocober 1746. Translatcd fiom the Spanilh, 8vo.
Lond. 1748.

Limia Gozofa, Defcripcion de las feflibas Demonftraciones,

con que efta ciudad Celebro ia real Proclamacion de el Nonibre
Augufto del Catolico Monarco D. Carlos III. Lima, 4to.
1760.

Llano Zapata (D. Jos. Eufeb.) Preliniinar al Tomo I. de las

Memorias Hiflorico-Phyfic.as, Critico Apolojcticas de la A-
inerica Meridional, 8vo. Cadiz. 7 59.

Lopez (Thom.) Atlas Geographico de la Aierica Septen-
trional y Meridional, im:no. Prr. 1758.

Lorenzana (D. F. Ant.) IIiltoria de Nueva Efpagna, efcrita

por fu ELclarecido Conquiarador Hlernan Cortes, Aumentlda
con otros Documentos y Notas, fol. Mex. 1770.

Lozano (P. Pedro) Defcripcion Chorograpiiica, del Terre-

torios, Arboles, Animlales, del Gran Chaco, y de los ritos y
Coflunibics, de las innumerabilcs Naciones que la Habitan,
4to. Coidov. 1733.

-_-- Hifloria de la Compagnia de JeUfis en la Pro-
vincia del Paraguay, fol. z vols. 1lad. 1753.

M

Madriga (Pedro de) Description de la Gouvernrent du

Perou. Exft. Voyages qui ont fervi a l'etablifiement de la comp.
des Indes, toni. ix. 10;.

Mariana (P. Juan tie) Difcu:fo de las Enferniedades de la
Coinpagnia de Jesus, 4to. Mad. 1763.

Martinez de la Pucnte (D. Jos.) Con:pendio de las Hiftorias

de los Defcubrinlientos, Conquiftas y C uterras de la India Ori-
ental, y sus Tflas, defde los 7'iempos dcl Infante Don Enrique
de Portugal fiu inventor, 4to. Mad. 168r.

Martyr ab Angleria (Petr.) De Rcbus Oceanicis & Novo
Orbe Decades tres, 121110. Colon. 1574.

-De infulis nuper inventis, & de Moribus Inco-
larum. Ibid. p. 329.

.--

-- Opus Epiflolarum, fol. Anmfl. 1670.

- --- I1 Sonimario cavato della tfua -Hifioria del
Nuevo Mundo. Ramufio III. i.

Mecluacan-Relacion cde las Ceremonias, Ritos y Poblacion

de los Indios de Mechuacan-hecla al I. S. D. Ant. de Men-
doza Virrey de Nueva Efpagna, fol. MS.

Melendez (Fr. Juan) Teforos Verdaderos de las Indias His-

toriade la Provincia de S. Juan Baptifla del Peru, del Orden
Ieu Predicadores,' fol. 3 vols. Rom. i681.

Mendozar

Mendozar (D. Ant. de) Lettera al Imperatore del Difcopri-

mento della Terra Firma della N. Spagna verso Tramontano.
Ext. Ramufio III. 35 5.

-- (Juan Gonz. de) Hiftoria del gran Reyno de
China con un Itinerario del Nuevo Mundo, 8vo. Rom. 1585.

Monardes (El Dottor) Primera y Secunda y Tercer Parte

de la Hiftoria Medicinal de las Cosas que fe traen de nueftras
Indias Occidentales, que firven en Medicina, 4to. Sevilla

'574. Moncada (Sancho de) Reftauracion Politica de Efpagna y
defeos Publicos, 4to. Mad. 1746.

N

Nizza (F. Marco) Relatione del Viaggio fatta per Terra al
Cevole, Regno dicette Citta. Exft. Ranuf. III. 356.

Nodal-Relacion del Viage que hicieron los Capitanes

Barth. y Gornz. de Nodal al defcubrimiento del Eftrecho que
hoy es nombrado de Maire, y reconocimiento del de Magel-
lanes, 4ro. Mad.

Nueva Efpagna-Hiftoria de los Indios de Nueva Efpagna

dibidida en tres Partes. En la primera trata de los Ritos,
Sacrificios y Idolatrias del Tiempo de fu Gentilidad. En la
fegunda de fu maravillofa Conversion a la Fe, y modo de ce-
lebrar las Fiestas de Nueftra Santa Iglefia. En la tercera del
Genio y Caracter de aquella Gente; y Figuras con que'nota-
ban sus Acontecimientos, con otras particularidades; y Noti-
cias de las principales Ciudades en aquel Reyno. Efcrita en
el Agno i 5. i por uno de los doce Religiofos Franciscos que
primero Paffaron a entender en fu Conversion, MS. fol. pp.
618.

0

Ogna (Pedro de) Arauco Domado. Poema, iznlo. Mad.
16nS.

Ordenanzas del Confejo real de las Indias, fol. Mad. 1681.
Ortegi (D. Cafiniiro de) Refumen Hiftorico del primer
Viage bccho al redcdor del Mundo, 5to. Mad. 1769.

Oirolio (Jerom) I-Iiftory of the Portuguese, during the
Reign of Emmanuel, 8vo. z vols. Lond. 1752.

Offirius (Hieron.) De rebus Emmanuelis Lusitania Regis,
8vo. Col. Agr. 1572.

Ovalle (Alonfo) H-istorical Relacion del Reyno de Chili,
fol. Rom. 1646.

fl.An Hoiltorical Relation of the Kingdom of Chili.
Exft. Churchill Collec. III. 1.

Oviedo y Bagnos (D. Jos.) Hiltoria la Conquifta y Publa-
cion de Venezuela, fol. Mad. 1723.

Oviedc
530

Oviedo (Alonfo) Sommaria, &c. Exft. Ramufio III. 44.
Oviedo (Gonz. Fern. de) Relacion Sommaria de la Hiftoria
Natural de las India. Exft. Barcia Hilt. Prim. tom. i.

Oviedo Hiftoria Generale & Naturale dell Indie Occiden-
tale. Exft. Ramufio. III. 74.

Relatione della Navigatione per la Grandiflina
Fiume Maragnon. Exft. Ramus. III. 415.

P

Palafox y Mendoza (D. Juan) Virtudes del Indios o Na-
turaliza y Coffumbres de los Indios de N. Efpagna, 4to.

------ Vie de Venerable Doni. Jean Palafox Evcque de
l'Angelopolis, Izmo. Cologe, 1772.

Pegna (Juan Nugnez de la) Conquifta y Antiguedades de las
Ilas de Gran Canaria, 4to. Mad. 1676.

Pena Montenegro (D. Alonfo de la) Itinerario para Paro-

chos de Indios, en que tratan las materias las particuli:-rcs,
tocantes a ellos para fu buen adminiftracion, 4to. Amberes.

1754. Peralta Barnuevo (D. Pedro de) Lina fundada o Conquifta
del Peru Poema Eroyco, 4to. Lima, 1732.

Peralta Calderon (D. Mathias de) El Apoftol de las Indiqs

y nueves gentes San Francisco Xavier de la Compagnia de Je.
sus Epitome de sus Apoftolicos hechOs, 4to. Pamp. 1665.

Pereira de Berrido (Bernard.) Annales Hiforicos do cftado
do Maranchao, fol. Lifboa, 1749.

Peru-Relatione d'un Capitano Spagnuolo del Defcopri-

mento 3 Conquilta del Peru. Exfl. Ranlu: 11.
I 571.

Peru-Relatione d'un Secretario de Franc. Pizzarro della
Conquefta del Peru. Exft. Ramufio III. 392.

- Relacion del Peru, MS.

Pefquifa de los Oydores de Panama contra D. Jayme Mug-

nos, &c. por haverlos Comnlerciado illicitanente en tiempo de
Guerra, tol. 1755.

Philipinas-Carta clue escribe un Religiofo antiguo dc Piiili-

pinas, a un Amigo luyo en Elpagna, que le pregunta cI Na-
turel y Genio de los Indios Naturales de Eftas Isi.s. MS. 4to.

Piedrahina (Luc. Fern.) Hiftoria general de las Conquillas
del Nuevo Reyno de Granada, fol. Amnbres.

Pinelo (Ant. de Leon) Epitome de la lilliotlicca Oriental y

Occidental en que lc comniceren los Efcritores, de las Indias
Orientales y Occidentales, lbo. 2 vols, Mad. 1737.

Pinzonius focius Adnlirantis Colunlbi-Navigatio & res per
cuml repertxc. Ex.f, Nov. Orb. Gryil:ei, p. 1 19

Pizarro

53t

Pizarro y Orellana (D. Fern.) Varones illuftres del N. Mun-
do, fol. Mad. 1639.

Puente (D. Jos. Martinez de la) Compendio de las Hiitorias

de los Defcubrimientos de la India Oriental y sus Ifas, 4to.
Mad. 1681.

Q.

Quir (Ferd. de) Terra Australis Incognita, or a new Sou-

thern Discovery, containing a fifth Part of the World lately
found out, 4to. Lond. 1617.

R

Real Compagnia Guipuzcoana de Caracas, Noticias hiflo-

riales Practicas, de los Succeffos y Adelantanlientos de efta
Coinpagnia defde fu Fundacion en 1728 haita 1764, 4to.
1765.

Recopilacion de Leyes de los Reynos de las Indias, fol. 4
vols. Mad. 1756.

Relatione d'un Gentilhuomo del Sig. Fern. Cortefe della

gran Citta Teniiftatan, Mexico, & delle altre cofe della Nova
Spagna. Exft. Raniuf. III. 304.

Remefal (Fr. Ant.) Hiftoria general de las Indias Occiden-

tales y particular de la Governacion de Chiapa y Guatimala,
fol. Mad. 16zo.

Ribadeneyra (D. Diego Portichuelo de) Relacion del Viage

defde que falio de Linta, hafta que Ilego a Efpagna, 4to. Mad.

1657. Ribandencyra y Barrientos (D. Ant. Joach.) Manuel Conm-
perdio de el Regio Patronato Indiano, fol. Mad. 1755.

Ribas (Andr. Perez de) Hiftoria de les Triumphos de Neuf-

tra Sta Fe, entre Gentes las nlas Barbaras, en las mifliones de
Nucva Efpagna, .fol. Mad. 1645.

Riol (D. Santiago) Reprefentacion a Philipe V. fobre el cf-
tado a&ual de los Papeles univerlales de la Monarchia, MS.

RochaP-itta (Sebaftiano de) Hiftoria da America Portougue-

za des de o Anno de 150 de fu Defcobrinento ate o de 1724,
fol. Lifoa 1730.

Rodriguez (Manuel,) Explicacion de ia nlulla de la Santa
Cruzado, 4to. Alcala, 589.

.---- (P. Man.) El Maragnon y Anma.onas, Hiftoria de

los Defcubrimientos, Entradas y Reducion de Naciones, fol.
Mad. 1684.

Roman (Hieron.) Republicas dl Mundo, fol. 3 vols. Mad.
1595.

Rofende (P. Ant. Gonz. de) Vida del Juan de Palafox Ar-

zobifpo de Mexico, fol. Mad. 1671.
532

Ruiz (P. Ant.) Conquifta Efpiritual hecha por los Religiofos

de la Compagnia de Jesus, en las Provincias de la Paraguay
Uragay, Paranay Tape, 4to. Mad. 1639.

S

Salazar de Mendoza (D. Pedro) Monarquia de Eipagna,
tom. i, ii, iii, fol. Mad. 1770.

Salazar y Olarte (D. Ignacio) Hiftoria de la Conquifta de
Mexico-fegunda parte-No place nor year.

Salazar y Zevallos (D. Alonz. Ed. de) Confsituciones y Or-

denanzas antiguas Agnadidas y Modernas de la Real Univerfi-
dad y eftudio general de San Marcos de la Ciudad de los Pleyes
delPeru, fol. EnlaCiudad de los Reyes, 1735.

Sanchez (Ant. Ribero) Dissertation fur l'Origine de la Ma-

ladie Venerienne, dans laquelle on prouve qu'elle n'a point ote
portee del'Amerique, 121110. Paris, I765.

Sarmiento de Gainboa (Pedro de) Viage al Eftrecho de
Magellanes, 4to. Mad. 1768.

Santa Cruz (El Marques) Comercio Suelto y en Companias
General, 121110. Mad. 1732.

Scheinidel (Hulderico) Hiftoria y Defcubrimiento del Rio
de la Plata y Paraguay. Exft. Barcia I-lift. Prim. tom. iii.

Sebara daSylva (Jos. de) Recueil Chronologique & Analyti-

que de tout ce qu'a fait en Portugal la Societe dite de Jesus,
depuis son entree dans ce Royaunle en 1540 jufqu'a son Ex-
pulfion en 1759, 121110. 3 vols. Lifb. 1769.

Sepulveda (Genefius) Dialogus de juftis belli caufis prafer-
tim in Indos Novi Orbis. MS.

Seyxas y Lovero (D. Fr.) Theatro Naval -Hydrographico,
4to0. 1648.

---- Defcripcion Geographica y Derrotcro de la Re-
gionAftral Magellanica, 4to. Mad. 169o.

Simon (Pedro)Noticias Hiftoriales de lasConquiftas deTier-
ra Firme en las Indias Occidentales, fol. Cuenca, 1627.

Solis (D. Ant. de) I-iftoria de las Conquiftas de Mexico,
fol. Mad. 1684.

----- Hiltory of the conquest of Mexico.-Tra.flated
byTownfend, fol. 1724.

Solorzano lerrcira (Joan.) Politica Indiana.
----- - Dc Indiarum jure five de jufla Indiarunl Occiden-
taliuin Gubernatione, ful. z vols. L.ugd. 1672.

- De Indiarunl Jure, fol Matriti, 2 vols. fol. 1629.

Suarc. de Figucroa (Chriflov.) Hechos de D. Garcia lur-
tado de Mendoza, 4to. Mad. 1613.

Tarragcnes

533
*..... .

T

Tarragones (Hieron. Gir.) Dos Libros de Cofinographia.
4to. Milan, 1 56.

Techo (F. N'chol. de) The Hiflory of the Provinces Para-

guay, Tucuman, Rio de la Plata, &c. Exft. Churchill's Coll.
VI. 3.

Torquemada (Juan de) Monarquia Indiana, fol. 3 vols.
Mad. 1723.

Torres (Sim. Per. de) Viage del Mundo. Exft. Barcia Hifl.
Prim. III.

(Franc. Caro de) Hiftoria de las Ordenes Mili-

tares de Santiago, Calatrava y Alcantara, defde fu Fundacion
hasa el Rey D. Felipe II. Adminiftador perpetuo dellas, fol.
Mad. 1629.

Torribio (P. F. Jos.) Aparato para la Hiftoria Natural
Efpagnalafol. Mad. 1754.

- -- Differtacion Hiftorico Politica y en mucha parte
Geografica de las Iflas Philipinas, Izmo. Mad. 1753.

U

Ulloa (D. Ant. de) Voyage Hiftorique de 1'Amerique Meli-
dionale, 4to. 2 tom. Paris, 1752.

-_--- Noticias Americanas, Entretenimientos Phyficos

Hiftoricus, fobre la America Meridional y le Septentrional
Oriental, 4to. Mad. 1772.

(Franc.) Navigatione per fcoprire l'Ifole delle

Specierie fino al Mare detto Vermejo nel 1539. Exit. Rainuf.
11. 339.

----- (D. Bernardo) Retabliffement des Manufaturcs
& du Commerce d'Efpagne, 12mo. Amft. 1753.

U'tariz (D.. Geron.) Theoria y Pracica de Commercio &
de Marina, fol. Mad. ]757.

--- -- The Theory and Praaice of Commerce, and
Maritime Affairs, 8vo. z vols. Lond. 1751.

V

Vcnegas (Migule) A Natural and Civill-Iiory of California,
8vn. 2 vols. Lond. 1759.

Varages (D. Thom. Tanaio de) Reftauracion de la Ciudadl

del Salvador y Bair de Todos Sandos en la Provincia del 1Bra-
fil, 4to. Mad. 1628.

Vargas Machuca (D. Bern. de) Milicia y Defcripcion de las
Indias, 4to. Mad. 1699.

Vega (L'Ynca Garcilaflo de la) Hiftoire des Guerres Civilcs

des Elpagnoles dans les Indes, par Baudouin, 4to. z toi.
Paris 1648.

Vci;»
534

Vega (Garcilaffo de la) Hiftoire de la Conquete de la

Floride. Traduite, par Richelet, 2nzmo. 2 toni. Lcyd.
1731.

----- Royal Commentaries of Peru, by Rycaut, fol.
Lond. 1688.

Veitia Linage (Jos.) The Spanili Rule of Trade to the
Weft Indies, Svo. Lond. 1702.

Nonrte de la Contratacion de las Indias Occiden-
tales, foi. Sevill. 16-2.

Verazzano (Giov.) Relatione dcllc Terra per lui Scoperta

nel 1524 x.
Ex Ranifio III. p. 420..

Viage de Efnagna, 12:110. 6 tomi. Miad. 1776.
Victoria (Fran.) Relationes Theologic;e de Indis & de jure
belli contra eos, 4to. 1a6. 765.

Viera y Clavijo (D. Jos.) Noticias de la I-Tiolria general
de las Iflas de Canaria, 4to, z to(i. 'al!d. 1772.

Villagra (Gasp. de) Hittoria de Nueva Mexico Poema,
Izmo. Alcala, 16o.

Villa Segnor y Sinchez (D Jos. Ant.) Thcatro Ameri-

cano. Description general de los Rcynos y Pro\incias dc la
Nueva Efpagna, fol. 2 toml. Mex. 174'.

X

Xerez (Franc. de) Verdadera Relacion de la Ccnquifa del

Peru y Provincia de Cuzco, Emniiada al Empcrador C:irlos V.
Exft. Barcia Hist. Prim. tonm. III.

Rclatione, &c. &c. x. Exf. annfio III. 372.

Zarate (Aug. dc) Hilloria dcl DcfcuLbriiiiento y Conquifil
te Ia Provincia del lelt . Exft. Barcia. Hil. Prim. tomi. III.

-- -Hifloire de la Decotvrte & tie la Conquete du
Icrou, 121110. 2 tomi. Paris, 1742.

Zavala y Augiion (D. Migiuel de) Rcprc!cntacion al Rcy

N. Scgnor D. Philipe V. dirigida al itas feguro Aumento
dtl Real Erario. No piace, 132.

Zevallos (). Pedro Ordeo;L:x dt) 1liloiai y Viage del
Mundo, 4to. Mad. 1691.

I N D E X.

535
V70L. Hi.

M i11

# INDEX.

I

N

D

E

X0 A9
N. B. The Roman Numer'si rcl;r !o the Volumne, and ti Ft I :r'e

to to.c i, g1 .

A
A B rSS IV'NIl, an cmbaffy sent to

that country by John 11. Kinrg i.

Portugal, i. 55.

Acapu/ca, the nature of the trade carried

on from thence to Manila, ii. 427.
Amount of the tre.ifire on board the
ihip talcn by Lord Anfdn, 5 1.
Arofla, his method of accounting for

the different degrees of hear, in the
old and new contirents, i. 448.
Adair, his account of the revengeful

temper of the nativ Americans, i.
475.
/ld.oifn, his ijflification of Hilnno's ac-

"o'lint of the African fed<, i. .* .

/jrica, the wefrern .o;ll or, l.iii *x-
plored by order of Jolin I. I.iu'? rs
Portugal, i. 4o. Is discovered licm
Cape Non, to 1(jacor, 42. Cape
Bojador duubled, 46. The coi.ntrirs
louthward of the River Scrc,'g.. dil-
covered, 52. C.ip of CGood llpe 1cti
,y B.irtiholoimew l1i.iz, 5;. ('A J;:!(t;
the extreme hc.t of tIl the l are thleic,
254. Igllorance ol' l.e alr. cllt ,Ill.l-
lnomners corlln'rninlg, 423.

,l'..i/i,/t are, the flat.c r, I.t' .

the nri-

tive America.i i 32j 'i V. , plihi-
pal c.ailfs (f llih di, it' ol, -;;z.

/,ooada, is lent to Flitl i, I,, .L .1 ciun-

nillioncr to infpclt thie con l.'t,
Coliimbus, i. ;o.
/4vi/ur, Jerom de, is relieved from a

long ca.ptivily among thlt In:di.mis ait
Cutizunrel, by Fernando ('ours, ii. to.
*slbtueierlte, It.odri(go, lis brbarous

treatment of the Indians of Hifpanio--
a1, i. 24.

7aUi.aaLi, in the Spanish Cuilomr, the

term ixplJired, ii. 514.
.xJ,:x./;cr tie Gre.It, his political cha-
r.: cer, i, 14. His motive in foundine.
the city of A!exandria, 15. His dif
coveries in Inia, 16.
.l'l-arder VI. Pope, grants to Ferdi-

nand and Ilf.bell.i of C.flile the right
of all their wei.ie n discoveries, i. r 13
Sends mifli nalies with Columbus on
his second v, vyag, il4.
.4.ilrnoi , Dirio iec,his birth and cha-

I ict'r, ii. ,9. AUlbci.atcs with Pizar-
ro and (de l.,!uc, in a vovixae of d;i-
cov.';, -co. ris unifuc. sful at-
tmrnits, 151. 1 nerlciicC, by P;'arrs
in his Sp.nillh negoa.tion, 159. I's e-

icinciled to h'm, I6o. IEii:'gs rein-

urcc:;ncnts tJ I'!z.irro at 'Peru, 1-6.
Ieg:nilning ct dilctlnfrios betweetn him
and I'i'aito, li(. Invades Cliii, I9;.
:; created poicinor r.l Cliili, and
rnia;hes ;o ('uIco, ic9. Stizes Cuil,
out Ls thI hai.ls of l'i7iro, i01.
l)feats Aiv.,!r.;lo, a;d t.d;ie him pli-
fob,,, ;/ ii.. Is i'r .ivo i byl the artful
tni',, i.[ io ns I l'l .i is Pi'/i.rro, ao'.
1 fd.c,.,te hv thin l'iz.i(.s 2Acf. 1,
tiliill plrlfio r, ^.. , Is tried arn

lcondelecd(l, 2.'. Is put tu deatl

log,
209,

jll/nario the fin, A;itorls rIefuge to lis

ftalih..'~ hIllwe is.,t I.ill, , ii.21'7. Ilis

lthar ii,, ilibi. Il.eids .a cunfliirtacy
;; d-? l Ir.incis Piz.irto, 2.t8. Piiar
ail'ltr d, 219. IC aclkowledged La

M m li th

his fuccerfor, 22o. His precarious
situation, 22z . Is defeated by Vaca
de Cafiro, 223. 1s betrayed and ex-
ecuted, 224.
Ai'lajoJ .,ifgo, in the Spanini American

cullomns, the amoullt tf, ii. 514.
A/laraoo, Alnz.,, is sei:' fiom Lima,

by Fiancis Pizairo, with a body of
Spaniards to celieve his brothers at
CuRs)., ii. 2oI. Is taken Prilfner
by Alinagio, zoz. his cli.ic, 203.
a."',ra-ao, l'elio oit, is ltet by C'o tL's to
tommjui at Mexico, while hemarch-
£d ;aaiiiil N. av.ar,, ii. 7S'. He is
hefirtgd by the Mexicans, S4. His
impiludent Condulict, 85. His expe-
dition to (.i i lt in l .:rut IF9.

A's.l lit; s, a COntillliil. ot. ls I:, t )-x'tl

ill South Ameriia, by Francis Urel-
Iana, ii. 215.
Amncria, the continent of, discovered by

Chr:ftopher Columbus, i. 1 8. How
it obtained this name, i49. Fcrdi-
n.,nd ot Cafli!e nominatcs two go-
Scrnmcnts in, 192. 'Ihc ropofitions
offered to the nat ves, ilid. 11l rccep-
lion cf Ojeda and Nicuefti aniTng
them, 193. The South Sca difrcucr-
ce by Balboa, 2z4. Rio de P1 ita disco-
vcrerd, 33. Tllc natives ot, i .;urioully
treated by the Spanlardr, 2a . The
veq extent of, 48. ' hle grand ob-
jeds it pcfentied 1t view, 249. The
circumlt.lll es of, f.lvuri ble tor com-
nlcrte indl rivilizat:'n, 2 50. The cli-
mates ,of, 252. Various iaufes ot the
p)e uliarity ti its lilinaes , '.53. It
ricte acldo itLi ili vLrt .itc a\ it I1, i
diflovelicd, 257. I's alniml, z5g. Its
infees andl ietiles, 261. Bilds, 2,2.
(C;ncral account ,f it., foil, 260. In-
quiry into the lil li' l ii not uo, 264.
Could rnt I: col :

u It'. by civiiized ,.iti-

onS, z70. 'l'e xtiher n extiemiiry of,
cor.tiguois to A. ia, 273. IProba:lly
pe: plcd by Alt.licr, 2 o. ('oii.lton
m 1 ch 1 a r tC'

l C l. 1'i Cc l i 'lb , !it5

ii.Ltircd ii, ll, 2i. e CUi mIo ru:ec
II.., t .e l..;nl * . 'v ,jlti,'r l knowl
p.lts of tli e.,rt! 2 '

. 'i1 1 ' eru-

v: als all, r1 exi.::,5 :, ,i , '

.

The fit[ dirf rcvt:.crh

: .n l.&l,. t1! a

ht.iciot s fpie-i-] ,i''. i).: m it :1,:,,
2 5. Tlhe v.riltl. i (t cn" of lhi;,;: .
pihers r (pd1 tint[ ,rc i .;.ti;':, , z'IG.
Method obl't-rved in the I relentl irew
of their bodily cuii!titeution luld Lir-

cumflances, 288. The venereal disi
ease derived from this part of the
world, 307. Why so thinly inhabited,
337. The country depopulated by
continual wars, 366. Cause of the ex-
tr- me cold nes towards the southern
extremity of, 451. The natural un-
cultivated slate of the country defcrib-
ed,453. Bones of large extiniit fpeciei
of animals discovered under ground
near the banks of the Ohio, 454.
Why Eutopean animals degenerat:
there, 455. Supposed to have under-
gone a convulsive separation fromAlia,
459. Causes of the depopulation
ot, traced, ii. 346. This depopula.
tion not the ielik of any intenticon.
f:item of pliey, 348. Nor th:
retfilt of region, 350. Numb.r
of Indian natives itill remaining in
Mlexico and Peru, 351. All the Spa.
niih oominions there fubjefted to tai
viceroys, 354. Its third viceroyalt;
lately eftablidled, 355. See Mcx;..
Peru, Crtes, Pizarro, &c.

Anm rihans, native in Spanish Ameiici ,

their bodily conlitlution andcomplicx.
on, i. z9S. Their firength and aliili-
ties, 29lo. Their insensibility slhi
rc'ard to their women, 292. No d,-
fcrmities in tl.cir frame, 296. '1Tl
circumtla: ce accounted tor, 2C.
Uniformity of their colour, 293. A
peculiar race described, 301. '11:
Elquimaux, 3c., P1atagonians, 303.
The existence ot Patagonran giantl; y
remaining to be decided, 3o5. 'll ;
dil:al'cs, c36. T''hc verneIeal dlii::
peculiarly theirs, 307. 'T h poe ':'
and qualities of thrir mindr, ^5:'
Are only illicitous to fipplv In.n..-
diate wanlt, 310. 'I he art oil c,,iu.
tlalion liarcely known to thein, ; .
H.ve no abilract ideas, 312. ' ':
'oltll Arinericans much more ir;. "
C ent than thofl of t'.C Sou'll ,
' li'ir, . r'lio n ) I..br r, 5 . '
sct:,I !.:.', 31~7. ./Jp .ltlt:c; ;......
jil.i. ' :e v.'o:e',cn, 310. Thc;r

h r'

men rot prohlifl, 32]. Their ;ii,..
t.:l ;il.ncmn .nld flial doli, ::,
'I hsir nl;i:ds of fibf.nrlic, :e
I ;h;i:::;g, a' l5. Iciunir in , 36 ..
( L.i:ll; .,: . 'lisC *.,, i, , S

lejt.;. '

tihl,. culr

I Ce, 3z1.. Tno .t h''1:.'

L..iltis (il tlie dt:i lncs ol their .'
t, liii',J 33', T.li.t wn it o ti.

.i11 ,''

animals, bid. Their want of uecful
metals, 334. Their political inftitu-
tions, 336. Weie divided into imrnll
independent communities, ibid. Un-
acquainted with tile idea of property,
337. Their high fenle of equili:y
and independence, 338. Their ideas
of subordination impel felt, 34o. To
what trite these delcriptions apply,
341. Some exception', 343. lori-
da, ibid. The Natchez, 344. The
islands, 345, In Bogota, ib:d. Inqui-
ry into the caules ot thr'ce irregulari-
ties, 346. 'Their art of war, 349.
Their motives to hnltility, 350.
Causes of their ferocity, 3 t. lPerpe-
tuity of their animofities, 352. Their
mooes of conducting wtr, 353. Ale
not destitute of courage and torr;iude,
355. Incapable of military difci;line,
356. Their treatment of prilfners,
357. Their fortitude under torture,
359. Never eat human Pfcfh but to
gratity revenge, 361. H.ow the South
Americans treated their prifoncis,
362. Their military educatin, 363.
Strange method of chulfin a captilin
among the Indians cn tthi banks of the
Orinoco, ibid. Their numbers swafted
by continual wuars, 366. 'I'hir tribes
nslw recruit their numbers by adopt-
ing prilor.ers, 367. Are never for-
ntidab!e in war, to more poli;..d .na-
tions, 3£S. Their .its, dref., :.ii
ornaments, 369. Their lliJ;.ailin?
372. Their a.ims, 374. The'i, ]'i-
mecfic utensils, 75. (''"ii.ru-,tionl rs
their canoes, 376. 'The li lrllnlt's
with whitii they apply to l.lbuor,
377. Thlirl r li';ion, 378. Some
tribes altogetlecr .rliiilt llre ini , !f ..
Remarkable (ivcIfi:v in rthlir ielig;-
ous lnotions, 384, . 'heir ideas of the
immottality ot th:li .,l, 3S7. 'I'heir
modes of buli.il, 31S. WVhlv tlhir
ply5fici.ins pictenl:d t, te co

b jiurs,

390. 'Their lovc ul d.icinig, 333.
Their immoderaite palniin lr ni litJg,
395. re e:;trimcly adil;iid tol,,djuk-
c.inef's, 3q6. I'ut lLthi al.id a;Iil
inlculable to dealth, 4(o. (;c.ier l
elliniate of th'ir .cit .r.i('' , lCI.
'Iheir intellelii;Il ( o0\,
, -a,.'. Thlir

tii|lt ic ) t Iaitlts, 401. I' IIo t f its-

IrC.iorn , 404. l-,lrdnf' ol hII' , 405.
'1 heir infl ilibilily, 406. '; .iriiiiiilty,
407. 'JTheir ciltiiuli, 4c;. Tlrir
xlttttcs, tc9. T l c fI'lilt I 111,1c-

pendencc, 410. Fortitude, iiri. At-
tachment to their community, 411.
''heir latisfaflion with their own
condition, ;i.i. General caution i ,t
rclpect to this inquire, 41 .. Tso
difhnguilliable cl3l];.s (oi, 415. I:-
ceptions as to t their * h.ticler, .417.
Thc.r tha:a,'lerillic features delcritied,
460. Inliances of their pcrfeveing
peced, 461. An antipatihy inidufll-
oufny encouraged between themi and
the ncgices in America, by the Spa-
niards, ii. j69. Their prelent con-
dittiu, 370. How taxed, 371. Sta'cd
fcrvicees (emaned fromn themr, 37.
Mode of ex.tdlingt hefe fervi.cs, 373.
How govi .rned, i/t,/. Proteetor of the
Ii..iians, his ftUdcioll, 374. Reasons
, l'y si Imall a plitgrcis ls made in
ttrlr c-nvc! si-,., 38ij.
.,-':;. io Vcfpiucci. publilces the first

.l lttten ace ou lt (ls ihU Ncw VWorld,.nn.l
]Itlne gave name r, Ane'ica, i. 149.
Hslsclaim a.s aiditcovcer e cxami:ned,
4. i.
/i;,'l,.!.:i, a female caziltc of !'lifpanio-

1., her ba!e and cruel ul-ge lty the
S,.ini .ds, i. 1So.
.i,:'s,, llupendlus height ir..l extent of
litat langl of mountains, i. ;49. fheir
he:ght compared with other moun-
nlan, 446. (.onzal) I'iz.iri,'s ic-
mark!;:'lc expedition over, ii. 213.
A i':, :. la.:g:, very fcis tlfud in Ame-

rica a: its hin difcovecrv, i. 259.

/.Ai: !ts, cat.le of tile imperfection of

the art of inavigatimn .amoin; themI, i.
4. 'I'heir geo, l'plpical klnowlledge ex-
tc::r.;ly cenlined, , 423, 42-1, 42,6.
/':!I.'lti, preculiarly alt.itile( to the

t iln'l' among th;e (;'reeks, i. 1:.
,r ;i' / ;.:'!.", or ' 11i tta.iltion, lie at cf,

Ih idly knos.wn to thle native :Anllic
'', ',i. 310.
A/'1.'t/.:, t.tir, h lls cx'r!ori)taryv misiuon

to tIhe p;in.c ol' the T,irt.rsi, i. 32.

.lJ:iS.c dii.uv:i.s mni..i.e by thc Riulli.in;,

.//iri;t i a, the natile ofcxrlined,

ii. ;.-'i. Thlie ,.ilda i), iand how put
pi] *n1, tro, 4co. SoI.

. *h:.:/-!,., is tlt by li fltiter l .ill'('ir

t:7 II.crlltl il Ith l]inglon of (. ,it'. ,
ii. 1(7, Ief(iats his l)iinhlr lu.tlcair,
.nd ll 'ttli> tle empire of Peru, tif,.
enilts l'rcrfents tlu Piz:tro, 70. Visit(

I'iz.l;I0,

Pizarro, 173. Is perfiicunly fcized
by him, 176: Agrees with Pizarro
oil a raniom, 177. Is refused his
liberty, iSo. His beivl iur during
his confinement, 183. ' form of
trial befiowed on him, 184. Is put
to death, 1S5. Coml arif' n of authc-
rities relatii: to his tranihaclions with,
and treatment by 'izario, 468.

Audience of new Spain, board of, eaa-

blilhed Iv the Emperor Clilaes V. ii.
143. Courts of their ju. ildction,
356.

Averia, a Spaniflh tax for convoy to and

from America, when first imposed,
ii. 514. Its rate, 515.

Azor,:, ihofe inands discovered by the
Poltubuefe, i. 50,

B

as.'-ca, Vafc:) Nt.:, tz de, fettles a co-
lony at Saute i;.:.ia on the ulph of
Darien, i. 9 eceivtc isteili ence
ot the r:.i co;untry of t'riu, 0zo.
-1i: cl:.i:ic., a:o. M;rthcs acio's
the i:;iir.,s. zo;. D;ilcovrrs tle
SciL:.c. (U i.Ln, _- . 1P.turn;, 2.5.
Is iuj'tlc:;cd in his command by the
appoi;itment of t'd:rarias Da iL ,

v :7.,

Is fined by Pedraiias tor t'o:nr tr:.lf-
a;oiois, zo8. Is appointed lieut'ni.:t
governlor of the countries on the
South Sea, and marries Pl'dratias's
daughter, 20o. Is airencd ;nd Fut
to death by Peiraiias, 2I1.
Bark, Jesuits, a productiuii peculiar to

P-rui, ii. 393.
Barrere, his drlcriptiin of the ccritl:uc-

tion of Indian houses, i. 482.
Bcblring and Tfchiriltow, Iulli-n navi-

gators, thought t h.ave dii'overid the
northwefl extremity of Anr-,lic.i from
the eaiwaid, i. 275 Unccrtainty
of their accounts, 45ó.

J;eialcsaar, goveinoi of St. lMichadl,

rc'uces thie ling.lom (.f (uito, ii.
18I Is dcl rivcd of his command
ly Pizario, 213.
Ben.j.oiin tlr Jew of Ti di.iL, his extia-

ordinal) tlivels, i. 3i.

Bc,'r:,ra's, ins ncre ol lle l3ravcry of

the Caribets, mentioned by him, i.
487.

ret lirsotirt, J 'hn Id., a N. rman bJarn,

coiniqer. ;,il eir' Ithe C'. .iry
iflaindi, i. 38.

Birds, an acount of those natural to

America, i. 262. The flight of,
often ftrctch to an immense distance
from land, 431.

Bogota in tAierica, some account of the

inlii.bitantsof, i. 345. Cauls of their
tame submission to the Spaniards, 348.
Their religious dotrines and rites,386.
Bojador, cape, the firfi discovery of, i.

42. Is doubled by the Portuguese dif-
coverers, 46.
Bogfu, his account of the American war

f,.ng, i. 4-8.

Bovadilla, Fiancis de, is sent to -lifpa-

niolj to enquire into the conduEt of
Columbus. i. 154. Sends Columbus
home in irons, 155. Is degraded,
I 8, r16.

BR:.gai.n ile, his defence of the Periplus

ot i inno, i. 422.

l;osuc,', M.. h s ih.ira.er of the native

1'. wvi.,ls, i. 465,
, :j,':. thi c,..( of, discovered by Alva.
rez C.bi . i. l15. Remarks on the
clm.ate ,f, 451.

Ei,:.3, Pe:uvian, described, ii. 489.

./...: Airts, in South America, fuole
.:cc'unt of that province, ii. 336.

,j:,!./; ' ll, of no foice in Spanilli

Ainmeica, before examined and ap-
p:jv.d by ti:e toyal touncil of the
Indics, ii. 377. See Crruzado.

B;,ri.j of the dead, American mode of,
i. ;S'S.

C

Cj'rla, Alvarez, a Portuguese comman-

der, discovers the co.st of Brasil, i.
151.
Cacao, the befl in quality, produced in

the Spanif American colonies, ii.
393. The preparation of chocol.te
from, derived from the Mexicans,
412.

Cadiz, the galeons and flota removed

thither from Seville, ii. 401.
Califossia, the peninsula of, difcoveredl

by lernando Cortes, ii. 144. T'Ie
true slate of this country long un-
known, 329. Why depreciated by
the Jcfult, 330. Favnlir.ible ar-
coll lt of, given by Don Jo(,fl)i (l-
vet., i/id.
Cal'/fi, ins, the chara&aer of, by P.

Vcnerias, i. 467.
Caipc..'ly, difcovcrrd by Cordova, Alio

is repulfid by the nativre, i. 239.

Ca jI./' f't ,r

Campomanes, Don Pedro Podriguez,

charadter of his political and com-
mercial writings, ii. 511r His ac-
count of the produce of the Spanish
American mines, 516.

Canary islands erected into a kingdom by

pope Clement VI. i. 37. Are con-
quered by John de Bethencourt, 38.

Cannibals, no people ever found to eat

human flelh for fubfifence, though
often for revenge. i. 361. 478.

Canoes, American, the confiruction of,

described, i. 376.

Caraccas, eflablifhment of the company

trading to that coast, ii. 413. Growth
of the trade, 5c9.

Caribbee islands, discovered hy Colum-

bus in his second Voyage, i. 114.

Caribbees, their spirit peculiarly fierce, i.

417. Their character by M. de
Chanvalon, 466. Probable conjec-
ture .s to the diflinftion in character
between them and the natives of tie
larger illands, 488.

Catpini, his extraordinary mission to

the prince of the Tartars, i. 32.

CartLagena, the harbour of, the fateft and

bell fortified of any in all the Sp .nifl
Ameriian dominions, ii. 339.

Carthaginians, slate of commerce and

navigation among, i. 8. 'Ihe famous
voyages of Hano and Himilco, 9.

Carrvajl, Francilco de, contributes to

Vaca de Cafr-o's victory over young
Almagro, ii. 224. Encourages Gon-
za3o Pizarro to afiume the govern-
ment ot Peru, z3S. Advifcs Pizarro
to afl'une the sovereignty of the coun.
try, 243. Is seized by (;a(ca and
executed, 257.

Colil/o, Iernal Diaz del, character of

his lilloria Verd:adro de la 'on-
quilla de la Nurva l.fpigna, ii. 44.

C:nlrnto, I)ig,, revolts trom CGlnzalo

P'izarro to tire vicieoy of PIerii, ii.
z4o. Is defeated by C'arvajal, and fe-
crltes liimlclf in acave, 242. Sallies
cut and frizes Cu/co, 2z3. Is re-
duced by Piz.llro, 254. Is emplmoyed
Ly G;.ica to make dilcoveries in the
iepils alout the river Plata, 262.

Chann.,ildt, NM. Id, his cliaiaecr of the

native C.'libees, i. 466.

Chb.prtoses, in the Spanish American

colllic, , who tlius diflingullcdil il.
366.
(ials Ill. king of Spain, cflablilics

packet boats between Spain and the
colonies, ii. 415. Allows free trade
to the windward islands, 416. Grants
the colonies a free trade with each
other, 418.

Charles V. empeior, fends Roderigo de

l:igueroa to Hispaniola, as chief
judge, to regulate the treatment of
the Indians, i. 225. Causes this
subject to be debated before him, 230.
Equips a squadron at the solicitation
of Feidinand Magellan, ii. 129. Re-
signs his claim on the Moluccas to
the Portuguese, 133. Appoints Cor-
tes governor of New Spain, 135. Re-
wards him on coming home, 142,
Efiabliflnes a board called the Audi-
ence of New Spain, 143. His con-
siltations on American affairs, z25.
E.latblifh.s new regulations, 229.

Chili, is invaded by Almagro, ii. x95.

How fubjedtcd by the Spaniards, 332.
Excellence of its climate and foil,
333. Catife of its being neglected,
334. PrulpeCt of its improvement,
335.
Chi7uitos, political state of that people,

from Fernandez, i. 475.

Cbo:osate, the use of, derived from the

Mexicans, ii. 4rz.

Ch'lla, in Mexico, arrival of Cortes

there, with fume account of the town,
ii. 46. A conspiracy againfl Cortes
dilcovered, and the inhabitants de-
stroyed, 48.

C;rcro, inflance of his ignorance in geo-

graphy, i. 426.
Clna,'oa, political slate of the people

there, i. 474. 'heir mode of living,
481. Are drflitute of all religion,
484. Extraordinary large glain of
gplrd fouund there, ii. 490.

Ci,/i.i //., in the p'ovmice of Sonora,

late dilcorerics of rich mines made
thele by the Spaniards, ii. 328. l'r,-
bable cfflc't of thcle dircoveiies, 329.
C/e,).cnt VI. pope, clects tile Canary
illands into a kindgim, i. 37.

Clir'ites, influecnc d by a variety of

ca.lles, i. 2 52. 'Thcir op'eation onman-
kind, 414 Inquiry intothe ratife of
the dillerent ldgrees of hrat in, 448.
Co-,hiircal, an impolrtalt pr dlucioin, al-

mllt peculiar to New Spain, ii. 393.
Co/l, extraordinary predotniinance of, in

the clmates of A verica, i. 252.
Causes of this pcculiarity, 253.

Colonis',

Clonrier, Spanilh American, view of the

policy and trade of, ii. 345. Depo-
pulation the firlf effet of them, ibid.
Causes of this depopulatisa.,346. The
small-pox very fatal to, 348. Gene-
ral idea of the Spanish policy i., 352.
Early interposition of the regal au-
thority in, 353. An exclusive trade
the firrt objeet in, 360. Compared
with thole of antient Greece and
Rome, 361. The great refrintions
they aie fubje& to, 362. Slow pro-
grefs of their population fiom Europe,
363. Are difcouiaged by the itate of
property there, ibid. And by the na-
ture of their eccleliaflical policy, 365.
The various classes of people in, 366.
Ecclefiaflical cinfltitution of, 376.
Form and endowments of the church
there, 377. Pernicious effects of
monallic infRitutions there, 378.
Charatler of the 'eccleliaflics there,
379. Produ&tions of, 387. 'he
mines, ibid. Those of Plutofi and
Sacotecas, 388. The spirit with which
they are rorked, 390. F .tal effecs
of this ardour, 391. Othtr commo-
ditiec that compotl: the commnice cf,
393. Am.zing increafc of hurne'
cattle there, 394 Ad'alit.g:es vhlicih
Spain formerly derivcd fir.l them,
ibid. Why the fame advantages a:e
not still received, 396. Guaiua cos-
tas employed to check the cont.aband
trade in, 409. T'he use of legiller
ships introduced, 410. And gasicns
laid alide, 411. Company of tie
Caraccas inflituted, 413. I.nfablili-
ment of regular p cket-boats to, 415.
Free trade permitted betv.een thrm,
418. New regu!ations in the govein-
rnent bs, 40z. Reformation of the
courts of jufice, ibir. A fuulth vice-
royaliy ellablifliled 411. Attempts
to reform ldumenlic policy, 423. ' heir
trade with the Philippine illands,
426. Reveinue relircd from, by
Spain, 429. lxpence of adininilr.i-
tion there, az3. Sta.le of populjltin
in, 494. IThe number of mo,.itnriic
the e, 501. See li exico, Perru, &c.
Colou/mbil, Iarltholomnew, is sent by Iis

brother Clhriflopher to nitg ciare with
Ilenry VII Ic king of ELgl.ind, i. 70.
The milsfriitunes of hiis vo.lye, 73.
Follows his brother to Hifp.1,liol,l23.
Is veiled with the admilniflatillon of
Iffairs there by Iiis brother on his re.

turn to Spain, X31. Foundsthetown
of St. Domingo, i39.
Columbus, Christopher, birth and educa-

tion of, i. 59. His early voyages, 60.
Marries and fettles at Lilbon, 61. His
geographical reflections, 63. Con-
ceives the idea of making discoveries
to the westward, 65. Offers his services
to the Genoese senate, 67. Caule of
his overtures being rejected in Portu-
gal, (g. Applies to the courts of
Caflile and England, ibid. His pro-
pofal how treated by the Spanish geo-
graphers, 71. Is patronized by Juan
Perez, 74. His proposals again re-
jeaced, 75. Is invited by Isabella, and
engaged in the Spanilh service, 79.
Preparations for his voyage, So. The
amount of his equipment, 81. Sails
fiom Spain, 82. His vigilant atten-
tion to all ciicu:i.ftances during his
voyage, ?4. Apprehensions of his
crew, 85. His address in quieting
their cab.lds, 7. Indications of ithir
approac!ing land, 89. An island
difcoveied, go. He lands,g9. His in-
terview with the natives, 92. Names
the illin. S-n Salvadore, 93. Prose-
(utes his difcovelies fuutliwaid, 94.
I):.l-ocrs ad.i land. oin tie Itland ss
Cuba3 95. Diicovers Hifpanioia, 96.
Stfi's :hipwreck, but i, saved by tie
Indians, 99. Build a fort, 10o. Re-
turns to l;.ropr, Io4. His expeii-
ent to prcftrve the msemory of hii oii-
coveiies dluing a firln, 1o6 Ani\es
at the Azores, ibid. Arrives at Lillhn,
107. His reception in Spain, l.'.
I-iis audicnce with l:e dilland andi 1a-
bells, log. His equipment for a le-
cond voyage, 1 12. l)i fcvers ilie Ca-
ribbee illands, 1 14 FinJls his colony
on Hispaniola dclLroyed, 15i. Builds
a cit\, wiich he tals Isabella, 117.
Vifts the intelior parts of lle country,
I 19. Ilis men difuontented anil falIi-
ous, 120, Dlfcovers th illandl of Ja-
maica, 122. \iseets his brother Bar-
thiuolouiw .' lfabrlla, 123. '1 he na-
tives ill used iy his men, and brgin to
be alarmed, 114. I-le ilcfits tihe Indi-
ans, 127. Ixacs tribute from Ilrtm,
128. Retulrn, to Spain Is jiily hli:
condua, 13 ;. Is lirnifled witllh nmole
r'.ul;r Pri.li tor colonization, 133. llbs
tilird v(yaige, 136. Di)isoves tll
illand ol ''rinidad, 137. Difcovcrs the

culitlt llit

continent of America, 138. State of
Hispaniola on his arrival, 139. Com-
poses the mutiny of Roldan and his
adherents, 142. Is difirefFed by the
facious behaviour of his men, ISz.
Complaints cairied to Spain againli
him, 153. Is sent home in irons, 155.
Clears his conduct, but is not restored
to his authority, 1 7. His fol citati-
ons neglected, 16i. Forms new
fchemesof dilcovery, 162. Engages
in a fourth voyage, 164. His treat-
ment at Hispaniola, iFid. Searches
after a patllge to the Indian ocean,
166. Is filipwrecked on the coast of
Jamaica, 167- His artitice to fccure
the friendlhip of the Indians, 170.
is delivered and arrives at FHfl 'aniula,
173. Returns to Spain, 174. His
death, 1-5. His right to the oriinal
discovery of America derended. 4 34

Columbus, Don Diego, lues out his

claims to his Ia:lecr's Frivll',eF, i.
1S8. Marrics and goes over to His.
paniola, 189. Eflablifils a pearl
fishery at Cubagua, 190. l'rcjrcls the
conqurit of Cuh., 196. I!;s me.-
fures thwa;'ted by l'Feldin:ad, 213.
Retuins to Spain, -14.

CoiineC -, the . ra fromn whi.h its com-

men.cinent is to be dated, i. 2. Alo-
tives to an intrrccrir: among diflant
nations, 4. Still foinuibed in the
caftern empire after t!i- IL.bvelio:: of
the weffern, ;6. Revival of, in Iu-
rope, 2S.

Comipafs, nariner's, navi, .;iori extendled

more by the inivntii * t. than by
all the efforts of prrcecn,;g a.CS, i.
3;. By hoini i:nvnted, 36.

Co;d,itiiiiie, M. lii a;ccrunrt of the coun-

try at the t'Jut of the Andes, inl South
Amni:ica, i. 1. His rinars on
the charactcr ot tile narive Ameri-
canis, 466.

Congo, the kingdom of, difcoveted by

the Portugncie, i. 5.,

Cacftl.intinsf'le, the coii'q!'imcrce of re-

moving tile Ic.it of ti- Rloman eim-
pire to, i. 24. Conlinued a conmer-
cial city atrer the extinction of the
wellern tlip)iie, 26. Becanie the
chief mlirt of It.aly, 'S.
t'ilot.'a, I'ilanciica IH-tlrianle.', cliffo-
vers YiIc.itan, i. 23S. 1I Iellie! ;lt
C'ampeachliv, and cliitr., toi Cilib;, 29.3.

Corira, Aloinzo, Iibs obf' tvliio,s orn thi
cuotrJabanJ trade ul lhe SPJilih Colo-

nies, ii. 425. Charafler of his Ame.
rican memoirs, 475.

Cartis, I';cnando, his birth, education,

and charaecr, ii. 3. Is by Vel.l-
quez appointed commnalder of the ar-
mament fitted out by him against New
Spain, 4. Velafqutz becomes jealous
of him, 6. Velaifqu-e fends rordcis
to deprive him o t his commilEl:,
and lay him unlder arrest, 7. Is pro-
tected by his troops, S. The rnmtiunt
ot his torces, 9. Rejuccs the !n-
dians at Tab. fco, II. A.rrivs .at
St. Juan de Ulna, ibid. His inter-
view with two Mexican commanders,
13. Sends prelents to IMontezuma,
15. Receives others in return, 76.
tlit fchemcs, 21. Eltrabifhes a so::n
ot civil government, 24. Rcli;ns his
commilfion under Velasquez, and al-
fumes the command in thle king's
name, 27, His fiiend lip cutted by
th Zeiopoa!.lans, 28. Builds a fr;,
o3. Concluiads a formal allianlce o i;
fLee al caz:qes, i'>l,. l)Jioeers a
conf(ir.lcva; alng hli men, asii dcarlovs
sis flaps, 3t . Advances into tile
countr, 35. Is opposed by the Tidi-
calns, 37. Concludes a peace Mith
them, 42. His rail zeal, 44. Pro-
ceeds to Cholula, 46. Discovers a
conspiracy again.st him here, and de-
flroys t!:eiih:abitaits,48. Approaches
in light cf the capital ci'y of MLxico,
50. His firl interview w iti MNonte-
znma, 5 . His anxiety at his fituati-
on in the city of Mexico, 56. Seizes
Lmuntczum I, 60. Orders ham to be
t.ttered, 6z. Rcaf.ins of Iiis con-
duct, 63. P'revails on i'lntezuma to
ovn himcnifel a v.i(fl to the S anifh
crown, 66. Amouinit; and division of
his trealurc, 67. 'nrasges the iMexi-
cans by his inmprudent zeal, 70. An
afrmnment sent by Vrl.ITfulre to fupcr-
l'tle him, 74. His deliberations on
this event, 79. Advanic s to meet
Narvacz, 79. Detelas Narvaez, and
takes him prisoner, :S. (Cains over
the Spanlifl soldiers to his intereli,8;.
Returns to Mexico, 85. Hls impio-
per ti Ldu&'t on his arrival, 86. Is re-
fidluiely attacked by the Mexic.ns, 87.
Attacks them in turn withlt itccele,
818. )eath of Monte/iimna, go. Hieg
txlr.liirdini;ry escape sion dlath, 91.
Abandlons tie city of lMexicr, 9-. Is
attacked by the Mexicans, 93. Ilib

gie-t

great loges in the encounter, 94. Dif-
ficulties of his retreat, 95. Battle
of Otumba 97. Defeats tile Mexi-
cans, 98. Mutinous fpiiic of his
troops, lor. Reducesthe Tepeacans,

o10. Is strengthened by feve.al re-
inforcemeots, 104 Returns to Mex-
ico, to5. Establishes his head-quar-
ters at Tezeuco, 107 Re.uces, or
conciliates the surrounding country,
1o8. Cabals among his troops, lo9.
His prudence in fupprefling them,
ilo. Builds ard Ihunches afleetof
brigantines on t:e lake, 113. Be-
dieges Mexico, 1lS. Makes a grand
Lffault to take the city by florm, but
is repulled, t1S. Evades the Mex-
ican prophecy, izi. 'akes Gauti-
mozin pritoner, 124. Gains posies-
lion of the city, ibid. And of the
whole empire, 127. Def-ats another
attempt to lupel fede hir. in his co:n-
mand, 134. Is appointed govLrnor
of New S,ain, 135. liis Iclicm'
and arrane:nenms, 136. Cruel treat-
ment t f th' nativs, ;37. His con.
duct fubjteed lo inquiy), 14o. Re-
turns to Spain to jiillft himlci, 141.
ls rewarded by the einpeor Charles
V. 142; Goes back to Mexico with
limited powers, 143. Discovers Ca-
liforna, 144. Returns to Spain,
and dies, ibid. Inquiry into the na-
ture of his letteis to the Emer,r
Challes V. 443 Authi s who wrote
of his conlqut iil f New Spain, 444.

Council of the Indies, its power, ii. 3 5.
Creoles, in the Spanish American colo-

nies, chlaciatr of, ii. 367.
Croglan, colunel George, his accountof

the diflovery of the bones of large
extinc Ispecies of animals in Noith
America, i. 454.
Cru[ades to the Holy Land, the great

political advantages derived from, by
the European nations, i. 30.
Crujado, bulli of, ptbliflin. regularly

every two years in the Spanifli colo-
nies, ii 430. Prices of, and amnunt
of the sale at the lift publication, 5 2.
Cuba, the illand of, discovered by Chlil-

topher Columbus, i. 95. Is f.iiled
round by Ocampo, 188. The con-
quefl of, undertaken by Diego Velaf-
quez, 96. Cruel treatment of the
cazique Haitucy, and his repartee to a
friar, 197. Columbus's cnthufiaftic
dcfcriptiun of a harbour in, 431.

The tobacco produced there the finest
in all America, ii. 393.

Cubagua, a pearl fishery cflablifhed there,

i. 190.
Cumnana, the natives of, revenge their

ill treatment by the Spaniatds, i. 233.
The country desolated by Diego
Ocampo, 235.

Cuzco, the capital of the Peruvian em-

pire, founded by Manco Capac, ii.
164. Is seized by Pizarro, lSS. Is
besiegcd by the IPruvians, 198. Is
furprized by Almagio, zoi. Is re-
covered and pillaged Iby the Pizarros,
207. Was the only city in all Peru,
32z.

D.

Dancing, the love of, a favourite passion

among the Americans, i. 393.

Dariatr, the ilihmus of. Icfcribed. i. iol.

'The increase of fettlemeri there ob-
ftructed by the noxioufnrfs of the
climate, ii. 338.
De cl'iA, hil unfortunate expedition up

thr river l'lat.l, i. 21

Dc Sclih, A\nionio, charaier of his His-

tvia de I1 Conquifta de Mexico, ii.

41 .

D Elu'ila. e, prince, viceroy of Peru,

his v gorous me fures for refiraining
the cxcelles ot the reeular clergy
there, ii. 382. Ktndered inrffectual,
383.

Dias, Earth nlmew, discovers the Cape

of Good I-l pe, i. 55.

Di/cove-ii's, the aiffrience between those

made by land, and thlfe by sea,
fl.ttrl, i. 425.

Dodiwc/l, his ,bjecQion to the Pcriplus

ot -lanno cxploded, i. 421.

Dominroa, Sn. on the illand of Hifpannio-

Ia, itunided by Barlhulomew Colum-
bus, i. 139.
Donminiians, ihtfe in Hispaniola publicly

emunitr.ate againil the cruel treat-
ment of the Indians, i. 215. bee
Lai Cajais.

Dsittlneicis, fliong propensity of the

Americans to indulge in, i. 396.

Earth, thie plohe, of, bIow divided into

zones by the ancients, i. 22.

EirLvti, ns atientin, slate of clmmiecle
and navigation amulng tlieni, i. 5.

1/.

El Dorado, wonderful reports of a coun-

try so called, made by Francis Orel-
lana, ii. 215.
Elephant, that animal peculiar to the

torrid zone, i. 455.
EJhuimaux India ns,refemblances between

them and their neighbours the Green-
landers, i. 278. come account of,
362, 483.
EtEgene IV. pope, grants to the Portu-

guefe an exclusive right to all the
countries they flioul discover, from
Cape Non to the continent of India,
i. 49.
Euruqe, how aiftcled by the dismember-

mcet of the Roman em!ire by the
barbarous nations, i. 25. Reviv.l of
commerce and navigation in, 28,
Political advantages delivea from the
crufadts, 30.

V.
Ferdinand king of Caflile. See CclWzmbn!s

and /lbella. Turns his attentiorn at
length to the teiulation (f Ameri. an
afitllrs, i. 18.4. lDon Pieg' de Co-
lumbus su's out his ft iher's claims
ag£inft him, iSS. I'efls two go-
vernments on the cortinent of Ame-
rica, 192. Sends a fleet to Darien,
and tfupereldes Ba'bQ., 207. Appoints
Balboa lieutenant goser-or ot the
countries on the Smtth Stel, 210.
Sends Dias de Solis to dilcover a
wnflern paflJge to the Moluccas, 212.
Thwalts the mne.fures of l)irgo Co-
lumbus, 213. -lis decree comrcrning
the treatmneut of the Indians, 216.
Fernan-,l, Don Di go, charader of his

Hiilloria dcl Pcii, ii, 4.64.
SI ','Idez, IP. his dei.riptioin of the po-

litical tIlte oftlie C'liiquitts, i 475.

F sigeCo,, Rdierigo de, is appointed hlieff

judge of Hillpaiol , with a commis-
sion to examine into the treatment of
the Indian nativ-s, i 225.

25 .ikes an

experiment to deterniine the capacity
of the Indians, 234.

Florida difoveced by Juan Ponce de

Leon, i. 197. The tiliefs there he-
reditary, 341. Account of, from
Alvar Nugncz Cabuea. de V.c.i, i.
470.

Ilos,, Spanifi, nlme account of; ii. 401.
Ju,,,lff, hifln ol Ilad u.iijs, milniner for

Indian .ll;irs, ol lrtiiss thle pIans
tf colonization antd diic'very sorned

by Columbus, i. 12S. 136. Patro-
nizes the expedition of Alonzo de
Ojeda, 148.

G.
Galeons, Spanili, the nature and pur-

pose of these veflels, ii. 401. Ar-
rangement of their voya2e, 402.

Galvez, Don Joseph, tent to dilcover

the true slate of California, ii. 330.
Gama, Vasco de, his voyage for difosie-

ly, i. 144. Doubles the Cape of
Good Hope, 145. Anchors before
the city ,f Melinda, ibid. Arrives
at Calecut in Mvalabar, 146.

Gam rg, (:ange propensity of the Ame-

licals to, i. 395.
Ganges, erroneous ideas of the ancients

as to the position of that river, i.
424.
Ga2a, Pedro de la, sent to Peru as pre-

lident of the coart of Audience in Li-
ma, ii, 246. His charanter and mo-
deration, 247. The powers he was
veled with, 248. Arrives at Pana-
ma, 21 9 Acqui es pofieflion of la-
nama ;th li re fleet and forces there,
251. Advances tnwaids Ctifo, 225.
Plizarro's troops delert to him, 256.
His moderate :fe of the vic&ocy, 257.
I)vifes employment for his soldiers,
261. HIs divilion of tlhe country
among his follnwers, 262. Reflores
order 2nd governmenr, 263. His re-
ception at his return to Spain, 264.

GCren!'irz, inflance of his ignorance in

geography, i. 426.
Got.lly. tlie krowledge of, extremely

cuonfisnrd amlong the ancitnts, i. 22.
Rec.lme a favourite fludy amorig tile
Arabians, 27.
Giants, tlhe accounts of, in our early tra-

vellers, unconfirmed by recent dil-
coverits, i. 35, 463.
Gioica, Flavio, the inventor of the ma.

riner's com(pass, i. 36.
GCloi, its division into zones by the an-

cientt, i. 22.

Gold, why tile first metal with which

man was acquainted, i. 334. Extra-
ordi;nay large grain of, found in the
mines at Cinalao, 490.
Goiral), claratfer of his Chronica de

Ia Nueva Efpagna, ii. 444.

Good ilope, cape of, difcovcrcd by Bar-
tlioloitcw Diaz, i. 55,

Gover i -

Goverrment, no visible form of, among

the native Americans, i. 340. Ex-
ceptions, 343.

Gran Chaco, account of the method of

making war, among the natives of,
from Lozano, i. 476.

Granada, new kingdom of, in America,

by whom reduced to the Spamlh do-
minion, ii. 341. lts climate and
produce, 34z. A viceroy latcly efta-
bliled there, 355.

Greeks, ancient, progress of navigation

and discovery among them, i. 1.
Their commercial intercourse with
other nations very limited, 13.
Greenland, its vicinity to North Ameri-

ca, i. 278.

Grjalva, Juan de, sets out from Cuba

on a voyage of diifovery, i. 240. Dif-
covers and gives name to New Spain,
241. His reasons for not planting a
colony in his newly discovered lands,
243.

Guarda Costas, employed by Spain to

check illicit trace in the American
colonies, ii. 409.

Guatiiala, the indigo there superior to

any in America, ii. 393.

GuCatimozin, nephew and ton-in-law of

Montezuma, fuccecds Q(etlavaca in
the kingdom of Mexico, ii. 107.
Repulses the attacks of the Spaniards
in itorming the city of Mexico, I 8.
Is taken prisoner by Cortes, 1z4. Is
tortured to dilcover his treasure, 126.
Is hanged, 138.

Guiana, Dutch, cause of the exceflive
fertility of the foil therr, i. 457.

H1.

It[nno, his Periplus defended, with an

accoutt of his vuvage, i. 421.
Ilatuey, a caziqur of Cub.a, his cruel

treatnimnt, and memorable repartee
to l:ranicifc,.n friar, i. 197.
Ilisokt/civorih's voyage, account of New

Holland, and tie inliabilants tiorm,
i. 472.

Ileat, the different degrees of, in the

old and new continents accounted lor,
i. 448. Etlmnated, 456.
'lleniy, prince of Plitugal, his ch.iracter

auid nudies, i. 4a. lExpcditions fiorn-
cl by his older, 44. Applie flr a

papal grant of his new discoveries,
48. His death, 50.
Herrada, Juan de, assassinates Francia

Pizarro, ii. i19. Dies, 223.
llerrora, the belt historian of the con-

queRl of New Spain, ii. 446. His ac-
coe:nt of Orellana's voyage, 473.
li.jpaniola, the illand of, discovered by

Chriltopher Columbus, i. 96. His
tranlactions with the natives, 97.
A Colony left there by Columbus, 103.
The colony dedtroyed, 115. Colum-
bus builds a city called Isabella, 117.
The natives ill used, and begin to be
alarmed, iz4. Are defeated by the
Spaniards, 127. Tribute exated from
them, 128. They scheme to fRarve
the Spaniards, t9g. St. Domingo
founded by Bartholomew Columbus,
139. Columbus lent home in irons,
by Bovadil!a, 155. Nicholas de
Ovando appointed governor, 158.
Summary view of the conduct of the
Spaniards towards the natives of,
179. Unhappy fate of Anacoana,
iSo. Great produce from themines
there, 8 z. The inhabitants dimi-
nifh, 185. The Spaniards recruit
them by trepanning the natives of
the Lucayos, 186. Arrival of Don
Diego de Culumbus, 189. The na-
tives of, almofl extirpated by navery,
195, 214. Controversy concerning
the treatment of them, 215. Co-
lumbus's account of the humane
treatment he received from the natives
of, 432. Curious infance of super-
flition in the Spanilh planters there,
456.

Ilolquin, Pedro Alvare7, erects the royal

standard in 'Peru, in opposition to the
younger Almagro, ii. 223. Vaca de
t'afiro arrives and alfumes the com-
mand, ibid.

llc1in, his account of the navigation of

the ancient Grcl:s, i. 12.

llonduras, the value of that country,

owing to its production of the lugwood
tree, ii. 331'

11orned cattle, amazing increase of them

in Spanilli Ameiica, ii. 394.

llorjr, astonishment and miltakes of the

Mexicans at the first fight of them, ii.
4 E1. Expcdient of the Peruvians to
render them inrapable of aCtion, 47z.

l/lana Cap.c, Inca of ecru, his cha-
raActr and familr, ii, 166.

JIl/aa0 is

Hitafrar Capac, Inca of Peru, disputes

his brother Atahualpa's succession to
Quito, ii. 67. Is defeated and taken
prisoner by Atahualpa, ibid. Solicits
the affifiance of Pizarro againfl his
brother, 169. Is put to death by or-
der of Atahualpa, 178.

I.

Yamairca, discovered by Chriflopher Co-

lumbus, i. 1r2.
c7roiue, St. three monks of that order
sent by Cardinal Ximenes to Hifpa-
niola, to regulate tie treatment of the
Indians, i. 2zo. Their condut un-
der this commiffiol, 222. Are re-
called, 225.
yeJuits, acquire an absolute dominion

over California, ii. 329. Theirmo-
tives for depreciating thecountry, 330.
eous, ancient slate of commerce and
navigation among them, i. 7.
Incas of Peru, received oligin of their

empire, ii. 165. 36. 'heir empire
founded both in religion .aid policy,
307. See Peru.
India, the motives of Al-xander the

Great in his expedition to; i. I;.
The commerce with, how carried on
ill ancient times, 19. And \when
aits began to revive in Europe, 2S.
The firr voyage made round the
Cape of Go,,d H.pe, i.p .
Indians in Spaninfi America. See /le-

rirans.
Indics. VWeft, wihy C l'inbils.s disco-

vcries w.'rc so njn ed, i. ] j .
Innocent IV. pope, his extrlo diinary

million to the Prince of the Tartals,
i. 32.
In7ii!it'ion, court of, when and by whom

tirlt introduced into 'ortug)l, i. 429.
Jlnfers and repriles, why fl nrmrneotns

and noxious in Anmerica, i. z;r

'sl, I. king of Poitg.ll, tile ti!fl iho

font flils to explocr thlie wel!crn
co(is of Atricta, i. 40. iis I'^
prince I-lenry engag s in tlhe:i .t-
tecIpt', 42.
Jtbtn 11. king of I'oltu.al, patrnnfLcs all

attempts towards il.ikvclu'r, i. cr .
Sends an cmnbatlv to AIhyrnii., 55.
S-is ungenerous tictaitlint of Co-
lumbus, 69.
Iron, the rcafon hiy IIv.!!' natioiot

overe unacqu.iinic.i vitli il is metal,
i. 334.

Isabella, queen of Caflile, is applied to

by Juan Perez in behalf of Chrifto-
pher Columbus, i. 74. Is again ap-
plied to by QEintanilla and Santan-
gel, 77. Is prevailed on to equip
him, 78. Dies, 174. Her real mo-
tives tor encouraging discoveries, in
America, ii. 349.
Ifabclla, the city ot, in Hispaniola, built

by Chriflopher Columbus, i. 117.
Italy, the firlt country in Europe where

civilization and arts revived after the
overthrow of the Roman empire, i.
28. The commcrrcial firit of, active
and enterplifing.

L.
Laclr*),e illands, discovered by Feldinand

Magellan, ii. 131.
Lakes, amazing size of those inNorth

Ameiica, i. 250.
Las Cifas, Bartholomcw, returns from

Hisnlainirla to lolicit tie cae

ca of the

enltaved Indians at the court of Spain,
i. z9i. Is sent back with powers by
C.irdinal Ximcnes, 2Zo. Returns
dillrtt.itied, 223. I' ,cures a new
commillion to be font over on this
subic', 2z;. Rccommends the scheme
cf supplying thI clanics with negroes,
226. Un.ertakes a new colinv. 22S.
His confrcence w:th tile b;:Iop of
Darien befire lic !mpe.or (Charlcs
V 230. (Go.s to Arncrica ta) ,arri
his chtemcs int- exccution, 222. .ir-
crii'm ti' rc'" t

i' .t v'".'-:[ill e liiin., ^;4.

1-I,- ri,,r ln ltc , ~:.ll, :-3, . l c: '.im s
hit r clC''r: '. atI 'ni 11 1 t.lv:)ur or the
Jnrian', at thi drelirt of the emreror,
ii. 227. (Com; ., s a trtnititf on the
dcirutlacion of Anierica, 228.
Lro,:, Pedro Ciezi dtc, ci.r.licclr of lii

Chronica :cl Pt, t, ii. G61.
L:',, I:is d:lcuiptio ot' if:e . ourage aitnd

ilrocity i.ft l T!* .uiina, b, i'. 4717.
Li.a., thc city of. in I'c.ii, u. unicd hv

I'.z. i , Tii .

i. t.L.
L.. rc:.l, tIhe c(, nll'itv li.tgi'lve il"'-

i tl.ite o.C thei , l lr ,t.r'S u0s tlon1drl-
i.r atiid Y mam..lrlt, ii ',31. 'olir cy of
t 1i r Sp.lii.l'rd to iiclr.l t telc ll ngl.lh
trlade i l, 232.
Lo:is, St Iking of France, Iis cmb;l'y

to i bIe chli:i of tile ''.ia:rs, i, q2.
Lo:.ltio, hlii aIcr(unt of tlie mthiod of

,nii.ling w.r am'nlg the natives of
tU: ,i Cliacr, i. 47;6.

Laque, Hernando de, a priest, afrociates

Pizarro in his Peruvian expedition, ii.
550.

M.

Madeira, the fiand of, firlf discovered,

i. 45.
Madoc, prince of North Wales, story

of his voyage and discovery of Ntoth
America examined, i. 436.

ilagelaln, Ferdinand, his account of the

gigantic size of the Paragonians, i.
303. The exfitence of this gigantic
race vet to be decided, 305. 463.
His ilitrodtition to the court of Caf-
tile, ii. 1z8. Is equippc.l with a
squadron f-r a vovage ol difcoverv,
129. Sails through the faumous firait
that bears his name, 130. Disco-
vers the Ladrone and Philippine
inands, 131. Is killed, iibd.

Mlagnct, its property of attireaing iron

known to the ancients, but nor its
polar inclination, i. 4. .xtraotdinary
advantages resulting from this d fco-

very, 35.

Malo St. account of its commerce with

Spanish America, ii. 40q
,ranco Capac, founder of the Peruvian
empire, account of, ii. 164.. 306.

Mandtille, Sl r lhn, his eafle n travels,

with a charet,-r of his writings, i. 34

MaLnilla, the colony ,f, rfl.abliflei by

Pni;,x it. or Spa', ii. 4'.6. 'l'r"ld
htlweCl, dllii ..iltil Aimeic.a, 417.
:i,ikh:'i, ih.ir dip..ltitn arid Tn.mnrers
forie. lbv their situ, '1.1, i. 67.
IHlenLe irlfilbla.nces to b: tia..cl ill
cvry diltla Iplaces xSithI'.It c 111111-
nlCation, 26'.. h-lave un t .riml' t-
tained the grc-lt(ft perltctl ., ot ithi"
nature in ternlpitate *',ginit, 4 1

5'

aIar.'o Pll,', theVeo .tli, 1i txir.ior-

dinary tL;vrls, inl tile tlI. , i3'

larft Ga( .;. iel, hi. ahcouri t 1 tI,;

c'.".

trybctw. c:n l.

1c li:is air Malilil

liisllcilal c, i. 47 2

AVl,'i lt, DUI a, a ,Mcxcan l1ave, I..

hilloiy, ii. i7.
.f1.t.inris Tyrius, i.ls er'on. 'ous pc';.i:

,ft'Cnilia, i. 4v',.

].Irtyri, Petler, his fln'iit"nts oin11 t

fil difcvcery ot Amn.iicI, i. 459.
lllijlizos, in tic Spiti(li Ai\ter air c1,

,nics, diflincltiii tic:.cc'n thllcn a1
Mulnlttoes , ii. atl,.
Mlrltal, ufelul, tie orit;ilal I.'ti'\

America totally unacquainted with,
i. 334.

il1exicans, their account of their own

origin, compared with later difcove-
ries, i. 2So. Descriptions of their his-
tnrical picures, 480. Various exag-
gerated accounts of the number of
human victims sacrificed by them,
4S3. Their language furniflied with
refpeclful terminations for all its
words, ii. 477. How they contributed
to the support of government, 478.

Mexico, arrival of Ferdinand Cortes on

the coast of, ii. ix. His interview
with two Mexican oificers, 13. In-
f, llation felt to Montezuma, with
lime Spanilh prifents, 15. Mon-
terziina fends pref:nts to Cortes, with
orders not to approach his capital, 16.
State of the empiire at that time, 17.
The ZnemDoa:) ns court the friend-
fhlip of Cortes, 28. Several caziques
enter i::t alli.nce with Coites, 30.
C!naracer of th' natives of T'afcala,
36. '1 hie Tc'lacal.lnl ,uced to sue
tor peace, 42. Arrival of Cortes at the
capitl city, 51. The city described,
5. Monntezuma acknovledges him-
self a v.:il to the Spanish crown,
66. A:munt oft he treasure cullected
by Cortc.;, bS. Reasons of gold be-
ing found in sith finall quantities,
6S. T'he lMexicanrs enraged by the
imlprudent zeal ,[f Cortes, 70. At-
tack Alvarado daring the absence of
Curtrs, S4. Their rtfoiute attack on
Curiles w..en he rcturne ', 8-. DLath
of Montezcuma, o9. '1 he city aban-
doned by Cortes, 93. Battle ol
O():uumba, 97. T Ihc'liepeacans redu-
ced, or. 'ileparations ufthe Mlexi-
c.ins ag.linti the retuin of Cortes,,

o5. Cortes befreges the ci y with a
llcet on the lake, 1I5. Ihce Spani-
aids reilnuirt in florming the city,
- rl. '(;uithiin .hi n i.,ken plifoll,; r

4. Cuors ia;poinled gtovclnA,
- , IHis fthemcs an 1 trrangmeirits,

I 't . Ilhtlll niTI l tlr tr.t li I l 1til na-
t .- 1-,7 Iclrpti:n oft tile new

i.,i tihe lor. t ,," 'i"t cnl, p licy,
all It' il1, ^.7 our inl,,tm.u'iu l
cdli~cl.';. '. v itnie i ct, 2' 0.
t),iim .1 , ..It .. ',tb rclh,, 271. ?,it n: -
h r and | s

.,t ..cf , t.,l' e , ii s,

i .7, .

rl!,C;. nii al p.<ltc'l . n i
' r",' li' Jii

li o ianlis, 77. ittl. l
of~~ ~~~IlllUiO''

institutions, 179, Power and fplen-
dor of their monarchs, zSz. Order
of government, ibid. Provision for
the support of it, 283. Police of,
ibid. Their arts, z84. Their paint-
ings, 286. Their method of com-
puting time, 290. Their wars con-
tinual and ferocious, ibid. Their fu-
neral lites, 293. Imperfection of
their agriculture, ibid. Doubts con-
cerning the extent of the empire,
293. Little intercourse among its
several provinces, 294. Ignorance of
money, 295. State of their cities,
296. Templcs and other public
buildings, 297. Religion of, 3oz.
Causes of the depopulation of tjis
country, 346. The fmnll pox very
fatal there, 348. Numberof ndian
natives remaining there, 351, Lift
and character of those authors who

rsote accunts of the conquest of,
444. Dclctiption of the aqueduct
for the lupply of the capital city,
479. See Colonies.

M]i.eacl. St thc gulph of, in the South

Sea, dilcovered and named by lalboa,
i. zo4. The colony of, tflabllnsed
by Pizarro, ii 163.

Jllfr.rtil;s of manlir.i, wlhy fi;fl made

by land, i. ;.

M,:I', human, the efforts of, proporti-

oned to tle wants it tile body, i. 114.

Mines ,t Si uth America, the great in-

dutemrtnt to popul.litin, ii. 317.
Some account o(, ,S7. 'I h.ir pro-
duce, 389, The fc Ilt 'ithi xni h
tbcy ale \worked, 3o9. FI.it. l f}tls
ot this ardor, 391. Evidence ,,t the
periicious clffits of l.b, uring in
ilicm, 5co. Or hIVxnco, tot.i pro-
(lute ot to tile Spanill Icvlentiue 514.
q tó.
i',u,-lCii Ilands, the Sp.,nifli cl;limi on,

i,( l I,'y tlh I:.nlptr ir ('Il.Ch lis \'. to
tie l't tliitllCe li. I r
,1',,,./,qn, iiillr m ions, inrle rniills ( f-

Iclv s ot, ill ti'c Sp.titlifl Anl clitll co-

' f er'st ii. 37 i. Lil. i, t

rlt( vcncts

ti.r(, se'l.
'As,/:1? , ,ib 1;t. IerlitdirCi roCrfi of, wheic
,lili 'vecli y n.ivig.ltols, i, I9 .

AIn.ri':jit, . )Don I)io it.c.:ll plethi r at St.

I (tnlinigi) ili hcly vcmnl.H .ti itutnft
the eILctl trcatment f1 tlhe Intliians, i.

A'[.,'/,/ tnt, lathe s1irs intttrliencei r e-

Lc (t, dI by tic SpJani.truiD ,, t l ii if',
i. 242. lerciviS ilt'llit' .li't ot the
arrlval ot Irnando Cortcs itn hi. d,-
mi 'ions, ii. ij . llis preliulas to

' ó', 16. forbids iJim to ;ap-

proach his capital, 17. State of his
empire at this time, ibid. Ilis cha-
rater, 18. His pel plexity at the ar-
rival of the Spaniards, 19. His
timid negociations with Cories, zo.
I-is scheme for dertroying Coates at
Cholu:a discovercd, 47. His irrefc-
lute cndutf, 50. His irft interview
with Cones, 51. Is leized by Cortes
and confir;ed to the Spanili\ quarters,
60. Is fettered, 6z. Ackiowleges
himself a vairal to the Spanish crown,
66. Remains inflexible wi:h legard
to religion, 70. Ciicumnfances of
his death, S0. Account of a gold
cup of his, in England, 479.
2lMlatrois, in the Spanlilh ,n;ierican co-

lonies explanation of this difl:.:i.-:n,
ii. 368.

N.
N;aracz, Parphilo, is sent bv V-l:f-

(q)ez with an ainianitnt to M'xico,
to t'upelcie C'ollet, ii. 74. ' ikes
polfieftin if Z-ml[i *l\, 79. Is tic-
t.i!cd and tjken 1pliolner by Cortes,
t HIow lie carrieid on his corre!-
pondcnctc i.ith hloniteziina, 456.
,it,'c. . ,, in Amneriian nation, th(:ir
pIltica; innllit'tllion, i. 334. Caules
ol their talne fi:bn-ilTion lo the Spa-
niatd:, 348. 'Their iel: iGus doc-
tri:ns, 385.
avuriio'lin, the arts of, very slowly im-
proved i)y mlnkinJ, i. z. 'The
)lnot.ltrlgc ot, prior to ((.mn-cr.t.l
Ir:tti.ti rte, ;//. Immte;ift".t:.. ¢f
an,,s g lie tl. i.ct,', 4, Ll.2: :2 -
protu ,by Itri llivenlionl of'ih m:i:-
ncl'.t to,]i~ls, lldan by all tle ti;lttS
(.t plecrdinrg a igs, 35. 'ihe rit
nlav.,l ilt'i ,vetis lunltttaikn lby i'oi-
tut.il, 40.
i\''tte's. ISrir lpe.nliar rstduatihm Ind r

tic' Spaildll dnlimion l m Ai[(it'.ic,, 'i.
3 (0.

J\'.;;t/on/:/ilal', its l ilu.ition deltil..l, i.

A'e.w l/,l,i/, f( n:c' riri ilt fli. tcosla-

try .nli in¢,. l.,t, ,. 472.
2\/t'rO , '/*tr:, <ilIt( v( ritl ai d .na 't'. by

j a11.111 (;i 'j.elJ ,, 1. 241. .:/ 1..i,'.

A]'.t>,'o, Ito li , IiS loy.i}Le to Anenllc.i,

i. I ;c.

A', irlfe.iat'i mil;ht in anlict't timrn

hle:r nlgrtvted tlo, and co!loni.'ecd An'.
tic., i z,9. 438.

A'si"::'. Vil.i, lBl.,lci, appointrd vice-

i'l y Il I'rel, to i nlforce thll. r.w I,-
| ,t;l. iits, ii. 2 ;, . Ilis <l:.: i.c''r,
234 CiitJnimit, 'V.c.l i (.fAo,' tli
'il;t11, -3 . L .1.7'i.;lne s ItI :.i..t

.1,iii

him and the court of audience, 237.
Is confined, 238. Recovers his li-
berty, 239. Resumes his command,
240. Is pursued by Gonzalo Pizar-
ro, 241. Is defeated and killed by
Pizarro, 242.

O.

Ocnmpo, Diego, sent with a squadron

from Hispaniola to delolate the coun-
try of Cumana, i. 233. 235.
Ocanpo, Sebastian de, first fails round

Cuba, and difcovels it to be an ifiand,
i. 188.
Ocean, though adapted to facilitate

the intcrcourfe between distant coun-
tries cootinued long a formidable
barrier, i. I, See Compass, and Na-
Wigaation.
Ojeda, Alonzo de, his private expedition

tothe Wefi Indies, i. 148. His second
voyage, 159. Obtains a government
on the continent, 19z.

ClnmedJ, Father Bartholomew de, checks

the ;as zeal of Cortes at 'Ilalcala in
Mexico, ii. 45. Is sent by Cortes to
negociate with Narvaez, 77.

Orelanra, Francis, is appointed to the

command of a bark built by Gonzalo
Pizarro, and deserts him, ii. 214.
Sails down the Maragnon, 1 5. Re-
turns to Spain with a report of won-
derful dilcoveries, ibid. Herreia's
account of his voyage, 473.

Or.'rte, commands Almagio's party

againif the Pizarros, and is deteatcd
and killed by them, ii. zo6.

Orinoco, the great river of, discovered

by Christopher Columbus, i. 138.
The amazing plenty of fiai in, 4t,9.
Strange method 'of chufing a cipt.il,
among the IndialLtlibes on the banks
of, i. 363.

Otabeilc, thle inhabitants of, ignorant of

the art of boiling wa.itr, i. 483.

Ottniba, battle of, between Cortes and

the Mexicans, ii. 97.

Ovatdo, Nicholas de, is fcnt governor

to Hispaniola, i. 159. Iis prudent
regulations, 161. Refllfes adritflioln
to Columbus, on his lonl.th voyage,
164. His ungen'roius behaviour to
Columbus on his fllipwreck, 169, 171.
Receives him at length and fends him
home, 173, Engages in a war with

the Indians, 178. His cruel treat-
ment of them, 189. Encourages cul-
tivation and manufactures, 183. Hio
method of trepanning the natives of
the Lucayos, 186. Is recalled, 189.

P.

Pacific Ocean, why and by whom so

named, ii. 131.

Packet boats, firfi establishment of, be-

tween Spain and her American colo-
nies, ii. 41 5.

Panama, is fettled by Pedrarias Davila,

i. 212.

Parmcnides, the first who divided the

earth by zones, i. 427.

Patagonians, some account of, i. 303.

The reality of their gigantic size yet
to be decided, 305. 463.
Peadrarias Davila, is sent with a fleet to

iuperliede Balboa in his government of
Santa Maria on the isthmus of Darien,
i. 207. 'Treats Balboa ill, 208. Rapa-
cious condut of his men, o09. Is re-
conciled to Balboa, and gives him his
daughter, 210. Puts Balboa to death,
2 . Removes his settlement from
Santa Malia to Panama, 12z.
Penguin, the name of that bird not deri-

ved fiom the Welch language, i. 437.

Perez, Juan, patronises Columbus at

the iout of Castile, i. ,4. His so-
lemn invocation for the success of Co-
lumbus's voyaae, 82.

.Prcitus, of I-lanno, the authenticity of

that work jullified, i. 42I.

Pgru, tise fillt intelligence concerning

this coutity received by Vasco Nug-
ncz de llalloa, i. 2oo, 205. 'The coift
of,' fitft oulcovered by Plizarro, ii. 156.
Pizarro's lecond arlival, 161. His
huflile proceedings again!l the natives,
16. 'The colony ot St. Michael
eflablilIhd. 16,3 St.te of the empire
at the time ot this invasion, ibid. The
kingdmln divided between Ilualcar antd
AtahuallpJ, 167. Atabualpa ufirpa
the government, 16S. -luafear Ibli-
cits alTlltance trom I'izarr:', 69. Ata-
hu:ll)a vilits l'izarro, 173. Is seized
by Pizarro, 75. Ag, cement for hlis
ranforn, 177. Is refufd Ilis liberty,
180. Is cruelly put to de.ath, I8.
Confulfion of tle C:npire o thllis
event, 186. Quito reducecd by lic-

nalcarar,

nalcazar, S88. The city of Lima
fourded by P:zarro, ]94. Chili in-
vaded by Alnagro, i95. Infurrefion
of the Peruvians, 196. Almagro put
to death by Pizarro, 209. Pizarro di-
vides the country among his follow-
ers, 211. Progress of the Spanilh
arms there, 212. Francis Pizarro
affafinated, 219. Reception of the
new regulations there, 232. The vice-
roy confined by the court of audience,
238. The viceroy defeated and killed
by Gonzalo Pizarro, 242. Arrival of
Pedro de la Galca, 249. Reduction
and death of Gonzalo Pizarro, 257.
The civil wars there not carried on
with mercenjry soldiers, 258. But
nevertheless gratified with immense
rewards, 259. Their profusion and
luxury, ibid. Ferocity of their con-
tefls, 260. Their want of faith,
ibid. Infiances, 261. Division of bv
Gafca among his followers. 262. A
retrofpe into the original govern-
ment, arts, and manners of the na-
tives, 267. The high antiquity they
pretend to, 303. Their records, 304.
Origin ot their civil policy, 306.
This founded in religion, 307. The
authority of the Incas absolute and
unlimited, ibid. All crimes there
punibhed capitally, 308. Mild genius
of their religion, 309. Its influence
on their civil policy, 3to. And on
their military system, 311. Peculiar
state of property there, 312. Dif-
tintion of ralnls, 313. State of arts,
314. Improved late of agriculture,
ibid. Their buildings, 316. Their
public roads, 317. Their bridges,
319. Their mode of refining lilver
ore, 320. Worksof elegance, 321.
Their civilization, neverihelefs, but
imperfec&, 322. Cuzco the only place
that had the appearance of a city,
ibid. No pelfect frpar.tion of pro-
fellions, 323. Little commercial in-
trrcourfc, ibid. Tlheir unwarlile
spirit, 324. .at their Ilefli and finl
raw, 32Z. Brief account of other
provinces under the viceroy of New
Spain, 326. ('uses of the depnpul:t.
tiun of tilis country, 347. Thc fm1ll
pox very fatal the:e, 348. Wiiteis
who gaive iiccsiunits "I thll cr)!iio qieit
iol 463. Their metlhd of build-
ing, 487. SS.ite of tl1: rcVcnue de-

VoL. II.

rived from, by the crown of Spairi,
515. See Calnies.

Peter I. czar of Ruflia, his cxtenfive

views in prosecuting Asiatic difco:e-
ries, i. 273.

Phenikians, antient, fiate of commerce

and navigation among them, i. 6.
Their trade how conduted, 421.

Philip II. of Spain, his turbulent dil-

poition aided by his American trea-
fures, ii. 396. Establishes the colony
of Manilla, 4z6.

Philip III. exhausts his country by in-

considerate bigotry, ii. 396.
Philippine ilands, discovered by Ferdi-

nand Magellan, ii. 131. A colony
established there by Philip II. of Spain,
426. Trade betw-een, and America,
427.

Physic, the art of, in America, why

conneaed with divin.i-ion, i. 390.

Pinto, chevalier, his description of the

charaiteriflic features of the native
Ameicans, i. 460.

Pinzon, Vincent Yanez, commands a

verfel under Columbus in his firl
voyage of difeoverv, i. St. Sails to
America on a p:ivate adventure with
four Ihips, 18o. Discovers Yucatan,
188.
Pizaro, Ferdinand, is besieged in

Cuzco by the Peruvians, ii. 19g. Is
surprised there by Almagro, 2ol. E.s-
capes with Alyarado, 203. Defends
his brother at the cot c'os Spain,
210. Is committed to prison, z11.

Pizarro, Francilco, attends Balboa, in

his fettlemcnt on the ifihmus of Da-
rien, i, 194. Marches under hin
across the ifthlmus, where they disco-
ver the South Sea, 204. Ilis birth,
education, and chlratdler, ii. 148.
Afl'ociates with Almrgro and l)e
I.iLque, in a voyage ot dltcovery, 150.
-lis ill success, 1i. Is rccalled aid
deserted by mtoP ot liii fo:lowvcls, 154.
R mains on the illand of Gorgonm
for supplies, ibid. Difc.,vers tie co.l(t
of e'rtu, G56. lcrtiirs t', I'an.rnma,
157. Goes to Spiin, to lolicit rein-
forcements, rS . PI'ncries the lu-
prrme rommand fir hlitillf, t19.
Is alifled witli money by C',i'eS, ibrd.
Lands .itgai in l'cri, 161. Ili. hostile
iprcr'!ings agairill the tnliv's, I t2.
J.:!,llblilh cs the colony of :;i. Mliclh..l,
i6l. State of the l'eruvian cnipile at
N n tl:i

X.

this time, ibid. Cause of his easy
penetration into the country, 168.
Is applied to by Huafcar, foraffiftance
against his vi&orious brother Ata-
hualpa, 169. State of his torcces, ibid.
Arrives at Caxamalca, 171. Is visited
by the Inca, 173. His perfidious
feizureof him, 175. Agrees to Ata-
hualpa's ofi'r for his ransom, 177.
Division of their plunder, 179. Re-
fuses Atahualpa his liberty, 18o.
His ignorance exposed to Atahualpa,
183. Bestows a form of trial on the
Inca, 184, Pots him to death, 15.
Advances to Cuzco, 17. Honours
Conlcired on him by the Spanilh
court, g19. Beginning of dillenfion4
between him and Almagro, 192.
His iv:l regulations, 193. Founds
the city of Lima, 194. Infurrescion
of the Peruvians, 196. Cuzco seized
by Almagro, 20x. Deludes Almagro
by negotiations, 203. Defeats Alma-
gro, and takes him prisoner, 206.
Puts Almagro to death, 209. Divides
the country among his followers, 1 iI.
The impolitic partiality of his allot-
nIents, ibid. Mlkes his brother Gon-
zalo governor of Quito, 213. Is as-
frifinat-'d by Juan de Herrada, 219.
Pizarro, Gonzalo, is made governor of

Qlito, by his brother Francis, ii.
213. His expedition over the Andes,
ibid. Is deserted by Orellana, 2'4.
His dillrefs on this event, 216. His
diflftrous return to Quito, 217. Is
encouraged by the people to oppose
Nugnes Vela, the new viceroy, 236.
Atrumes the government of Peru,
L3S. Marches against the viceroy,
140. Defeats and kills him, 242.
Is advised by Carvajal to assume the
sovereignty of the country, 243.
Chufes to negociale with the court of
Spain, 244. Consultations of the
court on his conduc, 245. His vi-
olent resolutions on the arrival of
Pedro de la Gafca, 250. Resolves
to oppQfe him by violence, 251.
Marches to reduce Centeno at Cuzco,
253. Defeats him, 254. Is deserted
by his tioops on the approach of Gas-
ca, z56. Surrenders and is execut-
ed, 257. 1-is adherents men of no
principle, 261.
Plata, Rio dr, difcovcrcd by Dias de

Solis, i. a23. Its amazing width,
447.
Pliny, the naturalist, instance of his ig-

norance in geography, i. 427.
Ponce de Leon, Juan, discovers Florida,

i. 197. Romantic motive of his
voyage, 198.
Population of the earth, flow progrcfr

of, i. 1.

Porto Bello, discovered and named by

Chriflopher Columbus, i. 166.

Porto Rico, is fettled and fubje&ed by

Juan Ponce de Leon, i. 187.

Porto Santo, the first discovery of, i.

44.
Portugal. when and by whom the court

of inquisition was firi' introduced
into, i. 429.
Portugireje, a view of the circumstances

that induced them to undertake the
discovery of unknown countries, i.
39. 4I. First African discoveries of,
41. Madeira discovered, 45. They
double Cape Bojador, 46. Obtain a
papal grant of all the countries they
should discover, 49. Cape Verd
inlands and the Azores discovered,
50. Voyage to the East Indies by
Vasco de Gama, 145.

Poltfi, the rich silver mines there,

how discovered, ii. 388. The
mines of, greatly exhausted and
scarcely worth working, 505.

Prifiners of war, how treated by the

native Americans, i. 357.
Property, the idea of, unknown to the

native Americans, i. 337. Notions
of the Brafilians concerning, 473.

Protef7or of the Indians, in Spanish

America, his funcion, ii. 374.

Ptolemy the philosopher, his geogra-

phical description more ample and
exat than those of his predecellors,
i. 24. His Geography translated by
the Arabians, 27. His erroneous
polition of the Ganges, 424.

Q.
Sictlaavaca, brother of Montezuma,

lucceeds him as king of Mexico, ii.
105. Conducs in perfun the fierce
a'taclcs which obliged Cortes to
abandon his capital, lo;. Dies of
the finall pox, 106.
rlleveL/o, biflop of Dariel, his confc-

rclnc
I

rence with Las Casas on the treat.
ment of the Indians, in the presence
of the emperor Charles V. i. 230.
ucickjilver, the property of the famous

mines of, at Guanacabelica, reserved
by the crown of Spain, ii. 5o6. The
price of, why reduced, ibid.
uzinquina, or Jesuit's bark, a producti-

on peculiar to Peru, ii. 393.
uiepos, or hifloric cords of the Pe:uvi-
ans, some account of, ii. 3c4.
2uito, the kingdom of, conquered by

Huana Capac, Inca of Peru, ii. t66.
Is left to his son Atahualpa, 167.
Atahualpa's general revolts a'tcr his
death, 187. Is reduced by the Spa-
niards under Benalcazar, 1i8. Be-
nalcazar deprived, and Gonzalo Pi-
zarro made governor, 213.

R.

Ramtito, his defence of Hanno's account

of the coast of Africa, i. 422.

RegiJer rhips, for wh.at pirpofe intro-

duced in the trade between Spain and
her colonies, ii. 4o0. Supersede the
use of the galeons, 411.
Religion of the native Americans, an in-

quiry into, i. 378.

Ribas, his account of the political slate

of the people of Cinaloa, i, 474. Of
their want of religion, 484.

Rio de la Plata, and Tucuman, account

ofthofe provinces, ii. 335.

Rivers, the amazing size of those in

America, i. 249.

Robifon, profefTor, his remarks on the

temperature of various climates, i.
448.

Roldan, Francis, is left chief juflice in

Hifpaaiola, by Chrislo[lher Colum-
bus, i. 131. Becmes riogleder of
amutiny, 140. Suhlnits, 143.

Romans, their progrels in navigation and

discovery, i. 17. Their military fili-
rit averse to meclh.lnic.l arts and
commerce, 18. Navigation and
trade tavoured in the provillnce un-
der their government, 19. Their
extensive difcoveies hby land 20.
Their empire, and the f(ienceF, icf-
troyed together, 25.

Ruibriiquis, fthelr, his cmbaf'v from

France to the ciaun of tie i'.,t.ain
i. 33.

Rufians, Asiatic discoveries made by
them, i. 273. Uncertainty of, 458.

S.
Sacotecas, the rich fiver mines there,

when dircovcred, ii. 388.
San Slvnador, dlfcovered and named by

Chritopher Columbus, i. 93.
Sancho, Don Pedro, account ot his His-

tory of the conquefs of Pern. ii. 463.

Sandoval, the shocking barbarities e>.:-

cuted by, in Mexico, ii. i17.
- Francisco Tello de. is sent by
the emperor Charles V. to Mexico,
as vifitedor of America, ii. 2;3. His
moderation and prudence, ilid.

Savage life, a general cfimatc cf, i.

402.

Scalps, a motive of the native Ameri-

cans for taling them from their ene-
mies, i. 477.

Serralvo, marquis de, his extraordinary

gains during his vice-royalty in Ame-
rica, ii. 5x6.

Seville, extraordinary increase of its

manufactures by the American trade,
ii. 507. Its trade greatly reduced,
ibid. The American trade removed
to Cadiz, 401.

Silver ore, method of refining it prafli-

fed by the native Peruvians, ii. 320.

Scnora, late discoverics of rich mines

made there by the Sijaniards, ii. 3z8.

Soul, American ideas of the immortality

of, i. 387.

Soauth Sea, firfi discovered by Vasco Nug-

nez de Balboa, i. o204

Spain, general idea of the policy of,

with regard to the American ccionies,
ii. 352. Early inr!rpolItion of the
regal authority in the cohInic;, 353.
All the American dominions oif, ub.
jc'ted to two viceroyF, i4-. A third
vice-royalty lately l.cly i llhd, 3 5.
The colonies of, cmnpaiedl vilh
those of Greece anid Rome, 30x. Ad.
vantages she derived fio n her colo-
nies, 394. Why flh does net fill de.
rivethe lame, 95. Ra,id dlccline
of trade, 397. T'lis decline incrraf-
cd by the mode of regul.itig the in-
tcrcourfe with America, 4oo. Em-
piloDy guarda conas to check illicit

tra;le,

trade, 409. The use ofregifler hips
introduced, 410. Establishment of
the company of Caraccas, 413. En-
largement of commercial ideas there,
414. Free trade permitted to feve-
ral provinces, 416. Revenue deri-
vcd from America, 4z9. Specifica-
tion, 513.
acnisards, their curious form of taking
poufeflion of new difcoveecd countries,
i. 443.

itra6o, a citation from, proving the

gre2t geographical ignorance of the
ancients, i. 4z4. His own want of
geographical knowledge, 427.

Stlperlilntit, always conneced with a

detire of penetrating into the secrets
of futurity, i. 389.

T.

T'apia, Chriftoval de, is sent from Spaira

to Mexico, to supersede Cortes in his
command, but fails in the attempt,
ii. 134.
Tartars, the poflibility of their migra-

ting to America, i. 277.

Tlarfalu, in Mexico, charaaer of the

natives of, ii. 36. Oppose the pas-
sage of the Spaniards, 37. Are re-
duced to foe for peace, 4z.

Tobacco, that of Cuba the best flavoured

of any in all America, ii. 393.
'Teupinamlos, account of their ferocious

courage from L.cry, i. 477.

Trade, tree, opened between Spain and

her colonies, ii. 416. Increase of
the Sparnifh customs from this mca-
filre. 51o.
Tr'ade wiudr, the periodical course of,

when oilcoveled by navigatois, i. 19.

Travellers, antir ,t, charaser of their

writirg?, i. 31,

Tri:idad, the illand of, discovered by

Clriflr|hcr Columbus on his third
voyage, i. 137.

'turrmn, and Rio de la Plata, account

of thufe provir.ces, ii. 335.
'Iye, the commerce of that city Ihow

conducted, i. 121z.
'ytles of Spanish America, how applied

by the court of Spain, ii. 514.

V.

'acr / Cde (ao, Clrifloval, is sent rrom
Spdin to i tgulate the govtrnnirnt of

Peru, ii. 2o0. Arrives at Quito, 221.
Aftumes the supreme authority, 222.
Defeats young Almagro, 223. The
severity of his proceedings, 2z4.
Prevents an infurredion concerted to
oppose the new regulations, 234. Is
imprisoned by the new viceroy, 235.

Valverde, father Vincent, his curious

harangue to Atahualpa, Inca of Peru,
ii. 174. Gives his fandtion to the
trial and condemnation of Atahualpa,
184..

Yega, Garcilafo de la, charater of his

commentary on the Spanith w:iters
concerning Peru, ii. 465.

Vegetables, their natural tendency to ser-

tilize the foil where they grow, i. 264.

Velajquez, Diego de, conquers the island

of Cuba, i. 196. 237. His prepara-
tions for invading New Spain, ii. 1.
His difficulty in chufing a commander
for the expedition, 2. Appoints
Fernando Cortes, 3. His motives
to this choice, 5. Becomes fufpici-
ous of Coites, 6. Orders Cortes to
be deprived of his commission and
arrefled, 7. Sends an armament to
Mexico after Cortes, 72.

Venegas, P. his charater of the native

Californians, i. 467.

Venerealdifeafe, originally brought from

America, i. 307. Appears to be
wearing out, 308. Its first rapid
progress, 464.
Venezuela, hiltory of that settlement, ii.

340.
V.nice, its origin as a maritime Rate, i,

30. Travels of Marco Polo, 33.

Verd, islands discovercd by the Portu-

guefe, i. 50.

V'irereys, all the Spanifli dominions in

America fuljrcted to tw,,, ii. 354.
A third lately f (lbliflrd, 355. Their
powers, ibir. A fourth cRidbliihrJd,
421.
V.lla, Scgn-r, his account of the slate

of population in New Spain, ii. 495.
His detail of the Spanifl American
revenue, 5t3.

1Vllefagno, Antonio, one of Cortcs's

folders, foments a mutiny among Ihis
troops, ii. ilo. Is discovered by
Cortes, and hanged, i l.

Ulloa, Doll Antonio, de, his defcripti-

on of the characeriftic features of
the native Americans, i. 460, 461.
Ilis reason for the Amelicans not be-
ing Io sensible of pain as the rtfl of
mallkinld, i. 479. -li accoint of tihe
goods exprnced from Spain to America,
with the duty on thlem. 5 6.

Volkeanor

Volcanos, remarkable number of, in the Spanish colonies, i. 220. Patrontfes

northern parts of the globe difcoveted the attempt of Ferdinand Magellan,
by the Ruffians, i. 459. ii. ix8.

Wafer, Lionel, his account of a pecu-

liar race of diminutive Americans, i.
301. Compared with similar pro-
duaions in Africa, 302.

War song of the native Americans, the

sentiments and terms of, i. 478.

Wopnen, the condition of, among the

native Americans, i. 318. Are not
prolific, 3z1. Are not permitted to
join in their drunken feails, 399.
Nor to wear ornaments, 481.

X.

Xeres, Francisco de, secretary to Pizar-

ro, the earliest writer on his Peruvian
expedition, ii. 463.

Ximenes, cardinal, his regulations for
the treatment of the Indians in the

ulcatan, the province of, discovered by
Pinzon and Diaz de Solis, i. I,88.
Described, 446. From whence that
province derives its value, ii. 331.
Policy of the court of Spain with
refped to, 332.

Z.

Zarate, Don Augustine, charater of

his History of the conquest of Peru,
ii. 464.

Zones, the earth how divided into, by

the geography of the ancients, i. 22.
By whom first so divided, 427.

Zummaraga, Juan de, first bishop of

Mexico, the destroyer of all the an-
cient records of the Mexican empire,
ii. 271.
END OF THE SECOND VOLUME.

W.

Y.
