<* T H E
H I S T 0 R

Y

O F
SCOTLAND,

DURING THE RE IGNS OF
Queen M A R Y and of King

JAM E S

VI.

TILL
His ACCESSION to the Crown of ENGLAND,

WITH A
REVIEW of the SCOTCH H ISTORY previous to that Period;

And an APPENDIX containing ORIGINAL PAPERS.

IN TWO VOL U M E S.
By WILLIAM ROBERT SON, D.D.

VOLUME
L O N D O

IL.

N:
Printed for A. M i IA R

MDCC LIX.

in the Strand.

# BOOK VI.

THE
HISTORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

BOO K VI.
T H E unexpeted blow, by which the Regent fell, flruck Booa VI 4

the King's party with the utmost confernation. Eliza- r\^
beth bewailed his.death as the most fatal difafler, whiclh 57°'

could have befallen her kingdom; and was inconsolable to a degree cafiond y,
that little suited her dignity. Mary's adherents exulted, as if, now, :lht,. 1"'
her restoration were not only certain, but near at hand. The
infamy of the crime naturally fell on those, who expreffd fuci
indecent joy at the commiflion of it. And as the aaffin made his
escape on a horle, which belonged to Lord Clautd Hamilton, and
fled diredly to amilton, where lie was received in triumph,
it was concluded that the Regent had falln a fac-ifice to the rcliit-
meIlt of the (enll's party, rather than to t lhe revenge of a private
man. Cn the day after the mlurder, 'cott of IJucclcugh, and Ker
of Fclnilieli-l, botli zcalous abettors

a(tt the
( ticc I's caucsu, entered

VOL. I1. B3 l'landl

Book VI.

I570.

Steps taken
towards elet-
ing another
Regent,
Feb. 12.

England in an hostile manner, and plundered and burnt the coun-
try, the inhabitants of which expected no such outrage. If the
Regent had been alive, they would scarce have ventured on such
an irregular incursion, nor could it well have happened so oon astor
his death, unless they had been privy to the crime.

THIS was not the only irregularity, to which the anarchy that

followed the Regent's death gave occasion. During such general
confusion, men hoped for universal impunity, and broke out into
excefes of every kind. As it was impossible to refirain these, with-
out a fettled form of government, a Convention of the nobles
was held, in order to deliberate concerning the election of a Re-
gent. The Queen's adherents refused to be present at the meeting,
and protested againt its proceedings. The King's own party was
irresolute, and divided in opinion. Maitland, whom Kirkaldy had
set at liberty, and who obtained from the nobles then assembled
a declaration acquitting him of the crime which had been laid to
his charge, endeavoured to bring about a coalition of the two par-
ties, by proposing to admit the Queen to the joint administration of
government with her son. Elizabeth adhered to her old fyfteni
with regard to Scotch affairs, and notwithstanding the follicitations
of Mary's adherents *, laboured to multiply, and to perpetuate the
factions, which tore in pieces the kingdom. Randolph, whom ihe
despatched into Scotland on the first news of the Regent's death,
and who was her usual agent for such services, found all parties so
cxafperated by mutual injuries, and so full of irreconcilable rancour,
that it cost him little trouble to inflame their discord. The Conven-
tion broke up without coming to any agreement; and a new meet-
ing, to which the nobles of all parties were invited, was appointed
on the first of May -.

S Append. N I. 1 Crawf, Mcm, 131. Caldcrw. 2, 157.

JI EMEAN-
2

MEANTIME, Maitland and Kirkaldy, who frill continued to ac- BOOK VI.
knowledge the King's authority, were at the utmost pains to reflore I',"

1570.

some degree of harmony among their countrymen. They procured, A coalition of
for this purpose, an amicable conference among the leaders of the patls ,.-

tempted in

two factions. But while the one demanded the restoration of the vai.1
QUeen, as the only thing which could re-establish the public tran-
quility; while the other esteemed the King's authority to be so fa-
cred, that it was, on no account, to be called in question or i-
paired; and neither of them would recede in the least point from
their opinions, they separated without any profped of concord.
Both were rendered more averse from reconcilement, by the hope
of foreign aid. An envoy arrived from France with promines of
powerful succour to the Queen's adherents; and as the civil wars in
that kingdom seemed to be on the point of terminating in a peace,
it was expected that Charles would loon be at liberty to fulfil what
he promised. On the other hand, the Earl of SufTex was afle--
bling a powerful army on the borders, and its operations could not
fail of adding spirit and trength to the King's party -.

TIoUGcI the attempt towards a coalition of the factions proved (Qcre', p.r-

ineffectual, it contributed somewhat to moderate, or ilpend theil of Ldiburh.
rage; but they oon began to at with their usual animosity. lor-
ton, the moit vigilant and able leader on the King's fide, follicited
Elizabeth to interpole, without delay, for the flfety of a party,
devoted to her interest, and which flood in fclh need of her afli-
flance. The Chiefs of the Qten's faition, afnlmblinlm at ,in- ,,
lithlgow, miarched thence to Einbnl!-, ;

i .i] KirkaldyS, vlw wans
both C(;,vcrlour of the cafilc, anil Povolt of tll tovwl, pi' cvilcd

* < '*. m, . .rim., ' 1.

2 (on1

3

Book VI. on the citizens, though with ome difficulty, to admit them within
t vd the gates. Together with Kirkaldy, the Earl of Athole, and

1$5' Maitland, acceded almoofi openly to their party; and the Duke, and

Lord Herreis, having recovered their liberty by Kirkaldy's favour, re-
fumed the places, which they had formerly held in their councils,
Encouraged by the acquisition of persons, so illustrious by their
birth, or so eminent for their abilities, they published a proclama-
tion, declaring their intention to upport the Queen's authority, and
i'eemed resolved not to leave the city before the meeting of the
approaching Convention, in which, by their numbers and influ-
ence, they did not doubt of securing a majority of voices on their
fide *

nr"vcu the AT the fame time, they had formed a design of kindling a war
ntion in a between the two kingdoms. And if they could engage them in
war with Eng-
Il.K!. hoflilities, and revive their ancient emulation and antipathy, they

hoped, not only to dissolve a confederacy of great advantage to the
King's cause, but to reconcile their countrymen to their own So-
vereign, Elizabeth's natural and most dangerous rival. With this
view, they had, immediately after the murder of the Regent, prompt-
ed Scott and Ker to commence hostilities, and had since instigated
them to continue and extend their depredations. As Elizabeth fore-
saw, on the one hand, the dangerous consequences of rendering this
a national quarrel; and resolved, on the other, not to susser such
an insult on her government to pass with impunity ; he ifrued a
proclamation, declaring that she imputed the outrages which had
been committed, not to the Scotch nation, but to a few desperate
and ill-defigning persons; that, with the former, she was relolved

" Cranvf. Mem. 137. Caldcrw . 176.

to
4

to maintain an inviolable fiiendflip, whereas the duty, which file BooK VI.
owed to her own fubjeds, obliged her to chastise the licentiousness " `~

J*>~~~~ '~ b 1570.

of the latter . Suffex and Scroop, accordingly, entered Scot-
land, the one on the east, the other on the weft borders, and laid
waite the adjacent countries with fire and sword i. Fame magni-
sied the number and progress of their armies, and Mary's adherents
not thinking themselves safe in Edinburgh, the inhabitants where-
of were ill assed to their cause, retired to Linlithgow. There April z
they openly proclaimed the Qucen's authority, and sorbad giving
obedience to any, but the Duke, or the Earls of Argyll and Hunt-
ly, whonm he had constituted her Lieutenants in the kingdom.

THE nobles who adhered to the King, though considerably weak- KMng' Ip:;l'

enter !din-

ned by the defection of so many of their friends, afembled at hlh.
Edinburgh on the day appointed. They issued a counter-procla-
mation, declaring those who appeared for the Queen, enemies of
their country; and charging them with the murder both of the late
King, and of the Regent. They could not, however; presUme so
much on their own strength as to venture either to elect a Regent,
or to take the field against the Queen's party; but the aflitance,
which they received from Elizabeth, enabled them to do both. By
her order, Sir William Drury marched into Scotland, with a thou-
sand foot, and three hundred horse; the King's adherents joined
him with a coniderable body of troops, and advancing towards
Glasgow, where the adverse party had already begun hostilities by
attacking the caile, they forced them to retire, plundered the neigh-
bouring country, which belonged to the HIamiltons, and, after

* Cald. 2, i81. : C.bala, 1) 74.

Iizinlg

5

look VT. si'zing fonie of their cafiles, and razing others, returned to Edin-
'/-'7Na burgh.
1570.

Moticsof UNDER Drury's protection, the Earl of Lennox returned into
]:!;zacti's Scotland. It was natural to commit the government of the king-
conildi ut ,niil
rcgilil to dom to him, during the minority of his grandson. His illuitrious

birth, and alliance with the royal family f England, as well as of
Scotland, rendercd him worthy of that honour. And as his re-
fcntment againflI ary was implacable, as his estate lay in England,
and his family resided there, Elizabeth confidered him as a man,
who, both from inclination, and from intelefi, would ac in con-
cert with her, and ardently willfh that he might fuccccd Murray
in the office of Regent. But, on many accounts, she did not
think it prudent to discover her own lcntiments, or to favour his
pretcnlions too openly. The civil wars in Franc_, which had been
excited by a pretended zeal for religion, and carried oln with a fierce-
neci that did it real dishonour, appeared now to be o the p;,int of
coming to an ifilue; and after sledding the bett blood, and wafling
the riches provinces in the bingdom, both pa-.tl.s dciired peace
with an ardour, that facilitated Lhe negotiations, vwhich were carry-
ing on for that purpole. Charles IX. was known to be a paflionate
admirer of Mary's beautv. Nor could he, n honou:-, fuler a
Qeen of France, and the mioli ancient ally of his crown, to an-
guifl in iuch a cruel situation, without attempting to procure her
relief. Iie had, hitherto, been obliged to content himllcl with
remnillirating, by lib ambaliJtors, again2ll the indignity, with which
tlhe had ib, n treated. But if lie wcre once at full liberty to purnue
hii inlin;ations, Eliz/abtLih wo)'il iavc every thilng to dreCad Ilroi the
i t11pcaIo lity of his telmCper, and the power

v l Iis aiu. t t ierclo.
becaime ncceflry for her to aiL witi lm lliv, and n)t to :;p-

pea r,
6

7

pear, avowedly, to countenance the choice of a Regent, in con- Book VI.
tempt of Mary's authority. The jealousy and prejudices of the V -

1C70.

Scots required no lels management. Had flie openly supported
Lennox's claim; had file recommended him to the Convention, as
the candidate, whom she approved ; this might have rouzed the in-
dependant spirit of the nobles, and by too plain a discovery of her
intention, fihe might have defeated its success. For these reasons,
file hesitated long, and returned ambiguous anfwvers to all the
mefiages, which he received from the King's party. A more ex-
plicit declaration of her fcntiments was at last obtained, and an
event of an extraordinary nature eems to have been the occasion
of it. Pope Pius V. having iihued a bull, whereby e excommu-
nicated Elizabeth, deprived her of her kingdom, and absolved ier
fubLects from their oath of allegince, Felton, an Englifih man, had
the bo!dne!s to si it on the ates of the Bifliop of London's palace.
In former ages, a Pope, moved by his o\vwn ambition, or pride, or
bi otry, denounced this fatal ficntcnce againfit the mllo powerful
monarchls; lbut as the authority of the court ot Rome was novw le1
regardeld, its proceedings wcre more cautious ; and, it was only when
they wc!' rouzed by fume powerful l'rince, that the tunders of the
church vwere everheard. Elizabeth, tierefoire imputed this ftep, which
the Pope had taken, to a coimb.nation of the Roman Catholic Princes
againtl her, and i;lFpeded that tboe plot was on foot in favour of the
Scotch (Queen. In that event, file knew that the Iiafety of her
own kingdom depended on pelcrving ler influence in Scotlandi
and ill order to ilrlengthenl this, tlle renewed her pro111ifcs of pro-
tC'titg the King's adherens, encouraged te!n to proceed to tihe
election of a Regcent, and even ventured t ptoint out the Earl of
L eli,x, ai the piel i h
\1vo hadl the lcllt title. 'Ilit hollolur was

,ice'ord-

Book VI. accordingly conferred upon him, in a Convention of the whole
L .-' party, held on the 12th of July .

157,0.

Lennox elest- THE Regent's first care was to prevent the meeting of the Par-
ed Regcnt. liament, which the Queen's party had summoned to convene at

Linlithgow. Having effected that, he marched against the Earl of
Huntly, Mary's lieutenant in the North, and forced the garrison,
which he had placed in Brechin, to surrender at discretion. Soon
after, he made himself matter of some other cafles. Emboldened
by this successful beginning of his administration, as well as by the
appearance of a considerable army, with which the Earl of Suffex
hovered on the borders, he deprived Maitland of his office of fe-
cretary, and proclaimed him, the Duke, Huntly, and other leaders
of the Queen's party, traitors and enemies of their country $.

Iv;lrv's al- IN this desperate situation of their affairs, the Qeen's adherents
hcregit~ ,go- had recourse to the King of Spain 11, with whom Mary had held a
tiate with

.in. close correspondence ever since her confinement in England. They

prevailed on the Duke of Alva, to fend two of his officers to take
a view of the country, and to examine its coasts, and harbours; and
obtained from him a small supply of money and arms, which were
sent to the Earl of Huntly -. But this aid, so disproportionate to
their exigencies, would have availed them little. They were in-

lSizac1th, pro- debted for their safety to a treaty, which Elizabeth was carrying on,
poles a trea.ty under colour of restoring the captive Queen to her throne. The first
(t ;iccoin-
,ol.iti on,, l, fieps in this negotiation were taken in the month of May ; but hither-
t',,tecfl to little progress had been made in it. The peace concluded between
.jts. the Roman Catholics and lugonots in France, and her apprehen-

* Spot w. 240. Calll. . IS ScAppcn. N

npcnI CrawA. ilm. 159.
Cald. z. 198. || Sec A1pplldc N' III. A Jlllc. 3. 123. Cra.wl. Icin. 1;3.

FioIls
8

sions that Charles would interpose with vigour in behalf of his Book VI.
fitler in law, quickened Elizabeth's motions. She affeded to treat -
her prisoner with more indulgence, fle lifiened more graciously to
the follicitations of foreign ambaliadors in her favour, and seemed
fully determined to replace her on the throne of her anceflors. As
a proof of her sincerity, fie laboured to procure a cefiation of arms
btween the two contending fations in Scotland. Lennox, elated
with the good ortune, which had hitherto attended his admini-
Ifration, and flattering hinmfelt with an cafy tiumph over enmiets
who eates were waited, and their forces difiritcd, refilL.d, for
icme time, to come into tis meafiure. It was not f.id5 fr hi,
however, to difputc the swill of his protecrtcl'. A cefiition of ho-
flilities during two montlis, to commence on the third of September,
was agreed upon; and being renewed from i time to tie, it con-
ti uctll tlle ! fir of April next year '.

SOON after, Elizabeth deilpatched Cecil and Sir \Va!tcr Mildmlv

to the Queen of cots. The dignity of theti ambaiidors, the
former her prime l iniitcr, the 'ltter Chancelor of thle Exchequer,
and one of her allctf counfcllors, convincd all 'nartis that tlh
IncSoiation was frious, al(nd that the hotr of

,IV !. lil' rty v\.

n:ov approacling. 'lihe propositions, whilh tlie:C mI:' to hci.,
V.cre advantaCgcos to Flliza lbet, Lut such as a P;'i cc, ii a

\' ;'.-

liitiation, lad rfobln to ex;pcC&. T. Ce ra i'c til: ni o:' t e tic;'L <- c;

.in n;lll." h
; the r1(11cno iciifr a y pr'ct(n;!'i(s, t() t1c F.'!,lil ( .'o ';,

1'~), -

' c

J v ,

(lilrin:, ,li: ), tli's o\ln lil, (,r t ' o lie..: Ip(, i',' ; tl'.' : ;! r:,,

to thc nlliai ce bLt w( 1 tJlc t'e ; !v ;

!.i ,!l()iS ; t1.' ;: !.,i;i],, ; I t't b-

ic--', \vlC lhad ta!ca am , ,',ile.

n .'; .,': ....
' . ('i, ,.; .e to I,,ld

1no

9
'

Book VI. no correspondence, and to countenance no enterprize, that might
"-'--' diflurb Elizabeth's government; were among the chief articles. By

7 way of security for the accomplishment of these, they demanded

that ome persons of rank should be given as lofages, that the
Prince her son (hould reside in England, and that a few catles on the
border should be put into Elizabeth's hands. To some of there pro-
positions Mary conented; mc e endcavoured to mitigate; and
others he attempted to evade. In the mean time, she transmitted
copies of them to the Pope, to the Kings of France and Spain, and
to the Duke of Alva. She insinuated, that without some timely
and vigorous effort in her behalf, lhe would be obliged to accept
of thefi hard conditions, and to purchafc lierty at any price.
But the Pope was a diltant and i-fble ally, and by his eltbrts againQ
the Turks, his trealury was entirely exhauilcd. Charles had alrleady
becgun to me.iitate that contpir.acy againiit the Ilugonots, which
lmarks his reia2n with ilich infamy and it requird mluch Icluire, and
pcreit tralquiility, to bring that execrable plan to maturity. Philil
was employed ill fitting, out that leet, which acuircd lo great
renolwn to the Chrilianl arms, by the vidory over the infidels at

eIpanto; the iloors in Spain threatned an illfurrcdio ; and his
ulbjests in the N tlerlrands, provoked by much opprcllion, and
many indignities, were breaking out into open rebellion. All of
them, for these different reasons, advised Mary, without dependiing
on their aid, to conclude the treaty on the belt terms file could

procure .

l.li-t,, MARY, accordingly, consented to many of Elizabeth's demands,
:':'ti"' Cand ifcovered a lfcility of dillolitioni, which pronlilfd flill

(,,u t . III.
120t.

* An(I.. Vol. . 10o', 120

further
10

further concessions. But no conceflion file could have made, would Book V.
have satisfied Elizabcth, who, in spite of her repeated profef- .-h-
sions of sincerity to foreign ambaifidors, and notwithflanding the 570
solemnity witli which fle carried on the treaty, had no other
objc&t in it, than to amuse Mary's allies, and to gain time . After
Ihavin)g so long treated a Queen, who fled to her for refuge, in so
ungenerous a manner, ihe could not now diffinis her with safety.
Under all the diahdvantages of a rigorous confinement, vMary had
found means to excite commotions in Ilngland, which were ex-
tremely formidable. What defperatc efifes of her just refctment
might be expeted, if fie were set at liberty, and recovered her
former power ? W\hat eng:gements could bind her, not to revenge
the rongs fie lhad lfifered, nor to take advantage of the favcu-
rable conjunctures, that might present themielves ? Was it poflible
for her to give fucih iecurity for her behaviour, in times to come.
as might remove all fllficions and fears ? And was there not
good caufc to conclude, that no future benefits could ever obliterate
the memory of pait inj lries ? It was thus Elizabeth rcafoncd ; tihouili
she continued to ad as if her views had been entirely diiere;-t. She
appointed Icvcn of hcr privy counlellors to be commiioncrs 1or
fettlinE, the articles of the treaty ; and as MIry had already naned
the Biliops of Ross, and Galloway, and Lord Levingflton, for her
ambafiido's, flle required the Rcgert to ilpower proper pe rfons to
appear in behalf of tle Kin The Earl ol Morton, Pitcarn abbot of

I57 1

Dunferm-ling, adi( Sir James lMacgill w\ \1 the pcrlbns choln by
t!ic Regcnt. 'T'I y nrCfearcd fr tlilir j, ircy, as slowly as Eli-
:,el)th hur llf could hlave v,'i'ld . ,t length they arrived at
i.ondo,0n, :and met the c:,;:i i; )iu', of t'': tv'o (.esu'cls. M :Uiv',

' 1 )iaL-
(' 2

Bo:k VI. ambassadors discovercd the fi-ronef inclination to- comply with

'-.. every thing, that would remove the obfb.cles, wvh-ich flood in the
1 71.

way of their niillrefs's liberty. But when Morton and his aleiaes
were called upon to vindicate their condclt, and to ecxlin t:e
sentiments of their party, they began, in justification of their
trcattment of the Queen, to advance such maxims concerninl, the
limited powers of Princes, and the nat.ral rights of fubljes, as
were extremely llocking to Elizhaeth, whose notions of regal pre-
ronjative wcrc vc:v .exlted. \ith: regard to the authority which tlie
King nowt pocflfid, they declared that they neither ad, nor could
p!-iii;lv receive ilnlrudions, to coniient to any treaty, that tended
to fulbrt, o:' even to impair i;, in the lcaft degree . Nothing
cou.l l,d e inro:e ti.in, and lidicilous, tlhan such a reply from the
commlliiio iecrs of t-e King of Scots, to the QEen of England.
ILls pa'ty dcpcn lcd ablblutcly on 1 cr protection, her hand had featcd
h1i n on the throin, and to her power lie owed the continuance of li s
rte in. W\ith the utrnol cafe, lihe could have brought them to talk in
a very diffieent mannler; and wIhatever conditions she might l.ve
thou lht fit to prlcfrihe, they would have had no other choice lbut to
fuibai t. 'I his declaration, however, flie arlslecd to confiler as an inlu-

t , p'. ce .cdralic diliculty. And finding that tlere was no reafen to dread a ,
: l::*'-' dC'.:;nger from thee French King, who had not disCovercd tt eaCcrnIl-

i: support of Mary, which was expctmed; the reply made by Mito:'-
ton furniflhed her with a pretence for putting a flop to te n cocia-
Mlrch 21. tion, till the Regent liould find ambafihdors witlh more am:,!c

po'ers. And after being amnliid for ten mol thl with th hpe¢.s of
liberty, the uhii.ppy (uclcn of' Scots remained undei flriL. r cul!)dy
than ever, an:d without ally prolipet t1o eiiug fri-o it; \\ilec
tlhcli ilub])cl, \w lio flill ad hcici to lier, were cxpo; l'd, wi'hout lly

'I ( '

! d l. . - ~, . 1 ~ 1V 1C' , 5 3-
12

'3

or protecor, to tl;c - !, of enemies, whom their fucccfs in this ne- Bo;k VI.
gociation rendered i!ll more infolcnt. -

57'1.
On the lay after the expiration of the truce, which had been Dunt,,rtn

ca c lrpriz-

ohfervcd with little exacinefs on either fide, Captain Crawford of e'tlby the Re-
Jordan-hill, a gallant and entcrprifng officer, performed a service t''
of great importance to the Regent, by lluprizing the caifle of Dun-
barton. This was the only furtifiLd place in tle kingdoml, of nwhich
the Quieen had kept pofisliion, ever since tle commencement of
the civil wars. Its situation on the top of an h;i!Jh and almof} inac-
ceffible rock, whiclh ifes in the middle of a plain, rendered it ex-
tremely fitrng, and in te op)inon of that age ipregnable; as it
commanded the river Clyde, it was of great confcquience, and cf-
temnced thle mofi proper place il the kingdom for landing, aiy foreign
troops, that mighit come to Mlary's aid. The ftrcngth of the place
rendered Lord Fleming the govclnor, more cfcire than he otiilit
to have beep, conisdering its importatnce. A foJdier, Vwho Lad
served in tle garribon, and had been clilgnlfted lby lbnmec ill ue,
proposed the fhcie to the Regent, endeavoured to demonftrlat that
it was pracicable, and off. red hlilfCf to go t!he forenot m.n o;1
the cnterprize. It was thlou1gt IprIudnt to rifque any dan'ger, :F- o
great a prize. Scling-ladders, and w.hatevr elc was :cee':.r-v,
were prepared vwi:l the iutt n::a crccy and d(i'atchl. All che
aveiues to ttl call

e cfl ci

z'r d tl:t.i no inllli egen c of the dci:rii

miglht r-cchl the govcrnol. T-

, .lrds veiig, CL-frs dn nl :I.lc

r

from G ,lfow, witha iMall but dtcermtild bLnd. Lv miJiiiLt,
they arrived at the bottom o tiw i;c,.i. The moon was fct, nad thl
11<y, which liitl . to hd 1be c1xt cn v cl i c'., v.as c vcred xv i 1
thick< fog. It was wherec the iuck xva lighictl, thlat tli: a.it'.ts

1, AI) J. 3. 91,

Book VI. made their attempt, because, in that place there were few sentinels,

-J and they hoped to find them least alert. The first ladder was scarce
157 * fixed, when the weight and eagerness of those who mounted it,

brought it to the ground. None of the assailants were hurt by
the fall, and none of the garrison alarmed by the noise. Their
guide and Crawford scrambled up the rock, and fastened the ladder
to the roots of a tree, which grew in a cleft. This place they all
reached with the utmost difficulty, but were fiill at a great diitance
from the foot of the wall. Their ladders were made fast a second
time; but in the middle of the ascent, they met with an unforlen
difficulty. One of their companions was seized with ome sudden
fit, and clung, seemingly withoutlife, to the ladder. All were at a
.land. It was impofiible to pass him. To tumble him headlong
was cruel; and might occasion a discovery. But Crawford's pre-
fence of mind did not forsake him. lie ordered the soldier to be
bound fast to the ladder, that le might not fall when the fit was
over: and turning the other ide of the ladder, they mounted, with
ease, ever his belly. Day now began to break, and there iill re-
mained an high wall to scale; but after surmounting so many greater
difficulties, this was soon accomplimflcd. A entry olfervcd the firll
man, who appeared on the parapet, and had just time to give tlhe
alarm, before he was knocked on the head. The officers and fl-
diers of the garrison ran out naked, unarmed, and more anxious
for their own safety, than capable of malking refiltancc. The
afailants ruffled forwards, with repeated fiouts, and with the
utmofi fury; took pofTCslion of the magazine ; sizcd the cannon ;
and turned them againll their enemies. Lord Flcming got into a
finall boat, and tied all alone, into Argyllhi r. Cr awfol, il rewa-rd
of his valour and gool con dujlt, remlainei d lmaftlcr of the c.liAL ; ;iid
as lie did not lose a single mlan in the cntcrprizc, le cnj ved hi s sic-
ccfs with unmixed plealure. L.iv I'lei"ming, \crac the lrct) h

l vOV,

15

Envoy, and Hamilton archbishop of St. Andrews, were the pri- Book VI.
foners of greatefl diftindiorp.*.

571.

VERAC'S character protected him from the usage, which he me- strclblidhop, o

rited by his ativity in stirring up enemies againit the King. The put to dcatli
Regent treated the lady with great politeness, and humanity. But
a very different fate awaited the arclbifhop; lie was carried under
a firong guard to Stirling; and as he had formerly been attainted by
act of Parliament, lie was, without any formal trial, condemned
to be hanged; and on the fourth day after he was taken, the fen-
tence was executed. An attempt was made to bring him in as ac-
ccffary to the murther both of the King and Regent, but thelc ac-
culations were upported by no proof. Our hiitorians obfcrve that
lie was the first bifhlop in Scotland who died by the hlands of the
executioner. The high oflices he had enjoyed, both in church and
slate, ouglht to lhave exempted him from a puniihment, inflicted
only on the lowell criminals. But his zcal for the Queen, Iiis
abilities, aild Ils profeilion, rendered him odious and formidable
to the King's adherents. Lennox hated him as the perion, by wholi
counsels the reputation and power of the honuf of Hamilton were
supported. And party rage, and personal enmity, diatecd that in-
decent ftntence, for which iome colour was fought, by imputiig
to him such odious crimes --.

THE lots of Dunbarton, and the severe treatment of the Arch- I; :1U ,,:--

binfop, perplexed and enraged the Queen's party ; and hoflilities Vwre [1l .I ,;ii,-
renewed with all the fierceness, whiclh dilaapllintment and indig- ( ,;,,,
nation can inlpire. Kirkaldy, whlo, dLril, thle lu ce, I1ad taken care .'1L'.
to incrcafc the number of lis garrion, and to rovide very nc-
cellry for a iege, illucd a proclamation declarinig Icnnox's

* 3uch. 39y . 1 Siotf\'. 252.

autlo-

Book V. authority to be unlawful, and usurped; commanded all who fa-
k-~^~'/ voured his cause to leave the town within fix hours; seized the

7 arms, belonging to the citizens; planted a battery on the steeple of

St. Giles; repaired the walls, and fortified the gates of the city;
and, though the affedions of the inhabitants leaned a different way,
aheld out the metropolis against the Regent. The Duke, Huntly,
-Home, H1-erreis, and other chiefs of that faction, repaired to Edin-
burgh with their followers; and having received a fnll fum of
money, and tome ammunition fiom France, fo-rmed no contemptible
army within the walls. On the other fide, Morton seizcd Lcith,
and fortified it; and the Regent joined him with a considerable body
of men. While the armies lay so near each other, daily fkirmiilhes
happened, and with various fuccies. The Queen's party was not
firong enough to take the field against the Regent, nor was his u-
periority so great as to undertake the ficge of the castle, or of
the town ®.

" ,., SoI. time before Edinburgh fell into the hands of his enemies,

;

1 ;.iJ- the Regent had fimmoncd a Pa!liament to meet in that place. In
Ml, ,. order to prevent any objection againf the lawfulness of the meeting,

the members obeyed the prociamation as exaOly as pofible; and
aifembled in a hoLife at the head of the Canongate, which, thoughl
without the walls, lies within the liberties of the city. Kirkaldy
exerted himself to the utmDft to interrupt their meeting; but they
were so firongly guarded, tat all his eflurts were vain. They
pallied an at attainting, nI aitlail, and a few others, and then ad-
jurned to the 2tlth of Atuguft .

: U'lld.

C" 17,~/

THE other party, in order that their proceedings might be coun- Book VI.

tenanced by the fame shew of legal authority, held a meeting of '-
parliament soon after. There was produced in this assembly, a de-
claration by the Queen, of the invalidity of that deed, whereby
she had resigned the crown, and consented to the coronation of her
son. Conformable to this declaration, an a was pafr, pronounc-
ing the resignation to have been extorted by fear; to be null in it-
seif, and in all its consequences; and enjoining all good fubjeds to
acknowledge the Queen alone to be their lawful sovereign, and to
support those who aed in her name. The present eftabliihment
of the protestant religion was confirmed by another flatute; and,
in imitation of the adverse party, a new meeting was appointed on
the 6th of Auguf .

MVEANWHIsvLE, all the mileries of civil war desolated the king- rvii.l,-i,
dom. Fellow citizens, friends, brothers, took different fides, and condition of

the kingdom.

ranged temcflves under the flandards of the contending facdions.
In every county, and almost in every town and village, K]iOg's-mc/z
and z'ecnSs-ncln were names of diflindion. Political hatred diliolved
all natural ties, and extinguished the reciprocal good will and con-
fidence, which hold mankind together in society. Religious zeal
mingled itielf with thelfe civil diftindtions, and contributed not a
little to heighten, and to inflame ther:.

THE faions which divided the kingdom were, in appearance,

only two. But in both thlei, there were pcrlbns, wvith views, andl i, ,
principles, so different firom c.acl other, tlhat they oughtl to be difL
tinguithed. With fomlc, coni'icrations of rcliio!l \vcre rc Jolli-

Ciiwf. Mem1. i-77
VoL, II.

17
I)

Book VI. nant, and they either adhered to the Queen, because they hoped, by

^-'- her means, to re-establish Popery, or they defended the King's au-
1571. thority, as the best support of the Protestant faith. Among these

the opposition was violent and irreconcileable. Others were in-
fluenced by political motives only, or allured by views of interest;
the Regent aimed at uniting these, and did not despair of gaining,
by gentle arts, many of Mary's adherents to acknowledge the King's
authority. Maitland and Kirkaldy had formed the fame design of
a coalition, but on such terms, that the Queen might be reflored
to ome share in the government, and the kingdom fliake off its
dependance on England. Morton, the ablest, the most ambitious,
and the most powerful man of the King's party, held a particular
course; and moving only as he was prompted by the court of Eng-
land, thwarted every measure, that tended towards a reconcilement
of the factions; and as he served Elizabeth with much fidelity, he
derived both power and credit from her avowed protection.

TIHE time appointed by both parties, for the meeting of their

parliaments, now approached. Only three peers and two bishops
appeared in that, which was held in the Qeen's name at Edin-
burgh. But contemptible as their numbers were, they passed an
act for attainting upwards of 200 of the adverse fadion. The
meeting at Stirling was numerous and splendid. The Regent had
prevailed on the Earls of Argyll, Eglinton, Camuls, and Lord Boyd,
to acknowledge the King's authority. The three Earls were among
the mol powerful noblemen in the Kingdom, and had hitherto
been zealous in the Queen's caufc. Lord Boyd had been one of
Mar-y's commifioiers at York and Weflminfter, and, since that time,
had bcn admitted into all her nlolt secret councils. But, dring that
turbulent period, the conduCt of individuals, as well as the prin-

ciples

ciples of faAions, varied so often, that the sense of honour, the Book VI.
chief preservative of conliflency in charater, was entirely loft; '-~
and without any regard to decorum, men suddenly abandoned one
party, and adopted all the violent pafilons of the other. The defec-
tion, however, of so many persons of diindtion, not only weak-
ened the Queen's party, but added reputation to her adversaries.

AFTER the example of the parliament at Edinburgh, that at Stir- , Iin
ling began with fiaming ads againfl the opposite faction. But in the palrty irprix-

ed in Stiiha'g.

midst of all the security, which confidence in their own numbers, or
distance from danger could ifpire, they were awakened, early one
morning, by the flouts of the enemy in the heart of the town.
In a moment, the houses of every person of diftindion were fur-pt .
rounded, and before they knew what to think of so strange an
event, the Regent, the Earls of Argyll, Morton, Glcncairn, Caf-
fils Eglinton, Montrose, Buchan, the Lords Sempil, Cathcart,
Ogilvie, were all made prisoners, and mounted behind troopers,
who were ready to carry them to Edinburgh. Kirkaldy was the
author of this daring enterprize ; and if he had not been induced,
by the ill-timed anxiety of his friends about his safety, not
to hazard his own person in condufcing it, that day would
have terminated the contefl between the two fations, and have
restored peace to his country. By his direaion, four hundred men,
under the command of IIuntley, Lord Claud Hamilton, and Scott
of iBucclctlIig, set out from Edinburgh, and the better to conceal
their dclign, marched towards the fottlh. But they soon wheeled
to the riht, and horfcs having been provided for the infantry, rode
ilrci llt to Stirlinr. By o1ur il tc morning, they arrived there;
I;tit one cntly was posted on the walls, nor a tingle man was awake
albout the place. They met with no relillancc frui any perton they

l)

lhad

Book VI. had seized, except Morton. He defending his house with obstinate

'- -' valour, they were obliged to set it on fire, and he did not surrender
157'. till forced out of it by the flames. In performing this, ome time

was consumed; and the private men, unaccustomed to regular dif-
cipline, left their colours, and began to rifle the houses, and shops
of the citizens. The noise and uproar in the town reached the ca-
ftle. The Earl of Mar allied out with thirty soldiers; fired briskly
upon the enemy, of whom almost none but the officers kept toge-
ther in a body. The townsmen took arms to aift their governor;
a sudden panic truck the assailants; ome fled, ome surrendered
themselves to their own prisoners; and had not the borderers, who
followed Scott, prevented a pursuit, by carrying off all the horses
within the place, not a man would have escaped. If the Regent
had not unfortunately been killed, the lois on the King's
fide would have been as inconiiderable, as the alarm was great.
T/ink on the arcbifTjcp f /St. Anl/rcws, was the word among the
Twic ReeC.t Qieen's oldiers; and Lennox fell a acrilice to his memory. The

officer, to whom he surrendered, endeavouring to protedt him,
loft his own life in his defence. He was slain, according to the
general opinion, by command of Lord Claud Hamilton. Kir-
kaldy had the glory of concerting this plan with great fecrccy, and
prudence; but Morton's fortunate obinacy, and the want of dif-
cipline among his own troops, deprived him of success, the only
thing wanting to render this equal to the most applauded military
enterprizes of the kind .

rc:C cl2. As o many of the nobles were aflcmblcd, they proceeded, with-

R ft. out delay, to the election of a Regent. Argyll, Morton, and \Mar,

bCSq-' yclv.

26, Cl MMc.
62c.

'1 ,¥c'v. 226, Clw(.Mciii. 24.

werel
20

were candidates for the office. Mar was chosen by a majority of Book VI.
voices. Amidst all the fierce dissentions, which had prevailed so - "-
long in Scotland, he had diftinguifled himself by his moderation, his
humanity, and his disinterestedness. And as his power was far in-
ferior to Argyll's, and his abilities not so great as Morton's, he was,
for these reasons, less formidable to the other nobles. His merit,
too, in having so lately rescued the Leaders of the party from immi-
nent deftrucion, contributed not a little to his preferment.

WHILE these things were carrying on in Scotland, the tranfaRions

in England were no leis interesting to Mary, and still more fatal to in England a-
her cause. The parliament of that kingdom, which met in April,
pased an a, by which, it was declared to be high treason, to
claim any right to the Crown during the life of the Queen ; to affirm
that the title of any other pertbn was better than hers; or to main-
tain that the parliament had not power to fettle, and to limit the
order of fucceision. This remarkable flatutc was intended not
only for the security of their own sovereign, but to curb the refllefs
and intriguing pirit of the Scotch Quecn, and her adherents -I-.

AT this time, a treaty of marriage between Elizabeth and te
Duke of Aniou, the French King's brother, was well advanced. M.arriag cn-

'--' ~?c iatcd be-
Both courts seemed to desire it with equal ardor, and gave out, trcn, Fiz:i-

b! a tlxc

with the utmost confidence, that it could not fail of taking place. Ilick, Ae
Neither of them, however, wiihed its success; and they encou-j'L'
raged it for no other end, but because it served to cover.or to promote
their particular designs. The whole policy of Catherine of Mcdi-
cis was bent towards the accomplifhmlnelt of her dtciable prujed
for the dcfierudtion f the Ilugonot chiefs; and by carrying on a
negotiation for the marrinage of her son with a l'ri lccl, who \v;s
j ily ficmcd tlle pro)tcetlrcfb of that party, by yielding lunic tlilgs

'1 (C;m.1 I.4' .

i11

21

Eook VI. in point of religion, and by discovering an indifference with regard
'- - to others, fle hoped to amuse all the Proteflants in Europe, and to

571.

lull asleep the jealousy even of the Hugonots themselves. Eliza-
beth flattered herself with reaping advantages of another kind. Dur-
ing the dependance of the negociation, the French could not with
decency give any open afliflance to the Scotch Queen; if they con-
ceived any hopes of success in the treaty of marriage, they would, of
course, interest themselves but coldly in her concerns; MIary hersel fm uft
be dejected with losing an ally, whom file had hitherto reckoned her
moil powerful protector; andby interruptingher correspondence with
France, one source, at least, of the cabals and intrigues which dif-
turbed the kingdom, would be flopt. Both Queens succeeded in
their schemes. Catherine's artifices imposed on Elizabeth, and
blinded the Hugonots. The French discovered the utmof indif-
ference about the interest of the Scotch Queen; and Mary, confider-

Noi ,lk's ing that court as already united with her rival, turned herself, for
contliracv in proteCion, towards the King of Spain . Philip, whose dark and
alayor O thoughtful mind, delighted in the mystery of intrigue, had held a

fIcret correspondence with Mary, for ome time, by means of the
Bishop of Ross, and had supplied both herself, and her adherents
in Scotland, with finall fums of money. Ridolphi, a Florcntine
gentleman, who resided at London under the character of a bank-
er, and who afted privately as an agent for the Pope, was the perlbn
whom the Bishop intrusted with this negociation. Mary thought
it necessary, likewise, to communicate the secret to the Duke of
Norfolk, whom Elizabeth had lately reitored to liberty, upon his
folcmn promise to have no further intercourse with the 0Q2cn of
Scots; which, however, he rcgardel to littlc, that fie took no flep
in any matter of moment, without his advice. She complained in

i* Di^gcs. J4, 1i8. Cl. 3.1.

a Io),

Z3111*
22

23

a long letter, which she wrote to him in cyphers, of the baseness, Book VI.
with which the French court had abandoned her interest; he de- --
dared her resolution of imploring the afiftance of the Spanifl Mo- 57 I.
narch, which was now her only resource; and recommended Ri-
dolphi to his confidence, as a person, capable both of explaining,
and of advancing the scheme. The Duke commanded Hickford,
his secretary, to decypher, and then to burn this letter; but whe-
ther he had been already gained by the court, or resolved at that
time to betray his master, he disobeyed the latter part of the order,
and hid the letter, together with other treasonable papers, under
the Duke's own bed.

Ridolphi, in a conference with Norfolk, omitted none of those

arguments, and spared none of those promises, which are the usual
incentives to rebellion. The Pope, he told him, had a great fum
in readiness to belrow in tb good a cause. The Duke f Alva had
undertaken to land ten thousand men, not far from London. The
Catholics to a man would rife in arms. Many of the nobles were
ripe for a revolt, and wanted only a leader. Half the nation had
turned their eyes on him, and expeced him to revenge the unmerited
injuries, which he himself had suffered ; and to rescue an unfor-
tunate Q.een, who offered him her person, and her crown, as the re-
ward of his success. Norfolk approved of the design, and though
lie refuscd to give Ridolphi any letter of credit, allowed him to use
his name, in negociating with the Pope, and Alva *. The Bishop
of Ross, who, from the violence of his temper, and impatience to
procure relief for his miftres, was apt to run into rash and dcfpc-
rate dcfigns, adviscd the Duke to aflemblc fecrctly a few of his fol-
lowers, and at once to ifize Elizabeth's person. But this the Duke

* AndJcrf. , 161i

rcjcacd

Book VI. rejected as a scheme, equally wild and hazardous. Mean while,
- --' the English court had received some imperfect information of the
i157. by plot, by intercepting one of Ridolphi's agents; and an accident hap-
E;izabcth. pened, which brought to light all the circumstances of it. The Duke

had employed Hickford to transmit to Lord Herreis, ome money,
which was to be distributed among Mary's adherents in Scotland.
A person not in the secret was intrusted with conveying it to the bor-
ders; and he, fiifpecing it from the weight to be gold, whereas
he had been told that it was silver, carried it diredtly to the privy
council. The Duke, his domeflics, and all who were privy, or
st. 7. could be fufpeded of being privy to the design, were taken into

custody. Never did the accomplices in a conspiracy discover less
firmnets; or fcrvants betray an indulgent mafler, with greater balc-
ness. Every one confessed the whole of what he : new. HIickford
gave direcions how to find the papers, which he had hid. The
Duke himself, relying at firl on the fidelity of his afociates, and
believing all dangerous papers to have been destroyed, confidently
afierted his own innocence; but when their depoitions, and the
papers themselves were produced, aflonifhed at their treachery, he
acknowledged his guilt, and implored the Queen's mercy. His
offence was too heinous, and too often repeated, to obtain pardon;
and Elizabeth thought it necefairy to deter her iubjes, by his
puniflment,from holding a correspondence with the Qcen of Scots,
or her emiflaries. Being tried by his Peers, he was found guilty of
high trcafon, and, after everal delays, suffercd death for the
crime *.

TILE diicovery of tlis conspiracy produced many effieds, ex-
tremely detrimental to Mary's interest. The Biflop oJl Rcis, who ap-

* Andcrf. 3. ].j). State Triil, i. 85.

peared
24

peared by the confefiion of all concerned, to be the prime mover in Book VI,
every cabal againfl Elizabeth, was taken into cuflody, his papers 57
searched, hirfelf committed to the tower, treated with the utmost
rigour, threatened with capital punifLment, and after a long con-
finement, set at liberty, on condition that he should leave the king-
dom. Mary was not only deprived of a servant, equally eminent
for his zeal, and his abilities, but was denied, from that time, the
privilege of having an ambafSdor at the Englif court. The
Spanifih alllaflador, whom, the power and dignity of the prince
he represented, exempted from fch infuilts, as Rols had suffered
was conmmanded to leave England M ary herself was kept under
a friiler guard than fornerly, the number of her domestics
abridged, and no person permitted to fee her, but in prcfence of her
keepei s --.

AT the fame time, Elizabeth, forcfecing the tforin which was Llizbc-tlh c-

c rcsa1e openly

gathering, on the continent, againf her kingdom, began to wil aintthe
thlat tranquillity were refiorcd in Scotland ; and irritated by Mary's tc:t'
late attempt against her government, flie dctermined to ar, with-
out dilguile or ambliuvity, in favour of the King's party. This rc-
fulution ille intimated to the leadcrs of both Jfations. iMar, file o. .
told them, had held such a criminal correspondence with her
avowed enemies, and had excited such dangerous conspiracics both
2againlt her crown a;nd life, that ile would henclforth confidcr ler
as unwortly of prrotcecion, ardt would never conFlent to rcfiore ler
to libci ty, flr less to replace her o11 her thr-one. She exhorted them,
tlicr-clorc, to unite in ackn.owlledg(ilng the King's authority. She
proli l to proculre by Icr mcdi. tiili equitalIc termls for tofc,
who had hitherto opp;oeiCJ i.. 1itlt ii tl e (lill conltinued rLefiaur,

it

.. . 1 1'
, . .'.:, ,., ,

25
V.,,.. ,]1.

i'

1

Book VI. he threatened to employ her utmost power to compel them to sub-

- I'"- mit +. Though this declaration did not produce an immediate effect;

though hostilities continued in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh;
though Huntly's brother, Sir Adam Gordon, by his bravery, and
good condu&, routed the King's adherents in the North, in many
encounters; yet such an explicit discovery of Elizabeth's sentiments
contributed not a little to animate one party, and to depress the
spirit and hopes of the other *.

1572. As Morton, who commanded the Regent's forces, lay at Leith,
ofailities car- and Kirkaldy fill held out the town and cattle of Edinburgh, scarce

rled on be-
ween cthem. a day pased without a fkirmih. And while both avoided any de-

cifive action, they harafied each other by attacking frnall parties,
beating up quarters, and intercepting convoys. These operations,
though little memorable in themselves, kept the paflions of both
facions in perpetual exerciSe and agitation, and wrought them up,
at laif, to a degree of fury, which rendered them regardless not
only of the laws of war, but of the principles of humanity. Nor
was it in the field alone, and during the heat of combat, that this
implacable rage appeared; both parties hanged the prisoners they
took, of whatever rank or quality, without mercy, and without
trial. Great numbers suffered in this shocking manner; the un-
happy vidims were led, by fifties at a time, to execution; and it
was not till both fides had smarted severely, that they discontinued
this barbarous pracice, so reproachful to the character of the na-
tioin -. Mean while, those in the town and castle, though they had
received a supply of money from the Duke of Alva , began to
fuffcr for want of provisions. As Morton had dettroycd all the

t Scc Append. N IV . Cll. 2. 29, 294. Strypc. 2. 76.

t Crawf. Icmre, ,
218 2, 2 . Cald, 2. 315,

mills
26

27

mills in the neighbourhood of the city, and had planted small gar- Book VI.
rifons in all the houses of strength around it, scarcity daily increased. -
At last all the miseries offamine were felt, and they must have been 5
loon reduced to such extremities, as would have forced them to ca-
pitulate, if the English and French ambaffadcrs had not procured a
suspension of hostilities, between the two parties *.

THOUGH the negociation for a marriage, between Elizabeth and League e

tween Eng-

the Duke of Anjou, had been fruitless, both Charles and the were land and
desirous of concluding a defensive alliance between the two crowns. rance.
He confidered such a treaty, not only as the belt device for blinding
the Proteflants, the conspiracy against whom was now almofi ripe
for execution; but as a good precaution, likewise, againt the dan-
gerous consequences, to which that atrocious measure might expose
him. Elizabeth, who had hitherto reigned without a ingle ally,
saw her kingdom now so threatned with intertine commotions,
or exposed to invasions from abroad, that (he was extremely solicitous
to secure the affiflance of so powerful a neighbour. The difficul-
ties, arising from the situation of the Scotch Queen, were the chief
occasions of any delay. Charles demanded ome terms of advan
tage for Mary, and her adherents. Elizabeth refused to liften to
any proposition of that kind. Her obstinacy overcame the faint
efforts of the French Monarch. Mary's name was not so much as
mentioned in the treaty, and with regard to Scotch affairs, a hort Ajpril t.
article was inserted, in general and ambiguous terms, to this pur-
poe, " that the parties contradting shall make no' innovations in
Scotland; nor susser any firanger to enter, and to foment the sac-
tions there; but it shall be lawful for the Qcen of England to
chaftibe, by force of arms, thot Scots who ihall continue to har-
bour the EngIliflh rebels Inow in Scotland [--." In conftcquncc of

'* J . 6. - Dilis' . io; , C.i.
C 4.J .

L 2 tiis

Book VI. this treaty, France and England affected to a in concert with re-

L- ^ gard to cotland, and Du Croc, and Sir William Drury, appeared
1572. there, in name of their respective sovereigns. By their mediation,

a truce, for two months, was agreed upon, and during that time,
conferences were to be held between the leaders of the opposite
factions, in order to accommodate their differences, and restore
peace to the kingdom. This truce afibrdced a afonable in-
terval of tranquillity to the Queen's adherents in the South; but in
the North, it proved fatal to her interefr. Sir Adam Gordon had
flill maintained his reputation and fupcriority there. Scveral par-
ties, under different officers, were fcnt againil him. Some of them
he attacked in the field; againfi others he employed flrat.gem ;
and as his courage and condu t were equal, none of his enterprizes
failed of success. I-Ie made war, too, with the humanity, which
became o gallant a man, and gained ground by that, no lels than
by the terror of his arms. If lie had not been obliged, by the
truce, to suspend his operations, hc would, in all probability, have
brought that part of the kingdom to fibmit entirely to the Queen's
authority :.

Proceedings NOTWITHSTANDING Gordon's bravery and filccefs, Mary's in-
in ;nlsland terest was on the decline, not only in her own kingdom, but among
;~tiliill Marv.

the Englifl. Nothing could be more offenlive to that nation, jea-
lous of foreigners, and terrified at the pro!pet of the Spanish yoke,
than her ncgociations with the Duke of Alva. The parliament,
which met in May, proceeded against her as tlhe moll dangerous
enemy of the kingdom ; and after a folcmn confec-ence cbtwenvc
the Lords and Commnons, botl hloules agreed in bringing in a bill
to declare her guilty o high trcalbni, and to dcprive her of all

ii, I

I. I'-9]l
28

right of succession to the crown. This great cause, as it was then Book VI.
called, occupied them during the whole session, and was carried -- -
on with much unanimity. Elizabeth, though file applauded their 5
zeal, and approved much of the courie they were taking, was fa-
tisfied with fliewing Mary what fle might expea from the re-
fentment of the nation; but as she did not yet think it time to pro-
ceed to the most violent extremity against her, he prorogued the
parliament *.

THESE severe proceedings of the Englith parliament were not T-r,, Sec
more mortifying to Mary, than the coldness and neglec of her allies h'eg' ii'

*'s~

° - initrril.

the French. The Duke of Montmorency, who came over to
ratify the league with Elizabeth, made a hew of intereriing him-
self in her favour, but intfead of folliciting for licr liberty, or her
refl-oration to her throne, all that he demanded was a flight mitiga-
tion of the rigours of her impriolnment. And even tllis inmall re-
quell, he urged with so little warmth or importunity, that no re-
gard was paid to it ~.

TIE alliance with France afforded Elizabeth much fitisfaition, : :.

- I I e nia1.c

-cn

t.

and he xpcaede from it a great increase offecurity. She now turned off I.i.i;.
her whole attention towards Scotland, where the animolities of the
two sions were ill io high, and so many interfering intcrefis
to be aufted, that a general pacification seemed to be at a great
dillance, But while fle laboured to bring them to iolme agrce-
ment, an event happened which filled a great part of EIurope, with
afrollillmcnlt, and witlh horrol. This was the mafliTcrl of Paris;
an attempt, to which there is no parallel in thle hiiory of mankind,
citlhicr fr tie difimulatioln vllicli led to it, . r fr the cruclty an.1

< LD'cw..; Jun,
2 , . I J)bb. 2. 512.

barLaity

29

30

Book VI. barbarity, with which it was put in execution. By the most
'- J 'solemn promises of safety and of favour, the leaders of the Pro-

1572. teftants were drawn to court; and though doomed to deftrudion,

they were received with carefies, loaded with honours, and treated,
for seven months, with every possible mark of familiarity, and of
,i glft 4. confidence. In the midst of their security, the warrant for their

deftrueion was issued by their sovereign, on whose word they had
relied; and, in obedience to it, their countrymen, their fellow
citizens, and companions, imbrued their hands in their blood.
Ten thousand Protestants, without diftintion of age, or sex, or
condition, were murdered in Paris alone. The fame barbarous or-
ders were sent to other parts of the kingdom, and a like carnage en-
sued. This deed, which no Popish writer, in the present age, men-
tions without detestation, was, at that time, applauded in Spain; and
at Rome, solemn thanksgivings were offered to God, for its fuc-
cess. But among the Protestants it excited incredible horror; a
triking piture of which is drawn by the French ambassador at the
court of England, in his account of his first audience after the
maflacre. "A gloomy sorrow, fays he, fat on every face; silence,
as in the dead of night, reigned through all the chambers of the
royal apartment; the ladies and courtiers were ranged on each ide,
all clad in deep mourning, and as I passed through them, not one
bestowed on me a civil look, or made the least return to my
salutes *."

Dctriment:il BUT horror was not the only paflion, with which this event in-
tI,',in,- spircd the Protestants; it filled them with fear. They confidered

it as the prelude to omic greater blow, and believed, not without
great probability, that all the Iopifhi Piinces had confjirvd the dc-

' Car;lte, 3. 522.

itrltion)l

firudion of their feet. This opinion did no small disservice to Mary's
affairs in Scotland. Many of her adherents were Protestants; and,
though they wished her restoration, were not willing, however,
on that account, to sacrifice the faith which they professed. They
dreaded her attachment to a religion, which allowed its votaries to
violate the mofi solemn engagements, and prompted them to per-
petrate the most barbarous crimes. A general confederacy of the
Protestants seemed to them, the only thing that could uphold the
Reformation against the league, which was formed to overturn it.
Nor could the present eftablihment of religion be long maintain-
ed in Britain, but by a fridt union with Elizabeth, and by the con-
currence of both nations, in espousing the defence of it, as a
common cause *.

Book VI.

157z.

THE Regent took hold of this favourable conjuncture for ne-

gociating a general peace. And as he laboured for this purpose, cTI,..cwrs to
with the utmoil zeal, and the adverse faction placed entire confidence titC both

parties.

in his integrity, his endeavours could scarce have failed of being
successful. Maitland and Kirkaldy came so near to an agreement with
him, that scarce any thing remained, except the formality of sign-
i:ag the treaty. But Morton had not forgotten the disappointment
he met with in his pretensions to the Regency; his abilities, his
wealth, and the patronage of the court of England, gave him
greater sway with the party, than even the Regent hilmfelf; and he
took pleasure in thwarting every ncafure pursued by him. He was
afraid that if Maitland and his afiociates recovered any lhare in the
admiiltration, his own influence would be considerably diminilhed;
;nd tile legcnt, by their means, regain that afendant, which bc-
lolncd( to his itation. With him, concurred all thol, who wci-e
in pufticflon of tie lands, which bellonged to any of tle (lccn's

* I)i,;c's, 21t
, 2.11, 67

Iparty.

31

Book V. party. And his ambition, and their avarice, frufirated the Re-

--- ' gent's pious intentions, and retarded a blfiing so necessary to the
$572

kingdom, as the eflabliflmnent of peace C.

Sucii a difcoverv of the felfifllnefs and ambition, which reigned

among his party, made a deep i mprefiion on the Regent, who loved his
country, and wished for pea;ce with much ardor. This inward grief
broke his spirit, and bv degrees, brought on a fettled melancholy,
that ended in a diftempcr, of which he died on the 29th of O()do-
ber. He vwa, perhaps, the cnlv person in the kingdom, wiho
could have enjoyed the office of Rent, without envy, and have
left it, without loti of reputation. Notwxitihtanllci their mutual
animofities, both factions acknowledged his views to be honourable,
and his integrity to be uncorrupted t-.
irorton No competitor now appeared agaitnt Morton. The (Oteen of

,icnc- t.England powcrfully fupprortcd his claim, and notwitlflandiln the
". -'. fears of the people, and the jealoufv of the nobles, he was eleced

Regent ; the fourth, who in the space of five years, had held thnt
dangerous office.

As the tuce Iad been Ip;c':olnc to tc fil i of , ua.lr-y, tilis gate

himl an oppoltunity of c() ltiluil, tnc le ocitioiS l tl i pp
parIt, lwhich l li.d bccLn let on iot 1'' lis lprcdcccLr. [!2y pro-
duced no cfLuCts, however, till tc blkgi iii g of t l)ii c,t car.

1.r ''o '.i. Iwc proccWl o

to tlieic, fuom events,, ]1iii .ro i;tot;il, cL;.,
defervc our notice.

'r M(.1', 2 . ,i. \l_ ,s..ll ;';, -] Ij. r

Tll r

THE Earl of Northumberland, who had been kept prisoner in Book VI.
Lochleven, ever fnce his flight into Scotland in the year 569, was

-b~

1&

.

. ~~I572.

given up to Lord Hunfdane Governor of Berwick; and being car-
ried to York, suffered there the puni(hment of his rebellion. The
King's party depended so entirely on Elizabeth's protetion, that it
was carce poilible for them to refuse putting into her hands a per-
son who had taken up arms againfl her. But as a fum of money
was paid, on that account ; and liared between Morton and Dou-
glas of Loch!even, the former of whom, during his exile in Lng-
land, had ben much indebted to Northumberland's friendlfip, the
,bandonilng tills un. .; )y lnobleman, in such a manner, to certain
dcilructltionl , was deemced an ulngl-atcful and mercenary ation '.

Tini, year was remarkable for a considerable innovation in the .fi::i, f ': t.

governmelnt of the Church. Soon after the Reformation, the Popihl churs- .
3ilhops beiig confirmed by law in poifilon of part of their bene-
ficcs, the spiritual juriliidtion, which belonged to their order,
was cxcrcicd by fupcrintclndants, but with more moderate autho-
iity. On thle death of the archlbiflop of St. Andrews, Aorton ob-
tain:cd fomn the Crown a grant cf t t temporalities of that sec.
But as it was tlh:uhlt i:lccclt for a laman to hold a lcnlefice, to
wlhich the cur-e of iu!ls wal annexdc, lie lprocured D)uglas, icltor
of the uivcrlity of St. Alncrews, to be chosen arcllifilop ; iand
all tting him a iall pcnfion out of tle revenues of tih fee, retained tihe
remainder in h;s own Ihands. The nobles, wvo aw tlhe advantagcs
tli)c might rci p from (uch a praticp, i'npp )rtcd him in the exc-
citi,)n of Iis n. It g'avc ,I(.i:t (.ltc.:cc, l(l\\vc\ cr, to tl' Clcr:, ,
\; ), i t l. ()aJ o)l pc Lt.titng an (I ic', \\'i;ic naime Cand power W;S
et, ,.~'.: to til;L , wiJieCd tlIat tlic recvclucs \\v!iiLi had i luioc 'd to it,

C'l ,]1\vlt, .A( 1't. r, .'.'.', ( .r'>l.l. I!?

C
V\ '.. . 1

,
1

33

34

Book VI. might be employed in supplying such parihfes, as were fiill un-
11~^-' provided with fettled pastors. But on the one hand, it would have

I 572 been rath in the Clergy to have irritated, too much, noblemen, on

whom the very existence of the Proteflant Church in Scotland de-
pended; and Morton, on the other, conducted his scheme with
such dexterity, and managed thenm with so much art, that it was,
at last, agreed, in a Convention composed of the leading men
among the Clergy, together with a committee of privy council,
"that the name and office of archbilhop, and bishop, flbould be con-
tinued during the King's minority, and these dignities be conferred
upon the best qualified among the Proteflant Miniflers ;but that with
regard to their spiritual jurisdiCtions, they flhould be fubljed to the
general aiTlmbly of the Church." The rules to be oblirved in
their lcion; and the prfons who were to supply the place, and
enjoy the privileges, which belonged to the Dean and Chapter in
times of Popery, were likevwife particularly pccified :. And the
whole being laid before the General Afiebbly, after some exceptions
to the names of ./cbiI/7op, , Da, C/.ap'r, &c. and a protefation
that it flould be confidered only as a temporary conflitution, till
one nmore perfet could be introduced, it obtained the approbation
of that court E. Even Knox, who was prevented fom attendin
the Afcimbly y y the ill fate of his hcalth, though he dclaimed
loudly againit the Simoniacal paction, to which Douglas owed his
prefermlent, an d bailcd the nomination of a perlc;l, worn out
with a;,, ad intirmities, to an ofiicc, which rctquircel uimpaired
vigour both of body and mnilnd, ccmns not to have condemned the
pr:ccding s of the Convention ; a in a letter to the Aielmbly, re-
cczmmc'mwndcd Ioinc of their regulaltions with rpct to the lection
of 3ithops, as worthy of lviLn caretully obftrved . IN con-.

* (',l 2l . ,-'5 1 Id 3J. I Sec ;'\A ppit . N-' '.

(] Ic 'c

quence of the Assembly's consent to the plan agreed upon in the Book VI.
Convention, Douglas was inflalled in his office; and at the fame _ -,

. i ~1572.

time, a archbishop of Glasgow, and a bifhnop of Dunkeld were
cholen from among the Protestant Clergy. They were all admitted
to the place in parliament, which belongerd to the eccleiaftical or-
der. But in imitation of the example fct y lorton, such pcions
were made with them by different noblemen, as gave them pof-
felcion only of a very finall part of the revenues, belonging to their
fees .

SOON after the breaking up of this allnmblv, Knox, th;e pi ime infiru- .. .

nmcntoffpreading and eflablifiing the Reformned rigion in Scotland, ,l.l[:t-l
ended his life, in the 67t1 year of his age. Zeal, i:trepidi-t, dii iter- Iiox.
eftedncfs, were virtues which lie pofcfled, i n aeminent degree. 1ie
was acquainted, too, with the learning, cultivated in that agec; and
excelled in tlat species of eloquence, which is calculated to rouze,
and to inflame. His maxims, however, were often too fcvcre, and
the impetuofitv of his temper excefiive. Rigid and uncompl)yiig
himfeif, he shewed no indulgence to the infirmities of others. Re-
gardlcfs of the dilincions of rank and character, he uttered his
admonitions with an acrimony and vehemence, more apt to irritate,
than to reclaiin. This often betrayed him into indecent and un-
dutiful exprcilions, with ref)pea to the Q(cen's pcrfon and con-
duct. These very qualities, however, which now rendered his
charaler less amliable, fitted him to be the inilrtmctt'of Pr-ovi-
dence for advancing the Reformation, among a fierce people, and
cIiaIblcd him to face da;nger,, ad to ilrtmoieit c(potiti,, fror
wh]i', a pcrlon of a morc gntlc s)ilit v\'oiti hav- lbcell apt t.
fl'nil k back. J' an unwcarl:icd alpplicationl to Iludv, al! to l't1fi-

~' r t j, '(,r.

35
F '.

1!{.1

Book VI. ness, as well as by the frequency and fervour of his public dif-
---. courses, he had worn out a constitution, naturally firong. During
1572.

a lingering illness, he discovered the utmofl fortitude; and met
the approaches of death, with a magnanimity inseparable from his
character. He was conflantly employed in ads of devotion, and
comforted himself with those profpeds of immortality, which not
only preserve good men from desponding, but fill them with exul-
tation in their last moments. The Earl of Morton, who was pre-
sent at his funeral, pronounced his eulogium in a few words, the
more honourable for Knox, as they came from one, whom lie had
often censured with peculiar evcrity, " Here lies tie, who never
feared the face of man *."

1 573. THOUeG Morton did not delire peace from such generous mo-
'; l \\c;cLnt tives as the former Regent, he laboured, however, in good carnef:,

t:-c.a3j it the
(chc.n's to eflabliih it. The public confutions and calamities, to which he

owed his power and importance when he was only the second per-
son in the nation, were cxtremely detrimental to him, now that he
was raised to be the first. W\hile so many of the nobles continued
in arms against him, his authority, as Regent, was partial, feeble,
and precarious. Elizabcth was no ls delirous of extinguishing
the flame, which flie had kindled, and kept io long alive in Scot-
land -. She had dilfovered the alliance with France, from which
she had expeaed such advantages, to be no foundation of fccurity.
And though the appearances of fiendlhip l lill lubllifted between
her and that court, and Charles daily renewed his proteilations of
inviolable adherence to the treaty, ilic was convinced, by a fatal
exalmple, how little she ought to rely on the promiles or oaths of
that perfidious Monarch. cr amnbafiiador warned her that the

Sw. 206. CJ. ?. -73

French
36

- I DillgCS, -209.

37

French held a secret correspondence with Mary's adherents in Scot- Book VI.
land, and encouraged them in their obflinacy*. The Duke of -'
Alva carried on his intrigues in that kingdom, with less difguie. 573
She was persuaded that they would embrace the firfl serene interval,
which the commotions in France and in the Netherlands would
allow them, and openly attempt to land in Scotland. She resolved,
therefore, to prevent their getting any footing in the island, and to
cut off all their hopes of finding any aiiiance there, by uniting the
two parties.

THE situation of Mary's adherents gave the Regent great advan- Jlls ove't=rCS

rr'icce by

tage in his negociations. They were now divided into two fations. AJItliintd arn
At the head of the one, were Chatclherault, and Huntly. Mait-Kirk '
land and Kirkaldy were the leaders of the other. Their high rank,
their exteniv-e property, and the numbers of their followers,
rendered the former considerable. The latter were indebted for
their importance, to their personal abilities, and to te tirength of
the castle of Edinburgh, which was in their pofTellion. The Re-
cent ad no intention to comprehend both in the fame treaty; but
as he dreaded that the Qeen's party, if it remained entire, would
be able to thwart and embarafs his adminiiration, he resolved to
divide and to weaken it, by a eparate ncgociation. He made the
firll overture to Kirkaldy and his aciatcs, and endeavoured to
renew the negociation with them, which, during the life of hiis
predeccibr, had been broken off by his own artifices. Put Kir-
kaldy knew Morton's views, anld yftcn of government, to be
very different from tlhofc of the former Regent. Mtlaitland conlidcr-
cd him, as a personal and implacable enemy. They received re-
pi.aticd al turaniccs of protection 'rom FIrance. A\nt though the lic .
of Rochielle citploved the Frencl arms a t tlat time, the jllmc

* 1d. 2y6, 312.

Book VI. hopes, which had so often deceived the party, fill amused them, and

C-- - they expected that the obstinacy of the Hugonots, would oon be
1573 subdued, and that Charles would then be at liberty to a with vi-

gour in Scotland. Mean while, a supply of money was ent, and
if the cafile could be held out till Whitfunday, effectual aid was
promised t-. Maitland's genius delighted in forming schemes, that
were enterprizing and dangerous; and Kirkaldy possIeed the intre-
pidity, necessary for putting them in execution. The castle, they
knew, was so situated that it might defy all the Regent's power.
Elizabeth, they hoped, would not violate the treaty with France, by
fending forces to his assistance. And if the French should be able to
land any confidcrable body of men, it might be possible to deliver
the Queen from captivity, or at least to ballance the influence of
France and England in such a manner, as to rescue Scotland from
the dishonourable dependance on the latter, under which it had
fallen. This splendid, but chimerical project, they preferred to
the friendship of Morton. They encouraged the negociation, how-
ever, because it served to gain time; they proposed, for the fane
purpose, that the whole of the Queen's party should be compre-
hended in it, and that Kirkaldy should retain the command of the
cattle, fix months after the treaty was signed. His interest prompted
the Regent to reject the former; his penetration suggested the dan..
ger of complying with the latter; and all hopes of accommodation
vanished 1[.

As soon as the truce expired, Kirkaldy began to fire on the city

of Edinburgh, which, by the return of the inhabitants whom lie
had expelled, was devoted as zcaloufly, as ever, to the King's caule.

- Diggc, 314. Jj Mlcl. 235, &C.

But
38

39

But as the Regent had now set on foot a treaty with Chatelherault Book VI.
and Huntly, the cefation of arms still continued with them.

1573.

THEY were less scrupulous than the other party, and listened Accepted y
eagerly to his overtures. The Duke was naturally unsteady, and ChtnC1herault

and Hundy.

the approach of old age increased his irresolution, and aversion to
adion. The niferies of civil discord had affliied Scotland, almost
five years, a length of time far beyond the duration of any former
conteti. The war, inflead of doing service, had been detrimental
to the Queen; and more ruinous than any foreign invasion, to the
kingdom. In prosecuting it, neither party had gained much ho-
nour; both had suffered great losses; and had exhaufled their own
estates, in wafting those of their adversaries. The commons were
in the utinoit misery, and longed ardently for a peace, which
might terminate this fruitless, but deftrucive quarrel.

A GREAT fRep was taken towards this desirable event, by the A, . tl

treaty concluded at Perth, between the Regent on one hand, the treat.
and Chateihlerault and Huntly on the other, under the mediation of Fb 23'
Killegrew, Elizabeth's ambassador -. The chief articles in it were
these ; that all the patties comprehended in the treaty flould declare
their approbation of the Reformed religion, now eftablifled in the
kingdom ; that they flould submit to the King's government, and
own Morton's authority as Regent; that they should acknowledge
every thing done in oppolition to the King, ince his coronation,
to be illegal ; that on both ides, the prioners who had been taken
flould be fct at liberty, and the lands restored to their proper
ownrc-s; that the a of attainder pafltcd againfr the Quecn's
adhcrents flould be repealed, and indemnnity granted for all the
crimel, of which they had been guilty incc the 5th of June

- Sec Append, N' VI.

1567;

Book VI.1567; that the treaty should be ratified, by the common content

L'- '--' of both parties, in parliament .
1573.

Siegeof the KIRKALDY, though abandoned by his associates, who neither
cafile of Edin-
burgh. discovered follicitude nor made provision for his safety, did

not lose courage, nor entertain any thoughts of accommodation -.
And though all Scotland had now submitted to the King, he fiill
resolved to defend the caffle, in the Queen's name; and to wait the
arrival of the promised succours. The Regent was in want of
every thing necessary for carrying on a siege. But Elizabeth, who
determined, at any rate, to bring the dissentions in Scotland to a pe-
riod, before the French could find leisure to take part in the quarrel,
soon afforded him sufficient supplies. Sir William Drury marched into
Scotland, with 500o foot, and a considerable train of artillery. The
Regent joined hiln, with all his forces and trenches were opened,
- r " and approaches regularly carried on, against the castle. Kirkaldy,

though discouraged by the loss of a great fum of money, remitted
to him from France, and which fell into the Regent's hands,
through the treachery of Sir James Balfour, the most corrupt man

* Crawf. Mem. 25r.

q- Melvil, wvhofe brother Sir Robert was one of those who joined ith Kiikaldy

iL the defence of the caflc, and who was himself f'rongly attached to their party,
asserts that Kirkaldy offered to accept of any reasonable terms of composition, but
that all his offerswere rejeted by the Regent. ,:elv. 40. But as Elizabeth was,
at that time, extremely dclrous of refloring peace in Scotland, and her ambaflador
Killegri-w, as well as the Earl of lRotlls, usid their utmofl endeavours to pri-uade
Kirkaldy to accede to the trcaty of Perth, it feins more credible to impute the
continuance of holilitics to Kirkaldy's obstinacy, his diltrul of Morton, or his
lope of foreign aid, than to any other calufe

That this was really the c.iLf, is evident frnom the positive tliniionv of Spotfw.

269, 27o. Cnllld. 44). Jilft. Iili. 3, 4. Digg, 3 ,. C'awl.\O d'os account agi eC-;,
n1 the m1ain, withl theirs, Mim. 2)3.

of

of that age, defended himself with bravery, augmented by despair. Book VI.
Three and thirty days he refifed all the efforts of the Scots and '~ '
Engliflh, who pulhed on their attacks, with courage, and with 73
emulation. Nor did he demand a parly, till the fortifications were
battered down, and one of the wells in the castle dried up, and the
other choaked with rubbifli. Even then, his spirit was unfubdued,
and he determined rather to fall gloriously behind the last intrench-
ment, than to yield to his inveterate enemies. But his garrison
was not animated with the fame heroic and desperate resolution,
and riling in a mutiny, forced him to capitulate. He surrendered rMl ,3.
himself to Drury, who promised, in the name of his miltrefs, that
he fliould be favourably treated. Together with him, James Kir-
kaldy his brother, Lord Home, Maitland, Sir Robert Melvil, a
few citizens of Edinburgh, and about i6o soldiers were made pri-
foners *.

SEVERAL of the officers, who had been kept in pay during the

war, prevailed on their men to accompany them into the Low-
countries, and entering into the service of the states, added, by their
gallant behaviour, to the reputation for military virtue, which has
always been the chara&eriftic of the Scotch Nation.

THUS by the treaty with Chatelherault and Huntly, and the Review of the

surrender of the castle, the civil wars in Scotland were brought to charater of
a period. When we review the state of the nation, and com- b is.
pare the strength of the two factions, Mary's partizans among
the nobles appear, manifestly, to have been superior both in num-
bers, and in power. But these advantages were more than counter-
ballanced by others, which their antagonists enjoyed. Political abi-

Cald. 2. 408. Mclv. 240. Craw. AIcm. 265.

4i
VOL. II.

G

lities,

Book VI. lities, military skill, and all the talents, which times of ation form,

or call forth, appeared chiefly on the King's fide. Nor could their
enemies boast of any man, who equalled the intrepidity of Mur-
ray, tempered with wifdon ; the profound sagacity of Morton;
the subtle genius, and insinuating address of Maitland ; or the
fucccfsful val(ur of Kirkaldy; all which were, at first, employed
in laying the foundations of the King's authority. On the one fide,
rneafures were concerted with prudence, and executed with vi-
gour; on the.other, their resolutions were rafli, and their conduct
feeble. The people, animated with zeal for religion, and prompted
by indignation againf the Qieen, warmly supported the King's
cause. The Clergy threw the whole weight of their popularity into
the fame scale. By means of these, as well as by the powerful
interposition of England, the King's government was finally eta-
biifhed. Mary loft even that iladow of fvereignty, which, amidif
all her fufi'rings, ihe had hitherto retained among her own sub-
je'ts. And as she was no longer permitted to have an ambnffador
at the court cf England, the only mark of dignity which flie
had, for some time, enjoyed there, ihe must henceforth be con-
fidered as an exile stripped of all the ensigns of royalty; guarded
with anxiety in the one kingdom ; and totally deserted or forgotten
in the other.

K;rk.J' rt KIRKALDY and his associates remained in Drury's cuflody, and
tu Jtii were treated by him with great humanity, till the Queen of EnP-

land, whole prif)ncrs they vwere, fould determine their fate.
Morton infifled that they should fufehr the puniflnment, due to their
rebellion and obstinacy; and declared that so long as they were
allowed to live, he did not reckon his own perlon or authority I-c
cure; and lIizabeth, without regarding Drury's onour, or his
promiltis in her name, abandoned them to the Regent's diipofil.

1k,
42

43

He first confined them to separate prisons; and, soon after, with Book VT.
Elizabeth's consent, condemned Kirkaldy, and his brother, to be --

1573.

hanged at the cross of Edinburgh. Maitland, who did not expect Aul573.
to be treated more favourably, prevented the ignominy of a public
execution, by a voluntary death, and " ended his days, fays Melvil,
after the old Roman fashion *".

WHILE the Regent was wreaking his vengeance on the remains

of her party in Scotland, Mary, incapable of affording them any
relief, bewailed their misfortunes in the solitude cf her prison.
At the fame time, her health began to be much impaired by con-
finetnent, and want of exercise. At the intreaty of the French a-
baflldor, Lord Shrewfslury her keeper was permitted to carry her to
B3uxton-wells, not far from Tuthbury, the place of her imprifonmcnt.
Cecil, who had lately been created Baron of Eurlcigh, and Lord
High Treasurer of England, happened to be there at the fatmec
time. And though no Minifler ever entered more warmly into the
views of a sovereign, or gave flroncger proofs of lis fil.clity and at-
tachment, than thiis great man, yet such was ElizabCth's dirrlul
cf every person, who approached the Qlecn of Scots, that her
fufiicions even extendcd to ]i:nl; and while ,M ary jfiily reckoned
him lher molt dangerous Cenemy, lh f d fom dislicult in per-
iiadin;j his owin mifitrcS, that he was not partial to that unhappy
Qcc11n 1-.

TII;i DIuke of Alva was this year recalled fi-o the rovcrnmcnt

of the Netherlands, where his hauhlty and (ipprcil;vc ;adnlil'i!lra
tion rouzcd a spirit, in attcllemiiln to Iiibdic whiich, 'paii a xI;anlicl
its tranulrcs, ruined its armies, ;:ld Ilof its -l ry. Clu ,

* - 'lvd. 242. -l Sr!pcL, .
2. 24t, 28.

G 2

!ticcccd-

44

BoQk VI. fucceedect him, was of a milder'temper, and of a less enterprizing
.- -' genius. This event delivered Elizabeth from the perpetual dif-

1573. quietude, occasioned by Alva's negociations with the Scotch Queen,

and his zeal for her interefl.

THOUGH the kingdom was now fettled in profound peace, many

The5 egnt'sof the evils, which accompany civil war, were still felt. The
adminiltra- restraints of law, which, in times of public confusion, are little re-
tion becomes
odious, garded even by civilized nations, were totally despised by a fierce

people, unaccustomed to the regular administration of justice. The
disorders in every corner of the kingdom were become intolerable;
and under the protection of the one, or the other faction, crimes of
every kind were committed, with impunity. The Regent set him-
self to redress there, and, by his industry and vigour, order and fe-
curity were re-established in the kingdom. But he loft the reputation,
due to this important service, by the avarice, which he discovered,
in performing it; and his own exacions became more pernicious
to the nation, than all the irregularities, which he refrained A.
Spies and informers were every where employed; the remem-
brance of old offences was revived; imaginary crimes were invented;
petty trespasses were aggravated; and delinquents were forced to
compound for their lives, by the payment of exorbitant fines. At
the fame time, the current coin was debated*; licences were fold

t See Append. NQ VII.

The corruption of the coin, during Morton's administration, was very great.

Although the quantity of current money coined out of a pound of Bullion, was
gradually incrcafcd by former princes; the standard or fincnefs uffered little al-
teration, and the mixture of alloy was nearly the fame, with what is nowufed. But
Morton mixed a fourth part of alloy, with every pound offilvcr, and funk, by confe-
quencc, the value of coin, in proportion. In the year 1581, all the money coined
by him was called in, and appointed to be recoined. The flandard was restorcd
the fame purity as formerly. Ruddim. Prxf. to Anders. Diplom. p. 74.

for
3

for carrying on prohibited branches of commerce, unusual taxes were Book VI.
i'mposed on commodities ; and all the refinements in oppression, from L
which, nations so imperfectly polished as te Scots are usually ex- 574
empted, were put in praEtice. None of there were complained of
more loudly, or with greater reason, than his injustice towards the
Church. The thirds of benefices, out of which the Clergy re-
ceived their fubfiftance, had been slowly and irregularly paid to col-
ledors, appointed by the General Assembly; and during the civil
wars, no payment could be obtained in several parts of the king-
dom. Under colour of redressing this grievance, and upon a pro-
mise of afigning every Minister a flipend within his own parish,
the Regent extorted from the Church the thirds to which they
had right by law. But the Clergy, instead of reaping any advan-
tage from this alteration, found that payments became more irre-
gular and dilatory than ever. One Minister, with a pitiful salary,
was commonly burdened with the care of four or five parishes, and
the Regent's insatiable avarice seized on the reit of the fund *.

THE death of Charles IX. which happened this year, was a

new misfortune to Mary. Henry III. who succeeded him, had not
the fame attachment to her person, and hisjealoufy of the house of
Guise, and obfequioufiefs to the Qeen Mother, greatly alienated
him from her interest. ,

THE death of the Duke of Chatelherault mut likewise be

confidered as some loss to Mary. As the parliament had frequently Janunry z2.
declared him next heir to the Crown, this entitled him to great
refpet among his countrymen, and enabled him, more than any

* Crawf. Mem. 272. Spotfw, 273. Cald. 2, 420, 42,.

other

,. /

45

Book VI. other person in the kingdom, to counterballance the Regent's

power.
1575.

SOON after, at one of the usual interviews between the wardens

of the Scotch and English marches, a fcufile happened, in which
the English were worfred; a few killed on the spot ; and Sir James
Forester, the warden, with several gentlemen who attended him,
taken prisoners. But both Elizabeth and the Regent were too fen-
iible of the advantage, which resulted from the good underfianding
that fubifled between the two kingdoms, to allow this flghlt ac-
cident to interrupt it.

Attrmpt of THE domestic tranquillity of the kingdom was in some danger
the Clergy
n.;,inittii of being diflurbed by another caufc. Though the persons, raised
,plFcopalor- to the dignity of bifllops, possessed very finall revenues, and a very

moderate degree of power, the Clergy, to whom the Regent and
all his measures were become extremely odious, began to be jealous
of that order. Knowing that corruptions l.cal into the Church,
gradually, under honourable names, and upon decent pretences,
they were afraid that, from such finall bcginlinigs, the licra;'clly
might grow, in time, to be as powerful and opprclive as cver. The
chief author of these fufpiciois was iMr. Andrew 3clvil, a man,
difiinguifled by his uncommon erudition, by the feivcrity of lis
manners, and the intrepidity of his mind. 1>t, bicd u) in the
rctirement of an academy, he was unacquailntd \\ih tlc arts of
life ; and being more attentive to the ends which lie purlacid, tha
to the means which lc cplocyd for promoting them, lie often de-
feited laudable dcigris, by the ipctuolity a iprudence with

lwhicll li c;lrrieed tlIem on. A (quLcfion ws lvvc l ; li in the
aflnblly, " vYh thr tlle ofiicc of bililop, as 11now ecrcil d ii the
kingdomi, vcre nagreeable to the word of Goil ?" the cccle(tiiL

ticjil
46

47

tical hilicatories, continual complaints were made of the bishops, Book VI.
for ;;.jcl t of duty, many of which, their known remifincfs too well -
jufificd. The bishop of Dunkeld, being acufed of dilapidating I575
his benefice, was found guilty by the assembly. And the Regent,
inflead of checking, connived at these disputes about Ecclenaftical
government, as they diverted the zeal of the Clergy fiom attend-
ing to his daily encroachments on the patrimony of the Church*.

T}E weight of the Regent's oppressive adminifiration had, hi- 157..

therto, fallen chiefy on those in the lower, and middle rank; but cl l' tri
he began now to take fifch fleps, as convinced the nobles, that their rnbbic:,.
dignity would not long exempt them from feeling the effecs of
his power. An accident, which was a frequent cause of dissention
among the Scotch nobles, occasioncd a difference between the Earls
of Argyll and Atbole. A valdfl of the former had made ome de-
predations on tihe lands of the latter. Athole took arms to pnnif
the oiTendcr ; Argyll, to protect him ; and this ignoble qiuarel they
were ready to decide in the field, when the Ilcgnt, lbr intucnoiin
his authority, obliged then to dirand their forces. Both of them
had been guilty of irregularities, wieh, t1hog com o, re
contrary to the letter of the law. OCf thCf the e,'nt tooi. advart,li,
and reolved to found on them a charge of trcanitl. This defrii
was revealed to the two Earls by one of' tor-ton's retainers. 'l he
common danger, to which they were epol)c, d, colmpelledt them
toforgct old quarrels, and to uiic in a cloui c'.iliclcracv, fcr thcir
mutual defence. Their inI.ion c'a::(rcd t:em ,orir;dta;llc; they
dcfpifed the summons wlich the. lc G;crtt g-ave tihel t appear lcfbre
z court cf juftic; and lie was Alij:cd to dcfifs from ny frtlli.tl

1 C. Airclnlml i cs 1 571, J01i· 1o . 1 rl1. 1 5.

Book VI. prosecution. But the injury he intended made a deep impreflion,
'---' and drew on him evere vengeance *.

J576.

NOR was he more successful in an attempt, which he made, to

load Lord Claud Hamilton with the guilt of having formed a con-
fpiracy against his life. Though those, who were supposed to be
his accomplices were seized, and tortured, no evidence of any thing
criminal appeared; but, on the contrary, many circumstances dif-
covered his innocence, as well as the Regent's secret views, in im-
puting to him such an odious design t.

'Ihey turn THE Scotch Nobles, who were almost equal to their Monarchs
their eves to.

ardthetC t in power, and treated by them with much diftindion, observed
King. there arbitrary proceedings of a Regent, with the utmost indigna-

tion. The people, who under a form of government extremely
simple, had been little accufiomed to the burden of taxes, com-
plained loudly of the Regent's rapacity. And all began to turn
their eyes towards the young King, from whom they expected the
redress of all their grievances, and the return of a more gentle,
and more equal administration.

james's edu- JAMES was now in the twelfth year of his age. The Queen,
cation and dif.-
pofilions. soon after his birth, had committed him to the care of the Earl of

Mar, and during the civil wars, he had resided securely in the
castle of Stirling. Alexander Erfkin, that nobleman's brother,
had the chief direction of his education. Under him, was the fa-
mous Buchanan, together with three other preceptors, the most
eminent, the nation afforded, for skill in those sciences, which were
deemed necessary for a prince. The young King flewed an un-

* Crawf. Mcm. 25.

1- Crawf. Mcm. 287.

common
48

c.ommon paiflon for learning, and made great progress in it. And Book VI.
the Scots fancied that they already discovered in him, all those vir-

577.

tues, which the fondness or credulity of fubjets usually ascribe to
princes, during their minority. But as James was frill far from that
age, at which, he was permitted, by law, to assume the reins of
government, the Regent did not sufficiently attend to the senti-
ments of the people, nor reflet, how naturally these prejudices
in his favour might encourage the King to anticipate that period.
He not only neglected to secure the friendflip of those, who were
about the King's person, and who possessed his ear, but had even
exasperated some of them, by personal injuries. Their resentment ,;,i ci-
concurred with the ambition of others, in infufilng into the Kirn 'l:;~! i'
early suspicions of Morton's power, and designs. A Kig, they ,i.
told him, had often reason to fear, leldom to love a Regent.
Prompted by ambition, and by intereid, he would cndeavour to keep
the prince in perpetual infancy, at a difance from his fubjecs, and
unacquainted with business. A small degree of vigour, however,
was fuflicient to break the yoke. SubjeAs naturally reverence their
Sovereign, and become impatient of the temporary and c!l'cgtcd
jurisdiction of a Regent. Morton had governed witl a rigou:, un-
known to the ancient Monarchs of Scotland. The ntio) oionaned
under his opprefions; and would welcome the firlt p!o!f-. of a
milder adminifiration. At present, the King's name was ic.u'ce
mentioned in Scotland, his fiiends were without influence, al;d his
favourites without honour. But one effort would discover IMIorton's
power to be as feeble, as it was arbitrary. Th fame attem-pt would
put himself in poflTfeion of his jult authority, nd rcfcue the na-
tion from intolerable tyranny. If lie did not regard his owi
rights as a King, let him liften, at Ic:f-, to tlce cies of his
people .

* Mclv. 249.
Vor~. II. It F

49
VOL. II.

IY

Tl E'

Book VI. THESE suggestions made a deep impreflion on the young King,
'-^-' who was trained up in an opinion that he was born to command.
^ P fl77, j His approbation of the design, however, was of finall consequence,
a in:l the without the concurrence of the nobles. The Earls of Argyll and

cet ' Athole, two of the most powerful of that body, were animated

with implacable resentment against the Regent. To them the Ca-
bal in Stirling-cafle communicated the plot, which was on foot;
and they entering warmly into it, Alexander Erskine, who, since
the death of his brother, and during the minority of his nephew,
hid the command of that fort, and the custody of the King's per-
son, admitted them secretly into the King's preence. They gave
him the fame account of the misery of his fubjedEs, under
the Regent's arbitrary adminifration ; they complained loudly of
the inuiftice, with which themselves had been treated ; and bc-
fought the King, as the only means for redrefling the grievances
of the nation, to call a council of the whole nobles. James con-
sented, and letters were issued, in his name, for that purpose ; but
the two Earls took care that they fliould be ent only to those, who
were known to bear no good will to Morton *.

It 57 THE number of these was, however, o considerable, that, on
.axci. 4. the day appointed, far the greater part of the nobles affembied at

Stirling; and so highly were they incensed againit Morton, that al-
though, on receiving intelligence of Argyll and Athole's interview
with the King, he had made a feint as if lie would resign tle Re-
gency, they advifid the King, without regarding this offer, to de-
prive him of his oflicc, and to take the admilitration of' govern-
ment into his own hands. Lord Glanmis the Chancellor, and
lcrrcis, wcrc appointed to gnify tils resolution to Morton, who

li Spoutfw. 278.

was,

was, at that time, in Dalkeith, his usual place of residence. No- Book VI.
thing could equal the joy, with which this unexpeded rcfolution 3

I$7S.

filled the nation, but the furprize occasioned by the feeining ala- e r-igl li,
crity, with which the Regent descended from so high a fation. lc al' "'

b , tircs.

He neither wanted sagacity to foresee the danger of resigning, nor
inclination to keep poficf0on of an office, for the expiration of
which, the law had fixed o distant a term. But all the iburces,
wilence the faction, of which he was head, had derived their flrcngth,
were either failed, or now fiupplicd his advcrfarics witli the means of
humbling him. The Commons, the city of Edinburgh, the Clergy,
were all totally alienated firoim him, by his multiplied opprcfnions
Elizabeth, having lately bound blcrclef, by treaty, to fend a con-
filcrable body of troops to the aiftalnce of the inhabitants of the
xcNtherlands, who were fruggilng for liberty, had little lcifure to
attend to the affairs of Scotland ; and as fle had nothing to dread
from France, in wllofe councils the princcs of Lorrain ad not,
at that time, much influence, llle was not diflcac:d, perhaps, at
the birth of new -fataions in the kingdom. Evcn those noblcs,
who had long been joined with Morton in filion, or svwhom he
had attached to his person by benefits, Glamis, Lindfv, Rutveln,
Pitcarn the secretary, Murray of Tillibarden Comptroller, all te-
ferted his falling fortunes, and appeared in the council at Stirlingo
So many concurring circumflanccs convinced Miorton of his own
weakinef, and determined him to give way to a torrcrlt, which
was too impetuous to e refifled. IHe attlendcd the Chancellor .'..ich 1i
and lrerrcis to Edinburghl; \.:s prcfent w"Jicn the Kiln('s ac-
ceptance of the governmenl t was proclaimed ; c.:'i, in lte prc/rncc
of the people, itfrrendcrcd to the Kin,';, all t :uth ority, to
which lie had any claim in virtue of lhis oiicc. ']This cerclemony
\was accompanied with such cxccllive jy .d accl'amaltions of ti
mluklitltd, as added, no doubt, to tlheL  r!ilbi, ;, ;ll an ambi-
tious l)pirit imullf lcl, whenIc c(oIpilled to reloiunce liil-ctIc

1I 2 z pwo\'c

1I

Bool: VI. power; and convinced Morton how entirely he had loft the assec
~"--~-' tions of his countrymen. He obtained, however, from the King

1573. '

an a, containing the approbation of every thing done by him in
the exercise of his office, and a pardon, in the most ample form,
that his fear or caution could devise, of all past offences, crimes,
and treasons. The nobles, who adhered to the King, bound them-
selves, under a great penalty, to procure the ratification of this at,
in the first parliament .

Continilesto A COUNCIL of twelve nobles was appointed to assist the King,
, 'itch[ thc l!o .
tin,, oftlie in the adminifh-ation of affairs. And Morton, deserted by his own

i'f'l'iY party, and unable to flruggle with the faction, which governed ab-

folutely at court, retired to one of his feats, and seemed to enjoy
the tranquillity, and to be occupied only in the amusements, of a
country life. His mind, however, was deeply disquieted with all
the uneasy reflecdions, whiich accompany disappointed ambition;
and intent on schemes for recovering his former grandeur. Even
in this retreat, which the people called the Lyon's-den, his wealth
and abilities rendered him formidable. And the new Counsellors
were so imprudent as to rouze him, by the precipitancy with
which they haflened to strip him of all remains of power. They
required him to surrender the cafile of Edinburgh, which was flill
in his possession. He refuted at firfi to do so, and began to prepare
for its defence; but the citizens of Edinburgh having taken
arms, and rcpulfed a part of the garrison, which was fcnt out to
guard a convoy of provisions, he was obliged to give up that im-
portant fortrcfs, without rcrfitance. This encouraged his advcrfa-
ries to call a parliament to meet at Edinburgh, and to multiply
their demands upon him, in such a manner, as convinced hi

* Sputfw. 278. Crl'wf; XMc1m. 289. Cald, 2. 522.
52

53
lhat rnothing less than his utter ruin would satisfy their inveterate BooK VI.

1578.

ThErR power and popularity, however, began already to decline.

Tile Chancellor, the ablest and most moderate man in the party,
having been killed at Stirling, in an accidental rencounter be-
tween his followers, and those of the Earl of Crawford; A-
thole, who was appointed his fucceflbr in that hih office, the
Earls of Eglinton, Cathnefs, and Lord Ogilvie, all the prime
favourites at court, were either avowed papists, or suspected of lean-
ing to the opinions of that scc:. In an age, wvhen the return of
Popery was, so much, and so justly, dreaded, this gave univerfil
alarm. And as Morton had always treated the papifls with rigour,
this unseasonable indulgence made all zealous Protestants remem-
ber that circumfltance in his administration, with great praise .

MORTON, to whom none of these particulars were unknown,

thought this the proper junCure for etting to work the inflru- ir,;i- ,.
ments, which he had been preparing. I-Having gained the confi- t'o:ty/
dence of the Earl of Mar, and of the Countcfs his n;olthr, le
infnuated to them that Alexander Erfi1ine had formed a .-t to de-
prive his nephew of the government of Stirling caIlc, and the ci-
tody of the King's perlon ; and easily induced an ambitious ;vo:;.:,
and a youth of twenty, to employ force to prevent ti flppolc
iljury. The Earl repairin, suddenly, to Sti;liig, a:d bin, ad-
mitted, as tfual, into tll caft'c with his attninilts, si"c tIh
gates early in the morning, and turned out his unclc, whlo drtdc; 'i '
no danger from his hands. T1 he lo!liers of tc :arri!oln ilbitcd
to im as their governor, and, with little dangr, and no cfliJlio

' Splotf\v . ' 8i.

of

54

Book VI. of blood, he became matter both of the King's person, and the
L----J fortress *.

1578.

AN event so unexpected occasioned great consternation. And

though Morton's hand did not appear in the execution, he was
universally believed to be the author of the attempt. The new
Counsellors saw it to be neceflary, for their own safety, to change
their measures, and inflead of pursuing him with such implacable
resentment, to enter into terms of accommodation with an adver-
fary, fill so capable of creating them trouble. Four were named,
on each fide, to adjufi their difi-erences. They met not far from
Dalkeith. And when they had brought matters near a conclusion,
Morton, who was too agacious not to improve the advantage,
May -2.1. which their security and their attention to the treaty afforded him,

fctout in the night-time for Stirling, and having gained Murray of
Tillibardin, Mar's uncle, was admitted by him into tie cai'le
and managing matters there wit is usual dexterity, he lhad oon
more the command of the fort, than the Earl himflf. I[e was
likewise admitted to a feat in the privy council, and acquired the
fame afccndant in it t.

As the time appointed for the meeting of parliament at Edin-

burgh now approached, this gave hilm tome an:iety. He was
afraid of carrying the young King to a city, whose inhabitants were
so much at the devotion of the advcrfe fadtion. EI-I was no less
unwilling to leave Jame s behind at Stirling. In order to avoid this
dilemma, he issued a proclamation, in the King's iname, changing
tlei pce of meIltin frolm Edinburgh to Stirling caille. This
Athole and his parly rprefented as a flep altogether unco; ll.'tutionial.

* Cald. z. 53'. - Ca l. 2. 5 6.

l I c
*

The King, said they, is Morton's prisoner; the pretended Coun- BooK VI.
fellors are his slaves; a parliament, to which all the nobles may re- '---'
pair without fear, ad where they may deliberate with freedom, is
absolutely necessary for fettling the nation, after disorders of such
long continuance. But in an assembly, called contrary to all form,
held within the walls of a garrison, and overawed by armed men,
what safety could members exped? what llberty could prevail in
debate ? or what benefit result to the pu!L;c ? The parliament met, JIl!y -.
however, on the day appointed, and notwitlhftandingt the protefta-
tion of the Earl of Mlontrofe and Lord Lindsay, in name of their
party, proceeded to business. The King's acceptance of the go-
vernmcnt was confirmed ; the a granted to Morton, for his fe-
curity, ratified; ofme regulations, with rcward to the numbers and
authority of the privy council, were agreed upon ; and a penllon
for life granted to the Countcfs of Mar, who had been so ilru-
mental in bringing about the late revolution %

MEANWHILE, Argyll, Athole, antd their followers, took arms, ,,.,ii ,

upon the specious pretence of rescuing the King from captivity, and tho': t::t.
the kingdom from opprefon. James hir-tle, impatient f the i,,,i
servitude in which he was held, by a man whom he had long been
taught to hate, secretly encouraged their nterpi>-:'.; tihoug, at the
fame time, lie was obliged not only to ci'avow them in public, Lut
to levy forces againlf them, .and even to dcclare, by proclialn:.tton,
thalt he was perfcJ-ly free from an.y cons raint, itie:c uponl ti< -cr-
son, or Lis will. Both ides (ltticl.lv took the Afild. Argll a id
Athole were at the head of yooD li: ; ti c E.i1 f Antus, Mcr-
ton's neplicL, met them with an l y ;

!!i'y ; ; ntr pit
oVweCver, was ager to cInaeC. Pjorton iitullced inc fidt.'i' oi

C Id, 2. 5 . Piti. V. JLC. Vr.

55

Book VI. his own troops. The two Earls were sensible that a ingle vidory,
k-r8 however compleat, would not be decisive; and as they were in no

578 condition to undertake the siege of Stirling castle, where the King

was kept, their strength would soon be exhausted, while Morton's
own wealth, and the patronage of the Queen of England, might
furnish him with endless resources. By the mediation of Bowes,
whom Elizabeth had sent into Scotland to negociate an accommo-

Elizabeth ne- dation between the two facions, a treaty was concluded, in confe-
agcc5a -n quence of which, Argyll and Athole were admitted into the King's
tion between presence; some of their party were added to the privy council; and
thcm. a Convention of nobles called, in order to bring all remaining dif-

ferences to an amicable iflue .

So soon as James assumed the government into his own hands,

he dispatched the abbot of Dunfermling to inform Elizabeth
of that event; to offer to renew the alliance between the two
kingdoms; and to demand poffeflion of the estate, which iLad latcly
fallen to him, by the death of his grandmother, the Countess of
Lennox. That Lady's second son had left one daughter, Arabella
Stewart, who was born in England. And as the chief objec(ion
against the pretensions of the Scotch line to the crown of England,
was that maxim of Englifs law, whicl excludes aliens rom any
right of inheritance within the kingdom, Elizabeth, by granting
this demand, would have cfllililicd a prccedcnt in James's tavoulr,
that might have been cfclccmcd (lccilivc, with reg aid to a v:I't,
which it had bccn her coniinit care to keep unldecided. V,' i out
fUini:-ing this delicate qucllion to b tried, or allc.iin any neCv
lil-ht to be thrown o that, wlich flC coli(';i;'cd 's the

l cat 1i

s e lll ry
of her reign, she commanded the rents of thc clate to Lc l:quel-

* crawf Mcm. 307.

t. I

tered by Lord Burleigh, mailer of the wards; and by this method Book VI.
of proceeding, gave the Scotch King early warning how necessary L--
it would be to court her favour, if ever he hoped for success in 578.
claims of greater importance, but equally liable to be contro-
verted t.

AFTER many delays, and with much difficulty, the contending 1579.

nobles were at last brought to some agreement. But it was follow-
ed by a tragical event. Morton, in token of reconcilement, hav- i,ii -4.
ing invited the leaders of the opposite party to a grcat cntertainment,
Athole the Chancellor was, soon aftcr, taken ill, and died within
a few days. The fptoms and violence of the di!eafe gave rite
to fIrong suspicions of his being poisoned. And though the phyli-
cians, who opened his body, differed in opinion as to the cause of the
distemper, the Chancellor's relations publickly accused Morton of
that odious crime. And the advantage which visibly accrued to
him, by the removal of a man of great abilities, and averse from all
his imeafures, was sufficient proof of hois guilt to the people, who
are ever fond of imputing the death of eminent persons to extra-
ordinary causes *.

THE office of Chanccllor was bctowedv upon Argyll, whom this io.to-'; _

le [Ia procCiJ-

prefermcnt reconciled, in a great lmcafrie, to Morton's ainiiiftra- lii';ll,,t
tion. I I had inow rcovered all the authority lie pofclfcd during i.,:'t cf
his Regency, and had cntirely broken, or baifled, tlhe power and
cabals of his enemies. None of the great flamiliCS remained to be
thle o' ljcis of hii jcaloutF,, or to obltrilt lii s dcelins, but that of

]amiitoll. 'The

ail of A rr',:, il

c les trothc-r, Iad never reco-

vered the fLock, v'hich she
ce ived trol tIle ill fuccCfs of i> pal-

' C'In cl . . )1i. i'
., 1,-.;l\.'. ,') )

1

fionl
V)L. II.

Book VI. sion for the Qeen,. and had no.w altogether loft his reason. Lord

,---- John, the second brother, was in poffcffion of the family estate, Lord
1579. Claud was Commendator of Paisley; both of them young men,

amblijiuns, and enterprizing. Morton dreaded their influence in
the kilgdom ; the courtiers hoped to snare their spoils among them;
and as all Princes naturally viewv their ficcelobrs with jealoufv and
hatred, it was easy to ifufe these paflions into the mind of the young
King. A pretence was at hand to jufiify the moif violent proceed-
in s. The pardon, fiipulated in the treaty of Perth, did not ex-
tend to toi, who were acccfi'ry to the murder of the Regcents
j ivriv, or L!n!ox. Lord Joln and his brother were iultedtcd
(i-1 b1jin' tlhc ui ao;s of both tl.c cries, and ;had Lecn included,

2:l a ,:ii.ic,.l . ;;or attainder on that account. \Vithout fiumininolli

t.. . t )a, c c:' iY.P:lig a i:rle witnels to prove the chiar-e,
t .i': naoi;.:' >
'.'.s now t. ).i: ih fiiicicnt to flbbjce thetn to a!! the

.1 l .:, , ; ' icv,o

l.

i l Iavc ilcil rrcd by beingl frm.llyconvicled.

nc/ L;rL 0s ?1, tonl, Alir, and Elinton, together with the Lords
.icl nL, icd, and Catlcar , received a conmiilion to I-iz. their

:L^lo a:dt Cl'.nteC-. On a iw houlrs warning, a caonidcrable body

o troops w\as realdy, and marched towards i laailton, in liouile
an'ay. lap:i,

t. the th l ical'e tlho'.i wth

reatc dificulv1. Bt tlheir lands were conlicatcd. Tlhe cailics of
I-1antail and Draff bi ; tliofc who dctfended them puniih-
cd. The :ia;l of Arran, tlioh iMcapable, ftol his situation,
of committing any crime, was involved, by a lamicful abuse of
law, in the commonl ruin of his iamily ; and as if he, too, could have
been gui'.ty of rebellion, confined a close prinller. There pro-
ceedCings, to contrary t t he fIt'luldamiental pi inciplcs of' juflicc, wecr
all rattlie in th e i'bLf(lqcint ,arillitinent '::

' C ...M i -. , i,3. , , ,.

ABotl r
58

ABOUT this time Mary sent, by Nauc her secretary, a letter to Book VI.

her son, together wvith some jewels of value, and a vest embroidered "
with her own hands. But as flte gave him only the title of Prince 579
of Scotland, the meffcnger was difiniffcd, without being admitted
into his pretence .

Tioucir Elizabeth ad, at tlis time, no particular reason to fear N.in',-t,;ii

any attempt of the Popish Princes, in illary's fvour, flC iicll co- ill' "cl"'n . ;
tiined to guard her with the fame anxious care. The cquifition':'ll :-'1
cf ortugal, on the one Ihaid, andi the defence o the Netherlands, :..c,;ii,
(o the othcer, fully mployc the coulncils and arms of ain.
France, torn ill pieces by intctifnC comm 1otionl, and tI(unCe a weak,
and capricious prince, dcfpilb. and diutncd by hi> ow\n i.l 'C,
was in no con ditllon to (iturb its neigho urs, I lizaeth had loo
amuled that court by cariying on a taty of marria;e witl the
Duke of Alencon, the Kiig's brother. But whether, at the age
of forty lfive, iLc rea.ly intended to m.:.rry a Prince ol tvcnty ? whe-
ther the pleau re cfbehn-g l :tt.d and courted, maleit lii'lei to the
adjrcflco of so young a lover, w\;o1 tle all\Cd to v'it 1:' It two
dif-irent tims, and treated 'vth the luil Ci'il" ;. I"_'

I'i; L ?

or whlctlher con/dlcrations ot' intereiL, pr,,'j.mi:';.l in L-'{, as
well as in every otcr trari'.ih'n of lir i,''' .:'. in

,lii-ory, vrlic1h we are nLot colncerndc to rI)iVc> : l;i

a * ;'/)-

lrels of tilis ni c; CiltiOl \h \lli Vil \,aj

, 1't\M 1 . ui: t: an e.; ':i' :

,i ry

Le':ngth, M.iry could expect no alane i i !. - cout,

f L V

.;' '
.

*e CI':.E f, Inlcnll. ,i.i.

1.'\
1\ LI 1ON

BOOK VI. MORTON seems, at this time, to have been equally secure; but

C "'~" his security was not so well founded. He had weathered
Two favour- out one storm, had cruflled his adversaries, and was again in pof-
itc gain an session of the sole direction of affairs. But as the King was now
alCcndant over
Jarmes. of an age, when the charaCter and dispositions of the mind begin

to unfold themselves, and to become visible, the finalleft attention
to these might have convinced him, that there was reason to expect
new and more dangerous attacks on his power. James early dif-
covered that excessive attachment to favourites, which accompanied
him through his whole life. This pafilon, which naturally arifcs
from inexperience, and youthful warmth of heart, was, at his
age, far fiom being culpable; nor could it well be expetled that
the choice of the objects, on whom he placed his ateCt:olons, ifould
be made with great skill. The molt considerable of them, was
Eflme Stewart, a native of France, and son of a second brother
of the Earl of Lennox. HIe was diflinguifhedl by the title of Lord
D'Aubign6, an eite in France, which delcendcd to him from his
ancclors, on whom it had been conferred, in reward of their va-
lour, and ferviccs to te French crown. He arrived in Scotland,
Szp:unlbcr . about this time, on purpofi to demand the ellate and title of Len-

no-, to which he pretended a legal right. He was received, at firil,
bv the King, wxith the rcf)pct due to so near a relation. The
gracefulness of his pcron, the elegance of his drui;, and his
courtly behaviour, made a great imprefiion on James, who, even
in his more mature years, was little able to rcfit thefl frivolous
charms; and his affetion flovwed with its usual rapidity, and pro-
fulien. \Vithin a few days after tcwart's appearance at ccur-l, lie
was created Lord Abirlbrothock, soon alter Earl, and then Duk!e of
Lennox, Governor of D)umbarton cill, Captain of the guard,
filrfI Lord of the bedchamber, a Lord Iighi Chamlberlall. t
thc lamel time, and without any of the cnvy, or interference,

which
6o

which is usual among candidates for favour, Captain James Stewart, Book VI.
the iecond on of Lord Ochiltree, grew into great conidence. But v
notwithflanding this union, Lennox and Captain Stewart were per- 579
Tons of very opposite characters. The former was naturally gentle,
humane, candid; but unacquainted with the late of the country,
and milled, or iifinformed by thole, whoml he trutfed; not un
worthy to be the companion of the young King, in his amuse-
ments, but utterly ditfluaihicd for aing as a Miniftler, in direcing
his afiirs. I' he latter was remarkable for all the vices, which
render a man formidable to his coulltry, and a pernicious counsel-
lor to Ilis Prince ; nor did he poiktfs any one virtue, to counterba-
L1nIce the!c vices, uilels dexterity in condulting Ilis o;vn delg'ls,
and an entcrprizinj courage, luperiur to the feinf of danger, llay
pass by that nimc. Un retlained by religion, rgardlefs of decency,
and uildiiinavedl by otnplition, he aimed at objets, ieeiniiilv un-
attainablec; lbut nidecr a Prince, void of experience, and bliin to
all te d.:tcts of those, who llad rained his favourt, his aud(Lcity
\was ;lccc'siul; and honours, wealth, and power, were the reward
of hij cri.mes.

UOTHl the favourites concurred in employing their whole rddrefs, Ti liclu

to uLndcrlminie Morton's credit, which alone obfltruLed their full to wN!""i',i
polcilionl of power. And as James had been bred up with an aver- tIli<.
lion for that nobleman, who endeavoured rather to maintain tlc
authority of a WTtor, th,ln to a.t xvidl the obfqulioufilcs of a Nli-
nitlcr, they found it no dlilicult matter to accomplifhl their dctliu.
A'O rt , w) could

I o lollger keep tle King lhut up within the

walls of Stirling caille, liavilig called a plrlii.liunlclt to meet a:t 'di'n-o,';,,) ( r 1-.
l)urglh, broutgllt himn thithcr. James madc his entry ito tlic (cpi-
t:l, witl grealt llcinity ; the citizens rcceived himi withl tlie luudfC

.ac-

Book VI. acclamations of joy, and with many expensive pageants, according

v5/^ to the mode of that age. After a long period of thirty seven years,

57 during which, Scotland had been fubjelCed to thle delegated power

of -Regents, or to the feeble government of a woman, and had
fulecred all the miseries of civil war, and felt the insolence of foreign
armies, the nation rejoiced to fee the fceptcr oice more in the hands
of a ing; and fond even of that fladow of authority, which a
Prince of fiftcen could poCefs, they flattc'!cd tlhemiclves, tt unionl,
order, and tranquillity xw;uld now be refcsrcdi to the k. inricm.
James opened the ptrliament with extraordi:,Iry Ilpmp, lbut no-
thing remarkable pailed il it.

TiiESE dcconftrations, however, of te plcolc's love and attach-
Imcnt to their Sovereign, cnvorIaCLd tiic fiavoriitcs to contillue thcir
i:.i'iiuatioiis arainit orito ; and as the Kinl now; refiidd in the
I::!acc of :ly-rud-louft, to wliicl all his uil' j ds had acccfs, tlhe
c ;l':ll againll: thle Earl grew daily sroIgcr, a d the intrigu, \V ich
occaiioned hlis fall, ripened gradually.

MORTON began to be fc:nlble of ,is dangeri, and entleavolured to

1put a f(ihp to the c.rrecr of Lennox's :iclfer;lnt-l, by rcprcefetinl
Lim ! a ormidal; e c my to the l-forcd Rltl lgion, a secret
an,(lt in favour of IPpery, anid a know-n cmiifry of the house of
(;Glil. The Clergy, apt to believe ever, rn!ur( of this lsind
ip rc Adt the' alarm amngl :i the ptoplc. ILut Lenio> , ciLcr oult of
corn pl.til an cc to liis m' ,ai -, orc''' inLcd 1' tlhe at:ments o1f omc
l.-.d .i.;vi'ii.:;, \1horll the 'i i'1pp ,ie l to ii l-l lhim in the
p'i: i,,; ol- (s tli ,'(.t! t I.lii)!i, lL: licy - rci )uIccJ the errors

i;' i'' e o, id

tie £.i:c {1 't. (;!nl:,. dJcl,;rc.! }:iLf a mem-
l-r ol the Church of' Scoilalb J, l',y iglin,,- licr Cv'.l'..ilon osi:.~Ttl~

T lIi.;,
62

1 0 1
') U -

This, though it did not remove all suspicions, nor silence soee Book VI.
zealous preachers, abated, in a great degree, the force of the ac-
cufatioln .

G;N the otler lland, a rumour prevailed that Morton was , rc-

paring to fcize the King's pe'fon, and to carry lim into L glu.
\XWheher despair of n maintainig his power, by any ot her mans, had
driven him to make oany ov;c-'ture of tliha ki:.l t.) ,';c T. nliif C(oL:t,
or whcthcr it was a cailumnv, invcntc by i' a ;L ; -s t -e '.'r
him odio us, cann2ot ;nov bc dettrTicd \Vith cc' ainty. As he dcl. c
at his l.',th, thalit si cle c; lir! .1.

.!

c a . s

t '''1.....

the latLter .nis to be , ob . J

. i .

.......n. |;

. -

ever, for reviving t:c a ol f L ,oi CI

.; .;.!i:, ,. ic liA.

blcen, for fornc tillic, d'ifil d. h:t 1 '' c'., r on
Lennox. A!,xanl3 dc; rii;.' e --

''

deputy; thcvl ha undler them a n S(,s Ci; t':ncp, \.' , .crc i-
vpointcd coniianly to attend

Cthe Kir;n, a ^'na' : -.i- -

p i d cOI' :
** ^.I.

M ORTON was not inorav, i o(r .t:.: 1.i. cn:::;. itc' .d to in-

finnate, by fulch unu!fal pt, e

"-',' . t.

. .

:.l :

his last rcfoii rcc a li to :

:,

ap pie d to (t. i( l

.-' i r:,

llood him in f.-ad, in his ,e ' . -i'.'t''. : i C'a' . .' _ (':

this u)plicationl e, .llt.! n '' (.

an ll rcc d nt d l ' ' , '

'l ;'

s 1'1: , :

v.

afiiolr to th

t .ii li ':1

C ni

(th e* c

l )

e

;'

(

.

. D 1

i

1 .' , '

.'

.T:.

l . .
and tlpoi i tAat cr,tLi)C , 'i l l iin .i: .; ; :1; 'e.:. I . " 'i 'd

C ( a,,... , i!. :' '.
1

63

*' ( l
,\' 1i' 1M 11 ,. , o ,tl\'. ',.

Book VL in difgufl, and without taking leave; Sir Alexander Home was
; J0 itfent to expoflulate with Elizabeth on the subjec. After the treat-

J58o.

ment, which her Envoy had received, Elizabeth thought it below
her dignity to admit Home into her presence. Burleigh, to whom
he was commanded to impart his commifion, reproached him with
his Iafter's ingratitude towards a benefatrefs, who had placed the
crown on hishead, !and required him to advise the King to beware
of sacrificing the fiendfhip of so ncceffary an ally, to the giddy
humours of a young man, without experience, and firongly sus-
p;ecd of principles, and attachments, incompatible with the hap-
piness of the Scotch nation.

T.rton ntccu- THIS accusation of Lennox hastened, in all probability, Mor-
-: of tu
:n .-c- rs the ton's fll. The a of indemnity, which he had obtained when

late lnge. e resigncd the Regency, was worded with flch scrupulous exadtnefs,

as alrno screened him fi-om any legal prosecution. The murder
of the late King was the only crime, which could not, with de-
cency, lie inserted in a pardon, gnanted by his son. Here Morton
fRill lay open to the penalties of the law. And Captain Stewart,
who fl-unned no aCtion, however dcfpcrate, if it led to power, or
to favour, entered tle council-clhambir, while the King and nobles
Dcccncm:ci.;, were afTeinbled, andl falling on his knees, accused Morton of bcinr

accessary, or according to tile language of the Scotch law, ar't an. art,
in the confpriracy ag:inlf tle life of his MaEijctly's father, and offer-
ed, under the ulal penalties, to verify this charge by le;al evi-
dence. AIMorton, \whlo was preient, heard this acculhtion wih
firlnncfs; and replied it aitll a tiliainful fiile, proceedingii iilcr fiom
cointemlpt of the intiamotis cliaraCtlcr of is accillcr, or s:o: con-
Icioul nls ot lis own ilnnlecCcle," tlhat lli' known cal, in pn.li}h-
i:g tol wiho were oupecdt of tlat dctjilalle clime, might \well
64.

exempt himself from any suspicion of being accelTary to it, never- Book VI.
thelefs, he would cheerfully ubmit to a trial, either in that .8.
place, or in any other court, and doubted not but his own inno-
cence, and the malice of his enemies, would then appear in the
clearest light. Stewart, who was fill on his knees, began to en-
quire how he would reconcile his beflowing so many honours on
Archbald Douglas, whom lie certainly knew to be one of the
murtherers, with his pretended zeal against that crime. Morton
was ready to answer. But the King commanded both of them to
be removed. The Earl was confined, firit of all, to his own house, iS ,
and then committed to the cafale of Edinburgh, of which Alex- Juar!
ander Erskine was Governor; and as if it blad not been a fuflicient
indignity to fubjc:t him to the power of one of' his enemies, he was,
soon after, carried to Dumbarton, of which Lennox had the corn- I"ar
mand. A warrant was, likewise, issued for apprehending Arch-
bald Douglas, but he, having received timely intelligence of the
approaching danger, fled into England *

Ti Earl of Angus, who imputed these violent proceedings not

to hatred againf M!orton alone, but to the ancient enmity between
the houses of Stewart and of Douglas, and who believed that a
conspiracy was now formed for the dcftrudion of the whole name,
was ready to take arms in order to rescue his kinsman. But Mor-
ton absolutely sorbad any such attempt, and declared that he would
rather fufitr ten thousand deaths, than bring an imputation on his
own character by seeming to decline a trial -.

* Cl.wf. Mcm. 373. *1 Johnlif. . Spof, 311.
VOL. II.

K

ELIZA-

Bo ck VI. ELlZABETH did not fail to interpose, with warmth, in behalf of

'-- ,'~'- a mlln, who had contributed o much to preserve her influence over
T :,!:,, Scotland. The late tranfantions in that kingdom had given her
'~ 1:.; 'I trcit uneafincfs. The power which Lennox had acquired inde-

Ji^ pcindelnt of her was dangerous; the trcatment her ambaf adors had

met witih, diffred greatly from the rcfpdc, with lwhich the Scots
were in u to receive her AMliniler s; and the attack now made on
r<',!ton fiitiy convinced her, that there was an intention to low the
fiCds ( f dilo:lid betwten tile two nations, and to idaiuce James into
a ilxe·w .,lii.!:CCe i'iil 1 l-rance, or into a mlarriage \with lome Poll iih
P;iviC1.s. t l ,1' ( thle i relicnilionls, fie ordered a conliderabli
boVX -i "o ; to Le' ah. timb.. o tie borders oft cotlaItd, and dci-

ji ! .: I }. :i.' phi as her anmau,(j1or into tlat -i:iom. Ire aa-

( r l

C i h* 11i 'l' not

I o;lv\ to _i :':'L, . .i Lt o ils c(in 'il, b iut to a Con-

v\;-t-i.); c{ ed es net at t:;t l; I be "aL v,'ii c:iinci'ti

ti c irao.'e;::,.rv bc;.cfits wihal 1 'i:'.. .1 h.td concri: o 1 the
C..hi nI;,oiT : 'i h'at \x'iiiCo!t e:. x:dinr a il 'e oct of Sind for

,.;'\i CiI, \Viil1 t

k cLt1.; i
'0 2itieS '.'[sIS L'd .1n il the

1s 2, 1-

' i1C a.i .ct , I 'a., .

.; t,

c i j ' l 1 o O_ r her

I :

' i -

._mjihion oi' I .nIce,

c0t'1 ii

c.(d :i:oa,'l t." ,1 t ie -._ i; i),, and

lut them ,n 'olliliol i:t . anc...t .ri ' t : ..,t l':] t;.,: i'c i!-

lilng f] l td pr-oteclted t . i', \i' r IO

h OLiiL t.' KinS i ,

' e

bLv her alittan alone, the Cirown s.v peiL:'\".t o ;

eih, I.; il, and

al1 the attempts of t 1 acrl c faion .fd : ''lat an unin,
u:hoewn to their 'aneci' S, buit cItialIy hl i :.ial to oLli kiir-
doi;,, lia. t, kllied ,;

l '

g ei lil of veas, aI d 'I ti h fo)l iin y

1' 'a il |ii'; i; 5 l1:.l cUI.A.l-,;[ to.) (ii'Llt) tilLi ]:: w i;te (.)f triios'

,o

'i" ";iie, a1( 1;t

c nic, l
CuIdlO Oc', indcr de .edal tlL/ eld!,d :

That ihe ld olieI ved, ( a

l Le, an liilnal col ]; , ial
66

estrangement, in the Scotch Council, which fie could impute to Book VI.
none but to Lennox, a fiuljed of France, a retainer to the houLfe
of Guise, bred up in the errors of Popery, and fill lulifoc6ted of
favouring that fuperflition. Not tatisfied with having mounted so
fast to such an uncommon height of powCe, which he excrcifed
with all the raffnefs of youth, and all the ignorance of a Rlrangcr;
nor thinking it enough to have deprived the Ear! of lorton of the
authority, due to his abiiities, ad cxperience, he had copfpired
the ruin of that nellc-,ian, .ho had often exsofcd li lilc in the
King's cause, xvlio iad co i:trib , ted m):-e thail an olcr ul jcct to
place him on the throne, to relt tile acl'Clc 1ltl oi I OL r, ind
to preterve te tuiion betwveen t ,

t . ingir, ) n. I *iai,' z::l for

religion remained among the nobls t Sco .lrJ, i tcv v-il I . ir
the conitinuainc o anity wvlhi E',nl;:i, if they vit. i tic pri-
vileles of th}eil own olde, lie clled upon tnc, ill t'l: 3i.C ui
his nvlitieFs, to lrctIlove iJulc a perniciouLS tuniljli- a Le I.x
froil tlhe 1!prcic of t heL y'ouo I.i.', to Ireiclut tuln o: Ot tile
l!ani ls of lls avowed 'ci:cmv, ;:i;:d i! ci'e to iiinm the bc ici

,l . a tar

and impartial trial. A!nd ii cc v;'e; i'ecefl i:' t)u'\'rds aecoin-
plifhing a dcl'lln, lo ltlLt.'y t) tie I[ ;: an} I nomil, li( p;o :':iLe
them the prot:ction o Is Mii'lrd in th'

Cii : we, 'ilb wI"iat-
ever afillance they fould cdild citl.r of menl or 1ini)ey ' :'

BUT thl:. cxtraodinary rcmionrilancc;, acco!::,!inicd v'i; .,, i

alln ui'iiiaal appal ri"-O tl n

r' ,i[

hiS , '0. c, '0'. ;

I ',Lt (.

I :l

man' cinl \l,, - 1y I'ii.:l'et'l, in i;vu;;r (ja vear'r ,

o:f a, j ,:;'

1'l tl mttU
li, C_?', 0ll3 p:i:l .ii,' iul ' * it

I ^ C.(iJ, . (, K p, '[. '(''i.

C. ' ft.
i~ii) C(~i~llil ;!iilIll~;K .: i os'Cc;)~~~illlI jlic~O;~ i~~!;:

67

Book VI. of the valour, which many of his fubjets had displayed in the

8--v'-' service of the States, to enter into a long detail of the restless en-
1S81. terprizes of the Popish Princes against the Protestant Religion;

to beseech him to adhere inviolably to the alliance with England,
the only barrier which secured his kingdom against their dangerous
cabals; and above all things, to difruft the insinuations of those,
who endeavoured to weaken or to dissolve that union between the
British nations, which all the Proteflants in Europe beheld with so
much pleasure :.

James deter- JAMES'S Counsellors were too intent upon the deflruction of
,cl1c t,) a - their enemy to liflen to theec remonflrances. The ofiicious inter-

hin. position of the Prince of Orange, the haughty tone of Elizabeth's

meiage, and so avowed an attempt to excite ubjcts to rebel
against their Soverein, were confidercd as unexampled insults on
the Majcly and indcpendance of a crowned head. A generai and
evasive antwver was given to Randolph. James p;ecparcd to assert
his own dignity with spirit. All those fufpeecd of favouring Morton
were turned out of office, fomic of them were required to surrender
themselves priloners; the fencible men throughout the kingdom were
commanded to take arms; and troops were levied, and posted on
the borders. The Englill ambafTidor, finding that neither the
public manifelo which he had delivered to the Convention, nor his
private cabals with the nobles, could excite them to arms, fled in
the night-time out of Scotland, where libels againfi him had been
daily publishcd, and even attempts made upon his life. In both
kin domns every tiling wore an ole fpc. Iut Eliza-
beth, though lle wilhed( to have intimidated the Scotch King by

* Cail, .' o.

Iher
68

her preparations, had no inclination to enter into a war with him, Book VI.
and the troops on the borders, which had given such umbrage, '-VJ

Ij8I,
were loon dispersed *.

THIE greater solicitude Elizabeth difcovcred for Morton's safety,

the more eagerly did his enemies drive on their schemes for his
deflrucion. Captain tewart his accuser was firit appointed Tutor
to the Earl of Arran, and oon after both the title and estate of his
unhappy ward, to which he advanced ome frivolous claim, were
conferred upon him. The new made Peer was commanded to
conduct Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh, and, by that
choice, the Earl was not only warned what fate he might expct,
but had the cruel mortification of secing his mortal enemy already
loaded with honours, in reward of the malice with which he had
contributed to his ruin.

THE records of the court ofj//ficil7;v at this period are lois. The

account which our iflorians give of Morton's trial is inaccurate and ar(d con1lm'-
unfatisfatory. The whole proceedings seem to have been violent, cd.
irregular, and opprefiive. Arran, in order to extort evidence, tor-
tured several of the Earl's domestics with unusual cruelty, During
the trial, great bodies of armed men were drawn up in diierent
parts of the city. The jury was compunefd of the Earl's lnown
enemies; and though he challenged fveral of them, his objeCtions
were overruled. After a flort conlultation, his peers found him
guilty of concealing, and of being art n7//d part in, the conspiracy
;igninf} the lite of the late Kilng. The irll part of the verdit did
not furprize himl, but lie twice repeated the words aizt rn/rid / with

' Clr w'f. McI.m 328. Strypc, 2. Appr i 8.

sl) In

69

Book VI. some vehemence, and added, God knows it is not so. The doom,
_---- which the law decrees against a Traitor, was pronounced. The

King, however, remitted the cruel and ignominious part of the feln-
tence, and apoilted that he should susser death next day, by being
beheaded

DURING that awful interval, Morton ponlfTcd the utmofi com-

p':fire of mind. Hie foipped chcerfully ; lept a part of the ight,
in his usual manner ; and employed the refi of his time in relilious
coCnferences, and in as of devotion, w-ii ioie li:i'Le-s or the
city. The' Cler'!gymn who attended him, c ealt freel ,' with his oln-
f:icnce, and prc(fld his crimes home upon him. What ie con-
fceld with regard to the crime for which Itc lieffecd is rcmarka-
ble, and fuppilles, in t-lm minalre, the ipcrifction o our records,
IL. alcklnowlcid, t!!.t on his return from England after the death
.' lizio0, 1othwel]l 1h .d infornmed lim o t;e conti;iLacy againil the
1 .i,:, whlich the Qecn, as he told himin, kwv of and approved ;
thalt lie dolicitcd hlin to conc ur in the execution of it, lwhich, at
t!.ht time, lie allii;utcly cdcili:c ; that, soon after, Lthwcll him-

Iif, and Arclihb.id .,u 1,ia, in his name', re:e',ving their fIollicitations

to the ifamic purlo:C, lie !hd rc;.iurcd ta war 'ra: ,t, uder the Queenl's
hand, auth:orizing t, :c l.cpt, an as that h; never been produced,
lie had refild to be any farther concerned i the matter. " But,

contii. uid lie, as I either coi t'.. to h!i'. ti'Canable a , nor

" aiillcd inl the csmi;t i:n;

- it, , i \\i ;':; : 1;il:ic for lle to

" reveal, or to pre\'i'e . T o

., ; ;i ; ,

i :'.Ie tlhe
diuverya ?

The (l(e.'l \Viis il'l,.'

il.il( (li i'd_ ;c^.. ;,1, .iv

.. was Inch

" a chai' i>,' , (i
t .it i: ii (erLa colti i' ;'.. ' ' ;,. '.:..i,.::tcd to hlim.

: Spotlv'. 31 . Joiill . ('. C( .iv,. i.Llin, ,j .. t'!J. . .!

" I ntly

7'

c" Iluntly and Bothwell, lwho bore the chief way i the kingdom, Book VI.
< were themfides the erpetrators of the crime.' These circuml- '- --
nlanccs, it mu.l be confcfied, go s)ome Iegth towards cxtcnuatilln
Mor'ton's glilt; and thouhl his aology for the fivour ihe la
shewn to Archbald DouIgas, whom ihe knew to be one of te con-
iiraltos, he r Idcs latislidtory,, no ul::inay rc.'l Liox:s c-ci;n to h:tve
ditilicted Ilis own mind on thllt account":-. W\i,;n his keepcrs told
him that the guards were attclndin', and all tlinis in rca.:inets,
( I pra.ifie ny Go , laid lhe, I ai ready li" i .'i'. Arran co1n-
mnanded thLce ,uardls; an cv iln tlio ,'ilt I; t e ; 'ec
hnl'l.icall)e 1;tred i, apt to ri'leCit theI ., e

C of ,i' '

not ibrcar this imb-ic. On th., .i";'., 1L, ].:li -our v; c.:': ;

his conttenance alnd vicc u :e;'1 ; nId a!t i n . iw.:; i ill
dcvoion', he fitiL;'cd dC .::h \-, h t:, . i:..;' ;'..lt'', v ch l .
_ c I; 'e

· *1

tce namle of olt llas.

I Js bred . n'c ln rE j i . (o
Edinl, uir! ; and .is bJov, :!i.l nli tli u'- <.nt o:' the i:. ':< i,

- o

. L

cover ~vit~. a bet'a ly ce k, vrs

carr'd i'' rn non pork>; t)

thic uit.al bl'i:';-'..c of crii:,na :.

3. ',e i L ;'i ends dll ' 'C-

com'anv it to t'

, r[v', or di;LO"e tl'.eir " o'L

d ii 7 'y
aly svlnIp}tom oSs ot to'v --.

Ai.F,5 N. 1,:.) '+ZD tD1'0 ' ';:lX ' i' 1...

'

i. ' ...'

,. '1' o.

q inl

1;

-

A:RAN, no lets profli.'t: in -'..i'....., , .....d ...i.........., ...

potilc con t, i ; " is
bs h infamous mar';. '' \ 1 ,1 ,,;d>. ',):?

c'tV into falvour t: c(x'i't, ;e h l

'L '

o. ''i'; i'I 1',

)i" vr t:'u { , ctr.';'id (11 tla ci'' : ; '1 ' ',''i;i~l i s',il: ( i ;;

blneie '~oI r, a o z (ni

ii

^(ul';' anid but',on leat , :1!Ot:

: i:. crd :, t. t
; c

e (':(,\t\ . MIcu(.. \pm. J. -
Ctv,''. KI. .' ;'

(I Ii i1-

i
i

lo)ok VI. dcfcription of a cotemporary Historian, intolerable in all the im-
p.. - -. perfections, incident to her sex." Impatient of any re(fraint upon

158 tlheir mutual desires, they, with equal ardor, wished to avow their

unionl publickly, and to legitimate, by a marriage, the offspring
of their unlawful paflion. The Countess petitioned to be divorced
from her husband, for a reason, which no modest woman will ever
plead. The judges, overawed by Arran, passed sentence without
July c. delay. And this infamous scene was concluded by a marriage,

solemnized with great pomp, and beheld by all ranks of men with
the utmoftl horror *.
Octob:r 2 . A Parliament was held this year, at the opening of which some

disputes arose between Arran and the Earl now created DI)k: of
Lennox. Arran, haughty by nature, and pushed on by his wife's
ambition, began to affeTt a: cquality with the Duke, under whose
protedtion lie had hitherto been contented to place hinmflf. After
various attempts to form a party in the council aganilf Lennox, he
found him fixed so firmly in te King's affetitns, that it was im-
possible to shake him, and rather than lose all interest ai court, from
which he was banilhed, he made the mnof humble fubmifTions to
the favourite, and again recovc;-ed his former credit. This rup-
ture contributed, however, to render the Duke frill more odious to
the nation. During the continuance of it, Arran afvedcd to court
Clergy, pretended an extraordinary zeal for the Protelant Religion,
and laboured to confirm the suspicions, which were entertairced of
his rival, as an emiffiry of the houie of Guise, ald a favolrer of
Popery. As he was supposed to be acquainted with the Duke's
xnoft secret designs, his calumnies were listened to with lmore cre-

* Spotfw. 315.

dit,

dit, than was due to his character. To the fame cause, we must Book VI.
ascribe several as of Parliament uncommonly favourable to the -"" --
Church, particularly one, which abolished the praCtice, introduced
by Morton, of appointing but one minister to several parishes.

No notice hath been taken for ome years of Ecclesiastical as- Eccefiaflica

fairs. While the civil government underwent so many extraordi- affir"
nary revolutions, the Church was not free from convulsions. Two
objects, chiefly, ingrofled the attention of the Clergy. The one
was the forming a fylfem of discipline, or Ecclesiastical polity.
After long labour, and many difficulties, this was at last brought to
some degree of perfection. The Assembly olemnly approved of it,
and appointed it to be laid before the privy council, in order to ob-
tain the ratification of it in parliament. But Morton, during his
administration, and those who, after his fall, governed the King,
were equally unwilling to fee it carried into execution; and by
ilarting difficulties, and throwing in objections, prevented it fiom
receiving a legal fandion. The other point in view was the abo-
lition of the Episcopal order. The biflhops were so devoted to the
King, to whom they owed their promotion, that the function itself
was by ome reckoned dangerous to civil liberty. Being allowed a
feat in parliament, and diftinguiflied by titles of honour, these not
only occasioned many avocations from their spiritual employments,
but loon rendered their charater and manners extremely differcnt
from those of the Clergy in that age. The nobles viewed their power
with jealousy, the populace confidered their lives as profane, and
wifled their downfal with equal ardour. The personal emulation
betwcen Melvil and Adamson, a man of learning, arid eminent fbr
his popular eoqucnce, who wxas promoted, on tl]c dcath of Dou-
gYlas, to e Arclbiop of St. Andrew's, inirngled itf'lf with tllc

VoL. 1I.

I,

1' 'aslhm:i

74
Book VI. paffons on each fide, and heightened them. Attacks were made,

'·-a-.. in every aflenbly, on the order of bithops; their privileges were

gradually circurfcribed ; and at last an a was passed, declaring
the office of bishop, as it was then exercied within the realm, to
have neither foundation nor warrant in the word of God; and re-
quiring, under pain of excommunication, all who now pofieffcd
that office, instantly to resign it, and to abstain from preaching or
adminiflring the sacraments, till they hould receive permislion
firom the assembly. The court did not acquiesce in this decree.
A vacancy happening, soon after, in the fee of Glasgow, Montgo-
mery Minister at Stirling, a man vain, fickle, presumptuous,
and more apt, by the blemishes in his charatcr, to have alienated
the people from an order already beloved, than to reconcile them
to one which was the objed of their hatred, firuck up an infamous
bargain with Lennox, and on his recommendation was chosen
Archbishop. The Presbytery of Stirling of which he was a mem-
ber, the preibytery of Glasgow whither he was to be tranf-
lated, the General Affcmbly, vied with each other in prosecuting
him on that account. In order to screen Montgomery, James
j32' made trial both of gentle and of rigorous mcafures, and both were

equally ineffecual. The General Afftmbly was jutl ready to pro-
nounce against him the sentence of excommunication, when an
Ilerald entered and commanded them, in the King's name, and
under pain of rebellion, to itop further proceedings. Even this
injunction they dcfpifcd. And though Nlontgomr,:1y, by his tears,
and Iceling penitence, procured a liort rc)itc, the sentence was
-:t lalt ilihIcd by their appointlmnt, and publillcd in all the churches
tIroughout the kingdom.

0 0

TiE

75

THE firmness of the Clergy in a colledive body, was nt greater Book V.
than the boldness of iome individuals, particularly of the Minifsers -'~'

1582.

of Edinburgh. They inveighed daily ag,aiinfl the corruptions in
the adminifiration, and, with the fieedom of speech admitted into
the pulpit in that age, named Lennox, and Arran as the chief au-
thors of the grievances, under which the church and kingdom
groaned. The courtiers, in their turn, complaied to the King of
the insolent and seditious spirit of the Clergy. In order to check
the boldness of their discourses, James ifiucd a proclamation, comn
manding Dury, one of the noft popular Ministers, not only to
leave the town, but to abfRain from preaching in any other place.
Dury complained, to the judicatorics of the Church, of this en-
croachment upon the immunities of his ofice. They approved of
the doctrine which he delivered; and he determined to disregard
the royal proclamation. But the magifirates being determined to
compel him to leave the city, according to the King's orders, he
was obliged to abandon his charge, after protefling publickly, at the
cross of Edinburgh, againfi the violence, which was put upon
him. The people accompanied him to the gates, with tears and
lamentations; and the Clergy denounced the vengeance of heaven
aainl the authors of this outrage .

IN this perilous situation flood the Church; the authority of its

judicatories called in question, and the liberty of the pulpit restrain-
ed, when a flddcn revolution in the civil government procured tlhem
uncxpc&ted relief.

TIlE tWO favourites, by their alcendant over the King, poflcflld (il.'':':
uncolntroulcd powcr ill t:e kin ldomi , and cxercilci it with the uC- '5.; il tli-

Spud. 27,1l~~~~'I J

1' 1

. j-
* Cll. Al;nb, 176--i o2. Spuif. 277, &c.

11moll
J 2

Book VI. most wantonness. James usually resided at Dalkeith or Kinneil, the
'-8 - -' feats of Lennox, and of Arran, and was attended by such company,

1582' and employed in such amusements, as did not suit his dignity.

The services of those, who had contributed most to place the
Crown on his head, were but little remembered. Many who
had opposed him with the greatest virulence, enjoyed the rewards
and honours, to which the others were intitled. Exalted notions
of regal prerogative, utterly inconsistent with the conflitution of
Scotland, being instilled by them into the mind of the young Mo-
narch, unfortunately made, at that early age, a deep impression there,
and became the source of almost all his future errors in the govern-
ment of both kingdoms *. Courts of justice were held in almost
every county, the proprietors of land were called before them, and
upon the slightest neglect of any of the numerous forms, which are
peculiar to feudal holdings, they were fined with unusual and into-
lerable rigour. The Lord Chamberlain revived the absolute uris-
diAion of his office over the Burroughs, and they were fubjedted to
exactions no less grievous. A defignfeemed, likewise, to have been
formed to exasperate Elizabeth, and to dissolve the alliance with her,
which all good Protestants efeemed the chief security of their re-
ligion in Scotland. A close correspondence was set on foot between
the King and his mother, and considerable progress made towards
uniting their titles to the Crown, by such a treaty of aflbciation,
as Maitland had projected; which could not fail of edangering or
diminifling his authority, and mufl have proved fatal to those, who
had acted against her with greatest vigour t.

l sI(,, ) ALL these circuiflances irritated the impatient spirit of the
,.,pie a- Scotch nobles, who resolved to tolerate no longer the inlolence or

;,^~".ud llAt. 1tu'52l. 3. 5

'* Caldl. 3. 152. 1t Cald. 3. 157

the
76

77

the two minions, or to fIand by, while their presumption and in-Book VI.
experience ruined both the King and kingdom. Elizabeth, who, --
during the administration of the four Regents, had the entire direc-
tion of the affairs of Scotland, felt herself deprived of all influence
in that kingdom ever since the death of Morton, and was ready to
countenance any attempt to rescue the King out of the hands of
favourites, who were leading him into measures, so repugnant to
all her views. The Earls of Mar and Glencairn, Lord Ruthven,
lately created Earl of Gowrie, Lord Lindsay, Lord Boyd, the Tu-
tor of Glamis, the Mater of Oliphant, with several Barons and
gentlemen of ditindtion, entered into a combination for that pur-
pose. And as changes in administration, which among polished
nations, are brought about slowly and silently, by artifice and in-
trigue, were in that rude age effected suddenly and by violence, the
King's situation, and the security of the favourites, encouraged the
confpilrators to have immediate recourse to force,

JAMES, after having resided for some time in Athole, where he l; the
enjoyed his favourite amusement of hunting, was now returning King's prfom

at uihci.

towards Edinburgh, with a fniall train. He was invited to Ruth-
ven castle, which lay in his way; and as he fufpeded no danger, he
went thither in hopes of farther sport. The multitude of strangers
whom he found there gave him ome uneasiness; and as those who
were in the secret arrived every moment from different pai ts, the ap-
pearance of so many new faces increased his fears. He diiiembled,
however, and next morning made ready for the field, expeting
to find there ome opportunity of making his ecape. But the
nobles entering his bed-chamber, presented a memorial again(t the
illegal and oppreiive aions of his two favourites, whom they rc-
pricfntcd as most dangerous cnemics to the religion and liberties of
the nation. James, though he received this rellonflrance with the

CO 11-

Book V. complaisance which was necessary in his prefcnt situation, was ex-
-- J tremely impatient to be gone; but as he approached the door of the

12 2 apartment, the Tutor of Glamis rudely flopped him. The King

complained, expoftulated, threatned, and finding all these without
effeEt, burst into tears, " No matter, said Glamis fiercely, better
children weep than bearded men." These words made a deep im-
prefiion on the King's mind, and were never forgotten. The con-
fpirators, without regarding his tears or indignation, difiliied such
of his followers as they fufpeede; allowed none but their own party
tohaveaccefs to him; and though they treated him with great refpedt,
guarded his person with the utmost care. This enterprize is usually
called, by our hiflorians, The raid of Rzut/bven l

Comni~t r-
3ann to pri sl.

LENNOX and Arran were aftonifihed to the last degree at an event

so unexpected, and so fatal to their power. The former endeavour-
ed, but without success, to excite the inhabitants of Edinburgh to
take arms, in order to rescue their Sovereign from captivity. The
latter, with his usual impetuosity, mounted on horseback the mo-
ment he heard what had befallen the King, and with a few fol-
lowers, rode towards Ruthven cafle; and as a considerable body
of the conspirators, under the command of the Earl of Mar, lay
in his way ready to oppose him, he separated himself from his
companions, and with two attendants arrived at the gate of the
castle. At the fight of a man so odious to his country, the indigna-
tion of the conspirators rose, and infrant death mull have been te
puniflrment of his rafmnecfs, if the friendflip of Gowrie, or lome
other caufc not explained by our historians, had not saved a life,
so pernicious to the kingdom. 1tc was confined, however, to

* Cald. 3. 134. Spots. 320. 4Mlv. 357.

tle

79

the castle of Stirling, without being admitted into the King's Book V.
presence. -

1582.

THE King, though really the prisoner of his own fubjeds, with Command

whose conduct he could not help diScovering many symptoms of IClvojt'e
disgust, was obliged to publish a proclamation, signifying his ap- .isa1".
probation of their enterprize, declaring that he himlelf wsas at full
liberty, without any restraint or violence offered to his person ; and
forbidding any attempt against those concerned in the Raid f' RuthJ
rvcz, under pretence of rescuing him out of their hands. At the
fame time, he commanded Lennox to leave Scotland before the Aug im 2s,
2oth of September .

SooN after, Sir George Carey, and Bowes, arrived as ambaiTadors Tshe Co,! i-

fiom Elizabeth. The pretext of their cinbalny was to inquire after rdt!lo cOctic-
the King's iafety; to encourage and countenance the conspirators Eiiz;bcii.
was the real motive of it. By their intercession, the Earl of An-
gus, who, ever since the death of his uncle Morton, had lived in
exile, obtained leave to return. And the accelion of a nobleman
so powerful and so popular itrengthened the fation t.

LENNOX, wxhofe amiable and gentle qualities had procured him

many friends, and who received private affuranccs that lhe King's
favour towards him was in no degree abated, seemed reollved, at
irfl:, to pay no regard to a command, extorted by violencc, and no
lcs difagr-ccable to James, than it was rigorous with regard to him-
eclf. But the power ofhiscncmies, who were maflersof thc King's per-
i(n , who were ccrctly slportcd by Elizabeth, lnd ropenly applauldtl
i'y tlic Clcrg', deterred him fol an c ntclrpric, tle it.cccis of

C.. 1i. 3 5, i '. -I C.,I, d. 152.

',which.

Book VI. which was dubious, and the danger certain both tohimfelf, and to his

Sovereign. He put off the time of his departure by various arti-
S582. sices, in expectation either that James might make his escape from

the conspirators, or that fortune might present some more favoura-
ble opportunity of taking arms for his relief.

Their con- ON the other hand, the conspirators were extremely solicitous not
duaapproved only to secure the approbation of their countrymen, but to obtain
by an Aflem-
biyanda some legal fantion of their enterprize. For this purpose, they
Convention of
ctlatcs. published a long declaration, containing the motives, which had

induced them to venture on such an irregular ftep, and endeavoured
to heighten the public indignation againfl the favourites, by repre-
senting, in the firongeft colours, their inexperience and insolence,
their contempt of the nobles, their violation of the privileges of
the Church, and their oppreflion of the people. They obliged the
King, who could not with safety refuse any of their demands, to
grant them a remission in the most ample form; and not satisfied
Odober 3. with that, they applied to the Assembly of the Church, and easily

procured an ad, declaring " that they had done good and acceptable
service to God, to their Sovereign, and to their native country;"
and requiring all incere Protestants to concur with them in carry-
ing forward such a laudable enterprize. And in order to add the
greater weight to this ad, every Minifler was enjoined to read it,
in his own pulpit, and to inflict the censures of the Church on
those who set themselves in opposition to so good a cause. A Con,
vention of estates, assembled a few days after, pafled an adt to the
fame effet, and granted full indemnity to the conspirators for every
thing they had done *.

* Cald. 3. 177, 187, 200. Spots. 322.

JAMES
8o

JAMES was conduced by them, first to Stirling, and afterwards Book VI.

to the palace of Haly-rud-houfe; and though he was received every
where with the external marks of refped0 due to his dignity, his Lennox's de-
motions were carefully observed, and he was under a relraint no pastur so
less ftrid, than at the first moment when he was seized by the con-
fpirators. Lennox, after eluding many commands to depart out of
the kingdom, was at last obliged to begin his journey. He lingered,
however, for ome time in the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, as
if he had frill intended to make one effort towards refloring the
King to liberty. But either from the gentleness of his own dii-
position, averse to blood-fled and the disorders of civil war, or
from ome other cause, unknown to us, he abandoned the deiign,
and let out for France, by the way of England. The King issued Decem'. c.
the order for his departure, with no less reludCance, than the Duke
obeyed it. And both mourned a eparation, which neither of them
had power to prevent. Soon after his arrival in France, the fatigue
of the journey, or the anguifi of his mind, threw him into a
fever. In his last moments, he discovered such a firm adherence
to the Proteflant faith, as fully vindicates his memory from the im-
putation of an attachment to Popery, with which he had been un-
charitably loaded in Scotland . As he was the earlielt, and befl
beloved, he was, perhaps, the most deserving, though not the
most able of all James's favourites. The warmth and tenderness
of his Malter's affeteion for him was not abated by death itself. By
many ads of kindness and generosity towards his posterity, the King
not only did great honour to the memory of Lennox, but i-t his
own charader in one of the moilt favourable points of view.

* Spots. 324.
V( L. I1I,

81

TrlE
All

Book VI. THE success of the conspiracy, which deprived James of liberty,
_--,' made great noise over all Europe; and at last reached the ears of

5 2. Mary in the prison to which ile was confined. As her own ex-

Mary's anx'e-
tyabouther perience had taught her what injuries a captive prince is exposed to
on. fuffeir; and as many of those, who were now concerned in the en-

terprize against her son, were the fame persons whom lle confc-ir-
ed as the chief authors of her own misfortunes, it was natural for the
tenderness of a mother to apprehend that the fame calamities were
ready to fall on his head ; and such a profped did not fail of add-
ing to the distress and horror of her own situation. In the anguish
of her heart, he wrote to Elizabeth, complaining in the bitterert
terms of the unprecedented rigour, with which she ]erielf had
been treated, and beseeching her not to abandon ler son to the
mercy of his rebellious subjects; nor permit him to be involved
in the fame misfortunes, under which he had so long groaned.
The peculiar vigour and acrimony of tcile, for which this letter is
remarkable, discover both the high spirit of the Scotch Queen,
unfubdued by her ffferings, and the violence cf her indignation
at Elizabeth's artifices and severity. But it was ill adapted to gain
the end he had in view, and accordingly it neither procured any
mitigation of the rigour of her own confinement, nor any inter-
position in favour of the King.

3 7v HENRY III. who, though he feared and hated the Princes of

..II:I~tl.iOeS Cuife, was often oblicd to court their favour, intcwrpocd with
':ait''n,'iJ warmth, in order to extricate James out of the hands of a party

1ly . so entirely devoted to the Engliflh interelr. IHe commanded M. de

la Motte lenelon, his ambnafTador at the court of England, to re-
pair to Edinburgh, and to contribute his utmot cl ndeavours towards
placing James in a ituation, morc fuitalle to his dignity. As Eli-

zabcth

83

zabeth could not, with decency, refuse him liberty to execute this Book VI.
commifflon, he appointed Davison to attend him into Scotland as t- -
her Envoy, under colour of concurring with him in the negocia- 583
tion, but in reality, to be a spy upon his motions, and to obftrudt
Ihis ficcefs. James, whose title to the Crown had not hitherto
been recognized by any of the princes on the continent, was ex-
tremely fond of fich an honourable embafiy from the French Mo-
narch, and, on that account, as well as for the fake of the errand Jainu-r,-.
on which he came, received Fenelon with great resecd. The no-
bles, under whose power the King was, did not relill this iterpo-
fition of the French court, which had long loit its ancient influence
over the affairs of Scotland. The Clergy were alarmed at the
danger to which religion would be exposed, if the Princes of Guise
should recover any acendant over the public councils. And though
the King tried every method for refiraining them within the bounds
of decency, they declaimed againfl the court of France, againtl
the Princes of Guise, againit the ambaflador, againif entering into
any alliance with such notorious persecutors of the Church of God,
with a vehemence, which no regu!ar government would now tole-
rate, but which was then extremely common. The ambafiador,
watched by Davison, difrrufltd by the nobles, and cxpofed to the
insults of the Clergy, ad of the people, returned into England
wvithout procuring any change in the King's tituation, cr receiving
any answer to a proporal which he made, that the governmente
ihiould be carried on in the joint-names of James, and the Q3ten
his mother ;.

jXVIANW IILEL, James, thoulgh lie dilcmblcd with great art, J'c-

l.i:*. (n.,i.'
rcan every d(ay more unealv uiLcr lsis con inCinnt ; is ui cilincLt i;,,,, ol te-

-; (,',J, '< 7. 1'

7'. :.p(. ? .
2 c Appc.l. N ' V111.

5V1 2 rendlered

Book VI. rendered him continually attentive to find out a proper opportunity
'-" for making his escape; and to thisattention, he at lait owed his liberty,

3 which the King of France was not able, nor the Queen of England

willing to procure for him. As the conspirators had forced Lennox
out of the kingdom, and kept Arran at a distance from court, they
grew ecure ; and imnaining that time had reconciled the King to
them, and to his situation, they watched him with little care. Some
occasions of discord had arisen among themselves; and the French
ambassador, by fomenting there during the time of his residence
in Scotland, had weakened the union, in which alone their safety
con ifted *. Colonel William Stewart, the commander of the band
of gentlemen, who guarded the King's person, being gained by
James, had the principal merit in the scheme for restoring his maf-
ter to liberty. Under pretence of paying a visit to the Earl of March
-. his grand uncle, James was permitted to go from Falkland to St.

Andrew's. That he might not create any suspicion, he lodged, at
first, in an open defenceless house in the town, but pretending a
curiosity to fee the cattle, no sooner was he entered with ome of
his attendants whom he could trust, than Colonel Stewart com-
manded the gates to be slut, and excluded all the reft of his train.
Next morning the Earls of Argyll, Huntly, Crawford, Montrose,
Rothes, with others to whom the secret had been communicated,
entered the town with their followers; and though Mar, with fe-
veral of the leaders of the fadcion, appeared in arms, they found
themselves so far out-numbered, that it was in vain to think of re-
covering poffcflion of the King's person, which had been in their
power somewhat longer than ten months. James was naturally of so
loft and ductile a temper, that tholt who were near his person, com-
monly made a deep imprclion on his heart, which was formed to

* Cinid. 482.

be
84

be under the fvay of favourites. And as he remained, during so Book VI.
long a time, and at a period of life when resentments are rather '-
violent than lasting, implacable and unreconciled to the confpira-
tors, they must either have improved the opportunities of infinuat-
ing themselves into favour with little dexterity, or the indignation,
with which this first insult to his person and authority filled him, mui
have been very great.

His joy at his escape was youthful and exceflive. He resolved, Resolve',

lhowever, to

however, by the advice of Sir James Melvil, and his wileft coun- treat theml
fellors, to a with the utmost moderation. Having called, into t mod'era'
his presence, the leaders of both factions, the neighbouring gentry,
the deputies of the adjacent burroughs, and the Miniiers and the
heads of colleges, he declared, that although he had been held
under restraint for some time by violence, he would not impute
that as a crime to any man, but without remembering the irregu-
larities, which had been so frequent during his minority, would
pals a general at of oblivion, and govern all his fubjeds with un-
distinguishing and equal affecion. And as an evidence of his fin-
cerity, he visited the Earl of Gowrie at Ruthven castle, and grant-
ed him a full pardon of any guilt he had contracted, by the crime
committed in that very place *

BUT James did not adhere long to this prudent and moderate Bt Arra re-

gains his as-

plan. His former favourite, the Earl of Arran, had been per- c.-!ntoc.
mitted for some time to reside at Kenneil, one of his country feats. 1li:'1
As oon as the King felt himself at liberty, his love for him began
to revive, and he expressed a flrong desire to fee him. The cour-
tiers violently opposed the return of a minion, whose insolent and

* Malv. 272.

overbearing

Book VI. overbearing temper they dreaded, as much as the nation detefied

L- --/ his crimes. James, however, continued his importunity, and pro-
1583'

m-ifing that he flould continue with him no longer than one day,
they were obliged to yield. This interview rekindled ancient assec-
tion; the King forgot his promise; Arran regained his ascendant
over him; and within a few days refunmed the exercise of power,
with all the arrogance of an undeserving favourite, and all the rash-
ness peculiar to himself*,

And the KIing THE first effeEt of his influence was a proclamation with regard
pi ue m

aoeo-
'I tl'1.l' to tlofe concerned in the Raid of' Rlutbven. They were required

to acknowledge their crime in the humblest manner; and the King
promised to grant them a full pardon, provided their future condudt
were such, as did not oblige him to remember palt miscarriages, The
tenor of this proclamation was extremely different from tle act of
oblivion, which the conspirators had been encouraged to expet.
Nor did any of them reckon it aife to rely on a promise, clogged
with such an equivocal condition, and granted by a young Prince,
under the influence of a Minifler, void of faith, regardlits of de-
cency, and tranflorted, by the desire of revenge, even beyond tle
usual ferocity of his temper. IMany of the leaders, who had at
first appeared openly at court, retired to their own houtifcs; and for-
feeing the dangerous lornm which was gathering, began to look out
for a retreat in foreign countries -.

;,IClti' S ELIZABETII who had all along protced the confpiratcrs, was
,:~)!]tiii cextremely dilguflcd with mieaiures which tended vilil)ly to their

i becllll Of of
,tlicolrpir, dLcfhtlu(on, and wrote to tlic KiLg a hari1 and haughty lctter, rc-

,,,,L .jroacing him in a llile, very uncllC monll allong Princes, witl

* M-!v,?7; tI lcv. ?'-S,. tr 3,. C:!d.. o.
o

breacli
S

breach of faith in recalling Arran to court, and with imprudence
in proceeding so rigorously againfl his best and most faithful subjects.
James, with a becoming dignity, replied, that promises extorted by
violence, and conditions yielded out of fear, were no longer bind-
ing, when these were removed; that it belonged to him alone to
chufe what Minilecrs he woiuld employ in his ervice; and that
though he resolved to treat the conspirators at Ruthven with the
utmost clemency, it was necessary, for the support of his authority,
that ichl an insult on his person should not pass altogether un-
centIred'-d

Book VI.

15 53.

ELI ZABETH 'S letter was quickly followed by W\allinlgham her ~' ,,;i, l.:
fecrctary, whom flte appointed her ambalTidor to James, and who cmtnll;y ito(

coiladj.

appeared in the Scotch court, with a splendor and magnificence,
well calculated to please and dazzle a young Plince. Wallingha n
was admitted to everal conferences with James himself, in which
lie infifed on the fame topics contained in the letter, and the King
repeated his former anfwvcrs.

AFTriR suffering several indignities, fiom the arrogance of Arran,

and his creatures, he returned to England, vithout concluding any
new treaty with the King. WValfingham was, next to Burleigh,
the Minister on whlom the chief weight of the English administration
refled; and when a pcrfon of his rank, slept so far out of the or-
dinary road of bufinets, as to undertake a long journey, in his old
age, and under a declinilng slate of health, ome affair of confe-
quence was lippofed to be the cause, or tome important event was
expected to be thle effct of this meafurc. But as nothing confpi-
cuous eitler occasioned, or followed this enbafly, it is probable
that Elizabeth had no other intention in employing this sagacious
Minillcr, than to dicover, witlh cxadletnc, tlhe capacity and dil-

A Mclv. 27(.

pofitlion

87

Book VI. position of the Scotch King, who was now arrived at a time of life,
'--^- when, with some degree of certainty, conjectures might be formed

583 concerning his character, and future conduct. As James possessed ta-

lents of that kind, which make a greater figure in conversation, than
in ation, he gained a great deal by this interview with the Englifl
secretary, who, notwithstanding the cold reception he met with,
gave such an advantageous representation of his abilities, as deter-
mined Elizabeth to treat him, henceforward, with more decency
and refped *.

ELIZABETH'S eagerness to protec the conspirators rendered

James more violent in his proceedings againfl them. As they
had all refuted to accept of pardon, upon the terms which he had
offered, they were required, by a new proclamation, to surrender
themselves prisoners. The Earl of Angus alone complied ; the refl
either fled into England, or obtained the King's licence to retire
Decem. 17. into foreign parts. A Convention of eates was held, the mem-

bers of which, deceived by an unworthy artifice of Arran's, de-
clared those concerned in the Raid of Ruthvcn to have been guilty
of high treason; appointed the a passed las: year approving of
their conduct to be expunged out of the records; and engaged to
support the King in prosecuting the fugitives with the utmost rigour
of law.

THE conspirators, though far from having done any thing that was

uncommon in a barbarous age, among mutinous nobles, and under an
unsettled slate of government, mu: be acknowledged to have been
guilty of an at of treason against their sovereign; and James, who
confidcred their conduCt in this light, had good reafin to boall of his

'* Mclv. 293. C.ld. 3. 258. Jbb. 2. 536,

2 clmelncy

clemency, when he offered to pardon them, upon their confefling Book VI.
their crime. But, on the other hand, it mufft be allowed that, --

I583.

after the King's voluntary promise of a general oblivion, they had 1
some reason to complain of breach of faith, and could not, with-
out the most unpardonable imprudence, have put their lives in Ar-
ran's power.

THE interest of the Church was considerably affe&ed by these 1584.
contrary Revolutions. While the conspirators kept possession of The Clergy

favour the

power, the Clergy not only recovered, but extended their privileges. conspirators
As they had formerly declared the hierarchy to be unlawful, they :rrigtte
took some bold measures towards exterminating the Episcopal
order out of the Church; and it was owing more to Adamson's
dexterity in perplexing and lengthening out the process for that pur-
pose, than to their own want of zeal, that they did not deprive,
and perhaps excommunicate all the Biflhops in Scotland. When the
King recovered his liberty, things put on a very different aspec.
The favour bestowed upon Arran, the enemy of every thing decent
and sacred, and the rigorous prosecution of those nobles, who had
been the moll zealous defenders of the Protestant cause, were con-
fiderel as sure presages of the approaching ruin of the Church. The
Clergy could not conceal their apprehensions, nor view this in-
pending danger in silence. Dury, who had been restored to his
office as one of the Miniflers of Edinburgh, openly applauded the
Raid of Rutl/vc6 in the pulpit, at which the King was so enraged,
that, notwithflanding some symptoms of his fbmnifion, he com-
manded him to resign his charge in the city. Mr. Andrew IMcl-
vil, being fiinmmone d before the privy council to answer for tc
dotine lie hadl uttered in a crmon at St. Andr-ew's, and acc,cd
of comparing, the prcfcnt grievances of the nation with tlhoiz tndcr
James III. and of intiilating oblilquely tlat tlley ought to be rdcilrcl-

VOL. II. N f

Book VI. fed in the fame manner, thought it incumbent on him to behave

--,-- ' with greater firmness. He declined the jurifdision of a Civil court,

'584. in a cause purely Ecclesiastical; the Presbytery of which he was a

member had, as he contended, the sole right to call him to account
for words spoken in the pulpit; and neither the King nor council
could judge, in the firit intance, of the doctrine delivered by
Preachers, without violating the immunities of the Church. This
exemption from civil jurifdidion was a privilege, which the Popish
Ecclesiastics, admirable judges of whatever contributed to increase
the lustre or power of their body, had long struggled for, and had at
last obtained. If the fame plea had now been admitted, the Pro-
teflant Clergy would have become independant on the civil magif-
trate, and an order of men, extremely useful to society while they
inculcate those duties which tend to promote its happiness and tran-
quility, might have become no les pernicious by teaching, without
fear or controul, the moio dangerous principles, or by exciting
their hearers to the moit desperate and lawless actions. James, jea-
lous to excess of his prerogative, was alarmed at this daring en-
croachment on it. And as Melvil, by his learning and zeal, had
acquired the reputation and authority of head of the party, he re-
solvcd to punish him with the rigour, which that pre-eminence
rendered neceflary, andto discourage, by a timely severity, the re-
vival of such a dangerous claim. Melvil, however, avoided his rage
by flying into England ; and the pulpits reibunded with complaints
that the King had extinguifcd the light of learning in the kingdom,
and depivtd the Chlurchi of the ableit and most faithful guardian
of its liberties and difcinline '.

1
*' Sptf. 330. C.i1L. 3. 3c!.

'TA ,.SE
90

THESE violent declamations of the Clergy, against the measures Book V.

of the court, were extremely acceptable to the people. The con-
fpirators, though driven out of the kingdom, still poflcffed great
influence there. And as they had every thing to fear from the re-
fentment of a young prince, irritated by the furiours counsels of
Arran, they never ceased folliciting their adherents to take arms in
their defence. Gowrie, the only person among them who had
fuibmitted to the King, and accepted of a pardon, soon repented of
a itep, which loft him the efieem of one party, without gaining
the confidence of the other. And, after suffering many mortifica-
tions from the King's negle&t, and the haughtincfs of Arran, hie
was at last commanded to leave Scotland, and to retide in France.
While he waited at Dundee for an opportunity to embark, he was
informed that the Earls of Angus, Mar, and the Tutor of Gla-
mis, had concerted a fchenme for furprizing the castle of Stirling.
In his situation, little persuasion was necefli-rv to draw him to en-
gage in it. Under various pretexts, lie put off his voyage, and lay
ready to take arms on the day fixed, by the conspirators, for the ex-
ecution of their enterprize. His lingering so lonI; at Dundee, with..
out any apparent reason, awakened the suspicion of the court,
proved fatal to himself, and disappointcd the lfuccefs of the confpi-
racy. Colonel William Stewart frrounded the house where he
lodged with a body of soldiers, and in spite of his resistance, took
him prisoner. Two days after, Angus, Mar, and Glamnis, seized
the castle of Stirling, and erecting their standard there, published
a manifest-o declaring that they took arms for no other reason, but
to remove from the King's prefcnce, a minion who had acquired
power by the mofl unworthy aftions, and who cxercifed it with the
most intolerabl e intoolcncc. The account of Cowrie's imprifonmnelnt
struck a damp upon their spirits. They imputcd it to his own
treachery, and fullpfcdtcd that as lie had formerly dferted, be had

N 2 110W'

9-r

B0ook VI. now betrayed them. At the fame time, a um of money, with which

L^ 8 Elizabeth had promised to supply them, not being duly paid, and

54 their friends and vassals coming in flowly,they appeared irresolute and

difheartned; and as the King, who aded with great vigour, ad-
vanced towards them at the head of 2c,ooo men, they fled pre-
cipitately towards England, and with difficulty made their escape *.
This rash and feeble attempt produced such effects, as usually follow
disappointed conspiracies. It not only hurt the cause, for which it
was undertaken, but added strength and reputation to the King;
confirmed Arran's power ; and enabled them to pursue their mea-
fures with more boldness, and greater success. Gowrie was the firif
vidim of their resentment. After a very informal trial, a jury of
peers found him guilty of treason, and he was publickly beheaded
at Stirling.

May 22.
A pailiament
held.

Severe laws
against the
Church.

To humble the Church was the King's next ifep. But as it became

necessary, for this purpose, to call in the aid of the legislative au-
thority, a parliament was hastily summoned. And while so many
of the nobles were baniihed out of the kingdom, or forbidden to
appear in the King's presence; while Arran's haughtiness kept ome
at a distance, and intimidated others; the meeting consisted only
of those, who were absolutely at the devotion of the court. In
order to conceal the laws which were fiaming from the knowledge
of the Clergy, the Lords of the Articles were sworn to secrecy.
And when ome of the Miniflers, who either fufpeded, or were
informed of the danger, deputed one of their number to declare
their apprehensions to the King, he was sized at the palace-gate,
and carried to a distant prison. Others, attempting to enter the parlia-

* IIomc's lift. of Houfc of Dougl. 379. Spots. 330.

ilcnt

ment house, were refused admittance *. And such laws were passed, Book VI.
as totally overturned the constitution and discipline of the Church. ~

i1584.

The refuting to acknowledge the jurifdidion of the privy council; May zz.
the pretending an exemption from the authority of the civil courts;
the attempting to diminish the rights and privileges of any of the
three etfates in parliament, were declared to be high treason. The
holding Assemblies, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical, without the King's
permifion or appointment; the uttering, either privately, or pub-
lickly, in sermons, or in declamations, any false and scandalous re-
ports againit the King, his ancestors, or minillers, were pronounced
capital crimes t.

WHEN these laws were published at the cross of Edinburgh,

according to the ancient cullom, Mr. Robert Pont, Minister of Sto
Cuthberts, and one of the Lords of feflion, iolemnly protested
against them, in the name of his brethren, because they had been
pasld without the knowledge or content of the Church. Ever
since the Reformation, the pulpits and ecclesiastical judicatories had
both been eteemed sacred. In the former, the Clergy had been
accustomed to censure, and admonish, with unbounded liberty. In
the latter, they exercised an uncontrouled and independantjurifdic-
tion. The blow was now aimed at both there privileges. These
new flatutes would have rendered church-men as inconsiderable, as
they were indigent; and as the avarice of the nobles had firipped
them of the wealth, the King's ambition was about to deprive
them of the power which once belonged to their order. No won-
der the alarm was universal, and the complaints loud. All the
Ministers of Edinburgh forsook their charge, and fled into England.
The mol eminent Clergymen, throughout the kingdom, imitated

* Cald. 3. 365. rPal., 8. Jac. VI.

thcli

94

Book VI. their example. Desolation and atoniflment appeared in every part
'-^--' of the Scotch Church; the people bewailed the loss of Pastors,

1584. whom they esteemed; and full of consternation, at an event so un-

expeaed, openly expressed their rage against Arran, and began to
fufped the King himself to be an enemy to the Reformed Re-
ligion *.

Spots. 333.

TI L

# BOOK VII.

THE
HI STORY

OF
SCOTLAND.

B O K VII.
W5 TH I LE Scotland was torn by those inteffine fadtions, Book VII.

Elizabeth was alarmed with the rumour of a project in .--
agitation for setting Mary at liberty. Francis Throgmorton, a Tli84

&0~ ~ C)o~~~

3,~~~~~~ aJ~

^Throgmor-

Chefliire gentleman, was fufpeded of being deeply concerned in the ton's conipi-
defgn, and on that suspicion he was taken into custody. Among lzabth.
his papers were found two lifts, one of the principal harbours
in the kingdom, with an account of their situation, and of the
depth of the water in each ; the other, of all the eminent Roman
Catholics in England. This circumstance confirmed the suspicion
agailnf him, and ome dark and dcfpcrate conspiracy was fppofed
just ready to break out. At firit lie boldly avowed his innocence,
and declared that the two papcrs were forged by the Queen's li-
nifcrs, in cdcer to intimidate or infilare him ; and lie ev1 n cliidtl urtc
the rack with the utnoll fortitutde. But being broughlt a cond

2 ti e

Book VII. time to the place of torture, his resolution failed him, and he not
i-- only acknowledged that he had held a secret correspondence with

I54.' the Qeen of Scots, but discovered a design that was formed to

invade England. The Duke of Guise, he said, undertook to furnifl
troops, and to condulc the enterprize. The Pope and King of
Spain were to supply the money, necessary for carrying it on ; all the
English exiles were eager to take arms; many of the Catholics at
home would be ready to join them, at their landing; Mendoza the
Spaniih ambassador, who was the life of the conspiracy, spared no
pains in fomenting the spirit of difaffetion among the Engliff, or
in hastening the preparations on the Continent; and by his com-
mand, he had made the two lifts, the copies whereof had been
found in his poiffefion. This confession he retracted at his trial;
returned to it again, after sentence was passed upon him; and re-
trated it once more at the place of execution *.

To us in the present age, who are assisted in forming our opinion

of this matter, by the light which time and history have thrown upon
the designs and characters of the Princes of Guise, many circum-
stances in Throgmorton's confeiion appear to be extremely remote
from truth, or even fiom probability. The Duke of Guise was,
at that jundure, far from being in a Situation to undertake foreign
conquests. Without either power or office at court; hated by the
King; and persecuted by the favourites; he had no leisure for any
thoughts of disturbing the quiet of neighbouring flates, and his vast
and ambitious mind was wholly occupied in laying the foundation
of that famous league, which flhook the throne of France. But
about the time Elizabeth detcted this conspiracy, the close union
between the houlc of G(uilc and Philip II. was remarkable to all

* IlolilngfilCd, 1370,

Europe,

Eur,ope, and as their great enterprize againt Henry III. was not Book VII.
yet disclosed, as they endeavoured to conceal that under their '~-
threatnings to invade England, Throgmorton's diicovery appeared 4
to be extremely probable; and Elizabeth, who knew how ardently
all the parties mentioned by him wifled her downfal, thought that
flhe could not guard her kingdom with too much care. The indif-
creet zeal of the Englih exiles increased her fears. Not satis- .Var.;i!,c
filed with inceffnt outcries againfl her severity towards the i;it',a'"tl"'
Scotch Queen, and her cruel perfecutioii of her Catholic fubjllcs,
nor thinking it enough that one Iope had threatned her with th.l
sentence of excommunication, and another had aually pronounced
it, they now began to difperle books and writings, in which they
endeavoured to persuade their dilciples, that it would be a mleritorious
acion to take away her life; they openly exhorted the raids
of honour to t;eat her, as Judith did Holofernes, and by iuch an
illustrious deed, to render their owni names honourable and iacred
in the Church, throughout all future ages . For all thele reasons,
Elizabeth not only inflicded the puniflment of a traitor on Throg-
morton, but commanded the Spanifl ambassador inflantly to leave
England ; and that (le might be in no danger of being attacked
within the iiland, (fle determined to use her utmoit efforts, in order
to recover that influence over the Scotch councils, which hile had
for some time entirely loft.

TIlERE were trce diffrcent 1methoids, by which Eli/ibctl l.:,c,..

might hlpe to accolplifli tlis; either by furniling tucll cicteual e''::' ~ I'
aid to tllhc hnihcd nobles, as would eable themi to rei'nlc thli le.i'.i
cliief direiicln of aflairs; or lyv entering into liich a trcatv \\itl . ,

.M ,as miglit intinidlate her tol, who bcin now acecuitlo i to L, '''

* C.mdi , *97.

97
V (,!.. 1I

()

Book VII. vern, would be apt to agree to any terms, rather than refign.the

--,-- sceptre, or admit an associate in the throne ; or by gaining the Earl
584' of Arran, to secure the direction of the King his mater. The

last was not only the eafief, and fpeedieft, but the most certain of
success. This Elizabeth resolved to pursue; but without laying
the other two altogether aside. With this view, he sent Davison,
one of her principal secretaries, and a man of abilities and address,
into Scotland. A Minister so venal as Arran, hated by his own
countrymen, and holding his power by the most precarious of all
tenures, the favour of a young Prince, accepted Elizabeth's offers
without hesitation, and esteemed the acquisition of her protection
Augurt 13. to be the most solid foundation of his own greatness. Soon after,

he consented to an interview with Lord Hunfdane the Governor of
Berwick, and being honoured with the pompous title of Lieute-
nant General for the King, he appeared at the place appointed, with
a splendid train. In Hunftlane's presence, he renewed his promises
of an inviolable and faithful attachment to the Englifl interest,
and assured him that James should enter into no negociation, which
tended to interrupt the peace between the two kingdoms ; and as Eli-
zabeth began to entertain the fame fears andjealoufies concerning the
King's marriage, which had formerly disquieted her with regard to
his mother's, he undertook to prevent James from liflening to any
overture of that kind, till he had previously obtained the Queen
of England's consent *.

c.erCepro TH!E baniled Lords and their adherents soon felt the effects of
;,.'ilg;. - Arran's friendship with England. As Elizabeth had permitted

j 1, l thc la-
nitli:- L.odl. them to take refuge in her dominions, and several of her Miilers

were of opinion that 11e cutght to employ her arms i defence of

' (ClJ 3' .71 v.
1., ;I. .Appltl N IX.

thcr
98

their cause, the fear of this was the only thing, which reflrained Book VII.
James and his favourite, from proceeding to such extremities against I
them, as might have excited the pity or indignation of the English,
and have prompted them to exert themselves with vigour in their
behalf. But every apprehension of this kind being now removed,
they ventured to call a parliament, in which an ad was palTed, at-
tainting Angus, Mar, Glamis, and a great number of their followers.
Their eflates devolved to the Crown, and according to the pradice
of the Scotch Monarchs, who were obliged to reward the faction
which adhered to them, by dividing with it the spoils of the
vanquished, James dealt out the greater part of these to Arran, and
his afibciates *.

NOR was the treatment of tle Clergy less rigorous. All Minis- \gainil the

ters, readers, and profefbfrs in Colleges were injoined to subscribe,
within forty days, a paper teflifying their approbation of the laws
concerning the Church, enaded in lafl parliament. Many, over-
awed, or corrupted by the Court, yielded obedience; others flood
out. The flipends of the latter were sequestered, some of the
more aivc committid to prison, and numbers compelled to fly the
kingdom. Those who complied, fell under the fupicion of aing
fiomn mercenary or ambitious motives. Those who suffered, ac-
quired high reputation, by giving such convincing evidence of their
frmnncfs and finceritv. The judicatorics of tle Church were altnof
entirely suppressed. In some places, fkarce so many Miniliers re-
mained, as to perform the duties of religious worship; they oon
-unk in reputation among the people, and being prohibited not only
from difcourling of public affairs, but obliged, by the jealousy of
tlhe adclinlliltation, to iunlc every Icntiiment and cxprellion in uch a

* C:ldJ. 3. 57.

99
()

l'11It1IC r

THE HISTORY
Book VII. manner, as to give the court no offence, their sermons were deem-

g--- ed languid, insipid, and contemptible. And it became the general
I584'

opinion, that together with the noft virtuous of the nobles, and
the most faithful of the Clergy, the power and vigour of Religion
were now banished out of the kingdom *.

MEANWHILE, Elizabeth was carrying on one of those fruitless

negociations with the Queen of Scots, which it had become almost
matter of form to renew every year. They served not only to
amuse that unhappy princess with some proijpect of liberty; but
furnished an apology for eluding the follicitations of foreign powers
in her behalf; and were of use to overawe James, by fihewing him
that she could, at any time, fct free a dangerous rival to dispute his
authority. These treaties fae suffered to proceed to what length she
pleased, and never wanted a pretence for breaking them off, when
they became no longer necessary. The treaty now on foot was
not, perhaps, more sincere than many which preceded it; the
reasons, however, which rendered it ineffetual were far fiom bein g
frivolous.

New confi- As Crichton a Jesuit was failing from Slanders towards Scotland,
ihabth1.i the ihip on board of which he was a paflenger happened to be

chased by pirates, who, in that age, often infefled the narrow seas.
Crichton, in great confusion, tore in pieces some papers in his cuf-
tody, and threw them away; but by a very extraordinary accident,
the wind blew them back into the fliip, and they were immediately
taken up by some of the pafengers, who carried them to WVade,
the Clerk of the privy council. IIc, with great industry and pa-

* CAl. 5'.

ticnecc,

tience, joined them together, and they were found to contain the Book VII.
account of a plot, formed by the King of Spain, and Duke of I 8"

1584.

Guifc, for ivading England. The people were not vet recovered
from the fear and anxiety occasioned by the conifiracy, in which
Throlgmoron had been engaged, and as his discoveries appeared
now to be confirmed by additional evidence, not only all their for-
ner apprehensions recurred, but the conflcrnation became general
and excellive. As all the dangers, with which England had been
threatned for fomle years, flowed either immediately from Mary
herself, or from thoe, who imade use of her name to justify their
infirrections and conipiracics, tils gradually diminished the conm-
paiflon due to her situation, and the English, inflead of piting, be-
gan t ard to

ear and to hate her. Elizabeth, under wvhole wiI and pa-

cific reign the Englifih enjoyed tranquillity, and had ope ned sources
of wealth unknown to their ancestors, was extremely beloscd by
all her people; and regard to her flfety, not less than to their owni
interet, animated them against the Scotch Queen. In order to dil:

 ' .b~~~~~~ Occ'ii1ho i,1 21

courage her adherents, it was thought neceffiry to convince themn, abcittin ;n
by some public deed, of the attachment of the English to their:ll- \."
own Sovereign, and that any attelmpt againfl her life would prove
fatal to her rival. With this view, an w.'.iatia' was framed, the t,,b,., .
iubfcribers of which bound therfelves by the muet solemn oaths,
"to defend the Queen against all her enemies, foreign and domcf-

tic; and if violence hould be ofTered to her life, in order to
' favour the title of any pretender to the Crown, they not only en-
"' gagcd never to allow or acknowledge the perion, or persons, by

whoml, or for whom, such a detestable ad should be committed,
"b hut vowed, in the pretience of the Eternal God, to prosecute

f such person, or persons, to the death, and to pursue tem,
C with their utmiof vengeance, to tllcir utter overthrow and x-

tirpa-

Book VII."' tirpation-.%" Persons of all ranks subscribed this combination,
1584 with the greatest eagerness and unanimity t.
1584.

Whichgreatly MARY confidered this combination, not only as an avowed
al;irnm- r. design to exclude her from all right of succession, but as the certain

and immediate forerunner of her deftrution. In order to avert
this, he made such feeble efforts as were still in her power, and ent
Nauc her secretary to court, with offers of more entire rfigna-
tion to the will of Elizabeth, in all points, which had been the
occasion of their long enmity, than her past sufferings had been
hitherto able to extort +. But whether Mary adhered inflexibly to her
privileges, as an independant Sovereign, or yielding to the necefiity
of her situation, endeavoured, by conceflions, to ooth her rival,
tlei was equally unsuccessful. Iler firmness was imputed to obfli-
nacy, or to the secret hope of foreign assistance; her concefiions
were either believed to be insincere, or to flow from the fear of some
present danger. Her willingness, however, to comply with any
terms was so great, that Walsingham warmly urged his mifrrcfs
to come to a final agreement with her. But Elizabeth was per-
fuaded, that it was the spirit raised by the aff.ciation, which had
rendered her so paflive and compliant. She always imagined that
there was omething mysterious and deceitful in all Mary's acions,
and fufpeaed her of carrying on a dangerous correspondence with the
English Catholics, both within and without the kingdom. Nor
were her suspicions altogether void of foundation. Mary had,
about this time, written a letter to Sir Francis Inglcfield, urging
him to haften the execution of what fie calls the Great plot or DIf-
fignrif/nt, without hesitating on account of any danger in which it

X State Tiials, i. 122.

- Cd, cg.·

Ciel Ibid.,

mig(ht
ni,,1/

might involve her life, which he would most willingly part with, Book VII.
if, by that sacrifice, she could procure relief for so great a number '-

J584.

of the oppressed children of the Church *. Instead, therefore, of She is treated
hearkning to the overtures which the Scotch Queen made, or grant- with greater

rigour.

ing any mitigation of the hardships of which he complained, Eli-
zabeth resolved to take her out of the hands of the Earl of Shrews-
bury, and to appoint Sir Amias Paulet, and Sir Drue Drury, to be
her keepers. Shrewsbury had discharged his trust with great fide-
lity, during fifteen years, but, at the fame time, had treated Mary
with gentleness and refped, and had always sweetened harlh com-
mands, by the humanity, with which he put them in execution.
The fame politeness was not to be expected from men of an in-
ferior rank, whose severe vigilance, perhaps, was their chief re-
commendation to that employment, and the only merit, by which
they could pretend to gain favour or preferment t.

As James was no less eager, than ever, to deprive the banished (r,, a n,
nobles of Elizabeth's protection, ie appointed the Mafiter of Gray fvouriteof

the ling's.

his ambafiador to the court of England, and intrusted him with
the condut of a negotiation for that purpose. An honour for
which he was indebted to the envy and jealousy of the Earl of
Arran, Gray poffefied all the talents of a Courtier; a graceful per-
lon, an insinuating address, boundless ambition, and a restless and
intriguing spirit. During his residence in France, he had been ad-
mitted into the most irltimate familiarity with the Duke of Guise,
and in order to gain his favour, had renounced the Protcftant Re-
ligion, and profefied the utmnoft zeal fur the captive Qeicen, who
carried on a ccret corrclFondcnce with hilm, fromn which she cx-
pctled great aldv'ntages. On is return into Scotland, lie paid

trv c, 3. 2 26. I Card . Jco,

court

103

o10
Book VII. court to James with extraordinary afiduity, and his accomplih-

ments did not fail to make their usual impression on the King's heart.
Arran, who had introduced him, began quickly to dread his grow-
ing favour; and flattering himself, that absence would efface any
sentiments of tenderness from the mind of a young prince, pointed
him out, by his malicious praises, as the most proper person in the
kingdom, for an embassy of such importance; and contributed to
raise him to that high dignity, in order to haften his fall. Eliza-
beth, who had an admirable dexterity in discovering the proper in-
firuments for carrying on her designs, endeavoured, by careses, and
by presents, to secure Gray to her interest. The former flattered his
vanity, which was great; the latter supplied Ihis profulncfs, lwhich
was still greater. 1Ie abandoned himiclf without rclcrvc to Eli-
zabeth's directions, and not only undertook to preserve tle King
under the influence of England, but ated as a spy upon the Scotch
Qcueen, and betrayed to her rival every fecrct, that lie could draw
from her, by his high pretensions of zeal in her service '.

JIi interef GRAY'S credit with the English court was extremely galling to
wvith the court
f Ein'lacnd. the banihed nobles. Elizabeth no longer thought of employing

her power to restore them; he found it easy to govern Scotland,
by corrupting the King's favourites; and in compliance with Gray's
follicitations, fle commanded the exiles to leave the north of Eng-
land, and to remove into the heart of the kingdom. This ren-
dercd it difficult for them to hold any correspondence with their
cccmc partizans in Scotland, and almost impofiible to return thither with-

out her permillion. Gray, by gaining a point which Jamcs had so
much at heart, rivetted himself more firmly than ever in his fa-

St)yp, 3. 3,2. lclv. 316.

vour;

1o0

your; and by acquiring greater reputation, became capable of ferv- Book VII,
ing Elizabeth with greater success *.

I584.

ARRAN had now poflefled, for some time, all the power, the
riches, and the honours, that his immoderate ambition could desire, or 1,585.

Arran's cor-

the fondness of a Prince, who set no limits to his liberality towards ruption, and
his favourites, could bestow. The office of Lord Chancellor, theinilence
highest and most important in the kingdom, was conferred upon
him, even during the life of the Earl of Argyll, who succeeded
Athole in that dignityt. And the public beheld, with afton:ih-
ment and indignation, a man educated as a soldier of fortune, ig-
norant of law, and a contemner of justice, appointed to preside in
parliament, in the privy council, in the court offeflion, and intruf-
ed with the supreme disposal of the property of his fellow fubjedcs.
He was, at the fame time, governor of the caffles of Stirling and
Edinburgh, the two principal forts in Scotland; Provost of the city
of Edinburgh; and as if by all there accumulated dignities his me-
rit had not been sufficiently recompenced, he was created Lieutenant
General over the whole kingdom. No person was admitted into
the King's presence without his permission; no favour could be
obtained but by his mediation. James, occupied with youthful
amusements, devolved upon him the whole regal authority. Such
unmerited elevation increased his natural arrogance, and rendered
it intolerable. He was no longer content with the condition of a
subjed, but pretended to derive his pedigree from Murdo Duke of
Albany, and boasted, openly, that his title to the Crown was pre-
ferable to that of the King himself. But, together with these thoughts
of royalty, he rctained the mcannef,, suitable to his primitive state.
I is venality as a judge was scandalous, and was exceeded only by
that of his wife, who, int defiance of dcency, made lierfelfa party

* C.i.l, 3. ('4. 1 Crlwf. O!fli., of State, App. ,) .

vt~~~L., 11. P ~~~is

ill

P'
Vol, I.

THE HISTORY
Book VII. in almoff every quefifon which came to be decided, employed her

8~~ influence to corrupt, or to overawe the judges, and almost openly

dictated their decisions*. His rapaciousness as a minister was in-
satiable. Not satisfied with the revenues of so many offices; with
the estate and honours which belonged to the house of Hamilton;
or with the greater part of Gowrie's lands, which had fallen to his
share; he grasped at the poflcflions of several of the nobles. He
required Lord Maxwell to exchange part of his estate, for the for-
feited lands of Kinneil; and because he was unwilling to quit an
ancient inheritance for a poffeffon so precarious, he stirrcd up againli:
him, his old rival, the Laird of Johnston, and involved tat corner
of the kingdom in a civil war. He committed to prison te IEarl
of Athole, Lord Home, and the Mafterl of Cafils ; the irll, bc-
ci£ife lhe would not divorce his wife, a daughter of the Earl of
Cowrie, and entail his estate on him ; the second, becautc he wlas
unwilling to part with some lands, adjacent to one of his cftates;
and the third, for refusing to lend him money. His spics and in-
formers filled the whole country, and intruded themselves into every
company. The nearefi neiglhburs distrustcd and feared each other.
All familiar focicty was at an end. Even the common intercourles
of Ihumanity were interrupted, no man knowing in whom to con-
fide, or where to utter his complaints. There is not perhaps in
hiitory, any example of a minister so univcrfally detcfLab)le to a na-
tion, or who more jufily deservcd its detestation t.

ARRAN, notwithstanding, regardless of the fentimcnts, and de-

fpiiing the murmurs of the people, gave a loose to his natural ten-
prc-, and proceeded to as still more violent. David I ome of Ar-
gaty, and Patrick his rotller, having received letters fioml one of

* Catl,. 3. 33 . Scotlru'vct's Sta.gcriiLg, Sttc, 7. '} Spots. 337, 33'

tle

the banifded Lords, about private business, were condemned and Book VII.
put to death, for holding correspondence with rebels. Cunning- --
hameof Drumwhafel, and Douglas of Mains, two gentlemen of 55
honour and reputation, were accused of having conspired, with
the exiled nobles, to seize the King's person. A single witness only
appeared; the evidence they produced of their innocence was un-
answerable; their accuser himself not long after acknowledged that
he had been suborned by Arran ; and all men believed the charge
against them to be groundless: they were found guilty,, notwith- ~ ":"'
flanding, and suffered the death of traitors '.

ABOUT the fame time, that these gentlemen were punifned for P.iry con-

a pretended conspiracy, Elizabeth's life was indangered by a real one. Elilbe't'l
Parry, a Dotor of laws, and a Member of the House of Com-
mons, a man vain and fantastic, but of a resolute spirit, had lately
been reconciled to the Church of Rome; and fiaught with the
zeal of a new convert, he offered to demonifrate the ncerity of his
attachment to the religion which he had embraced, by killing Eli-
zabeth. Cardinal Allen had published a book, to prove the mur-
der of an excommunicated Prince to be not only a lawful, but a
meritorious adtion. The Pope's Nuncio at Venice, the Jefutits both
there and at Paris, the English exiles, all approved of the deficgn
The Pope himself exhorted him to persevere ; and granted him, for
his encouragement, a plenary indulgence, and remiflion of his fins.
Cardinal di Como wrote him a letter to the fame purpose. But
though he often got accc to the (Qeell, ear, or ome remailing,
ietnf of duty, restraincd him from perpetrating the crile. IInp-
pily, his intention was at lafl diicovcrcd by Ncvil, the oly pcroii
ii iLngland, to whom lie had communicatci it; and lie hiillcl

* S .oItv,'. 33j8. C ld. 3. 794.

107
p )

Iia 'in[ ,

Book VII. having voluntarily confefed his guilt, he fiifered the punishment

-*-'s which it deserved ".
1585.

March z.
A severe la- THESE repeated conspiracies againit their Sovereign awakened the
tute, which indignation of the English Parliament, and produced a veryextra-
proved fatal
to Mary. ordinary itatute, which, in the end, proved fatal to the Queen of'

Scots. By this law the Association in defence of Elizabeth's life was'
ratified, and it was further enacted; " that if any rebellion shall be
"excited in the kingdom, or any thing attempted to the hurt of
"her Majesty's person, by or for any person pretending a title to

the Crown, the Queen flall impower twenty four persons, by a
' commifTion under the great tkal, to examine into, and pals fen-
" tence upon such offences; and after judgment given, a procla-
"mation flall be iued, declaring the persons whom they find guilty,
"excluded from any right to the Crown ; and her Majesty's sub-
"jeds may lawfully pursue cvery one of them to the death, with

all their aiders and abettors. And if any design against the life
" of the Queen take effect, the persons, by or for whom, such a

detestable ad is executed, and their iies, being any wile assent-

"ing or privy to the fame, flall be disabled for ever from pre-
' tending to the Crown, and be pursued to death in the like man-

ner -." This a was plainly levelled at the Qeen of Scots;

and whether we confider it as a voluntary expression of the zeal
and concern of the nation for Elizabeth's safety, or whether we im-
pute it to the influence, which that artful Princess preserved over
her parliaments, it is no easy matter to reconcile it with the general
principles of jufticc, or humanity. Mary was thereby rendered
accountable not only for her own actions, but for those of others;

' State Trials, Vol. , 0 o3.
Io8

1 sta te Tlialsl, ol. . 1 -, 3

in consequence of which, (he might forfeit her right of fuccef-Book VII.
lion, and even her life itself. L- -i

1 585.

MARYjufIly confidered this a, as a warning to prepare for Therigour

the worfl extremities. Elizabeth's ministers, it is probable, had hit was trl;t-
resolved, by this time, to take away her life and suffered books to ed, incread.
be publiffled, in order to persuade the nation, that this cruel and
unprecedented measure was not only necessary, but just *. Even
that short period of her days which remained, they rendered un-
comfortable, by every hardship, and indignity, which it was in
their power to inflict. Almost all her servants were difmifed ; Me
was treated no longer with the refpe due to a Queen ; and though
the rigour of seventeen years imprisonment had broken her con-
litution, flie was confined to two ruinous chambers, scarce habita-
ble, even in the middle of fumnmer, by reason of cold. Notwith-
tfanding the scantiness of her revenue, he had been accustomed
to distribute regularly ome alms among the poor in the village ad-
joining to the castle. Paulet, now, refused her liberty to per-
form this pious and humane office, which had afforded her great
consolation, amidfi her own sufferings. The castle, in which the.
resided, was converted into a common prison; and a young man,
fufpedcd of Popery, was confined there, and treated with such rigour,
under her eye, that he died of the ill usage. She often complain-
ed to Elizabeth of there multiplied injuries, and expoflulated as
became a woman, and a Queen; but as no political reason now
obliged that Princess to amuse her any longer with fallacious hopes,
far from granting her any redrcfs, she did not even deign to give
her any anFwcr. The King of France, closely allied to Elizabeth,
on whom lie depended for afiltancc, was afraid of espousing Mary's

4 Strypcl, :. 9use

cause~

log

Book VII. caule, with any warmth ; and all his foliicitations in her behalf
' .-,- - were feeble, formal, and inefficacious. But Caftelnau, the French

58 ambassador, whose compalffon and zeal for the unhappy Queen

supplicd the defects in his instructions, remonfirated with such vi-
gour against the indignities, to which fie was exposed, that, by his
importunity, he prevailed at length to have her removed to Tuth-
bury ; though the was confined, the greater part of another winter,
in her present wretched habitation .

A brcach e- NEITHER the insults of her enemies, nor the neg!ca of her
.c ul ;1L'- fiiends, made such an imprefion on Mary, as the ingratitude of her

ii 1on. James had hitherto treated his mother witll fiial refpred,
and had even entered into ncgociations with her, wlhich gave urn
brage to Elizabeth. But as it was not her interief that this good
correspondence ilould continue, Gray, who, on his return into
Scotland, found his favour with the King greatly increased by the
success of his embaliy, persuaded him to write a harli and unduti-
ful letter to his mother, in which he exprefly refused to acknow-
ledge her to be Queen of Scotland, or to confider his affairs as
conneced, in any wife, with hers. This cruel requital of her ma-
ternal tenderness overwhelmed Mary with sorrow and dcfpair.
" Was it for this, laid flie, in a letter to the French ambattador,
ival'ch 24.

" that I have indured fb much, in order to preserve for him the in-
' heritance, to which I have a iut right ? I amn far from envllyiv
" his authority in Scotland. I desire no power there; nor wilh t'o
" ft my foot in that kingdom, if it were not for the pleafiure of
' once embracing a son, vwhom I have hithcrto loved with too ten-

l

dcr affction. Whatever he either enjoys, or expces, he derived
it from me. Froml him, I never received aliilancc, fillpply, cr

* J<'b,, v-. 2. -6- 59So

(' benefit

I 1
( benefit of any kind. Let not my allies treat him any longer as a

King; he holds that dignity by my consent; and if a speedy

"repentance does not appease nyjuft resentment, I will load him
" with a parent's curse, and surrender my Crown, with all my pre-
"tensions, to one, who will receive them wth ritude, and de-
"fend them with vigour *." The love which James bore to his mo-
ther, whoim he1 had never known, nay whom lie had been early taught
to confider as the mod abandoned perftn of her iex, cannot be sup-
posed ever to have been ardent ; and ic did not now take any pains
to regain her favour. But whether her indignation at his undutiful
behaviour, added to her bigotted attachment to Plopter, prompted
Mary at any time to thilnk ferioully of dilinheritig her son ; or whe-
ther these threatnings were uttered in a sudden sally of disappointcd
affeLtion ; it is now no caf;y matter to determine. Some papers which
.'re fill extant seem to render the former not improbable -.

CARES of anCother k!ind, and no Ics dilcuieting, occupied Eliza- Dal.,-c. :-

beth's tholughts. The calm, which lhe ihad long ciioyed, felcmed now .li:bl.i
to be at an end ; and such storms were gathering in every quarter,
as filcd her with jt alarm. All the neighlboturing nations had
underlgone revoliutions, extremely to her diltldvvantage. 'i he great
quaiitics, whichl Henry III. lhad dilf layed in his youth, and which
raied the expc5ations of his fulbed-s so high, vanished on llis as-
cending the throne ; and his acquiring iifprenmc power eemns not.
only to have corrupted his heart, but to have impaired his under-
ilanding-. l e oon loft the cicemi and affecion of the nation; and
a life, ivided between the au1eritics of a superStitious devotion,
and te xta ncis of

ethe molt diflblutc dcbauchery, rendered
himn as contemptible, as lie was odious on account ol- his rapacioi-l-

Scc N' xl.

Book VII.

--J55 ,585.
Jebl', `:. 57· . ,e APPUrI. l~lu X.

Book VII. ness, his profusion, and the fondness with which he doted on two

--~-. unworthy minions. On the death of his only brother, those fen-
585' timents of the people burfi out with violence. Henry had no chil-

dren, and though but thirty two years of age, the succession of the
Crown was already confidered as open. The King of Navarre, a

from the pro-
greil of tlhe distant descendant of the royal family, but the undoubted heir to
leaguc; the Crown, was a zealous roteflant. The prospect of an event,

so fatal to their Religion, as his ascending the throne of France,
alarmed all the Catholics in Europe. And the Duke of Guise,
countenanced by the Pope, and aided by the King of Spain, ap-
peared as the defender of the Romi-,f faith, and the afiertor of the
Cardinal of Bourbon's right to the Cr wn. In order to unite the
party, a bond of confederacy was formed, diflinguifhed by the name
of the Holy Leagzl. All ranks of men joined in it with emulation.
The spirit spread with the irresistible rapidity, which was natural
to religious paflions, in that age. The defirudion of the Reforma-
tion not only in France, but all over Europe, eemed to be the ob-
jea and wish of the whole party. And the Duke of Guise, the
head of this mighty and zealous body, acquired authority in the
kingdom, far superior to that, which the King hireifl pofcflfed.

fiom the Philip II. by the conquest of Portugal, had greatly icreafed the
powerofPhi- naval power of Spain, alnd had at last reduced under is dominion

that portion of the Continent, which lies beyond the Pyrenean
mountains, and which nature items to have defincd to form one
great Monarchy. William Prince of Orange, who first encouraged
the inhabitants of the Netherlands to afiert their liberties, and wlhoe
wisdom and valour formed and protected the rising commonwealth,
had fallen by the hands of an affaflin. The superior genius of the
Prince of Parma had given an entire turn to the fate of the war in
the Low Countries ; all his cnterprizcs, concerted with consummate
,skill, and executed with equal bravery, had been attended with un-

inter-

interrupted fucccfs; and the Dutch, reduced to the lafi extremity, Book VI!.
were on the point of falling under the dominion of their ancient C- ---'
marler. 5

NONE of thole circumfcances, to xlhich Elizabeth had hitherto EHer ,i t.,i

owed her security, exitled any longer. Shc could derive no ad-

.

vantage from the jealouly, which had iubfilicd between France and
Spain; Philip, by means of his confederacy with the Duke of
Guile, had an equal sway in the councils of both kingdons. The
Hugonots were unable to contend with the power of thl
league; and little could be expectedi froml any diversion thc
might create. Nor was it probable tlat the Nctlherliands could long
occupy the arms, or divide the flrength of Spain. In this fituatioi
of the affairs of Europe, it became ncceihary for Elizabeth to form
a new plan of condu ; and her wisdom in forming it, was not
greater than the vigour, with which lue carried it on. The mea-
fures, most fitable to her natural temper, and which fll had hi-
therto purued, were cautious and safe; tofe, ile now adopted,
were enterprizing and hazardous. She-preferred peace, but was not
afraid of war; and was capable, when compelled by neceiity, not
only of defending herself with spirit, but of attacking her enemies
with a boldnciS, which averted (danger from her own domi-
nions. She immediately furnished the -Hugonots with a con-
fidlerable supply in money. She carried on a private negociation
wilth Hlenry III. who, though compelled to join the league, hated
the leaders (o it, and willied for their dfl'i-rction. She openly
undertook the protection of the Dutch cotmmonwealth, and sent a
powerful arl:, to its aliillance. Slhc endcavoured to frmn a general
cotnfed-racv Volf the Ir'(tcte.lLn Princes, in optoflition to the Popif( i i:ll,\ 1 ,
leartie. She detcermi nei to proceed with the utmost rigour atgaifl Pjitj, ,','
the (2,et I of' Scot:', whol fffc rin's, and i rijits as; )(rded her enl ile- , .,...

VoL. I
i i, (mi),

Book VII. mies a specious pretence for invading her dominions. She resolved to
l^vT - redouble her endeavours in order to effet a closer union with Scot-

1585 land, and to extend and perpetuate her influence over the councils

of that nation.

SIE found it no difficult matter to induce most of the Scotch

courtiers, to promote all her designs. Gray, Sir John MIvaitland,
who had been advanced to the office of Secretary, which his brother
formerly held, Sir Lewis Bellenden the Justice Clerk, who had
:a~y,) succeeded Gray as the King's resident at London, were the persons

in whom fle chiefly confided. In order to diret and quicken their
motions, flie despatched Sir Edward WVotton along with Bellenden
into Scotland. This man was gay, well-bred, and entertaining;
lie excelled in all the excrciles, icr which Jarnes had a paion ; and
amlufed the young King, by relating the adventures he had met
with, and the obfirvations lie had made, during a long residence in
foreign countries ; but under the veil of these sUperficial qualities, he
concealed adangerousand intriguing 1pirit. I-Ie soon grew into highr fa-
your with James, and while he was ifemingly attentive only to plca-
lure and diversions, lie acquired influence over the public councils,
to a degree which it was indecent for a RPralncr to loisei, '.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable to te nation,
,,,,, \1xith than tile proposal he nmade of a firi alliance between tihe two

kingdoms, in defencc of thec Reformed Rcligion. The rapid and
alarming progrels of the popilli league tcileed to call on all Protef-
tant princes, to unite for the orcecrivatiun of their colmmon li tith.
j,!> j~ lames emibraced the overture with warth, a an Colnvention of

ltatcs ipowereid lhim to conlcludec fich a treaty, and cilngagd to

ratily

ratify it in parliament --. The alacrity, with which James con- Book VII.
curred in this measure, must not be wholly ascribcd either to his owln '"
zeal, or to Wotton's addrels ; it was owing in part to Elizabeth's
liberality. As a mark of her motherly afl'icon for the young
King, Ile fettied on him an ainnual pension of ooo pounds ; tlie
fame i-Un which her father had allotted her, lefore she ascended
the throne. This circumfance, vlwic fhle took care to mention,
rendered a fum, which in that age was fir from beingb inconide-
rable, a very acceptable prefcnt to tle King, whose rcLienues, d(ur-
ing a long minority, had been almost totally diilipated *

BUT the chief object of Wotton's intrigues, was to ruin Arran. ,i.,,, .

While a minion, so odious to the nation, continued to govern the A"."
King, his affiiance could be of little advantage to Elizabeth. And
though Arran, ever since his interview with Hunfdane, had ap-
peared extremely zealous for her interefr, file could place no great
confidence in a man, whose conduct was so capricious and irregular,
and who, notwithstanding his protellations to the contrary, still
continued a secret correspondence both with Mary, and with the
Duke of Guise. The banished Lords were attached to England
from aftiction, as well as principle, and were tl'c only persons
among the Scots whom, in any dangerous exigency, lle could
thoroughly trust. Before Bellenden left London, they had been
iumlmoned thither, under colour of vindicating theimfelves from his
accuiations, but, in reality, to concert with him the most proper
mcafiurcs for restoring them to their country. Wotton pursued this
plan, and endeavoured to ripen it for execution; and it was greatly
facilitatcd by an event, ncither uncommon nor considerable. Sir
loln lIurfl', and Ker of Fcrlnilerfl, the Englifi and Scotch war-

1 Spotr~v. 339.

-* C>dJ 3 55,
-2 -

lIe
den.,

Book VII. dens of the middle marches, having met, according to the cuflom

-v8 of the borders, about mid-summer, a fray arose, and Lord Ruffel,

the Earl of Bedford's eldelf son, happened to be killed. This scuffle
was purely accidental, but Elizabeth chose to confider it as a delign
formed by Ker, at the infligation of Arran, to involve the two
kingdoms in war. She infited that both of them should be deli-
vered up to her; and though James eluded that demand, he was
obliged to confine Arran in St. Andrew's, and Ker in Aberdeen.

Aflifs the During his abfencc from court, Wotton and his aflociates carried
ianiflcd no-
le.c no- on their intrigues without interruption. By their advice, the baniih-

cd noblcs cndeavoured to accommodate their differences with Lord
John, and Lord Claud, the Duke of Chatelherault's two sons, vwhom
Morton's violence had driven out of the kingdom. Their com-
mon sufferings, and common interest, induced both parties to bury
in oblivion the ancient discord, which had fubfificd between the
houles of Hamilton and Douglas. By Elizabeth's pcrmilion, they
returned in a body to the borders of Scotland. Arran, \who had
again recovered favour, infitled on putting the kingdom in a posture
of defence. But Gray, Bellenden, and Maitland, secretly thwarted
all his measures. Some neceffiry orders they prevented fom bcing
ibed ; others they rendered incffcdual, by the manner of exe-
cution; and all of them were obeyed slowly, and with reluc-
tance *

VorTTroN's frtile brain was, at the fame time, ig with ano-

ther, and more dangerous plot. IIe had contrived to ifze the
King, and to carry him by force into England. But the dcfi;ii

j' ' 3 ti\t . \.1 ,

VX :;

was happily discovered; and in order to avoid the puniflment his Book VII.
treachery merited, he departed without taking leave *.

i585
MEAN while, the banified Lords hastened the execution of their They return

into >cotlknj,

enterprize; and as their friends and vaflals were now ready tojoil and i.err co,:I
them, they entered Scotland. Wherever they came, they were ciled to th
welcomed as the deliverers of their country, and the molt fervent
prayers were put up to heaven, for the success of their arms. They
advanced, without losing a moment, towards Stirling, at the head
of o,oo3 men. The King, though he had alemnbled an army
superior in number, could not venture to meet them in the field, with
troops, whose loyalty was extremely dubious, and who, at b,
were far fiom being hearty in the caue ; nor was either the town
or caille provided for a icge The gates, however, of both were
shut, and the nobles encamped at St. Ninians. That .flie night o .
they furprized he town, or more probably it was betrayed into their
hands; and Arran, who had undertaken to defend it, was obliged
to save imfclfl by a precipitate flight. Next morning they invcft-
ed the cafllc, i which there were not provilions for twenty four
hours; and James was necefihtated immediately to hearken to terms
of accommiodation. They were not o elated with iucccs, as to
urge extravagant demands, nor was the Kinlg unwilling to lmake
cvery reasonable conceflion. They obtained a pardon, in the ollo(-
ample form, of all te offences, they had committed ; t priln-
cipal foits in the kingdom were, by way of Iccurity, put into their
hands Craw\ford, Montruf, and Colonel Stewart were rcmovci
flomn the King's preItnce ; and a parliament was called, to clabhllill
tranquillity in thie natioun '-.

*. M ';h, ....

I ' !J ] 7 ' ,

'TlO!.: , ,C

117

Book VII. THOUcH a great majority in this parliament consisted of the con-

t-8-- federate nobles and their adherents, they were far from discovering
.5 pXi. t. a vindicive spirit. Satisfied with procuring an at, refloring them
D)ci nlber ic. to their ancient honours and eflates, and ratifying the pardon grant-

ed by the King, they seemed willing to forget all past errors in the ad-
ministration, andfpared James the mortification of feeing his Mi-
nifters branded with any public note of infamy. Arran, alone,
deprived of all his honours, stripped of his borrowed spoils, and
declared an enemy to his country by public proclamation, funk back
into oblcuritv, and mufl, henceforth, be mentioned by his primitive
title of Captain James Stewart. As he had been, duiing his un-
merited prosperity, the objeCt of the hatred and indignation of his
countrymen, they beheld his fall without pity, nor did all his sus-
ferings mitigate their resentment in the least degree.
(Chl!,ich-af- THE Clergy were the only body of men, who obtained no redrcfs of

their grievances by this Revolution. The confederate nobles had, all
along, asseted to be confidcred as guardians of the privileges and dif-
cipline of the Church. In all their manifefos they had declared tleir
resolution to restore these, and by that popular pretence, had gained
many friends. It was now natural to cxped tome fruit of these promifcs,
and some returns of gratitude towards many of the most eminent
preachers, who had suffered in their cause, and who demanded the
repeal of the laws paiffd the preceding year. The King, how-
ever, was resolute to maintain thcfc laws in full authority ; and as
the nobles were extremely follicitous not to disgust him, by insisting
on any difagreable rcqucfl, the claims of the Church in this, as well
as in many former intianles, \wre filcrificcd to the intcreft of the
laity. The Miniflers gave vent to their indignation in the pulpit, and

thlci

119

their impatience under the disappointment broke out in some Pook VII.
expreflions, extremely difrefpecaful even towards the King himself*. 5

I5S6.

THE Archbiliop of St. Andrew's, too, felt the e s of their

anger. The Provincial Synod of Fife summoned him to appealr,
and to anfwver for his contempt of the decrees of former Aem-
blies, i prcfuming to exercise the funllcion of a 3iflhop. And
though he refultd to acknowledge the jurisdiCtion of the court, and
appealed fromt it to the King, a sentence of excommunication,
equally indecent and irregular, was pronounced againfi him, .\ nl;,
Adamlon, with no lets indecency, thundered his archiepilcopal ex-
communication againlt Melvil, and some other of his oppo-
nents.

SOON after, a General AfTembnly was held, in which the King7

with some difficulty, obtained t a ad, permitting the ine and
oflice of a 3ifilop iill to contillue in tile Church. The power of
tle ordcl, hoever, was con iltlrabl)y retrenched. '-Te cxercil
of difciplii-, and the iipetlion of the life and docrlinc of the
Clergy, vcireC committed to Prelbyterics, in which Billiops should
be allowed no other prc-eminence, but that of prclidinr as pr-
Fptual m2oerators. They thcmfelves were declared to be lbl;cdl , in
the fame manner as odier pallors, to the juriflidion of the (;cneral
Afih:mbly. And as the cdilcuflionl of the Ar-clbit]lop's appeal mihL
have kindled unufLall heats in the Allembly, that afhir- wvs tcrmilnat.
cd by a compromlil'. -Ie renounced any claim o I;llbprcmlcy ov:r
the Chuircll, and p i-omil'd to demieanl himllelf llitabilv to lle cli1-
raclr of a iilhiop, as dclcrilil by St. Paul. The A lcmnlvl, w\itih-
.out cxsm ining tlic louldiitiois ot tile lietcInc of cx:eommuni -
i c

t ,11

120
Book VIJ. tion, declared that it should be held of no effeCt, and restored him

./,J ,

to all the privileges, which he enjoyed before it was pronounced.
i 5S6. Notwithflanding the extraordinary tenderness shewn for the honour

of the fynod, and the delicacy and refpct, with which its jurifdic-
tion was treated, several members were so zealous as to protest a-
gailli: this decilion *.
b
A l.a,lJ l& THE court of Scotland was now filled with persons, so warmly

Utluc. attached to Elizabeth, that the league between the two king-

doms, proposed last ear, met with no interruption, but from D'Ef-
neval the French Envoy. James himfelffirft proposed to renew the
negociation. Elizabeth did not susser such a favourable opportu-
J_:' 5. nity to flip, and inflantly despatched Randolph to conclude a treaty,

which fle so much desired. The danger to which the Protefiant
religion was exposed, by the late combination of the Popish powers
for its deftrudion, and the necessity of a frit confederacy among
those, who had embraced the Reformation, in order to obfi-lut
their pernicious designs, were mentioned as the foundation of the
league. The chief articles in it were, that both parties should bind
themfclves to defend the Evangelic Religion ; that the league fhouil
be ofifenive and defensive againll all, who flall endeavour to dillurb
the excrciicof religion in either kingdomn ; that if one of the two
partics be invaded, the other, notwithilanding any former alliance,
should nut dir-ctly or indirectly allifl the invader; that if England
be invaded in any part remote from Scotland, Jlmcs fould afift
the QeCCn with 20oo horfc, and 5coo foot; that if tlic cn my
landed or approached within ixtv Imiles of Scotland, the Kc in l silo ll
take tic field with ]is whole forces, in the iillme annr, as he
rvould do in defClce of his own kingdom. Elizabetlh, in -turr

CIA 3. 8ol. Sp

iinuier-

undertook to aEt in defence of Scotland, if it flould be invaded. Book VII.
At the fame time, fle aured the King that no fep should be taken, T
which miglit derogate in any degree from his pretensions to the
English Crown *. Elizabeth expressed great satisfaction with a
treaty, which rendered Scotland an useful ally, inflead of a dange-
rous neighbour, and afforded her a degree of ecurity on that fide,
which all her ancellors had aimed at, but none of them had been
able to obtain. Zeal for religion, togethcr with the blefiings of
peace, which both kingdoms had enjoyed during a considerable pe-
ricl, had so far abated the violence of national antipathy, that the
King's conduct was universally acceptable to his own people -.

THE acquittal of Archbald Douglas, at this time, expoled Jame.

to much and deserved censure. This man was deeply engaged in
the conipiracy againfl the life of the King his father. Both Mor-
ton, and Binny one of his own servants, who ftffired for that crime,
had accused him of being prefcnt at the murder Il. Ie had escaped
punifiment by fying into England, and James had often required
Elizabeth to deliver up a person so unworthy of her protecion. He
now obtained a licence, from the King himnfelf, to return into Scot-
land; and after undergoing a mock trial, calculated to conceal ra-
ther than to dcted his guilt, he was not only taken into favour by
the King, but fcnt back to the court of England, with the honou-
rable character of his alubalafldor. James was now of such an age,
that his youth ad i:nexperience cannot be pleaded in cxcule for this
indeceInt tranlction. It imulf be imputed to the cxccflivc facility
cf his tmper, vwhlicl often ld himl to gratify his courtiers, at tlc
:c'?nccc cf his own dignity and rcputationl '..

Spu,,tiw. . :. ' 513. 1 Sc Appiij. Nq XiI.
Stipor. .' . CtiJ. . ) .

No r

2
IK

Book VIT. NOT long after, t.e inconfidcrate atTecion of the English Catho-

~ g'-6- lies towards Mary, and their implacable resentment againit Eliza-
P.C o'r Bi. be-th, gave rife to a conf)iracy, which proved fatal to the one Queen,
inn;'::,io- l^ct an ilindelible slain on the reputation of the other, and prelfeitld
,!,i! ll.i ^ - a fpeftael to Europe, of which there had hitherto been no example

in the hiflory of mankind.

DOCTOR Gifor;d, Gilbert Gifford, and Hlodgfon pricfts educated

in the seminary at Rihcims, hadl ot ado te a; ctrat an and nthu-
fiaflic notion, that the Bull of Pius V. a1ainfI Elizablth was di ated
immediately by the Holy Ghot. This wvild opinion they iflilicd
into Savage, an ofiicer in the Spanri; army, n'.tC for lis fluriou
zeal, and daring courage; and pei.dcd him that no lervice could
be l0 acceptahble to hcavcn, as to take away tlhe life of an excim-
A , unicated IHeCetic. Savage, ea. r to ot.iin tle Ct-ron of m ar-

tyr':dom, bouCnd lhimfcli, by solemn vow, to kill Ilizab1it. Bli-

-, a trafiickin prieif, ba d at that timle come over to Paris, and

olic.,cd .CndCza

tihe ,Spii-h ambalTdor th'Cer, to procure an in-

vuLI'on of El. ad, vhile the of tihe leau e lo pro/pr-
'.'.!?, and the .il om leit I;nad b fendilng tlmany cf the (OnelCn'
ILci troops into the Netherlands. PI,'. t and the n'Ili:h ex';iles dI.-

l )ns r.ted the fruitlfscls o s iuci an attempt,

lnlesl Elizal'thI were

-rdi cut oi, or te invadicrs leciredc of a powt)crl concurrencel' ol
t-eii' l!andi:g. If it could be ho,,ped tlhat cither of the . c veis woulhi
hape:,i, c Ci nil a id \v.s prtom!'d; and in thli man time B..lard
iv'a le't back to renew his ii.trLguts.,

HIt comumunicatcd lis d(figns to Anthony ILbi:'ton, a v,\iu.,'u

,',entic2aln in i)crbt'ihic, ul' a kr'iul :tune, :n li.:iy anil :.;
neil'tie; , \who lavilgr contraslted, duling lIi; iEl ( 1'e. in ['ee.a',

;o
" :niliairtv ', itil tIle Arelibifhlio of (1tl;go\v, hi;d been rc1,omic(.enl.!1

.e1
122

ed by him to the Qieen of Scots. I-e concurred with Paget in Book VIT.
conideriin the death of Elizabeth as a necefiary preliminary to any '"',.
invasion. Ballard gave him iopcs that an end would soon be put to
her days, and imparted to him Savage's vow, wlio was now in Lon-
don waiting for an opportunity to frilke the blow. But Babington
thought the attempt of too much importance, to rely on a ingle
hand for the execution of it, and propoed that five resolute gen-
tlemen ffiould be joined with Savage in an cnterprize, the fcccfs
of which, was the foundation of all their hopes. He oci-ed to
find out persons willing to undertake the service, whoe honour,
iecrecv, and courage, they might safely trust. Ile accorIingly
optened the matter to Edward Wifolr, 'Thoru-s Salilmbry, Charles
Tilnev, Chiioc Tichbournc, I:obert Gage, John 'lave:l.', RoberL
Barnvevll, John Charnock, IHenry DuIt, Jolihn Joe, nld olly, a
of tlhem, c' ccpt Polly, whioe buliiag f£orw\ud zel ilntroducc
LiI i;nto their Iociety, gentlemen of -good fmilic; , united together
iI the l'oJs of private' iiendiip, tre'cthlcl ' by the more power-

1 t'i r
! iou li. ylly col,.ltt.io ,s wcie held ; t'il ' pI an I .

:~u.l

Ui r.I r, i°

"o C.1rkati-. was *:.t

. ,' fe icl i; a: tll ir dilr ct par.t., a':i, .

to take arv ,

... ; 'tedaol; o oe2,: th.e (,:: of

' i 's;,

a'!:d

o;:noi'tiaut ilerviC of :all, fell to Tichi. n. c a:d a;.a' , \.

it}'i 1,.r

inb ciate ,. A nd 1f total ly had tlit r bij.tt:d p:

l 1ia c c 't; t- i:!,i-

taelo, \p ...

,i v( ,;.ii oor, vci v'im. . l ii:.'t, s : l

coant:larc, :1 jp.carlcd, t>thena no le

II) t' w:ca!i ):llicl!' t :I;n ii: \ -a . ; J. ..

a.iJ i!) o(J( i to jlL

p i'etliate tlil n: ii i ' r it,

ili',' Ii;i ,

th ie ll:l ai
(d ,', (* !: ','" the p'ortr it; ol tilL ii. fl i , \ ' L .. 1 .1

,
' ir ton

1? 3

Book VII. ington in the middle, and a motto intimating that they were jointly

6C-' embarked in some hazardous design.

1586.

Difcoveredby The conspirators, as appears by this wanton and imprudent in-
Vallingham.

fance of vanity, seem to have thought a discovery scarce pofible,
and neither diflrufted the fidelity of their companions, nor doubted
the success of their undertaking. But while they believed that their
machinations were carried on with the most profound and impene-
trable secrecy, every ftep they took was fully known to Walsingham.
Polly was one of his spies, and had entered into the conspiracy
with no other design than to betray his abociates. Gilbert Gifford,
too, having been sent over to England to quicken the motions of
the conspirators, had been gained by VWalfinghamn and gave him sure
intelligence of all their projeds. That vigilant miniller immedi-
ately imparted the difcovcries which lie had made to Elizabeth ; and
without communicating the matter to any other of the Counsellors,
they agreed, in order to underffand the plot more perfectly, to wai
till it was ripened into some form, and brought near the point oI
exccution.

Ar last, Elizabeth thought it dangerous and criminal to expcdc
, ~,'.ild her own life, and to tempt providence any farther. Bilard, the

priin mover in the whole onljliracy, was arrefled. His abciate,
difconccrtcd and firuck with af{onilllnlent, endeavoured to fIve
thilemllvcs by ilight. lut, vithin a few days, all of them, excc.t
\Vindilor, \wc'c fci cd in d(litlrcit places of' the kingdom, and( c' ;n-
m; iicii to the T\ver. Tihoutii tlicy had ucrtaken tc p;'t, they
walnted thle iilrll and dctermiliicd firiit of alli.fillns; and, il ii tcicl
1.v f;ca- o 1 ilopl, (liCiovcrcd( all they knc\v. The iiglnatiun (o
tl;,: peplrCiC', and their impatiCence to revenge Ich an execrable c(m-

biln:tin
124

bination against the life of their Sovereign, hallened their trial, Book VII.
and all of them suffered the death of traitors . '----

i5 86.

Sept. z.o
THUS far Elizabeth's conduc may be pronounced both prudent Mary is.nc

cufed of being

and laudable, nor can fle be accused of violating any law of hu- all 2cCOsllnicg
inanity, or of taking any precautions beyond what were necessary pitc""C
for her own safety. But a tragical scene followed, with regard to
which, posterity will pass a very different judgment.

T-IE frantic zeal of a few rash young men accounts sufficiently for

all the wild and wicked designs which they had formed. But this was
not the light, in which Elizabeth and her Ministers choe to place
the conspiracy. They represented Babington and his aflociates to
be infiruments employed by the Queen of Scots, the real though
secret author of so many attempts againf the life of Elizabeth, and
the peace of ler kingdoms. They produced letters, which they
ascribcd to her, in support of this charge. These, as they gave
out, had come into their hands, by a very singular and nmyftrious
method of conveyance. Giftsrd, on his return into England, h ad
been intrufied with letters to Mary ; but in order to make a trial cf his
fidelity or address, they were only blank papers made up in that
form. These being afely delivered, he was aftcrwirds employed
without farther fcruplc. By 'Vallingham's pcrmiion, and the
connivance of Paulet, he bribed a tradefmian in the neighbourhood -
of Chartley, whlither Mary had been conveyed, who depolited the
letters in a hole in thle wall of, the eaclle, covered with a oofte llonc.
Tlence they \ twre takenll tllc (Qtccn, a:d in the fate manner,
lher a11lwcs retrned. All tlie c wcre carried to Wallngliam

~~lvul's I'C'Lllrll 1 -, -~~~~~~~~~~~~.

. J 515 St '
tc Vol 1. ;,?

1]ook VII. opened by him, decyphered, fealed again so dexterously that th
. 6.--- fraud could not be perceived, and then transmitted to the persons

iT. '
to lwom thcy wcre directed. To letters to Bablingtoni, with fevral

to Mendoza, Paget, Englcfield, and the English fugitives, were pro-
cured by this artifice. It was given out that in these letters Mary ap-
proved of the conspiracy, and even of the assassination; that fihe
directed them to proceed with the utmost circumpedion, and
not to take arms till foreign auxiliaries were ready tojoin them ; that
flte recommended the Earl of Arundcl, his brothers, and the young
Earl of Northumberland, as proper persons to conduC ad to add
reputation to their enterprize; that file advised them, if poibie,
to excite at the fame tile sone c

om motion in Ireland ; and above

all, besought them to concert with care the means of her eflape,
fuggefiing to them several expedients for that purpoke.

ALL thcf circumfi-ances were opened at the trial of the confii-

rators. And whilc the nation was under the influence of tholb
terrors which the aociation had raised, and the late danger lhad
anrmnented, they were believed \without hesitation or enquiry, and
lprcad a general alarm. ,Mary's zeal for her reliion was well
kno\wn ; and in that age, examples of the violent and ihn;ruinary
jni;it which it in'pired, were numerous. All the cabals ^;aiill tle
pt.cc of the kingdom for many years Ileld been carriedl on in her
nJac ; alnd it n.v
i ;appears evidently, aid tlie Englifl, that the sAfety

t'i t:& one ()ji'en i's i,p.-:it aie wi i thait of the other. Why

lt enL, a d;d t'l, f?
;Clm '1; ti? 1 ti .nquiiitv of E ingland be facridied

r tlhe `ike ;1

a t V'n- \,' aV wavs a li'e to ce-r to te nation

c(.xp(,L, l t,' lt'e ic ,' t'i .'.lil'-; L, a.n e.\i) i]iratml rival ? Th1e caf

sI''o':d' 1,1

i i a!tlui;,, i; \v i ppm,-;ied, t e laced

perf,

( u 9l1r '^i\.J n I s .td
1 ,t .i led, and wh1'y uilld it art

iniurcll

'I 12 /
j ;I 126

injured people execute that ju:1 revenge uwich they had Book VII.
vow c dh -
,

No felirlents coll1 be more rceahle thnn these to Elizabeth Fii:;.'. !'-

and her inif!crs. They therfclvies had at firfl propaated them c,, , t,-.-
at:ain'5, tl'he peple, a ond they now rervcd both as an apclogy, an a '
motive, fur their proceeding to fiil, cxtremities againfl the Scotclh l.:-.
QICCen, as they Lad Ir, , m-cditated. The more ilnjries Elizabeth
lea;ed on ir, ar, the more i1h fared and hated that unhalpy Qee:,
and came at lars to he nerfuaded thnt tliere could be no oer fe-
curity for her own li:, bht the deatl of her rival. Burleigh and
\\Vllnlhan~l had pron'cte) to zcalou y all hcr n-iafilres with regard
to Scotcli aflirs; and iad actd, with so little reserve, in cppofition
to Mary ; that they hadr rcafon to dread the mofl violent Cefets of
her refcntmnt, if ever flc ,loule mount the throne cf En-land;
and therefore tihe elneavoured to hinder an event lo fatal to thcn:-
fhlv\s, by con'IfirY3in, their lMii'tref's fear ind hatred of tlie c otil

AIEAN while, Mlary w as guardcd V1wit unuful vigilance, and reat 1.,

c

care was. talen to keep iher iliora,- t of the 'i'cor ti c
ipiracy. Sir Thomas Gores was t L l f o c ):;, to ac-
enailnt ler boil (of it, and c£ tc h ie'-ntlF n with wIich the \v2s
:.aei as acccil;: v to that crime; a;; i, . , . .. \.. h t.e ,-

ti 1c'nc i l ,

er

v i

t
C;' c , I' .

I)t ] ' ''1l: l '
'

11C

127

Book VII. her two secretaries, the one a native of France, the other of Scot-

g-6'' land, were carried prisoners to London. All the money in her

I586.
Sept . custody, amounting to little more than 2000 pounds, was secured.

And after leading her about, for ome days, from one gentleman's
house to another, ihe was conveyed to Fotheringay, a strong cable
in Northamptonshire *.

ID.liiertes No farther evidence could now be expected against Mary, and
conerning nothing remained but to decide what flould be her fate. With re-
the method of
jroctcding. gard to this, Elizabeth and those Ministers in whom lie chiefly con-

fided, seem to have taken their resolution; but there was frill great
variety of sentiments among her other Counsellors, Some thought
it fufiicient to diimnifs all Mary's attendants, and to keep her under
such close refraint, as would cut off all possibility of corresponding
with the enemies of the kingdom ; and as her constitution, broken
by long confinement, and her spirit dejeded with so many cares,
could not long support such an additional load, the Queen and na-
tion would soon be delivered from all their fears. But though it
might be easy to secure Mary's own person, it was impossible to di-
minifh the reverence which the Roman Catholics had for her name,
or to extinguish the compaflion with which they viewed her sis-
ferings; while there continued, infurretions and invasions iwould
never be wanting for her relief, and the only effect of any new ri-
gour would be to render them more frequent and dangerous. For
this reason the expedient was rejeCted.

Detcrminrs to A public and legal trial, though the most unexampled, was jLuded
vry her pub- the mol unexceptionable method of proceeding ; atd it had at the
lickly.

1 CaIni. 1
128

fame time, a fcmblance of juiiicc, accompanied with an air of dg- Bo k VII,
nity. It was in vain to search the acient records, for any flatute - -'
or precedent, to jullify flich an uncommon frep, as the trial of a
foreign Prince, whlo had not enrtercd the kingdom in arms, but had
fled thither for refuge. The proceedings againfl her were founded
on the at of last Parliament, and by applying it in this manner, the
inte:ntion of those whlo had framed that fevcre latutc became more
apparent '

ELIZABETI resolved that no circumilanlce of pomp or folcmnIiy

flould be wanting, which could render tlhis tranfl-'.tin fuchl as be-
came the dignity of the pcrilon to be tried. She appointed, by a
commiion under the great feal, forty prfons, the moll illuf'rious
in the kingdom, by their birth or offices, together with five of the
judges, to hear and decide this great caulc. Many difitculties were

arted by the lawyers, about the name and title by which Mary
should be arraigne ; and while the ecfentials ofjuflice were ib grofly
violated, the empty forms of it were the objedcs of their care. They
at length agreed that fle fliould be ftilcd, "'Mary, daughter and
"( heir of Jamencs V. late King of Scots, commonly called QLcen of
"Scots, and Dowager of France -.

AFTER the manv indignities which fle had lately sufFered, Mary

could no !1::yrcr doubt but that her dciruliolln was determinedl. hc
cxpccted, every moment, to aend her (days by poilon, or by omec of
tholcc licrct meanlIs, usually cmpeloTd againill captive rince. And
Icll te ma.lice of ller cncjics, at the fllme timei that it depri' dt
her of life, otlLtd Cndeavour likcwi e to lill laer repultatioii, ili C

' ,im ,19,
Col(. Jliiq. 3 .
'1. Stirpc, 3. ^.

S
Vor.. II

'29

Book VII. wrote to the Duke of Guise, and vindicated herself, in the frongeft

8---,- terms, from the imputation of encouraging or being acceflbry to

the conspiracy for affaltinating Elizabeth *. In the solitude of her
priln, the rIrange resolution of bringing her to a public trial had
not reached her ears, nor did the idea of any thing so unprecedented,
and lo repugnant to regal Mlajefty, once enter into her thoughts.

The tl at ON the eleventh of October, the commissioners appointed by
il(ierinngay. Elizabeth arrived at Fotheringay. Next morning they delivered

a letter from her to Mary, in which, after the bitterefl reproaches
and accusations, fie informed her, that regard to her own safety
had, at last, rendered it neccf'arv to make a public enquiry into her
conduct, and therefore required lcr-, as fle had lived so long under
the rotection of the laws of Eigl:ind, to fubrnit now to the trial,

iMarv r ir i, 'hicih thcv ordained to be taken of her crimes. Mary, though fur-
at fFt tO
plI.A. prized. at the nmcfiTige, was neither appalled at the danger, nor un-

mindful of her ovn dinllity,. She protestcd, in the Imoil solemn
manlncr, that nfe \vas innocent of the crime laid to her charg,
alnd had never countenanced any attempt againll the life of the
Qeen of England; but, at the fame time, refued to acknowicge
t,,c urifdidion of her comtnifiioners. " I camne into the king-
" (1Cdm," aii fe, " an indepenient Sovereign, to implore the

( Qucen's affifance, not to fubjl;c myicif to her authority. Nor

"is my spirit so broken by its pail misfortunes, or si intimidated
' by p retent dangers, as to stoop to a:ny thilng unlbecoming the
' lMajfly of a crowned head, or that will dilgrace the anccflors
;' from whom I am defctnled, and the son to \whllm I liall leave
i my throne. If I mufl be tied, Princes alone canl be ln Peers.

", Jcbb, 2., 2°,;

" Tlk
130

cc The Oueen of England's fubijeas, however noble their birth Book VII.
L may be, are of a rank inferior to mine. Ever since my arrival G
' in this kingdom, I have been confined as a prisoner. Its laws

never afforded me any protescion. Let them not now be per-
" vcrted, in order to take away my life."

TrHE commissioners employed arguments and intreaties to ovcr-

come Mary's resolution. They even thrctened to proceed accordi;g
to the forms of law, and to pass sentence against her on account of
her contumacy in refusing to plead ; fle perfilled, however, for two
days to decline their jurifdition. An argument urged by Hatton,
the Vice-Chamberlain, at lafl- prevailed. I-e told her, that by
avoiding a trial, mle injured her own reputation, and deprived her-
self of the only opportunity of setting her innocence in a clear light;
and that nothing would be more areeable to them, or more ac-
ceptable to the Queen their Miftrcfs, than to be convinced, by un-
doubted evidence, that fle had been unjufily loaded with these
foul aspersions.

No wonder pretexts so plausible filould impose on the unwary Constts

Queen, or that lihe, unafilted, at that time, by any friend or coun- ido"c"c t
fellor, fhoulc not be able to deteCt and elude all the artifices of
Elizabeth's ablest Minillers. In a situation equally melancholy, and
under circumfianccs nearly similar, her Grandion, Charles I. re-
fuacd, with the tnioft firlmnci, to acknowlege the usurpcd juiif-
diftion of the HIigh Court of Jutiic ; and poftcrity lias pprovcd
his conduc, as suitable to the dignity ot a Kingi. If Mary was
less constant in ]er refulution, it must be inputt.d 1flciv to her anxi-
o'.1s deti c of vindicating her own honour.

S ?

Book VII. AT her appearance before the Judges, who were feated in tile
L/'%.j7 great hall of the castle, where they received her with much cere-

I586. mony, she took care to protest, that by condescending to hear and
O. 4.

to give an answer to the accusations, which flhould be offered
againtt her, fie neither acknowledged the jurifdition of the court,
nor admitted of the validity and justice of those ads, by which they
pretended to try her.

THE Chancellor, by a counter-protefiation, endeavoured to vin-

dicate the authority of the court.

The accusi.
titn ail
llcr.

THEN the Qeen's Attorney and Sollicitor opened the charge

against her, with all the circumstances of the late conspiracy. Copies
of her letters to Mendoza, Babington, Eglefield and Paget were
produced. Babington's confeslion, those of Ballard, Savage, and
the other conspirators, together with the declarations of Naue and
Curie her secretarics, were read, and the whole ranged in the moll
specious order, which the art of the lawyers could devise, and
heightened by every colour, their eloquence could add.

MARY lifened to their harangues attentively, and without emc-

tion. But at the mention of the Earl of Arundel's name, who was
then confined in the Tower, on suspicion of being acceTlury to the
confiracy, the broke out into this tender and generous excl:mation,
' Alas how much has the noble houle of Howard iuffered for
" my fakec!"
lh1 Jclc. Wl FEN tlhl Qitcen's council had fiified, Mary flood up, and

wit grcat magnanimitv, and equal prclence of tnind i, bccan her
defence. S- li Cewailcd the utilalinfs of her own situation, tli;lt,
after a captivity of nliectccn years, dlurilln which flie had luficlcd

trcatli lcn'L
132

'33

treatment no less cruel than unmerited, he was at last loaded with Book VII.
an accusation, which tended not only to rob her of her right os'-o-'

1586.

fucceflion, and to deprive her of life itself, but to transmit her name
with infamy to future ages: That, without regarding the sacred
rights of sovereignty, fihe was now f bje(ed to the laws framed
against private persons; though an anointed Queen, commanded to
appear before the tribunal of subjects; and like a common crimi-
nal, her honour exposed to the petulant tongues of lawyers, ca-
pable of wrefling her words, and of mifreprclnting her ations:
That, even in this dishonourable situation, ilIe was denied the pri-
vileges usually granted to criminals, and obliged to undertake her
own defence, without the pretilnce of any friend with whom to
advise, without the aid of council, and without the use of her own
papers.

SrE then proceeded to the prticular articles in the accusation.

She abfolutcly denied any correipondence with Babington : Thc
name of Balla d was not so much as known to her: Copies only
of her pretendced letters to them were produced: Though nothing
less than her hand-writing or subscription was fufiicicnt to convic
her of such an odious crime: No proof could be brought that the
letters were delivered into her hands, or that any answer was re-
turned by her direclion: The confcflions of wretches, condecmnen d
and executed for Inch a detelable ation, were of little weight
fear or hope might extort fiomT tLhem many things ilcollfifcnt with
truth, nor ought the llolour of a cn to be Iaiiied by icli vi!c
tcflimolny. 'Ih'e ticcl.ar'.ii of her tccrct'rics was not mnore coii-
clullfve; prolifts and thLs

! mit h

ll t eatliil (,vccome the rcl ilutioun of

two itran

crs in order to Icrecn tllheml lves, tlicy mig lt throw the

l.llnc on her; but tlicv coe'l dLitcovcr nothin g to lLI- pr ji(licc:
xwith out vie latilg, in the tillv place, thecir oath ol fidel ity; a d tJc ir

1-?,~ i 1jui y,

Book VIL perjury, in one instance, rendered them unworthy of credit in

8^^v~^- another: The letters to the Spanish ambassador were either nothing
1586. more than copies, or contained only what was perfectly innocent:

" I have often," continued flie, " made such efforts for the re-
cc covery of my liberty, as are natural to a human creature. And

convinced, by the fad experience of so many years, that it was

"vain to expect it from the justice or generosity of the Qjueen of
"England, I have frequently follicited foreign Princes, and called
" on all my friends to employ their whole interest for my re-
"lief. I have, likewise, endeavoured to procure for the English
' Catholics some mitigation of the rigour with which they are

now treated; and if I could hope, by my death, to deliver them

"t from oppression, I am willing to die for their fake. I wist, how-
"ever, to imitate the example of Esther, not of Judith, and
"would rather make intercession for my people, than fled the
"blood of the meanelt creature, in order to save them. I have

often checked the intemperate zeal of my adherents, when either
' the severity of their own persecutions, or indignation at the un-
c( heard-of injuries which I have endured, were apt to precipitate
' them into violent councils. I have even warned the Qeen
(C of dangers to which there harll proceedings exposed herself.
"And worn out, as I now am, with cares and ufferings, the prof-
< pea of a Crown is not so inviting, that I iould ruin my foul
" in order to obtain it, I am no ranger to the feelings of huma-
" nity, nor unacquainted with the duties of religion, and abhor
cc the detestable crime of afsiination, as equally repugnant to
(( both. And, if ever I have given conlent by my words, or even
" by my thoughts, to any attempt against the life of the Queen
" of England, far from declining the judgment of men, I fliall not
C even pray for the mercy of God. I"

"* Canid. 52", &c.

Two

Two different days did Mary appear before the judges, and in Book VIs.

every part of her behaviour maintained the magnanimity of a T
Queen, tempered with the gentleness and modesty of a woman.

THE commilioners, by Elizabeth's express command, adjourn- Sentence.-

ed, without pronouncing any sentence, to the Star-Chamber in gi ;.'e
Westminster. When assembled in that place, Naue and Curie were
brought into court, and confirmed their former declaration upon
oath. And after reviewing their whole proceedings, the commis-
fioners unanimously declared M/ary " To be accefnbry to Babington's
c conspiracy, and to have imagined divere matters, tending to the
cC hurt, death, and deftrucdion of Elizabeth, contrary to the ex-
(c press words of the flatute, made for the security of the Queen's
" life. "

Ir is no easy matter to determine whether the injulice in ap- recgu;ariti.

pointing this trial, or the irregularity in conducting it, were great- i the tial
es and mofl flagrant. By what right did Elizabeth claim authority
over an independent Queen ? Was Mary bound to comply with the
laws of a foreign kingdom? How could the fubjeds of another
Prince become her judges? Or if such an insult on royalty were
allowed, ought not the common forms of justice to have been ob-
served ? If the teflimony of Babington and his affociatcs was o
explicit, why did not Elizabeth spare them for a few weeks, and
by confronting them with Mary, overwhelm her with the full con-
vidtion of her crimes ? Naue and Curle were both alive, wherefore
did not they appear at Fotheringay, and for what reason were they
produced in the Star-Chamber, where Mary was not prefcnt to lic.ir
what they dcpofd ? Was this suspicious evidence enough to con-

i Crllel, 525,

(l,} m1 r'

13S

Book VTI.demn a Queen ? Ought the meanef criminal to have been found

guilty, upon such feeble and inconclusive proofs?
I586.

IT was not, however, on the evidence produced at her trial,that the

sentence against Mary was founded. That served as a pretence tojuf-
tify, but was not the cause of the violent steps taken by Elizabeth
and her Miniilers towards her destruCtion ; and was employed to give
oime appearance of justice, to what was the offspring of jealousy and
fear. And the nation, blinded with resentment against Mary, and
solicitous to secure the life of its own Sovereign from every danger,
observed no irregularities in the proceedings, and attended to no de-
secs in the proof, but grasped at suspicions and probabilities, as if
they had been irrefragable demonstrations.

The parli- THE parliament met a few days after sentence was pronounced
nent colfrm againt Mary. In that illustrious aemnbly, more temper and dif-
hie fentencc,

cernment, than are to be found among the people, might have
been expected. Both Lords and Commons, however, were equally
under the dominion of popular prejudices and paflions, and the
fame excefies of zeal or of fear, which prevailed in the nation, are
apparent in all their proceedings. They entered with impatience
upon an inquiry into the conspiracy, and the dangers which threat-
ned the Queen's life, and the peace of the kingdim. All the pa-
pers, hich Ladl been produced at Fotheringay, were laid before
them. And after many violent invectives againt the Queen cf
Scots, both houses, unanimoully, ratified the proceedings of the
commiiiioners by whom she had been tried, and declared the fel-
tcnce agailnft her to le jus and well fiunded. Not iatisfied witl
this, they presentcd a joint addrcfs to the Queen, clfecclihing her,

lind etlcmnnd D
tIi excution as le regarded her own safety, the prefcrvation of the Irotefant
of it.

rcligion,
136

religion, the welfareand withes of her people, to publish tilefentence; Book VIl.
and without farther delay to inflic on a rival, no less irreclaimable -
than dangerous, the punishment which ftle had merited by so many
crimes. This request, didtated by fears unworthy of that great
Assembly, was enforced by reasons still more unworthy. They
were drawn not from justice, but from conveniency. The mnot ri-
gorous confinement, it was pretended, could not curb Mary's in-
triguing spirit; her address was found, by long experience, to be an
overmatch for the vigilance and jealousy of all her keepers: The
severest penal laws could not refIrain her adherents, who, while
they believed her person to be sacred, would despise any danger to
which themselves alone were exposed: Several foreign Princes were
ready to second their attempts, and waited only a proper opportu-
nity for invading the kingdom, and aferting the Scotch Queen's
title to the Crown. Her life, for there reasons, was incompatible
with Elizabeth's safety; and if he were spared out of a false cle.
mency, the Queen's person, the religion and liberties of the king-
dom, could not be one moment secure. Neceifity required that (he
should be sacrificed in order to preserve these; and to prove this fa-
crifice to be no less just than necessary, several examples in history
were produced, and many texts of scripture quoted, but both
the one and the other were misapplied, and distorted from their
true meaning.

NOTHING, however, could be more acceptable to Elizabeth than Elizabeth'

an address in this strain. It extricated her out of a situation, ex-difimulation.
tremely embarrafiing; and without depriving her of the power of
sparing, it enabled her to punilf her rival with less appearance of
blame. If ile chore the former, the whole honour would redound to
her own clemency. If fie determined on the latter, whatever

VOL. II. T was

138
Book VII. was rigorous might now seem to be extorted by thefolicitations of her

^--^ people, rather than to flow from her own inclination. Her answer,
I586. however, was in a stile, which (lie often used, ambiguous and

evasive under the appearance of openness and candor; full of such
professions of regard for her people, as served to heighten their loy-
alty ; of such complaints of Mary's ingratitude, as were calculated
to excite their indignation; and of such insinuations that her
own life was in danger, as could not fail to keep alive their fears.
In the end, he besought them to save her the infamy and the pain
of delivering up a Queen, her nearest kinswoman, to punishment;
and to confider whether it might not still be poflible to provide
for the public security, without forcing her to imbrue her hands in
royal blood.

THIE true meaning of this reply was easily understood. The

Lords and Commons renewed their former request, with additional
importunity, which was far from being either unexpected, or of-
fenfive. Elizabeth did not return any answer more explicit;
and having obtained such a public fandion of her proceedings, there
was no longer any reason for protracing this scene of dissimulation;
there was even some danger that her feigned difficulties might at
last be treated as real ones; the therefore adjourned the parlia-
ment, and reserved in her own hands the sole disposal of her rival's
fate *.

ALL the Princes in Europe obfrvcd the proceedings againit

France int0tr-
poic ti,.) l' Mary, with aftonifnnent and horror; and even I-enry III. notwith-
,.Ibll;lf of hfanding his known aversion to the ]houii of (uife, was obliged to

intcrpofe in her behalf and to apcear in defence of the collImon

" Camd. 526. D'Fvwcs 37,

riglht .

rights of royalty. Aubefpine his resident ambassador, and Bellie- Book VII.
vere who was sent with an extraordinary commifflon to the 155
fame purpose, interceded for Mary with great appearance of Nev. z1.
warmth. They employed all the arguments which the caufc na-
turally uggefted; they pleaded from jufice, generosity, and hu-
manity ; they intermingled reproaches and threats. But to all these
Elizabeth continued deaf and inexorable, and having received some
intimation of Henry's real unconcern about the fate of the Scotch
Q.een, and knowing his antipathy to all the race of Guile, fle
trufRed, that these loud remonfirances would be followed by no vio-
lent relentment *.

SHE paid no greater regard to the follicitations of the Scotch

Kinlg, which, as they were urged with more lincerity, merited more -olr to i:
attention. Though her commiffloners had been extremely careful lite"'1
to sooth James, by publishing a declaration that their entence againfl
Mary did, in no degree, derogate from his honour, or invalidate
any title whici he formerly pofied; he beheld the indignities to
which his Mother had been exposed with filial concern, and with
the entiments which became a King. The plide of the Scotch
nation was rouzed, by the insult offered to the blood of their Mo-
narclhs, and called upon him to employ the most vigorous efforts,
in order to prevent or to revenge the Qceen's death.

AT fir-t, he could scarce believe that Elizabcth would venturc
upon an a&ioun so unprecedented, which tended so visibly to

* C.L1. 5- i.

Irc'Itih
T

Book VII. render the persons of Princes less sacred in the eves of the

186. people, and which degraded the regal dignity, of which, at other

times, (he was so remarkably jealous. But as oon as the ex-
traordinary fleps which flie took discovered her intention, he
dispatched Sir William Keith to London; who, together with
Douglas the ordinary ambassador, remonstrated, in the itrongeft
terms, again2t the injury done to an independent Queen, in sub-
jeaing her to be tried like a private person, ani by laws to which
fle owed no obedience; and besought Elizabeth not to add to
this injury, by suffering a sentence unjust in itself, as well as dif-
honourable to the King of Scots, to be put in execution '.

ELIZABETH returning no answer to these remonstrances of his

ambaflador, James wrote to her with his own hand, complaining
in the bitterest terms of her conduct, not without threats that both his
duty and his honour would oblige him to renounce her friendship, and
to a as became a son when called to revenge his mother's wrongs tf
At the fame time he assembled the nobles, who promised to tand
by him in so good a cause. H-e appointed ambassadors to France,
Spain, and Denmark, in order to implore the aid of these courts;
and took other steps towards executing his threats with vigour. The
high strain of his letter enraged Elizabeth to such a degree, that ile
was ready to difiiifs his ambassadors without any reply. But his
preparations alarmed and enbarraffed her Ministers, and at their

* Sec Append. N° XIII.

t Vrch. Mern. I. .

intreaty
140

14r

intreaty he returned a soft and evasive answer, promising to Book VII.
liften to any overture from the King, that tended to his mother's `-^--
safety; and to suspend the execution of the sentence, till the arrival 5
of new ambafladors from Scotland .*

MEANWHILE, ihe commanded the sentence againfr Mary to be Decc:n. 6.

published, and forgot not to inform the people, that tis was ex- .l',^l'.t'
torted from her by the repeated intreaties of both houles of parlia- p-blil,.
ment. At the fame time, the delpatched Lord Buckhuift and Ecale
to acquaint Mary with the sentence, and how importunately the
nation demanded the execution of it, and, though ffie had not hi-
therto yielded to these follicitations, he advised her to prepare for
an event, which might become ncceffary for securing the Proteilant
religion, as well as quieting the minds of the pcople. Mary re-
ceived the mcibge not only witlhout Lfymptoms of fear, but with
cxprcfilons of triumph, " No wonder, laid fie, thle Englifil Iould
" now thirl fr the bood of a fobrign Prince, they have often
"oilrcdi violncce to their own Monarchs. But after so many fut
6 ferings, ldeath comes to me as a welcome deliverer. I am proud

to thinkl tat my life is esteemed of importance to the Catholic
5r eligion, and as a martyr for it I am now willing to die -."

AS TER the publication of the ftcnce, Mary was sipped of

S}ic is rea ed

every remaining mark of royalty. The canopy of slate in her i;ilt:th t,-
apartment was pullcd down ; Paulet entered her chamber, and ap-
proaclhed her person without ceremony; and even appeared covered
in her prctfcencc. Shocked with thefi indignities, and offndc(d at
this gro! fllamilliari-ty, to which fle had never been acctuflomcd,
Mary (it:cc more complained to Elizabeth ; and at the itne tilie,

. Cd. 523. Jclb:, 2].
4 1, pu t s'\V. -, . 1 ' C; k 1 c]. 1 . 5 '

142
Book VII. as her last requefl, intreated that he would permit her servants to

carry her dead body into France, to be laid among her ancestors,

z586.
Dccem. 19. in hallowed ground; that ome of her domeflics might be present

at her death, to bear witness of her innocence, and firm adherence
to the Catholic faith; that all her servants might be suffered to leave
the kingdom, and to enjoy those small legacies, which she hould
bestow on them, as testimonies of her affection ; and that, in the
mean time, her almoner, or ome other Catholic Priest, might be al-
lowed to attend her, and to aflift her in preparing for an eternal
world. She besought her in the name of Jesus, by the foul and
memory of Henry VII. their common progenitor, by their hear
consanguinity, a nd the royal dignity with which they were both in-
vested, to gratify her in there particulars, and to indulge her so far
as to signify her compliance by a letter under her own hand. Whe-
ther Mary's letter was ever delivered to Elizabeth is uncertain. No
answer was returned, and no regard paid to her requeffs. She was
offered a Protestant Bishop or Dean to attend her. Them he re-
jeeed; and without any Clergyman to direct her devotions, he pre-
pared, in great tranquillity, for the approach of death, which she
now believed to be at no great distance *.

1587. JAMES, without losing a moment, sent new ambafladors to Lon-

james renews don. These were the mafler of Gray, and Sir Robert Melvil. In
his ollicita-
tios in her order to remove Elizabeth's fears, they offered that their Mailer
January would become bound that no conspiracy hould be undertaken

against her person, or the peace of the kingdom, with Mary's con-
sent; and for the faithful performance of this, would deliver some
of the most considerable of the Scotch nobles, as hoflages. If this

Camd. 528. cbb, ,. 295.

were

were not thought sufficient, they proposed that Mary should resign Book VII.
all her rights and pretensions to her son, from whom nothing inju- 6
rious to the Protestant religion, or inconsistent with Elizabeth's
safety, could be feared. The former proposal, Elizabeth rejeCted
as insecure; the latter, as dangerous. The ambassadors were then
itfru.ed to talk in an higher tone; and Melvil executed the com-
nmifion with fidelity and with zeal. But Gray, with his usual per-
fidy, deceived his Mafier who trusted him with a negociation of so
much importance, and betrayed the Queen whom he was employed
to save. He encouraged and urged Elizabeth, to execute the fen-
tence against her rival. He often repeated the old proverbial fen-
tence, " The dead cannot bite." And whatever ihould happen, he
undertook to pacify the King's rage, or at least to prevent any vio-
lent effects of his resentment *

ELIZABETH, meanwhile, discovered all the symptoms of the Eizabcth'

most violent agitation and disquietude of mind. She shunned so- - t'n
ciety, she was often found in a melancholy and musing posture, and
repeating, with much emphasis, there sentences which she borrow-
ed from some of the devices then in vogue; Aut ser aiutferi; e
jeriare, sei. Much, no doubt, of this apparent uneasiness mufi
be imputed to diflimulation ; it was ipoffible, however, that a
Princess, naturally so cautious as Elizabeth, should venture on an
action, which might expose her memory to infamy, and her life
and kingdom to danger, without reflecding deeply, and hesitating
long. The people waited lier determination in ufpence and anxie-
ty ; and left their fear or their zeal should jublide, rumours of
danger were artfully invented, and propagated with the utinofl in-
duiil-y; Aubelpinc, the French abalfador, was accufcdl of havin'y

Spetfw. 357 Se Appcnd N XIV.

fubo-ilc(

I43

Book VII. suborned an affiaTn to murder the Queen. The Spaniil fleet was

8-~^"- said by ome to be already arrived at Milford-haven. Others affirm-
587. ec that the Duke of Guile had landed with a strong army, in Sus-

sex. Now, it was reported that the Northern Counties were up
in arms; next day, that the Scots had entered England with all their
forces; and a conspiracy, it was whispered, was on foot for seizing
the Queen, and burning the city. The panic grew every day more
violent, and the people, aftonifled and enraged, called for the exe-
cution of the sentence against Mary, as the only thing which could
restore tranquility to the kingdom *.

\Varrant for
RIlary's exceu-
tion igncd.
lJebruary i.

WHILE these sentiments prevailed among her fubjees, Elizabeth

thought ihe might safely venture to firike the blow, which he had
so long meditated. She commanded Davison, one of the fecrc-
taries of tfate, to bring to her the fatal warrant and her behaviour,
on that occasion, plainly hewed that it is not to humanity, that we
must acribe her forbearance hitherto. At the very moment file
was subscribing the writ which gave up a woman, a Queen, and her
own nearest relation, into the hands of the executioner, she was
capable of jesting. " Go, fays he, to Davison, and tell Wal-
fingham what I have now done, though I am afraid he will die for
grief when he hears it." Her chief anxiety was how to secure the
advantages which would arise from Mary's death, without appear-
ing to have given her content to a deed so infamous. She often
hinted to Paulet and Drury, as well as to ome other courtiers, that
now was the time to discover the sincerity of their concern for her
fafcty, and that hc expeded their zeal would extricate her out of
her prccnt perplexity. But they were wife enough to seem not to
underfland her meaning. Even after the warrant was signed, flie

' (lndl1. 533, 534.

COIl -

Or
144

I 1 5

commanded a letter to be written to Paulet, in lets ambiguous Book VIL
terms; complaining of his remifnefs in sparing so long the life of =

d - ~

3 1 5,)-7.

her capital enemy, and begging him to remember at Lit v, hat was
incumbent on him as al affectionate subjet, and to diivcr hIs< o-
vereign from continual fear and danger, by forteniln,, t'he dys o'
his priloner. Paulet, though rigorous and harlh, and often brutal
in the discharge of what he thought his duty, as rMary's keeper,
was nevertheless a man of honour and integrity. Ie rjected tie
propol with disdain; and lamenting that he Ihould ever have been
deemed capable of ati1ng the part of an aliin, le declare that
th Queen might difpoe of his life at her pleasure, but he would
never slain his own honour, nor leave an everiJaliiing mark of in-
famy on his posterity, by lending his hand to perpetrate io foul a
crime. On the receipt of this anfver, Elizabeth became extremely
pecvifh ; and calling him a daintyi and prccijf i'i/cw!, who would
promise much, but perform nothing, Dhe propoicd to enploy one
Wingfield, who had both courage and inclination to firike the blow ~-.
But Davilbn, renmonflrating againt this method, as no Ieis dangerous
than dishonourable, fle again declared her intention tiat the ifn-
tcnce pronounccd by the conlmiffioners ilould be ccxccu:td accord-
ing to law ; and as she had already signed the warralt, fe Ibcrcd
that no farther application might be mnadc to her o that

l ;a '. iy

this, the privy counf1clors tlougt ticmfelvcs fuiliciitI auith!jr!: . .
to proceed; and prompted, as they pretended, L 'v ,'c;l fr it:
Qieen's ffetvy, or inligatcd, as is more probable, by thc lan i:,icn-
sion of the danger to whic tlhecy would thlmfclvcs I'* c. .,,i , i,
the life of the (icC! of Scots wecre 1par'ci, thlcy :islili';<. in >&,c
Council Chamber, and by a letter und:; all their hlij I:2, Cn;: \ :'cd
the Earls of Slhrcw\\liry atnd Ken', t)'ethcr wvtI lJc

li" ,:.'1i.i
o tihe C(.!1un;, t t) Ice thle flenIlt cc put itn c'x;Ctllti ()l

*I IHi,;'. I.:its!. . tiic DI ),,i, . * CI1. 1 34, S3 iy'1, '. ; .;" :.
VoL. lI. IU 0)>O

ON Tuesday the 7th of February, the two Earls arrived at So-

theringay, and demanding access to the Queen, read in her pretence
the warrant for execution, and required her to prepare to die next
morning. Mary heard them to the end without emction, and
crofiing herself in the name of the Father, and of the Son:, and of
the Holy Ghost, " That foul, said fIe, is not worthy of the joys
of Heaven, which repines becau the body rminfl endure the fiLoke
of the executioner; and though I did not ecxpef that the QC'een of
Ingland would set the firfl example of violating the sacrcd perion
of a Sovereign Prince, 1 willingly fuibmit to that which providence
has decreed to be my lot." And laying ner huid on a Bible, which
happened to be near her, fie solemnly protested that ihe was inno-
cent of thatconfpiracy which Babington had carried on against fili-
zabeth's life S. She then mentioned the requelts contained in her
letter to Elizabeth, but obtained no satisfaCtory anifwer She en-
treated, with particular earnetfnes, that now in her last moments,
her Almoner might be fuffired to attend her, and that fie might
enjoy the consolation of those pious inflitutions prescribed by her
religion. Even this favour, which is ufiially granted to the vileP;
criminals, was abfolutcly denied.

HFR attendants, during tis converition, were bathed in tear,

and though overawed by the presence of the two arls, with dif-
ficulty fupprelfed tiheir anguish ; bLt no foOrner did en

clt and Shrews-

bury withdraw, than tlhey ran to tbihr i1trc-l, and brit out into
the lmoft pafllionate cxlrc!ionls o t :lci-'ictl al rro-ov. Mairv
however, not only retainh'd perl;ci coniri)l r, o(' milld [I,it en-
dcavourcd to moderate their (.xceflive gric'l And ailling on her
knccs, with ll her cmeiics aroulnd lher, ile thalnked H leaven tat

N

_ ) 110 2. 3-w'

146

Book VII.

I'-v'i li'i.be a-
r our at her
Lirtt;h.

14-7

]cr sufferings were now so near an end, and prayed th t fle mig:t Book VII.
be enabled to endure what nfil remained withl dcclvc, and with '---
fortitude. The greater part of the evening, fle employed in fit-
tling her worldly afliirs. $he wrote her Tclalcnt wikh h- c'vn
hand er .

tscr loney, er jcwsel ad helr dcaths, fih dif:ibucl

among her fcrva:,ts, aceordiete to th-ir rank or merit. The wrote a
f-ort letter t the K-;ing oC' lirace, a!d another to the Duke of
Gui.', fiul of' tensi:r but magnanimous fcntiment, and reconm-
m dc!;Jdi hter i'jul to their prayers, andl heraf- iced fervaints to tir

protict. lAt It;ppr, fte tat teIperatCly, as usual, ad onverkl

not only with cafe, but with chcerfiulncl; fli drank to cver oe
of her ervanis, a;d, alkcdd their forgivcnefs, if ever ;He hiad sied
in any part of her duty towards them. At her wonted time (ie
went to bed, and slept calmly a few hours. Early in the morning
fch retired into her clolet, and employed a considerable time in de-
votion. At eilght o' clock, the Htigh herifF and his officers cnterled
Ihr chamber, and found her till kneeling at the alt;lr. She imc-
di.:tely llarted up, and with a majefic meini, and a coulntenance uln-
dilhayved, and eveil cheerful, advanced towards thle (lace of exc-
cution, leaning on two of' aulet's attendants. She \.clV d:-eild in a
mnourn'in habit, but with an elergance and lendor, - '' <,e

d I',c'I

long laid aside, cxcept on a fwS fcflival days. An <:,.s );' iii,
by a poiandcr chain at her neck ; her beads at lher qi, i; a . i ;;
her hand fle carried a crucifix of ivory. At the foot of tc I i,
thei two Earls, attended by several entlemen ci-ot te ni' o,

lli -

Cotn:tics, rcccivcd ller; and there Sir A/!lrew tMelvil, tihe ,'malci
of er loutliold, who had l;Cen fiLcluded, o)r foi, c v <s,

t i

le '

her pref i', was lermiitted to) take h is hi ll r1e vcl. t tCe li,i,;

(i a 2 lifilr lS w l\'1 )oi 1(e t'li. ']i' I(,\'ti.l, il hlit1?) l

a ilt ti (,: , i'[.

ielied int( tear>; and s l e \\a '

l wa;silii ' ;,' cin

v r :iti, :, ;11i c' i--
plaining of is own hxa d fate iin li'n ',,- .ni,:tcd to) carry the atteOt: t

i t-' i^J J
I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~2

143
Book VII. of lfch a mournful event into Scotland, Mary replied, " Weep not;
' -- ' agood Melvil, there is at prefcnt greater cause for rejoicing. Thou
1 87 fiLalt, this day, fee Mary Stewart delivered from all her cares, and

such an end put to her tedious sufferings as fle has long expeled.
Bear witness that die constant in my religion ; firm in my fidelity
towards Scotland ; and unchanged in my affedtion to France. Com-
mend me to my son. Tell him I have done nothing iniurious to his
kingdom, to his honour, or to his rights; and God forgive all those
who have thirstcd, without cause, for my blood.

'Vith much difficulty, and after many intreaties, she prevailed

on the two Earls to allow Melvii, together with three of her men
servants, and two of her maids, to attend her to the scaffold. It
was eredted in the fame hall wleie lhe had been tried, raised a little
above the floor, and covered, as well as a chair, the cuflhion, and
block, with black cloth. Mary mounted the fieps with alacrity,
beheld all this apparatus of death with an unaltered countenance,
and signing herself with the crols, fie fat doxwn in the chair. Eeale
read the warrant for execution with a loud voice, to which fle
lillened with a careless air, and like one occupied in other thoughts.
Then the Dean of Peterborough began a devout discourse, suitable
to her present condition, and offered up prayers to Heaven in her
behalf; but ihe declared that the could not in conicience hearken
to the one, nor join with the other; and falling on her knees rc-
peated a Latin prayer. When the Dean had finiShed his devotions,
the with an audible voice, and in the Englilh tongue, rccommcnded
unto God the aflited state of the Church, and prayed for prof-
pcrity to her ion, and for a long life, and peaceable reign to Eliza..
beth. She declared that ihe hoped for mercy only tlrough the death
of Chrifl, at the foot of whlofi image, ite now willilngly iCled ]c'.
blood; and liftilng 1up, and kiling the Crucifix, fie thlusaddrcflcd

t, " As thy arms, 0 Jfuts, were extended on the Cross; so with Book VII.
the outilrctchcd arms of tlhy mrcy, receive me, and forgive my T'-.
filns."

Si tlien p:-cipared for the bloik, by takini of her veil, and

upper garments ; and one oi1 the executio;lers rudetl' endeavourlin
to atlr, ihe gcnily checked him, and laid, zih a finile, that fle
had not been accufloned to uncdei(s before lo many fpeclators, nor
to be servcd Lb such valets. \v'ith calm ut undaunted fortitude,
she laid hler l:ck on the block; and while oine ex:cutioner helld Il -
hands, the o!hcri at the ftcon firokec, cut offi her head, which
falling out ol its attire, dilcolercd l herlair already rown qi ite ,gra-,
with cares and Ibrrowvs. The executioneri hi it up till iteaiciinll
with blood, and the Dean criin out, " So erilh all Q Iccn Eli'l-
beth's enemies," the Erl of Kent alone anfwverc Amen. The
rcei of the sietlators contillued illent, and dtro'llned ill tears ; beig)
incapable, at that moment, of any other 1fntinents, but thoi of
pity or admiration I.

Suc vwas the tragical death of Mary Qeen of Scots, after a life

of forty four years and two monthls, aliloft nineteen years of which
!le paTed il captivity. Tlhe political parties which were frmed
in the kingdom, during her reign, have iubliifted, under various
delnoninations, ever iince tlat time. The raincour, with which
they were at firit animatel, Iath dclcnded to iccceeding ages, and
their prejudices, as well as their rage, have been perpetuated, and
even alugmenlted. Among iforians, xwho w\ere under the domi-
nion of all teif pafiions, and who have either aclihced to her
every virtuous and amialle quality, or hIave imputed to her all the

'~ C,011d. . SPutif. 355. Jcbb. . 3u. Stirpc, 3), 35

S

S11in-icits C'

1 .
Vice ,

J49

Book VII. vices, of which the human heart is fuceptible, we fcarch in vailn
--- f--. for Mary's real charader. She neither merited the exaggerated

5°7/' .prailcs of the one, nor the unditinguifnin cenfur o tih other.
I'c .nr-c- To all the charms of beautv, and the tmoft elegance of exter-

nal form, flie added thole accompi'ii7lments, which render their
ilnpreflion irreiilible. Polite, aiibllc, ifinuating, fprightlv, and
capable of speaking and of writing w ith cqual ease and dignity.
Sudden, however, and violent in all her attachlments; -caue' her
heart was warm and unfufpiou^s. I;mpatient o: contradiction;
becaufc file had been accuonmed from her i:nfallnc to b1 treated as a

lQueen. No fItan^er, on mle oc-,,o , to diiimulattion ; which,

in that perfidious cou:t \wh:ee i;c rcl vcd eir edlccItl at:, was rcclon-
ed among the ncccfilrv arts ot ''crnnitit. Not inliiiiaibl of
flattery, or unicontlious of that plea urc, with wvliich alnleo cverv
woman beholds the influence of her own beauty. Formed with
the qualities which we love, not with the talents that we admire;
flhe was an agrceable wov anl, rather than an illuuiious Quieen.
i'he vivacity of her spirit, not futiciently tcemucied with lound
.uiltdgmcnt, and the warmth of her lhert, which was not, at all
times, under the restraint of dilfretion, cbtraye her both into er-
iors, and into crimes. To lay tlhat t1he wa always unfortunate,
wi:l not account For that loing and almoil uninterirupted lucccfiion of
calamities which betel lher; wc mul iv!;wifel add that tili was olten
implrudent. 1er patTion for Darnly was rafl, y!outlhil, anid cx-
cefivc. And tihough the hidden tral!lition to the oT ofite extreme
was thc lnatural c ofi&l of her ill-requited love, ad of Iis inlrati-
tude, iilolc ncc, and brutality; yet nelittur tlilre, nor <Ioti.vAcli':
artlul adlrcIls, and!I il)mp rtant li.:vices, can u;1 iy her

, it'aeil:n :;t to

tolijt nobleman'll . lt'ven thle n:.'nners of the ile, li,:l.tiou1 ::1 tluv
v,.er, are no aplogy for tis unplalp ,I' nor cJn. they in'ure
10o

U3 to look on that tragical and infamous scene which followed Book VII.
upon it, with lets ahorrence. Humanity will draw; a veil over - -"
this part of her charaster which it cannot approve, and may, per-
haps, promp1t) ollLm to impute her aions to her fitiiation, molre than
to her ciipolionrs; and to lament the unhappineiT of the former,
rather than aci';c tle perverfnesl of tihe latter. Mary's ferings
exceed, both i dcree, and in dturation, thoc tragical difircefls,
which falncy has f-eined to xccite sorrow and cor Yifcration ; and
while we lurvcy tieln, we are apt altoetlhr to forget her frailtics,
we think of her faults with f inignatiol, an a approve of our
tears, as if they were ilied for a perlibn whio had attained much
nearer to pure virtue.

WrrWI regard to the Queen's person, a circunflance not to be

omliit d in writing the hiilory of a female reign, all cotcmporary
authors agree iil acribing to Mary, the utmloiL beauty of countc_
nance, and( elegance of ihape, of which the human formn is capa-
ble. Hler hair was black, though, according to the fatiLon of that
age, fle frequently wore borrowed lckcs, and of different colours.
Her ees were a dark. gray; her complexion was xquiitely fine;
and her hands and arms remarkably delicate, both as to fihpe antd
colour. IHer flature was of an height that roe to the maijcti;'.
She danced, ihe walked, and rode with cqual grace. ITcr tafle
sori !nutlc Vwas j.i'.l, and flc both funR and played t.upon, tlhe lute,
wvitl tilncc)Ilnln : i. Towards the enld of Ii r lil' , fie bera
to ,-o.v {lt; and her lon confinement and the tcoli (o1 tlhe
Lhuoies in vlitli tIe w\as impril ncd, brou l t on a rle1matifm,
xvhieli depi Sivi lier o the iufe of Iher limbs. No man, fays Biran-
toni, ever eheld 1her perlon witliout admiriation ad love, or wil
read ihlr hijtory without Sorrow.

'! i

57

Book VII. NONE of her women were suffered to come near her dead body,
'--^- which was cairied into a room adjoining the place of execution,

where it lay, for some days, covered with a coaref cloth torn
from a billiard table. The block, the scaffold, the aprons of the
executioners, and every thing slained with her blood, were reduced
to ashes. Not long after, Elizalbe h appointed her boy to be
buried in the Cathedral of Peterborouoh, with royal magnificence.
But this vulgar artihice was employed in vain ; the pageantry of
a pompous fune'ral did not efface the mcmorv of those injuri:,
which laid Mary in her grave. L.?men, son. alter his accefiion to
the Enfiflll tlrone, ordrcd her '

body to be lremoved to \Veiilmin..

fter-abbey, and to be depofitd amlclrg the Monarchs of Eng-
land.

ll- ELIZABETH afeced to receive the accounts of iMary's death,

(t, t" l a-
ic(Int M.r's with the moll violent emotions of furprize, and of concern, Sighs,

tears, lamentation and mourning, vere all employed to dilplay
the reality and greatnels ofher forrov. Evident marks of dilimula-
tion and artifice may be traced through every period of Elizabeth's
proceedings, against the life of the Scotch Queccn. The coIr-
miflion for bringing M ary to a public trial was ltelningly extorted
from her, by the intrcaties of her privy counFlellcrs. She delayed pub-
lilfiing the sentence gainft: her, till she was twice sol!icitcd by both
houses of Parliament. Nor did tlhc sign the warrant for execution,
withlcut the ulmcfit . apparent reludaincc. On1e fc!e more of the
boldcefl and moil focln,,i deceit remained to be eclhibited. Slh
undertook to make the world believe that Marv had been put t'
dcath without ler nowledge, and a:aii: her will. Andt avi-
*un, lwho neither fluflced her intention, nor his own dan11 ( er, w\
lier infltnllrumil t in carryingt on tli s artilicc, and ell a vilitm to it.

IT
52

153

IT was his duty as secretary of slate to lay before her the Book VI.

warrant for execution, in order to be signed ; and by her command,
he carried it to the Great Seal. She pretended, however, that
she had charged him not to communicate what he had done to any
person, nor to susser the warrant to go out of his hands, without
her express permiflon; that in contempt of this order, he had not
only revealed the matter to everal of her Miniflers, but had, in con.
cert with them, assembled her Privy Counse'lors, by whom, with-
out her content or knowledge, the warrant was issued, and the
Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent impowered to put it in execution.
Though Davison denied all this, and with circunmflances which bear
the flrongeft marks of truth and credibility; though it Cin l fcalc
be conceived that her privy council, composed of the persons in whom
ihe molt confided, of hler Ministers and favourites, would alicinble
within the walls of her palace, and venture to tranfa a matter of
so much impoitance, without her privity, and contrary to her in-
clination ; yet so far did fle carry her diflimulation, that, with all
the signs of displeasure and of rage, she banished mofi of her Coun-
fellors out of her presence ; and treated Burleigh, in particular, so
harshly, and with such marks of disgust, that he gave up himself
for loft, and in the deepest affliction, wrote to the Quecn begging
leave to resign all his places, that he might retire to his own estate.
Davison the instantly deprived of his office, and committed hlIm a
close prisoner to the Tower. He was Ibon after brought to ; ,;!,
folernn trial in the Star Chamber; condemned to pay a fine of
io,ooo pounds; and to be imprisoned during the Quen's pleafirl-
He languished, several years, in confinement, and iever recovered
any degree of favour or of power. As lier jalolfv and fear li.;
bereaved the Qen of Scots of life, in ordlcr t) palii:: tis p;::-
of her conduct, Elizabeth iaile no lcr},'ic o s.i . i.i t 1- -

VOL. I. )X l .ti,

Book VII. putation and happiness of one of the most virtuous and able men in

--- her kingdom '.
15S7.

I ;,,ch TIiIS solemn farce, for it deserves no better name, furniiecd
int:.vour, to Elizabeth, however, with an apology to the King of Scots. As the

profpe& of his Mother's danger had excited the King's filial care
and concern, the account of her death filled him with grief and
resentment. His subjes felt the dishonour done to him, and
to the nation. In order to sooth both, Elizabeth inflantly def-
patched Robert Carey, one of Lord Hunfdane's ons, with a letter
cxpreffing her extreme afflidion on account of that miserable ac-
cident, which, as she pretended, had happened far contrary to her ap-
pointment, or intention. James would not permit her messenger
to enter Scotland; and with some difficulty, received a memorial
he ent from Berwick. It contained the tale concerning Davison,
drefled up with all the circumflances, which tended to exculpate
Elizabeth, and to throw the whole blame on his rashness or treach-
cry. Such a defence gave little fitisfadion, and was confidered as
mockery added to insult; and many of the nobles, as well as the
King, breathed nothing but revenge. Elizabeth was extremely
solicitous to pacifv them, and neither wanted inifruments, nor rca -
sons to gain her end. Leicefler wrote to the King, and ifinl-
ham to secretary Maitland. They reprclentcd the certain deiruic-
tion, to which James would expolc himincli, if witil the folrces ,f
Scotland alone, hle should venture to attack a kingdom, o ilr fipc-
rior ill power ; that the hliflory of past- ages, as well as his \lothel '
Lid cxp ciccllc, migt convince himi thiit nothing could be niro:c

'ci::n':ior!j or deceitful than dcpciidancc on foricigl aid; that tli.

-oIs d. 5/J. S ~pc 3. 37 ·

King of France would never wish to fee the Britiff kingdoms united Book VII.
under one Monarch, nor contribute to invetf a Prince so nearly --
allied to the house of Guise, with such formidable power; that
Philip might be a more active ally, but would ccrtainly prove
a more dangerous one, and under pretence of afilnliiig him, would
aftert his own right to the Englifhl Crown, which hi already bega.
openly to claim ; that the fame llatute, on which the sentence ofdeath
against his Mother had been founded, would jflify the excluding
him from the fuccefl.on to the Crown; that the Englith, naturally
averse from the dominion of firangers, would not fail, it exafpe-
rated by his hostilities, to apply it in that manner ; that Eiza-
beth was diifpofed to repair the wrongs which the Mother had sus-
sered, by her tenderness and affecion towards the son; and that by
engaging in a fruitless war, he would deprive hinfelf of a noble
inheritance, which, by cultivating her friendship, he must infalli-.
bly obtain. These representations, added to his confciouinefs of his
own weakness, to the smallness of his revenues, to the mutinous
spirit of some of the nobles, to the dubious fidelity of others, and
to the influence of that faction, which was entirely at Elizabeth's
devotion, convinced James that a war with England, however just,
would in the present juncture be altogether impolitical. All there
considerations induced him to stile his refcntment; to appear satis-
sied with the punilllnent, infliCed on Davilon; and to prelfrve all
the semblances of fi-iendfilip with the Englilh court ': Il this
manner, did the cloud which thrcatncd uIch a fiorm pass away.
i.ary's death, like tlat of a common criminal, remained unavcnged
by any I'rince; and whatever inlfamy Elizabeth might incur, ilic
was exposed to no new dangr-, on that account.

' Spotfw, 358. 7rpc
3. 77.

a R 1X'i

5
X 2

I56
BookVII. MARY'S death, however, proved fatal to the Mafler of Gray, and

- --' Ibft him that favour which he had for some time possessed. He was
1 587. become as odious to the nation, as favourites, who acquire power with-

Disgrace of
the Master of out merit, and exercise it without discretion, usually are. The tea-
Gray. cherous part, which he had aced during his late embassy, was well

known, and filled the King, who at length came to the knowledge of
it, with surprise. The courtiers observed the symptoms ofdifguft ari-
iing in the King's mind, his enemies seized the opportunity, and Sir
William Stewart, in revenge of the perfidy with which Gray had
May 10. betrayed his Brother Captain James, publickly accused him before

a Convention of nobles, not only of having contributed, by his
advice and suggestions, to take away the life of the Queen, but of
holding correspondence with Popif( princes, in order to subvert
the religion established in the kingdom. Gray, unsupported by the
King, deserted by all, and conscious of his own guilt, made a feeble
defence. He was condemned to perpetual banifiment, a punifi-
ment very unequal to his crimes. But the King was unwilling to
abandon one, whom he had once favoured so highly, to the rigour of
justice; and Lord Hamilton his near relation, and the other nobles
who had lately returned from exile, in gratitude for the zeal with
which he had served them, interceded warmly in his behalf.

HAVING thus accomplished the deftruCion of one of his enemies,

Captain James thought the juncture favourable for prosecuting his
revenge on them all. He singled out secretary Maitland, the molt
eminent both for abilities, and enmity to him; and offered to prove
that he was no less accessary than Gray to the Queen's death, and
had even formed a design of delivering up the King himself into
the hands of the English. But timc and ab!ence had, in a great
maeafurc, extinguished the King's affetion for a minion, who so little

dcicrvcd

157

deserved it. All the courtiers combined against him as a common Book VII.
enemy. And instead of gaining his point, he had the mortifica- --
tion to fee the office of Chancellor conferred upon Maitland, who,
together with that dignity, enjoyed all the power and influence of a
prime Minister.

IN the Aflembly of the Church, which met this year, the fame

hatred to the order of Biflops, and the fame jealousy and fear of
their encroachments, appeared. But as the King was now of full
age, and a parliament was summoned on that occasion, the Clergy
remained satisfied with appointing some of their number to reprc-
sent their grievances to that court, from which great things were
expected.

PREVIOUS to this meeting of parliament, James attempted a work The King ..
worthy of a King. The deadly feuds which subsisted between many of tempts to -

b. ... 1 1.1 r * 1 r * ltc the no-

the great families, and which were transmitted from one generation to bIls
another, weakened the strength of the kingdom; contributed, more than
any other circumntance, to preserve a fierce and barbarous spirit among
the nobles; and proved the occasion of many disasters to themselves,
and to their country. After many preparatory negociations, he invited
the contending parties to a royal entertainment in the palace of Holy-
rud-houfe; and partly by his authority, partly by his intreaties,
obtained their promise to bury their dissensions in perpetual oblivion.
From thence he conduted them, in solemn procession, through the
fireets of Edinburgh, marching by pairs,. each hand in hand with
his enemy. A collation of wine and fwect-meats was prepared at
the public Cross, and there they drank to each other, with all the
igns of reciprocal forgivcncis, and of future fricndlhip. The peo-
ple, who were present at a tranfaclion so unufral, conceived the moll
ianguile hopes of secing concord and tranquillity cftablilhcd i:n

every

Book VII. every part of the kingdom, and tellified their fatisfadion by re-

S~~- peated acclamations. Unhappily the effeds of this reconciliation
1587.

were not correfpondcnt either to tle pious endeavours of the King,
or the fond withes of the people.

TliE sirs care of the parliament was the security of the Protef-

tant religion. All the laws palied in its favour, since the Refor-
mation, were ratified ; and a new and evere one was enated against-
seminary Priefis and Jesuits, whose refllefs indufiry in making pro-
felytes brought many of them into Scotland about this time. Two
ads of this parliament deserve more particular notice, on account of
the confequcnces with which they were followed.

aln-

EcM~tVn l of
( lurcs lands.

THE one refpeded tle lands of the Church. As the publick reve-

nues were not uflicient for defraying the King's ordinary charges; as
the adminifiration of government became more complicated and more
expenlive; as James was naturally profuse, and a ranger to mcono-
my; it was necefilry, on all these accounts, to provide some fund
proportioned to his exigencies. But no confidcrahle fum could be
levied on the Commons, who did not enjoy the benefit of an ex-
tenlive commenrce. The nobles were unaccuflomed to bear the bur-
den of heavy taxes. And the revenucs of the Church were the
only source whence a proper supply could be drawn. Notwith-
flanding all the depredations of the lity lince tle Reformation, and
the various devices which they had employed to seize the Church-
lands, bfom considerable ortion of them remained fiill unalicnated,
anld were held either by the Biifops who poffci:ed the benefices,
or wec griantcd to laymen during pleafurc. All telce lands wrle,
i: this parliament, annexed, by one general law ,to t he Ctown,

P .1t. nI, J.c. vi c. 9.

an.! 1

and the King was ipowered to apply the rents of them to his Book VII.
own fe. The tithes alone were reservcd for the maintenance of --_
the persons who served the cre, and the principal Manfion-houfe, I587'
with a few acres of land, by way of glebe, allotted for his ri-
dence. By this great accei'onl ofproperty, it is natural to conclude,
that the King, lmuit have acqui cd a vafc increae of power, and the
influence of the nobles have us-ered a proportional diminution. 'Tle
very reverfc of this ieems, howevcr, to have been the cafe. Almost
all grants of Church-lands, prior to this adR, were thereby confirmcd;
and titles, which were formerly rekon)ed prec:rious, derived from
thence the fantion of parliamentary authlority. James was i k
wife aulthor ized, duiring a limited time, to make inew alenations ; aia
such was the facility of his temper, ever ready to yield to the lol-
licitations of iis servants, and to gratify their moll extravagant de-
mands, that, not only durin tt tilme, but throughout his whole
reign, he was colltinuallyv employed in bclovoing, and Jis pr-
liament in ratifying grants of that kind to his nobles; hence little ad-
vantage accrued to the Crolwn from1 that Xvhichl might hnve been
so valuable an addition to its revenues. The Biflops, however, were
great ftufferers by the law. But at this juncure, neither the King nor
his Miinilers were follicitous about the intercfts of an crrder of men,
odious to the people, and persecuted by the Clergy. Their cnenics
promote t law with the utmloit zeal. Tle projlie of sharing
in their spoils induced all parties to conlent to it; and after a llcp
so fatal to the wealth and1 power of the dignified Clery, it was li,
ditiicult matter to introduce that chanlge in the govellrnmllX t of the
Church, which oon after took place *.

j.,,,,,.. 3j,,

T1IE

159

Book VII. THE change, which the other flatute produced in the civil con-

-- ' flitution, was no less remarkable. Under the Feudal fyflem, every

IefJce Barons Freeholder, or vassal of the Crown, had a right to be present in par-
admitted into liament. These Freeholders were, originally, few in number.
pa liment by v
tlciriepc- 'but possesid of great and extensive property. By degrees, thele
ftiitat' val pofieflions were divided by the proprietors themselves, or par-

celled out by the Prince, or split by other accidents. The number
of Freeholders became greater, and their condition more inequal,
besides the ancient Barons, who preserved their estates and their'
power unimpaired, there arose another order, whose rights were
the fame, though their wealth and influence were far inferior,
But, in those rude ages, when the art of government was ex-
treinely imperfect, when parliaments were seldom afiembled, and
deliberated on matters little interefiing to a martial people, few of
the Lefi'r Barois took their feats, and the whole parliamentary
jurisdiCtion wvas exerciscd by the Greater Barons, together witil
the Ecclefiaflical order. James I. fond of imitating the forms ot
the Englifl constitution, to which he had been long accustomed,
and desirous of providing a counterpoise to the power of the great
nobles, procured an aCt, in the year 1427, dispensing with the
personal attendance of the lesser Barons, and impowering those
in each county, to chufe two commiflioners to represent them in
parliament. This law, like many other regulations of that wiif
Prince, produced little effed. All the King's vassals continued,
as formerly, poffefied of a right to be present in parliament, and,
unless in some extraordinary conjunctures, none but the grcater
Barons attended. But by means of the Reformation, the conili-
tution had undergone a great change. The ariflocratical power ol
the nobles had been much incrcaicd, and the influence of the Ec-
clefiaffical order, which the Crown uually employed to check teir
ufuirpations, and to ballance their authority, had diminiLicd in

2 pro-
i6o

16:

proportion. Many of the Abbies and Priors had been erected into Book VII.
temporal peerages; and the Proteltant Bishops, an indigent race
of men, and odious to the nation, were far from pofiefling the weight 57
and credit, which their predecessors derived from their exorbitant
wealth, and the fuperfitious reverence of the people. In this si-
tuation, the King had recourse to the expedient employed by
James I. and obtained a law reviving the statute of 1427; and from
that time the Commons of Scotland have sent their rcprcfentatives
to parliament. An at, which tended so vilibly to abridge their au-
thority, did not pass without oppolition from many of the nobles.
But as the King had a right to summon the lefler Barons to attend
in person, others were apprehenlive of feeing the house filled with
a multitude of his dependants, and consented the more willingly
to a law, which laid them under the reftridion of appearing only
by their representatives.

THE year I588 began with an universal expectation throughout I 58S.

all Europe, that it was to be difiinguifed by wonderful eventss he approach
and revolutions. Several astrologers, according to the accounts of armado.
cotemporary historians, had predided this; and the situation of
affairs in the two principal kingdoms of Europe was such, that a
sagacious observer, without any fpernatural intelligence, might
have hazarded the prediction, and have foreseen the approach of
tome grand crilis. In France, it was cvident fiom the aflonifing
progress of the league, conducted by a leader, whol ambition was
reftlaincd by no scruples, and whose genius furinountcd all diflicu!-
ties; as well as from the timid, variable, ad impolitic councils of
llcI-ry III. that either that Monarch ml Itilubit to abanduon tlce
tVironc, of which lie was unlworthvl ;or by fmc iididc and di ril
blow, cut ofi' his formidlable rivll. Accordingl'y, in tlhe bcgini
cf the y\'ar, tihe l)ukc of (JiCf: rovc i Malcr out of' hli c.i'it.i

\! , . Y it,

Book VII. city, and forced him to concllde a peace, which left him only
'-8--' the fliadow of royalty; and before the year expired, he himsel

fell a victim to Henry's fears, and to his own security. In Sain,
the operati.ns were such, as promised something still more uncom-
mon. During three years, Philip had employed all the power f
his European dominions, and exhaufled the treasures of the Indies,
in vast preparations for war. A fleet, the greatest that had ever
appeared in the ocean, was ready to fail from Lisbon, and a nu-
merous land army was afTembled to embark on board of it. Its
defination was fill unknown, though mlany circumilances made it
probable that the blow was aimed, in the firit place, against Eng-
land. Elizabeth had long given secret aid to the revolted provinces
in the Low Countries, and now openly afforded theln her protec-
tion. A numerous body of her troops was in their fervicc; tlhe
Earl of Leiccflcr commanded their armies; he had great tw\v
in the civil government of the republic; and ome of its nmoil con-
fiderable towns were in her poffefion. Her fleets had insulted the
coasts of Spain, intercepted the Galleons from the V'est Indies, and
threatened the colonies there. Roused by so many injuries, allured
by views of ambition, and animated by a superstitious zeal for pro-
pagating the Romifi Religion, Philip resolved not only to invade,
but to conquer England, to which his descent from the house oi
Lancaster, and the donation of Pope Sixtus V. gave him, in
his own opinion, a double title.
t.orlun of ELIZABETH fliw the danger approach, and prepared to cn-

S'n"that counter it, with the utmoi: intrepidity. The mcafures for

the defence of her kingdomn were concerted, and carried on, with
the vwildoin and vigour, which diflinguith her reign. lcer chicf
care was to fecurc the fiendflip of the King of Scots. Shc
had treated the Queeln his Mother with a rigour unknown among

Princes;
162

Princes; he had often used himself harfily, and with contempt; Book VIL
and though he had hitherto prudently suppressed his resentment of '"~
these injuries, lle did not believe it to be altogether extinguished,
and was afraid that, in her present situation, it might burr out
with a fatal violence. Philip, sensible how much an alliance with
Scotland would facilitate his enterprize, courted James with the ut-
-mno afiiduitv. He excited him to revenge his Mother's wrongs
lie flattered him with the hopes of haring his conquests; and offer-
ed him in marriage his Daughter the Infanta lltbella. At the lIme
time, Scotland Ifwarmed with prielts his emiilhries, w!.o educcd
some of the nobles to Popery, and corrupted others with bribes and
promises. Hluntly, Errol, Crawford, were the heads of a fation,
which openly efpoilfed the interest of Spain. Lord Maxwell,
arriving from that court, began to alemble his followers, and to
take arms, that he might be ready to join the Spaniards. In order
to countcr-ballance all these, Elizabeth made the warnef profcf-
sions of f-iendfhip to the King, and Alh by, her ambaiador, enter-
tained him with magnificent hopes and promises. lfe aured him
that his right of iucceflion to the Crown flould be publickly ac-
knowledged in England ; that he mhould be created a Duke in that
kingdom ; that lie mfould be admitted to ome hare in the goverin-
ment; and receive a considerable pension annually. James, it is
probable, was too well acquainted with Elizabeth's arts, to rely
entirely on these promises. But he underflood his own intercf in
the preflnt junture, and purlued it with much fIcadinefs. lc re-
je&ed an alliance with Spain, as dangerous. IIe refused to admit
into his pretence an ambassador fiom the Pope. IIe sized Colonel
Scmple, al agent of the Prince of P'arima. IIe drove many of
the trafliquing 'ricfis out of the kingdom. lie marched fudcidtly
to Dunifries, difpcrfcd MaxwCel's followers, and took him prii lncr.
In a Convention of the nlobles, lhe declared hii. rcfolttioin to :tlc e

Y 2 inviolualy

163

Book VII. inviolably to the league with England and, without litening to the

^v 8 iflggeftions of revenge, determined to adt in concert with Elizabeth,

against the common enemy of the Protestant faith. lie put the
kingdom in a posture of defence, and levied troops to obftrud the
landing of the Spaniards. IHe offered to fend an army to Elizabeth's
afnilance, and told her ambaflador that he expeded no other favour
from the King of Spain, but that which Polyphemus had promised to
Ulyfies, that when he had devoured all his companions, he would
make him his last morsel %

\ naitio .! THr zeal of the people, on this occasion, was not inferior o

"'acet('f1 that of the King; and the extraordinary danger, with which they
Ie:ilion. were threatened, fuggefled to them an extraordinary expedient for

their security. A bond was framed for the maintenance of true
Religion, and the defence cf the King's person and government,
in oppolition to all enemies foreign and donmefic. This contained
a confelon of the Proteflant faith, a particular renunciation of the
errors of Popery, and the most solemn promises, in the name, and
through the strength of God, of adhering to each other, in sup-
po ting the former, and in contending against the latter, to the utmofl
of their power t. The King, the Nobles, the Clergy, and the
people iubfcribed it with equal alacrity. Strange or uncommon
as such a combination may now appear, many circumstances con-
tributed, at that time, to recommend it, and to render the idea
familiar to the Scots. When rouzcd by any extraordinary event,
)r alarmed by any public danger, the people of Ifiael were accuf-
tomcd to bind themnflves, by a solemn Covenant, to adhere to that
Religion, which the Almighty had established among them; tlis
the Scots conlidered as a sacred precedent, which it became them to

* ('lnidL 54-1 Jlhnll, i T) SpotwV. 39.

I Duilop' C ollc .

( of Confics. Vol, 2. i o'
l6.4

imitate. In that age, no considerable enterprize was undertaken Book VII.
in Scotland, without a bond of mutual defence, which all concerned '" `
reckoned necessary for t eir security. The form of this religious con-
federacy is plainly borrowed from thiof political ones, of which
so many inflances have occurred ; the articles, ltipulations, and pe-
culiar modes of exprefilon, are exactly the fame in both. Almofi
all the considerable Popish Princes were then joined il a league for
extirpating the Reformed religion, and nothing could be more na-
tural, or fcemned more efficacious, than to enter into a counter-afib-
ciation, in order to oppose the progress of that formidable conspiracy.
To thlee caules, did the Covcnalt, which has become io famous
in hiltory, owe its origin. It was renewed at differcnt times during
the reign of James '. It was revived witl great solemnity in the
year 1638. It was adopted by the Englifi, in the year I 64, and
enforced by the civil and ecclesiastical authority of both kingdoms.
The political purposes to which it was then made subservient, and
the violent and unconfitutional measures which it was then em-
ployed to promote, it is not our province to explain. But at the
juncture, in which it was firif introduced, we may pronounce it o
have been a prudent and laudable device for the defence of the re-
ligion and liberties of the nation; nor were the terms in which it
was conceived, other than might have been cxpected from men
alarmed with the impending danger of Popery, and threatened with
an invasion by the moflt bigotted, and mosl powerful Prince in
Europe.

PnIIL1 P'S cagernefs to conquer England did not inspire him cithei

with the vigour or despatch, neccilary to ensure the ficcels of io
ighlty an enterprize. His fleet, which ought to have failed in April

* CnlJi.
C 1, 1 3,

dil

Book VII. did not enter the English channel till the middle of July. It ho-

88 vered many days on the coast, in expectation of being joined by

the Prince of Parma, who was blocked up in the ports of Flan-

fThe AXtmad ders by a Dutch squadron. Continual disasters pursued the Spa-
defeated.

niards during that time; successive storms and battles, which are
well known, conspired with their own ill conduct, to disappoint
their enterprize. And by the blefing of Providence, which
watched with remarkable care over the Protestant Religion, and
the liberties of Britain, the English valour scattered and destroyed
the Armado on which they had arrogantly bestowed the name of
Invincible. After being driven out of the English seas, they were
forced to fleer their course towards Spain, round Scotland and Ire-
land. Many of them suffered flipvreck on these dangerous and
unknown coafls. Though James kept his ubjcds under arms to
watch the motions of the Spaniards, anti to revret their landing in
an hostile manner, he received 700 who were cf:lt aflore by a tem-
pest, and after supplying them with ncceflitrics, pcmlnited them
to return into their own country.

On the retreat of the Spaniards, Elizabeth fnt an anibaficldor

to congratulate with James, and to compliment him on the firm-
ness and generosity, he had dilcovered during a co:'juniftlrc f dan-
gerous. But none of Afhby's premises were any lo:)c!' remem-
bered; that MinifeRr was even accused of havin' c. ceded hil
powers, by theSe too liberal offirs ; and conlcious o1 his own false-
hood, or alhamed of being disowned by his court, le withdrew
;ccretly out of Scotland *.

PH IL P, convinced by fatal experience of his own rafiinefs i.

attempting the conquest ol England, by a naval armament, cquippdcI
'otl;audi " Johnt. 13.1, Cald. .8,

nt
i66

at so great a difiance, and fubjeded in all its operations, to the Book VII
delays, and dangers, and uncertainties, arising from seas and winds, -I
refolvei to make his attack in another form, ad to adopt the plan
which the Princes of Lorrain had long meditated, of invading Eng-
land through Scotland. A body of his troops, he imagined, might
be ealily wafted over from the Low Countries to that kingdom, and
if they could once obtain footing, or procure ailtance there, tho
frontier of England was op n and defencclets, and the northern
counties full of Roman Catholics, who would receive them with
open arms. Mean while, a defient might be threatened on the
southern coall, which would divide the Englilh army, dilfrad their
councils, and throw the whole kingdom into terrible convullions.
In order to prepare the way for the executionl of this dtgn, he
remitted a considerable fum of money to Bruce, a seminary lPrielf
in Scot'and, and employed him, together with Hay, Creighton and
Tyrie, Scotch Jesuits, to gain over as many persons of iiitindion
as pofiible to his interest Zeal for Popery, and the artful infina- opol; ), .;,,l ,
tions of thece emiflaries, induced several of the nobles to favour 'al~'!n

gal1i. ti.x

a ilcafure, which tended so manifeflly to the deftrucqion of their Kin.
country. Huntly, though the King had lately married him to the
daughter of his favourite, the Duke of Lennox, continued warmly
attached to the Romifl Church. Crawford and Errol were ani-
mated with the zeal of new converts. They all engaged in a
correspondence with the Prince of Parma, and in their lettcrs to
him, ofifred their service to the King of Spain, and undertook,
with the aid of 600o men, to render him mafler of Scotland, and
to bring so many of their vafials into the field, that lhe hould be
able to enter England, with a numerous army. Francis Stcw:,'t,
,radiionl of James V. whom the King had created Earl of Both-
well, though influenced by no motive of religion, for hc dtill
adhered to the Proteflant faith, was prompted, merely by caprice,

Y67

Book VII. and the restlessness of his nature, to join in this treasonable corrief-
' X ;-' pondence.

S1589.
February 17. ALL these letters were intercepted in England. Elizabeth, alarm-

ed at the danger which threatened her own kingdom, sent them
immediately to the King, and reproaching him with his former
lenity toward the Popish party, called upon him to check this for-

1ihcKinp, niidable conspiracy, by a properfeverity. But James, though firmly
mlaxims with
regard to Po- attached to the Protestant religion, though profoundly versed in the
try.'' theological controversies between the Reformcrs and the Church of

Rome, though he had employed himself, at that early period of
life, in writing a Commentary on the Revelations, in which he
proved the Pope to be Antichrist, had nevertheless adopted, already,
those maxims concerning the treatment of the Roman Catholics,
to which he adhered through the reit of his life. The Roman
Catholics were at that time a powerful and aive party in Eng-
land; they were far from being an inconsiderable faaion in his own
kingdom. The Pope and King of Spain were ready to take part
in all their machinations, and to second every effort of their bigo-
try. The opposition of such a body to his fuccefion to the Crown
of England, added to the averfcnefs of the Englifla from the go-
vernment of ftrangcrs, might create him many difficulties. In
order to avoid.there, he thought it necessary to sooth, rather than to
irritate the Roman Catholics, ad to reconcile them to his fuccefliol,
by the hopes of gentler treatment, and ome mitigation of the ri-
gour of those laws, which were now in force againif them. This
attempt to gain one party by promises of indulgence and as
of clemency, while he adhered, with all the obflinacy of a dif-
putant, to the (dodrincs and tenets of the other, has given an air
of mystery, and even of contradilion, to this part of the Kings'
¢harader. The Papiis, with the credulity of a fel: ftllrgtiin,

(I)

to obtain power, believed his heart to be wholly theirs; and the Book VII.
Protestants, with the jealousy inseparable from those who are al- V
ready in poffeflion, viewed every a of lenity, as a mark of indif-
ference, or a symptom of apoftacy. And in order to please both,
James often aimed at an excefiive refinement, mingled with difli-
mulation, in which he imagined the perfection of government, and
of King-craft, to consist.

His behaviour on this occasion was agreeable to these general His ecexfive

maxims. Notwithstanding the follicitations of the Q.een of Eng- leni, ho the
land, enforced by the jealous remonfirances of his own Clergy, a
short imprisonment was the only punishment he inflicted on Hunt-
ly and his aflociates. But he soon had reason to repent of an ad of
clemency, so inconsistent with the dignity of government. The
first use which the conspirators made of their liberty, was to assemble
their followers, and under pretence of removing Chancellor Mait-
land, an able Minister, but warmly devoted to the Englifli interest, April '
from the King's councils and pretence, they attempted to seize
James himself. This attempt being defeated partly by Mait-
land's vigilance, and partly by their own ill conduct, they were forced
to retire to the North, where they openly erected the standard of
Rebellion. But as the King's government was not generally un-
popular, or his Miniers odious, their own valals joined them
slowly, and discovered no zeal in the cause. And the King, in per-
son, advancing against them with such forces as he could suddenly
levy, they durfl not rely so much on the fidelity of their troops,
which though superior in number, followed them with relucance,
as to hazard a battle; but fuffring them to difpcrfe, they furren-,x,,rl ai
dered to the King, and threw thcmfelves on his mercy. Huntly,
Errol, Crawford and Bothwcll were all brought to a public trial.
Repeated ads of treason were easily proved against them. The

VOL. II. Z King,

169

Book VI. King, however, did not permit any sentence to be pronounced X
.''",- and after keeping them a few months in confinement, he took oc-

5 9 cation, amiilt tlhe public fefiivity and rejoicings, at the approach

of his nmrriage, to 'et them at liberty *.

The KI-r'< As James was the only descendant of the ancient Monarchs of
m:, :i' x Si

li Scotland, in the diret line; as all hopes of uniting the Crowns of the
'\Jrc oi' Den-

two kingdoms would have expired with himn; as the Earl of Arran,
the. prcfuiptive heir to the throne, was lunatic; the King's mar-
riage was, on all these accounts, an event which the nation desired
with the utmoflt ardour. HeI hiimfelf was no less desirous of ac
complifling it; and had made overtures, for that purpose, to the
cldeft Daughter of Frederick I. King of Denmark. But Elizabeth,
jealous of every thing, that would render the acceifion of the
liouf of Stewart more acceptable to tle Englifl, endeavoured to
perplec James, in the amen manner lhe had done Mary, and em-
ployed as many artifices to defeat or retard his marriage. IHis Mi-
nitlers, gained by bribes and promises, seconded her intentions; and
though several differcnt ambafladors were sent from Scotland to
Denmark, they produced powers so limited, or infiled on condi-
tions so extravagant, that Frederick could not believe the King to
be in earnest ; and fufpieCing that there was some delign to deceive,
ur amuse him, gave his daughter in marriage to tle Duke of Brunf
wick. Not discouragcd by this dilappointment, which he imputed
entirelv to the conduct of his own Minifiers, James made his addrci(-
fts to the rinceis Anne, tFredcrick's lccond daughter. And tlioui
1.li::.cthl cnndeavoured to ivert himi firon this, )by rIconmmnendiing
Catherine the King of Navarrc's filtcr, as a more advantagious nmatch
though (fie prevailed on the Privy Council of Scotland to declare
againlt te aliance with Denmark ; ihe prlifed in his choice. And
ddcinairing of overcoming the obflilcv of his own Minifcr-s, in

<poif. 37 ;. (I',;h. ,).*'

any other manner, he secretly encouraged thle citizens of Edin- Book VII.
burgh to take arms. They threatened to tear in pieces the Chan- -
cellor, whom they accutd as the person, whoie artifces had hither- 5
to disappointed the wiihes of the King, and the expecations of
his people. In consequence of this, the Earl Marifial was ent into
Denmark, at the head of a splendid embassy. He received ample
powers and iflrucions, drawn with the King's own hand. The
marriage articles were quickly agreed upon, and the oung Queen
set fail towards Scotland. James mde great prciprations for her:
reception, and waited her landing with all the impatience of a
lover ; when the unwelcome account rrived, that a violent tempefi:
had arisen, which drove back her fleet to Norway, in a condition
so shattered, that there was little hope of its putting again to sea,
before the ipring. This uncxpected disappointment, he fekl
with the utmost enfibility. He inltantly fitted out some flips,
and without communicating his intention to any of his coun-
cil, failed, in person, attended by the Chancellor, several noblemen, oa *
and a train of 300 persons, in quest of his bride. He arrived afely
in a fiall harbour, not far diflant from Upilo, where the Qaeen then
resided. There the marriage was solemnized. And as it would have No,. 2.
been rafil to trulf thole boisterous seas, in the winter ifafon, James
accepted the invitation of the court of Denmark, and repairing
to Copenhagen, pafied several months there, amidst continual feafl-
ing, and amultments, in which both the Queen and himself had
great delight .

NIo event i the (ilg',s life appears to be a wider deviation from

his general charad[er, than this fuddcn sally. I is ton Charles .
w.as capable of that cxceflive admiration of the other sex, v, ]Lich

1 7
.1 M'Av. 37-,

BookVII. arises from great sensibility of heart, heightened by elegance of

-- atafte; and the romantic air of his journey to Spain suited such a dif-

position. But James was not susceptible of any refined gallantry,
and always expressed that contempt for the female character, which
a pedantic erudition, unacquainted with politeness, is apt to inspire.
He was fretted, however, at the many obstacles which had been
laid in his way. He was anxious to secure the political advantages,
which he expected from marriage; and fearing that a delay might
afford Elizabeth, and his own Miniilers, an opportunity of thwart-
ing him by new intrigues, he suddenly took the resolution of pre-
venting them, by a voyage from which he expected to return in a
few weeks. The nation seemed to applaud his conduct, and to be
pleased with this appearance of amorous ardour, in a young Prince.
Notwithstanding his absence so long beyond the time he expected,
the nobles, the clergy, and the people, vied with one another in
loyalty and obedience; and no period in the King's reign was more
rcmarkable for tranquillity, or more free from any eruption of those
factions, which so often disturbed the kingdom.

T II
172

# BOOK VIII.

THE
HISTORY

O F
SCOTLAND.

BOO K VIII.
O N the firfi of May the King and Qgeen arrived at Leith, Book

and were received by their fubjeds, with every possible ex- -

preflion of joy. The solemnity of the Queen's coronation was con- 1590.
duced with great magnificence ; and so low had the order of bishops .uec' agrive
fallen, in the opinion of the public, that none of them were pre- in Scotlnd.
sent on that occasion, and Mr. Robert Bruce, a Preffyterian Mi-
nifter of great reputation, set the Crown on her head, adminiftred
the sacred undcion, and performed the other cuflomary cere-
monies.

TsiE zeal and fuccfes, with which many of tlie Clergy had

contributed towards preserving pcace and order in the kingdom,
during his labicncc, reconciled Jamnes, in a great degree, to their per-
frons, ad even to the lPrcltlytcrim folrm of govcnllml(lt. JI pre-

cl.'itc :

Book t'VIII,

I go.
iiivld

fence of an Aflembly, which met this year, he made high encoe
miums on the discipline, as well as the dodtrine of the Church,
promised to adhere inviolably to both, and permitted the affemnliy
to frame such as, as gradually abolilhed all the remains of epif-
copal jurifdid'ion, and paved the way for a full and legal cftablifl-
ment of the Presbyterian model *.
T AN event happened soon after, which afforded the Clergy no small

triumph. Archbifiop Adamson, their ancient enemy, having fallen
under the King's difpleafurc, having been deprived of the reve-
nues of his fee in consequence of the ad of annexation, and being
opprefied with age, with poverty, and diseases, made the meaneli
fubmiiion to the Clergy, and delivered to the Aflembly a formal re-
cantation of all his opinions concerning Church government,
which had been matter of offence. Such a confciion, from the
mot learned person of the order, was confidered as a teflimony,
which the force of truth had extorted from an advcrfary .

Diycr(dcrs in
~ix ki11dom.

MEAN while the King's exceflive clemency towards offenders

multiplied crimes of all kinds, and encouraged such as of vio-
lence, as brought his government under contempt, and proved fa-
tal to many of his fubjedts. The hifory of everal years, about
this time, is filled with accounts of the deadly quarrels between
the great families, and of murders and aaftinations perpetrated
in the moll audacious manner, and with circumflances of the t-
molt barbarity. All the defects in the feudal ari-locracy were now felt
more cfnfibly, than at any other period ili the hifory of Scutland,
and universal licence and anarchy prevailed to a deCree, scarce con-
iftcnt with the prcifrvation of society. While the King, too

* Call. 4. 204,

2

Spot \v. 35.Cgd. 4. 2 4.
/ r

(:>-- 1I
4_ 9

gentle to punish, or too feeble to a with vigour, suffered all these Book VIILT
enormities to pals with impunity. 1

1 91.

BUT though James connived at real crimes, wichich , ::t;:',;t

is conmmonly a: imaginary one, engrossed his attention, and thofer;i :.:
funfpeceid of it, felt the whole weilht of hil authority. Many K "'
pecrolns, neither extremely ol, nor wretchedly por, which were
ufuialil Ihldl to be certain indications of this crime, !but m-ncrs of
families, and matrons of a decent rank, and in the "nddi'e ae of
life, were fcized and tortured; and though their conrfions con-
tained the inoft absurd and incrcdible circumianccs, the Ki;g's pre-
indices, thole of the Clergy, and of the people, confoircd in (c-
lieving their extravagancics without hesitation, andi in pnlnilin-
their persons without mercy. Some of these unhappy fuffcrers
accused Bothwell of having consulted tlhem, in order to know the
time of the King's death, and of having employed their art, to
raise the florms, which had endangered the (ueen's life, and had
detaincd James folong in Denmark. Upon ti cvidcnce, tt no-
bleman was committed to priobn. 1His turbulent an(d haughty fiit
could neither submit to the retlraint, nor brook such an indimtitv
Having gained his keepers, he made his cfcape, and imputirg the
accusation to the artifices of his enemy, the Chancellor, at'cmll-led
his followers, under pretence of driving him fom the King's
councils. Being fvoured byv ionc o te Ki;g's attcndants, hic
was admitted, by a ccrc paiL gle, under cloti of ni n

ht, into the

court of te pa of I

o oly-ruad-hluul. lc advanced dirctly to-

wardis tle ro al apartment, bu , happily, before lc entered, the
.larnll was taken ano tel doors liut. While lie attempted to lurlnTc'"'' :,'
.oprien to of tlhem, and to let i1rc to otIhers, the citiz7(IS of' I'iln.-
bnrhl' lild tilm t ruiIn to thilr arnt, 'and hIe cl.ipd wi't tc t-

BookVIII. most difficulty; owing his safety to the darkness of the night, and

----' the precipitancy with which he fled*.
1592-·

HE retired towards the North, and the King having unadvifedlv

given a commiflion to the Earl of Huntly, to pursue him, and his
followers, with fire and sword; he, under colour of executing that
commission, gratified his private revenge, and surrounded the house
, of the Earl of Murray, burnt it to the ground, and flew Murray

himself. The murder of a young nobleman of such promiing
virtues, and the heir of the Regent Murray, the darling of the
people, excited universal indignation. The citizens of Edinburgh
rose in a tumultuous manner; and though they were restrained, by
the care of the magiffrates, from any a of violence, they threw
aside all refpec for the King and his Ministers, and openly insulted
and threatened both. While this mutinous spirit continued, James
thought it prudent to withdraw from the city, and fixed his refi-
dence for some time at Glasgow. There Huntly surrendered him-
self to jutlice; and, notwithstanding the atrociousness of his crime,
and the clamours of the people, the power of the Chancellor, with
whom he was now closely confederated, and the King's regard for the
memory of the Duke of Lennox., whose daughter he had married,
not only protected him from the sentence which such an odious
adion merited, but exempted him even from the formality of a
public trial -.

Presbyterian A flep of much importance was taken, oon after, with regard
vernmcnth - to the government of the Church. The Clergy had long coim-
-ablifhcd by plained of the encroachments made upon their privileges an('

MIclv. 388. Spots. 386. Spots. 38-

il it

jurifdiCion, by the as of the parliament 1584, and though these
laws had now lofl much of their force, they resolved to petition
the parliament, which was approaching, to repeal them in
form. The juncure for pushing such a measure was well chosen.
The King had loft much of the public favour, by his lenity to-
wards the Popish faction, and flill more by his reiifniefs in pur-
suing the murderers of the Earl of Murray. The Chancellor had
not only a powerful party of the courtiers combined against him,
but was become odious to the people, who imputed to him every
falle ftep in the King's conduct. Bothwell fill lurked in the king-
dom, and being secretly supported by all the enemies of Mait-
land's adminifration, was ready, every moment, to renew his au-
dacious enterprizes. James, for all thee reasons, was extremely
willing to indulge the Clergy in their request, and not only con-
sented to a law, whereby the as 1584 were rescinded or explained;
but he carried his complaisance still further, and permitted the par-
liament to eablifi the Presbyterian government, its General Afiem-
lies, Provincial synods, Prefbyteries and Kirk fefilons, with all
the dilferent branches of their discipline and juriifdi&ion, in the moit-
ample manner. All the zeal and authority of the Clergy, even
under the adminil'ration of Regents, from whom they might have
expeded the mllto partial favour, could not obtain the fandtion of
law, in confirmation of their mode of Eccleiiaitical government.
No Prince was ever lels disposed than James to approve a fytliem,
whol-e republican genius iniipire a paflion for liberty, io repulgant
to Ills exaltced notions o royal prerogative. Nor could any aver-
Ion be more inveterate than lji, to the auflicre and unccomplyin
charadter of the P1relbterilIm lery in that a;e C; who, inmoi
einient l zeaI, thall for 1po!tcy, oflt el conltradid(tCd Iiis (,pilion;s,
and ccn1Ui'el'U' i; ci',; n uld, witI a fre iccdo , equally ofi I live to his
dloglinatilin ;'s a IThologian, and to his pride as a King. Ilis liua-

VOL. II. A a tio, l

Book VII,

1592.

177

178
BookVIII. tion however obliged him, frequently, to conceal, or to diffembe
'*""" his sentiments; and as he often disgusted his fubjets, by indulging

1592. the Popish facion more than they approved, he endeavoured to

attone for this, by concessions to the Presbyterian Clergy, greater
than he himself would otherwise have chosen *.

IN this parliament, Bothwell and all his adherents were attainted.

But he oon made a new attempt to seize the King at Falkland;
and James, betrayed by ome of his courtiers, and feebly defended
by others, who wished well to Bothwell, as the Chancellor's avow-
ed enemy, owed his safety to the fidelity and vigilance of Sir Robert
Melvil, and to the irresolution of Bothwell's aflociates -.

A ),ee con- THIS danger was scarce well over, when the nation was alarmed
piracy oftl with the discovery of a new and more formidable conspiracy.

George Ker, the Lord Newbottle's brother, being seized as he was
ready to set fail for Spain, many suspicious papers were found in
his custody, and among these, several blanks signed by the Earls
of Angus, Huntly, and Errol. By this extraordinary precaution,
they hoped to ecape any danger of discovery. But Ker's refolu-
tion flrinking when torture was threatened, he confessed that he
was employed by these noblemen, to carry on a negociation with
the King of Spain; that the blanks subscribed with their names
were to be filled up by Crichton and Tyrie; that they were in-
ftruded to offer the faithful service of the three Earls to that Mo-
narch ; and to follicite him to land a body of his troops, either in
Galloway, or at the mouth of Clyde, with which, they undertook, in
the first place, to cflablifh the Roman Catholic Religion in Scot-
land, and then to invade England, with the whole forces of the

* Cal4. 4. 248, 252. Spots. 388,. - MciV. 402.

kingdom,

kingdom. Sir David Graham of Fintry, and Barclay of Lady- BookVI.
land, whom he accused of being privy to the conspiracy, were 5
taken into custody, and confirmed all the circumstances of his
confession *.

THE nation having been kept for some time in continual terror r593

and agitation by so many fuccefive conspiracies, the discovery of Zeal of ilh
this new danger compleated the panic. All ranks of men, as if peoPle
the enemy had already been at their gates, thought themselves
called upon to fland forth in defence of their country. The Mi-
nifters of Edinburgh, without waiting for any warrant from the
King, who happened at that time to be absent from the capital,
and without having received any legal commission, assembled a
considerable number of Peers and Barons, in order to provide an
infant remedy against the impending danger. They seized the
Earl of Angus, and committed him to the castle; they examined
Ker; and prepared a remonstrance to be laid before the King, con-
cerning the fiate of the nation, and the necessity of prosecuting
the conspirators with becoming vigour. James, though jealous And proceed-
of every encroachment on his prerogative, and offended with sub- King against
jeds, who instead of petitioning, feermed to prescribe to him,them.
found it necessary, during the violence of the ferment, not only
to adopt their plan, but even to declare that no consideration should
ever induce him to pardon those, who had been guilty of so odious Ja" 8
a treason. He summoned the Earls of Huntly and Errol to fur-
render themselves tojuftic:. Graham of Fintry, whom his Peers
pronounced to be guilty of treason, he commanded to be publickly
beheaded; and marching into the North at the head of an army,
the two Earls, together with Angus, who had escaped out of pri-

* Rymcr, 6. jyo.

Aa 2

179

Book VIII. son, retired to the mountains. He placed garrisons in the castles

- -' which belonged to them; compelled their vaflals, and the Barons,
I593.

in the adjacent counties, to subscribe a bond containing profeflions
of their loyalty towards him, and of their firm adherence to the
Proteflant faith; and, the better to secure the tranquillity of that
part of the kingdom, constituted thle Earls of Athol, and Mar-
lall, his Lieutenants there *.

March 18.
Eizahcth
folsicits him
to treat them
with rigour.

HAVING finished this expedition, James returned to Edinburgh,

where he found Lord Borrough, an extraordinary ambassador from
the court of England. Elizabeth, alarmed at the discovery of a
conspiracy, which she confidered as no lets formidable to her own
kingdom, than to Scotland, reproached James with his former
remifnefs, and urged him, as he regarded the preservation of the
Protestant religion, or the dignity of his own Crown, to punish
this repeated treason with rigour; and if lie could not apprehend
the persons, at least to confiscate the eltates of such audacious re-
bels. She weakened, however, the force of thece requests, by
interceding, at the fame time, in behalf of Bothwell, whom, ac-
cording to her usual policy in nourishing a factious spirit among
the Scotch nobles, she had taken under her protection. James abib-
lutely refused to liften to any interceflion in favour of one, who
had o often, and witl so much outrage, insulted both his go-
vernment and his person. With regard to the Popifli conspirators,
lie declared his resolution to prosecute them witl vigour; but thal
he might be the better able to do so, he demanded a finall umn of
money from Elizabeth, which fhc, distrustful, perhaps, of tel
manncr in which he might apply it, fhcwcd no inclination to grant.
'The zeal, lhowever, and importunity of his own fubjecs oblicdl

"l SPOts. 31. Call . 2z9,.

hil
180

him to call a parliament, in order to pass an a of attainder againfl BooklVII.
the three Earls. But before it met, Ker made his escape out of ~--'

1593-

prison, and on pretence, that legal evidence of their guilt could not
be produced, nothing was concluded againfl them. The King him-
self was universally fufpeced of having contrived this artifice, on
purpose to elude the requefis of the Queen of England, and to
disappoint the wiflies of his own people. And therefore, in order
to tooth the Clergy, who exclaimed loudly against his conduct,
he gave way to the pasing of an a, which ordained those who
obstinately contemned the censures of the Church, to be declared
outlaws *

WHILE the terror excited by the Popish confliracy poiefed the £otlivcll

nation, the court had been divided by two rival factions, which srpUizs tlh
contended for the chief direction of affairs. At the head of one,
was the Chancellor, in whom the King reposed entire confidence.
For that very reason, perhaps, he had fallen early under the Queen's
displeasure. The Duke of Lennox, the Earl of Athol, Lord
Ochiltree, and all the name of Stewart espoused her quarrel, and
widened the breach. And James, fond no less of domestic tran-
quillity, than of public peace, advised his favourite to retire, for
some time, in hopes that the Queen's refetment would bfide.
But as he flood in need, in the present juncture, of the afiiflance
of so able a Minifler, he had recalled him to court. In order to
prevent him fiom recovering his former power, the Stewarts had
recourse to an expedient no less illegal, than desperate. Having
combined with lBothwcll, who wvis of the fame fiurname, they Jluy .
brouglht him back fe rctly into Scotland ; and seizing the gates of
the palace, introduced him into the royal apartment with a numc-

' CI. . 313. S`ts. 392' IM`. 1 3. Jac. V1I c. i6(.

rous

i8I

BookVIII. rous train of armed followers. James, though deserted by all his

~sv-' courtiers, and incapable of resistance, discovered more indignation

than fear, and reproaching them for their treachery, called on the
Earl to finish his treasons, by piercing his Sovereign to the heart.
But Bothwell fell on his knees, and implored pardon. The King
was not in a condition to refuse his demands. And a few days
after he signed a capitulation with this successful traitor, to whom
he was really a prisoner, whereby he bound himself to grant him
a remffion for all past offences, and to procure the ratification of
it in parliament; and in the mean time, to difinifs the Chancellor,
the Malter of Glamis, Lord Home, and Sir George Home, from
his councils and presence. Bothwell, on his part, consented to
remove from court, though he left there as many of his affo-
ciates, as he thought sufficient to prevent the return of the adverse
fation.

He recovers BUT it was now no easy matter to keep the King under the
hs berty, fame kind of bondage, to which he had been often subjet during

his minority. He discovered so much impatience to shake off his
fetters, that those who imposed, durfi not continue, the restraint.
September 7.

They permitted him to call a Convention of the nobles at Stirling,
and to repair thither himself. All Bothwell's enemies, and all
who were desirous of gaining the King's favour by appearing to be
so, obeyed the summons. They pronounced the insult offered
to the King's person and authority to be high treason, and declared
him absolved from any obligation to observe conditions, extorted
by force, and which violated so eflcntially his royal prerogative,
James, however, fill proffered him a pardon, provided he would
sue for it as an a of mercy, and promise to retire out of the king-
do.m These conditions Bothwell rejected with disdain, and bc-

2 taking
82

taking himself once more to arms, attempted to furprize the King, Book VIII.
but finding him on his guard, fled to the borders *.593

THE King's ardour again f Bothwell, compared with his flow andSutered of

evasive proceedings against the Popish Lords, occasioned a general favouring the
disgust among his fubjecds; and was imputed either to an exceflive Ppi rd
attachment to the persons of those conspirators, or to a secret par-
tiality towards their opinions; both which gave rife to no unrea-
fonable fears. The Clergy, as the immediate guardians of the
Proteflant Religion, thought themselves bound, in such a juncture,
to take extraordinary steps for its preservation. And the provincial
fynod of Fife happening to meet at that time, a motion was made
to excommunicate all concerned in the late conspiracy, as obftinatesep. 25z
and irreclaimable Papists. And though none of the conspirators
resided within the bounds of the fynod, or were subjeCt to its ju-
rifdiction, such was the zeal of the members, that, overlooking
this irregularity, they pronounced the sentence of excommunica-
tion, to which the a of lafl parliament added new terrors. And
left this should be imputed to a few men, and accounted the
a&c of a small part of the Church, deputies were appointed to
attend the adjacent synods, and to desire their approbation and con-
currence.

AN event happened, a few weeks after, which increased thetHislcnicy o>

wards themnr,

people's suspicions of the King. As he was marching on an ex-ua, l7-
pedition against the bordercrs, the three Earls, coming suddenly
into his pretence, offered to submit themselves to a legal trial, and
James, without committing them to cuilody, appointed a day for
that pirpofe. The conspirators prepared to appear with a formi-
dable train of their friends and vafials. But, in the mean time,

* Cald. . 326. Spots. 305.

the

183

Pook VIII. the Clergy, together with many Peers and Barons, assembling at

".''. Edinburgh, remonstrated against the King's extreme indulgence
1$93.

with great boldness, and demanded of him, according to the re-
gular course of juftiee, to commit to sure custody persons charged
with the highest ads of treason, who could not be brought to a legal
trial, until they were absolved from the censures of the Church;
and to call a Convention of estates, to deliberate concerning the
method of proceeding against them. At the fame time, they offered
to accompany him in arms to the place of trial, left such auda-
cious and powerful criminals fllould overaw justice, and dictate
to the judges, to whom they pretended to submit. James, though
extremely offended both with the irregularity of their proceedings,
and the presumption of their demands, found it expedient to put
off the day of trial, and to call a Convention of estates, in order to
quiet the fears and jealousies of the people. By being humoured
in this point, their suspicions began gradually to abate, and the
Chancellor managed the Convention so artfully, that he himself,
together with a few other members, was impowered to pronounce
a final sentence upon the conspirators. After much deliberation,
Nov. 6. they ordained that the three Earls, and their associates, should be

exempted from all further inquiry or prosecution, on account of
their correspondence with Spain; that, before the first day of
February, they fiould either submit to the Church, and publickly
renounce the errors of Popery, or remove out of the kingdom;
that, before the firtf of January, they should declare which of
there alternatives they would embrace; that they flould find furcty
for their peaceable demeanour, for the future; and that if they
fai!ed to signify their choice in due time, they should lose the be-
nceit of this ad of a)olitioz, and remain exposcd to all the pains
of law

* Cald. 4. 330. Spori. 97.

I3s·
184

1 3

BY this lenity towards the conspirators, James incurred much BookVIIi.

reproach, and gained no advantage. Devoted to the Popish super-
fition, fubmiflive to all the dictatcs of their priests, and buoyed
up with hopes and promises of foreign aid, the three Earls refused to
accept of the conditions, and continued their treasonable correfpon-
dence with the court of Spain. A Convention of estates pronounced Jin. i L
them to have forfeited the benefit of the articles, which were of-
sered; and the King required them, by proclamation, to surrender
themselves to juitice. The presence of the Engliih ambatTador
contributed, perhaps, to the vigour of thee proceedings. Eliza-
beth, ever attentive to James's motions, and imputing his reludance
to puniih the Popish Lords to a secret approbation of their deligns,
had lent Lord Zouche to represent, once more, the danger to whlich
he exposed himself, by this false moderation; and to require himi
to exercifethat: igour, which their crimes, as well as the poflure of as-
fairs rendered ncceffary. And though the fIeps now taken by the
King silenced all complaints on that head, yet Zouche, forgetful
of his charater as an ambafidor, entered into private Inegocia-
tions with fuchl of the Scotch nobles, as diiapproved of the King's
ineafures, and held almost an open correfponidencc with Both weil,
who, according to the uual artifice of malecontents, pretended
much solicitude for reforming the difordcrs of the commonwealth ;
and covered his own ambition with the fpecous veil o zeal iiinft
those Councellors, who reirained the King from purifing tlle.avo\cd
enemies of the Proteflant faith. Zouche encouraecd im, in the
name of his Mistress, to take arms againfl his Sovercigu .

I'MEAN while, the King and the Clergy were filled with mutulal d l ,

trust of each oher. They were jcalous, pcrh:lps to excel, that his al ' "I'1 l
sections leaned too much towards the lopiil faction ; hlie fulifctcdl tc hc.lm,
without good rcafon, of prompting Bothwell to rebellion, and cvcn

VoL. I. B b of

Book VII. o'f supplying him with money for that purpose. Little instigation,

L^'y indeed, was wanting to rouze such a turbulent spirit as Bothwell's,
I59+.

to any daring enterprize. He appeared suddenly within a mile of
Edinburgh, at the head of 400 horse. The pretences, by which
he endeavoured to juflify this infurredion, were extremely popular ;
zeal for religion, enmity to Popery, concern for the King's honour,.
and for the liberties of the nation. James was totally unprovided
for his own defence; he had no infantry, and was accompanied
only with a few horsemen of Lord Home's train. In this extre-
mity, he implored the aid of the citizens of Edinburgh, and, in
order to encourage them to at with zeal, he promised to proceed
again ft the Popish Lords with the utmost rigour of law. Animated
by their Ministers, they ran cheerfully to their arms, and advanced
with the King at their head against Bothwell; but he, notwith-
Rtanding his success in putting to flight Lord Home, who had rashly
charged him with a far inferior number of cavalry, retired to Dal-
keith without daring to attack the King. His followers abandon-
ed him oon after, and discouraged by so many fucceiive difap-
pointments, could never afterwards be brought to venture into the
field. He betook himself to his usual lurking places, in the North
of England; but;Elizabeth, in compliance with the King's remon-
ftrances, obliged him to quit that retreat *,

Fr, 0, :,, crs No sooner was the King delivered from one danger, than he was
firo t r callCed to attend to another. The Popifl Lords, in consequence
'iil 3,." of their negociations with Spain, received, in the spring, a -upply

of money from Philip. What bold designs this might inlpirc,
it was no easy matter to conjedurc. From men under the do-
minion of bigotry, and whom indulence could not reclaim, the

* Spo'f. ,0io. CaldJ. 4 359

moll-
i86

mnoft desperate aions were to be dreaded. The assembly of the BookVIIll
Church immediately took the alarm; remonstrated against them ~--
with more bitterness than ever; and unanimously ratified the fen-
tence of excommunication, pronounced by the fynod of Fife.
James himself, provoked by their obstinacy and ingratitude,
and afraid that his long forbearance would not only be gene-
rally displeasing to his own fubjelts, but give rife to unfavourable
suspicions among the English, exerted himself with unusual vigour.
He called a parliament; laid before it all the circumfances andc ne '
aggravations of the conspiracy; and though there were but few
members present, and several of there connected with the confpi-
rators by blood or friendship, he prevailed on them, by his influence
and importunity, to pronounce the mos rigorous sentence the law
can inflicd They were declared to be guilty of high treafop, and
their estates and honours forfeited. At the fame time, flatutes,
more evere than ever, were enated against the profeflbrs of the
Popish Religion.

How to put this sentence in execution, was a matter of greater Battl of

difficulty. Three powerful Barons, cantoned in a part of the Gle"lva:;
country almost inacceflible, surrounded with numerous vassals, and
supported by aid from a foreign Prince, wre more than an over-
match for a Scotch Monarch. No intreaty could prevail on Eli-
zabeth to advance the money, necessary for defraying the ex-
pences of an expedition againfl them. To attack them in person,
with his own forces alone, might expofc him both to disgrace and
to danger. He had rccourfc to the only expedient which remain..
ed, in fch a situation, for aiding the impotence of Sovcreign au-
thority; he delcgatc(d his authority to the arl of Argyll, and Loi-.
iorbcs, the leaders of two clans at emity with the conlfiraitors
.d gave tem com ifolllion to invade their lands, and to buizc til,

8. b . ca'il .',

187

Book VIII. calfles which belonged to them. Bothwell, notwithitanding aI
v---'J his high pretensions of zeal for the Protestant Religion, havin-

1 54 now entered into a close confederacy with them, the danger became

every day more urging. Argyll, follicited by the King, and rouzed
by the Clergy, took the field at the head of 7000 men. untly
and Errol met him at Glenlivat, with an army far inferior in num-
ber, but composed chiefly of gentlemen of the low countries,
mounted on horse-back, and who brought along with them a train of
oa. 3. field-pieces. They encountered each other with all the fury,

which hereditary enmity and ancient rivalflip add to undisciplined
courage. But the Highlanders, dilconcerted by the first discharge
of the cannon, to which they were little accustomed, and un-
able to refil the impreflion of cavalry, were soon put to flight.
And Argyll, a gallant young man of eighteen, was carried by his
friends out of the field, weeping with indignation at their dif-
grace, and calling on them to stand, and to vindicate the honour
of their name *.

ON the sirs intelligence of this defeat, James, though obliged to

pawn his jewels in order to raise money -, assembled a small body
of troops, and marched towards the north. He was joined by the
Irwines, Keiths, Lefleys, Forbeses, and other clans at enmity withl
IIuntly and Errol, who having loft several of their principal fol-
lowers at Glenlivat, and others refusing to bear arms against tihe
King in person, were obliged to retire to the mountains. Jaice:
wafted their lands; put garriions in ome of their castles; burnt
others; and left the Duke of Lennox, as his Lieutenant in that
part of the kingdom, with a body of men fuficient to re(:rain them
tiom gathering to any head there, or from insetsing the low

C]..;.I. . 408. -1 Bir'h, \Mcm. I. 1I6.

country)

country. Reduced at la-st, to extreme dirtrefs by the rigour Book V1II
of the season, and the defcrtion of their followers, they obtained 94
thetKing's permifion to go beyond seas, and gave security that they Popifhi L.ord,

driven out of'

should neither return without his licence, nor engage in any new thekingdom.
intrigues againll the Proteflant Religion, o the peace of the
kingdom .

BY their exile, tranquillity was re-eftabliflied in the North of r9,.
Scotland; and the firmness and vigour, which James had displayed Thc Rnj..n

Cathclic 1 :

in his last proceedings againif them, regained him, in a great degree, centi ;::ii.
the confidence of his Proteflant subjes. But he funk, in the mic0-
fame proportion, and for the fame reason, in the ftieem of the
Roman Catholics. They had aerted his mother's right to the
Crown of England with so much warmth, that they could not,
with any decency, rejet his. And the indulgence, with which
lie affeiced to treat the profefibrs of that religion, inspired them with
such hopes, that they viewe-d his acceifon to the throne as no
undesirable event. But the rigour with which te King purued
the conspirators, and the severe atutcs against Popery to which he
had given his consent, convinced them that these hopes were vifio-
nary; and they began to look about in quelc of fume new fuccc.or,
whole rights they might oppose to his. Tlie Eng!ifil lapifis tu;-nii
their eyes towards the Earl of Eex, whofc generous mind, though
firmly eftablifilcd in the Proteflant sith, abhorred the fieerltie
iiifliCed, in that age, on account of religious opinions. Tlocjf of
the fame fed, who wcre i exile, formed a bolder fcherne, and one
more Iuitable to their situation. They advanced the claim of the
JIn ita of 'ain ; and lPar1- the cLit pubilhld a book, in whicl),
by false quotations from lliRoy, by fabulous gencalodies, and ab.-

* SlotLfw. I. C.il. -j, , c.

fulrd

189

Book VIII. surd argument, intermingled with bitter invectives againft'the King
L -V---i of Scots, he endeavoured to prove the Infanta's title to the English

'595- Crown to be preferable to his. And Philip, though involved

already in a war both with France and England, and scarce able
to defend the remains of the Brgundian Provinces against the
Dutch commonwealth, eagerly grasped at this airy project. The
dread of a Spanish Pretender to the Crown, and the opposition
which the Papists began to form against the King's succession,
contributed not a little to remove the prejudices of the Protefrants,
and to prepare the way for that event.

Bothwell BOTHWELL, whose name has been so often mentioned as the
forccd to 17y
irno Spain, disturber of the King's tranquillity, and of the peace of the king-

dom, was now in a wretched condition. Abandoned by the Queen
of England, on account of his confederacy with the Popifl Lords;
excommunicated by the Church, for the fame reason; and defcrted,
in his diflrefs, by his own followers; he was obliged to fly for
safety to France, and thence to Spain and Italy, where, after re-
nouncing the Proteflant faith, he led, many years, an obscure and
indigent life, remarkable only for a low and infamous debauchery.
The King, though extrei. -ly ready to sacrifice the firongeft resent-
ments to the slightest acknowledgments, could never be softened
by his fubmillions, nor be induced to liiten to any intercefiion in his
behalf.

Tilts year the King loft Chancellor Maitland, an able Miniler,

on whom lie had long devolved the whole weight of public affairs.
As James loved him while alive, he wrote, in honour of his Imc-
mory, a copy of verses, which, when compared with the coin-
politions of that age, arc far from beiuig inelegant -t.

* Wianw. Me. . Spots. 4o :1
Id,

S 00 ,.

SOON after his death, a considerable change was made in theBook VIII.
adminifiration. At that time, the annual charges of government V

1596.

far exceeded the King's revenues. The Queen was fond of ex- A chnge in
pensive amusements. James himself was a firanger to (Economy. the atiadrnil
It became necessary, for all there reasons, to levy the public re-
venues with greater order and rigour, and to husband them with
more care. This important trust was committed to eight gentle-
men of the law *, who from their number were called OSfavians,
The powers vested in them were ample, and almost unlimited.
The King bound himself neither to add to their number, nor to
supply any vacancy that might happen, without their consent: and
knowing the facility of his own temper, agreed that no alienation
of his revenue, no grant of a pension, or order on the treasury,
should be held valid, unless it were ratified by the fublcription of
five of the commissioners; all their ats and decisions were declared
to be of equal force with the sentences of judges in civil courts.;
and in consequence of them, and without any other warrant, any
person might be arrefled, or their goods seized. Such extensive
jurisdiction, together with the absolute disposal of the public
money, drew the whole executive part of the government into their
hands. United among themselves, they gradually undermined the
reft of the King's Ministers, and seized on every lucrative or honou-
rable office. The ancient servants of the Crown repined, at being
obliged to quit their fations to new men. The favourites, and
young courtiers, murmured at feeing the King's liberality fIinted by
their prcfcriptions. And the Clergy exclaimed againfl onie of
them as known apofl-tes to Popery, and l-ifpeCtcd others of fccretly
fivour-ing it. Tlhey retained their p:rvc, hlowever, not\ithfland-

* Alcx.nlir c 'cnton Prcfideclt of the Sfliol, V.T'ltcr Stwart Commciidnator f
l.uttIc Il.( o l Pivy Sil, DI):ivl ( ii'-u, .hli 1indi;iy,

J:.ncs2 l'llin(flnl, Tho-
- lx I.iislilcll, Jolhn Skcnc Clerk t Rc' i lct, and Peter V oini Et n i '():;..

., i;ng

291

BookVlIII. ing this general combination against them; and they owed it intirely

ic596 to the order and ceconomy which they introduced into the adminif-

tration of the finances, by which the necefrary expences of go-
vernment were more easily defrayed, than in any other period of
the King's reign *.

t,; 'c THE rumour of vail preparations which Philip was said to be

a ;;tniti tle carrying on at this time, filled both England and Scotland with the
Popilli Lords.

dread of a new invasion. James took proper measures for the de-
fence of his kingdom. But these did not satisfy the zeal of the
Clergy, whose suspicions of the King's sincerity began to revive;
and as he had permitted the wives of the banished Peers to levy
the rents of their estates, and to live in their houses, they charged
him with rendering the aE of forfeiture ineffectual, by supporting
the avowed enemies of the Proteflant faith. The assembly of the
Church took under consideration the state of the kingdom, and
having appointed a day of public fafRing, they solemnly renewed
the Covenant, by which the nation was bound to adhere to the
Proteflant faith, and to defend it against all aggressors. A com-
mittee, confiiUing of the mol: eminent Clergymen, and of many
Barons, and gentlemen of diftintion, waited on the King, and laid
before him a plan for the security of the kingdom, and the pre-
servation of religion. They urged him to appropriate the estates
of the banifled Lords, as a fund for the maintenance of soldiers;
to take the itrieteil precautions for preventing the return of fuci:
turbulent fubjeds into the country; and to purlue all who vwtec
lulpedcdl of being their adherents, wi,ll the utmost rigour.

JThic Iin"', NOTHIING could bC more repugnant to the King's hclemcs,
ciii'ill, ',, more diairccablc to his inclination, than thlle propositions. Avcrlc,
witi l {l, '

tO Spolf. 413. 435.

x ~tliii.!?,
192

thlroughliis whole life, to any course, where he expe&ed oppofi-Book VII.
tion or danger; and fond of attaining his ends, with the charaCter 6
of moderation, and by the arts of policy, he observed with con,
cern the prejudices against him, which were growing among the
Roman Catholics, and resolved to make some attonement for that
part of his conduct, which had drawn on him their indignation.
Elizabeth was now well advanced in years; her life had lately been
in danger; if any Popifi competitor should arise to dispute his right
of succession, a fation, so powerful as that of the banished Lords,
might be extremely formidable; and any division among his own
fubjets might prove fatal, at a jundure, which would require
their united and most vigorous efforts. Inflead, therefore, of the
additional severities which the aflembly proposed, James had
thoughts of mitigating the punishment, which they already suffered.
And as they were surrounded, during their residence in foreign
parts, by Philip's emiflaries; as resentment might difpoce them to
lifRcn more favourably, than ever, to their fuggeflions ; as dcfpair
might drive them to still more atrocious adions he resolved to recall
them, under certain conditions, into their native country. Encou-
raged by these sentiments of the King in their favour, of vwliich they
did not want intelligence, and wearied already of the depncilant and
anxious life of exiles, they ventured to reCulrn fcrcetly into 'cot-
land. Soon aiter, they presented a petition to the Kin(, bciLin?,
his permission to reside at their owvn houifes, and oftritig to give fc-
curity for teir peaccable and dutiful behaviour. James called a
Convention of catcs to deliberatc on a matter of such ilportancc,
and by their advice he granted the pctitioin.

So soon as they were inforncil of this, the I Cmembers ofa conrllmittce, 'It'll l,,""

lappointll d l)y the Ilal: afiinmbly, mett lit i dinbll r"ll , and \ith ll t;. pre- Itl; :1 :I
,

VoL. I, (' c Liitanlcy

BookVIII. cipitancy of far, and of zeal, took such resolutions as they thought
--"-'J necessary for the afety of the kingdom. They wrote circular

596' letters to all the Prefbyteries in Scotland; they warned them of the

approaching danger; they exhorted them to flir up their people to the
defence of their just rights; they commanded them to publish, in
all their pulpits, the at excommunicating the Popifli Lords; and
enjoined them to lay all those who were fufpeaed of favouring Po-
pery under the fame censure, by a summary sentence, and without
observing the uual formalities of trial. And as the danger eemed
too prefing to wait for the stated meetings of thejudicatories of the
Church, they made choice of the moif eminent Clergymen in
different corners of the kingdom, appointed them to reside conflant-
ly at Edinburgh, and to meet every day with the Miniflers of that
city, under the name of the Sanding Colncil of the Chzrch, and
vested in this body the fuprerme authority, by enjoining it, in imita-
tion of the ancient Roman form, to take care that the Church.
should receive no detriment.

THESE proceedings, no less unconstitutional than unprecedented,

were manifefi encroachments on the royal prerogative, and bold
steps towards open rebellion. The King's conduct, however, jus-
tified in some degree such excfers. His lenity towards the PapiIrs,
Ib repugnant to the principles of that age; his pardoning the con-
ipirators, notwithfIanding repeated promises t the contrary; the
rcCefpeC le paid to Lady IIuntly, who was attached to the Romiflt
religion, no Icfs than her husband ; his colmmitting the care of his
daughter, the Princcfs Eliz/abeth, to Lady Lcviigf)(lo, who wal
infected with the fame fuperftitio ; the contempt witll which he
talked, on all occasions, both of the character of Mitniflcrs, and
of their funClion; wcre circumflanlccs which migh t have fillc(t

1mi1.,
1

minds, not prone by nature to jealousy, with some suspicions; and Book VI,
might have precipitated into rafi councils, those, who were far re- 96
moved from intemperate zeal. But, however powerful the motives
might be which influenced the Clergy, or however laudable the
end they had in view, they conduEed their measures with no ad-
dress, and even with little prudence. James dilcovered a rong
inclination to avoid a rupture with the Church, and, jealous as he
wsas of his prerogative, would willingly have made many concessions
for the fake of peace. By his command, some of the Privy Coun-
fellors had an interview with the more moderate among the Clergy
and enquired whether Huntly and his afiociates might not, uponI
making proper acknowledgments, be again received into the boforn of
the Church, and be exempted from any furthcr puniflinent, on account
of their pas apoflacy and treasons. They replied, that though the gate
of mercy flood always open for those who repented and returned, et
as these noblemen had been guilty of idolatry, a crime deferviing
death both by the law'of God, and of man, the civil magiitrate
could not legally grant them a pardon; and even though the Church
fSould absolve them, it was his duty to inflid pnifhllent upon
them. This inflexibility in tlhoie, vwho were reckoned the nmof
compliant of the order, filled the King with indignation, which
the imprudence and obfiinacy of a private Clergyman heightened
into rage,

Miz. David Black, Iilniflcr at St. Andrew's, d'l;courii'n in one ,

,)F his fcelrmios, accordiln to custom, concerning thie late of the '' -'
nation, afirlmed that the ling; had permlitted tie opifii ords to 1:,'...
return into Scotland, and by that a(dtion, hIad dilcov-c the trea-
chery of his own heart; that all Klings \wcic the Devil's cil(dcll;
that Satan had now tlhe gidance of the court; that tlhe Q(tc.n of

C c 2z EiI.Ind

BookVIII. England wasan atheitl; that the judges were miscreants and bri-

6-.,-. bers; the nobility godless and degenerate; the- Privy Counsellors
9 cormorants and men of no religion; and in his prayer for the Queen,

he used there words, We must pray for her for fashion's fake, but

. we have no cause, she will never do us good. James commanded

Nov. 1.
The Clergy him to be summoned before the Privy Council, to answer for fuchl
cpoufce his
l^ctee.1 seditious exprefiions; and the Clergy, instead of abandoning himl

to te punifhmcnt, which such a petulant and criminal attack on
his superiors deserved, were so imprudent as to espouse his cause,
as if it had been the common one of the whole order. The con-
troverfy concerning the immunities of the pulpit, and the rights of
the Clergy to testify againfi vices of every kind, which had
been agitated in I584, was now revived. It was pretended, that
with regard to their sacred fundion, Ministers were fuljec to the
Church alone; that it belonged only to their Ecclesiastical superiors
to judge of the truth or falfhood of docrines, delivered in the
pulpit; that if, upon any pretence whatever, the King usurped this
jurifdicion, the Church would, from that moment, fink under
servitude to the civil Magistrate; that instead of reproving vice,
with that honest boldness, which had often been of advantage to
individuals, and salutary to the kingdom, the Clergy would learn to
flatter the paflions of the Prince, and to connive at the vices of
others; that the King's eagerness to punish the indiscretion of a
Protestant Minifler, while he was so ready to pardon the crimes of
Popish conspirators, called on them to fland on their guard; and
that now was the time to contend for their privileges, and to pre-
vent any encroachment on those rights, of which the Church had
been in pofefeion ever since the Reformation. Influenced by thcle
conlfiderationl, the council of the Church en oined Black to lcclirle
the juriididlion of the Privy council. And he, proud of filch n

ppo-
196

'97

opportunity to display his zeal, presented a paper to that purpose, Book VIIr.
and with the utmost firmness refused to plead, or to answer the 596
questions which were put to him. In order to add greater weight
to there proceedings, the council of the Church transmitted the
declinature to all the Prefbyteries throughout the kingdom, and
commanded every Miniiler to subscribe it, in testimony of his ap-
probation.

JAMES defended his rights with no less vigour than they were at-

tacked. Sensible of the contempt under which his authority muff
fall, if the clergy should be permitted, publickly, and with impu-
nity, to calumniate his Minillers, and even to censure himself; and
knowing, by former examples, what unequal reparation for such
offences he might expet from the judicatories of the church, he
urged on the inquiry into Black's conduct, and ihued a proclama-
tion, commanding the members of the council of the church to
leave Edinburgh, and to return to their own parishes. Black, in-
stead of submitting, renewed his declinature; and the council, in
defiance of the proclamation, declared, that as they met by the
authority of the church, obedience to it was a duty fIill more la-
cred, than that which they owed to the King himself. The Privy
council, notwithstanding Black's refuing to pcad, proceeded in the
trial; and, after a oltmn inquiry, pronounced him guilty of te
crimes of which lie had been accused ; but referred it to the Kin-
to appoint what puniflment lie flould fiiffer.

MEAN lwhiic, mally Clneavours we:e used to bring mratters to

accommniodation. Alinofl ecryday prodl pIc.l llbme new fcclnme t
reconciliement; but thlrolugh tihc lKiin 's icklcics, tlhe obftinacv (
the Clergy, or the intrigues of the courtiers, they all provced il !'-
fcLtual. Loutl parties appealed to the people, andl y rccir((,c.

ai l

Book VIII.

1596.

and exaggerated accusations, endeavoured to render each other
odious. Insolence, sedition, treason, were the crimes, with which
James charged the Clergy; while they made the pulpits resound
with complaints of his excessive lenity towards Papists, and of the no
less excessive rigour, with which he oppreled the established Church.
Exasperated by their bold invectives, he, at last, sentenced Black
to retire beyond the river Spey, and to reside there during his plea.
sure; and once more commanding the members of the ltanding
council to depart from Edinburgh, he required all the Minifiers
in the kingdom to subscribe a bond, obliging themselves to submit,
in the fame manner as other fubjeds, to the jurisdiction of the
civil courts, in matters of a civil nature.
A tumult in THIS decisive measure excited all the violent paifions, which

li . poflefs disappointed factions; and deeds no less violent immediately

followed. These muff be imputed in part to the artifices of some
courtiers, who expeted to reap advantage from the calamities of
their country, or who hoped to leften the authority of the Od.a-
vians, by ingaging them in hostilities with the Church. On one
band, they informed the King that the citizens of Edinburgh
were under arms every night, and had planted a strong guard round
the houses of their Ministers. James, in order to put a flop to this
imnaginary insult on his government, iliucd a proclamation, com-
manding twenty four of the principal citizens to leave the town,
within fix hours. On the other hand, they wrote to the Miniitcrs,
advising tlhem to look to their own fafcty, as IIuntly had been ic-
cretly admnitted to an interview witil the King, and had been the a-
thor of the fcverc proclamation ag ainfl the citizens of Edinburgh

They

* Though malltcr were idiijfirioily ?r;,yav'in\' by )prforln, la1 \xillhc l IW ;

pnru-ics to purflue violcnt Cl.irtl.rC j n1Cithcrof lictrclpirrS w\CICc :itlo,,tll Ic.llitiii
198

They doubted no more of the truth of this intelligence, than the Book VIII.
King had done of that which he received, and fell as blindly into ' -w
the irarc. 'The letter came to their hands, just as one of their num-
ber was going to mount the pulpit. They resolved that lie should Dcc. 17
acquaint the people of their danger ; and he painted it, with all the
itrong colotus, which men naturally employ, in defcribilg any
dreadful annd inflant calamity. When the ferlloln was over, lie de-
fired the nlbles and gentlemen to aliencble in the Littl: C/:;^-c;
The whole multitude, terrified at what they had heard, cowdlcd
thither; they promised and vowed to fland by the Clurch ; they
drew up a petition to the King, craving the redress of thoie grie-
vances, of which the Clergy complained, and befecching him to
deliver them from all future apprehensions of danger, by rcmoving
such of his Counsellors, as were known to be enenes of the
Protestant Religion. Two Peers, two Gentlemen, two Eurgeies,
and two Miniters, were appointed to present it. The King hap- ''c :.? i;,
pened to be in the great hall of the Tulbooth, where tle ourt cf
feflion was fitting. The manner in which the petition was de-
livered, as well as its contents, offended him. Hie gave ant
haughty reply; the petitioners infiited with warmth ; and a prcr
mifcuous multitude prefiing into the room, James retired abruptly
into another apartment, and commanded the gates to be shut be-
hind him. The deputies returned to the multitude, who cere
/till alcnLebled, and to whom a inilIr had been rcading, in their ab-
fence, the flory of Itamn::. W\hen they reported that the Kin-
had restsed to lilecn to their pcitions, the Church was filled in a

or founlation. As thtir \ 'iiln crils o cre f;,,t.c to I' il (l:in!er, fomc of tl;
eri)l ' zc,l.'oul (iti'/eIHs .ad (I ctcrrni l lo d( tfiri tlt in, 1) f. (.c (,if ;Ilr ,. l'iil. ,
IMlein. . 2z ,. llunltly I1LI Icc)til I ViZ.lt ly in l'.lill, 1 lb1l . w lc-c h hI,.l anl illct-
T/otW, ii' lot vwith thle Kii;', alt

,litAl l sitl, mc of i: MiFlilti s, il lhc. Ibid.
:5,.

mom(lllclt

I99

Book VllI. moment with noise, threatnings, execrations, and all the outrage

596.^ and confusion of a popular tumult. Some called for their arms;
:596

some to bring out the wicked Haman ; others cried, the sword of
the Lord and of Gideon ; and rushing out with the most furious
impetuosity, surrounded the Tolbooth, threatning the King him-
self, and demanding some of his Counsellors whom they named,
that they might tear them in pieces. The magifirates of the city,
partly by authority, partly by force, endeavoured to quell the tu-
mult; the King attempted to sooth the malecontents, by promising
to receive their petitions, when presented in a regular manner;
the Ministers, sensible of their own rashness in kindling such a
flame, seconded both; and the rage of the populace, subsiding as
suddenly as it had risen, they all dispersed, and the King returned
to the palace; happy in having escaped from an infurredion, which,
though the instantaneous and unconcerted effec of popular fury, had
cxpofed his life to imminent danger, and was confidered by him as
an unpardonable affront to his authority .

As oon as he retired, the leaders of the malecontents aembled,

in order to prepare their petition. The punishment of the Popifli
Lords; the removal of those Counsellors, who were fufpeded of
favouring their persons or opinions; the repeal of all the late ads
of council, subversive of the authority of the Church; together
vitlh an at approving the proceedings of the flanding council;
were the chief of their demands. But the King's indignation vws
fill so high, that the deputies, chosen for that purpose, durfl not
venture, that night, to prccnt requefs which could not fail of ki:Jld
liig his rage anew. Icfore next morning, James, with all his at.

SpotRfw. , c. Cld. 5. 5, &c. EBich, Mem. 2. 235.

tce da;lla ,lt
£00

attendants, withdrew to Linlithgow; the feflion, and other courts Book VIII,
of justice, were required to leave a city, where it was no longer con- 596
fiftent either with their safety, or their dignity to remain; and the He leaves
noblemen and barons were commanded to return to their own and progeeds
houses, and not to reassemble without the King's permifilon. The wjtih everity
vigour, with which the King ated, struck a damp upon the spirits citizens.
of his adversaries. The citizens, sensible how much they would
susser by his absence, and the removal of the courts of justice, re-
pented already of their condudt. The Ministers alone resolved to
maintain the contest. They endeavoured to prevent the nobles
from dispersing; they inflamed the people by violent invedives
againll the King; they laboured to procure subscriptions to an as-
fociation for their mutual defence; and conscious what lustre and
power the jundion of some of the greater nobles would add to their
cause, the Ministers of Edinburgh wrote to Lord Hamilton, that
the people, moved by the word of God, and provoked by the il-
juries offered to the Church, had taken arms; that many of the
nobles had determined to protect the Protestant Religion, which
owed its eftablifilment to the piety and valour of their ancestors; that
they wvanted only a leader to unite thenm, and to inipire them with vi-
gour; that his zeal for the good cause, no less than his noble birth,
entitled him to that honour: They coljurd him therefore not to
disappoint their hopes and wishes, nor to refule the fuffring Church
that aid, which ile to much needed. Lord Hamlilton, inflead of
complying wi'th their desire, carried the letter dircd-ly to the Kin2r,
whom this new insult irritated to ifch a degree, that lie commanldedi
tlhe magirfatcs of IdinbuLrgh inflantly to fcizc their Mhiniflrs, n
vianiicft incendiaries, and encouragcrs of rebellion. Tlie nimail-
t!"ates, in order to rciai the Klz's favour, were nrncl.;ii,- t

Vol., II I) d ot.' E,

201

Book VII. obey; and the Minifers, who saw no other hope of safety, fled

' ---p towards England *.
1597.

The King
humbles the
power of the
Church.
I.1 . ;.

THIS unsuccessful infurredion, inflead of overturning, efablifh-

ed the King's authority. Those concerned in it were confounded
and dispersed. And the reft of his fubjeds, in order to avoid sus-
picion, or to gain his favour, contended who should be moif for-
ward to execute his vengeance. A Convention of eltates being
called, pronounced the late infurredion to be high treason; ordained
every Minister to subscribe a declaration of his submission to the
King's jurifdition, in all matters civil and criminal; impowered
magifirates to commit, inflantly, to prison any Minister, who
in his sermons, should utter indecent reflections on the King's
condutd; prohibited any Ecclefiailical judicatory to meet, without the
King's licence; commanded that no person ihould be eleced a
magilrate of Edinburgh, for the future, without the King's ap-
probation; and that, in the mean time, the present magistrates
flhould either discover, and infliCt condign punishment on the au-
thors of the late tumult, or the city itself should be fubjeded to
all the penalties of that treatinable action -.

A e tle ARMED with the authority of these decrees, James refolv-d to crush

p iicL.s of entirely the mutinous spirit of his fubjeds. As the Clergy had, hi-
tihc citizens cf
Fdtblu;rgh. therto, derived their chief credit and firength from the favour and zeal

of the citizens of Edinburgh, his first care was to humble them. Though
the magilrates submitted to him in the nof ajct terms ; though
they vindicated themselves, and their fellow citizens, from the mope
(iltanlt intention of violating his royal pcrfon or authority ; though,
after the flritcf scrutiny, no circumfianiccs that could fix on them

* SpotfwV. 45. (Lid. 5. 2(j.

1 C: . 5· ' 1 -

tj ,.

the suspicion of premeditated rebellion had been discovered ; though Book VIII.
many of the nobles, and such of the Clergy as still retained any
degree of favour, interceded in their behalf; neither acknowledge-
ments, nor interceflions, were of the least avail *. The King
continued inexorable, the city was declared to have forfeited its pri- Feb. 28
vileges as a Corporation, and to be liable to all the penalties of trea-
son. The capital of the kingdom, deprived of magitratcs, de-
ferted by its Ministers, abandoned by the courts of justice, and pro-
fcribed by the King, remained in desolation and despair. The
courtiers even threatened to raze the city to the foundation, and to
ered a pillar where it flood, as an everlasting monument of the
King's vengeance, and of the guilt of its inhabitants. At Ja}l, in
compliance with Elizabeth, who interposed in their favour, and
moved by the continual follicitations of his nobles, James absolved Marci :.
the citizens from the penalties of law, but, at the fame time, he
stripped them of their moit important privileges; they were neither
allowed to eled their own magifirates, nor their own Minifeers;
many new burdens were imposed on them; and a great um of
money was exaEted by way of peace-offering -.

James was, mean while, equally afliduous, and no less success- NvcwruuL

fll, in circumscribing the jurifdicion of the Church. Experiencehad tgarton thl
discovered that to attempt this, by ads of parliament, and sentences (:lur]l.
of privy council, was both ineffectual, and odious. He had re-
course, now, to an expedient more artful, and better calculated for
obtaining his end. The Ecclesiastical judicatories were composed
of many members; the majority of the Clergy were extremely
indigent, and unprovided of legal lipends; the Ministers in the

* C lJ. 5. I49. '- Sputl(w. 43. 44.

203

cnigh-
Dd

Book VIII neighbourhood of Edinburgh,. notwithstanding the parity etablish

57 ed by the Prefbytcrian government, had aumed a leading in the

Church, which filled their brethren with envy ; every numerous body
of men is fu'ceptible of sudden and firong impressions, and liable to
be influenced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by there confide.
rations, James thought it poflible to gain the Clergy, whom he had
in vain attempted to subdue. Proper agents were fct to work all
over the kingdom; promies, flattery, and threats were employed
the usurpations of the brethren near the capital were aggravated;
the jea!oufy of their power, which was growing in the distant pro-
vinces, was augmented ; and two different General Afnimblies were
held, in both, which, notwithilanding the zeal and boldness, where-
with a few leading Clergymen defended the privileges of the Church,
a majority declared in favour of those measures, which were agree-
able to the King. Many pratices, which had continued since the
Reformation, were condemned; many points of dicfipline, which
lad hitherto been reckoned sacred and uncontroverted, were given
up; the licence, with which Ministers discoursed of political mat-
ters, was refrained; the freedom, with which they inveighed
against particular persons, censured; sentences of summary excom-
munication declared unlawful; the convoking a General Assembly,
without the King's permifiion, prohibited; and the right of no-
minating Ministers, to the principal towns, veiled in the Crown.
Thus, the Clergy themselves surrendered privileges, which it
would have been dangerous to invade, and voluntarily submitted
to a yoke, more intolerable than any James would have ventured to
impue by force; while those who continued to oppose his mna-
ilercs, inltead of their former popular topic of the King's violciet
cllcru;acliilmnts on a jliliti(on whichI did not belong him, wc:

I~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ - .

olb.
I

obliged to turn their outcries against the corruptions of their ownBookVIII.
order *.

1597.

BY the authority of these afremblies, the Popifl Earls were al-Popifh ord.

lowed to make a public recantation of their errors; were absolved
fi-om the 1ntcnce of excommunication; and received into the
bosom of the Church. But, not many years after, they relapsed
into their former errors, were again reconciled to the Church of
Rome, andl by -their apoftacy justified, in some degree, the fears
and cruples of the Clergy with regard to their absolution.

TIHE ?Miniflcrs of Edinburgh owed to the interceffon of these

afiemblics, the liberty of returning to their charges in the city.
But this liberty was clogged in such a manner, as greatly abridged
their pover. The city was divided into diftind parishes; the num-
ber of Minifiers doubled; prfons on whose fidelity the King
could rely were fixed in the new parishes; and these circum-
itanccs, added to the authority of the late decrees of the Church,
contributed to confirm that absolute dominion in EcclefiaRical
afTAirs, which James possessed during the remainder of his reign.

THE King was so intent on new-modelling the Church, that

the other tranfations of this period farce deserve to be remem-
bered. The Octavians, envied by the other courtiers, and fpiit-
ilng into Ufitions amnong themfelvcs, recigned their commiflion ; and
the adminifiration of the revenue returning into its former channel,
both the King and the nation were deprived of the benefit of their
re'gular and frugal ccolnomly.

" Sputf.v. 133 Ca! 5. I{, 2 .

'ti'' A. 1: DS

20

Book VIII. neighbourhood of Edinburgh, notwithstanding the parity efrablifhl

J557. ed by the Presbyterian government, had assumed a leading in the

Church, which filled their brethren with envy ; every numerous body
of men is fu ceptible of sudden and tfrong imprefifons, and liable to
be influenced, corrupted, or overawed. Induced by these confide.
rations, James thought it poflible to gain the Clergy, whom he had
in vain attempted to subdue. Proper agents were set to work all
over the kingdom; promises, flattery, and threats were employed;
the usurpations of the brethren near the capital were aggravated;
the jea!oufy of their power, which was growing in the disrant pro-
vinces, was augmented ; and two different General AflLmblies were
hell, in both, which, notwithlanding the zeal and boldness, where-
with a few leading Clergymen defended the privileges of the Church,
a majority declared in favour of those meafiures, which were agree-
able to the King. Many practices, which had continued since the
Reformation, were condemned; many points of discipline, which
lad hitherto been reckoned sacred and uncontroverted, were given
up; the licence, with which Ministers discoursed of political mat-
ters, was restrained; the freedom, with which they inveighed
agaiilft particular persons, censured; sentences of summary excom-
munication declared unlawful; the convoking a General Affcmbly,
without the King's permission, prohibited; and the right of no-
minating Ministers, to the principal towns, vested in the Crown.
Thus, the Clergy themselves surrendered privileges, which it
would have been dangerous to invade, and voluntarily submitted
to a yoke, more intolerable than any James would have ventured to
impufe by force; while those who continued to oppose his mca-
iurcs, inltcad of their former popular topic of the King's violc;t
cilcruachlnets on a jurifliionll hichl did not belong him,

o.-
1

obliged to turn their outcries against the corruptions of their own Book VIII.
order . -

1597.

B3Y the authority of these affcmblies, the Popiflh Earls were al- Popini Lords

lowed to make a public recantation of their errors; were absolved parde
from the sentence of excommunication; and received into the
bosom of the Church. But, not many years after, they relapsed
into their former errors, were again reconciled to the Church of
Romle, and by their apoftacy justified, in some degree, the fears
and scruples of the Clergy with regard to their absolution.

TIIE MDinifers of Edinburgh owed to the intercefon of these

anlcmblics, the liberty of returning to their charges in the city.
But this liberty was clogged in fucl a manner, as greatly abridged
their power. The city was divided into diffind parishes; the num-
ber of Minifers doubled; prfons on whose fidelity the King
could rely were fixed in the new parishes; and these circum-
stances, added to the authority of the late decrees of the Church,
contributed to confirm that absolute dominion in Ecclefaiical
affairs, which James poffelied during the remainder of his reign.

T'IE King was so intent on new-modelling the Church, that

the other tranfaitions of this period scarce deserve to be remem-
bered. The Oavians, envied by the other courtiers, and split-
ing into sions amonll thelmflvcs, reigned their commion ; and
the adminiflration of the revenue returning into its former channel,
both the King and the nation were deprived of the benefit of their
regular and fugal conomly.

' Sputfwv. 33. CQ!J. . , 2S.>

To i','A 1K DS

205

Book Vil. TOWARDS the end of the year, a parliament was held in order

to rcftore Huntly, and his aiiciates, to their estates and honours,

'597.
Dec. 9. by repealing the at of forfeiture paflfd againfl them. The authority

of this supreme court was likewise imployed to introduce a farther
innovation into the Church; but conformable to the fyflem which
the King had now adopted, the motion for this purpose took its rife

reltrz t a from the Clergy themselves. As the ac of general annexation, and
)cat in par- that establishing the Presbyterian government had reduced the few

Bishops, who still survived, to poverty and contempt; as those
who possessed the Abbeys, and Priories, were mere laymen, and
many of them temporal Peers, few or none of the Ecclesiastical
order remained to vote in parliament, and by means of that, the
influence of the Crown was considerably diminiflied there, and a
proper ballance to the power and number of the nobles was want-
ing. But the prejudices, the nation had conceived againif the
name and character of Biflhops, were so violent that James was ob-
liged, with the utmost care, to avoid the appearance of a design to
revive that order. He prevailed therefore on the commission ap-
pointed by last assembly to complain to the parliament, that the
Church was the only body in the kingdom destitute of its repre-
fentatives in that supreme court, where it so nearly concerned every
order to have some, who were bound to defend its rights; and
to crave that a competent number of the Clergy should be ad-
mitted, according to ancient custom, to a feat there. In compliance
with their request, an at was passed, by which those Miniilers
on whom the King ihould confer the vacant Bifhopricks and Ab-
beys, were intitled to a vote in parliament; and that the Clcrgy
might conceive no jealousy of any encroachment on their privileges,
it was remitted to the General Affcmbly, to determine what fpiri-
o206

2

tual

tual jurifdi&ion or authority in the government of the Church these Book VIII.
persons should possess . '"

THE King, however, found it no easy matter to obtain the con-

currence of the Ecclesiastical judicatories, in which the a of par-
liament met with a fierce opposition. Though the Clergy per-
ceived how much lufire this new privilege would reflect upon their
order; though they were not insensible of the great accefion of
personal power and dignity, which many of them would have
acquired, by being admitted into the supreme council of the na-
tion, their abhorrence of episcopacy was extreme; and to that,
they sacrificed every consideration of interest or ambition. All the
King's profesions of regard for the present constitution of the
Church did not convince them of his sincerity; all the devices that
could be invented for reitraining and circumscribing the jurifdidion
of those, who were to be raised to this new honour, did not dimi-
nifh their jealousy and fear. Their own experience had taught
them, with what insinuating progress the hierarchy advances,
and though admitted at firll with moderate authority, and under
specious pretences, how rapidly it extends its dominion. " Varnifli
over this chcme, said one of the leading Clergymen, with what
colours you please ; deck the intruder with the utmost art; under
all this difguie, I fee the horns of his mitre." The fame sentiments
prevailed among many of his brethren, and induced them- to re-
ject power and honou.r, with as much zeal, as ever those of their
order courted them. Many, however, were allured by the hopes
of preferment ; the King himnfelf and his Ministers employed the
flnme arts, whicli they had tried lb fuiccefifLlly last year; and after ,;,,,,,
long debates, and much opposition, the General Atfclbly declared

' pu:i\v. .so. P- 1. 1 5 (h Yc, VI c. 235.

207

Book VII. that it was lawful for Ministers to accept of a feat in parliament;

that it would be highly beneficial to the Church, to have its re-
presentatives in that supreme court; and that fifty one persons, a
number nearly equal to that of the Ecclesiastics, who were an-
ciently called to parliament, should be chosen from among the
Clergy for that purpose. The manner of their elecion, toge-
ther with the powers to be vested in them, were left unde-
cided for the present, and furnished matter of future delibe-
ration *.

5g9 . As the profpet of succeeding to the Crown of England drew

.imescndea- nearer, James multiplied precautions in order to render it certain.
vours \ithll
iucce to gain And as he was allied to many of the Princes of Germany by his
LEnOland marriage, he sent ambassadors extraordinary to their several courts,

in order to explain the justness of his title to the English throne,
and to desire their aillance, if any competitor should arise to dil-
pute his undoubted rights. These Princes readily acknowledged
the equity of his claim; but the aid they could afford him was
distant and feeble. At the fame time, Edward Bruce abbot ct
Kinlofs, his ambassador at the Englifl court, follicited Elizabeth,
with the utmost warmth, to recognize his title by ome public deed,
and to deliver her own fubjets from the calamities, which are
occasioned by an uncertain or disputed succession. But age had
strengthened all the pafions, which had, hitherto, induced Eliza-
beth to keep this great question obscure, and undeci.ded; and ;
general and evasive answer was all that James could obtain. As n:
imprcflion could be made on the Qleen, the anbaffador was conm-
manded to found the disposition of her fubijAs, and to try w}]i;
p'rorctl he could make in gaining tlhem. Bruce poflcfTd all the

Spo)ts. 15-. C2;1. 5. 2..27
2-8

l;ll .:p.'

talents-of secrecy, judgment, and address, requisite -for conduting Book VIII
a- negociation, no less delicate, than important. A Minister of 5
,this characer was intitled to the confidence of the English. Ma-
ny of the highest rank unbosomed themselves to him without re-
serve, and gave him repeated assurances of their resolution to assert
his master's right, in opposition to every pretender i. And as fe-
veral pamphlets were dispersed, at this time, in England, contain-
ing objections to his title, James employed tome learned men in
his kingdom to answer these cavillers, and to explain the advantages
which would result to both kingdoms, by the union of the Crowns
These books were eagerly read, and contributed not a little to re-
concile the Englifhl to that event. A book publihfed this year, by
the King himself, produced an effect flill more favourable. It was
intitled B/i/licon Doron, and contained precepts concerning the art
of government, addressed to Prince Henry his son. Notwithiland-
ing the great alterations and refinements in national tafle since that
time, we must allow this to be no contemptible performance, and
not to be inferior to the works of molt cotemporary writers, either
in purity of style, or jutnel's of composition. Even that vain pa-
rade of erudition with wlhich it abound, and which now disgusts us,
raised the admiration of that age; and as it was filled with those
general rules, which speculative authors deliver for rendering a people
happy, and of which James could ditcourfe with great plaufiility,
though often incapable of putting them in practice; the Englif
conceived an high opinion of his alilitics, and expeced an increcaf
of national honour and prosperity, under a Prince so profoundly
skilled in politics, and wvho gave fucli a fItccimcn both of his wildom,
and of his love to his people -.

* Johnlt. 4.2. 1 C.mnd. Spots. ,457
VOL. 1I.

209
E c

Etoodl tVit ' TtrE Queen ofrEnglatid's' sentiments conceening James, swert

- very diffe-ett from these of her subjes. His excessive indulgence

towards the Popish Lords; the facility with which he pardoned their
repeated treasons; his restoring Beaton, the Popish Archb-ishop of
Glasgow, who had fled out of Scotland at the time of the Reforma-
tion, to the poffeflion of the temporalities of that benefice; the ap-
pointing him his Ambassador at the court of France; the applaute
he bestowed, in the Bafilicon Doron, on those who adhered to the
Queen his mother, Elizabeth confidered as so many indications of
a mind alienated from the Protestant religion; and fufpeded that
he would oon revolt from the profession of it. These suspicions

Acc'ecs lhim feeined to be fully confirmed, by a discovery which came from the
ofcorrefpond-
i.ng ith te Master of Gray, who resided at that time in Italy, and who, ra-

oet ther than susser his intriguing spirit to be idle, demeaned himself f

far as to a as a spy for the English court. He conveyed to Eli-
zabeth the copy of a letter, written by James to Pope Clement VIII.
in which the King, after many exprefiions of regard for that pontiff,
and of gratitude for his favours, declared his firm resolution to treat
the Rcman Catholics with indulgence; and, in order to render the
intercourse between the court of Rome and Scotland more frequent
and familiar, he solicited the Pope to promote Drummond, Bishop of
Vaizon, a Scotsman, to the dignity of a Cardinal *. Elizabeth, who
had received, by another channels, ome imperfect intelligence of this
correspondence, was filled with just furprize, and immediately def-
patched Bowes into Scotland, to inquire more fully into the truth
of the matter, and to reproach James for an aion so unbecoming
a Proteflnt Prince. He was no less aflonifhed at the accusation,
and with a confidence, which nothing but the consciousness of in-
nocence could inspire, affirnied the whole to be a mere calumny,

* C.;il. 333. -- Winw. MCrc. vol. i. 37, 52.
21!0

and
1

and the letter itself to be forged by his enemies, on purpose to Book VII.
bring his incerity in religion to be fufpeaed. Elphingfton the Se-
cretary of State denied the matter with equal solemnity. It came
to be known by a very singular accident, which happened ome
years after, that the information which Elizabeth had received was
well founded, though at the fame time the King's declarations of
his own innocence were perfetly consistent with truth. Cardinal
Bellarmine, in a reply which he published to a controversial treatise,
of which the King was the author, accused him of having aban-
doned the favourable sentiments which he had once entertained of
the Roman Catholic religion, and as a proof of this quoted his let-.
ter to Clement VIIL. It was impossible, any longer, to believe this
to be a ficion; and it was a matter too delicate to be pasted over
without ifrict inquiry. James immediately examined Elphingflon,
and his confefiion unravelled the whole myltery. He acknowledged
that he had mfuffled in this letter, among other papers, which he
laid before the King to be signed, who, fufpeEting no such deceit,
subscribed it together with the reft, and without knowing what it
contained; that he had no other motive, however, to this ation,
but zeal for his Majesty's service; and, by flattering the Roman Ca-
tholics with hopes of indulgence under the King's government, he
imagined that he was paving the way for his more ealy accefion
to the English throne. The Privy Council of England entertained
very different sentiments of the Secretary's conduct. In their opinion,
not only the King's reputation had been exposed to reproach, but
his life to danger, by this rafl imposlurc ; they even imputed the
gun-poxwder trealln to the rage and disappointment of the Papifs,
npon finding that the hopes which this letter ilired were fiul-
tratcd. The Secretary was sent a prilbncr into Scotland, to be tried

I: c z I2 'i

2I

Book VIII. for high treason. His peers found him guilty; but, by the Qoeen's

599~J interceiion, he obtained a pardon *.

ACCORDING to the account of other hiforians, James himtnlf

was no iranger to this correspondence with the Pope; and, if we
believe them, Elphingfton being intimidated by the threats of the
English council, and deceived by the artifices of the Earl of Dun-
bar, concealed some circumftanccs in his narrative of this trant-
altion, and falsified others; and, at the expence of his own fame,
and with the danger of his life, endeavoured to draw a veil over this
part of his Maiter's conduct t.

.nmcsat.t Grt LurTr whether we impute the writing of this letter to the Secre-
'< ,^

,Ql t tary's officious zeal, or to the King's command, it is certain, that,
c.i ',ihc.. about this time, James was at the utmost pains to gain the friendfmili

of the Roman Catholic Princes, as a necefiiry precaution towards fa-
cilitating his accession to the EnglifI throne. Lord -Home, who
was himself a Papist, was entrusted with a secret commifiion to
the Pope : ; the Archbishop of Glasgow was an active intrurnmnt
with tholtC of his own religion j1. The Pope expresed fich fa-
vourable sentiments both of the King, and of his right to the Crown
of England, that James thought himself bound, ome years after,
to acknowledge the obligation in a public manner *'. Sir James
Lindsay made great progress in gaining the English Papists to ac-
knowledge his Majesty's title. Of all these intrigues Elizabeth re-
ceived obscure hints, from different quarters. The more irnner-
fedlv ihe knew, the more violently she I'slpccted the King's dc-
li'::;, and tc natural jcalouly of her temper incrc.ain g with arc,
lie obfcrve(d lis conduct witlh greater flicituuc than ever.

S . A 5 , 5 7. C Uilli vo,~.·, v.11

;6 , 5 0 7 . j o h n s ~ . ~ 4 8 . I ( d . l. V . 3 2 . VI' . 7
X~ii,~.. >I~m vol. i 7 aJvl xi ` 111d Vo' v.(<;

'-1,
2 12

THE queflions with regard to the election and power of the re-

presentatives of the church, were finally decided this year, by the
General Afiembly, which met at Montrose. That place was
chofcn, as most convenient for tle Ministers in the north, among
whom the King's influence chiely lay. And although great num-
bers resorted fromn the northern provinces, and the King employed
his whole intcreft, and the authority of his own priecnce, to gain
a majority, the following regulations were with difficulty agreed
on. That the General Affmbly fliall recommend fix prfons to
every vacant benefice, which gave a title to a feat in Parliament,
out of whom the King flall nominate one ; that the person so eleC-
ed, after obtaining his 1fat in Parliament, flhall neither propose, nor
consent to any thing there, that may aict the intere of the cthurch,
without pccial inflrullons to that puirpdfe; that he fall be an1fer--
able for his conduL to every General Aflembly; and fbmit to its
ccnfur-e,'without appc.il, upon pain of infamy and excommunica-
tion; that he lhall difcha ge the duties of a Paitor, in a partici'a-
conglreation; that he shall not usurp an ccclcfiafiical urifdicion,
superior to that of his other brethren ; that if the church infli& on
him the ceniure of deprivation, he fla'l, thereby, fcrfei his fei;t in
Parliament; that he shall anjnually rgn his commi' n to the
General AlFembly, which may be restorcd to him, or r:,t, as .te
Afeimbl, vith the Kirg's anprobation, iaalI judg mn,)2 e.,lni,, -
for the good of the church -. 'Nothing could be more repug nant
to the idea of Epilcopal government, than there regulations. 1t
,was not in confcqucnce of' r-iltrs derived r('lom tlil.r ofiice, but oe
pov.'crs contfrric, bv a con1mi):Ln, tii;at ecclt.ciilii..al tner1oins w'c:c
to be admitted to a i at i ",:tllmi:mnt; ticv \w!e tlie rcprCtc'iLi-
ti'.'i', not the lPpc:ricr: cf thc !'!-vi'. )iJ)cfitutct c all
, )iritual an-

1 ,p.( :5;1 , 7. 1 ,;'. , . l . .
,. V .

t"li or',

t x 't ,

Book'V1I1

j 6oo.

l 1.jr --h 2--2.
I±- rauh-
tions ux It")1-
gard tot
church,

213

Book VIII. thority, even their civil jurifdiaion was temporary., James, Ihow-

6-0. ever, flattered himself that they would soon be able to shake off

these fetters, and gradually acquire all the privileges which belonged
to the Episcopal order. The clergy dreaded the fame thing. And
he contended for, and they opposed the nomination of these com-
missioners, not so much on account of the powers then vested in
them, as of those, to which it was believed they would oon at-
tain .

Cowry's con- DURING this summer, the kingdom enjoyed an unusual tranquil-
piracy, lity. The clergy, after many truggles, were brought under great

fubjetion; the Popish earls were reflored to their eflates and ho-
nours, by the authority of Parliament, and with the consent of
the church; the reft of the nobles were at peace among thernfelves,
and obedient to the royal authority; when, in the midst of this fe-
curity, the King's life was exposed to the utmost danger, by a con-
fpiracy altogether unexpeted, and almost inexplicable. The au-
thors of it were John Ruthven Earl of Gowry, and his brother
Alexander, the ons of that Earl who was beheaded in the year
1584. Nature had adorned both there young men, especially the
elder brother, with many accomplishments, to which education had
added its most elegant improvements. More learned, than is usual
among persons of their rank; more religious, than is common at
their age of life; generous, brave, popular; their countrymen, far
from thinking them capable of any atrocious crime, conceived the
Inmo sanguine hopes of their early virtues. Notwithstanding all
thefc noble qualities, ome unknown motive engaged them in a con-
fpiracy, which, if we adhere to the account commonly received,

Inuf
2 14

' ST 45,1·

rtfl t betyanfmitted to pofierity, as one of the moit wicked, a' well Boolk VISl.
as one of the wort concerted, of which hitfory makes any mention. 600.

ON the fifth io August, as the King, who resided during the

hunting season in his palace of Falkland, was going out to his sport
early in the morning, he was accosted bv Mr. Alexander Ruthven,
who, with an air of great importance, told the King, that the even-
ing before he had met an unknown man, of a suspicious aspect,
walking alone in a by-path, near his brother's house at Perth; and
on searching him, had found, under his cloak, a pot filled with a
vast quantity of foreign gold; that he had immediately seized both
him and his treasure, and without communicating the lmatter to any
person, had kept him confined and bound in a solitary house; and
that he thought it his duty to impart such a singular event, first of
all to his.Majefty. James immediately fufpeded this unknown per-
son to be a trafficking priest, supplied with foreign coin, in order to
excite new commotions in the kingdom; and resolved to impower
the Magistrates of Perth to call the person before them, and inquire
into all the circumstances of the story. Ruthven violently opposed
this resolution, and with many arguments urged the King to ride di-
re(ly to Perth, and to examine the matter with his own eyes. Mean
while the chace began; and James, notwith'ianding his pafion for
that amusement, could not help ruminating on the strangeness of
the tale, and on Ruthven's importunity. At last, he called him,
and promised, when the sport was over, to set out for Pcrth. The
chace, however, continued long; and Ruthven, who all the while
kept close by the King, was liill calling on him to make hafle. At
the death of thc Buck, he would not allow James to rfay till a sieh
horic was brought him ; and obllrving the Duke of ,Lennox and
thic Earl of Mar preparing to accompany the King, lie ntrtatcd
him to countermand tlhem. This James refucd ; and though

Rutll-

Book VIII. Ruthvei's impatience and anxiety, as well as the apparent pttur.

L;^6-o bation in his whole behaviour, raised some suspicions in his mind:

yet his own curiosity, and Ruthven's solicitations, prevailed on him
to set out for Perth. When within a mile of the town, Ruthven
rode forward to inform his brother of the King's arrival, though
he had already despatched two messengers for that purpose. At a
little distance from the town, the Earl, attended by several of the
citizens, met the King, who had only twenty persons in his train.
No preparations were made for the King's entertainment; the Earl
appeared pensive and embarrassed, and was at no pains to attone,
by his courtesy or hospitality, for the bad fare with which he treated
his guests. Whi n the King's repast was over, his attendants were
led to dine in another room, and he being left almost alone, Ruth-
ven wlifpered him, that now was the time to go to the chamber
where the unknown person was kept. James commanded him to
bring Sir Thomas Erskine along with them; but, infead of that,
Ruthven ordered him not to follow : and condueing the King up
a flair-cafe, and then through several apartments, the doors of whlich
he locked behind lhim, led him at las into a finall study, in which
there stood a man clad in armour, and with a sword and dagg'e
by his fide. The King, who expeA1ed to have found one difarinec
and bound, flarted at the flght, and enquired if this was the per-
son ; but Ruthven fatching the dagger from the girdle of the
man in armour, and holding it to the King's breafl, " Remember,

said he, how unjul y y fathcr fufyired by your command; voi

t are now my prifolncr; fulbmi to my difp fal without rfiftance,
' outcry; or this dagger shall ilanty avenge his blood." Jainic
expoflulated with Ruthven, intreated, and flattered him. The ma,
whom lie found in the fludy, tlood, all the while, trclmbli,
and dlifnaycd, without courage cither to aid the King, or to 1:-

COnlI

cond his aggressor. Ruthven protefled that if the King raised no out- Book VIII.
cry, his life should be safe; and, moved by some unknown reason, l"
retired in order to call his brother, leaving to the man in armour the
care of the King, whom he bound by oath, not to make any noise
during his absence.

WHILE the King wasin this dangerous situation, his attendantsgrow-
ingimpatient to know whither he had retired, one of Gowry's atten-
dants entered the room haflily, and told them that the King had
jus rode away towards Falkland. All of them rushed out into the
ilreet; and the Earl, in the utmost hurry, called for their horses.
But, by this time, his brotler had returned to the King, and swear-
ing that now tlere was no remedy; he behoved to die; offered
to bind his hands. Unarmed as James was, lie scorned to submit
to that indignity; and closing with the alTaflin, a fierce struggle
ensued. The man in armour flood as formerly, amazed and mo-
tionlelt; and the King dragtging Ruthven towards a window, which
during his absence he had persuaded the person with whom he
was left to open, cried, with a wild and affrighted voice, " Trea-
': son ! Treason ! Help! I am murdered ! " lHis attendants heard,
and knew the voice; and saw, at the window, a hand which gral ,c
ihe King's neck with violence. They flew with prccipit.lion to his
affiflance. Lennox and Mar, with the greater number, ran up the
principal flair-cafe, where they ound all the doors fliut, which they
battered with the utmoltt fury, cndlavouring to bur theml open.
But Sir John Rlamihy, cntering by a back-ilair, which '1 to the
apatmlent where thle Kllg w\as, fouiIdI the (oor opcn ); and rllufil-;
iilon Ruthiven, x ho was l ill ruggllii) with the King, tiuck hil
twice with lls dagger, and thrufl hulin towards the ftair-caf, nhIr
:' i 'lTomas Erlkin and bir llughl I lcrrcis imet, and killed hil ; i

VuOiL. I, .I' f (ivii,

2I7

THE HISTORY
Book VIII. crying with his last breath, " Alas! I am not to blame for this

6-oo- " atior." During this scuffle, the man, who had been concealed

in the study, escaped unobserved. Together with Ramsay, Erskine,
and Herreis, one Wilson a footman entered the room where te
King was, and before theyhad time to slut the door, Gowric rufhedin
with a drawn sword in each hand, followed by seven of his attendant
well armed, and with a loud voice threatened them all with in-
ftant death. They immediately thrust the King into the little fudv,
and f(utting the door upon him, encountred the Earl. Notwith-
standing the inequality of numbers, Sir John Ramsay pierced Gowric
thro' the heart, and he fell down dead without uttering a word ; hi,
followers having received several wounds, immediately fled. Three
of the King's defenders were likewise hurt in the conflict. A drea'-.
ful noise continued still at the opposite door, where many perfob:
laboured in vain to force a paflhge; and the King being assured thci.
they were Lennox, Mar, and his other friends, it was opened on
the inside. They ran to the King, whom they unexpectedly found
safe, with transports of congratulation ; and he, falling on his knees
with all his attendants around him, offered solemn thanks to GoJ
for such a wonderful deliverance. The danger, however, was ni.
vet over. The inhabitants of the town, whose Provost Gowrie was,
and by whom he was extremely beloved, hearing the fate of the to :
brothers, ran to their arms, and surrounding the house, threatened.
revenge, with many insolent and opprobrious speeches againf th
King. James endeavoured to pacify the enraged multitude, ,
flpeaking to thein from the window ; he admitted their Maifratc:
into the house ; related to them the whole circumfianccs of th::
IfadI; and their fury rubliding by degrees, they diipcricd. Oln feachl
ing the Earl's poclkets for papers, that might difcovcr his dclilgns ;nlt
accomplices:, nothing was found but a fimall parchment bag, f;l

I

(,

of magical characters, and words of enchantment; and if we may Book lII,
believe the account of the conspiracy publiflied by the King, " while i6oo.
" these were about him, the wound of which he died, bled not;
(I but as oon as they were taken away, the blood gushed out in
cc great abundance." After all the dangerous adventures of this busy
day, the King returned in the eveiing to Falkland, having commit-
ted the dead bodies of the two brothers to the cultody of the Ma-
giftrates of Perth.

NOTWITHSTANDING the minute detail which the King gave of The motie.c

0 b of the C-)1!p-

all the circumfiances of this conspiracy againit his life, the motives rato,,,c )'tcP
which induced the two brothers to attempt an aion so dtefable, ii'Y "xti:
the end they had in view, and the accomplices, on whose aid they
depended, were altogether unknown. The words of Ruthven to
the King gave ome grounds to think, that the delire of revenging
their father's death had infligated them to this attempt. But, nwhat-
ever injuries their father had ufcrcd, it is IcaCrce prObab!e that they
could impute them to the King, whos.e youth and fiubjleion, at that
tine, to the violence of a faction, exempted him fom being the object
of refentnment, on account of actions whichl were not d(one by hiscoln-
mand. Jaine had even endeavoured to repair the wrongs wvhich the
father had sered, by benefits to his children ; and Gowrie himinl-,
sensible of his f avour, acknowledged it with the warmncl exprcl-
sions of gratitude. Three of the Earl's attendants, Lbing convicd
of afflfting him in this afnault oi the King's servants, wtre executed at
Perct1h ; but they could give no lit into the nmotives, wVlich hali
prtomptud thdir matEr to an action to repugnant to tilhti ac!tnowicgl -
:ients;. l)iligcllt circh wa:;lmadc ior-tlLc lC1per concc;eI( it i

tl tCIu.{;,

:1( ii; 1(m li ll greaCt d ilcovcrics were c'xlpecd. uLt Alidrcw J ltli'ii..
,n the Earls 1leward, wlho, upon a proiln oftparldn, con;iuil

1: f 2 lil ll'

219

Book VIII. himself to be the man, was as much a stranger to his mailer's defigno,

as the reft; and though placed in the study by Gowrie's commarn,
he did not even know for what end that fRation had been afigned
him. The whole tranfaation remained as impenetrably dark as ever;
and the two brothers, it was concluded, had concerted their fhelme
without either confident or accomplice, with unexampled fccrecy,
as well as wickedness.

Srrot's dif- AN accident, no less strange than the other circurnfanccs of the
co:Viericcon Iory, and which happened nine )ears after, difcovcrcd that thl,,

opinion, however plausible, was ill founded; and that the to,
brothers had not carried on their machinations all alone. One Sprot,
a notary, having vwhifpered among several persons that he knew
several secrets relating to Gowrie's conspiracy, the privy counc;l
thought the matter worthy of their attention, and ordered him
to be seized. His confession was partly voluntary, and partlv
forced from him by torture. According to his account, Logan of
Reftalrig, a gentleman of an opulent fortune, but of difolut
morals, was privy to all Gowrie's intentions, and an accomplice
in his crimes. Mr. Ruthven, he said, had frequent interviews
with him, in order to concert the plan of their operations; the
Earl had corresponded with him to the fame purpose; and one
Bour, Logan's confident, was trufled with the secret, and carricJ
the letters between them. Both Logan and Bour were now dea'.
But Sprot affirmed that he had read letters written both by Gowi-l
and Logan, on that occasion ; and in confirmation of his tcftimomn,
several of Logan's letters, which a curiosity fatal to L:imfclf h:i;
prompted Sprot to Rcal from among Bour's papers, were produced '

" Logpan'; letters wc'e five in number. One to Tour, another to Gowiic, :nlii thii:
of them wvitihvit any dlilriclion; nor did Sprot decllare the na.nie of the c rfli i

m iiliL,

22 1

These were compa1red, by the privy council, with papers of Lo- Book V11I.
gan's hand writing, and the resemblance was visible. Persons of . "'-

16o.

undoubted credit, and vwell qualified to judge of the matter, exa-
mined them, and ifvvo'c to their authenticity. Death itself did not
excnpt Logan from prolfcution, his bones vwere dug up, and tried
for 1High Tricalin, and by a fcntcnce, equally odious and illegal ,

his

wvhom they were l-ritten. Logan gives him the appellation of Ri:,' HUo.:'rnab;.
It appcars fiom this, however, and fom other words in the letter, Crcmn. 5. that
there w fcte Leveral persons privy to the colifpiracy. The date of the firfl litter is
July 18th. Mr. Rutliven had communicated the mattcr to Logan only five days be-
fore. Ibid. It appears f-om the original fumzmois of FoIfui/ ' e ngain Logan's
heirs, that Four, though he had letters addrecied to him with regard to a confi-
racy equally dangerous and important, was so illiterate that he could not read.
" Jacobus our, literalrum prolfus ignalus, dic:i Georgii opera in legendis omnibus

feriptis ad eum mifis, vel pcrtinentibus, utcbatut.'' This is altogether fagge ;

and nothing but the capricious character of Logan can account for his chufing fch
a confident.

* By the PRoman law, persons guilty of the crime of High Treason might be tried

even after death. 'I his prac'tice was adopted by the Scots, vithout any limitation,
PIarl. 15 o. c. 69. But the unlimiterc exercise of this power was oon conceived to
be dangerous ; and the Crown was laid under proper rcfriftions, by an aft A. D.
I 42, which las never been printed. The words of it are, ' And l'c:aufc the atJi
Lords (i. e. the Lords of articlcs) think the did atc (viz. i 54$) too eneral, nlnd
prejudicial to the Barons in the realm, thcrefore fatutes and ordains tihat the aid
at fliall have no place in time coming, but against the lhcirs of them'that r,>uri-
oully commits or filall commit Isle majely aganilf the King's pion, agail;t tli;
realm for evcltilng the Ilime, and ::l aiit them tihat fL.:l lapplt;i tt bct ay the hki;, :
alrnl ;i llenaily, and beilig nootlrly known i:1 theti lime; and Ihei hL is (,f !.:
pcifoins to hb called and judged withi n live y)ea': alter tlie dcc:tIc' of' the fa:I p;:-
font3 t immitters; of the laid elimi s; and the' lil tili I bl ' p;s, the La;d ,; I: :;

.ever to Ke p1 'li d

l for tlie 11m." ''e1 t.'nt, c a aill J.,,ia vii.I; til tlltilte

in two paiticlilals. 1lc was niot no, ii) kn ox.n dii in ; ii, li!'c toI'b. :; iic, o)n-
plieu in th i e

lime so lit h

1 li \ : as; tl itd aid l i., liL'irs \\ c're c;!.1 illn ntl ltiut ll c'
ltin live cl' es after lMi' dclth. It i ic i alel t l.a ,'t ,te inb lot to li.;ve

Lee i

2^2
Book VIII. his lands were forfeited, and his posterity declared infamous. Sprot

was condemned to be hanged for misprision of treason. He ad-
hered to his confession to the last, and having promised, on the
scaffold, to give the fpeEtators a sign in confirmation of the truth of
what he had deposed, he thrice clapped his hands, after he was
thrown off the ladder by the executioner *.

BUT though it be thus unexpectedly discovered that Gowrie did

not ad without associates, little additional light is thrown, by this dif-
covery, on the motives and intention of his conduCt. It appears
almost incredible that two young men of such diftinguified virtue,
should revolt, all at once, from their duty, and attempt a crime so
atrocious, as the murder of their Sovereign. It appears frill more
improbable, that they flould have concerted their undertaking with

so

been attended to in the parliamcnt wvli.h forfeited Logan. Another singular cii
culrftance defervcs notice. As it is a maxim of jufice that no pcrfon can be tried
in absence; and as lawyers are always tcnacious of their forms, and often abfuir
in their devices for prcferving them, they contrived that in any process againlf ;a
dead pcrobn, his corpse or bones filall be presented at the bar. Examples of this
occur frequently in the Scotch hiltoly. After the battle of Corrichie, the dead
body of the Earl of Huntly was preiented in parliament, before fntcnce of ser-
fiiuitlue was pronounced aainft him. For the fane reason the bodies of Go\wlic
and his brother were prcferved, in order that they might be produced in parlia-
ment. Logan's l,)lcs, in comnpl ance w\-th the fa1lnc rlll, were cdug up. nMacLez.
Crim. Law. Book. i. Tit . . 2 z2.

` It appears that Archliliop Spotfwood was p>resLnt at the execution of Splt.
, o011. 1 5; and yet h11 fcm;s to ha.'ve !ivec no c redit to hli d(il ovc i ks. Tlie 111 11-
11l1 ill xhchli e ] a s of him is

t reiii.. r kk le," WVc ithicl o not I lltulid Il'niti)i

'the 1 .ii .l nllltin t :Lndi cxteeit iol l iof

(to 'C Spill)t, v}l)o fllfe red at. '.inl, Il ,,

I c.iii do( hlloh iil. Ills

[ , iio llioi , tli)uit l \fliiut.ily and co)ll tiil, (nl i ni inti

' pr)l:lbililty. 'li,': nx:in depol'd, &c . It fccmed t,) be a , ,in i .i
"mcr inlvention of tlhe man's ow\n Lbrinl, for neitltr id clie tll ' the ltt(c, t,,

u tw ' ;.3

so little foresight and prudence. If they intended that the deed BookVIIT.
should have remained concealed, they could not have chosen a more 1o.
improper scene for executinlg it than their own house. If tey
intended that I-Ienderfon should have struck the blow, they could
not have pitched on a man more defitute of the courage, that lmuf
direc the hand of an afinain; nor could they expct that he, un-
folicired, and unacquainted with tleir purpoitf, woud venture on
such a desperate ation. If Ruthven meant to flab the Kiin
with his own hand, why did he withd-raw t-he dacgr after it was
pointed at his breaf ? IIow could he leave the Kin, after such a
plain declaration of his intention ? Was it not pepoftercus to com-
mit him to the keeping of uch a timid and fails aflbci at, as ICn-
derfon ? For what purpose did he wafle time, in biing the hannds
of an unarmed man, whom he might easily have dispatched vith

s' could any wife man think that Cowrie, who went about the treason so fecictl'-,
( xould lhav communicated the matter to such a man as Logan was known to be."
p. 503. Spotfwood could not be ignorant of' the flemniity with which Lognn had
been tried, and of the proof brought of the authenticity of his letters. lie him-
fell was probably preien t in parlilamnilt at the tri.l. The Earl of Dunbar, of iwhlo
e lws s it the

aliwas fpaks w ith

th reflpct, was the perlton \vwho dirtcted the proce

againit Logan. Such a peitlnptir dration agaln.i tl c htreutii cf E prot s evi-
dence, notwithflaldinl, all these circumllancs, is flurprizing. Sir oI. Hinil-
ton, the King's advocate at tlht tiic, and atlerward: Earl of f Iilldiop, rit1:o:-
sents the proof produced at Lotlans trial as extrmely cunv'icin ; ai. iln 1 ;;-
ginal letter of his to the KIini 2ifl of June I6o9. (in ]ibi l. 1luijt. ji:i.l a!!tcr
mecntioning the manner ii \hiich the ti.t] lad bettln co;ndu&t, he thius (,)1. on.
" \W hen the probation ('i tli i ;!! .o1s \;as ritli te d t the Lords of :'tic' . \;'. ,
they (ound unirmllll', all iln o ne' x, ,i, thie r iL i ll'll)l. to e 1 i) tl '. ;,
that they) fcmc d to contlld l io lio',1 lid abe l ,if n.'.loii',) o e[sa l i tihet ,
f.i'tlmi of lhiL heart, not t 1 o

in t pithb v, rJ,.,,

Litit v le:
i. (oy ; '.. "l

,t lic bell r.ank conleli.; , tl..t h.ill v. hicloi thel doabt.td ;t their cnr in(t

);.1

ho I,(' was now so) m.dleli i, t til

"
hr li,¼J to cl iithem ti-i.h s, 'i. .i . idl
aJi,' lont)'er refuse todeIl..!e lli thein iiieL d relo tioii o,0 the tiuth ok tht l.t IOli..

BookVIII. his sword? Had providence permitted them to embrue their

hands in the blood of their Sovereign, what advantage could have
accrued to them by his death? and what claims or pretensions
could they have opposed to the rights of his children * ? Inevitable
and instant vengeance, together with perpetual infamy, were the
only consequences they could expect to follow such a crime.

ON the other hand, it is impossible to believe that the King had

formed any design against the life of the two brothers. They had
not incurred his indignation, by any crime; and were, in no de-
gree, the objets of his jealousy or hatred t; nor was he of a spirit

so

* It has been asserted, that, in consequence of the King's death, the Earl of Gow-

vie might have pretended to the Crown of England, as the son of Dorothea Stew-
art daughter of Lord Methven by Margaret of England, who after her divorce
from the Earl of Angus, took that nobleman for her third hulband. Burnet IHilf
of his: own times. But this aertion is ill founded. It appears, fiom undoubted evi-
dence that Lord Methven had only one child by Queen Margaret, which died in it;
infincy, and Dorothea Lady Ruthven was not the daughter of Queen Margaret,
but of Jt Stewart Lord Methven's second wife, a daughter of John Earl of
Athol. Crawf. Peer. 329. And though Cowrie had really been deccended from the
blood royal of England, the King had at that time a son and a daughter; and besides
them, Lady Arabella Stewart daughter of Charles Earl of Lennox had a preferable
title to the Crown of England.

-I- Sitr Henry Nevlc, in a letter to Sir Ralph WXinwood, imputes the death of the

two brothers to a cause not mentioned y any of our Hiliorians. " Out of Scot-
land we hear that there i no good agreement, but rather an open diffidence b,,-
t\\'i't tili King and his wife, and i.iny are of opinin that the discovery of foili
atll'ciion between her and the El of (o'vlic':; br)tihcr (who was] killed \wiLh lhi)
was the tirlcf .aii[(c and motive of' tht tniedy." W\in. Mem. vol. i. 27.. Wh-c.
t'er the (oil\wi' pirlatges in Nicol('ih's lcttcl ebe eny contfimatito (of that ftif)-
(illn, ih; flnlhlitted t, the reader. I1 his kltter Sept. 2, 1() 2, le mIle tionls the 1(:
tLlrnl Cu (Curi 's two youtoger bulothlirs ito Scotland, and adds, " c
I e collilil ; i

(

225

so sanguinary, or so noted for rash and desperate valour, as to hate BookVIII.
attempted to murder them in their own house, where they were 600
surrounded with many domefics, he only with a slender and un-
armed train; where they could call to their aslance the inhabi-
tants of a city, at the devotion of their family, while he was at a
distance from all aid ; and least of all would he have chosen for his
associates, in such an enterprize, the Earl of Mar, and the Duke
of Lennox, the former connected in close friendlhip with the house
of Gowrie, and the latter married to one of the Earl's fiflers.

WHICHSOEVER of these opposite systems we embrace; whether

A conjedture

we impute the intention of murder to Gowrie, or to the King; COlCc,,,IIii
insuperable difficulties arise, and we are involved in darkness, myf-tle nt"c'r
tery, and contradictions. Perhaps the source of the whole con- fpirators,
fpiracy ought to be searched for deeper, and by deriving it from
a more remote cause, we may dilcover it to be less criminal.

To keep the King of Scots in continual dependance, was one

great objiec of Elizabeth's policy. In order to this, hie foretinmes
f£othed him; and sometimes bribed his Mlinilers and favourites;
and when fie failed of attaini.g her end by thcic mans, fie en-

of these two, and the Queen of Scots dcaling with them, and fcniitig avway ani
ftu!inlinag -Mrs. Beatrix [their fitler] with such information ias Sii- T'homs Erilinc
ihas givren, 1:iLth bred gcat ffpicioii in the Kilng of Scots, that tly C

couc 'nut iin

but upon fonme d:aigcrouts plot." In another letter January , I(o;. The d a
of wriliillg y Iaft Mrs. eatrix Ruthven w.is bIooulght by the I.aly Pailly, and M11:.O
of Angus, as one of their g!ntlewomcn iito lie court ill the cvelillr , iad ilow\.

1 ai clhaiin erb i l

preo-rd fl i he by the Q cci in's Jird'ctic il, \\h1icc thle (ii,.'Cei liJ,

mIi)(: tine a.! nI c ilarlc ce witih ier. ( T this; the King go(t n)iltc', and tllie\\''c I l;
dli l Cethal t o t i () ccn, gently rep)lovig lier for it, and examlisin qtli.:.' i [
?the Q(l iil's servants ol thle fiCml , anld of other lmaittcrs therelunito bc)liiiiig; \\iiIl
i-,u h diil.i cion and fccrciv as requires Lch a mIalt tr.

'oUL. 1 . ( co u-lri ^c

O g o ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~.

Book VIiI. encouraged the Clergy to render any adminiflration fli diru'urled
.---... unpopular, by dccrying it, or stirred up forne faction of the noi';

to oppoCe, and to overturn it. They, unacquainted with the arts
of undermining a Minilry by intrigues, had recourse to the r.,er
praCtice of rendering theirfelves matnl rs of the Iin?'s prfon, that
they might thereby obtain the directions of his councils. Tho'
nobles, who seized the King at the Az'il (f' R:/,':-'c', w\re iili..
gated, anld fpportcd by her. lothwell, in all his wild attemnt.,
en1oyed lier protecion, and found aretreat in her dominions. Tl
conneCiOns, whicih James had been formling of late with tChe t ;-
nman Catholic Princes, his cfcret negociations in Engiland with i.i'
fiLlc:is, and tle nmax:iis by which lie overned his ovwn ]:I,;
corn, all con tributed to exc ite her iValoufl. She (leanei1 .i..
,rcat Revo' tioin n Scotland to be approaching, and tt was her interCIz
to prevent it. The Earl of G)owrie was one of the inot powe;,-l'.
of the Scotch nobles, and dccecnded fi-om anccfcors warmly at-.
tachcd to the Engliif intcreft. I-e had adopted the fame fvtccm,
asnd believcd tlic wnl'are of liis country to be inseparably con net-
ed wit the fubLnfelnc of the alliance between the two kingdom<.
During his retidence at Paris, he had contrated an intimate friend'fi
v/ith Sir IIclnryTNevill, the QiccUn' anbaijdor there, and was r-:
cormnmendced by lhiml to his Court, as a person of holn rat .
imht be made *. Eliz.ibcthl received him, as he palTed thlrou n
Ilnglanid, with ditinguituied marks of refpc't and favour. Frm
,li thcl circumflanccs, a ffplicion may arifc, that the plan of ta
c.,:' riiracy a: ti!;'t t e K l v was f ulncel at tlhat time, ini ce.i ,
vw'iti hei'. Sh a lifpiicion preval c in tlhat age, andt frc)n ti
Ic'tL!'s (,' ) :c:~ '

{ ,, Eli,.aec.h's a'enllt ill S'cttiand, it ;app'.L" ,

not to hr dl i ',t (.f oiil ldaltion. An IJ: liih l'.i, wa.Is ,' ' v
ov,'!ing, si' (Ilmc timwe, in the muutl of thl: i rthi (e.'l I .i

T

li.t-
226

The Earl's two younger brothers fled into England, after theBookVIIL
ill success of the conspiracy, and were protected by Elizabeth. And 6o.
James himself, though he prudently concealed it, took great
umbrage at her behaviour. None, however, of Elizabeth's in-
trigues in Scotland tended to hurt the King's person, but only to
circumscribe his authority, and to thwart his fcheines. His life was
the surest safe-guard of her own, and refirained the Popish pre-
tenders to her Crown, and their abettors, from desperate attempts,
to which their impatience and bigotry might, othcrwile, have urged
them on. To have encouraged Gowrie to murder his Sovereign,
would, on her part, have been an a of the utmost imprudence.
Nor does this seem to have been the intention of the two brothers,
Mr. Ruthven, first of all, endeavoured to decoy the King to Perth,
without any attendants. VWhcn these proved more numerous than
was expeced, the Earl employed a ratagem in order to ieparate
them from the King, by pretending that he had rode away towards
Falkland, :nd by callin' hafily for their horss, that they might
follow him. Bv h Luttig James up, nmean while, in a diint corner
of the houLe, and by attempting to bind his halnds, their deiln
fecems to have leen ratiher to leize, than to afiainatc hin. And
thloulgh Cowvri had not coletoicd his follower'C, o as to ave been
able to detan him on a rifoner, in that ar3t of the kindom
by oCpen frce, he might loon have been conveyed ab:.ad the
EngPiinh i ip, which waited perhaps to receive him, aid hle /in:
hlale been landed at Fal-Caflc, a houfl (f Lot ll, in1 which,
;ecc.)iiinig, to in1a: o(i lCurc hilti in his 1'ttrs, iomce ircnlcvonlz
of tihc c')frpiri t(lj i was to lc ] eli. Am lidtil the tilrpriz lje anl eAr-
ror, it.) whkil tlie lKiT; mifl iv bleen tlrownl by tlhc viea'
( scred to hil, it ws extremely natur.l f lhin to cosncilde tl.t
!i, life was tlt. was the ilterel all

liot iial< Vs to coll--

' Ln lhimn in this ielicl, a i o in t
y ;lii y ,his dan ge, in oier to , tu

(' ,>' . to

227

Book VIIt. to the importance, and merit of their own services. And thus,
{6-' his fear, and their vanity, aided by the credulity and wonder, which
:I6o.

the contemplation of any great and tragical event, when not fully
understood, is apt to inspire, augmented the whole tranfation. On
the other hand, the extravagance and improbability of the circum-
flances, which were added, detra&ed from the credit of those,
which really happened; and even furnished pretences for calling
in question the truth of the whole conspiracy.

Many dlfbc- TIE account of what had happened at Perth reached Edinburgh,
leve the ac-
count li- next morning. The privy council commanded the Minifers of that
eii by the city intlantly to aemble their people, and, after relating to them

the circumfiances of the conspiracy formed against the King's
life, to return publick thanks to God, for the protection, which
he had so visibly afforded him. But as the first accounts tranfinit-
ted to Edinburgh, written in hurry, and while the circumstances
of the conspiracy were but imperfectly known, and the paflions
which it excited flrongly felt, were indiftind, exaggerated, and
contradictory, the Ministers laid hold of this, and though they
offered to give public thanks to God for the King's safety, they re-
fused to enter into any detail of particulars, or to utter from
the chair of truth, what appeared to be fill dubious and un-
certain.

A FEW days after, the King returned to Edinburgh ; and though

Galloway, the Minister of his own Chapel, made an harrangue to the
people at the public cross, in which he recited all the circumitancc:;
of the conspiracy ; though James himself, in their hearing, confirmed
his account; though he commanded a narrative of the whole'
transaction to be publifhled; the Ministers of that city, as well a:;
many of their brethren, still continued incredulous, and unconvince'

Their
228

Their high efleem of Gowrie, their jealousy of every part of the BookVIII.
King's conduct, added to some false and many improbable circum- 160o.
flances in the narrative, not only led them to fufped the whole,
but gave their suspicions an air of credibility. But at length, the
King, partly by arguments, partly by threats, prevailed on all of
them, except Mr. Robert Bruce, to own that they were convinced
of the truth of the conspiracy. He could be brought no further
than to declare, that he reverenced the King's account of the tranf-
acion, but could not fay that he himself was periuaded of the truth
of it. The scruples or obstinacy of a single man would have been
little regarded, but as the fame spirit of incredulity began to spread
among the people, the example of one, in so high reputation for
integrity and abilities, was extremely dangerous. The King was
at the utmost pains to convince and to gain Bruce, but finding it
impoflible to remove his doubts, he deprived him of his benefice,
and after repeated delays, and many attempts towards a reconcile-
ment, banifled him the kingdom %.

THE proceedings of parliament were not retarded by any scruples Proceeings

of this fort. The dead bodies of the two brothers were produced a: pllllact
there, according to law; an indiEtment for High Treason was pre-co°:ntir':ors
ferred against them ; witncTes were examined ; and, by an unani-
mous sentence, their estates and honours were forfeited; the
punihment due to Traitors was inflicted on their dead bodies; and,
as if the punifhmcnt hitherto in u did not express fuificicnt detefi-
tion of their crimcs, the parliamcnt cnacted that the frname f
Ruthven should be abolilhcd ; and in order to prefcrve the memory
of the king's miraculous cfcapc, ndl to declare the fenfc whVicih
the nation had of the divine goodncis, to all futur as, appoinll

* Spots. 461, c d.
C 5i. 3S, c.

the

229

BookVIiI.the fifth of August to be observed, annually, as a day of public

6---. thanksgiving *.
i6J2. T HOUGH

A few weeks after the death of the t wo brothers, the King published a ds-

cmurfe of their vile and unnatural c6nfpiracy agairn his life. In the year 17 13, George
Earl of Cromerty published an " Hiflorical account of the conspiracy by the Earl
* of Gowric and Robert Logan of Reflalrig againtf King James VI." He iccmi
not to have fen the account which the King himfclf had given of that mattlr,
and borrows the whole historical part from Spotfwood, and other authors ; but .
has extracted from the public records the depolitions of the witneffls produced by
the King's Council, in order to make good their charge against the two brothcle
and Logan their alfociate. From these two treatises, our knowledge of all the ma-
terial circumflincec of the conspiracy is deilved. The evidence which they co-.
tain, one would exlpec to be authentic and decisive. An account of a 1ft, i'.!
recent, publishcd by royal authority, and the original depositions of persons c:.
mined in prfeence of the highest court in the nation, ought to convey a degree ('
evidence seldom attained in hiitorical relations, and to exclude all remaining dotubl
:.nd uncertainty. But as every thing with regard to this tranfaclion is dark and
li obllmatical, the King's account and the dlepfitions of the vitnefies not only vary,
but co;tirad'iC each other in so many cirlcuinalt, ces, tlhat nmuch room is fill !cf't f;) 1h.-
iitatiin, and hiltoiical fcepticifmi. 'I he te-imony of Flenderfon is the fuli-i a)
nuoi:important,h but in fi-vei;l particulars the Ki,n's account and his are cont.a-.
tditory. I. Accodig to the King's account, while t'.Ir. Ruthven was holding tl-
(te'a;cr it hi.; bi calt, " the fellow in the fiudy lood tuaking and trembling.' TDilc
17. Int liitdci !n fa\-s that he !'imfel' wil :Irc lhic

t deggr out of Mr. Rutlvln'.,

Land. Dil .. 5 . Ciiom. 5o. I-Lndeion Iibe wifc

i o: to his wife thaLt he lha

tha:t day tVwi e

f ivd the King from being fiabbcd. Disc. 54. Crom5. I[. Th:

K;ing allbits tlht iclndlefonl oL ned the window during Mr. Ruthvcn's abfinc;.
J)iic. 23. liindi lioll dcIplLss li.:t e \ as oilv atteimpting to open it whln \'1.

tlii;\in rct Lrii L, ind tlihat (duhL;' the l'ii;'h K tv':en the Kinl ar d

h i:!, !.,

op: ,1 ii c.l); '.; , ;.Cli n. 51, .. [I1. ! ;''c ;i;) uil\e t'

:l' illr, t!

illi\v' i. the' slid-.' fii .!, LI' :il l tle fi,u-n ', bh h

li' il til ini's l ;l,: iiia.'ii'. ,. i

ti11c 'ii'l', all 1 e tl i ,'. ln. ) '. _, . ut tl c'ndcr(;I ailir l i

t t 11e liit 'luh I : ...

l i l,le u\;ill Xvhi( Mr\ . ElLill\\e a'ptz .

toi lsi.l the Kinll;; 1,,t

.. 1il.'

]L.['\. I'.ulti' ',

c i. \l i.i l \l~a .

I x.' ; (lc].Lw.t liil l; to Hlop tlu ]s:ill5':; it<)iill, .

tli,:t ici opL ' 1,. \\;h L.),. D iic. 5.': (.'Iom z, 1,'. l' h

II. Jy l i .
k ;i's . ,.1: ,;,

THOUGH Gowrie's conspiracy occasioned a sudden and a great BookVI1I.
alarm, it was fll-ow-cd by no consequences of importance ; and -

having .Cx'i cr,-

MIt. Ruthven left him in the fndyr, and -ent away in order to meet with his bro-
ther, and tl-iat the Earl came up the flairs for the f mec purpose. Disc. 23. EHendcr-
son tdenor t that he n rl. Itdean left the King, ' he bclieves that he did not p.iss
i'rno the door." Crom. 51. It is apparent both fi-om the situation of the honic,
and si om other circulnl lrc.;s, that tlicre could not pofiibly have been any interview
bctv cCi1 the brolhers at thi, timei. fc. 23.

letndcrfon w\as twice examined, firfr at Falkland hcfore the privy council in Au-

gU: l,L an nexlt at Udinbllr- h before the Parliament in November. Not to mention
iiom 1ls Itr v.ariaii'Js between t dt'pofitions, we fliall point out two which are
reim:.; Laie. In hi, ifl dC'ilill l

.iun MrI. IICiendCI'uI rIliates the mnolf material cirrcum-

fiane oF tx!' thol ii t he \ words. " iMr. Rutlve n pulled out the dceponent's
' idl',:C'Cr and liCld tlhe lamc to lis Majefly's breaf, faying romoilr yrcu of nyf,- .r's
" T'ir'dcr ; i;'/: a1 iow! lie f /r i, ,and mintiig to his Highnecle's hearIt with the d( g-

c r, t tl;e dlcpo lct threw t

t lifame ot of AIIr. Rntthven's hands, and f\vore tha'

as (;Jel f jdg, his tuli, that if Mr. Ruthven :iid retained the dagger iin Iis

'; hand1, thle ipace a mnl may
i , I; ri': lic, hle w'o:ld have bl ic cn the King to the

lhilts wviL it.'' Dirf. . i i at hu iccond. examlination he va ied fom this in txwo

m:Ltriail cileuniflinccs. tifi tih \sirs which ie at that time put in IMr. Rutthven's
imouth v hiile le celd the dT, jr at the Ki'i's breafl are" Sn yo'i't ,./i I
c"' ,'p/-

,sic .er 1;, ;':/, cilcr C' 7'.yJi,r' dai /." SCecondly v. Clin hic tireatned ii \h ith death,

it \was onlly to deter thim h nom Iallio l any nolfe. ' 11:1 ^ i:, ' /I C'.r' , ;i ;:

' '7all ../''." 2. JIn Is iIll dewc'oiz , tli' vl ordc s of Mr. .tih c 'cn wlsen hec tttl;ed
t tili ls,.mblr \whVir lie hla left tlihe Ki!q, ae

i "

S ;r ' i' rc ;

1 cfi', /3 Gd 1/cu I /i

" ' t in his fcnd d.p.. / ly .;od I iire is no remed, .nd W.fje:c to
' irid hi llsia kfv's Lra ' idss." C li'. 4, The matC i ' ;.it-; '':

e {I/? ;c orit-tc '.

I' ,dc i llc

1 Ivi:'. T h l.e , *I

x

\\ l;i' t
! .i t..e !,".1',d t'.t h, had :' : . i '-

h; 1 i. I ; t,;s s

)r a

I.Iill \ t1'

,1 ti.

;i itii

li'tl.r

ill ,f . 1. 1 '. il ''! [ il i i . : i I i l.ir i .1 It'
I i.-

to

Book VIII. having been concerted by the two brothers, either without any a-

fociates, or with such as were unknown, and chose to remain so,
the danger was over, as soon as discovered. But not long after, a
conspiracy broke out in England against Elizabeth, which, though
the first danger was instantly dispelled, produced tragical effe&s,
that rendered the close of that Queen's reign dismal and unhappy,
As James was deeply interefled in that event, it merits our particular
notice.

THE court of England was, at this time, divided between two

powerful factions, which contended for the supreme direction of
affairs. The leader of the one was Robert n' reux, Earl of
Effex; Sir Robert Cecil, the son of Lord Treat. Burleigh, was
at the head of the other. The former was the mofl accomplished,
and the most popular of all the Englifl nobles; brave, generous,
affable; though impetuous, yet willing to liflen to the councils
of those whom he loved; an avowed, but not an implacable
enemy; a friend no less constant, than warm; incapable of dif-
guising his own sentiments, or of misrepresenting those of others;
Letter fitted for the camp, than for the court; and of a genius that
qualified him for the first place in the adminiflration, with a spirit

to pacify them, Diec. 32. The Duke of Lcnnox confirms this in his deposition.
Crom. 44. An at of privy council fmmoning the Magifrates of Perth to anfwcr
for that riot is still extant. And yet Andrew Roy, one of the Baillics of the to;w:,
dcpofes that he himfeif railed the people, and that they took arms in order t,
nifilt the King. Crom. 66. 2. Ilcnderfon deposes that hc gave an evanfiv ani\wci
to Mr. John Moncrief, who enquired where lie had been that morning, bcanfu tl:
laarl had commanded him not to let any man know that he had been at Falkl.:n>!.
D)il. 54. Monclief depules to the ainic purpose. Crom. 64. And yet (;cti I:
I-ay, alterwards Lord Kinnoul, and Chaiccllor of Scotland, and Pcter Iay, d -
poic that the Eal1, in their presence, atlked Indelfnl, " \Whoml c found with the
lKi--g at Falkland ?" Crom. 70, 7 1. Which quenfion fielms to prove that he did n.
aim ia l keepilg that journey a fccrct,

w1 LJI
232

whiclh sorned the second, as below his merit. Ile was soon dis- BookVIII.
tingILuflhed by the Quccn, who, with a profusion uncommon to her, w-.

1601.

conferred on him, even in his earlieit youth, the higlhefl honours,
and lmot important oiccs. Nor did tis diminiil the efeem and
affeccion of his countrymen ; but, by a rare flicity, lie ias at once
the favourite of his Sovereign, and the darling of the people. Ce-
cil, on the other hand, educated in a Court, and trained under a
father, dceply flillcd in all its arts, was crafty, insinuating, indus-
trious ; and though pofiCircd of talents, which fitted him for the
iihcl:eft offices, he did not rely upon his merit alone for at-
tainin theml, but availed himself of every advantage, which his
own address, or the mistakes of others, affordcd hlim. Two fuchl
men were formed to be rivals, and enemies. Eilex (Iclpiled the
arts of Cecil, as low and base. To Cecil, the Earl's magnanimity
appleared to be presumption and folly. All the military men, except
Raleigh, favoured Eex. Most of the courtiers adhered to Cecil,
xvlol n manners more nearly resembled their own.

As Elizabeth advanced in years, the fruzrIe between thefer;: .:,.,

factions became more violent. Ifefi, in order to itregrtln him- p.:'!l'.
iif1, had earlv courted the fiiendchip of the Klig of Scots, tor ; :.
wh;o!Ul ri;ght of fcceslion he was a zeallous advocatee , and hCeld a
dcole corrlefpondence both with him, and with his , riincipal Mini-l
tcrs. Cecil, devoted to the Qeen alone, role daily to ncwv ho-
nours, by the aliduity of his ftrviccs, anti t p.lti Lnc, wvil
whichI he expcdted the reward of tcm. Vlile the arl's hit'l
If'pirit and ipLctlOfity lulmctilmes C:.p>old Ill ti) chcckI.s fioin ai
?li t rci. , lv ]o, though partial in her dibt,.lion tow. rds hiin, (r)i
lPot eaiily bea-r ctradi ai ctonferred fav(ours o(lin ulinvil!ii;,,-
lv, antl alway!s tloIwlyr. I i own solicitations, lhovvcr, ece)?cL
ni:liciilllv by lhis enemies, wl) wvitlLcd to rem1ove im at a (il-

-33
Vol,. II.

II 1x

Book VIII. tance from court, advanced him to the command of the army em-

1io ployed in Ireland, against Tyronne, and to the office of Lord

Lieutenant of that kingdom, with a commission almost unlimited,
His success, in that expedition, did not equal either his own pro-
mises, or the expeC-ations of Elizabeth. The Queen, peevish from
her disappointment, and exasperated against Effex by the artifices of
his enemies, wrote him a harsh letter, full of accusations and re-
proaches. These, his impatient spirit could not bear, and, in the
first transports of his resentment, he proposed to carry over a part
of his army into England, and by driving his enemies from the
Queen's presence, to reinstate himself in favour, and in power. But,
upon more mature thoughts, he abandoned this rash design, and
setting fail with a few officers, devoted to his person, landed in
England, and posted dire(tly to court. Elizabeth received him,
without any symptom either of affecion or of displeasure. By
proper compliances and acknowledgments, he might have regained
his former ascendant over the Queen. But he thought himself too
deeply injured to submit to these. Elizabeth, on the other hand,
determined to subdue his haughty temper; and though her severity
drew from him the most humble letters, he confined him to the
Lord keeper's house, and appointed commissioners to try him, both
for his condut during his government of Ireland, and for leaving
that kingdom without her permission. By their sentence, he was sus-
pended from all his offices, except that of Mafler of the horse, and con-
tinued a prisoner during the Qteen'spleafure. Satisfied with having mor..
tified his pride thus far, Elizabeth did not susser the sentence to be rc-
corded, and oon after allowed him to retire to his own house. I)ur..
ing thei tranfadions, which occupied fevcral months, Eftc'x Iiituatcd
between the allegiance he owed to his Sovereign, and the dcfrc
of revenge ; and fomctimcs leaned to the one, and ipmctimes to the
oi,&~ idcl. other. In one of the intervals when the latter prcvailed, hc fcnrt

235

a meienger into Scotia" to encourage the King to aert his own Book VllI,
right to the fucceflion by force of arms, and to promise that, be- I
fides the alftance of the Earl and all his friends in England, Lord
Mountjoy, now Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, would join him with
500ooo men, from that kingdom. But James did not chufe to hazard
the losing a kingdom, which was juit ready to fall into his hand,,
by a premature attempt to seize it. Mountjy, too, declined the
enterprize, and EfTex adopted more dutiful schemes all thoughts
of ambition appearing to be totally effaced cut of his mind.

THIS moderation, which was merely the effcc't of difgull and .;-, i.

disappointment, was not of long continuance. And the Qeen t:1'" '
having not only refused to renew a lucrative grant, which fle h!ad
formerly beltowed, but to admit him into her preftnce, that new
injury drove a temper, naturally impatient, and now much frctted,
to absolute despair. His friends, instead of boothing his rage, or
restraining his impetuosity, added to both, by their imprudent and
interested zeal. After many anxious consultations, he determined
to attempt to redrcfs his wrongs by violence. And conscious how
unpopular such an cnterprize would be, if it appeared to proceed
from motives of private revenge alone, he endeavoured to give it the
semblance of public utility, by mingling the Kiig of Scotland's interefi
with his own. He wrote to James, that the faction, which now
predominated in the Englifr court, had resolved to support the prc-
tensions of the Infanta of Spain to the crown, that the places of
the greatefl importance in the kingdom were put into tie hands of
his avowed enemies ; and that unlcfs lie sent ambafladurs, without
delay, to insist on the imnmediate declaration of his right of Iucccflioi,
their meafiires were so well concerted, that all hi. ( hopes wotulld be
dcfperate. James, who knew llo dilagrccabic ;ljcl a prlop.)l.l
would be to the Qecn of EngIn1d, was not \villil r;fhly; r c--

1 1 )2

BooklVIII pose himnfelf to her displeasure. But Effex, blinded by refentmrcnt,
'"7'-~~ and impatient for revenge, abandoned himself to these passions, nd

acled like a man g:ided by frenzy or deCpair. With to or three
hundred followers, incompleatly armcd, he attemptcd to aisu't a
thron!e, the bet edablifhed in Europ., Sallying, at their he li,
out of his own hotue, he called on the citizens of London, if
th c either valued his life, or \wified to p:eferve the kingdoml frc:
tle dominiion of the Spaniards, to take armis, and to follow ils
Sl'uadai\l. ITe advanced towards the palace, with an int.ntion to
drive Cc:l and i:is faCion out of the QCecen's prcfcnce, and to ol-
tlin a d,'cWarti;cGI of the Scotch KIing's right of fucccfion . I!t,

t ¼!, ' :

; i:'cl : . ircd bv' thie citiz.ens, not a manL would join hlin

i.. tt d. <'I:l cntc prlze. -Difpirhicd by their indis'erence, d(certed
l'vi 1 .1'.'i ; of I(iS 0on5 W '1 attiendai ts, and almoi flrroit11ded b tic

trc ' l-, nwhich tllchlid uder different leaders into the city, he rc-
tri !;:i to his ; O\n h oufc; and xvitlhout any bold eflrt, fuitablc to
;5is p;"Lnt cond1ition, or \.orthy of his for!mer reputation for cuu-
ra.' , lic fli.' cirenJ ed to lis enemies.

si; 0on as Jamcs lies.ld of Eli'x's ill success, he appointed the

E.aini f \IMar, and the Allbot of Iinloi, to repair as his amba.-..
(io:s to the ccurt of T-lrl, n. Thc former of tihef was te i :-
fun, Lb wh'fe C ean1l Esiex liadl cail-ied on his corrcl-ondence w\t:
tc Ling. i was a poltionatc admirer ol tl 'he l' lara.:-, , :'
,i. p.; Ld to att l iat ever / thin tthat could cointribute to ll.s l',:t.
',-'..e, i::iitil i', a close frccii i \viti \' , w. - eaIv t) tee ..:

lir v, h e i..: .. ccal. 1Nor ' .s thli (l;

K.ce ¢. .;

a aiP' V

lii , . t ; '.I. x, tl]:;.In the ¢c ice oi the ;. 1 .:. .....(:. ; I l \ \X,.
e m n i'd'c!;l '-'.1 .l t'. Ljli;!, il t'le \\ ,'n- ;L . I . .:': .;i ti. , ;t!l , .

'- Iii . 51\ in. 2. t-',.

and if they foiuni tL:- tie ling, by avowving his friends, could Book vII.
either pricmotc tiii c '!': -,<, ,r contribute to their safety, they were
impowered to lay alie a.i, d iguife, and to promise that he would put
himihbif at t:;.r headi , ard c-,:lm v. hat was due to him, by foice of
armus . La C btelo thc nmbaLadurs could reach London, Eftex
had fufrS rcd the,;l:ni'lnet hle merited by his treason. Perhaps tlic
scar of' t3u,,r iltotelc~ln-, in order t) obtain his pardon, haicened
hiis dtatl . _iz abilh cuntinued, i r ome timc, irrtfolute concern-
inglt his Lite, an ld not bring hcrlCif to conlign into the iandsl
cl the executioner, , man, h had once poilled her favour o
intircly, withont a -painful firuggie between iier recnltmcnlt agail:
his late mifionduc, and her iacient afrieijon towards lim. The
(;ill:reb to which le was now re.uced tended natunally to lob'en the
former, wl.;le it revived the latter with new tcndernefs; and te in-
tercefiion of one faitihful friend mligiht lperaps have laved his li i, .;d
have procurcdhii arcmnilTion,wliil, ofi herrhif, thle Queen was a!Ilhn-
ed to rant. BuIt this clerous ;nobleman had at tha tilie no Ilch
frieCnd. And Elizabethl, iollicited inceiLntly by her MIiliters, and

I'I1ciid. A.; by er I 11 iit rs, ad

(:fdl.cd w\ith tile Ihaugl;tincli oF Litex,, w\o, as fie imiaginld,
fiorncd to 'lUe for pa'don, at lat: commL nded the i:entcncet to be I:t t
in executioi. No 1(oncr xas ti Ie

blow ltruck, tlanlilie rc-

pented of her own I1nll'l 1, :itl LcwaiLed hi., ccath wid. the dee p-
cft sorrow. Jamels a;'avls conidrc d lil aIs oIn, who had
1llen a martyr to hi: Ie1'-ic, and afIcL Iii.; ac son t1 the L,!-
0-lifh tlrone, iitl.oCi , ihi n

': !his lo( o;i': I

, V'.ll as a'i li .

--I

cti;,C ill tl: co i ; .cc' , al d !l i l I t'e I '' t 1l '.
ivL'Ui' --.

..I I ' : ,

1 1 ' ~
r.i 1.

'Book VIII. THE Scotch ambafladors, finding that they had arrived too late

6o~. to execute the chief business committed to their charge, not only

Jame, con- concealed that part of their inftrudions, with the utmost care,
tinues his in.
~riels in but congratulated the Qeen, in their Maser's name, on her
Elngind. happy escape from such an audacious conspiracy. Elizabeth,

though no fIranger to the King's correspondence with Effex, or to
that nobleman's intention of aerting James's right to the Crown,
was not willing that there should be known to the people, and, for
that reason, received the congratulations of the Scotch ambaffadoir
with all pofible marks of credit, and good will; and in order to
sooth James, and to preserve the appearances of union between the
two courts, increased the subsidy which he paid him annually.
The ambassadors resided for iome time in England, and were em-
ployed, with great success, in renewing and extending the intrigues,
which Bruce had formerly entered into with the English nobles.
As Elizabeth advanced in years, the English turned their eye;
more and more towards Scotland, and were eager to prevent eacl
other in courting the favour of their future Monarch. AfTurances
of attachment, profefiins of regard, and promises of support,
were offered to James from every corner of the kingdom. Cecil
hinfclf, perceiving what hopes EffTx had founded on the friendihip
of the Scotch King, and what advantages he might have derived
from it, thought it prudent to stand no longer at a distance from a
Prince, who might so soon become his Mafler. But being sensible,
at the fame time, how dangerous such an intercourse might prove,
under a Mifirefs naturally jealous, and whofc jealousy grew fironge
with old age; though he entered into a correspondence with him,
lie carried it on with all the secrecy and caution necessary in his
situation, and peculiar to his character. And James, having gained
:h , man wihuc opp(,oitiou and irfluence he had hitherto chiefly

dread<,l,,
238

dreaded, waited, in perfect security, till that event should happen, Book VIII.
which would open his way to the throne of England. It was, 160r
with ome difficulty, that he restrained, within proper bounds, his
adherents in that kingdom, who labouring to distinguish themfelvcs
by that officious zeal, with which a Prince, who has a near profped-
of mounting the throne, is always served, urged him to allow a
motion to be made in parliament for declaring his right of fuccefiion
to the Crown. James prudently discouraged that design; but it
was with no fnall fatisfadion that he observed the ascendant he
was acquiring in a court, whose dictates he had been, so long, ob-
liged to obey; and which had either prescribed or thwarted every
ftep he had taken during the whole course of his reign *

NOTWITHSTANDING the violent fruggles of the political sac- 16o02

tions which divided the court, and the frequent revolutions which AtC'lV'Alo
had happened there, since the King firif took the reins of govern- Hiiiadiirsr
ment into his own hands, Scotland had enJoyed unusual tranquillity,
being undisturbed by any foreign enemy, and free from any intestine
commotion of long continuance. During this period, James endea-
voured to civilize the Highlands and the files, a part of his domi-
nions almost totally neglected by former Monarchs, though the
reformation of it was an object highly worthy of their care. The
long peace with England had afforded an opportunity of subduing
the licentious spirit of the borderers, and of restraining their de-
predations, often no less ruinous to their countrymen, than to their
enemies. The inhabitants of the Low Country began, gradually,
to forget the use of arms, and to become attentive to tlie arts cf
peace. But the l igllallnders, retaining tlheir natural iicrccnces
averfc from labour, and inured to rapine, infcllcd their more iniduii-

'' Sput. 1.'I- , 47i . Lilid . Icti. 2 514.

,rio u
4-

2-39

Bonk VII!. t ious nei;hbours, by their continual incursions. James being s)o-
Y",-",. licitouls not only to erel thieir inroads, but to render them ufefult

i 9 fubljects , had at different times enaced many wife laws extremeyi

conducive to thece ends. All landlords, or Chiefs of Clans, were
enjoined to permit no perions to reside in their estates, wh, cai4
not find il.licient furcty for their good behaviour; they vcre re-
quircd to make a lift of all fupicious persons under their iurii.lic-
tion, to bind tliemflves to deliver them up to jufticc, and to in-
deml-nitv those vwho thould fuffir by their robberies; and in ozde
to alcertin tlhe faithful pclformance of thei artielas, the ch'i,:
tlhc.!elv.cs we.Cre obliged to give hof.ages to the Kilg, or to pIt1
pledges in his hands. Three towns, which might terve as a retr.,at
!or tihe indtl'lio.s, alnd a nuirlry for arts and coilnl-m ce. wereC ap-
pointed to be buill in different parts of the Highlands ; one in Can-
tyre, another in Lockabar, and a third in the lfe of Lewis; and
in order to draw inhabitants thither, all the privileges of Roval
1.lroa.jhs iwcre to be conferred upon them. Iinding it however t')
;c l(

n e. :i ttter to t

in, i tle .nloaitants of tole countries wxit

the love o idulsry, a rebluotion was taken to plant amon;r then;,
colonics o. people from the mere industrious counries. The fir.
experiment was made in the I!l of Lewis; and as it was advan--
tafcoully situated for the lifiaing trade, a source from which Scot-
land ought naturally to derive great wealth, the colony tranf'oor. e
thither was drawn out of Fife, the inhalitaits of which were well
ikiiled in th.,t biranch of cctmmerce. But before they had remailned
ther:e l;(r cnou h to hmani1ic

ile (ool e-ets of tlhis inflitution, ti,.

i:!ndtlT>, enr ::ed at iCci g ii ir country occupied by thole inrtl!t-
(id, ook arms, and( ltl ii tl ing the l th i'lht time, lmulil.lci
tomC of tlem, andi colmplled (the rcli to abandon the lttllme!'ai.

l J .:!, I)u. 1 55;

... ^ . ,~~~~~"i -'
24°

The King's attention being soon after turned to other objects, we Book VIII.
hear no more of this salutary project. Though James did not pur- I60.
sue the design, with that steady application and perseverance, with-
out which it is impossible to change the manners of a whole peo-
ple, he had the glory, however, not only of having first conceived
the thought, but of having first pointed out the proper method of
introducing the civil arts of life, into that part of the Island .

AFTER having long enjoyed a good Rtate of health, the effect of a

Elizabeth's

found constitution, and the reward of uncommon regularity and tem- lt, ilncfh and
perance, Elizabeth began, this winter, to feel her vigour decrease, dath
and to be sensible of the infirmities of old age. Having removed
on a very stormy day from Wefhninfter to Richmond, whither
ihe was impatient to retire, her complaints increased. She had no
formed fever ; her pulse was good; but she eat little, and could not i 60o.
sleep. Her distemper seemed to proceed from a deep melancholy, Jalnuty 3'.
which appeared both in her countenance and behaviour. She de-
lighted in folitudc; fie fat constantly in the dark; and was often
drowned in tears.

No sooner was the Queen's indisposition known, than persons of

all ranks, and of all different fedLs and parties, redoubled their ap-
plications to the King of Scots, and vied with each other, in
profeflions of attachment to his person, and in promifcs of ifb-
miflion to his government. Even lomc of her own t.rvaints,' weary
of the length of her reign, fond of novelty, impatient to get rid o
the burden of gratitude for pafl benefits, and expcting to fiare
in the liberality of a new Prince, began to dcfcit her. Andi crowsI,
o(, people lhurried towards Scotllnd, eager to pre-occupy tc iavolur
of the ulicccfl-r, or afraid of being too late in p.yling hlolunagc
to liIm.

t 1'l, 537, 1 9., '5 , 597. Spots. 46,3.

24t

I\ 'i,.n '
Vol II .

1i

242
BookVIII. MEAN while, the Queen's disease increased, and her melancholy

-,r appeared to be fettled and incurable. Various conjecures were
1603.

formed concerning the causes of a dilbrder, from which flie seemed
to be exempted by the natural cheerfulness of her temper. Some
imputed it to her being forced, contrary to her inclination, to pardon
the Earl of Tyrone, whose rebellion had for many years created
her so much trouble. Others imagined that it arose from observing
the ingratitude of her courtiers, and the levity of her people, who be-
held her health declining with most indecent indifference, and looked
forward to the acceflion of the Scotch King, with an impatience,
which they could not conceal. The most common opinion, at that
time, and perhaps the most probable, was that it flowed from
grief for the Earl of Effex. She retained an extraordinary regard
for the memory of that unfortunate nobleman and though fih
often complained of his obstinacy, seldom mentioned his name
without tears . An accident happened soon after her retiring
to Richmond, which revived her affetion with new tenderness,
and imbittered her sorrows. The Countess of Nottingham, being
on her death-bed, desired to fee the Queen, in order to reveal some-
thing to her, without discovering which, she could not die in peace.
iWhen the Qecen came into her chamber, she told her, that while
Efiex lay under sentence of death, lie was desirous of imploring
pardon in the manner which the Queen herself had prescribed, by
returning a ring, which during the height of his fvour lhe had
given him, with a promie that, if in any future diflrcs, he tleri
tlhat back to her as a token, it filould intitle him to her protedion
ti:at Lady c oop was the person he intcellcd to inmloy iu ortdr to
proiint it; tiat by a illake, it was put into her lis inilead ol
L.tiy crtop'' ; adlik that lL ]having communicated the Imattter- to licr

illan , ol {et ' I'Lex's iei tii mllacalc encm lic, lie had luib.i

* il ,(ilM. ill 2 5') .

her either to carry the ring to the Qieen, or to return it to the B ook VIl
Earl. The Countess, having thus disclosed her secret, begged the 60o3.
Queen's forgivences; but Elizabeth, who now saw both the malice
of the Earl's enemies, and how unjuftlv f(le had filfpeaed him of
inflexible obstinacy, replied, " God may forgive you, but never can ;
and left the room in great emotion *. From that moment, her
spirit funk entirely; fle would scarce taile food ; fle refused all the
medicines prescribed her by her physicians; declaring that fle wi ed
to die, and would live no longer. No intreaty could prevail on her
to go to bed; she fat on cushions, during ten days and nights, pen-
live, and silent, holding her finger almost continually in her mouth,
with her eyes open, and fixed on the ground. The only thing to
which flie teemed to give any attentionl, were the adts of devotion
performed in her apartment, by the Archbil1iop of Canterbury ,
and in there fie joined with great appearance of fervour. WXal-c ,
at laRs, as well by anguish of mind, as by long ainencc, fle

This anecdote concerning Elizabeth was first publifled by Olborne, Mlcm of

Fliz. p. 23 ; is confirmed by the tcfiinony of <de ManricL, Mem. 2' o, and by the tra-
ditional evidence of Lady Elizabcth Spelmaln publithld by Dr. lirch, Negoc. :o6(
Camden mentions the (Qeen's grief for LEtfx'; death as one ot the c:arss of hcl-rue-
lancholy. Some original papers remain which prove that thi1 \ss commonsly bT i.vc1.
at the time. Birch Mem. 2. ;o6. But ELiTe had been beheaded two, years before
her death, and there seems to have been no other reason, but that which we have as-
irgncd, w\.hy her sorrow ioultid revive with so much violence at Lo gI cata di;la e of:
timic. As the dceath of the Countifs of Nottinllhlai happened abot a frtnit ,i ,-t
fbl the Qlneen's dleth, the coinllidelce of tlefe evellts, to;ethelr wit h the other e-t -
dence mentioned, adds so much pi bability to the fory related by ()luborne, Is ill
clititle it to a place in hlitiloy. '1 he only ob)jcdiol to the accolit wve hl;tve icn o
I.lizabeth's :tta(lhmn lt to lllx. :;isis fotin IlI hrgreat i e. At the ag of 0C, i1:
;alllolol.) palLions arIe c (om nltlly :tl)llllu tll y cool, ;andl thlie Xiolencei( of ll the I .i'-
0ioins, cxc.(pt OCne, is much abatcd. IBu the force of tlhis; ol)jecioi i:, ciut ilc Iy iiiT;: ,,l
by an i\Alilh whvio lis ilitifli d nma.n pafli: q ill tlic lnlitl llilklory, an1tl ado'lile'
illtUV. Ca.logLie ( f Roy. and No). Antil 1r. Alticle l1illx.

243
Cni' d

1
1 i

Book VII. expired without a struggle, on Thursday the 24th day of March in

6--

. the 7 th year of her age, and the 45th of her reign *.
1603.

FOREIGNERS often accuse the English of indifference and dif-
tlc. refpe towards their Princes. But without reason; no people are

more grateful than they to those Monarchs, who merit their grati-
tude. The names of Edward III, and Ilenry V. are mcn-
tioned by the English of this age, with the fame warmth, as they
were by those, who hared in the blessings and splendor of their
reigns. The memory of Elizabeth is fiill adored in England.
And the hiltorians of that kingdom, after celebrating her love of
her people; her sagacity in diferning their true interest ; her fieadi-
ness in pursuing it; her wisdom in the choice of her Ministers; the
glory fie acquired by arms; the tranquillity fie securcd to her sub-
jects; and the increase of fame, of riches, and of commerce,
which were the fruits of all these ; juitly rank her among the mos:
illuirious Princes. Even the defeEts in her character, they cb-
serve, were not of a kind pernicious to her people. Her excef-
five frugality was not accompanied with the love of hoarding; and
though it prevented omne great undertakings, and rendered te
f£lccefs of others incompleat, it introduced ceconomy into her admi-
niitration, and exempted the nation from many burdens, which a
Monarch, more profuse, or more enterprizing, lmul have imposed,
Iler flownes in rewarding her servants fomctimes discouraged ufc-
fual merit; but it prevented the undefcrving from acquiring power
andl wealth, to which they had no title. ITer extreme jealou y c,
th)-f princes, wlio pretended to difputc her right to the Crown, lci
PIcr to take filch precautions, as tended x'o Ic!s to the public l-i'e-
tv, than to I1ir own; and to court tlic afidli(uns of her people, a

* ( ',lill . I.i~l,:. N . 2. - '. 'r.~ l',_i'w. Ni~'I,)>, . '. '5'rypc ';, 373.

ti;<r

the firmest fpport of her throne. Such is the pifture the El- ookVIl.
glifb draw of this great Queen.

1603-

WnIIorvER undertakes to write the Hifiory of Scotland finds him-

self obliged, fi-equently, to view her in a crvy difircnt, and in a
les amiable light. Her authority in that kingdom, dulring the
greater part of her reign, was little inferior to that, which fhl
pofledC in her own. But this authority, acqluicd at fir by a
service of great importance to the nation, Ill c xe!-ci1d in a :mnln er
extremely pernicious to its happilnfs. Bly hecr ind i'ry in foimnts. i'
the rage of the two contcndin faciions; by flupplvi thele wit'.
partial aid; by feeding the other with fall hopes; by b)llancioo;
their power so artfally, that each of them wa.s able to dil-cfl, al:d
neither of themi to subdue the other ; the rendercd Scotland lonr the
feat of discord, conflfilon, and bloodilecd: and her craft and i:-
trigtles, efctcq'ing what the valour of her ancclors could, notr ac-
complif, redcluccd that kiingdcom to a s1ite ofdcpcindlanc oln Engli;.
The maxims of policy, often little confolnant to thofi of mor.lits-,
may, perhlaps, jufiify this conduc. But no apoloy can be offered
for her blhaviour to Queen Mary; a fcCne of dililmulation withoult
neceflity; and of fevcrity beyolnd example. In almlall lir oCter ac
tions, lizaibeth is the objct of our hi-heft :rdmiration ; in tl j, we
muLf allow that ille not only laid aside the magnanimity, which be-
came a Qtcel, but the fecli1gs, natural to a womlan.

TIhIo'c;iI Elizabethl would never permit the (liclli,,n concr;,ij.

the rid, It of ficccfi t-il t t ('O n\'VI t ie

t) erm' ineI il p i.'K rt'[l -:

'i '"

;:ior declare iher (own sIntiine ('t, ncerllin, a (it, w.ich (he vii:d I
t ) iremnain an imlpenetra.lel mli'' ; ilc l.id, ho,\cv;: , .'>'rn
:.>

1.ti'i (of c:Kxcllin tel c'c /- l:ieo l i ', ) ;1' ih',e

at.nl . 'i, to \' 1
;'I

0 ^

)>
I;J

Book VIII. his title was undoubted. A hort time before her death, she broke
'.,-> the silence, which file had so long preserved on that fubjedt, and

1603. told Cecil and the Lord Admiral, " That her throne, was the throne

of Kings; that he would have no nean person to alcend it, and
that her Cousin the King of Scots should be her successor." This
she confirmed on her death-bed. And as soon as she breathed
her last, the Lords of the Privy Council proclaimed James King of
England. All the intrigues carried on by foreigners, in favour of
the Infanta, all the cabals formed, within the kingdom, to support
the titles of Lady Arabella, and the Earl of Iartford, disappeared
in a moment; and nobles, and people, forgetting their ancient
hostilities with Scotland, and their aversion for the dominion of
strangers, teflificd their fatisfadion with louder acclamations, than
were usual at the accefiion of their native Princes. Amidlt this tu-
mult of joy, a motion made by a few patriots, who pro;oled to
prescribe some conditions to the ic, ecifor, and to exact from him
tie redress of iome grievances, before they called him to the throne,
was scarce heard; and Cecil, by ftifing it, added to his flock of
merit with his new Master. Sir Charles Percy, brother of the Earl
of Northumberland, and Thomas Somerset the Earl of Worcefler's
fn, were deipatched to Scotland, with a letter to the King, signed
by all the Peers and Privy Councellors then in London; informing
him of the Quecn's death, of his Acceifion to the throne, of their
care to recognize his title, and of the universal applause, with which
the public proclamation of it had been attended. They made
the utnmott halle to deliver tis welcome neilge; but were pre-
vented by the zcal of Sir Robert Carey, Lord lunfdanc's younget
ion, who ftting out a few hours after Elizabeth's death, arrived ;it
Edinburgh on Saturday night, just as the King had gone to bCe,,
lie was ilmmlediately admitted into tle loyal apartment, and knccl-

4
246

247

ing by the King's bed, acquainted him with the death of Elizabeth, Book VII.
saluted him King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, and 1603.
as a token of the truth of the intelligence which he brought, pre-
sented him a ring, which his Sifter Lady Scroop had taken from the
Queen's finger after her death. James heard him with a decent
composure. But as Carey was only a private mefienger, the infor-
mation he brought was not made public, and the King kept his ap-
partment till the arrival of Percy and Somcrfet. Then his titles
were solemnly proclaimed; and his own fubjeds expressed no lets
joy, than the English, at this increase of his dignity. As his pre-
fencewas absolutely necefiary in England, where the people were
extremely impatient to fee their new Sovereign, he prepared to let
out for that kingdom, without delay. He appointed his Queen to
follow him within a few weeks. He committed the government
of Scotland to his Privy Council. He intrusted the care of his
children to different noblemen. On the Sunday before his depar-
ture, he repaired to the Church of St. Giles, and after hearing a
sermon, in which the Preacher displayed the greatnes of the divine
goodness in raising him to the throne of such a powerful Kingdom
without opposition or bloodfied, and exhorted him to express his
gratitude, by promoting to the utmofl, the happiness and prosperity
of his fubjecs ; the King rote up, and addrefing himflf to the peo-
ple, made many protlffions of unalterable aftetion towards them ;
promised frequently to visit Scotland ; atilured them that his Scotch
fubjecs, notwithftandir hIis ablDfnce, flould feel that le was thcii-
native Prince, 1no less than whcin he rcfided an(ng them; and Ini'ht
flill trust that lis cars lliould bc ial\n;s open to teir lptitions, which

elc would anfwvc with the anci' ity ;II :i lrio o a ;l):lrint. I is words
were, oten, interruped by the tcai's of thIL whslle a!lclienlce , \v

Book VIII. though they exulted at the King's prosperity, were melted into
.-6. 3J sorrow by there tender declarations*.
1603.

Takc'Pc-- ON the fifth of April, he began his journey, with a splendid,
fT;n of the but not a numerous train; and next day he entered Berwick.

l;Wherever he came, immense multitudes were assembled to welcome
him ; and the principal persons, in the different Counties through
which he passed, displayed all their wealth and magnificence in
entertainments prepared for him, at their houses. Elizabeth had
reigned so long in England, that mofl of her fubjedts remembered
no other court but her's ; and their notions of the manners and de-
corum suitable to a prince were formed upon what they had ob-
served there. It was natural to apply this flandard to the behaviour
and asions of their new Monarch, and to compare him, at firfi
fight, with the Qccn, on whose throne he was to be placed.
James, whoe manners were extremely different from hers, suffered
by the comparison. -He had not that flowing affability, by which
Elizabeth captivated the hearts of her people; and though easy
among a fewV whom he loved, his indolence could not bear the
fatiguc of renderilng himself agreeable to a mixed multitude. He
was no les a stranger to that dignity, with which Elizabeth temper-
ed her familiaritv. And instead of that well-judged frugality, with
which ihe conferred titles of honour, he befiowed them with
anll difirguifling profusion, that rendered them no longer marks
of diflilntion, or rewards of merit. But these were the refledtions
of tlvh few alone ; the multitude continued their acclanations;
and amiid(ft tlief, Jalmes entered London1 on tlhe 7th of May, and
took pcaccable poihtiion of the thlrolne of Enlgland.

1" Spols .r7G

THUS were united two kingdoms, divided from the earliefl ac- Book VlIr:

counts of time, but destined, by their situation, to form one great Codi.
monarchy. And by this junction of its whole native force, Great
Britain hath risen to an eminence and authority in Europe which
England and Scotland never could have attained.

THE Scots had so long confidered their Monarchs as next heirs A vi.' ::.

to the Engliaf throne, that they had full leisure to reflect on all in i!eO. .;:
the consequences of their being advanced to that dignity. But td;'rfi
dazzled with the glory of giving a Sovereign to their powerful :'l'"t: i,'!
enemy, relying on the partiality of their native Prince, and in full
cxpe&ation of sharing liberally in the wealth and honours he would
now be able to bellow, they attended little to the moRs obvious con-
sequences of that great event, and rejoiced at his accefiion to the
throne of England, as if it had been no less beneficial to the king-
dom, than honourable to the King. They soon had rcafon, how-
ever, to adopt very difiernt sentiments ; and from that period, we
may date a total alteration in the political constitution of Scotland.

THE feudal Aristocracy, which had been subverted in nmot

nations of Europe by the policy of their Princes, or had
been undermined by the progress of commerce, ll'ill fubfifl-ed
with full force in Scotland. Many causes had contributed
gradually to augment the power of the Scotch nobles; and even
the Reformation, which in every other country where it prevailed,
added to the authority of the Monarch, I1 incrcacd tlheir 'wealth
and influence. A King, pofibicld o(fa

l i';i i c'.;':, w\ilI :i piero.-

tive extremely limited, anld ulnFupplc l.eil ;1 '1 ! li,: .!i; ;; , L III ri'::
c.xcrcifc much authority over Licl pli.t i ;tli;,,i::.. I . ; !,i !i
:ovcmr i by cxpedients; and tll c !.I'. 3 ; .:i'c\ , tli(Li i.. -!..t il i:!i ,:
ipower to execute tlhie; , hb t ti'in 1t: '
2 v .'l.', !' ;', i . .:-:

VOL'., 'IL

249

Book VII. nobles. But though this produced a species of government feebte

-'/V and irregular beyond example; though Scotland, under the name

and with all the outward ensigns of a Monarchy, was really sub-
ject to an Aristocracy,' the people were not altogether unhanpv;
and even in this wild form of a constitution, there were principles,
which tended to their security and advantage. The King, checked
and overawed by the nobles, durst venture upon no at of arbi-
trary power. The nobles, jealous of the King, whose claims ad
pretcnfions were tnany, though his power was fnall, were afraid
of irritating their depcndants by unreasonable exaCtions, and tem-
pered the rigour of ariftocratical tyranny, with a mildness and
equality to which it is naturally a flranger. And while the military
genius of the feudal government, remained in vigour, the vaiffti
both of the Crown and of the Barons were not only free firom op-
pression, but courted by their superiors, whose power and impor-
tance were founded on their attachment and love.

BUT, by his accession to the throne of England, James acquirel

such an immense acceffilon of wealth, of power, and of splendor,
that the nobles, aftonilhed and intimidated, thought it vain to
fruggle for privileges which they were now unable to defend. No,.
was it from fear alone that they submitted to the yoke ; James, par-
tial to his countrymen, and willing that they should partake in hi;
god fortune, loaded them with riches and honours; and the hope
js his favour concurred with the dread of his power, in tamin-
their fiercc and independent spirits. The will of the Prince be-
came the fupcmne law in Scotland, and the nobles (trove, with cmt!-
lation, who fhouldl most implicitly obey commands, which tile
h-ad fornilcrlv bcIl accuilolled to colntellln. Satisfied with lavin,
flljcl. tle ,!(.lIt t) the Ciiwil1, the Ki ng left them in full pi),

( fii : :
2so

effion of their ancient jurifdidion over their own vassals. The Book VIiL
extensive rights, veiled in a feudal Chief, became in their hands '
dreadful instruments of oppression, and the military ideas on which
there rights were founded being gradually loIs, or disregarded,
nothing remained to correct or to mitigate the rigour with which
they were exercised. The nobles, exhausting their fortunes by the
expence of frequent attendance upon the English court, and by at-
tempts to imitate the manners and luxury of their more wealthy
neighbours, multiplied exacdions upon the people, who durf scarce
utter complaints which they knew would never reach the ear of
their Sovereign, nor move him to grant them any redress. And
from the union of the Crowns, to the Revolution in 688, Scot-
land was placed in a political situation of all others the molt fingu-
lar, and the most unhappy; subjected at once to the absolute will
of a Monarch, and to the opprefiive jurifdition of an Aristocracy,
it suffered all the miseries peculiar to both there forms of govern-
ment. Its Kings were despotic; its nobles were slaves and ty-
rants; and the people groaned under the rigorous domination of
both.

DURING this period, the nobles, it is true, made one effort to

flake off the yoke, and to regain their ancient independency. After
the death of James, the Scotch nation was no longer viewed by
our Monarchs with any partial affecdion. Charles I. educated anong
the English, discovered no peculiar attaclhment to the kingdom of
which lie was a native. And the nobles, !prceiving th teiceptre to
be now in hands lcfs fiendly, and tfvasc lby a Prince with wll(n
they had little connedion, and over wvlofc councils tlhIv lind i ttl
influence, no longer fublitied vi:hl the fame inlplieit ().di c:;c.
Provoked by some eiicroachmnlint'it of tllic.i, t:'l il 't',
:,

k , ^ ]: '1K-

2St

Book VI. apptehenfive'bf others, the nlai'ns of their an6ient firit began to

appear. Tliey''omplained;' nd remdnftrated. Arnd the people
being, at the fame time, violently difgted at the innovations in
Religion, the nobles secretly heightened this disgust; and their ar-
tifices, together with the ill condut of the court, raised such a
fpiit, that the whole nation took arms againfl their Sovereign, with
an union and animosity of which there had formerly been no ex-
ample. Charles brought against them the forces of England, and
notwithstanding their own union, and the zeal of the people, the
nobles must have funk in the struggle. But, the difaffeAion which
was growing among his English subjects, prevented the King front
ading with vigour. A civil war broke out in both kingdoms.
And after many battles and revolutions which are well known,
the Scotch nobles, who first began the war, were involved in thL
fame ruin with the throne. At the Restoration, Charles II. re-
gained full pofeffon of the royal prerogative in Scotland; and the
nobles, whose eflates were wafted, or their spirit broken by the
calamities to which they had been exposed, were ess able and left
willing than ever to resist the power of the Crown. During th;
reign, and that of James VII. the dictates of the Monarch were
received in Scotland with most abjeC submission. The poverty to
which many of the nobles were reduced, rendered them meaner
slaves, and more intolerable tyrants than ever. The people, always
negle(ed, were now odious, and loaded with every injury, on ac-
count of their attachment to religious and political principles, ex-
tremely repugnant to those adopted by their Irinces.

TzE Rcvolution introduced other maxims into the govcrnmcnt

of Scotlanl. To increafc the authority of the Prince, or to fccuIIr
the i)rivilcgsc of the nobles, had hitherto been almost the tlce olh-

i at

jtof our laws. The rights of the people were scarce ever men- BookVI1I.
tiQned, were.difregarded, or unknown. Attention began, hence-
forward, to, be paid to the welfare of the people. By the claim of
right,, their liberties were securcd. And the number of their re-
presentatives being increased, they gradually acquired new weight
and conlideration in Parliament. As they came to enjoy more fe-
curity, and greater power, their minds began to open, and to form
more extensive plans of commerce, ofinduftry, and of police. But
the ariftocratical spirit, which still predominated, together with
many other accidents, retarded the improvement and happiness of
the nation.

ANOTrERR great event completed hat the Revolution had be-

gun. The political power of the nobles, already broken by the
union of the two Crowns, was almofl annihilated by the union of
the two kingdoms. Initead of making a part, as formerly, of the
supreme afembly of the nation, instead of bearing the imofl confi-
derable sway there, the Scotch nobles are admitted into the British Par-
liament by their representatives only, and form but an inconiderable
part of one of those bodies in which the legiative autho, ity is veiled.
They themfelve are excluded absolutely from the house of Commons,
and even their eldest sons are not permitted o reprefet their coun-
trymen in that august afNembly. Nor have their feudal privi-
leges remained, to compensate for tllis xtinction of their po-
litical authority. As commerce advanced in its progrels, anid
govcrnmell t attajiicJ n;aIel-r to pcri'cLion, tleic were infnfily
circumllcrib-', : ;'..i :.t i:lii, b)v law' I:, ) lc s alutary to tlic pil)b-
lic, than f i al to ithe ro c:, tlie. hav, i\ cci t alim totally ab,(lifljcJc .
As the noblec. ,cr: ' dc.!rivci (Js l'x'i :, tlh people acqu'ird l i t xV.
Exempted fI..i bl!i',tc'?s to vl..ii.h they \crc suintly }
S c!i)ct',

1r;: !'t'n (

253

BookVIII.fcreened from opprefflon, to which they had been long exposed,

and adopted into a constitution, whose genius and laws were more
liberal than'their own, they have extended their commerce, refined
their manners, made inprovements in the elegancies of life, and
cultivated the arts and sciences,

THIS survey of the political fiate of Scotland, in which events

and their causes have been mentioned rather than developed, en-
ables us to point out three aeras, from each of which we may date
some great alteration, in one or other of the three different mem-
bers of which the supreme legislative assembly in our constitution
is composed. At the Accefio2, the Kings of Scotland, once the
most limited, became, in an inflant, the most absolute Princes in
Europe, and exercised a despotic authority which their Parlia-
ments were unable to controul, or their nobles to resist. At the
l.ioln, the feudal arillcclacy, which had subsistcd so many ages,
and with power so exorbitant, was overturned, and the Scotch
nobles voluntarily surrendered rights and pre-eminences, peculiar
to their order, and reduced themselves to a condition, which i no
longer the terror and envy of other fubjets. Since the Union, the
Commons, anciently negleded by their King-, and despised by the
nobles, have emerged into dignity; and being admitted to a parti-
cipation of all the privileges, which the English had purchased
at the expence of so much blood, muff now be esteemed a body
not less considerable in the one kingdom, than they have long been
in the other.

T-rE church felt the efcctIs of the absolute power which the

King acquired by his accefion; and its revolutions, too, are or-
thy of notice. James, during tilhe latter years of his adm.iniitra-
tion in Scotland, revived the name and ollice of Biillops. But tleiy

puile tlltil

possessed no ecclesiastical jurifdition or pre-eminence; their reve- Book VIII.
hues were inconsiderable, and they were fcaice distinguished by any ----
thing, but by their feat in Parliament, and by being the obje of
the clergy's jealousy, and the people's hatred. The King, delighted
with the splendor and authority which the Englifli Bifops enjoyed,
and eager to effEtc an union in ccclefiafical policy, which he had,
in vain, attempted in the civil government, resolved to bring both
Churches to an exact conformity with each other. Three Scots-
men were consecrated Bishops at London. From them, their bre-
thren were commanded to receive orders. Ceremonies unknown
in Scotland were impoled. And though the clergy, lets ofe-
quious than the nobles, boldly opposcd thele innovations, James,
long practiscd and well killcd in the arts of managing them, ob-
tained at length their compliance. But Charles I. a fuperftiious
Prince, unacquainted with the genius of the Scots, imprudent and
precipitant in all the meas-ures he purued in that kingdom, prefing
too eagerly the recepticn' of th- English liturgy, and indicreetly
attempting a resumption of church lands, kindled the flames of
civil war; and the pcople beitng left at liberty to indulge their own
wifies, the Epi'copal church was overturned, and the Prefbytcrian
government and dilciplin wtere re-ctlablithed with new vigour.
Together with monarchy, ';:"ip.cv was r'lcred in Scoland. A
form of government, io odious t ti c people, rquuii frce to)
uphold it; and though the wi}ole rigjur of authority, and-all the
barbarity of perficutioln wrce cr'ti,,yLd in its support, the averfioI
of the nation was infiirmoni tb}'c, anrd it fubfitid w'Th d(liEcult'.
At the ecvolution, the i;icillnlt;, 'lS olt i ): pt.' wtre' tliouglht wol-
thy the attention o tr l i , 'i tca..n L vern .t
was ag;ilin elal li] Icd, and b c , i. ltiia u by t]ic U ji .n, It' fill main-
tamied in the kinlrdum.

255

BookVIIi. NOR did the influence of the Accefflon extend to the civil and ec-
~'-- - clefiaftical conflitutions alone; the genius of the nation, its tafle

and spirit, things of a nature still more delicate, were sensibly as-
feted by that event. When learning revived in the fifteenth and
sixteenth centuries, all the modern languages were in a state equal-
ly barbarous, devoid of elegance, of vigour, and even of perfpicui-
ty. No author thought of writing in languages so ill adapted to ex-
press and embellili his sentiments, or of ereCinga work for immorta-
lity, with such rude and perishing materials. And as the spirit, which
prevailed at that time, did not owe its rife to any original effort
of the human mind, but was excited by admiration of the ancients,
their compositions were elleemed not only the standards oftafle, and
of flntiment, but of flile; and even the languages in which they
wrote were thought to be peculiar and almost consecrated to learn-
ing and the Muses. Not only the manner cf the ancients was
imitated, but their language copied and, extravagant as the attempt
may appear to write in a dead tongue, in which men were not ac-
customed to think, and which they could not speak, or even pro-
nounce, the success of it was aonifhing. As they formed thei:
flile upon the purest models, as they were uninfeded with thosC
barbarisms, which the inaccuracy of familiar conversation, the as-
sedation of courts, intercourse with strangers, and a thousand other
causes introduce into living languages, many moderns have attainedi
to a degree of elegance in their Latin compositions, which the
Romans themselves fcarcc possessed beyond the limits of the Au-
guilan age. \While this was almost the only species of compofi-
tion, and all authors, by uling one common language, could 1I
brought to a nearer comparison, the Scotcl writers were not in-
ferior to thof of any other nation. The happy genius of Buchanan,
equally formed to cxccl in prole and in vcrfc, more various, more oi

CJ
256

ginal, and more elegant, than that of almost any other modern Book VII.
who writes in Latin, rflects, with regard to this particular, the
greatest lustre on his country.

BUT the labour attending the fludy of a dead tongue was irk-

fbme; the unequal return for their induilry which authors met with,
who could be read and admired only within the narrow circle of
the learv!el, was mortifvin g; and men, instead or walling half
their lives in clarning the language of the Romans, began to
relille and to polilh their own. The modern tongues were found to
be fufcptibl2 of beauties and graces, whi:, i- not eual to te
of the ancient ones, were at I-liA more attai.nale. An the It;l
lians Ilvin, fiift let the examle, Latin was no io ,zcr ulfc in te
works of taie ; it was confined to books of icnce ; and the politcr
nations have !banlihd it even from tlhefe. The Scots, we m.ay prc-
funm, -wolid havCe had no canfe to regrct this change in the public
tafft, and vwol.l fill have bcn able to ma; tain iom equality with
other nations, in their puriluit f literary honor. The English
and, Scotch langluages, derived from the slime sources, were,
at te end of the fixtcenth century, in a fte ncarly similar, dif-
fcrin from one anotinr fomwh at in orthography, though not
only the words, but the idos were inuch the fiane. The letters
of several Scotch ltatefinen of that age are not inferior in elegance,
or ill uritv, to t}ior of the nglifh Minifirs witlih -om
they corrcsl ondcdd, ]lincs Iimfe!f was mafelr us a file fir from
contemrptillc ; and Ib his ex;aple anlld clcoura;gement, the Scocich
L'n, guagf Ini ght have kept pace with the iili in rificmcliit.
Scotlland ymiht have had at I,, cs

-t ts in its own, a=

well as in the Latin langtl. gc, to boalt of; and llc improve-
rients in tarfic, in the arts, an in tlec fiucxcs, wlic h lvrc.ild over

2r7

2_ ,

tle

I
Vo,.. II.

258
Pook VIII.the other polished nations of Europe, would not have been mu-
L-`--- known there.

Bur, at the very time when other nations were beginning to dr.

the ue of Latin in works of taste, and to make trial of the ftrengt
and compass of their own languages, Scotland ceaed to be a kin,..
doin. The transports of joy which the Acceflion at firIt ocaiio.c .i
were soon over; and the Scots, being at once deprived of all t,
objects that refine or animate a people, of the pretence of their lrince,
of the concourlf of nobles, of the fpllcndor and elegance of a cou'r
ani univeril deieion of spirit seems to have seized the nation. T,
Court being wVith drawn, odomeflic flandard of propricty and corre
ietsf of fpccch rlcmaiicd ; tlhe fw compositions that Scotland pro-
duccl were tried by the Englih standard, and every word (
phraci that varied i the lcafl from that, was condemned as barbareot.
vllhereas, if the two nations had continued dil-inC, each might hayv
retained idioms and forms offpecch peculiar to itself; and thecle, reil
dered faihionable by the example of a court, and supported by the
authority of writers of reputation, would have been conlidcred in;
the fame light with the varieties occasioncd by the different dia-
lects in tlle Greek tongiuc, would have becn marked as beauties, ane,
in many calts, ufite promifcuoully by tle authors ol both lnaioiis.
But by the Acceilion, the English naturally became the iole jiudg:
and lawgivers in language, and rejecdtd as iolecinfin , every form of
feccch to which their ear was not accullomedl. Nor did the Scot':,
while the intercourlc Lbetwccni the two nations was incoIlfiderabcle

A' A - i(ai;l.;.blc i-

pr (.f tlh littlc ilttl'i, urfc bctw t ]''lil

e l tli 1 nlIl S', r',

l -'lci iit t ll iO, ol i the C]-o\\V1?, i; to ibc) so l i >n t (ni)

W io 11I l p.tpcl, one puil)! '..

hy ) il:ymi ls, lthe th'r bIy '

; tslyp . In tic 't:r ] 5'7, I' 11 b.b til (o

ti '.lim l: t li lts' i

fli)op of L:,) Il t, I,lke ,t iurvci y oft ill thc IIln, .'i' \with lli thitii';,l l.,mniltl .,i 1
W ','.lJniiic . 1 ,,' lii,; I(i) ) ', 'im ih i'; vc'!y jm iiit.I , it ;ti I,'. l: I .t 'l! \.: '1,

. :,1

and ancient prejudices were flill so violent as to prevent imitation, pof- BookVII.
fess the means of refining their own tongue according to the purity of
the English flandard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into
it from every different source. The Clergy of Scotland, in that age,
were more eminent for piety than for learning; and though there
did not arise many authors among them, yet being in possession
of the privilege of discoursing publickly to the people, and their
sermons being too long, and perhaps too frequent, such hasty pro-
ductions could -not be elegant, and many slovenly and incorrea
modes of expression may be traced back to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccurate, and that
profession having furnished more authors, and the matters of which
they treat mingling daily in common discourse and business, many
of those vitious forms of speech, which are denominated Scotticisms,
have been by them introduced into the language. Nor did either
the language or publick tafle receive any improvement in parlia-
ment, where a more liberal and more correc eloquence might have
been expected. All business was tranfaeted there by the Lords of
Articles, and they were so iervilely devoted to the court, that few
debates arose, and none were conducted with the Ipirit and vigour
natural to a popular aftembly.

Tius, during the whole fcventcenth century, the Englil were

gradually refining their language, and their tafe ; in Scotland the
former was much debated, and the latter alnoft entirely loft. In
the beginning of that period, both nations were emerging out of
barbarity; but the diftancc between them, which was then inconl-

numlcr of Scots at that time xwas 5 . ITlyncs 455. A fi'vcy of thc fnmc kind \.:
made by Sir Thomas Row, Lord Mayor A. 1 56. 56. lTh nutmber of Scots 1a1,I
then inc reafed to SS. Strype .. Supplcnllnt N° I. ( ) the Aceelliol of, Jilnlc ; a coin-
fiderable number oi ,(cots, c.fp ci:illy ol the hliher i.nk, rcforltd to 1''ii;l 11t(; but
it wv.s noti till the union that thic ilntc'coml 11 betwveen cillt two kIiligd oll b, .me11- jg'cal.

L I 2 iidurablc,

259

Book VII. the other polihied nations of Europe, would not have been un-

~L " known there.

BuTr, at the very time when other nations were beginning to d ,

the ue of Latin in works of taste, and to make trial of the flrergtrl
and compass of their own languages, Scotland ceascd to be a ki,
dcoln. The tranip orts of joy which the Acccflion at firit occaliol i,
were soon over; and the Scots, being at once deprived of all tli,
objects that refine or animate a people, of the presence of their t'rinceL
of the concourse of nobles, of the splendor and elegance of a cou,-,
aln universal dejetion of ipirit eemrs to have seized tle nation. T:
Court beil g withdrawn, nodomeflic flandard of propriety and coiirrc'.
ners of fpecch remained; the few compositions that cotland pr,-
duced were tried by the Engllh flandard, and every word (!
phralc that varied in the lcaft from that, was condemned as barbaroul:
whereas, if the two nations had continued diniiict, each might h1tv
retained idioms and forms ofipeech peculiar to itself; and there, reil-
dered faifionable by the example of a court, and supported by the
autlority of writers of reputation, would have bece confidered in.
the fame light wi the varieties occasioned by the different dia-
lects in the Greek tongue, would have been marked as beauties, a,,
in many cafl, ufedi promit;uolfiy by the authors of both naticis.
But by the Acceflion, the English naturally became the iole jUCii'es
and lawgivers in language, and rcjcdtcd as iolecifin, cver form of
feccch to which their car was not accustomed. Nor did the Sots,
while the intercourfc btween the two nations was inconlidcrab!c ',

' A rcimarLablc prof (of' the little inltcrloull c bctw\e ccll

t tlhe 1,nll.ili anl Sct ',

lifoiilrc tillle Ol ol( thel Cro. VlS, i, to be fotl n il two (. l)'t p ell ;, oll p(iii)), .'.
by l l:Lyns, ll( ( th tl b y St)ypc. In tllhe vf(lr I5 7, I'.l/.abctli (oi l ht't. til' li-
fl)op of Lo lon t)o .)til f (ticy of :ll the Ilil , t iiis xiti li (ilic;;( l l.(a l,,ln .1 1

,kVi',sJ[ l t('. it; lhi' report, xvlihl, is
very mi utltt, it a;pp'I '; l liI t tlhe .,

!. 'l1'
258

and ancient prejudices were fLill so violentas to prevent imitation, pof- BookVIII.
fess the means of refining their own tongue according to the purity of "
the English flandard. On the contrary, new corruptions flowed into
it from every different source. The Clergy of Scotland, in that age,
were more eminent for piety than for learning; and though there
did not arise many authors among them, yet being in pofle/ion
of the privilege of discoursing publickly to the people, and their
sermons being too long, and perhaps too frequent, such hasty pro-
duCtions could not be elegant, and many slovenly and incorrect
modes of expression may be traced back to that original. The
pleadings of lawyers were equally loose and inaccurate, and that
profession having furnished more authors, and the matters of which
they treat mingling daily in common difcourfc and business, many
of those vitious forms of speech, which are denominated Scoitici/ms,
have been by them introduced into the language. Nor did either
the language or publick tafti receive any improvement in parlia-
iment, where a more liberal and more correct eloquence might have
been expeced. All business was tranfaded there by the Lords of
Articles, and they were so ervilely devoted to the court, that few
debates arose, and none were conducted with the spirit and vigour
natural to a popular afiembly.

THUS, during the whole fcventeenth century, the English were

gradually refining their language, and their tafie; in Scotland the
former was much debased, and the latter alinoft entirely loft. In
the beginning of that period, both nations were emerging out ot
barbarity; but the distance between them, which was then incon-

nunmber of Scots at that time was 5 . ITayncs 455. A frvtcyof the fmec kind ':\;
made by Sir Thoimas Row, Lord Mayor A. 1). i568. The numbcr of Scots had
then incrcafed to 88. Stryp i.. Supplement N° 1. ()n the Accci()ii of J.iamc a con-
fidel rblIc number of ,cots, cfp, ially of the hihlicr iink, r fortci. to Ihl.ill d ; bint
it was not till thle unio that the intcrcol Cilct betweV cli the t wo kilngdoms bc)'.i me rca l.

L 1 2 fidcrale,

2;9

PookVIII. fiderable, became, before the end of it, immense. Even after science
-~- ' had 6nce dawned ppn theithe Scots feermed to be finking back

into ignorance and obfcuri, ; and aive and intellgent as they
naturally are, they continued, while other nations were eager in
the pursuit of fame and knowledge, in a slate of languor and llu-
pefadion. This, however, must be imputed to the unhappiness
of their political situation, not to any defeCt of genius; for no
sooner was the one removed in any degree, than the other began to
display itself. Tie a& abolishing the power of the Lords of Articles,
and other salutary laws passed at the Revolution, having introduced
freedom of debate into the Scotch Parliament, eloquence, with
all the arts that accompany or perfect it, became immediate ob-
jeCts of attention; and the example of Fletcher of Salton alone
is sufficient to hew that the Scots were fill capable of generous
fcntiments, and, notwithstanding ome peculiar idioms, were able to
express themselves with energy, and with elegance.

AT length the Union having incorporated the two nations, and

rendered them one people, the diflindions which had fubfiited for
many ages gradually wear away; peculiarities disappear; the fame
manners prevail in both parts of the island; the fame authors are
read and admired; the fame entertainments are frequented by the
elegant and polite; and the fame flandard of taife, and of purity
in language, is eflablifhed. And the Scots, after being placed,
during a whole century, in a situation no less fatal to the liberty
than to the tafle and genius of the nation, were at once put in pol-
frtfion of privileges more valuable than those which their anceflors had
formerly enjoyed; and every obflruation that had retarded their pur-
iu't, or prevented their acquisition of literary fame, was totally re-
moved,

APP ENN.
260

# APPENDIX. No. I. (Vol. I. p. 180.) A MEMORIAL of certain points meet for the restoring the realm of SCOTLAND to the antient weale.

P P EN D I X.

No. I. (Vol. I. p. i8o.)
A MEMO R IAL of certain points meet for the rforing she

realm of S c o T L A N D to the atiezt weale.
IMPRIMis, it is to be noted, that the best worldly felicity that Scotland can have, th Auiuft

is either to continue in a perpetual peace with the kingdom of England, or to r155s,oton.
be made one monarchy with England, as they both make but one iflind, di- Lib.Cal. B.c.
vided from the reft of the world. fol. 7. From

TF the sirs is fought, that is to be in perpetual peace with England, then mufl it ne- coPy in fe-

ceairrily be provided, that Scotland be not so fubjelt to the appointments of France, cretx Ct' li's
as is presently, which, being-an antient enemy to England, feeketh always to make
Scotland an infirument, to excn ife, thereby, their malice upon England, and to
make a foot-flool thereof to look over England as they may.

THEREFORE, when Scotland shall come into the hands of a mere Scottifl

man in blood, then may there be hope of such accord, but as long as it is at the
commandment of the French, there is no hope to have accord long betwixt theie
two realms.

THEREFORE feeing it is at the Fcnch king's commandment by reason of his

wife, it is to be confidercd for the weale of Scotland, that until she have children,
and during her abfeice out of the realm, the next heirs to the crown, being the
house of the Hanmiltons, should have regard hereto, and to fee that neither the crown
be imposed nor wafted; and on the other fide, the nobility and commonalty ought to
force that the laws and the old cufloms of the realm he not altered, neither that the
country be not impoverithed by taxes, cmpreft, or new impofls, after tihe man;ic:
of France; for provision wherein, both by the law of God and man, the Si t e}ii
king and his wife may be moved to reform their mifgovernance of tc land.

AND for this purpose, it were good tihat the nioLility alid common jied v ii

the next heir of the crown, to fcek due reformation of fitch great abuses as tend to
the ruin of their country, Rwhich miuft be dei'n before the lFrinch giEu too lii)i
and insolent.

FIRST, Thalt it may be provi' cl, bi ; c.nfcnt of the thrcee cflatc of thc aii, th(at

the land may be free trom ;ail il! l.;y like as Liila ndJ i, for julliiicatim w li. i. .,
if any free generail coiull ci y 1b

. ad w he l; I.'i ,

l(c oinc lave lnot t!h! '.

ofjudgment, they may oct to ilicw tlih.r cause to bc nioft ag recabl to. Cillit.;
religion.

NI'X, To provide that ScttU, Lri!l ;h' e' eOVCrsiac, in all rules ;rtl oifL.c;, by

the antient blood ot tl;c re.btld, witluott 4 I'hl ,,,).]':,,, I ,ie(s,
,', i!.i';', ::;

.u!!

all other princes govern their countries, and especially that the forts might be in t.
hands of mere Scottish men.

THIRDLY, That they might never be occasioned to enter into wars against Eng.
land, except England hlould give the first cause to Scotland.

FOURTHLY, That no noblemfan of Scotland should receive pension of France,

except it were whilst he did serve in France, for otherwi'e thereby the French
would hortly corrupt many, and betray their own country.

FIFTHLY, That no office, abbey, living, or commodity, be given to any but
mere Scottish men, by the assent of the three estates of the realm.

SIXTH, That there be a councel in Scotland appointed in the queen's absence, to
govern the whole realm, and in those cafes not to be directed by the French.

SEVENTHLY, That it be by the said three estates appointed how the queen's re-

venue of the realm hall be expended, how much the queen shall have for her por-
tion and estate during h.r absence, how much shall be limited to the governance and
defence of the realm, how much yearly appointed to be kept in treasure.

IN these and such like points, if the French king and the queen be found unwil-

ling, and will withfiand these provisions for the weale of the land, then hath the three
eflate, of the realm authority, forthwith, to intimate to the said king and queen their
humble requests; and if the fame be not effeCtually granted, then humbly they may
commit the governance thereof to the next heir of the crown, binding the fame allh
to observe the laws and antient rights of the realm.

FINALLY, If the queen (hall be unwilling to this, as it is likely (he will, in re-

speLt of the greedy and tyranous affection of France, then it is apparent that Al-
mighty God is pleased to transfer from her the rule of the kingdom for the weale of
it, and this time must be used with great circumfpc'lion, to avoid the deceipts and
tromperies of the French.

AND then may the realm of Scotland confider, being once made free, what

means may be devised by God's goodnels, to accord the two realms, to endure for
time to come at the plcafure of Almighty God, in whose hands the hearts of a!l
princes be.

No. 1I. (Vol. . p. S8.)

A letter of Maitland of Lethington's, thus direted,

To my loving friend Jamec. Be this delivered at London.
-oth Jlnuary I UNDERSTAND by the last letter I received from yow, that discoursing wi.t

t (0 1r zour countrymen upon the m.tcr of Scotland, and comoditeys may cnlcw

cIl >. il)i.al to that realm, hereafter giffze presently aflifi ws with zour forces, ze find a norl-

.. ,,. 1 ,r1 bre of the contrary advite, couting that we fall nut at length be found trufly frends,
the o( in,l in nor mean to contynew in con;ant ametye, albeit we promic, but only for avoyd
i o\w1 halUnd. iing the present danicr make zow to serve our turne, and afte being delivered, becum

ciicliC.e as of bcfore. For prose quhareof, they allege things have pait betwixt w:s
heretofore, and a few presumptiones tending to the sarI end, all grounded upon mill rust;
qullillks, at the firit liclt, hivc lorme Ihewe of apparencc, gif men we)' not the circunll-
itailccs o( the nla t:r; but gif they will confer the tyrne piaft with the prelcillt, conlidcr
the nature of this caus, a.ld citalc of our contre', I doub: Inot but jugeCicnt fl 1), .llt: to
blmifh nIliltr. ru And firll, I wad will zc ihould exaynlc tlhe caues offi tlc old inul -

t; c

tye betwixt the realms ;s Lngland and Scotland, a;;d quhat moved our anceflours to
enter into ligur with tl renche; quhilks by our floreys and regif+res off antiquiteys
appear to be these. 'lhc princes of England, ome tyme, alledging a certaine kynde
off foveraint) e over this realm some tyme upon hye courage, or incited by incur-
sions o our bordoilrare., and semblable occasions, mony tymes enterprifed the con-
quest otf ws, and fa far furth preift it by force off armes, that we wer dryven to great
extramiteys, by loss of our princes, our noblemen, and a good part of our cuntrey,
fa that Lxl,"rience taught ws that our owne flrength was fcarfe fufficier:t to withstand
the force cl England. The Frenche zour auncient encmyes, confidering well how
natuic had fa placed ws in a iland with zow, that na nation was able fa to annose
Englain ; s we being encmyes, foucht to joine ws to theym in ligue, tending by that
meane to de.ourne zour armyes from the invasion off France, and occupy zow in the
dcfcince off' zur country at hanic, offering for that effect to beftowe some charges
upon ws, a!nd for compassing fs theyr purpos, choyfed a tyme to propone the mate:-,
qu!., :; the Fcfclhe memory off ijuris lately reccaved at z r hands, was fa dpelv
prenIed on our liartes, that all our myndes were ocupved how to be reveog'd, and
arme ourfelfcs with the powar off a forayne prince against zour enterprises thereafter.

THIS wes the beginning off our confederacy with France. At (tuhilk tyme, our

cronicles iiiaks mention, that some of the wyfeft foresaw the perril, and small frute
Should cdound to ws thereof at lenth: zit had affection fa blinded jugement, that
the advile of the mait part owercame the best. The maift part of all quer]ls be-
twixt ws since that tyme, at leift quhen the provocation came on our fyde, hes ever
fallen out by theyr procuremant rather than any one caus off our fees: and quhien-
faever we brack the peace, it come partly by theyr intyfements, partly to elcihew
the conquefi intended by that realm. But now hcs God's providence fa altered the
cafe, zea changed it to the plat contrary, that now hes the Frenfche taken zour
place, ad we, off very jugement, bccum difvrous to have zow in theyr rowme.
Our eyes are opened, we epy how uncareful they have been of our weile at all
tvmes, how they made ws ever to serve theyr turne, drew us in maift dangerous weys
tor theyr commodltc, and niverthelefs wad not fiyck, oft tymes, againfi the natour
of the liguc, to contrak peace, leaving ws in weyr. We fee that their fupporr,
off late zere, wes not grantit for any atclion they bare to w-, for ptie tiley had
off our eflate, for recompcenfe off the lyke friendship fchawin to thcvm in tyme (t'
theyr afflidtionec, but for ambition, and infaciable cupidite to reyrne, and to makl
Scotland ane acceflbry to the crown of France. This was na friendly ofice, but
Ilercenary, craving hyre sarre exceeding the proportion of theyr defivi:g ; a hale
realm for the defence of a part. We fee thevm manifcfily attempt the tling we'u('-
pected off zow ; we feared ze ment the co:nqiucf (ffT Scotliand, a;ld they :i L pl.ut jiv
f.llenl to that work; wce ated zowv fr doubt we hail ze rncnt vil towards ws, m!lt
fIll we love theyin, (qu'ilks bealins' the name of friends, go about t, bring w in .iilt
vile fcrvitude ? (Glf by zour fr ldly fi;ipplt at tils tvme, ze fall dc.'ire that ;,
onl flte ze not the ruynlo l o r ur co i.tr)', blut will prlci'rv' the libortie tlci((,'
flol conquest by Irao.si.'tea , .11l 1n t tlif' i cati(, of all i;tiilty ' itl zow, andl
ligie witli theyir, be takel ;ivwa ?

' i 1i' c..'!..s

'lil rl movce , hl w fall tih cfle es ',
ricmane ? 'I lie fl-r of coiqrt (: ni l !! V' w' toll l o . l \('m thite inI tiln e c:; (-!c;I:l-

.t:d, (mlicn we i-' icyn pl.nt l' tt( ll I, t, ;,,, i.c()v

n :.aw ws ;tt, ii!,, l

f.ll wtI not l:ltc the'icsr , .lnl t'. lir /ow ? ( !t \\s haive iliwir l.It c

i( t c(liliL., .,

tion iimii, [011 nl '
i t dI-'. i..11 !1 1i .';i i \' tl tiltll , o ()! (iuli II: Vi, had li', 11nlil l ,,m -

1 (lit:lt',

tmodite, quhat fall move us to breake with zow, that off all nationes may do wu
greateff plefbur ?

BUT ze will fay, this mater may be reconcyl-d, and then frends as off befbre. I

think weill peace is the end of all weyr, but oft this ze may be afiired, we will
never fa far trust that reconciliation, that we wil be content to forgo the ametxe
of England, nor do any thina may bring ws in suspicion with zow. Gifft'
wold, at aly tne to please theym, break with zow, should we not, befydeC the
lofie off estimation and discrediting of ourselfes, perpetually expone our common
weill to a maift manifest danger, and becum a pray to theyr tyranny ? Qlh;,is ai,
could we implore, being detlitute of zour friendship, gif they off new wald attemrp
theyr fornar nterpiife? Quhat nation myght help ws giff they wald, or wald
g.iff they myght ? and it is lyke cncuch, they will not flick hereafter to tak theI
tvme off ws, quhen diplefour and grudge hes taken depe rute on baith fydes, '
ing ambition has fa impyrit ower their rafon, that before we had ever done ailv
thing Inyght offend theyii, but by the contrary pleased theym by right and wraln,
they did not tlick to attempte the subversion of our haleltate. I wald ze ihould n;
ellieme ws fa baravne of iugfment, that we cannot forere our awne perril; or .
liolifche, that we will nlot itudv by all godc means to entertayne that thing om;,
be our fafetye; quhilk consistes all in the relayinE of zour frendflips. I pray zow
confider in lyke cafe, when, in the days of zour princes off maift noble memori
king lHenrv the VIIi. and king Edward the VI. ineanes wer opened off amitye l)e-
twixt baith realms ; was not at all tncs the difference of religion the onely flai
they wer not embraced ? Did not the crat of our clergy and power of theyr
adlicrents ul)bert the devifcs of the better !brt ? But now has God off his ni'r
c)y reinovcd that block furth of-f the way: now is not theyr practise lyke to tak
place anv mare, when we ar corni.- to a conborinity oftIdofrine, and protLs thl
fame rligion ith zow, quhilk I take to be the firayteft knot o amitye can hb
dcvill. Giff it may be allegedl, that ibinm off our countrymen, at ony tme,
violated theyr promnis; giff ze liss to way the circulnflances, ze fall fynd th,'
promnis is rather brought on by neceflite, aftcr a great owerthraw off our men.
then conime o fie will, anid tel over to our great incommodite and d(cca,
(r:s our haill iate, at lcitl la taken. Blut in this cael, fall the preservation off' our
ilbertie be infepera)lx joined with the keping off promr.cfe, and the violation off (ilr
iavth clat ws i mai milzrable iecrvitude. Sa that gift' neyther the feare of (God,
revcrei . of nIan, reigipn, oth r, pr rollll , .or warldly honeltyc wes fufricicnt tc
bynd ws, yet fall the zcale oft' ou: n.i:l c coilntry, the maintenance osi' ourowi
tate, the fatty of our w)fics and child(rcie trom favevy, compell ws to k;)
proinifi. I am asSurcd, it is trcwlnv ald ti iiicrcly ine it on our part to cnntilncV r',
puipetual ametyc with zow; it fail be uttered y our proceedings. Gift' ze lu; .
(cllVrolun of it as we a, afiu;liancs Imayv b devsfcd, quhlarby all partyes w\ill

\ e out

of doultc. There be gode ImeC.: s to do it, fit infiruimcnts for the purpos, tym n
tirvecs weill, the inhabitants off'baith rilimes wifli it, God hcs wroul, li in the I> (-
pie's hartcs on bayth parties a ccrtalne tlill agreemenit upon it, never ldi!, ;t anit
tncme, so mony things collcurie at ones to lknyt it up, the (diipoltion (;' :t \v,',
quliais harts ae i (Godis hands, may mak up the ;hale. I hopc le quha ies li! 1i11
this wouk, and maintcyncd it qlulhile no', by tihe cxScctation of ma111, stale ('l
it.

I pray zow, let not zour mnen dryve tymc in confultatioli, quhcther ze fall ilp-

port ws or no. Seyng the mater fpeaketh for itlelf, that ze mon take upon zow the
defence off our caus, giffze have any refpe for zour awnc wcill 'I heir preparativcs in
France, and levying of men in Germany, (quheyroff [ am lately advertised) ar not
altogydder ordeyned for us, ze ar the mark they shote at ; they feke our realme, but
for ane entrey to zours. Giff they should diredtly fchaw hoffilite to zow, they
knaw zo wald mak rcdy fr theyrne ; therefor they do, by indired mcanes, to blind
zow, the thing, they dare not as it planely attempte. ''hey feme to invade us to
th' end that having assembled theyr hale forces la nere zour bordours, they may unlok it
to attack zow: It is ane off theyr aid fetches, making a fchew to one place, to lyght on
ane other. Remember how covertly zour places about Bollougne were allaizeit, and car-
ryed away, ze being in peace as now. How the entcrprife of Calais was f) nely dillerm-
bled, I think ze have not fa sone forgotten. Beware of the third, prevent theyr
policy by prudence. Gift zc lb not the lyke dilpofition prec'ntly in theyin, ze re na-
thing. It is a groffc ignorance to mifkiiaw, what all nations planely ipcks off'. T;k
hede ze fay not hereafter, " Had I wist ;" ane uncomely fcntence to procedc oft a
wyfe man's mouth. That is onwares chanced on to zow, quhilk zow commonly
wifled, that this countrey myght be divorfed from the Frcnfche, and is fa comme to
pass as was mailt expedient for zow. For gift'by your intyfeinent we had taken the
mater in hand, ze myght have fufpeted we would have been ontrufty frends, and
na langcr continued ftedfafe, then perril had appeared. But now, quhcn off our
self, we have conceyved the hatered, provoked by private injuries, arnd that theyr
evil dealing with ws hes deserved our inimitye, let no man doubte but they fall fynd
ws encmyes in ernest, that fa ungcntly hes demeyned our countrey, and at quhais
hands we can look for nathing but all extremitye, giffever they may get the upper
hand. Let not this occasion, fa happely offered, escape zow? giffze do, neglet-
ing the present opportunite, and hoping to have ever gode luk comme fleaping upon
zow, it is to be feared zour enemye waxe to great, and fa flrang, that afterwards
quhen ze wald, ze fall not be able to put him down; and then, to zour smart, as-
ter the tyme, ze will acknowledge zour error. Ze have felt, by experience, quhat
harme cometh offoverfigl.t, and trutfing to zour cnemycs promcrie. We offer zow
the occasion, quhevrby zour former lofles may be repayred. Qtihilk gif ze let over
flyde, suffering ws t be owerrun, quha then, I pray zow, fall flay the Frenfche,
that they fall ot invade zow in zour own boundes, lick is their luff to reygne, that
they can neyther be content with theyr fortune prefcnt, nor reft and be satisfied
when they have gode luck, but will still follow on, having in theyr ane hrayne
conceaved the image of fa great a conqueflt, quhat think ye fal be the end ? s tcr any
of fa small jugement, that he doth not forcfic already, that theyr hail torce lfll then
be bent against zow ?

It 0al not be ami, to confider in quhat cafe the Frenfche be presently. lTheyr eflate

is not alwavs fa calin at hame as every man tlinketh. And trewly it wes not theyr
great redines for we) r made theym to tak this mater on hnd, at this tnie, but ra-
th(r a vayllc trult in their awnc policy, tliinkinig to ihave found na refiftnuln, the'r
oplinion hcs dcc(avcd tle)nm, and that nIakes thclm now .rlnaled. 'The etatcs oft
the elii piC (a; I he.ire) has futcd rcfltittioI (ift' thl'np

l ial owns, MIctz, 1 ,oll,

;11(n \'rdun, quhilk may iriw to fOin)e 1ci'vncs; anlltl t.l thing is not a cnue witlhn
tlti'r ;wic C ii tr'v', the I t'( f;t tlev )I' jiCfllntly for rc yr. te rlare o(oi tunt l c fllme

. ric t) mc l,1 /,ow. Giljlf t i like oc c.lionl wci oll'cd tu the 1l'C u f!rli ;i .lil!t ',

\,
V 11. A Ill ' cw,

wey, how gladly would they embrace it. Are ze not efchamcd of zour sleuth, to
ipare theym that hes already compassed your deflruction, giff they wer able ? Confi-
der with your self quhilk is to be choyfed ? To weyr against theym out with zour
realme or within ? Giffquhill ze fleape, we fal be overthrowne, then fall they not
fayle to fute zow in zour awne countrey, and use ws as a fote stole to overloke zovvo
But rome will fay, perhaps, they meane it not. It is foly to think they wad
not giff they wer able, quhen before hand the stick not to giff zour armes, and
uifrpe the style of zour crown. 'Then quhat difference there is to camp within zonwr
awne bounds or without, it is manifcfl. Gifftwa armyes should camp in yowr coun-
try, but a moneth; albeit ye reccaved na other harme, zit should zowr loife be rea-
tar, nor all the charge ze will nede to bcflow on our support will draw to, betdecs
the dishonour.

LEr not men, that eyther lack gode advise, or ar not for perticular refpets :ci'i

aff'cted to the caus, move zow to fubtrati zour helping hand, by alleging thiin.'
not apparent, for that they be poflible. It is not, I grant, unpoffible that we nl,
receave conditiones of peace; but I fee lyttle likelyhode that our ennemys will uil:r
ws fik as will remove all miftrufi, and giffwe wald have accepted others, the mater
had bene lang or now compounded. Let zow not be moved for that they terme w;
rebelles, and diffames our just querell with the name of conspiracy againit our so-
verayne. It is hir hyenes ryght we manetayne. It is the liberty off hir realnic we
fludy to preserve, with the hazard offourlyves. We are not (God knaweth, comi!e
to this poynt for wantones, as men impacient of rewll, or willing to fchake off the
zoke of governement, but ar drawne to it by neceffite, to avoyde the tyranny of
ftrangeares, feaking to defraude ws off lawful governement. Giff we should fuffr
firangeares to plant themfelffes peaceably in all the firenthes of our realme fortify
the Sey-portes, and maift important places, as ane entre to a plain conquefl, now
in the minorite of our foverane, beyng furth of the realme, should we not be thouglht
oncareful off the common weill, betrayares of our native countrev, and eill fiib-
jeAs to hir majefie ? Quhat other opinion could fche have off ws ? Might flhe not
julfly hereafter call ws to accompt, as negligent minilteres ? Giff Strangeares
should be thus suffered to broke the chefe offices, beare the hail rewll, alter and
pervert our lawes and liberty at theyr plefour; myght not the people esteem our no.
bl men unworthy the place of counfalours ? Ve n!ean na wyfe to fubtrak our obe-
dience from our foverane, to defraud hir hyenes off hir dew reverence, rents and
revenues off hir crown. We feke nathing but that Scotland may remane, as of be-
fore, a fre realme, rewlit by hir hyenes and hir ministeres borne men of the fni
and that the fucceflion of the crown may remane with the lawful blode.

I WALD not ze fould not fa lyttill eeme the fricndfhip of Scotland, that 7C

iuced it not worthy to be embraced. It fall be na fimall commo ite for zov to bh
dclivered off the anoyance of so neir a nyghtbour, quhlis inimityc and may nii,re
trouble zow, then off ony other nation albcit twyfl; a ;ifiin)t, lot lvenr d!;y n1. rihc
with zow. Befydes that zc fall not nde to fla c tile in .ii)n off alny prilnce Lckvn¢
the commodite to invade zow by land, on our lhan i. Confidelr quhat fiitic luon,
charges ze beflowe on the fortilication and keping of li.trr\ick; qui ilik . Ii:iy ic-
duce to a mean fowmc, aving ws to frcindc. ' lie realine o Irtland ting ot .-
tour a gode and fcrtill countrey, by re.fiin ol't the cioiti LV\'.illd n(iictci' S

: ;inl ],ik

of plicy, ze knaw to lie rather a burthen uito ) .ow tlici Tic it aiv .int;l(c; J il'

in !'

it were peaceable ]) iy be vely C(OimiOdiouts. J Sot :< iiin. ,l0: ( ilihavrot it i 1t.
onknowni to ,zow tlhili;t li.r\'icc w a.r .bill to do. lcluc ln t itivt' (Otu itiltlOitc

2 1 si

besides mony ma quhen they ar offred. Quhilks albeit I fludy not to amplify and
dilate, yet is na other countrey able to offr zow the lyke, and as the rather to be
embraced, for that zour aunceflors, by all meanes, maiff erneflly futed our amity,
and yet it was not theyr hap to come by it. The mater hes almaift carycd me be-
yond the boundes off a lettre, quharfor I will leave to trouble zow, after I have ge-
ven you this note. I wald wiss that zc, and they that ar learned, fould rede the
twa former orations of Demosthenes, called Olynthyacas, and confidere quhat couni-
fall that wyfe Oratour gave to the Athenians his countrymen, in a lyke cafe; quhilk
hes so great affinite with this cause of ours, that every word theroff nyght be apply-
ed to our purpos. There may ze learne off him quhat advise is to be followed,
when zour nyghtbours hous is on fyre: Thus I bid zow artely fareweill. From
Sant Andrews, the 20th of January, 1559.

No. III. (Vol. I. p. 1i9.'
Part of a letter from Tho. Randolph to Sir William Cecil, from tlh

camp before Leith, 29th of April, I56.

I WILL only, for this time, discharge myself of my pronmife to the carl cr .

Huntly, who so defireth to be recommended to you, a one, who with all his,, P ,.

heart favoureth this cause, to the uttermost of his power. Half the words that
come out of his mouth were able to persuade an unexperienced man to speak far-
ther in his behalf, than I dare be bold to write. I leave it to your honour to judge
of him, as of a man not unknown to you, and will myself always measure my
thoughts, as he hall deserve to be spoken of. WVith much difficulty, and great per-
suasion, he hath subscribed with the reft of the lords to join with them in this ac-
tion ; whatfomever he can invent to the furtherance of this cause, he hath promised
to do, with solemn protestation, and many words; he trufteth to adioin many to
this cause; and faith surely that no man {hall lie where he taketh part. He hath
this day subscribed a bond between England and this nation ; he faith, that tiher
was never thing that liked him better.

No. IV. (Vol. . p. 207.)

Randolph to Cecil, 7oth Agufi r i;o. Fronm EdinbLrgh.

SI N C E the 2th of July, at what time I wrote last to your honour, I have
S heard of nothing worth the reporting. At this prefilit it may please you to kow:'\ (). 'P.
that the most part of the nobles are hlre arrived, :is your honour fliall receive their' t1 ;i c'
inamcs in writilln. ' he earl of H-un tly excufcthl hi iclf y ;an infirmity ill his ICeg.
H-is lieutenant for this time is the lord of I.idigton, chosen Ij.'akcr o: the pali;i-
nimnt, or haranguc maker as tcfb men term it. 'Ihe first lday of their fitting in
(i:lianment will he. on 'Thurfidav wlext. Ilitliheto, as Il:iny ai have been plciefrt od
;hc lords hav\ conlil un (d and dd of ccrltii .;ih. tlhen to he lIrolo( inell, ais,
w.lio f.ioll be sent into Fr:linc, whl: ilto !Fh:i!d. It is Inuchi iafe'r to sild ri(hem
tha tihe otiler It fc(rn th alnol to lie Icf;,!\ l u1)1 tl;lIt f;ir I'.InJ1.m1 tin
I';:fl-r of M ;ixwcll, and l.ird (,f I.il .. ', I n r:ll(., 'il.it.irow ;i, ( Jil-
lier: Clcrk:. Alu ty have uniiltl vn thin ; i f t

3I .).? XXI\V.

XXIV. of the which the XI counsellors must be chofeil. They intend, vry
Ihortly, to fend away Dingwall the herald into France, with the iiamc-e of thocr tliy
shall chufe; and alio to require the king and queen's content unto this parlianl,it.
They have devilid how to have the contract with England confirmed by authority
of parliament; how alol to have the articles of the agreement between them alit
their king and queen ratified. These things yet have only been had in conmnluicIa-
tion. 1 or the confirmation of the contract with England I have no doubt; for thit
I hear many men very well like the fame, as the earl of Athol, the earl of Sutcr
lan', the L. (ilamis, who dined yeftcrday with the lord James. The .. Jailn
icqucfted me this pcfent day to bring the contract unto him. I intend also, this day,
to fpcak unto the L. Gray, in our L. Gray's name, for that he promiied i n
hearin to ubfci-ibe, and then presently would have done it, if the contract could h.l.e
been had. For the more assurance against all inconvenicnts, I would, befidc, t! .,
that I trust it shall be ratifv'd in parliament, that every nobleman in Scotlind hi ?.
his hand and set his leal, which may always remain as a notable monunmnt, the' tc a.;t
of parliament be hereafter difannulled. If it might, theiefore, stand with you a ic,
that the lords might be written unto, now that they are here prcet to that ctil!, ,.
that 1 might receive from }our Honr. foe carneft charge to travel herein, ,..
not but it would serve to good purpose. If it might be also known witi what ub:.. -
tial and effedious words or charge you desire to have it confirmed, I think n, ,,.
difficulty would be made. The Earl Marshal has ft been moved to fubiclibt, i;
ullCth mo delays than men judged he would. His son told me ycfterday, tt i.
would speak with me at leilture, so did also Drumlanrick ; I know not to what pu:-
pote : ] have caused lord James to be the carnefter with the L. marfial, soir
:iucority's fake, when of late it was in consultation by what means it mi !-t .,
wrought, that the amity between these two realms might be perpetual ; and ;:n.
diverse men's opinion, one said that he knew of no other, but by making them bht;
one, and that in hope of that mo things were done, than would otherwile have ev.
been granted ; the earl of Argyll advied him carnefily to flick unto that. th.t I.:
had promised for it, that it should pats his power and all the crafty knaves of hi,
counlel, (i am bold to ule unto your H. his own words) to break so gc'd., .

nJurpo.fc. This talk liked well the assisters, howsomever it pleased him to whor,
w;s s)poken iuto. The barons, who in time past have been of the pali.l '
1;ad vc!tcrday a convention amlong thenlelves in the church, in very honert and (ic:.
iort; they thought it good to require to be rcfored unto their ancient lb!ty,

b

iave voice in parliament. Tihey prefcnted that day a bill unto the loii j to t;..
,cl, a copy whereof fliAl be sent as s)on as it can be had. It was anlwitl!. it

1cntlv, ailt, taken in good part. It was referred unto the lords of the nrtic'e, ;, .

thc',' i!c chosen, to rclolve thereupon-.---.er, Jo !!cs a /l.: /J,',

J *' '

6. :

. !..

li,' /6] /,'/' ,/ ;;.i cj' )1unla , &c.----'l'his prfLeit monilng, 'iz. the 9th1, i i, :' -
(hlo(od, th.t he lurds inlterled to be at tlhe parliament, which cautfilfd ne i;o v'h.
to !l.iy ni' letter, to fIe vwhat I could hCar or learn worth the reportilg l nt, 'r.
low '. 'I'lie lolds, at ten of tlhe clock, . tiillmbl tlie lvec, at the |.xlaicc, \x.,:
the dukile licth; Iru n t(henvce they departd toais rhe tolbooth, s tley i
ldi, it. '.;ich one ) ig let

i is at ill uis (ch oi-r1t' as your II ii l] !{ i,1

tl l 111 tlils cr(oll. 'I he crowin, the ml,.ice, the' It'ord, \\vtcl Ald in ll the (It i ':,1, '
b ilcnce h lnig ti l.n liidcd, the L,. of ,i(i nt',tol beg;nl hr, oi.iti , 1i. Ie cx

e i 'l.
billafbicrl IyC to occupy that plce. 1 le made ab lici dh.lwi e of thiilu pi!i, .,il

I ,...

what necelsity men weie forced unto for the defence of their country, what remedy
and upport it pleaied God to lend them in the time of the r nece.ity, how much
they were bound heartily to acknowledge it, and to requite it. He took away the
perfualion that was in many men's minds that lay back, that mnifdeemed other things
to be meant than was attempted. He advised all estates to lav all particulris apart,
and to bend thernfelves wholly t) the true service of Gd and of their country.
He willed them to remember in what fate it had been of loig time for lack of
government, and exercifi of juifice. In the end, he exhiortel them to mutual amity
and hearty friendship, and to live with one another as members all of one body.-
1-lc prayed God long to maintain this peace and amity with all princes, cepccially
betwixt the realms of England anld Scotland, in the fear of God, and bo ended. The
cierk of regi ier inmmediatl v itood up, and asked them to what matter they would
pI-,rced: It was thou.ht necc.lry, tihat the articles of the pe.ice ilouid i confirmed
witli the commono coitent, for that it vwa thought ineceftary to tfnil tlhem aav with
fpedCi into F'rance, and to receive the ratification of them as oon as might be.
The articles being read, .:ere iinmmei.:tely agreed unto: A day wa, 'ppoin:ed to
have certain of the nobles flbticribe unto them, and to put to their feals, to be lient
away by a herald, who flill alfib bring the ratification again with him. Ihe ba-
oins, of whom I have above written, required an answer to their requfit, mcwlhat
wa3 laid unto the contrary The baro:n; al ed for them cuffom and authority.
It was in the end rle livcd that thiec fould be chosen fix to join with the lord oi
lhe artices, and thaL if they, afcer ood advilement, liould ind it right,and incefriry
tfr the coinlln'wealth, it flould be ratif'd at this parliament for a peipetual law.
'Sec lords poceced immediately hereupon, to the chufing of the lords of the arti-
cles. 'ie order is, that the lords fpirituall chufe the temnporal, and the temporal the
tiritual, and the burgi l s their own. '1'here were choscn as in this other paper
have written. This being done, the lords departed and accompanied the duke, all as
far as the Buw, ( hich is the gate oin'g out of the high fircet) and manv down into
tlhe paacewhere he licth. The town all in armour, the trumpets founding, and other
mufick ucli as they have. iThus much report iunto your highnes-s of that that I
did both hear andl tee. ( 'thlr folemnnities have not been uscd aving i times long
past the lo-rdls hace had pa liamcnt robes, which arc now with them wholly out ot
ife.

TriE namics of as many carls and !:rl'; fplritual and tempnrd.l as are assembled at
tl:J pnilii.LL ;:t.

'Iie (iuke of Chatcllicriult.

]"nl ?;. Lords. Lords Spilituai.

Ai r.n. }'I lkim:. St. Ai -ewis.
&.i \ 1l. I lnilt vet. D nI <~kll.

A\r)ll :!. "I

.ltle' '. A tilc <.

C'!.*r'hli, . N{ nxcII i \l'vt . 'l'e liilitop of tile /Ies,.
(.' i!',C . ( ';tl .t.!;. As l ots ;ind lilots, I
... ~,~,~il;. (lin'. kinow iiot how niim y.

." .'heil:iiit. '*I

- ..

.,~tr!}k. lnkli, ~

~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~ ~nl.1
.

Cathnefs.
Rothes.
Monteith.

Spiritual.

Athens.
Isles.
Lord James
Arbroath.
Newbottle.
Lindoris.
Cowpar.
Kinros.
Kilwinning.

APPEND

Lords.
Ogilvy.
Fleming.
Glamis.
Gray.
Ochiltrie,
Gordon.

I X.
The Lords of the Articles.

Temporal. Barons elected to be

of the Articles.

The Duke. Maxwcll.
Argyll. Tillibardine.
So aMarfhall. Cunninnghla hcad

Athole. Lochenvar.
Morton. Pirarrow.
Glcncairn. Lundy.
Ruthven. Ten Provofls o!
Er ie. the chief towns,
Bod. which also are
Lindsay. of the Articlc,.

So that with the Supcrior of St. Andrews, the whole is 36.

IT were too long for me to rehearse particularly the disposition, and chiefly the

affeaions of these men, that are at this time chosen Lords of the Articles. May it
satisfy your Honl. for '.his time, to know that, by the common opinion of men,
there was not a fubftancialier or more sufficient number of all forts of men chosen in
Scotland these many years, nor of whom men had greater hope of good to infue.
This present morning, vi: the icth, the .. of Lidington, made me privy unto
your letter; he intendeth, as much as may be, to follow your advice. Some hair
points there are. iHe himfiif is determined not to go into France. H1 alledzcth
many reasons, but speakeh least of that, that moveth him most, which is tf
example of the l1ft, that went on a more tgateful mefage than he £fAll carr,, .,
itood on other terms with their prince than he doth, and yet your honour k:-.v'.,
what the world judgeth.

Petition of the Lesser Barons to the Parliament, held Aug. i,.

n c!os 1 i /Y ' lorlds, unto your lordflhips, humbly means and flhow,, we t!-e ba.1at ."
R., 1.ip's frccholders of this realm, your bretlren in Chrilt, I hi,t wlhirc.is ti. ...
Icticr oC(el. of true it liion, ani( coiion well of this rcalm, arc, in this pirclcnt i , in,.:
:tli :uy-. to Ibe t. i;tcd, ordlclr, and clitbliilhcd, to the glory of (od, andlJ nmiiat.::.:) ;

the com.ilonwealth; ; 1: we heing the greatel Ilmnlbr in portion, wlic t ,'

. .. :

caui!cs coileicln, ana lias been, and yet ;tic ready to bear the greated pir'
thli (halrgis thcreuntill, ;is well in peace, as in war, both with our bo't , !
with our goodls; ;and sCcing tlicre is no place where we InmaV yd,) Icitt :, ,i'
.ov tlhaln il! general coucIils and parlilamicn;, in giving our bell Advice, .1 i,; ,'i ,

k,>

vote and c'unfcll for the furtherance tlereof, for the maintainance of virtue, and
punishment of vice, as use and custom had been of old by ancient ats of parlia-
ment observed in this realm; whereby we underfland that we ought to be heard to
reason, and vote in all causes concerning the commonwealth, as well in counfells as
in parliaments ; otherwise we think that whatfomever ordinances and fiatutes be
made concerning us and our eate, we ot being required and fufered to reason
and vote at the making th'reot, tliht the fane should not o ligc us to ftend thereto.
Therefore it will pleafi your lordships to take consideration thereof, and of the
charge born, and to be born by us, since we are willing to si ve truly to the common
well of this realm, after our estate, that ye will, in this prcftnt p':rliamcnt, and all
counfCll:s,l whlrc the common well of the realm is to be treated, take our advice, coun-
iell and vote, so ihat, without the fame, your lordships would susser notiling to be
palTed and concluded in parliamlent or councils aforelai ; and that all as of par-
liament made, in times aft, concernin g u for our place and cflate, and in our fa-
iour, e at this piefent parliament, confirmed, approved, a]Jl. ratihed, and a of
pailiamnt made thereupon, And your lordflips afwvcr humll\v belcechs.

()f the juccs; of this petitio, t/.c j oci.iig accsout is gi C ivy RI:n/> ; Lett.

to Cecil, i9 Aug. 156:, The matters concluded and past by comimon con;cnt
on Saturday Iatr, in such Coleln fort as the first day that they aflemhled, are thc!e.
Firtl, that the barons, according to an old a of parliament, made in the time of
James I. in the )ycar of God 1427, hall have free voice in parliament, this a paired
without any contradiction.

No. V. (Vol. I. p. 216.)
A etter of Thomas Randolph, the English resident, to the right wor-

Ihipful Sir \Willi im Ccil, knt. principal lfcretary to the queen's ma-
jdty.
Have received our honour's letters of the firR of this month, written at Ofyes 9 ' i",c-
in Eiicx, anid alio a let: r unto the lord James, from his kinfinan St. Come out u'tt. L-

of France, in this tlie" :i roe both that the queen of Scotland is nothing changed B1 lD lO. 32
of hlr pLrpLoe(C in home co ming. I aIre your honour that will be a sout adven-
ture foi a tick cra'cd woman, that may he doubted as vwell what may happen
u,;o her ui (,;1 the itas, I a!lb how hcartilv ile may be received vwhn file cometh
to land of a reat number, who arc uti -ly p)crfuadlc tihat flic intcndecth thcir utter
r0.ln, coliC n fl, i wilJ ; the prep.araniC is very inall whenfocver thlat fle arrive,
scr;L',v :ly ir :

-n In

- j I :.i<( 0h tli.t fl haii any) fch tliou liht iln 1hel h1 .!. 1 lalve

1fit.1n \'.ul 1 '. ':, l'iL i t o thle l(,! iJaml s, lo 1idM oton, lord Ledin toi,, they
'\A!} .1 ; v, l rr

" oIIou 'l, tUl:it iie

lttll il i ayed ',it tor a space, and if it wet e

:lot !iir' 1:, 'r (l(: n( l kt, L' i: of lim t (.'e ot tLho' th l '

tLy Ir er t: iv her face,,
'l'h)i tii'.t '! !:: t t i' c.n to I lcvei t the wic.Lcd d('tes of tihelc iiiircdl licvous I)i-

po'm. ' ! i' ;1in(l'(r:.. lbut fear tilt ti::it will .l)w: s 1' (: so1 1d tlht flij hLjUs 'fe-

clli, tr} l ' (! l am; the ilicy Ciin t) fland with) tl(i 1r'CI,!; 1'ii , anll to Iliua i il a;mity l itll
tli-n ',, 1hbmtir;; theiey hlave also necd to lok tini thliuill:i, lor their h;t'aid ir

"1.,', ;: :d t;lt i)' !';ec thi iS I ') rcteIed 'or f)l sty for tlicmlnlvc', buit to ie)OiC
i I'i.'', '' s ui;un the |c'n's n .Iej ty, ( r lvcC i.',n' tfavo0ti ald(l 1i'po: t. ritilid

;.. L'o;..

abroadl thlcv have none, nor many in whom they may trust at home. There are il
mind shortly to try what they may be assured at of the queen's majesty, andi what
the' n:ny ali-redly perform of that they intend to offer for their parties T''hi th
queen ns Scotland above all other things doubteth ; this she feeketh by all mean'. t,
prevent; and hath caued St. Cmc, in her name, earnefily to write to charge himn
that no fil.il things be attempted before her home coming; for that it is said, th.:
they to Idrclady arrived here out of England for the purpose, what femblant rrm-
evcr the noblemen do make, that they are grieved with their queen's refifld, th:
(rnCtlth far from their hearts They intend to expostulate with me hereup.n
have my anfwcr ready enough or them. If he thrust all Englishmen out ot thi
country, I doubt not but there will be some of her own that will ba e us some kind.
nief'. Of me she shall be quit, so soon as it pleafeth the queen's majeftv myv mi
trels no longer to use my service in this place. By such talk, as I have of lateh;td,
with the l:rd James, and lord of idington, I perceive that they are of mnind th.i
immediately f the next convention, i lhall repair towards you with their dete!ln;
nations, and rcfolutions, in all purposes, wherein your honour's advice is ernufi!y re-
quired, and shortly looked for. \ liatfomever I desire myself, I know rty w.,
ought to be bjcct unto the queen my fIbvercign's pleasure, but to content m).yii,
would God I were lo happy as to serve her majeify in as mean a itate as ever poe:
gentleman did, to be quit of this place; not that I do in my heart wax wcalry (,
her :injei y's (:ervice, but bccaufe my time and years require some place of nmole re-
;'uii, and quietnets than I iind in this country. I doubt also my insufficience wvlien
tlther troubles in th.s country arilc, or ought shall be required of me to the adv,::.::-.
mcnt of her majcfty's firvice, that either my will is not able to comrpais, or ni
credit fufficicnt to work to that cf-ect, as peichance hall be looked ofr at ml hand;.
As your honour hath been a means of my continuance in this room, Co I truit th.i:
I shall find that continual favour at your hands, that so soon a it liall itand with
the quene's najefty's pleasure, I may give this place unto oine far worthier than I am
myiftf, and in the mean fiafon, have my course directed by your good advice how
I may by my contrivance do some such service, as may be agreeable to her inac fit',.
Xwill and pleafute.

'T IrI SE few words, I am bold to rite unto your honour of rmyfelf. For th r ,

vhcre that is wished that the lords will f'outy continue yet for one month, I .!i:.!
your honour that there is yet nothing onitted of their old and accustom ml:.ed ;;

o I:

iloinig, and feeing that they have brought that unto this poi:it, and hu'd uld ,' lp-.L
a.:il, they werel u vAoit!,i of their lives.

I :s o that t

tOhe leave the mnatter. I douIbt mre i-'r n .-

n.ey, tihani I do her fair word ; and yet can I not conceive what ,reait thin :s c :n !.
wril' it witl forty t;oujld crowns, and ticafure of her own here kno ti '

.

n1.> 111 ,or rea;y nein:s to g'et it. The lord of Lidington lcavetl nothl' :.
tin- ut:ivillte: , ti.t lie :hin .ctih may le able to fatisfyc your desire, in ki],i,'.:
of t.r ineliIt ec oft thins here. 'v hatfomievcr conmeth of that, lie I;..: ,,
t'e - i , tii

t lt fl( c(ci1C not; but if flih do coime, to let hce know, at ti:1

:

wh.tI iLe flall fitdi, hi(ch i1, due oahliincc, and willing (crvicv, it llc ctIhr li .L
('!iIl, anld dtie t li\ in p..ce willi her nei'hhours. yt ltch

hl tti r>s a, o [.

,ill irLived, vyoir lion)l it t(oinwl vait uiilderfliidlthl of Mr. Knox hiiliil, :1 l Z
of (,!i , whit is dltcrnuinad, he linii'li to abide tie uttel mdfl, and olthel 1.
tu '.iv n ntl (d have taken ln lif(, alnd thtr, together with wha'tt ,..

foicever it will plesi; you to give hiii h yiu, iy.llr l , t' ,: the que ' i;i ' .. .
not utterly condemn iimn, or at the iuaf i tht i.:, iift

h t he is i, lore ci :.o 'with)

by hi> own queen, that her majcfly will not lil !.v (iie. r

1 ,i: ;'

I doubt not but it :.'i!j

b a great cornfoit unto himn, an11 will content il ny I .lh:rs; his daily pr;a er s for
the nainteinanice (f unlv with En alnd, and th!at (;,d will never fuRr men to be '2o
tungrate, ias by aly prL'ltafi)n to run iheadloi ll t' ei lion oftl em, ill t hat
ia ld th irlir c , anid 'Cre icd th'Lir coulltr?, to i ','. I lave farthl r, at tils titCme,
to trouble outr lhot.u', de(fii'r (id to end such a1 ",, 'etveen thl;ctx.'(o -realm ;
tlht God nilay b Jlo!ic' to thici of this wvoili --t . bor tlC '.ti o; ;' Zit,

No V. V. I. p 2.)

A lettr cf 3ieLcn Elizabcth to Qlccn Ml.ry.

To the riht excellent, aig!
t high anid mighty princcfic, our riht dear and wcii-

belovced filtcr and cousin the quccee of Scotland.

IGIT excellent, light high, and mnighty princefle, our rihlt dear an. rigtt
well beloved filler and coufii, we greet o:l well. The lord of St. Culime

brought to us your lctcis, dated the ''th of this pltcC:ent at \bbcville, xwlrcrbv ve
signify, that although by the anfwrll b'ouIght to you b , olliciClr 1Do)Zeli, e might
have had occalion to ha e uiltred into 1onic doubt o ur anits, yet after cci t.im p!;'-
pofls paflld betwixt you and our anl7bafla ol, you woulcd i.lilie us of your g ol mcanl-
in, to liv c with us !1 ait)y, amnd so yr )r purpo e t:i )e rcquire us to give credit
to the said St. o me. \Vc have thercunto th .ulht ood to anfwcr as iollowttlh
lhe fctame St. Cofnie hatii mlade like dcl:'ation ulnto us o your ua;t, for our' xctu e
ill not ratifling the treats, as yourself i ade to our lnibailiior. a:1nd w have Iiefly
answered to every the tirme points, as he cn i1hflyv ou; ail i if }lie f c. r

l]t o o,

yet leal i the c.ne fctiaf you milht be induced tolt hi. t)hat your rafons has fa-
tisfied us, i:mcral;l a!l'iire )you, tihat to our ricIucs )vior anlicr canrnot lhe re-
puted for a fatisfactioii. For we rejquire no bhnl fit oft o , but i.:t \ou will perforin

'your promiifc 'hlcieiito y) lu are ouiiLd !-. your !; dl and your l;a:l:, frii tie rcfufal

\lhereof we fe. no rca(btn alledgied can serve. Neither civct

e ' e any thiin, lit that

whichl is in your- own power as lqueen of Sc .tnd, tlhat which )youri It inll wr, and
'cec h doth th conif , it.t which your late li u tl. 's Oilr 7o(id br(,thr'.s ;',;)]b.S:i's
a'id .'(ou oncluded, tl.t which your own nobility and popllc we.rce .idc p x 'i'u,to,
t!'at which iieidc j m, iU.L i:,ct'.ii quc11 ithcl betwix. " t.. \ .tlth.t, itho:i it l i hic , 1n
peicLet ami it' can coiltiniit b)tw_ xt t -, a, if it be ill :ii. l'tiy v..id c1,

xx: d 1' 1

:;l. lot

/lLit \c will pereive, allotw aid : cCoI 'Vie. i'xi.h l ei:

cl\eci , c't' ui. i; !'( I'-,c:'t

' ti: btlil)sin er, that )',y u lltall itlltth'.''lh uol'o )o':l c' ;! l '' ', t, fIllIv' Iir l in
the advifc of ' (yo )rlicil in colaii , \. c all eo'tlt t iu c', o,; . nc ij; ol all
ullki ll '., and d :l i.o you i} t t

h e

t fu lly r,' l', '.l i[, .i t!is, l ,i ; 1 l.iri e ,i

to unsite a t [haind o, am ity, ;il! to i '.c il l 1bo:' l.:1

so tI wil t you a ,.;. i,

'i, ri le d-

I', ,a a; s ;dliri'dly in tle kilot ol li, l lil ,
111 , i; w\ Ic. ii t '.l el; ,1 I,.!tll a'.lli

lheod. A\ Ie. in w cI f : efllv ltiini , ,

t;t tlh '.,o !;

': .! .i'

it :lle

( \,ilt,:ry fliolld dol\)w, (wlich (.; d lo itd) thle vcei o ,c,;, (

:,

v . ',,.i .!,d :iot

;i uS , a,19 th l: o y V, ii ti lit ill

t l e li;L

of ll Iie )Ol:

i ,ltll ,:, l, . '., ,, '.h \ i'ln

\'u, 11. 1
, {>.r

1' )

.1 I'..

i 5~
,~ ' :--

our father fought to have knitt a perpetual bond, by ilnviting to come in this re.iln to

oi (k, of which matter we Ikiiow thle i remain ith us, ad we think with you,

funildry witnciefs of our father's cainefTc god imcamning, and of the error wh:recut
livers evil counccllors induced our lfathcr; or finally where it feemcth thalt ilC;rt
iath been made unto you, that we had sett our admiral to the seas with our navy to
cnipc.ich- e your paTalgc, both y otir servants do well undcerfild iow falfc .t I,
knowinl- for a trath tat we hve nlot ay mli(e thait two or three finall baik, i.j,,
t!c 'leas, to apprehentd certaieto cpirte ,

i t etand al:hn o 0i IdI

by the car e.lt coimplliinlt of tle amn;bafl lor (o our eood biothcr the !linll :in , ;o,'
nade of certain 'cotrtimcnl hatintin o ur (f sas s irates, under pretence of ti, ,

L ,t

niarlqu!e, of whicih ml.ttr al!o we carnel:ti' requiire you, at your coiiing to y'Iur re.ilmc,
to hiavCe inlc ood! c .l; deration, ,.,ld the raiher for cf)cct that oulght to )c btwi t>
yolr rea'lln ;a nd! tl2 C :i!'.:iL ; o uiS, of i''rauLe, of Spain, allnd of the houle - i;:-
p"< t!. Ar!d ito, rig'ht excellent, ridl t hih and mlighty pri cfS, we recei ^ :t l!

:

,

to vou with t'i(rt earnfL re iictt , nio, tco le,ct

to lc he our r cinllcdv ; d filletix -i;

(, ilicndli ip, wl'ichl, b f c (j ,d. wc ImlCenii a iii ttcnd t) accomplf li (Givcl uLi

.
our i;nct at lin; i, nghami the i '.L of Augufr, in the third year of our reign.

No. VII. (Vol. I. p. 253.)
A letter of Iantol;iill to the right honourable Sir Willianm Cecil, k]!1i:t,

p rinciipal fecrctary to the jqucn's nmjefty.
O F late, ii il the arrival of monficur la Crocl , I had nothing worth the v' ;ih r

untuo vour lhonour.-B1efore his coning, we had ib little to hiiit uponr, ti, ,,

did nothin hbut pals our time ill fcafs, bnquctting , malking, and unnin ,: tih
ring, aiid ifch like. lc brought with him such a number of lettcrs, and ucelii'unn-
dance of nlews, that for the fpacc ofthiee day, wc gave ourfelvcs to nothin ci ,,
to reading of w\ itings, and hIcri of tales rmany lb trucly reported, that tih nil,:::
he comnparcd to any that ever Lucian did write de vcris narrationilbus. A ni; ;!
li- tidin., lor thle rof aurcd, I fend this unto our honour a an uni oubtd ;r,
w\h;cl is, that the cardinill of ilrrainic, t his bcing with the cnlperor-, oved

\ ;;::-

i:i Aw betwee his vounrtcl fi;n, t'i e duke of Auftruche, and this qucen; . hi;! i
h:ith i'o f'r travailed, that it has alrecady come unto this point, th;:t if ine in: ,',
i', fla,1 uke will out of hlland fen hither his c lbafla dor, :nid ltit)er n d it
*',, coil Llri.ntio ieo with as con. cie;t Ipccd as may be; and to the int";t

u it .

: il mt

.1v i,-
'he be tter k ,vn, I Cloclh i ent luto her withl thli s niefi( e f oin t-i .

ot.lin;], \''iO hl; h prmitld in. tIhe emperor, to have word ag(ain befoe }ie

t tt] iA,i

,l.,'; a;,] l ri is e-c tf( 1a Ci( h1 is r.c:d' (o)r hlis (id'p rttire, and hIls 1 tt r.i w ti 1
bothl t.l ' ail ti, hl. '1'hi quc '; lbc.lng tlie-rc

,d! tiz/.c of' lhis tow,

Cdqci T i, 1)v lw.;i .

nC.,t~1, b.ath il t

1;i t (ir o , to know 1my )ird of IuI iix \''s iild( hl ii, hil \'..i.!

: l, l- o )p!,l V (lLe',! \'itl lin l, ta liei o l l Icotrn w iit lier Ile niil; is, *or

lt :

1,, int. > i' iie!ili o 1i 11n'. ( i il, but (,ly in, 'sli tit l, t aili'.t , lid .,
i(; .l!! y 1ntI tl;: I. ol' di;il ttiil sitinl, 11ce w.ill do, wh.t siC (cai to klctp i,,'t
iczit, : 1iid I, ii citle rcl oii lt

i 1, l I i, [l).'i e ('' inIOt lie tken, fhlc wiil, h l t ,i: tll:.,

t.( 111'11 l.l ,')(i \ vlih ' 11
( .i ti o 1,) ] \'C o1 t l ti lie to idC 'if.; ;ll1l iL 1(.lr, I 'i;

I I'

14

I :]i i J :'
EL P2 ~1 ()c

hnal, of ilc; mIlnd. (t ; lils tter l .

otic f l, in,

i cml1n is made rlvt', I ^-' ''

not wlc'tler lby o,:nc ioitll c'lc'c tih.,t 1ie hl;:J t':; l J . atIL r, or ! inc:' hI a.)',.:l
i11 France, div't 11 lteLI. h:' IC

p lc 'l t, ccn licr ice and lhimn, uA he-ti asI m .ll :I

it inmpolted INt grcl'at tat 1he k olv .'.u o, ax. c0 ,

;'U' ' icat.:i to uibm, ;,

m uch a t.'a \; tI.n I

11 ,
1 ll', i k.t Unto th fL''s. . hcih,'' rii:J t..-

ti i in ;ii.t(i, u .il' ] , I I., i

c liiti \) ; . ,. s I .iiS, t1 '' t t

1iv; cc> . t C(,J. ( . ii.s or l:1 \:i.C' in ; *;. I;. L ., I \ .' .' '' )) t

v itc for vc, C ti. ' il;s .i1l ) v'( i l i r I ' t .; f r tli l, t';:.'. :; " '':'-' i
I:lll1 oL: rt! ,it

hl ii i. 1, fil r jUl.l';Ci 1 1ovl , thl:l .' l;:it' (, 'l ' ,.', ..

t ; i !.-.l

to be \'.'

o ! i ',C .

-i'.r ,-. t;;

\' .i. ( ) thii- nin'tt;: ,

. t3e il : * \\:'.':.i .1 ltc. '

Ililt.) tilis (q C, '1 , i!t (i i' lkt . rllt I"

1 l/ll'C. ' !'1]!S i i

"! t';. c i ;.;' ... 1

kvri tlll.) ),I1 'i:l;i ! Ie;Lc);, ;:, 1 C;ti Lo) ic )',' !.l t..r hkl )'.. . .',, c'i
lo, u'

IL ... ho'

i
nt

'S.., 'c

iwllor;;1 '''.

tlicfc )irt', lie [>li t:ilt .;!I', .:tc i: lI unto tins (ue Clnl i'li; l tlIhe . (,i' Li :{ : ]

t , t.! ci-

n(itc wVas old, and co!it::!:cd onl' tlC n 's oft IFla;cc. 1 I 3ICCi'VC, di'.'!. V,! '', 1 l

ti

N\'cw.'ha'.'cn is lUri cIluf, but I an not so i i l}o'$jN l

, theilr al:lti ' i ,

lL t':..t i i : !.l)

theicv 'ill 1 ' ai llitiic is they d.1l c do

I(

1lt will ot 1.1v is t11 proIl . rb
1. o I ' C.'I-:. N -

i' n:l!us fortius l:ttrt.' l'rill 1 l1n1cc 1 (do .altlre tl1e11, '1.at 11 .'.n i ''.'. 1r tl i

mankc, or l1ow pitif i-Im \T their miriVc lbe, thlcy ar

l1710 tt) r-ccic

ht' i;;':..co-)::-

fr)t, for all their on a!c. \Vr fald dl)' inl doii t \h..t \' i . :'-.

' il s, c -'cp> t we put l'.tt;' oC Jir I)t) our Illn i

fl lcd i1i7.i , til, l e . JuI, >'

:(o '.' l, vO to li r t) iili , tnt '11 111:11' Il Void c'i tilie!;: cO 1i''.

To) MoiTo '. , thi il1 i f tis

1 iltai t, l :

t)e 1q (11 ci p iteil (,f tl.; .v. , t,,.a

1 -'

F.dI . t, i1

). t' Ir ' ha) I (od, \'o I11ha!l tl olon i.,1l' lI.Ir

i1';,l s1 cr,, ti7,1

' ; ,

the Lp . f Nt : nIrcv,'; [upol ' .', iLti.iv m '.,'t I-T f1r.!h l aI'i ro;i n '.
(tiN0 pI) for 0t m1a17.iiw; lt Loller )lll. l''t iii *)'m>
D' ' . I O1t' '!;y Ic..

t C ' ' ':.

i C 11 I1

at lta,1c ls. , ]1 ' : 1i, t.:0c
i l' I (' i tl

::oN. Y I-. (Vol. I. . l 2:1.,

i t*d:"'cc lau:t.oiL'h to )':e rirjit lhontra!'xo S,'i \e iv: C c ,

I.'"
~

t'ri;cii'al I'ccotiryV to

til.: tut s'. ;n,,; .',1 1

/

i,/~ A.n'i tl l". ' } 1,' i l or ii.) ti ' th tili. i'.,it, lRo

l r, t '

, . ,'. fPo. - [ . ,:.,:

j I,i t '.', l!'i ,11 ' d iI : ; :!I ,,1r ho c;

i o I! '

l'.r Ir j,]il .1. , ; i ,' ,

v.ih lilel Ill Y

2; . itt1t' t:'t, t ' N. :' [li[t . -41 ' '

, It il'. I !l oLsV,.. 1. ,:'" It

a d[ t;.' \'. [i' rc't C(a lv d i;oll/ t iL' (!![ lol,': 'l [' ) si t, i' t l; 'lt' (. 1 :: i1,.: ' '~'S1 : .

) h

<,ir tlv ' rch .ai'.a! (l! her ; ;., til o;.i 1 l; iily ! 1:,c.ltr of 1rIchII .

:,

, i',. ;i i; '.'....

oI I li '!,! ', 1':'' ! .

, ' ), t!'l ; tl',u0i0:s n . i l.' r.i.nc,

,l il)l |ii]']

. r I (.d7;'

.'))t ',; i

K '

tl, filI j,,r[ a: 1I d[ '', n, l '!,. i i]l;t t ;1,.i. X,

,i', by ([

i. ililni) tm:1l o lt .h:, ,~ '

2. . tl ,
tt','o l ,,l: ,l.i i i tx (.

i !I'.V \ '. t!. ', ' \.'o i/i ai-) , lr ('c'\\;1ll !,. a (loi"H , \.'llr l o n:l ( Ii *, l

l. l- .}

lii{1 1 '.' li'.l \',In ti "

, ll ' thii' _ t 1nti fili (' IL'{_:I) (\ '!)ld'.. 1 I li inl ' ! (.': I I/ lt tl l
/l

N r 2. ,

you may afluredly know, that nothing hall be left undone of her part, that may
move debate or controyerfie between this queen and our sovereign.

IT was much mused at by the queen herself, h w this new kindness came about,

that at this time ihe received two long letters written all with her own hand, aying,
all the time since her eturn the never received half so many lines, as were in one of
tht letters, which I can myfelftctlify by the queen's own faying, and other good as-
furance, where hitherto I have not been deceived. I can alfb farther allure your ho-
nour, that this queen hath fayd that she knoweth now, that the friendship of the
queen's majesty my sovereign may stand her more in flead, than that of her oot,
mother in France, and as fie is desirous of them both, so will (he not lose the one
for the other. I may also farther afure your honour, that whatfomever the occarion
is, this queen hath some what in her heart that will burfi out in time, which will ma-
nifeft that some unkindness hath paifed between them, that will not be eafv forgotten.
In talk fomctimcs with myself, ihe faith that the queen mother might have uied thil
matter otherwice than she hath done, and doth much doubt what shall be the fu'ccci
of her great lefire to govern alone, in all things to have her will. Seeing then that
presently they stand in such terms one with the other, I tho't it better to confirm her
in that mind, (this queen I mean) than to speak any word that might cause her to
conceive better of the other. And yet I am allurcd fie shall receive as friendly let-
ters, and as many good words from this queen, as the other did write unto her.
Whether the queen mother will speak any thing unto the L. of Lydington of that
puirpofe, he did write unto this queen of, I know not, but if she do, I think it hard
if your honour can get no favour thereof, at his return, or I perchance by tome means
here. It mav, perchance, be written only by that queen, to try what answer this
queen will give, or underfand what mind she beareth unto the queen's majcfty our
yovereign. The queen knoweth now that the earl Bothewell is sent for to London.
She caused a gentlemin of hers to enquire the cause; I answered, that I knew none
other, but that his takers were in controversy who took him, and that it should be
judged there. I know that the thinketh much that he is not sent into Scotland. It is
yet greatly doubted that if he were here, he would be reserved for an evil inftrumelt.
If thelord of Lidington have not been plain with your honour herein, he is in the
wrong to those who are his friends here, but most of all to himself. 'Ihere comes a
vulture in this realm, if ever that man come again into credit.

No. IX. (Vol. I. p. 269.)
The oration made by William Maitland of Lethington, younger fccrctary

for the time, in the parliament holden by our sovereign the king's mo-
ther, queen of this realm for the time, the time of the reflitution (I
Umquilc Matthcw Earl of Lcnox.
PMB Y lords and others here convened. Albeit, be that it has plcafed her maijclle

nmoft graciously to utter unto you, by her own mouth, ye may have flfficiently

conceived the caule of this your picfent aflnibly; yet having her majcfty's coi--
mandment to supply my Lord Chancellor's place, being prcfen)tly as ye fee dccile!,
1 am willed to cxprcfs the fame funcwhiat more at large.

N-TOU '

NOTOUR it is, how, in her Hghnefs's minority, a proceis of orfaltour was

decreed againit my Lord of Iennox, tor certain oftfnces alledged committed by him,
specified in the omne and cenfement of Parliament givcn 'thereupon; by reason
whereof he has this long time been exiled, and abent Iorth of his native country,
how grievous the fame has been unto him, it has well appeared by d vers his suites,
sundry ways brought unto her Majefyv's knowledge, not only containing most humble
and due fubmiflion, but always bearing kwitinei of his g(,od devction to her Vlajefty
his natural princcfs, and carneft aection lie had to her iTbhn fs most humble
service, if it hould pleaie her Majeily of her clemency t make hin able to enjoy
the benefit of a fulbjcct; many rfpects might have inoved her iiighnefs fivourably
to incline to his requcuf, as the antiency of his houle, and the irname he bears,
the honour he has to appertain to her ajefly by affinity, by icalon of ny Lady
Margaret her highnes;'s auln, and di'c .rs other his good conlidec(at)ions as ait( the
cfitcctuous re;ueit of heci ood fit!cr the (Quien's ajicily of En l.:ld, whose ca-rri it
c nlmendation was ot ole o nt, bies t

of

a moi bld tt f her own natural, her ma-

jefty has a ceitaln inclination to pity the decay of noble houlfs, iand s x\ce heard, by
her own report, has a reat deal more pleasure to be tile inflruncint of thie uijlloci,
maintenacec, anil advancement of the antient blood, than to hlave matter minitred
of the decay or overthrow of any goc:d race. Upon th s occion, her imanjc.!) the
more tenderly looked upon his rcqucft, and her good iiter the (Quen (of Einglnd's
favourable letter, writtent for recomminidatiion of his caul(, in conlidertion wherecof
not only has file granted unto himn her letter of rftitutiuin, hy way. of grace, but
a!so lifcenfed himi to pursue, by way of redution, the reniicli provided h b the. law
fr such as think themselves grieved by any judgmeIn, unorderly led, arid to have the
process revered ; for examination whereof, it has pleased her majcfty presently to
axlemble you the three etates of this her realme, by whose adi ice, deliberation, and
decision at her majefly's mind, to proceed forward upon his complaint<, as the
merits of the caure, laws of the realm, and practice oblcrvcd in filch cafcs, will
hear out. 'I he lum of all your proceedings at this time, being by that we ave
heard, thus as it were pointed out, I n grht here end, if the matter we have in hand
cave me nt occasion to fLy a few moure \ords, not far different from the fime sub-
ie , wherein I w(oid extelld the circu: Itances more larel /. f I cai'(d nict to
(t}cind her iigh'riels, wh(cfe prelence and iimodeft niitlire abhl'.s long tpeoakiln alnd
adulation, anld so xwiii compel me to fi;eak fue'h tiil:g, as mnay Iceni to tcl!d to av
good and pelf(fe point; and lea I it should be comted to me, as that I .cre oihli-
xious, if i should omit to put rou in remembrance, in what palt \ve nma acceplt thi,
anrd the like demonitrations of her rgentl! nature; whose gracious belthlviotllr t',.. idi,
all her iubilcis, in gecinel, mayv fertec for a pood proof of that felicity, \ve liay
look for udler her halpp)' goverinmelnt, or long ils it flt ll pafie G od to grit her
untto us; for a good harnmony to be Ihad ill the conlimmon wcill, tile ofFics lite.ri
thi prince and the fubjct .I must be rcciproclquc; as by her nmajelly's piudeilce wc

ienjoy this present peace wit all sot. i grT n.;tions, and quietness aong youtice lic, iti
fich fort, that I think jilly it may be aflinhimdl Scotlaani, in no m.in's ar' that )!e'-
lently lives, was in greateC l tctrlnqtllit ; lo is it the duty of all u her loving Il)l(tfs
to acknowlege the lle ian a alnofil ii 1 benefit, procceding fromi tile g(od gvern-
mient of her majiefy, declaiiing oui lves lkl thhl e fai ne, anid r.( li(lderig t) her
llnjefy such tdue obedcierce, as a jul [riiice imay look or at te l:i.i; of faithful
and obedicnt lulihjcLs. I mcan no torccd nor Inwillinlig obcdiLCnt, wichl I kliV

he

Ici nature does detefl, hut fuhl as proceeds from the contemplation of her rnmolefl
kiid of regiment', will tfr 1 vce and duty fake produce the fruits thereof. A i,
proof have ve all in general had of' her majcitly's benignity thel! thre-e year, tr:.it
flie has lived in the go'. ernment over you, anJ many of you have largely taitli iof
her large liberality and frank dealing ; on the other part hir highnlefl has haa

liarh -

llppcaralce of your dutiful obedience, so it beco!mes you to continue, as we lil, c
lbeuni, in conilideration of the mani notable example of her clemency aboveC (Ihe,,
her good qualitics, and to ablur at dectelf all falle bhruitcs and rumours, Wli,.l ',l
the mos{t pefilent evils t'hat can be in anyv common well, and t the lIweis :il

: ;\ i1-

t.,)s lercrf. 'I'hen may we be we!l alllircd to hIave of her an inllo!t glacioi p.i!c .!i,
.in . fn r.l j! faithful and lov inr fu') jcs ;; and 15) both te hiad and the in':: ,,
being er ncour;lgel to maintain the harmony and accord of the )politick hboi>, i <.-

'

I made mention before, as the glorv thereof fliall partly appertain to her

l ic-n1,',

llhall no finial praise and unip)caka'lc Cconnlmdtv reduuiti ithectlhrouihl to ,'',v .!1
ullivcri-aliy ier fujecis,

ND. X. (Vol .

I. p. 2 .
1'le peris and troLubles that may presently ensue, and in time t c.)-;m

toliowv, to te (cen's majeliy of England, and tate o this i-ci'.l,
tupon the mill:iiage of the Qicen of Scots to the Lord D)arley.
m(~ IRS 1', thle minds of such as be aficed to the Qicen of Scotts, ci .hr for hc:'-

ht a fel, o ' r thi opini )n of her pretence to this crown, or for the deliei to hi; '

h rgec of the i' mn of ieli in in thlis rcallm, or for the difcoitntnttion they Ihe al
the (uccn'b imjclty, or her lucceflion, or of the fcccfeion of any other be'side tl:-

'neiin of icit, flhal be, by this marriage, crcited, comforted, and induccre to
i \ei!C and la),i r how to bring their defircs to palls; and to make lbome etI!I':l'

o.rh:t p)c;i.on tholc arc, to the intent the iantity of the dangcr ma be ci h-' ,
the i.nme Imay be comipailed in tliol'e orts ither within tle realn or wi hoot.

TE filtl :ire such as are fpccially) devoted to the (ieen of Scott<, or to t7- I.:'

I): le\', by bo 'd of bllood and alliance ; as irtf 1 th h.louf' of L':rain and .:,:'.'
l)r hlir pair, and tlie i::-i of Ienox and his wi 'ec all fuchl in Scotland as lbe ' ! '
blood, and have icccivd P diolelaflures by the D)uke of Cha!l;riault alnl tl.c i.' '-
tons. 'I'he feconl aie all mianner of perlbns, botls in this rca in :i d (il :'rcotntli ,
that :ire devod to te autlorirt of Rome, and mislike of the reli ion nxw vc' i'.e'n ;

l:nI iin thlc.C t\o Ilits are tle -lbfliiicc of theni conmpre:Ic-d d lthat tfl:l1 t..e: c ' -
olt n thils m:r i:lce.

lNi..\'r tile rc i:'c to be confidered wihat perils and troulei t t hefe I nil orl( inI
i ,11 intendt to ilhis railm.

I ' a' , the ge, cral f'-,pc and mi rlk of all their d rl es i', and always fl; il IT, t

oli r tie ( tic'in ol Scotts to have the royal crown (1 tilis i !, l ; and tli'Ll. *,'
li(ni!i tile deviLs Lmay vary iamol(ill theisfelves for te conn:'!.i: )oh r oi ,!'cc:.'
in) to tlie cIil ts of the timel , aind according to tle i mpedimient wht l ill, v : '
imdl 1) nll;is ot t)t qItueen's ll aj l i's aloti i nld gover' nients, \'t ali till inti -
''e,, mIil;., (d vi!c s, aldl 'ral tice-, fliall wholly andl only tend to im ike t i'. ,li':
tl )eots .lurcln of this I cli, ind to dleprive )out fvcicei llady teiI ;

:l iilln t
:oc (li. Ui', tl t C arc two m).imers to be contidercdl, whicrco tihe on i lit wo lc ti '

i'..1

the other: the o0ne i iitlded by them, that either fioim n iaci'iuS b1ildel-s iu
religion, or for natural affcdtion to the queen of Scotts, or the lord l)aricL, do Cpr-
fuade theimf lves that the falid queen of Sctts hath prfertliy m1oe right to the crown
than our fovecrign lady the queen, of which lort he ai thir- kindred on both fiJe-,
and all such as are devoted to popery, either in En'Tanmd, Scothlnd, Ireland, or elic-
where; the other is meant by tei. . which, w\-. le!s li.il;e, :re pcriuaded that
the queen of 'Cots h'th ,only iilit ti) b the ncxt hcir to u: ccce t!he quen' mIajefty
and her iliue, of which lo;t few are without the reldi, but here w ithin, and vet of
them, not so many as ae of the contrary, ad fromn thle two o')t s Ilia' the peril
deviles and piratiese proceed. From the firfi, which imasil the queenl of Scots to
have perpetually right, arc to be looked for ti ele perils. Ii:xf, is it to be dcutecd
the devil will ifct ftme of them to imagne the hult of the li ief our Lder lo.e-
reigni lady, by such means as the devil t.h. l su e t o thm, aid ho" [! it i,- t, '.
alhliredlv l.optd, that a l mihty God will, as he hath hithi ;o, raci',uv lrr(t.:t! ;[
pref '.- liher frLom uch d:1ers. Seondl , there txill b. itt i pt , ;v t. rfka:,; ,
by bIru!es, by rumours, and such like, to alienate the miidi of iod iul j.t.s fromi
the qucen's maijcft, and to councilate them to the qucen f Sc ot:;, ;:lJ ,o this be-
half the frs t.cr-s :n. the north w\ill be much solicited and l bouild. 'hir ld th.r
will be att.ii; td causes of ome tumults and rebellions, fcci y in thle r thil to-
wards Scotland, 1) as therecupon may follow ore open cnterprize /cet ly \xiol nc.
'ourthly, thrie will be, hb tih !aid queens c(ouncil and sricnd, a new lc ..!uc mnaJc
with France, or Spain, that fli.ll e' oienlfive to this realm, and a urtlherace ti
their title. Aid it is ali'o vrx likecl, that they will let a oot as mane praLiccs
as they) can, both cupon the fr(.:tiers and in Ireland, to occaio;l tihe quccln's m;icfty
to encreafe and continue her c arge tihcrb}', to retain her from b mii hty or po-
tent, and for the attelipting of all thcfe things, many devile's will be iiagmted, frion
time to tine, and no negligence will therein appear.

FROM the second fort, which mean no other favour to the queen of Scotts, hut

that fte fiould fucccd in title to the queen's iiajefty, is not much to be feared, but
that they w;ill content thcmfieles to fee not only the queeln's majelRy not to marry,
and o to imnlacac it, but to hope that the queen of Scutts fhia!l have i ';ie, whlch
thy wiil thill to lhe n mrc plcalible to all mcn, becauSe t i'b the crowns of
En)liandi alind Scotland)J iall be united i oe, and thertcb the oc:;afioi: f war flhall
Ce..C; \ itl i which )pelfu,li(oi rman)' pconp'e may be fiuCed, a. a id to i line
IlicmriLelcs to the part of tlie queen of Scoits.

'tl : re!lmedics againlf tlief picrils.

A I)Dulicac.
A fnlmmary of the confLultation and advice given by the lo-rds and others ;,I'-I:, ,i

of the priv y council. Collcedc olut of thle lunidy andl fiveral IP'ccliis i. ., ,.
of the laidl counlic lors.

]Jord K eelper, c-. Conmptrolcr,
L1ord 'Ircaluter, \T. \'ice Cl.a n ilh lin,
l)clrh), \Ir, Secreta ry,
a lls of Bldt,) d, Cac,

1 .or ChlimbihJelii

L~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ld ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ 4)1.1 "

Quefiions propounded were these two.

RS' r what perils might ensue to the queen's majefl,, Cr thi r;i!n of the
nmari:;le betwixt te queen of Scotts, and the l.ord Darnly.
2. 'What werI meet to be done, to avoid or remedy the ame.

To the First.

Thle peciL bein: sundry, and very many, were reduced by some couiine'lors i; to
onlv oCne.

i. Fir-t, that by this marriage, the queen of Scottq, (being not marriecd a rlt
liliber il this realm, not of the worit fubjcLcls, might be alienated in their ;c.:i,
toim their natural duties to her m:ijefty, to depend upon the fuccef of this n:.r-i
of Scot!and, as a mean to eitabliii the fuccetlion of both the crwns i tle !c ;lt
the fae nmarriaec, and si f.avour all devics and praatices, that should tend to

( .
advancement of the queen of Scotts.

2. Secondly, that confidring the chief foundation of them, which furtherc2 t j

marriage of the lord Darnley, was laid upon the trust of such as were papist, as t.
only me:ns left to retore the religion of Rome, it was plainly to be tcen, th:,t !(:i
in this realm and Scotnud, the papifs would most favour, maintain, and forty-
this marriaTge of the lord Darnley, and would for furtherance of faction ill rcligil',
devise all means and practices that could be within this realm, to disturb the e!l i
of the queen's majcit', and the peace of the realm, and consequently to atci.ec\
their purposes by force, rather than fail. By some other, these perils have ineed
many brancles were reduced, though fornewvhat otherwilc, into two forts, ianl tl;(fL
were in nature such as tihey could not be easily fevered the one from the other, b:t
wLire knit and lincked together, naturclly for maintaining the one with the oth.r
The first of these fort of perils was, that by this marriage with the lord Darnlc}-,

ere was a plaill intention to further the pretended title of the queen of Scotts, r:ot

only to succeed the queen's majfitsy, as in her best amity file had profeflei, but ti t
to occupy the queen's eflate, as when the was in power, he did manifctly declare.

T'IE second was, that hereby the Romish religion should be ere'ted, and incire.td

daily in this realm, and thefl two were thus knit together, that the furtheiaiicl ai
maintenance of the title staid, in fulthering of the religion of Rome withiiu tlis
realm; and in like manlner the furtherance of the faime religion flood by the ti!',
for otherwifl the title had: no foundation.

Proves of tih fir-!l ) And to prove thit the intention to advance the title to lilii: )

the queen's majesty, mu t ineeds el!uc, was colfidered that always the intentioln ia.
will of any perfto is must mai ifelt, when their power is grcattit, and contr.r wxini
power is fniall, then the intention and will of every pcrlon is covered rand Icli ftin.
So as when the queen of Scotts power was greatell, by her nmarriage with tre ti
phinl of l:rnce, hbeii afterwards Firench k;ntg, it in;lnicfily appeared of wh;t mirl
Ihe, ;anid ll lher fiicnli were, uflrl theln ianiliefly all the mealls tlat coulid ie de-
visld to impuaich and dufrollhfs the queen's nmajcftv, ffi hby writing and pubiiliin
hlcrltf in all countlltcsqueen of Kn lanid ; by grantirg cliaiteis, x.tents, ;nil coi-
niilnii)s with tlhat 11ile, d wh both (te Irench ci and .Sic(,:.,
witi ha;ittlrs leollnil still iiundelaced ; and to plo(icute it with efl'c't, it is kno'.rn
wiLat lurci).xlio ( oitf wl-ar weie ade, and lent into Scotland ; and whvt other lii.t,
vwere alliembicd ill ftorein countries; )yeC, iin wlitt llimaliner a lI;aIIful Ipnce '
W

llt .'r

made by the French with king Phillip, to employ all the forces of France, to purfuc
all the matters by force, which by God's providence, and the queen's majelty con-
trary power, were repelled; and afterwards, by her husband's death, her fortune and
power being changed, the intention began to hide itself, and atho' by the Scottish
queen's commissarys an accord was made at Edenbrough, to reform all those titles,
and claims, and pretences, yet to this day, by delays and cavillations, the ratifica-
tion of that treaty hath been deferred. And lo now, as soon as she flall feel her
power, he will set the fame again abroad, and by conlidering of such errors as were
committed in the firfl, her friends and allies will amend the fame, and proceed sub-
flantially to her purpose. By ome it was thought plainly, that the peril was greater
of this marriage with the lord Darnley, being a ubject of this realm, than with the
mightiest prince abroad; for by this, he being of this realm, and having for the
cause of religion, and other refpceas, made a paity here, fhoull encreafe by fo'cc
with diminution of the power of the realm, in that whatuivecr power he could m1ke
by the faction of the papist, and other dilcontentcd persons here, should be as it
were deducted out of the power of this realm; and by the marriage of a lrianger,
the could not be aflured of any part here; so as by this marriage he should have a
portion of her own power to serve her turn, and a small portion of adversaries at
home in our own bowels, always ifen more dangerous than treble the like abroad;
whereof the examples are in our own flories many, that foreign powers never prevailed
in this realm, but with the help of some at home. It was also remembered, that
f;eing now before this attempt of marriage, it is found, and manifeflly seen, that ia
every corner of the realm, the faction that most favoureth the Scottish title, is grown
flout and bold, yea seen manifestly in this court, both in hall and chamber, it could
not be (but except good heed were speedily given to it) by this marriage, and by
the practice of the fautors thereof, the fame faflion would flortly encreafe, and
grow Co great and dangerous, as the redress thereof would be almost desperate. And
to this purpose it was remembered, how of late in perusing of the substance of the
justices of the peace, in all the countrys of the realm, scantly a third was found fully
aflured to be trusted in the matter of religion, upon which only firing the queen of
Scotts title doth hang, and ome doubt might be, that the friends of the earl of Le-
nox, and his, had more knowledge hereof than was thought, and thereby made avant
now in Scotland, that their party was o great in England as the queen's majefly durst
not attempt to contrary his marriage. And in this fort, was the fum of the perils
declared, being notwithstanding more largely and plainly fct out, and made so ap-
parent by many sure arguments, as no one of the council could deny them to be but
many, and very dangerous.

Second Quellion.

T[ir quieion of this confuttation was what were meet to be done to avoid thele

pcrills, or elfc to divert the force thereof from hurting the realm ; wherein thuei
were a great number of particular dcviles propounded, and yet the more part of them
was reduced by some into three heads.

i. TIIE firit thought ncccflhry by all persons, as the only thing of the moil moment

and officiary, to remedy all thcle pcrrils, and many others, and lich as without it,
no other remedy could be found fitfliciiit, andl that was to obtain that the queln's
majclty would marry, and make therein o long delay.

yOL. 11. 0 o 2. TIIE

2. THE second was to advance, establish, and fortify indeed the profeflion of re-

ligion, both in Scotland, and in England, and to deminifh, weaken, and feeble the
contrary.

3. THE third was, to proceed in sundry things, either to disappoint and break this.

intended marriage, or, at the least, thereby to procure the fame not to be so hurtful
to this realm, as otherwilf it will be.

'HE firlt of these three hath no particular rights in it, but an earnest and unfeigned

defirc and suite, with all humblcneis, by prayer to Almighty God, and advice alnd
council to the queen's majetfy, that she would differ no more time from marriage,
whereby the good fubjecs of the realm might flay their hearts, to depend upon her ma-
jefty, and the iflue o her b,dy, without which no surety can be devised to ascertain
any pcrlon ol continuance of their families or potteries, to enjoy that which other-
wile flould come to them.

SECOND, concerning the matters of religion, wherein both truth and policy were
joined together, had these particulars.

FIRST, whereas of late the adversaries of religion in the realm have taken occa-

sion to comfort and increase their faAion, both in England, Scotland, and abroad,
with a rumour and expectation that the religion hall be hortly changed in this realm,
by means that the bishops, by the queen's majesty's commandment, have of late dealt
flreightly with some persons of good religion, because they had forborn to wear cer-
tain apparel, and such like things, being more of form and accidents, than of a! ,
fubfRance, for that it is well known that her majesty had no meaning to comfort the
adversarics, but only to maintain an uniformity as well in things external, as in the
fubflance; nor yet hath any intention to make any change of the religion, as it is
established by laws. It was thought by all men very neceftary, for the fupprefiing (.!
the pride and arrogancy of the adversaries, indirectly hereby to notify, by her special
letters to the two arch-bishops, that her former commandement was only to retail
an uniformity, and not to give any occasion to any person to misjudge of her majeflv,
in the change of any part of religion, but tat he did determine firmly to
maintain the form of her religion, as it was efiablifhed, and to punifl flich a,
did therein violate her laws. And in these points, tome allo wished that it might
please her archbishops, that if they should fee that the adversaries continued in taking
occ:fion to fortify their faclion, that in that cafe they should use a moderation therein,
until the next parliament, at which time, ome good, uniform, and decent rdc:
might be devised, and eflablifled, for such ceremonies, so as both uniformity an
gravity might be retained am, ngf the clergy.

THlE fccond means was, that the quondam bilhops, and others, which had refuscd

to acknowledge the queen's majefiy's power over them, accordilg to the law, ald
were of late disperscd in the plague time to sundry places abroad, where it is known
they ccafe not to advance their faction, might be returned to the tower or fomc otl r
prilon, where they might not have such liberty to seduce and invegle the que(n'
mn;jefty's (ulIjeC's, as they daily do.

Ilir. third means was, that where the biffops do complain that they dare not x-

ecut the ccclcfi.ilfical laws, to the urtherence of rcligi, ni, for ser of he prcmiiniiiic
whicre\vitl the judges and lawyers of the realm, being not bcft afi'clcl in rclih,[i,
ldo tratn them, and in many cafes lett not to pinch and deface thiem, hal.t uiclri
fuih cafcs opened, fomc covenant authority might be given them, from the quci l,
inmje(fy, to continue during her plcafiirc.

rt 1 '

.
2

THE fourth was, that there were daily lewd, injudicious and unlawful books in

English brought from beyond seas, and are boldly received, read, and kept, and especially
in the North, educing of great numbers of good subjects, the like boldness whereof
was never suffered in any other prinLefs's time, that some fireight order might be given
to avoid the fame, and that it might be confidcred by the judges, hat manner of
crime the fame is, to maintain such books, made directly against her majefly's autho-
rity, and maintaining a foreign power, contrary to the laws of the realm.

THE fifth was, that where a great number of monks, fryers, and such lewd per-

sons arefled out of Scotland, and do serve in England, especially in the North, as
curates of churches, and all such of them as are not found honest and conformable,
may be banihed out of the realm, for that it appearcth they do sow sedition in the
realm, in many places, and now will increase their doings.

THE sixth, where sundry havinng ecelefiaflical livings are on the other fide the sea,

and from thence maintain sedition in the realm ; that liviltng may be better beLtowed,
to the commodity of the realm, upon good lbje6ts.

THE seventh is, that the judges of the realm, ha ing no small authority in this

realm in governance of all property of the realm, might be sworn to the queen's
majesty, according to the laws of the realm, and so thereby they hould for coniiiencc
ike maintain the queen's majefry's authority.

THE particulars of the third intention, to break and avoid this marriage, or to di-
vert the perrils.

FIRST to break this marriage, confidering nothing can likely do it, but force, or

fear of force, it is thought by ome that these means following might occasion the
breach of the marriage.

r. THAT the earl of Bedford repair to his charge.
2. TIHAT the works at Berwick be more advanced.
3. THAT the garrison be there increased.
4. THAT all the wardens put their frontiers in order with specd, to be ready at an
hour's warning.

5. THAT tome noble person, as the duke of Norfolk, or the earl of Salop, or
such other, be sent into Yorkshire, to be lieutenant general n the North.

6. THAT preparations be made of a power, to be in readiness to serve, either
at Berwick, or to invade Scotland.

8. THAT presently the lady Lenox be committed to some place, where file may
be kept from giving, or receiving of intelligence.

9. TIi AT the earl of Lenox and his son may be font for, and required to be sent home

by the queen of Scotts, according to the treaty ; and if they fliall not come, then to
denounce to the queen of Scotts the breach of the treaty, and thereupon to enter with
hofility ; by which proceeding, hope is conceived (so the fame be done in deeds and
not in hews) that the marriage will be avoided, or at the Icaft that it may be quali-
sied from many perils; and whatsoever is to be done herein, is to be executed with
speed, whilst she has a party in Scotland that favourcth not the marrijge, and bc-
loie any league made by the queen of Scots with France or Spain.

SoNE other allows well of all these proceeding, iaving of proceeding to hoflility,
but all do agree in the reft, and also to these particularities following.

10. ]FAT the earl's lands upon his tiff.ia, (or his ion's refusing, fluoid ble {Lized
and bcftowcd in gift or custody, a Il;atll iIcacle licr m.ijefly, upun good iuti'jcds.

() o 2. !i

23

I. THAT all manifest favourers of the earl, in the North, or elsewhere, be in-
quired for, and that they be, by sundry means well looked to.

12. THAT enquiry be made in the North, who have the stewardship of the queen'3

majesty's lands there, and that no pcrfon, deserving miftruf, be suffered to have
governance or rule of any of her fubjeas or lands in the Norih, but only to retain
their fees, and more trufly person have rule of the fame peoples lands.

1 3 THAT all frequent paffiges into this realm, to and from Scotland, be restrain-

ed to all Scottish men, saving such as have safe conduEt, or be especially recommended
from Mr. Randolph, as favourers of the realm.

14-. THAT some intelligence be used with such in Scotland, as favour not the mar-
riage, and they comforted from time to time.

j 5. THAT the queen's majesty's houfhold, chamber, and pensioners be better fee:l

unto, to avoid broad and uncomely speech uscd by sundry against the state of the
realm.

16. THAT the younger son of the earl of Lenox, Mr. Charles, be removed to
some place, where he may be forth coming.

17. THA1' confidering the faaion and title of the queen of Scotts hath now, of

long time, received great favour, and continued, by the queen's majesty's favour here-
in to the queen of Scotts and her ministers, and the lady Catharine, whom the Lid
queen of Scotts accompted as a competor unto her in pretence of title, it may please
the queen's majesty, by tome exterior ant, to shew some remission of her displeasure
to the lady, and to the earl of Hertford, that the queen of Scotts thereby may find
some change, and her friends put in doubt of further proceeding therein.

18. THAT whosoever shall be lieutenant in the North, Sir Ralph Sadler may ac-
company him.

19. THAT with speed the realm of Ireland may be committed to a new go-
vernor.

20. FINALLY, that these advises being confidered by her majefly, it may please

her to choose which of them she liketh, and to put them in execution in deeds, and
not to pass them over in consultations and speeches.

FoR it is to be aflured, that her adversaries will use all means to put their intention

in execution. Some by practice, some by force, when time shall serve, and no time
can serve so well the queen's majesty to interrupt the perils, as now at the first, before
the queen of S:otts purposes be fully fettled.

No. XI. (Vol. 1. p. 28S.)
Randolph to the earle of Lcicefter, from Edinburgh the 3 if of July,

1565.

Cott lill. Cal. AY it please your lordship, I have received your lordflip's letter by my fir.
P- . fol. zi 8.V vant, sufficient testimony of your lordlhip's favour towards me, whereof I
Au Original. think my self always so aflured, that what other mihap soever befall me, I hnve

enough to comfort my self with ; though I have not at this time received neither a:-
cording to the need I tand, nor the neccffity of the fervife that I am imployed inl,
will rather pas it, as I may with patience, than trouble your lordship to be firtlicr
flter for me, when there is so little hope that any good will be done for im. I doub

i
H '(

not but yoar lordship hath heard by such information, as I have given from hence,
what the present fate of this contry is, how th's queen is now become a married wife,
and her husband, the self fame day of his marriage, made a king. In their desires,
hitherto, they have found so much to their contentment, that if the reft succeed and
prosper accordingly, they may think thcnifelves much happier, than there is appear-
ance that they fiall be, so many difcotntcd minds, so much mifiking of the sub-
jeb t) have these matters thus ordered, and in this fort to be broJght to pars; I never
heard, of any marriage, so little hpe, so little comfort as men do talk, was never
seen, at any time, when men should most have fhcwcd themselves to rejoice, if that
consideration of her own honor and well of her contry had beent hal as appe'tained in
so weighty a cafe. This is now their fear, ti.e oveithrow of religion, the breach of
amitie with the q een's majetty, and the deftrution of as many of the nobility as he
lath miniliking of, or that he liketh to pjtch a qurrle unto. To fee all there inconve-
niencys approaching, there arc a good number that may soo'ner lament with them-
felvc1, and complain to their ncichbours, than be able to find remedie to help them,
foine atempt with all the force they have, but are too weak to do any good, what is
required otherway-, or what means there is made your lordship knowetli; what will
be anfwcared, or what will be done, therein, we are in great douibt, and though )our
intent be never so good unto us, yet d.( we so much fear your delay, that our
ruin hall p event your support when council is once taken. Nothing so needfull, as
fpecdy execution. Upon the queen's majcfty, we wholly depend, in her majesty's
hands it iLmndeth to save our lives, or to susser us to perish; greater honor her majcf-
ty cannot have, than in that which lyeth in her majesty's power to do for us; the ums
are not great, the numbers of men are not many that we desire; many will dayly be
found, though this will be some charge; men grow dayly, though, at this tiinm, I
think her m.ijefy shall loose but few; her friends here being once taken away, where
will her majelty find the like; I speak least of th.t which I think is moftearneftly in-
tended by this queen, and her husband, when by him it was lately said, that he cared
more for the papiffs in England, than he did for the protestants in Scotland ; if there-
fore, his hops be so great in the papists of England, what may your lordfilip believe
th.t he thinketh of the protestants there; for his birth, for his nurritour, for the honor
he hath to be of kine to the queen my mistress, if in preferri)g those that are the
queen's majeflies worst subjects to those that are her best, he i'eclareth what mind he
beareth to the queen's majcfiies flf, any man may fay it is flnderly rewarded, and his
duty evil forgotten; lie would now seem to be indifferent to both the religions, he to
use her mars, and he to come sometimes to the preaching ; they were married with
all the flemnitics of the popish time, favng that he heard not the mats; his fpcch
and talk argueth his mind, and yet would he fain seem to the world that he were (f
some religion; his words to al men, agaiflt whom lie conceivcth any difplcafure
how unjuil soever it e, so proud and fitfull, that rather lie feemeth a monarch of
the world, than he that, not long since, we have seen and known the lord Darnley;
he lookcth now for reverence of many, that have little will to give it himn; and (oime
there are that do give it, that think him little worth of it; All honor that may lie
altrihuted unto any man by a wife, he hath it wholly and lully; all pralilfs that imiy
be fpokcn of hin, he lacketh not from herfulf ;ll dignit cs that (le can ind.ie him
with, which are already given and granted ; no nman pl.afcth her that conric'tctli not
h! n; and what may I fay more, flic hath given over to him her hiole will, to lie
u iled and guided as hilclf bet likcth; flic can as much prevail with him, in .ny

thuin

thing that is against his will, as your lordhip may with me to perfwade that I fhoul
hang my self; this 1lft dignity out of hand to have been proclaimed king, she would
have it deferred untill it were agreed by parliament, or had been himself cf 21 years
of age, that though done in his name might have the better authority. He would
in no cafe, have it deferred one day, and either then or never; whereupon this doubt
is risen amongeft our men of law whether he being clade with a husband, and her
husband not twenty one years, any thing without parliament can be of strength, that
is d ne between them ; upon Saturday at afternoon, these matters were long in de-
bateing. And before they were well resolved upon, at nine hours at night, by three
heralds, at found of the trumpet, he was proclaimed king. This was the night be-
fore the marriage; this day, Monday at twelve of the clock, the lords, all that were
in the toun, were present at the proclaiming of him again, where no man fad so much
as amen, saving his father that cried out aloud God iave his queen, The manner ot
the marriage was in this fort, upon Sunday in the morning between five a i fix, fl:
was conveyed by divers of her nobles to the chapell; she had upon her back the rrcea
mourning gown of black, with the great wide mourning hood, not unlike unto that,
wh:ch she wore the doulfull day of the buriall of her husband ; he was led into the
chapel], by the earle of Lenox and Athol, and there was he left untill her hufbanij
came, who also wjs conveyed by the fame lords, the minifier pricfis, two, do the'-
receive them, the bands are asked the third time, and an infirument taken by a Noto:u
that no man said against them, or alledged any cause why the marriage might rot p;,.
ceed. The words were spoken, the rings which were three, the middle a rich di a
mond, were put upon her finger; They kneel together, and many prayers said ovec
them, she tarrieth out the mass, and he taketh a kits, and leaveth her there, and wear
to her chamber, whither within a space he followeth; and being required, accordii
to the solemnity, to cast off her cares and leave aside those forrowfull garments, ad
give herself to a more pleasant life, after some pretty refufall, more I believe for nmanci
lhke than grief of heart, (he fuffereth them that flood by, every man that couii
approach to take out a pin, and so being commited to her ladies, changed her gar-
ments, but went not to bed, to fignifie to the world, that it was not lust that movd
them to marry, but only the necessity of her country, not, if God will long to leave :

cdeftitute of an heir. Suspicious men, or such as are given of all things to make tlhe
worst, would that it should be believed, that they knew each other before that the'.
earme there, I would not your lordship should so believe it, the likelihoods are )
great to the contrary, that if it were possible to fee such an at done, I would n t be-
lieve it. After the marriage followcth commonly great cheer and dancing: to th: r
dinner they were conveyed by the whole nobility; the trumpets found; a largi;,
cried ; mony thro wn about the house in great aboundance, to such as were happy to
get any part; they dine both at one table, she upon the upper hand, there serve her
these earls Athole Shower Morton, Carvar Craufoord cupbearer; these fcrve him m
like office, earls glington, Caill<, and Glencairn ; after dinner they danced
awhile, and then retired thcnmfelves till the hour of supper; and as hey diced lo d,)
they fupe, forne dancing there was and so they go to bed; of all this I have written
to your lordship I am n ot Oculus teflis, to this, but of the verity your lordflii)
shall not need to doubt, howfoevcr I came by it; I was sent for to have been at the
upper, but like acurrifli or uncourtly caile 1 refuted to be there; and yet that whic:
your lordship may think might move me much, to have had the fight of my miltre;,
of whom tlhee eighteen days byjuti account I got not a fiht, I am my lotd taken I,,

j~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i[
t/s

all that fort as a vry evill person, which in my heart I do well allow, and like of
myself the better, for yet can I not find either honest or good that liketh their do-
ings; I leave at this time further to trouble your lordship, craving pardon for my
long silence, I have more ado than I am able to discharge, I walk now more abroad
by night than by day, and the day too little to discharge myself of that which I con-
ceive, or receive in the night. As your lordship, I am sure, is partaken of such
Litters as I write to Mr. Secretary, lb that I trufi that he small be to this, to save
me of a little labour, to write the Came again, most humbly I take my leave at Edin-
burgh, the last day of July, 565.

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. 291.)
Letter of the earl of Bedford to the honourable Sir William Cecil, knt.

her majcfty's principal secretary, and one of her highness's privy
council.

FTER my hearty commendations, this day at noon, captain Brickwell came 2d of Sept.
hither, who brought with him the queen's majesty's letters containing her full 'I56

rctolution, and pleasure for all things he had in charge to give information of, sav- Paper-Ofice
ing that for the aid of the lords of the congregation, there is nothing determined,fron the Ori-
or at the least exprefled in the fame letters, and for that purpose received I, thisgi"al
morning, a letter subscribed by the duke, the earl of Murray, Glencarne, and others,
craving to be holpen with o00 harqucbufyers out of this garrison, for their better
defence. And alieit, I know right well the goodness of their cause, and the queen's
majesty our sovereign's good will, and care towards them ; and do also underfand
that it were very rquifite to have them holpen, for that now their cause is to be in
this manner decided, and that it now standeth upon their utter overthrow and un-
doing, fiece the queen's part is at the least 5000, and they not much above troo;
hefides, that the queen hath harqucbufiers, and they have none, and do yet
want the power that the earl of Arguyle should bring to them, who is not yet
joined with theirs; I have thereupon thought good to pray you to be a means to
learn her majesty's pleasure in this behalf, what, ad how, I hall answer them, or
othcrwife deal in this matter, now at this their extreme necessity. For, on the
one fide, lyeth thereupon their utter ruin and overthrow, and the milerable iifbver-
sion of religion there; and, on the other ide, to adventure lb great and weight a
matter as this is, (albeit it be but of a few soldiers, for a small time) without good
warrauntc, and thereby to bring, pcradventure, upon our heads some wilful warrs,
and in the mean time to leave the place unfurnished, (having in the whole but 800)
without any grant of new lIpply fur the fame ; and by that means alob, to leave the
marshes here the more subjet to invasion, while in the mean season new helps are
preparing; to this know not 1 what to fay, or how to do. And so much more I
marvel thereof, as that having so many times written touching this niatter, no ro-
lut te

d rminaitionI conmeth. And so between the writing, and looking for an(wer,

the occalion cannot pass, hut Im nit nccds proceed and have lccels. ( od trn it to
his glory ; but fure]y all mnics realol hath great cause to fear it. Such a plh it is
Inow come ullto, ;as this little f(pply would do much good to advance God's honour,
to continuc her mnajc(ty's great an(d .arcftil memory of them, and to prcfervc a !ret

m.iiy

many noblemen and gentlemen. If it be rnpatnow helpen, it is gone for ever. Your
good will and affection that way, I do nothing misiruit, and herein fliall take such
good advice, as by any means I can.. . received from there lords two papers inclosed
the effeat whereof hall appear untoyou.. For those matters that captain Brickwell
brought, I hall answer you by my nWtt'a'nd herewith fend you two letters from Mr.
Randolph, both received this day. Byhimnyo shall hear that the proteflants are
retired from Edenborough further off. So as I hope your resolution for th ir aid shall
come in time, if it come with speed, for that they will not now so presently need
them; and so with my hearty thanks commit you to God. From Berwick, this
2J of Sept. 1565.

No. XIII. (Vol. I. p. 291.)

The queen to the earl of Bedford.

mzSepts. 156.T TPON the advertizements lately received from you, with such other things as
l':, er Oice. .. came also from the lord Scrope and Thomas Randolph, and upon the whole

matter well confidered, we have thus determined. We will, with all the speed that
we can, fend to you 30col. to be thus used. If you shall certainly understand that
the earl of Murray hath such want of money, as the impreiting to him of coo .
might fiand him in fiead for the help to defend himself, you shall pefently let him
secretly to understand, that you will, as of yourself, let him have o much, and so we
will that you let him have, in the most secret fort that you can, when the said mr
shall come to you, or if you can, by any good means, advance him some part theie
before hand.

The other 2000 . you shall cause to be kept whole, unspent, if it be not that you

shall fee necessary cause to imprest some part thereof to the now numbers of the
600 footmen, and oo horsemen; or to the calling out of wages of such workmen,
as by sickness, or otherwise ought to be discharged. And where we perceive, by
your sundry letters, the earnef request of the said earl of Murray and his afrociates,
that they might have, at the least, 300 of our soldiers, to aid them. And that yr.n
also write, that tho' we would not command you to give them aid, yet if we would
but wink at your doing herein, and seem to blame you for attempting such thing;,
as you with the help of others hould bring about, you doubt not but things wouldI
do well; you shall understand for a truth, that we have no intention, for many rl-
pets, to maintain any other princes fubjeL"s, to take arms againfl their sovereign;
neither would we willingly do any thing to give occasion to make warrs betwixt u
and that prince; which hath caused us to forbear, hitherto, to give you any poswer
to let them be aided with any men. But now, confidering we take it, that they are
pursued, notwithstanding their humble fibmiffion, and offer to be ordered and tric
by law and justice, which being refused to them, they are retired to I)omfrcle, a
place near our weft marches, as it fcerneth there to defend themselves, and adtlini
thereunto the good intention that presently the French king pretendcth, by fcndin,
one of his to join with ome one of ours, and jointly to treat with that queen, a),l
to induce her to forbear this manner of violent and rigorous proceeding againfit her
fuhbjcrs, for which purpose, the French ambassador here with us hath lately wlit-
-en to that queen, wherefore answer is daily looked for, to the intent in the m;rii

t11j,'.

time the said lords fllould not be oppressed and ruined, for lack of Come help to de-
fend them, we are content, and do authorize, if you shall fee it necefTary for their
defence, to let them (as of your own adventure, and without notifying that you
have any diretion therein from us) to have the number of 3o0 soldiers, to be taken
either in whole bands, or to be drawn out of all your bands, as you thall fee cause.
And to cover the matter the better, you fliall lend these numbers to Carlisle, as to
be laid there in garrison, to defend that march, now in this time, that such powers
are on the other part drawing to those frontiers, and lb from thence as you ihall
fee cause to diret of, the fame numbers or any of them may nmot covertly repair to
the said lords, when you (hall exprefly advertize, that you fend them that aid only
for their defence, and not therewith to make war against the queen, or to do any
thing that may offend her person, wherein you shall lo precisely deal with them, that
they may perceive your care to be such as if it hould otherwile appear, your dan-
ger should be so great, as all the friends you have could not be able to iave you to-
wards us. And to we allu:e you our conlcience moveth us to charge you, so to
proceed with them, for otherwise than to preserve them from ruin, we do not yield
to give them aid of money, or men: And vet we would not that either of these
were known to be our at, but rather to be covered with your own delire and
attempt.

No. XIV. (Vol I. p. 300.)

Randolph to Cecil, fron Edinburgh, 7th Feb. 565-6.

Y humble duty confitiered; what to write of the prelent fiate of the country 4n Original.
I am so uncertain, by reaobn of the daily alterations of mcns minds, that it

makth me much flower than otherwise I would. Within these few days, there was
fume good hope that this queen would have showed some favour towards the lords,
and that Robert lclvin (hould have returned unto them with comfort, upon some
conditions. Since that time, there are come out of France Clernau by land, and
Thorneton by sea; the one from the cardinal, the other from the bishop of Glaf-
gow. Since whole arrival neither can there be good word gotten, nor appearance
of any gr'od intended them, except that they be able to perfwide the queen's ma-
jefRy our sovereign to make her heir apparent to the croun of England. I write of
this nothing les than I know that fie hath fpokcn. And by all means thit she
thinketh the best doth travaile to brin( it to pa!s. There is a hand lately d(evised, in
which the late pope, the einpcror, the king of Spain, the duke of Savoy, with di-
vers princes of Italy, and the queen-mother fufpcdd to be of the fame confederacy
to maintain papifiry throughout Chriftiandom ; this band wa.s sent our of F rance
by Thorneton, and is fublcribed hy this queen, the copy thereof remaining with
her, and the principal to he rcturnelc very hortlic a I heir by I r. Stephen \'iillftn,
. it minister for fulch a devilish (c itl; if the coppic hcrcof may be gotten, that
fliall e c i rs I cn\crnicntlv may.
1 iilicur iioll ct citinc to thi, toutn upon

nI\ rltn],v, i timkc thl;it night to tinle q 1ci and her I fluilnd, but not long; tl i:;

(d.i l:- I;Ioentd ( oifrcIncc s with tihe) both, but notlilg c:;mc to the kiiowlcdl(
o)t Iov whcujc t thl y initcitct', I i..omilt ii' k With any that hath ;ay

111 i,) tliat

tl(cl[ will li' .o:
, (o;1 lDnc l,r tli,( lli lIy hiin, though it i' lifiu! that lie lilth vciy

,oI l will to d) lt o h vtl t( iioll oft I , pi) cr. i i b lo edg I

i ' to the con t,
\'(, . 1' |) :,1(

and liveth upon the queen's charges. Upon Sunday the order is given, whereat
means made to many to be present that day at the mass. Upon Candlemass day
there carried their candles, with the queen, her husband, the earle of Lenox, and
carle Athole; divers other lords have been called together and required to be at the
mass that day, some have promised, as Cafiels, Mongomerie, Seton, Cathnefs.
Others have refused, as Fleming, Livingston, Lindsay, Huntley and Bothel; and
of them all Bothell is the stoutest, but worst thought of; it was moved in council
that mass hould have been in St. Giles church, which I believe was rather to tempt
men's minds, than intended indeed: She was of late minded again to fend Robert
Melvin to negotiate with such as The trufteth in amongst the queen's majesty's fuib-
jetrs, of whose good willis this way I trust that the bruit is greater than the truth,
but in thefc matters, her majesty is too wife not in time to be ware, and provide
for the worst; some in that country are thought to be privie unto the bands and
confedercie of which I have written, whereof I am sure there is fomc things,
though perchance of all I have not heard the truth; in this court divers quarles,
contentions, and debates; nothing so much fought as to maintain michief and dil-
order, David yet retaineth fill his place, not without heart grief to many, that fee
their sovereign guided chiefly by such a fellow; the queen hath utterly refused to do
any good to my lord of Argyll, and it is said that shall be the first voyage that she
will make after she is delivered of her being with child; the bruit is common that
mhe is, but hardly believed of many, and of this, I can assure you, that there hive
of late appeared tbme tokens to the contrary.

No. XV. (Vol. I. p. 308.)
Part of a letter from the earl of Bedford and Mr. Tho. Randolph to

the lords of the council of England from Barwick, 27th of March,
1566. An Original in the Cotton Library, Caligula B. 1o. fol. 372.
iay it p.eas' yr onourl:,

E R I N G of so maynie matters, as we do, and fyndinge such varietie in the

27 M,ch, j
. reportcs, we have myche ado to decerne the veritie: which nakcth us the

Hi': flower and loother to put any thing in wrytinge, to the entente we wold not that

Vour honours, and by you the queen's majeflie, our fovereigne, should not be al-
vertifcd but of the vcric trothe as we can pofib!e. To this end we thought goad
to fend up captain Carewe, who was in Edinbourgc at the tyme of the last attenp-
tate, who spoke there withl diverc, and after that with the queen's self and her
lhub.imd confbrnie to that, which we have learned by others, and know by this rc-
porte, we fend the fame, confilrmed by the parties fclf, that were there prfclcit ,nd
afiylecrs unto these that were executors of the acle.

'Frlls we fynde for certain, that the quen's howflband being cntred into a vch-

ncnt tufpicion of l)avid, that by hyr) fmlne thynge was conimytted, which w.Is
inoli agyntle to the queen's honour, and nut to be borne of his pcrte, fyrite conlilu-
iicated his nynde to George I)uglas, who fynding Ilis sorrowes Ib great fought ,ill
the means lie coulde to put ome rernmdic to his grciff; and comnmunicatilng thl
inimc unto mny lord Ruthen by the king's conlmmandment, no other wayc couldle 1,e

'uulll

found then that David fholde be taken oute of the waye. Wherein he was so ear-
nest and daylye prefled the fame, that no refte coulde be had untyll it was put in
execution. To this that was found good, that the lord Morton and lord Lindfaye
thould be made previe to th' intente that theie might have their friends at hande, yf
neade required; which caused them to aemble so mayny, as thaie thought fuffici-
ent against the tyme, that this determination of theirs hould be put in executione;
which was determined the ixth of this inflante 3 daies afore the parliament should
begyne, at which time the fayde lordes were aflured, that the erles Argyle, Mor-
raye, Rothes and their complices holde have been forfeited, vs the kini, could not
be persuaded through this mcais to be their friends: who for the defyre he hade
that this intent should take cftc't th' one waye, was content to yielde without all
difficultie to t' other, with this condition, that thaie holde give their contents, that
he might have the crowne matrimonial. He was so impatient to fee thele thlings he
saw, and were daylye brought to his earcs, that he dayly prefled the said loid Ru-
then, that there might be no longer delaye; and to the intent y' myght be mani-
fefte unto the wolid, that he approved the ae, was content to be at the doing of
that himself.

UPON Saturdaye at night neire unto vilI of the clock the king conveyeth hinmelf,

the lord Ruthen, George Duglafs, and two others, throwc his owne chamber by
the privie stayers up to the queen's chamber going to which there is a cabinet
about xii foot square ; in the fame a little low icpofing bed and a table, at the which
theyr were fitting at the supper the queene, the lady Argile, and David witlh his
capp upon his head. Into the cabinet there cometh in the king and lord Ruthci,
who willed David to come forth, Iaying, that was no place for him. The queen
said, that it was her will. Her howfband anfverede, that y was againlt her
honour. The lord Ruthen faide, that he fiolde lerie better his deutie, and ofer-
ing to have taken him by the arm, David took the queen by the blychtes of lice
gown and put hilmfelf behind the queen who wolde gladlee have fahve him:
But the king having loosed his hand, and holding her in his armes, David was
thrull out of the cabinet thorow the bed chamber into the chamber of prelcn ,
whar were the lord Morton, lord Lindley, who intending that night to have refclv-
ed hym, and the next day to hang him, so mane being aout hym, that bore
hym evill will, one tiurfl him into the boddie with a dagger, anJ after hym a
great many others, so that he had in his bodie above wonds. It is told for
certayne, that the kingcs own dagger was left {sicking' in him. Wheathei he Hluck
him or not we cannot here for certayn. lie was not layne in the queen's prielns,
as was said, but goiln down the itayres out of the chamber of prefens.

T1HERE remaync( along tyme with the queen her hovwflband an(d the lord Ruthcr.

She made, as we he:c, great iiitrceflion, that he hold have no harm. She blame
crcatlec her howflnnd that was thee ator of lo foul a dedJ. It is said, that he tid
anfwecr, that David had more compianic of her oddie then he for thic (fpe ,f tv.

t

mollths ; aind thcrefoic fr ler hlonoui anld his owni cotcntentlet ihe lxave hi cl!clnt
tlat he should lie takel away. " It is nlot (f()thc h.lh) the womanlns 1pirt to lcelc
" thle hiifl ,(l," and thc ifoi ill ti t tll fli',tt l a.is lis o i . -lie (lil that wiI'1u lhi
came, file itlh( r woll lot, or mlai l11r ll '(:k. ( l`

\\ el,' ;faytiic sis, " ' I}I-

" takcn youir la(l of nime ini or l falrwll '' I hen wclc [pits', ix'lli] ilic l., 1l-
thli', hli is yt r n jfl¥' ifh:li) l111( ; illil 'cll

y (id tie to t C . Ii otli l. '; \\ }/
" imay I nut,' litllc (lie, " li;txc li :I: . i l ;:; yoiur wile d lid r liiifl .i.il '

1' p ) C) ilc

Other have done the like. The lord Ruthen aid that ihe was lawfully divorced
from her husband, and for no such cause as the king found himself greve. B-
fydes this man was mean, baffe, enemie to the nobilitie, fame to her, and de-
ftrucion to herfclf and country. " Well, faith she, that shall be dear b!ude to
"r some of you, yf his be fpylt." God forbid, fayth the lord Ruthen; for the more
your grace fhowe yourself offended, the world will judge the worse.

HER husband this tyme fpeaketh litle, herself continually weepeth. The lord

Ruthen being ill t ease and weak calleth for a drink, and faythe, " This I must do
" with your majesties pardon," and perfuadeth her in the belt fort he could, that
The would pacifie herself. Nothing that could be said, could please her.

IN this mean time there rose a nombre in the court; to pacific which there went

down the lord Ruthen, who went firayt to the cries Huntly, Bothwell and Ath.ll
to quiet them, and to aflure them for the king that nothing was intend aainit
them. These notwithstanding taking fear, when theie heard that my lord of Mur-
ray wold be there the next day, and Argile meet them, Huntly and Bothwell both
get out of a window and so depart Atholl had leave of the king with Flyfh and
Glandores who was lately called Dyfley the person of Owne) to go where they
vold, and bring concordie out of the court by the lord of Lidington. 'l'heie wei:t
that night to such places, where they thought thenifelves in moit fauftic.

BEFORE the king least talk with the queen, in the hering of the lord Ruthen she

was contents that he shold lie with her that night. We know not how he : * him-
(clf, but came not at her, and excused hymfclf to his friends, that he was so flepie,
tiat he could not wake in due season.

'IEERE were in this conpanic two that came in with the king; the one An-

drewc earl ot Tawfenfide, whom the queen fayth would have Itroken her with a
da ggr, and one Patrick Balentine, brother to the juflice clerk, who also her grace
Ifa'th, offered a dagger against her belly with the cock down. We have been ear-
ncfily in hand with the lord Ruthen to know the varitie; but he aflaureth us ot the
contrarie. There were i the queen's chamber the loid Robert, Arthur Arfkii,
one or two others. " hey at the first offering to make a defence, the lord Ruthen
(rawd his dagger, and 4 mo weapons then, that were not drawn nor seen in her
prelcns, as we arc by this lord alulrcd.

['Ihe letter afterwards gives an account of the flight to Dunbar-Cafilc, whether

retorted unto the lords Huntly and Bothwell: That the earl of Morton and lo:d
Ruthven find themselves left by the king for all his fair promises, bonds and fub-fcl p-
tions. That he had protested before the council, that he was never confentin to
the death of David, and that it is fore against his will: " ''hat of the great sub-
'i (fance David had there is much spoken, fume fay in gold to the value of i i':/.
" His apparel was very good, as it is laid, 28 pair of velvet hofc. His chliambr
"t well furnished, armour, dagger, pyftoletts, harquebuses, 22 swords. Of all this
" nothing fpioyld or lacked saving 2 or 3 dagger. He had the custody of all the

' queen's letters, which all were delivered unlooked upon. We hear of ajuill, that
" he had hanging about his neck of lome price, that cannot be heard of. He lhad
' upon his back, when he was flayn a night gown of danialk furred, with a fatten
"dublet, a houf of uffct velvet."

No X\'

,s

No. XVI. (Vol. 1, p. 3g5.)

Pa:; of a letter from Randolph toCecil, Jan. 16, 565-6.
..----' CANNOT tell what milliking of late there hath been between her grace

and her husband, he preflcth earnefily for the matrimoniall crown, which

fie is loath hastily to grant; but willing to keep somewhat in itore, until he know
how well he is worth to enjoy such a overcigiiity; and therefore it is thought that
the parliament, for a time liall be deferred, but hereof I can write no certainty.

From Mr. Randolph's lettcr to Secretary Cecil.
r S1HE jufiice-clerlin hard terms, more for his brother's cause than any desert, 4 .\piil, I;i:

and as far as I can hear the king of all other in worif, for neither hath the i'Pcr Oitic'

queen good opinion of him for attempting of any thing that was againfi her will, f;°m the ori-
inor the people that he hath denied Io manifef a matter, being proved to be done by gi"I
his commandment, and now himself to be the accuser and purluer of them that did
as he willed them. This Scott, that was executed, and Murray that was y)fctrday
arreigned, were both accuscd by him. It is written to me, for certain, by oc, tii.:
upon Monday last spoke with the ueen, that he i detcrminled that the houli of
L.tnnox fiall be as poor in Scotland as ever it was. The earl continucth sick, fbi1
troubled in mind; he ftaith in the Abby, his son has been once with him, and he
once with the queen, since she came to the castle. The queen hath now seen ;ill
the covennnts and bands that paired bet ween the king and the lords, and now findeth
that his declaration, before her and council, of his innocencv of the death of IDa id,
was life; ; nd gricvoufly offended that, by their means, he ilould feck to come to
the ci uwn mati noniiAl.

Part of a letter from Randolph to Cecil from Berwick, 25 April, ir C.
--TT ERP is ccntinually very much speech of the diifcord between the queen

1 .nd her husband, so far that, that is commonly said and belie ved of hi'n-

lIe!', that \jr. James 'I hornton is gone to Rome to fie for a divorce between them,
It is very certain that Mlalcvaficr had not spoken with him within thelt three days.
He is icither accompannyi' nor looked upon of an) nobleman ; attended upon by
certain of his own frvants, and fix or seven of the guard ; at llberty to do, and go
where, anl what he will, tecre hkc n'o hope, yet among thecmfelvcs of qtiietncf;.

-- ),xI; i's brother, named Jofcph, ,hio came this way with MalevaftectI, Ui;-
klnown to any nian liec(, is becoic' itctcary it hii blothcr's placc.

No, X\IJ,

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. 319.)

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, 3d August, 1566.

H E queen and her husband agree after the old manner, or rather worse. Sec
eateth but very seldom with him, lieth not, nor keepeth company with him,

nor loveth any such as love him. He is so far out of her books, as at her goilir out
of the castle of Edinburh, to remove abroad, he knew nothing thereof. It canni.t
for modesty, nor with the honour of a queen, be reported what le aid of lin;
One Hickman, an English merchant there, having a water-fpaniel Mwhich was vcr,
good, gave him to Mr. James Melvill, who afterwards, for the pleasure which h
ahw the king had in such kind of dogs, gave him to the king. The queen thereup,.:
fill arvclioufly out with Melvill, and called him disSembler and flatterer, and ti;.i
lec could not trust one, who would give any thing to such one as he loved not.

The earl of Bedford to Cecil, August 8.
TH E difagrcement between the queen and her husband continueth, or rait cr

increafeth. Robert Melvill drawing homewards, within twelve miles ,f

I'dinburg, could not tell where to find the Queen; sith which time she is come to
Edinburgh, and had not twelve horses attending on her. There was not then, nir
that I can hear of since, any lord baron, or other nobleman in her company. The
king her hufland is gone to Dumfermling, and paflcth his time as well as hc mair
having at his farewell, such countenance as wuld make a huiband heavv ' :.
the heart.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, 8 Sept. from Berwick.
T H E queen hath her husband in small estimation, and the Earl of Loinj ;

came not in the queen's light since the death of Davy.

Sir John Forster to Cecil, i th Dec.
tHE Earl of othwell is appointed to receive the ambafrldors, and all thin:.

lor the cl'riftening are at his lorlfhip's appointment, and the fanie is fic.rcciv

well liked of the nobility, as is said. The king and queen is prefcntly at Craig.nii-
Ilir, hut in little greater familiarity than lie was all the while patt.

Advcrtiflments out of Scotland from the carl of Bedfolrd.

\.:l, 1 ,6l.T I1 A 'I thle king and lie iccn narccd well together two daivs, after lic' coi;ii ;
I',111 t ii (, lni - . --, ald illtr mly lord f M urray's comingl to lEdlcn lrgli, t i'O ic\;
1:~11 l,ti- dir-ford l.is h.:ilpcnc . 'I'l c (qic'c liatli (cclalicd to ilmy lord of Mi luni;, tl.it ill '
,inl ,V' kir. lC. Ic lhim evil will, and Ih s .ii to her, thal t he is dctCr ilC to kl I Ilii

hiri

findin- fuIlt that she doth bear him so much company; and ill like manner, hath
willed my lord of Murray to fpiere it at the king, which he did a few nights since in
the queen's pretence, and ill the hearing of divers. The king confelcd, that reports
were made to him, that my lord of Murray was not his friend, which made him
speak that thing he repented; and the queen affirmed, that the king had spoken fucl
words unto her, and confefTcd before the whole house, that she could not be content that
either he or any other should be unfri'ind to my lord of Murray. My lord of Murray
enquired the fame iloutly, and ucd his speech very modefily, in the mean time the
king departed very grieved; he cannot bear that the queen fiould use familiarity
either with man or woman, and especially the ladies of Arguile, Murray, and Marre,
who keep most company with her. My lid of Murray and Bothwell have been at
evil words for the L. of Ledington, before the queen, for he and fir James Balfoure
had new come from Lcdington, with his answer upon such heads or articles as
Bothwell and hc hould agree upon, which being reported to the said earl in the
queen'; prelence, made answer, that e'er he parted with such ilands as was desired,
he hould part with his life. My lord of Murray said floutly unto him, that twenty
as honest men as he flould lose their lives ere he reafte Ledington. The queen
spake nothing, but heard both; in there terms they parted, and fincc, that I hear of,
have not met. The queen after her hunting came to Edenburgh, and carrecth the
prince thence to Sterling with her. This lafi Saturday was executed a servant of
the lord Ruthven's, who confefled that he was in the cabinet, but not of council of
the fast. The queen hath also opened to my lord of Murray, that nmoney was sint
from the pope, how much it was, and by whom, and for what purpo!e it was
brought.

No. XVII. (Vol. I. p. )
Part of a letter from Elizabeth to Mary, Feb. 20, I5(9. A copy inter-

lined by Cecil. It contains an answer to a complaining letter of Mary's
upon the inprifoning of the bilhop of Rots.
/- FTIER this i. c. ary's landing in Scotland] how patiently did I bear

.-"L with many vain delays in not ratif)illn the treaty accorded by yrur own

commifioners, whereby I received no small ukiiidnis, bcfidcs the niattifold ca.iif
of suspicion that I might not hereafter trufi to any wiitilngs. Then fllowcd a hnril
manner of dealing with ne, to cnttice my subi c ad ICea kinta, the lord l)arnly,
under colour of private suits for land, to come into the rcalm, to proceed in tr-aly
of marriage with him without my knowlegc, yea to conc!tide the fame without iny
aftent or liking. And how manly unkind parts acconmpanly'd tlat lat ; by receivin of
my fiubjccas that were base ruiinartsanat

and oflrs t home, d enhanfing ties

to places of credit againfl m will, witlh nllaly ifutl like, I will leave, for tiat the
renelicbrance of the fame cannot Lbut hb; niloti()or to vout. A\lid t all te i di I
as it were upplrcfs and oveicolme with ny nituiril incliliation of love towardl you;
anld (id afterwards ylad(ly, as you know, cilfcn your f1l, the cliild oft my I.id
kinfmn.ln, tlht hlad hefore fto lloyally ofiellndd ie, both il manlingc of you, a ili
other undltifl uslig cs towards me his locri rn. IHow frienil! a ilo dealt by ncf-
I;l-cs to reconcile himi , being your lifhl)alld, to you, v'icnl o'J.clr1 ouriilicd dilc(crd

I''twixti

27

betwixt you, who as it seemed had more power to work their purporcs, being evil to
you both, than I had to do you good, in refpet of the evil I had received. Well
I will overpass your hard accidents that followed for lack of following my council.
And then in your most extremity, when you was a prisoner indeed, and in danger of
your life from your notorious evil willers, how far from my mind was the remem-
brance of any former unkindness you had shewed me. Nay, how void was I of
refpec to the designs which the world had fen attempted by you to my crown, and
the security that might have ensued to my slate by your death, when I findin, your
calamity to be great, that you were at the pit's brink to have miserably lolt your
life, did not only intreat for your life, but so thrcatned fume as were irritated aainft
you, that I only may fay it, even I was the principal cause to save your life.

No. XIX. (Vol. I. p. 348.)
Letter Q. Elizabeth to Q. of Scots. Thus marked on the back with

Cecil's hand.-opia Litcearrin RLrgi ManjeJatis ad Reginam S tt-
rum. VI 1°. pilpris.
Pap. O11'c. "AD A I E, vous asant trop nrolcfli pr i M. ide Crocq, je n'etufe en si peu 'Ic

V concideration de vous faicher de cette .cttre, si Ics liens de charite vers les i ri-

ncz, et Ics prieres des mifrables nie m'y contrignallcnt. Je entens quc un edit a etu
di ulgud de par vous, madame, que ung chafcun, que veult juitifier que ons eftc Ics
meurtr ers de votre feu mari, et mo;i Jlu cousin, viennent a le faire le xIlme de cc
mois. La cuclle chore, ccmme c cft plus honorable et necefTaire, qui en tcl cas
fe pourra faire, ne cftant cache quelque miftere ou finefFc, ainfi le pere et anis du
n irt gcntellonim rn'ont umblcncnt requis, que je vous priaile de prolo:uc ic
juur, pource qu'lz cognoiffent que cls iniques e iont combinus par force de 1. ire ce
que par litiil ils nc pourront pas faire ; partant, je e puis mais finon pour l'amT.r
dz vous nlcnie, a qui il tuche e plus, et pour la consolation des innocens, de vou:i
cxhoi tr I le ur conceder cctte requeftc, laquelle, 1i elle les feroit nil, vous tourner(it
grandement en Ibup)con, de plus que j'cfpere ne pensez, t que ne voudriez volinicis
ouyr. 'our l'amour de Dieu, madame, usez de tclle finccritc & prudence en cc c.i;
qui vous touche dl si pres, qlue tout Ie monde ave raison, de vous livrer coinme i-
nocente d'ung crime si enorine, chose que si e fi'lc, fericz dignement cfbloy) hi s t!c
ranciz de princefles, non (fans cauc faite opprobre de vulgairc, et p!iitot que ccia
vous aviclle . j: vous lnhaliitcrois ur'c fpulture

h lonoraie, qu'une vie macii'

VAs v(iez lairnc, 9e jous tirite

conaml. na filec, et vous promlct, qe 1 j

si;

culb, It ly fa;ul;Ui'cl.r is mieulx, (1que je vous (!efire, comme Ic Selgneur l)i ii
po'rtc tciii'i:il Gc, a qui jC pic dc bon cirur dc vous infpircr a fiire cc q:i v,.:s i i.
plus a Ilonilur, cta ys

a i is plus de consolation, avcc mcs tres corldi;ills ccin

In'ltlutions oiilll(e a i(c'j(l;l li [(ju >

f (C ul it le I l pls JdC blin, (qui vJus puo ira . '
n',ui:2i .t', ii. 1 )c \\'l. cc' j;, ur dej anvier en haste.

, 1 ,:1 !i* i'

1' !t,' ,: ': J , i itl , ,: il'. h I, i
V \ l. .-,' :ili'.

N,.

37

No. XX. (Vol. I. p. 362.)

A letter from England concerning the murder of king Henry Darnley.
TH AVING the commodity of this bearer Mr. Clark, I tho't good to write a few E. nfniorton'.;

y words unto you. I have recl. some wiits from you ; and some I have seen A"clhic(;

ately sent others from you, as namely to the carl Bedford of the 16'h. of May. I budle d. -o.
have participat the contents thereof to such as I thought meet, this mekle I can airc 2- :
you; the intelligence given hither by the French was untrue, for there was i;ot one
papist nor protflant which did not consent thatjuflice shou!d be done, he the queen
my foVn. aid and support, against such as had committed that abominaile i murjci
in your country; but to fay truth, the lack & boldncrs did not rife ro(m such as
were called to council, but from such as fould give life and execution :hereunto.
And further, Iaffure you, I never knew no matter of cflate proponed wlich had to
many favourers of all forts of nations as this had: yea, I can ay unto you, 11) il
promoted the matter ith greater affiRlion, than thl Spanish amballhdor. And f t.r
I am, that no man dare openly be of any other mind, but to affirm that vhofi)excr
isguilty of thi murder, handfafled with advoutre, is unworthy to liv.. I fall n,)t
need to tell you, whith be our letts and stayes from all good things here. You are
acquainted with them as well as I. Neds 1 mult confess, that h wfoever we omit
occasions of benefit, honour, and surety; it behoveth your wholenobility, and namely
such as before, and after the murder, were deemed to allow of Bodwell, to prosecute
with sword and juflice the punishment of those abominable ats, though we lenJ'you
but a cold aid, and albeit you, and divers others, both honourable and honest, be
well known to me, and sundry oth.rs here, to be juflifiable in all their aclions and
doings; yet think not the contrary but your whole nation is blemihffed and infamit by
these doings, which lately passed among you. What we shall do I know not, neither
do I write unto you affurediy, for we be fuljea unto many mutations, and yet I think
we hall either aid you, or continue you n the defence and fafeg. ard of your prince,
so as it appear to us that you mean his safeguard indeed, and not to run the fortune
of France, which will beyour own deirultion, if you be unadviscd. I know not
one, no not one of any quality or cftate in this cointry, which does allow of the
queen your sovereign, but would gladly the world wcre lid of her, so as the fame
were d ne without farther slander, that is to fay by ordinary justice. This I fend the
23d May.

No. XXI. (Vol. I. p. 370.)
Part of a letter from Sir Nicolas Tlirogmorton to Cecil, i Ith of July,

i ;67, from Bcrwick.
- I R, Your Ictter tf it he ( ]l. I rceivcd the r ol' at Berwick. I am f rry An Oriinai.

-

1 to ( c thal t thei Icci'.; im il;!lv ,,iio!:ti(l ,!t(L il) h t t W:nrls tlhe lo.rd, for P' le *)liicc.

AhclCt ill i, done, it is they \\'lich mu])l f:ind cr i) :oc I: C

Ld:1 ( hil t c
t i c

VOL. 1,. '
. 'I t"-:r

her cousin, and will be better infiruments to work ome benefite and quietness to her
majesty and her realm, than the ueen of Scotland which is void of good fame.
A letter from Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to Cecil from Faftcaftle, 2th of

July, 1567.
SIR, as yow might perceive by my letter of the I I" July, I lodged at EaffL

caitle that night, acompanycd with the lord Hume, the lord of Ledington,

and James Melvin, where I was intrcated very ell, according to the fate oi thl:
place, which is fitter to lodge prifolners then folks at liberty, as it is very littel, if, t
i, verv strong. By the conference I have had with the lord of Ledington I fihl the
ioids his aiociates and he hath left nothing unthought of, which may be either to tihe.
tda.i er, cr work them fuerty, vherein they do not foiget what go( d and harnie
Er, ice may do them, and likewise they confider the fame of England; but as tsar
as I can perceave, to be plain with vow, they find more perril to grow unto them
through the queens majelys dealing, than either they do by the French, or y ayl
eontrary faction amongeLt themfilves, for they aflure themselves the queen will leave
them in the bryers if they run hcr fortoun, and though they do acknowledge r. r:
benefit as well to them, as to the realm of England by her majefiys doings at Leith,
xherecf they fay mutually her majcly and both the lealms Lave received gret frut;
yet upon other accidents which have chanced fincc, they have oblerved such thiigs in
her majestys doings, as have ended to the danger of such as fle hath dealt withal, to
the overthrow of your own designments, and little to the fuerty of anyparty; and ut'ot
there considerations and discourses at length, me thinketh I find a disposition in them,
that ci her they mind to make their bargain with France, or elfc to deal neither with
France nor yow, but to do what they shall think meet for their ifate and fuerty, and
to use there renedys as occation shall move them ; meaning neither to irritate I r;nc
nor England, untill such time as they have made their bargain alfuredly with one of
yow; for they think it convenient to proceed with yow both for awhile pari p:;l1i,
for that was my lord of l.edington's terms. I do perceave they take the matter ve.
unkindly, that no better answer is made to the letter, which the lords c.id fend to her
majefly, and likewise that they hear nothing from yow to their fatisfadion, I ha. e
answered as well as I can, and have alledged their own proceedings so obfculv n :th
the queen, and their uncertainty hath occationed this that i. yet happn d, a d there-
fore her majesty hath sent me to the end I may inform her througly of the fitc o
the matters, and upon the declaration of their minds and intents to such plirpo!e; :
shall be by me proposed on their majeflys behalf unto them, they flall be rcei!,.':
-nd rcfllutely answercd. At theef things the lord of Ledington smiled and f1.( i;
head, and said it were better for us yow would let us alone, than neither to do

i , r'

ours i es good, as I fear me in the end that will prove; S if their be any tn;ih in
Ledinrton, La Crocq is gone to procure Ramboilet his coming liither or a n.!i ,!
like quality, and to deliver them of their queen for ever, who f11hl lead her life in l't i ::
i a lbbay rcclufced, the prince at the French devotion, the l.ilm govcrnti l'-
council of their election ot the Scottish nation, the torts committed to the culil (.
fIch ias shall be choflen amn ngcft themselves, as yet 1 find no great likclihood tii.!t
shall have accces to the queen, it is objceletd they may not so di(l'lcale the Frcncli lI.(
unllcfi tli y were sure to find the queeln of England a good I:iceld; and when t

Ci .
'ari Offic.

®ncwe 'by my acefg to the queen have offended the French, then they fay yow will
make your profit thereof to their undoing; and as to the queens liberty, which wa.
the first head that I proposed, they said that thereby they did perceive that the queen
wants their undoing, for as for the reft of the matters it was but folly to talk of thent
the liberty going before; but said they, if you will do us no good, do us no harm,
and we will provide for ourfe'ves. In the end they said, we i(ould refute our own
commodity, before they concluded with any other, which I fi1oui,l hear of at rmy
coming to Edinr; by my next I hope to fend yow the band concluded by Hlamilton,
Argyll, Huntly an that faction, not so much to the prejudice ls the lords of Edin,
as that which was sent into ltrance; thus having no more leafu e but compel! d to le:lp
-on horseback with the lords to o to Edin', I humbly takec my leave of roin Fialtclic
the 12th July 1567.
To Sir Nicolas Throgmrorton being in Scotland. By the queen the i4th

Jully 567.
TRUSTY and well beloved we greet you well, thoi'gh we think that the causes ape: Ofli?

will often charge upon variety of accidents, yet this we think, for sundry resets,

not amiss, that as yow hall deal with the lords having charge of the young prince
for the committing of him into our realm, so shall yow alfe do well, in treaty with
the queen, to offer her that where her realm appeareth to be subject to sundry trou-
bles from time to time, and thereby (as it is manifaft) her son cannot be free, if he
/hall be contented that her son may enj y fucrty and quietness, within this our realm,
being so near s he knows it is ; we hall not faill to yield her as good fuerty therein
for her child, as can be devised for any that might be our child born of our own
body, and hall be glad to show to her therein the trew effec of nature; and herein
she may be by yow remembred how much good mayenfue to her son to be nouridied
and acquainted with our country; and therefore, all things confidered, this occation
for her child, were rather to be fought by her and the friends of him, than offered by
us; and to this end, we mean that yow hall so deal with her, both to flay her in
deed from inclining to the French praLife, which is to us nctorioufs to convey her
and the prince into France, and also to avoid any juit offence, that (he might h reaster
conceive, if she should hear that we should deal with the lords for the prince.
Sir Nicolas Throgmorton to queen Elizabeth, x4th July 1567, from

Edinburgh.
i T may please your majefly to be advertised, I did fignifie unto Mr. Secretary by my (::, ,l

letters of the l I'' and 12'1 of July, the day of mine entry into Scotl.Ald, the l.,; (.i':,*

caufcs of ny flay, my lodging at Faflcaftle a place of the lord liumes, wher I w.is
met by the said lord atnd by the lord lidington, and what had pafled in conference
betwixt us, whileft was at the said Falicallc. Since which time, ccollp !iid
with the lords alore.faid, and with 4co horses by their appointment for mny beitter
condud, I came to JEdiil the 1 2 ' of this prefcnt. The i'"th being Sunday alpplinrcd
for a folemne communion in this town, anld ll o a filemne fafr being publiihed, I
could not have conference with the lords which be afliimblcd within this town a;s

( ) I ., dJcfimc J,

desired, that is to fay the earls of Athole, and Morton, the lord Hume, the lord of
Lidington, Sir Jares Balfour captain of the castle, Mr. James M'Gill and the prefi-
dent of the session.

NEVERTHELESS I made means by the lord of Lidington that they would use no

protraEte of time in mine audience, so did I likewise to the earle of Morton, wli,,n
I met by chance; I was answered by them both, that albeit the day were dcftined to
sacred exerci'es, such as were there of the council would consult upon any moyen
touching my access unto them and my conference with them, and aid also that in
the afternoon either they would come to me, or I should hear from them. About 4
of the clock in the afternoon, the said 13th (ay, the lord of Lidington came to irmy
lodgings, and declared unto me on the behalf of the lords and others, that th.y re-
quired me to have patience though they had dcffcrcd my conference with them, which
was grounded principally upon the absence of the earles of Mar, and Glencairn, the
lords Semple, Crighton and others of the council, faying alob that they did confider
the matters which I was on your behalf to treate with them of, were of great
importance, as they could not atisfy nor conveniently treate with me, nor cive me
answer without the advice of the lords, and others their associates; the lord of Lidi:r-
ton also said unto me, that where he perceived, by his private conference with me in
my jo:rny hitherwards, that I prefled greatly to have speedy access to the queen their
sovereign, he perceived, by the lords and others which were here, that in that matter
there was great difficulty for many relpets, bit specially bcaufe they had refut' to
the French ambassador the like access, which being granted unto me, might grcatli
offend the French, a matter which they desired and intended to eschew; for theY ihd
not find by your majestys dealings with them hitherto, that it behoved them to rrit.:t
the French king, and to loose his favour and good intelligence ith him ; I ai:fwert;
that as unto their refuCall, made unto the French ambafador, monsieur de Ville RwoN
was dispatched forth of France before these accidents here happened, and his fpeci'a
errand was to impeach the queens marriage with the earle of Bothel, (fur so indece.
since my coming hither I learned his commiflion tended to that end, and to make cf-
ser to the queen of another marriage) and as to monsieur de Crocq, he could hve ni
order forth of France concerning these matters since they happncd ; and therefore the,
might very well hold them suspected to have conference with the queen, least they mnir
treate of matters in this time without inflruClions and so rather do harm then g, ot,
but your majesty being advertized of all things which had chanced, had sent nle i
ther to treate with them, for the well of the realm, for the confervatiun of their i;',
.ours and credit, a for their fuerty ; and 1 might boldly fay unto him, that }(o::,
nm.jev had better deserved th: n the Frenchhad. -e said, fr hisown part, he was nuci.
boundU unto your Inijeft)', anld a( always fund great f:ivour and courtetfy in 1'ui.-
lail I, but to be plain with y(ou, S Giyed he there is not manY of this afltlnblv i:
have foutu so great oblig:;tion at t' c (luce n your fovereins hands, as at the PFr-cri:i
kingrs , ,fr the caries of Morto)ll ;nl (lencairn be the only persons which took lctnei'
bv the (qcns nm.jcfl)s aid at l.ith, the rel of the noblemln were not in tile natinU!.
niii L; thilk C.iil he, th (CICe niajefly your Ilvcreign, by the opinion if her

i ,m i,

:(')Lin'l, ;and ,ll the \vwu,!, took a great benefit by that charge as the r;illi f Sc,
anil, or a particular pllun; and not to t, k with yow as an abl:alador, tI't \\vit
}it Nicolas llir(gmnorton, ny lord Mort, lanll fich as were in ain for th. dlc;'ii
of D).avi, ;lui(i hut culd favoul i t tle quctns inajeflys 11ha!ds, when they wcte t,k
iu(la'i fturtli ft their own ConItry but I w\v uld iall our wliolc company 'wteC ; \\ i

\ 1111.,,

willing to accomplifi the queen your sovereign intents and desires as I am, for mine
own part, lam but one, and that of the meanesT fort, and they e many noblemen
and such as have great intereit in the matter, mary yow shall be assured I will imploy
myself to imploy my credit, ad all that I may do, to fatisfie the queen your mistress,
as much as lyeth in me, and for your own pat you have a great many friends in' this
afiembly, with many other good words. But for conclr;fion I nluft take this for an
answer to flay untill the other lord were come, and thereupon I thought meet to ad-
vertize your rajefly what hath pifl'd, and how far forth I have proceeded; your ex-
peWation being great to hear from hence.

ANI) now to advertize your majesty of the slate of all things, as I have learned
since rsy coinig hither, it ma) pleate your majefly to understand as followeth.

THE queen of' cotland remaineth in good health in the castle of Lochleven, guarded

by the lod Linfay and Lochleven the owner of the house ; for the lord Ruthven i in-
ployed in another comminilon, because he began to show great favour to the ueen
and to give her intelligence. She is waited on with 5 or 6 ladys, 4 or 5 g' ilcwo-
nien, and 2 charnberers, whereof ore is a French woman. The earle o , ichan,
the earle of Murray's brother, hath also liberty to come to her at his pie; .; ; the
lords aforesaid, which have her in guard, doe keep her very firaitly, and .. :ar as I
can perceive, their rigour proceedetu by their rder from thee men, ecatu' :iat the
queen will not by any means be induced to end her authority to Iprc eciuc e mur-
der, nor will not conent by any perfwafion to abandon the lord Bothell tfr her hus-
band, but avoweth constantly that she will live and die with him; and faith :hat if it
were put to her choice to relinquish her crown and kingdom, or the lord B'othell. he
would leave her kingdom and dignity, to go as a fiiple damfell with him, and that
ihe will never consent that he hall fare worse, or have more harm than herself.

AND as far as I can perceive, the principall cause of her detention is, for that these

lords do fee the queen being of lb fervent aflection towards the earle Bothell as she is,
and being put at, as they should be compelled to be in contiinuall arms, and to have
(ccation of many battles, he bein, ith manifet{ evidence notorioLfly detect(d to be
the principall murderer, and the lordl meaning prosecution of juflice againfi him ac-
cording t his merits.

THE lords mean also a divorce betwit the queen and hirr, as a marriage not to

be suffered for many rcfpccs, wich fcratton cannot take place if the queen be at
liberty, and have power in her hands.

THEY do not also forget their own peril', conjoin'd with the danger of the prince,

but as faras I can perceave, they intend not either to touch the lqecil in fuerty or in
honor, for they do speak of her with rcie and reverence, and do affirm, a I do
learn, that the conditiois aferefaid accorapli el, they will both put her to liberty,
and restore her to her eliate.

TIHESI; lords have for te guard o tic;r t!'wl .150 I-Ia ii qbufhers wh:ch be in very

good order, fur the cnt.rt.ililleiit of w'lich companys, untill a l matters be com-
pounded, they did sue nlt) yur lu ji'. ), to aid theimn with such fulnlm f Imo(v, a,
hatli berei nit.tioncd to vlr. Sctrcr i 1)') lihe lord of Lidlimtols \iittint, amoulnlt-
ing as I crcc lvc to in ( cr t\wclx thtrr.l o :ri urn, of the

e'Ill'. ;ctc lttly .adverti.c I thit. it ;cch KinItl doth mind to (lend hithelr non-

fieur de 1,i C'lalp ll I(c Urflilic, knigi t , the l"rcii li ,;lder, and always well afl'c-
tionate t h ic Iulc ol u

( , an d lo;(\vivcr laI oieli, V illaroyc, Iand du Croc hvc
uledl lanlgu, c i te qtl-cn;ii tt.ivr alnd t. thlic lordib diiadvantagci there, to your na-

jelty;

jefly la Crocq doth carry with him foch matter as shall be little to te queens advan-
tage; so as it is thought the Ffench king, upon his coming to his presence, will ra-
ther fatisfie the lords, than plcafrire the queen; for th y have their party so well made,
as the French will rather make their profit by them, than any other way.

HEREWITH I fend your majefly the last bond agreed on, and signed by te
Harniltons, the earl of Argyll, I-Hintlv, and sundry others at Dumbarton.

NEVERTHELESS, since my coming to this town, the Hamiltons have sent unto mit

a gentleman of their surname named Robert Hamilton with a letcr from the bish}:i,
of St. Andrews and the abbot of Arbroth, the coppy whereof I fend your majefly :lI
mine answer unto them, referring to the bearer the declaration of tome things, as tllhei
did by him unto me.

THE earle of Ar:yll hath, in like manner, sent another unto me with a letter and

credit, 1 have used him as did the others, the coppy of both which letters I fed!
your majefly also. The lord Harrys t.ath also sent unto me but not written, ad I
have returned unto him in like fort.

Ac A1NST the 20th day of this month there is a generall afferebly of all the churches,

flires, and boroughs towns of this realm, namely of such as be contented to repair tc
th. f lords to this town, where it is thought the whole state of this matter will be han:-
leled, and I fear me much o the queens diSadvantage and danger; only) the lord to
L'dinoton and some others which be best affected unto her do provile some remdy (
for I perceave the great number, and in manner all but chiefly the common pco.
ple, which have assisted in there doings, do greatly diflonor the queen, and mind l2.
rioufly either her deprivation, or her defruiion ; I used the best means I can (conii-
dering the furie of the world here) to proroge this affcnibly, for that appeareth to me
to be the bcft remedy: I may not fpcak ofdiflblution of it, for that m y not be abidcn,
and I should thereby bring my fclf into great hatred and perril. 'The chiefeft of the
lords which be here present at this time dart nt show so much lenity ro the queen a,
I think they could be conticte ', for fear of the rage of the people. The woimen he
molf furious and impudent againf the queen, and yet the men be mad enough;
so as a firanger over bufie may soon be made a sacrifice amongef} them.

THIERE was a great bruit that the Hamiltons with their adherents would put tleir

Force into the fields against the 24-th us this month, but I do not find that intent fJ t uc,
as the common bruit goeth.

TIHE earle of Argyll is in the high lands, where there is trouble among his own
contr men.

THE earle of Lennox is by these lords much desired here, and I do believe yeoa

majefly may so use him, and direct him, as he (hall be able to promote your purp)ui
with these men.

T'l- l. earle of Argyll, the Hamiltons and he be incompatible.- I do ifa'
ain.iIgeft thie Hamiltons, Argyll and the company two fIrange anrd findry h!imouri<.

1l,\ A L'i ONS do make flow of the libhety of the queen, and profecut" that vwlr:

great carncicfsr, because they would have thcfc lords destroy her, ratlhe thail fli
Ihould be recovered from ihem by violence ; ailother time th(y fi;rc to d lirc her ii
berty, and Blothcll's dtcllruEtion, hccaluf they would comlnpa5 a marr-ina lhctu'it t.I
queen and the lord of Arbroth.

T'll earle of Argyll doth aflct her liberty, and Bothcll's dcfliru-cion, bccaufc hr
would marry the queen to his brother.

y/ '

AND yet neither of them, notwithfanding their open concurance, (as appeareth

by their bond) doth difcovcr their minds to each other, nor mind one end ; Knox is
not here, but in the weft parts, he and the reft of the miniflers will be here at the
great aflembly, whos austerity againf the queen I fear as much as any man's.

BY some conferrence which had with ome of this councill, me thinketh that

they have intelligence that there is a disposition in the queen of Scotland, to leave this
realm, and to retire herself either into England, or into France, but molt willingly
into England, for such -- and mifikings as she knoweth hath been, and is meant
unto her in France, leaving the regiment either to a number of persons deleagued,
and authorized by her or t, fIume one or more.

AND it please your majcfty, I tliinik it not amiss to put yow in remembrance,

that in cafe the said queen conme into England by your allowance, without the French
king's concent, he fiall looe her dowery in France, and have little or nothing from
hence to entertain her; and in cafe she do go into France with the king's content-
ment, she may be an infllument (if he cn recover favour, as time will help to can-
cell her disgrace) cither by matchilng with some husband ( f good quality, or by forme
other devi'e, to work new unquictnefs to her own contry, and so consequently to
your inajcily's.

HEREFORe. it mav please your m jcf-y to confiicr of this matter, aricl to let me

know your pleasure with convenient ipeed, how I shall anfwcr the fame, i, it Ie
propounded unto mie, either by the queen, or by the councill, as a piece of the end
anld compolition. For I am lure, of late, he hath feccmed very dfirous to have the
matter brought to pals, that he might go into England, rtaining her eflatc and
juri/Uiction in herfeil, though' he do not cxercife it; and likcwife I undcerftnd that
'omne of this council which be least affcted to her safety do think there is no other
way to save her. Thi's Ailmight' God preserve your majcfly in health honor and all
felicity; at EdinrI the 14 'July 567.
Sir Nicolas T-hrogmorton to Qclccn Elisabeth the i Sth July 1567, from

Edinburgh,
IT may please your majefly, ow nmight perceave by my letters of the 16"', how

far I had proceeded with these lord,, and what was their answer; since which AnO illai

time I have lioken particularly wih the earle Morton, the lord of Lidinton, an] Papc' Uiict.
Sir James Balfour captain of this caflle, at whose hands I cannot perceave that as yet
access to the queen to Lochleven will be granted me, flaying thcmfclves itill by the
labfence of the lords and others their aiiciatcs, which (they fay) they look for with-
in two davs; and for that I find, by likelihood and apparent pretcunptioiis, that
mine acces;, to the queen will hailly be granted, I have thought good not to defer
this diifatch untill I have a rclflute anliwcr in that matter.

MIAY it theciclr plcatc your ml;:ciLy to unidertland Robert Nleclvin returned from

the quc in iLoehlicen, to this town, the ('i' of July, and brought a letter frolm Iir
written of her own 1hai! to tce 1d1., 'which d,,th contain as I underlaiid nmttr ;l
i)llowctll-A lce(ucltl unto theu to lia:. coiilidcration of her health, and ii thely will
not put her to libel tv, to change the place of rcftiaiit to tile cafile of Stirlin;, to the
ca;d sic nmight lhave lic comilur anl coiinplof; ' ,hr l, aind if they w1l not cliitge

h ~:.c

43

her from Lochleven, he required to have Tome other gentlewomen about her, nam.
ing none.

To have her apothecary, to have ome modest minifter.-To have an imbroiderer

to draw forth such work as she would be occupied about, and to have a varlet of the
chamber.-Touching the government of the realm, he maketh two offers, which
are but generally touched in her letter, the particularitys be not specified, but refered
to Robert Melvin's credit, the one is to commit it only and wholly to the earle of Mur-
ray; the other is to the lords whose names ensue, afifted with such others, as they
/hall call unto them, that is to fay, the duke of Chattelrault, the earls of Morton,
Murray, Marr, and Glencairn.

SHE hath written unto them that I might have access unto her. - She re-

quireth further that if they will not treat her and regard her as their queen, yet to uc
her as the king their sovereigns daughter, (whom many of them knew) and as their
prince's mother.-She will by no means yield to abandon Bothell for her huflman1,
nor relinquish him ; which matter will do her most harm of all, and hardeneth thcic
lords to great severity against her.

SHE yeildeth, in words, to the prosecution of the murder.
I rAVE the means to let her know that your majesty hath ent me hither for her
relief.

I HAVE also perfwaded her to conform herself to renounce Bothell for her hlib.mi,

and to be contented to susser a divorce to pals betwixt them; he hath ent me word
that she will in no ways content unto that, but rather die; grounding herself upo:n
this reason, taking herself to be seven weeks gone with child, by renouncing BIothel,
she should acknowledge herself to be with child of a bastard, and to have forfeited
her honor, which she will not do to die for it; I have perfwaded her to save her own
life and her child, to choose the leafi hard condition.

MR, Knox arrived here in this town the 6 of this month, with whom I have had.
rome conference, and with Mr. Craig also, the other minister of this town.

I HAVE perfwaded with them to preach and perfwad lenity, find them both very

auflere, in this conference, what they shall do hereafter I know not, they are fir-
nifhed with many arguments, ome forth of the scripture, some forth of hiiorics,
some grounded (as they fay) upon the laws of this realm, fme upon practices uled
in this realm, and tonme upn the conditions and oth made by their prince at he;
coronation.

THE bishop of Galloway uncle to the earle of Huntley hath ent hither to thefr

lords, that his nephew the earle and ome others of that fide, may, at Linlithaow or
at Stirling, have ome communication with some appointed on this ide, aliur-iiir
them that there is a good disposition in the lords of the other party to concurre wiith
these, afilring further that they will not dissent for triffles or unnecelfiry thinrs, ,oil
(as I am given to understand ) they oan be pleased the queen's reftrint be contilul,
untill the murder be pursued in all persons, whereby the feperation of the (jqcen :i!,
Bothell is implyed, the preservation of the prince, the security for all men, andi.
good order taken or the govrrniice of the realn in tranquility.

CAPTl A IN Clerk, which hitti to long served in I)cmnaTk and icrvcdl t Newllave.l

did the 6'11 of this month (accomp;nyicd with one of his foldicrs, or raher the ii-
dlcl as the greater fame goeth) kill (ne \Vilitn a seaman, and fuinc a one ,is I,..i
grcret ctlimatiol i with the c lords both for his skill, his hardynefs, ihonlcly, iil \ni!
JiiK) llcf in thi, lion i

; I lwhereupon 'slki liath rnilcd him l s ; til ir (IiiiiiL 'l x . ''
44.

the ship which took Blacketer, which ship was appointed by these lords to go to
the north of Scotland to impeach the palfage of the earle Bothell, in cafe he went
either to the isles, or to any other place; by the death of this man this enterprizc
was dashed.

THE biffop of Galloway is come to Linlithgow, and doth desire to speak with
the lord of idington.

THE abbot of Killwinning hath ent for Sir James Balfour cptain of the calli
to have conference with him.

As I wrote unto your majeftv in my lafl, the Hamiltons now find no matter to

difever there lords and them asunder, but would concurr in all things (yea in
any extremity againfr the queen) so as that they miht be allured the prince of Scot-
land were crouncd king, and should dic without iflue, that the earle of Lenox's for
living should not inherit the croun of this realm, as next heir to his nephew.

AND although the lords and councelors tpeak reverently, mildl), and charitably

of their queen, so as I cannot gather by their speech any intention to cruelty or vio-
lence, yet I do find by intelligence, that the queen is in very great peril of her lite,
by reason that the people aflembled at this convention do mind vehemently the dc-
firution of her.

Ir is a public Ipeech amongst all the people, and amongst all cilatcs, (fIv;ng ot

the coutlfelors) that their queen hath no more liberty nor priviledge to commit mur-
der nor adultery, than any other private person, neither by God's law, nor by tl.c
laws of the realm.

'TH . earl Bothwell, and all his adherents and affociats, be put to the horn by

the ordinary justice of this town, named the lords of the feflion ; and command-
ment given to all hirriffs, and all other officers, to apprehend him, and all other
his followeis and reciptors.--l'he earl of Bothel's porter, and one ot his othcr
iervitors of his chamber, being apprehended, have contcfib(l such sundry circum-
It.ficcs, as it appeareth evidently, that lie the laid earl was one of the principal exe-
cutors of the murder, in his own perfan, acconpliany'd with indry others, o which
number I cannot yet certainly learn the nailmes but of three of them, that is t(
i;ly, two of the Ormiflon's of 'Tivotdall, and one lqayborn of lBollon ; the lords
would be lad that none of the murderers fiould have any fivour or receipt in Lni-
Iand, and hereof their desire is, that the officers upon the border ma;y be warned ;
iothcll doth lill remain in the north pirt:, but the lord 'ca o;i a;,d Fleming,
which have been there, have utterly abandoned him, and do repair hitherwards.-
The intelligence doth grow daily betwixt these lords, and those which held ocf; and
notwithliaiiding thefic lords have sent an hundred and fifty ha;(qubutlhrs to Stirllt, to
keep the town and palitge from urprize; and have thc) do(lo in like manner to
St. Johnston, which be the two palliocs from the north, aind weft to this town,
I do underfiand the captain of Ilunbar is miuch bllcdc in lortitryinig that place, I dj
mervile the carriages be not impeached othcrwiCe than they ) ,e.

(). late this (queen hath written a letter to the captaill of the l.il callc, wli ii

li.ath beeCn illlprizcd ; and thcicby matter is dilcovcicd wvhich nlmkcth little (t thl;c
lquen's advant;ige.

TI lus, lhaiing nIone other matter vworthy your maijefiy' knoxledghe, I Ihcli'c c!

Cod to prolier your mn:ijeiv with on; life, pI.r'lcc healh, alid PlOI)'iiOL' II:- I>.
At Edinburgh the l8th of .July 15 (7.

b~.I.l

l ,' 'A r,
V ,IL [.

1' I'

Lectter of Sir N :!..oi Th rognmorton to tle right honourable the earl of

I ,icelter, ki't. of the order, and one of the loids of her majesty's
mout honourable privy Counccl.

Y mny former diijlachCe fCnt to her nlajefly, and Mr. Secretary, since the 2th

.' of lly), ) of July, your lrihips mighlt h.l ve perceived the t:ite of this country, and to
.6-. wvhat end thele mattcrs be li:e to come; so as not to trouble our lordship with
Paper ife, many words; this queen is like very shortly to be deprived of her royal estate, her
from the Oti- son to be crowned king, and she detained in p-rilibn within this ealm, and the fame
i nal. to be governed, in the young king's name, 1h a councel, consisting of certain of

the nobility, and other wife men of this calm : so as it is cafy to be seen that the
power and ability to do any thing to the comiiioditT of the qucen's majefy, and the
realm of England, will chicfl, and in manner wholly, reft in the hands of these
lords, and others their afl;ciats, afiembled at Edinburgh. Now if the queen's n.-
jvty will flill perlift in her former opinion towards the queen of ScotlanJ (unto
whom he alall be able to do no good) then I do plainly fee that thele lords and all
their accomplices will become as good French, as the French king can winl, to all
intents and purposes. And as for the Hamiltons, the earls of Arguile, Huntlyc,
and that faction, they be already so far inchanted that way, as there needeth little
devise to draw them to the French devotion. Then this is the state of things so
come to pass of this country, that France has Scotland now as much conjoined un-
to them, to all purposes, as ever it was ; and what an infirument, the yung prince
tvill prove, to unquiet England, I report me to your lordships wisdoms, and there-
fore contidering the weight of the matter, and all the circumfiances, I trust your
lordships will well bethink you in time, (for 'tis high time) how to advise her maiefty,
to leave nothing undone that may bring the prince of Scotland to be in her pofefifon,
or, at the least, to be at her devotion. And amongst other things, that can ima-
gine, for the first degree, nothing is more meet to bring this to effeEt, than to al-
lure this company here aflembled, to bear her ma:iefty their favour. Some talk hath
pafled between the lord of Liddington and me, in certain conferences, ahout th s
matter. By him I find, that when her majetiy hall have won theli men to her
devotion, the principal point that will make them conformab'e to deliver their prince
into England, will reft upon the queen, and the realms enabling him to the fuc-
cession of the crown of England, for fault of iue of the queen's majesty' body,
some other things will also ite required, as the charge of the laid prince and his train,
to be at the charge of iEngland. I do well perceive that these men will never be
hrought to deliver their prince into n-land, without the former condition, for the
luccetlion of ' lng lnd; for (liith iilddington) that taking place, the prince shall be
as dear to the people of 'lai as to t pople of Scotland ; and the one will be
as caticlt: of his prcfrvation as the other. ()ther iife, he faitlh, all things confider-
<cd, it will he cl ledl(lc tlt the Scottiihmen have put tcir I lince to be kept in f; fcty,
as thof which cnilt tie lep to be kept by the wlv(s. So as for coircltfi(n,
your lordfhils may perccivc here will be the fco;e of tis matter. As unto the de-
live ingof him i upon hotages, lie Ifeth, let no man think, that the condition of

tilh

the fuccefion not being accomplsihed, the nobility and the gentry will never consent
to leave thernfelves deffitute of their sovereign, upon any hostages, neither upon any
promises, nor likelihood of good to issue in time to come. It were not good for
yourselves (faith he) that the matter wrre so handled; for then you should adventure
all your goods in one hip, which nm,!it have a dangerous efect, confidering the un-
willingness of tle queen our lbvereiu to clnt to cllabliihing any fucceflor to the
crown. And then, how uumCietc were i:, that her majesty having in her pofTefion
already all luch peroi as do pretend to it, or be inheritable to the crown, to have
our prince also in hcr cuffody. lor t) there might follow, without good capitula-
tions, a flrange and dangerous iiliic, tho' the queen your nifirefs do think that luch
imaginations could not proceed but from by heats, a you have uttered unto us on
her behalf. W'hat is come to pals ince my' lalt dispatch, and how far forth things
are proceeded, I refer your lordilip to be informed by my letters sent unto her ma-
jefly, at this time. And to I pray almighty God, preserve your lordship in much
honour, and felicity. At Edcnburgh this 24th of July, 1567.

It may please your good lordfbip to make my lord Stuard partier of this letter.

The queen to Sir Nicholas Throckmorton.

By the queen.

RUST Y and right well beloved, we greet you well, for as much as we do lh of Aug,
confider that you have now a long time remained in those parts, without ex- 156 7.

pedition in the charge committed unto you, we think it not meet eeing there hath
not followed the good acceptation and fruit of our well meaning towards that state,
which good reason would have required, that you should continue there any longer,
our pleasure, therefore, is, that ou hall, immediately upon the receipt hereof, fend
your lervant Middlemore unto the lords and eflates of that realm, that are afiembled
together, willing him to declare unto them, that it cannot but leem very strange
unto us, that you hav;ng been scent from us, of such good intent, to deal with them,
in matters tending so much to their cwn quirt, and to the benefit of the whole
eflate of their country, they have so far furgotten thenmfel'es, and o ightly re-
garded us and our good meaning, not only in delaying to hear you, and deferring
your access to the queen their overeign, but also, which is itrangeft of all, in not
vouchfafinlg to make any answer unto us. And atho' there dealilng be such, in-
deed, as were not to be looked for at their hands, yet do we find their usage and
proccedinigs towards their Sovereign and queen, to overpass all the re{t, in o itrange
a degree, as we for our part, and we luppofe the whole world betidcs, cannot but
think them to have therein gone to far beyond the duty of fubjetis, as mutl needs
remain to th-ir perpetual touche for ever. And therefore he shall fay, that we have
tho't good, without consuming any longer time in vain, to revoke you to our pre-
fence, requiring them to grant you liflcnce and pali)ort lo to do, which when you
hliall have obtained, we will that you make your repair hither, unto us, with as, conl-
venient I)eed as you mnay. Given, Lt.

Indorfcd 6h August, 1567.

Ri -.

Thrognorton to the right honourable Sir William Ccc l, knight, or.e of

her majcfty's privy council and principal fecrctary, give thcle.

S I P,
i 2th A;1t'U, HT AT I have learned, since the arrival of my lord of Ilurrav, and Mtof.

IV;-d

lp'aop eV()sli dc Linnerd, you fllall understand by my letter to her majesty, at this time.
Pac'. O,+cc,
t( oin t'e Ori- Thc French do, in their negotiations, as they do in their drink, put water to their

tiual wine. As I am able to fee into their doings, they take it not greatly to the heart

how the queen sleep, whether fle live or die, whether the be at liberty or in pi-
znn. The mark they fihoot at, is, to renew their old league, and can be as wil
contented to ta!c it of this little king, (howfocver his title be) and the fame hy the
order of there lords, as otherwie. Lyneroll came but ye{terday, and me thinkcth
he will not tarry long; you may guess how the French will eek to displease telf
lords, when they changed the coming of La Chappelle des Ourfins for this man,
because they doubted that de la Chappelle should not be grateful to them, beingl:.
pap)if. Sir, to speak more plainly to you, than I will do otherwilc, inc think-
eth the earl of Murray will run the course that those men do, and be par-
taker of their fortune. I hear no man peak more bitterly againfii the tr;iage',
and the players therein, than he, so little like he hath to horrible fins. I hear an
inkling that Lcedington is to go into France, which I do as much mislike, as any
thing, for our purpose. I can assure you the whole protcftants of France will li\c
and die in there incas quarrels; and, where there is bruit amongf you, that aid,
should be ent to the adverse party, and that Martigucs flould come hither itn
bome force; Mons. Baudelot hath afilred me of his honour, that infcead of Mai-
tigucs coming aaiiift them, he will come with as good a force to succour themn
And if that be ent under meaner conduct, Robert Stuart shall come with as many
to fortify them. But the conitable hath aftured these lords, that the king meaneth
no way to offend them. Sir, I pray you find my revocation convenient, and specd
you to further it, for I am here now to no purpose, unless it be to kindle there lortds
more against us. Thus I do humbly take my leave of you, from Edcnburgh te
12th c. August, 15 7.

Yours to use and command.

The Qeen to Nicholas Throckmorton.

R U S TY and well-beloved we greet you well. \Ve have, within theiC two
Jdays, received three iiidry letters of your-, of the 20th, 22d, and 2dl, ot

tli; montlh, having not beiore those received any f Ivcn days before ; and do tmil
ly tliefc your letters, that you have very dil-igrtl and largely advertiscd us of d.
the h sty and pcremtury procedings there ; whicl a we nothing like, so we ;u!!
in timen to Ic them wax colder, and to ICeCive fumel ret ratinll. 1or we(: (:i11ii:
p iriivc, that they with whoi you hve dealt, can anl'vcer tile doubts illoudJ b t!i,
Ilamiltous. w'lio loNwlocver tl:cv may be caliicdl for thtir private rflpect:, et ih<;('
thlings whnich ti('y IiJI C, V eill b illov d by ;al realonabl pe r n' . l'ir i t! v

i in..'e
48

may not, being noblemen of the realm, be suffered to hear the queen their fovere'gn
deilali her mind concerning the reports which are made of her, by such as keep her
in captivity, how ihould they believe the reports, or obey them, which do report it ?
and therefore our meaninr is, you shall let the Haniiltcs plainly underfland, that
v e do weli allow of their proceedings, (as far forth as the fame (doth concern the
nucen theiir fobveci n: for her relif ;and in luch things as shall appear reaLonable for
us therein to do, f. r the queen our silt r, we will be ready to perform the farme-.
And vwherc it is o (quirdl, that upon your corning thence, the lord Scroope should
deal v ith tthe o I.;riis to impart their meanings to us, and ours to them, we arc
well pleaitd therewith, and we require you to advertize the lord Scroope hereof by
your itrcr;, and to will hlin to shew hinfelf favourab!e to them in their actions, that
may appear plainly to tend to the rlief t the queen, and maintenance of her autho-
rity. Anid as we wilicd our ccretary to write unlto ou, that upon your micfilae done
to the earl of l\urrav, you might return, so our meaning is you fhaii. And i' these
our letters fhali meet 'iiu on the way, yet we will have you advcrtile bth the losd
Scroope, and the inamiltons, of our meaning.

Indoif.dl 293 Aug. 15(57.

No. XXII. (Vol. I. p. 373.)
Sir Nicholas Throckmlorton to the archbinlop of St. Andlew's and te

abbot of Arbrothe.

A FTER my t ood comimendaitions to your good lordhips, this hall be to adver-

. 1
-

tize you, that the quenu's rnajely in foireign; havinlg lint nic hither her 't ;ier-OUiiL,

ambafiaJor to the queen her -filer your fi)vcreigln to communicate unto her such f1r1 i 'pur
matter as he thought meet, confidcilic the ood amity and intelligcnice betwixt ich

l i11i -

them, who being dct.:i;incd in captivit\, .as your loidfhips kno. ) contrary to the duty 1 ilt tc
of all good ubjets, for the ei! irocnmc't f wh,;.e pelion, antd tihe rcfiittion of her
to her digniit\, her i:ajilty gase mn i charge to, ticat with thcfie ards aficmbled at
EdIenbuigh, ofifririg the all reai in,.bl coniiitions anld rnians as might be, fol
the ftife uard of the young princce the punillilmei t of tile I;tc hlorlible niurlcr, the
difolution of m

the marriage Lbct:,xth quec ;;d ti; c of Bod)vel, a;ld Iaiii' !cr

their owni fureti.s, n the notiatio;n (,f which matters I elic (b you.r li (ii
well kow) i-pent a ]long tiime to no 'urpofe, not bc; ig I to p;'e il in .:.y t'i;
wilh tlole- lord>, to the quien my fvericin's flrifit, Kn. f v-)t i

wlh t';,i! (i rio-

ceedings towaids her i[,j. sty. atd u;,l:!i u! L 'eh viour tow.;idI thei;r [oxic;i, I ]li'
advertiled the ju t

(l'. nli i)y ; f' (. n t hcin ii dJ to be.;' this ioii:n l ;

given me in charge to d..'. iCe lul}ier lc'iure titto llit ci, in I(bh I rt ti v
may twcl jitCiceive her i :iilit' ,hti difillss' Of thiir piIoCr digL , ail.dl rl.rclur; n l,1ti
rino k-ld mne. And fii tlir la! i, i t l i;1 (:lI to) cl iiiiii.iiC t the l.ime i;lt
your iord!,ip , eIquir ^ on t, 1 lit l: tw, 1 !', n- v (d pri ti: heiLe, ( shich
!l}i[l tbl, (!(,d wiliin :

s 111 i s I I;,'1- r(c.ixed i vil f io

t lm )yoi wi\:.;t yit, .,;:.

vc:tur conle!'eratces will :lfinr1dl' d , to,, t

f hi e (ili1l S, i]

\ o

ii 'o ci:i ,:t l:l',-\, ;,. to[

rcftoi her to her fornil r d ,its ly lor o o:l' ( t, i;.' ; fui.lh tllie: i,,i ', 1. e ri -
ftlid a l1 oth( r n)c d lri n, to thfl 'ld tl- ' i erl':, ii .rcilv nj\e lo i i
e , ti:.;' .oiicar

i or Iso 'iis j ii .i
;!, Iio, l isle ei. Irp ;1 /e.

'~'[[il }t~ll[ tt)t~lh~l~3
;x :},~:,]l~,m m lab c (.'11;t r[,l t('

AND in cafe, through the dispersion of your afiociates, your lordships can neither

communicate this matter amongst you, nor receive resolution of them all by that
time, it may please you to fend me the opinions of so many of you as may confir
together, within two or three days, so as I may have your answer here in this town
by Monday or Tuesday next at the furthest, being the 9th of this August; for I
intend (God willing) to depart towards England, upon Wednesday following. rhus
I mofl humbly take my leave of your lordships at Edenburgh, the 3th of Aug. 567.

Indorfed r3th of Aug. 1567.

Sir Nicholas Throckmorton to the lord Herrys.

i <

Ipl; - r y OUR good lordship's letter of the 3th of August I have received the i9th of

P.aper-o!Lcc, the fame. For answer whereunto it may like your lordship to understand, that
fTrom a copy I will signify unto you plainly, how far forth I am already thoroughly initruAed of
which fir Ni- the queen's majesty my sovereign's pleafurc, concerning the detention of the queen
t hool. ltnt to your sovereign, and concerning her relief.
f crtiry C'- '
To the fir her majefly hath given in charge, to use all kinds of persuasion in her

c'. ~ name, to move thele lords aflembled at Edenburgh to desist from this violent and un-

dutiful behaviour, which they use toward their sovereign. And in this part, besides
the hew of many rcafons, and sundry persuasions of amicable treaty with them, her
mnajcfly hath willed me to use (ome plain and severe speech unto them, tending
so far forth, as if they would not be better advised, and reform there their out-
rageous proceedings exercised againit their sovereign, that then they might be assured
her majelty neither would, nor could indure such an indignity to b done to the
queen, her good coulin and neighbour.

AND notwithstanding these my proceedings with them, they have made proof to

be little moved thereby, for as yet neither will they conient to the enlargement,
neither susser me to speak with her. So as it feemeth to me, it is superfluous to
treat any more with them after this manner. Vhcreupon I have advertised the
queen's majesty my sovereign, expecing daily her najcfty's further oder; and as I
shall be advertised thereof, so will not fail to signify the fame to your good lordfliip; and
in the mean time will advertise her majetfy alol, wlityour lo(rdship hath written untu
me. 'IThus with my due colnmendations to your good lordship, 1 commit the fJiUt
to almighty God, refting always to do you the pIeaifirc and lirvice that I can lxv,
fully. At Edenburgh.

Indorfed 24th of August, 1567.

No. XXIII. (Vol. I. p. 383.)
Account of lord Herreis's bchaviour in the parliament held December

15, ,567.

p r OicE lord Herrys made a notable harangue, in the name of the duke and himr-
Paper Ofliec. 1 self, their friends and adherents, (the duke hiimrelI, the earl of CailillIs, auld

the abbot of Kilwinning being allb prcfent) to pcrfuadc the union of the whole realm

in

in ene mind.' Wherein he did not spare to f/t forth solemnly the great praise that
part of this nobility did defcrve, which in the beginning took meanes for punifnment
of the earl Bothweil, as also sccing the queen's inordinat affetlion to that wicked
man, and that she could not be induced by their persuasion to leave him, that in
fequefiring her person within Lochlevin, they did the duty of noblemen. That their
honourable doings, which had not spared to hazard their lives and lands, to avenge
their native country from the nflnderous reports that were spoken of it among ther
natiolns, had well deserved that all their brethren hould join with them in to good
a cause. That lie aid they, in whofC names he did speak, would willingly, ai
without any compu'lion, entcr thcmfelves in the faine yoke, and put their lives and
lands in the like hazard, for maintenance of our caule. And if the queen hcrfelf
were in Scotland, accomianied with 20.oco men, they will be of the fame mind,
and fight in our quarrcl. lie hoped the remainder noblemen of their party, Hunt-
cey, Arguile, and others, which had not as yet acknowledged the king, would come
to the fame conformity, whereunto he would allo carnefily move them. And if they
will remain obtfinate, and refute to qualify themselves, then will the duke, he, and
their friendls, join with us to correct them, that otherwise will not reform themselves,
So plausible a oratioll, and more advantageous soir our party, none of ourlelves
c,)uld have niae. He did not forget to terire my lord regent, by the name of re-
gent, there was o mcntiom at all of the earl of Murray) and to call hilm grace at
every word, w.hen his i weches were directed to him, accompanying all his -o:ds
with low cc;urteliic after his anner.

No. XXIV. (Vol. I. p. 402.)
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 8th Aug. I568, from

Bolton.
U--- U T surely this queen doth seem, outwardly, not only to favour the form, An original.

but also the chief article of the religion of tle gofpcl, namely, juflification Papcr-O)tice.

bv faith only: and he hcareth the faults of papefCry revealed, by preaching or other-
wife, with contented ears, and with gentle and weak replys, and fhie doth not seem
to like the worse of religion throw me.
Part of a letter from fir Francis Knollys to Cecil, 21 Septcnibc, 56S,

from Bolton.
- T came to this queen's cars of -late that she was bruited to be lately turned

to the religion of the gofpll, to te great dlikin of the papifl heca-

bouts, which thing flc herfelt conllfi'ct

; t ulo nl, ;and yetCeidy openly ill the giceIt

chamlber, whlen thie allcmhbly wa, lull, al Ine

lo p.ipilt l. prcllt,, t1 took o.cili

to fjek of ieligionl, land thel opeiu ly fll e Pi fcld hetr!ilt to hle ut tle papill Cllo,
;and took upon liec to patronizc the i lallic, i:uol e arnlluly tllan i e

}C ,l.l donr a trlcat

N]lle altoic, altho' lier defeInces and argilrlt iiii! we(l loI weak, that tle C}: t ot l

o ier

?'t'iecl' wals only to ftew h ler zeal ; ;1nd all wtt 1v ,

; l, llto

il ilo l(i, wl 1 i fliJ, to
i clCr become lb coilitdentIyl'al. kw utir in ,.' '.i,, whx', lid 1', *ot.i it .have

7 1le

mne to loose France and Spain, and all my friends in other places, by eeming to
change my religion, ad yet Ift am, not assured the queen *my good filter will be my
asured friend, to the fatisfadion of my honour and expectation.

''o. XXV. (Vol. I. p. 404.)

Queen Elizabeth to the earl of Murray.

P.ipr-Office I ICHT trusty and right well beloved cousin, we greet you well. Where we
From a copy hear fay, that certain reports are made in sundry parts of Scotland, that what-
corrcAted by soever should fall out now upon the hearing of the queen of Scotts cause, in any
fecretarv Cc- proof to convince or to acquit the said queen concerning the horrible murder of her
cAl. late husband our cousin, we have determined to restore her to her kingdom and go-

vernment, we do to much mislike hereof, as we cannot indure the fame to receive
any credit: and therefore we have thought good to aflure you, that the fame is un-
truly devised by the authors to our dishonour. For as we have been always certified
from our said fitter, both by her letters and messages, that he is by no means guilty
or participant of that murder, which we wish to be true, so surely if he hould be
found justly to be guilty thereof as hath been reported of her, whereof we would be
very sorry, then, indeed, it hould behoove us to confider otherwite of her cause than
to satisfy her desire in restitution of her to the government of that kingdom. And
so we would have you and all others think, that shall be disposcd to conceive ho-
nourably of us and our actions.

Indorfd o2 Sept. 1568.

No. XXVI. (Vol. I. p. 409.)

Sir Francis Knollys to Cecil the 9th of O&ober,. I568, from Ybrk.

An otrighal. -- /}Y lord's grace of Norfolk fending for me to Bolton, to attend upon
P'apcr-Oicice. . him here Thursday last, I made my repair hither accordingly, mean-

ing to flay here until Iunday next ; as touching the matters of the commiflion, that
his grace and the reft have from her highncfs, his grace hath 'imparted unto me of
all things thereunto appertaining, and what hth hitherto pafled, and altho' the
matters be too weighty for my weak capacity, to presume to utter any opinion of
mine own thrcof, yet I fee tit my lord lern is for his parte labourcth a reconcilia-
tion, to be had wthout the extreity of odious accufltions; rhy lord of Ledintol
aso faith to mc, thit he could wish these matters to be ended in dulce maner, io
le:t it might be one With fifety ; of the reft you can conceive, by the advertilemcnt,
:ril w\riltings, sent up by our commiflioncrs.

No. XXVII.

-A letter from the bishop of Ross to the queen of Scots, from York,

Odtober 1568.

LEIS your majcely conferred at length with A. ane great part of a night,

p who affurit me that he had reasoned with B. this Saturday C. on the field,
who determinate to him that it was the D. determinit purpose not to end yourcott. ibC.,
cause at this time, but to hold the fame in fufpence, and did that was in her power, lig. C.
to make the E. pursue extremity, to the effe&t F. and his adherents might utter Copy,
all they could to your dishonour, to the effea to cause you come in disdain with
the hail fubjec's of this realm, that ye may be the mair unable to attempt any
thing to her disadvantage. And to this effet is all her intention, and when they
have produced all they can against you, D. will not appoint the matter inltantly,
but transport you up in the country, and retain you there, till he think time to hewr
you favour, which is not likely to be hastily, because of your uncles in France, and
the fear she has of yourself to be her unfriend. And therefore their counsel is, that
ye write an writing to the D. meaning that ye are informit that your fubjeds which
has offendit you.-This in effee that your majefly hearing tile eflite of your as-
fairs as they proceed in York, was informed that her majesty was informed of you,
that you could not gudely remit your fubjecs in such fort as they might credit you
hereafter, which was a great cause of the flay of this controversy to be ended. And
therefore persuading her D. effectually not to trust any who had made such narration
,Bt like as ye had rendered you in her hands, as most tender to you of any living,
so prayit her to take na opinion of you, but that ye wald use her counfell in all
your affairs, and wald prefer her friendship to all others, as well uncles as others,
and afllre h;er to keep that thing ye wald prornife to your subjes by her advice.
And if D. discredit you, ye wald be glad to satisfy her in that point be removing
within her realm in ecret and quiet manner, where her G. plealed, until the time
her G. were fully satisfied, and all occasion of discredit removed from her. So that
in the mean time your realm were holden in quietness, and your true fuljets reftor-
ed and maintained in their own estate, and sic other things tending to this effi:e
And affirms that they believe that this may be occasion to cause her credit you that
ye offer so far; and it may come that within two or three months she may become
better-minded to your grace, for now fle is not well minded, and will not flhw you
any pleasure for the causes furefaid.

. B. The title of this paper is in Cecil's hand ; the following key is addl in
another hand.

A. The laird of Lcthington.
B. The duke of Norfolk.
C. Vas the day he rode to Cawold.
1). The queen of n17 1gl.iJ.
.. 'Ihe quccen of Scot conlil:loli ,:' r
F. The c arll of lurray,
Vol.. II.

No. XXVII. (Vol. I. p. 41.)

Delib'anti( oF secretary Cecil's concerning Scotland, Dec. 2r, I5 ,
p'.p: (-':Ie. T ls 1,,: . va' for Engla:nd, but not the caficf:, that the queen of Scotts mig:t re.-

an:L eeii.' of

eh..r crown, and the state continue as it is.

';;i;: I,'c i..' :i., t En glnd profitable, and not so hard. - That the (iuet'

ro c(-(:t i, n': i in duced, by lo!me perf;'aliolns, to agree that her son miht ci.
ti::uc Luci, lbc: u i he is crown'd, and hc lelf to remain all queen; and that th
gi ' rn msnt of the ica n mi ht be committed to luch peribns as the queen
.r, rl'n'i (!n ; c:} namie, so ;s for the nomninl.tlo of them it might be ordered, thai
aI ccl;vnieet r unihcr of persons of Scotland hould be firlt named to the queen o,

.n :a:, iifiCercntly for the queen of Scotts, and for her son, that is to iy, thi

:
ii all by tie_ queen of Scotts, and the other by the earle of Lennox and

!x:lv Lnci ni::, p:rents to the child ; and out of thoe, the queen's majcf}y of Eng-
l.tl! to nmar:: choice for all the offices of the realm, that are, by the laws of Scot-

!.,d i 'pof: ,le by the king or queen of the land.
1 H. x ui: il] this may be done by the queen's majefly, the government remain in

tr, h ;ds of the earle of Murray as it is, providing he shall not dispose of any o.-
iici s or iperpetuils to continue any longer but to these offcred of the premiles.

l'I H.r a pailiaiimelt be lummoned in Scotland by fevcral commandmients, both c;
the queen of Scotts and of the young king.

--- THA' T hofages be delivered into England on the young king's behalf, to the

nu liber of twelve perionis of the earle of Mlurray's part, as the queen of Scotts iiali
name; and likewvie on the queen's behalf to the like number as the earl of \lMurray
shall name; the fame not to be any, that have by inheritance or office cause to be
in this parliament, to remain from the heginning of the iummons of that parliamcnt,
intill three mont sl after the parliament ; which hostages shall be pledges, that the
-r cods of either part shall keep the peace il all cafes, till by this parliament it be
concluded, that the ordinance which the queen of Egland shall devile for the go-
vrninent of the realm, (being not to the hurt of the crown of Scotland, nor con-
trlarv to the la'vs of cotland for any man's inheritance, as the fame was before tile
parl.imln t t Edin'. the Decem', 1567) hall be eflablilhed to be kept and
t.b3)ed, under pain of high tcrafon to the breakers thereof.

---'In AT by te fame parliament allo be flablilied all executions and judgments
y'i'Cn againt any person fur the death of te late king.

-- 1-' r bv the e parliament, a reniflion to be made universally from the

oucern <f Scotts to any hei contrarys, and also from every one fubijcCt to anothe,
u;in?, :;h;t rctitttion he made of ands and houses, and all other things heritable,
:!at il ae cben, by cither lide, taken from them which were the owners thereof, at
the i i.irimittiil (it thle queen of Scots to Lochlevin.

I'l -. T by thu e (ani l piiliamnent it be declare I who filall Ibe ficcflrs to the crowVi

I/' llt l- '

t <e ()of Sr;t, and Iher inlle ; or el!', that uch light as tile I). of C(lI:-

,io! lr.1 ltr htl .it rtlihe a.iril c of tle (). of '-cuts with tlhe lord l;rillcy, m ia b
<
r 'iibrv t I; ;,r l nut ]*: j,,iTir ,'l.

i ;.. .t (t (i. ; ',

1, y Ii)'.v leave of the rlq.iclnl' mnjely of E1r' l.id, t( wc!xe

. * ;L t' i ' a;', ti t i.,! p. l!.:ll nt, *ind thliat lie flall li C 1)t lalt u tl of l:.l ,il. , u ith-

( it ;t' ' .'Il l c I.t . (.f til:

, < 'lii i ': m .jti ly.

'I i' i hi ,n,,
':: l.l , idl 1'e n iiit.h,.d ai l nii.:lht up in lt ) .lrl , il!' [ .

'1

a ,l t .1 t',
54

Ir is to be confidered, that in this cause the composition between the queen and

her fubjc's may be made with certain articles, outwardly to be seen to the world
for her honour, as though all the parts hould come of her, and yet for the surety
of contrarys, that certain betwixt her and the queen's majelty are to be concluded.

No. XXVIII. (Vol. I. p. 42 .)

The queen to Sir Francis Knolleys, 22 Jan. 15638-9.
W E greet you well, we mean not, at this point, be any writing, to renew i;.. ,''.D

that which it hath pleased God to make grevious to us and forryfull to yow;

but forbearing the fame as unmeet at this point, having occasion to command yow
in our service, and yow also whileft yow are to serve us. We require yow to con-
rider of this that followeth with like consideration and diligence, as hkitherto yiw
have accufumate in our fervife ; at the time of our lall letters written to vow the
tourteenth of this month for removing of the queen of Scots, we had u:icrilftrini
out of Scotland of certain writtings Ilnt by her from thence into Scotland, am'o:',tt
the which one is found to contain great and manifefl untruths touchiin us and o:-r
allo, as shall and may plainly appear unto yow by the coppy of the famile, vi!'i;i
likewise we fend yow, and because at the fame time we were advertised, tt it fhoild
be shortly proclaimed in Scotland, though then it was not, we thought good firlt to
remove the queen, before we would disclose the fame, ad then expcti the itlfe theric-
of; and now, this day by letters from our cousin of Hunfdon we are al'ertai;lc,
that since that time the fame matters contained in the writting, are pub!iflcii i
diverlf parts of Scotland, whereupon we' have thought it very nmeet, for the d:i:-
charge of our honor, and to confound the falfchood contained in tt writtint, :ot
only to have the fame reproved by open proclamation upon our froiitiels, tihe cop .r
whereof we do herewith fend yow, but alib in convenient fort to c)large that quee;
therewith, o ai fnc may be moved to declare the authors thereof, and perC;jlet'rs of
lier to write in such slanderous fort such untruths of us ; and in the mncan leaf;n, w
have here fiayed her comnmifioners, knowing no other whom w may more prb;a-
bi r preflme to he parties hereunto, then they, untiil the queen fhili lnmne fui;: .
other, and auit them ; who eing generally chtaried, without ex',rc'iTlug to thlint
anv paiticularity, do use all nnller of fpcchles to diiiCh.lur thiellilvcs ; v;.hcrif)rc

ur pFicafure is, tilit ye fiall, after ye have w'Cel! p-ei'ulfe the cop;.y of th!is ivtt ;!
leiit to Vow, flcedi!y declare unto her, that we have good u crfllt!i:_] r;i':.n u;
ro divcrfc letti rs and wl itting.s, ent by her into >coil.)nJ, fil ti 1 ' Hr ol .) ;i .l ;,
:i! ,nngeit one tluch writtinr, is ent w-ith her con aiiL i nlc'i xi'L !> .: i\

ir .i-

ready pubi)ifhed, as wc aie much troubled in min i that a prim'c;, p;i sl i\ i r'ii-r
a calife in our Ihinds so impli llclted wl1i.il 1 ictlti .

.d

i(i C iLi'] i"t;,

c.':il

o C';';(;' c' -

cet.ve iit her own muinf, I'- allo) of thelm l l.t f l , ! fiLi; 1 a ri'

i ;!pI)o Al;!C ln.ltcI':; a/. iiiiil i', and ou;' ho oll , l :) .i ft'; ' .1' to i ,',.'

'L .. .i :' '

ftiV t! e fanc lbei: known )l 1 n, tr t, !. : ; i. \,

i

':i i we will not thi k sl i ill ol );LI; ila

t

;e lt i ,,! I ;,: .' I .

;, r' :' ,

};'- h tIL. beel C IIn c (L i. lec d |itC 'c il(),r l1 ',' L il' 1 ,'. .' t'> t"! !,an,.' ) . .: ,I', '
' )

/i 1- ~' vie iity I eIti '}'

,i1 iit/C, w,' ic"(,1!.' lII', VeCI :l'. fhtl II 1 '*.

. I ;I .l1;l' .'.'. (,!i .i (1'::' i .', , L '

t,. w ;I di(im ',/i hcr T

t l .!,

(; m1!1,' ;

t, i : ,'',;. : v ,. *:'',.1, m l ;

1 ; 1 ;;

j i ,",

'1

(i;>.,' ))lc L thL' : litie r'; a li 1cr'. ,'

' . : *

'

, .;

. i 'i 1 I

: '1, i, i 1!' !, :1 ,

, ,,
,.,':

i ,

r; *j . 1 l;' i:"';; ll y c .j
ti"i, ;.ls..... ...i'..*.. . I ,' , , ,

answer f her, whether flc (hall deny the writing absolutely, or name any that have
been the adviflrs yIler-of, you fhall.fay unto her that we have stayed her commlii-
fioners here, uil we may have some anriwer hereof, because we cannot but impute-
to them lome part of this evil dealing, untill by her answer the authors may bc
knou; n ; and as ion as you can have direl aniwers firom her, we pray you to re-
turn us the fame; for as the cafe Itandeth, we cannot but be much disquieted with it,
having our honour so deeply touched contrary to any intention in us, and for any
t!hing we know in our judgment, the earl of Murray and others named in the fame
writing void of thought for the matters, to them therein imputed ; you may impart to
the queen of Scots either the contents of the slanderous letter, or few her the copy
to read it, and you may also impart this matter to the lord croop, to join itli
you these as you fiall think meet.
Sir Francis Knolleys to queen Elizabeth, from Wetherby the 2Sth January,

I568.

Ai Otihi.ri' _--T XWILL fuprefs my own griefss, and pass them over with fillence, for the
i tile l'; rr j present learning of your majefly-and for this queen's answer to the coppie

Oe. of her supposed letter sent into Scotland, I must add this unto my brother's let-

ter, cent unto Mr. Secretary yefternight late; in process of time, he did not deny
but that the first lines contained in the fame copie, was agreeable to a letter that she
had sent unto Scotland, which touched my lord of Murray's promise to deliver her
fiut into your majesty's hands, and to avoid that the fame should not be done without
her conlent, made her,-fhe sith, to,write in that behalf; she faith also that she wrote
tl!at they should gaufe a proclamation,,to be made to stir her people to defend my
lord of Miurray's intent and purpose, for delivering of her Lid son, and impunge his
tebellious government, as lile termed iti but she utterly denyeth to have written any
of the other slanderous parts of the aid letter touching your majefly; she said also,
that she fufpeaed that a Frenchman, ow in. Scotland, might be the author of some
Scotch letters devised in her name, bqt tie would not allow me to write this for
.a!ny part of her answer.

No. XXIX. (Vol. I. p. 42&.)
Sir Nicholas Throgmorton to the right honourable the lord of Lid

dington.

-t i.' V o
U R letter of the 3d of July, I have received the Isth of the fame. For

,. ' answer whereunto you shall understand, that friends here to my lord regent
! :, ti: Si('nd 1' y'ou d wish such a concurrence in all doings, as in matter and circumftanccs

1'· there arise no dissention, or at the lealt, no more nor other than the difference of

countries doth nccf'arily require. We here do think convenient that as few dclavys
be uscd as mi.y be, ltr, the colllfmmation of the matter in hand, which princip:lly
(to ad)vance, ,mr

a llowance, pr oicutionl, and fIpccdy promotion in Scotland, is inolt

rcquifitt, for you alc lo wile, and well acquainted with the tate o the world, iand
with all our humours, as you know that imc do allow and diliallow for realo, onimc
Ior rcislpi of multitludel, ione for rcfpecC of perfolis, 1alnd ti the ciuie is to gro tlr--
wa.rd :i, ncu do Ukli t let it fbrward. You re nut to seek that iome will ula ctau-

tloll ;,

tions, some ncuir.'try, tome delays, and Come will plainly impugne it. And yet all
and every of tliefe forts will alter their doings, when they hall fee the regent and
his favours accord v/ith the belt and greatest part there, and agree with the witfit
and strongef party liere. Tho' the matter has taken his beginning here, upondeep
and weighty coitf.!crations, for the weil of both the princes and their reilms, as
well prelently, as in time to come, yet it is thought most expedient, that the regent
and the realm of Scotland, by you, hould propose the matter tothe queen our so-'
vereign, if ye. like to uie convenience, good older, or be dilpofed to leave but a
lbar, and no wound of the hurts pait 1 would be glad that this my letter hould
come to your hands boil-e the convention, whereat it seems your queeWs'-ref-oration
aind marriage to the duke of Norfolk shall be propounded, either to 'ynne in them
both allowance or rejection. To which proceedingrs, becaule you pray me to write
frankly, I lay anrd rcat(,l thus, me thinketh you ufli a propoflerous order, to demand
the content of such persons, in such matters, as their minds to a good end hath ra-
ther been felt or prepared, and therefore there mull needs follow either a universal
rcfufal, or a taticious ivifion amongst you, whercly a blouflaring intelligence muff
needs come to E:'.n Elizabeth of the intendcd marriage from thence, which ought
to have been !f.crctly and advisedly propounded unto her highness; hereby you tee
then the meaning is, by his dealing, her rmajeffy hall be made inexorable, and o
bring the matter to such pafle, as this which should have wrought surety, quietness,
and a flay to both tl.e queens and their realms, hall augment your calamity, and
throw us your befl friends into divorfe with ou, and into unhappy division aongflg
ourselves; for you may not conje -ture that the matter is now in deliberation, but
expeceth good occasion for executing; fire I am you do not judge o slenderly of
the managing of this matter, as to think we have not cast the worst, or to enter
therein so far without the affiflance of the nobility, the ablelt, the wifetl, and the
mightiest of this realm except queen Elizabeth; from whom it hath been concealed
until you, as the fitteff minilier, might propound it to her, on the behalf of the re-
gent, and the nobility of Scotland. How far master WToddes defimations do carry
them of queen Elizabeth's afR.cions, and mafler secretary's, to aflifr the regent and
to suppress the quceen of Scott., I know not, nor it is not material; but 1 do aiu-
redly tnink, that her najclty ill pieser her furet, the tranquility of her reign, and
the conservation of her people, before any device, which may proceed from vaiun
discourse, or impcrficdions of passions, and inconliderate ailectiols. And as fur
Mr. Secretary, you are not to learn, that as he liketh not to go too fall afore, to he
coveteth not to ta;r'/ lcu far behind, and fiecial when the rliques be of no grcea:
value or pouer. it I could as well ailurel you of his niagnaniity, alnd con-
flancy, as of his !present conformity, 1 would t1)a confidently, you in.iy rcptf .;s
well of hiir in tlis min:ttr, as of thl duke of Norfolk, the carls of Arunlcl, P'cm-
broke, I.CiceftC'r, Biciford, '.t r' filury, alid the lCt of the nobility; all which (!do
embrace and rot:cle the atconlinlinin(it of thiis talc. i ha\e, according to y)'or
advice, written ptlcfcltl to iny I'rd R, f l:l, wit tlic f.iie zeal and care (if lis
wvcll-doing that I ote to li1i,, w\ho:n 1 lo\e a) ilon!,ur. M\r. Secct:lry hlth aif-
uired unto him the qti('c of SLoall nl's hvri.'nr and tl o opinion, wlict'ritih l;l
fIemcth to bL wil f.iti fy" . if your c('rdi 1c, a; I tri!}t, hi.icn our co ni. n lli;lr,
for it is very lict i; t t . ' I IC

'si '

l () I'tlraCth borllt 1l l

to my lord Rtc;t;,. i :, Th :; , '' " ').v

'! :.'-l'.: ' ci. \Voo) :
t . il.t tlrf t i ,s 1. r

y1 f 'ty

majesty's affc:tion to be vain, and Mr. Secretary otherwifc bent than he conjeS ureth
of him, the effe of which her majesty's letter you hall understand, by my lord
Leicester's letter unto you at this diipatch. At the court, 20th July, 1569.

No. XXX. (Vol. I. p 430.)

Part of a letter from the earl of Murray to L. B. probably Lord Burleigh,

l.
)h -T.1 E CAUSE I fee that great advantage is taken on small motions, and that
l:ilu. I -_ I the mention of the marriage, betwixt the queen my sovereign's mother,
B. . t. 43. and the D. of Norfolk, hath this while past been very frequent in both the realms,

and then I myself to be poken of as a motioner, which I perceive is at the lft
come to her majefy's ears. I will, for fati'faction of her highness, and the dil-
charge of my duty towards her majesty, manifest unto you my interest, and med-
ling in that matter, from the very beginning, knowing whatsoever is prejudicial to
her highness, cannot but be hurtful to the king my sovereign, this his realm, and me.
WVhat conferrences was betwixt the duke of Norfolk, and any of them that were
with me within the realm of England, I am not able to declare; but I am no wife
forgetful of any thing that passed betwixt him and me, either at that time, or since.
And to the end her inajefty may underifand how I have been dealt with, in this
matter, I am compelled to touch some circumstances, before there was any men-
tion of her marriage. In York, at the meeting of all the commifioners, I found
very-and neutral dealing with the duke, and others her highness's commiffioncrs,
in the beginning of the cause, as in the making of the others to proceed fincerelv,
and lo further. During which time, I entered into general fpecch, flicking at or
jult defence in the matters that were objected againfi u, by the said queen's com-
nillioncis, looking certainly for no other thing, but summary cognition in the cause
ol controversy,, with a finall declaration to have followed. Upon a certain day,
the lord Lithington's ecretarv rode with the duke to Howard, what purpose they
ha-d I cannot fay, but that night Lithington returnin, and entring in conferrence
with me upon the slate of our aion, I was advised by him to pass to the duke, and
require familiar conferrence, by the which I might have obme feeling to what iflue
our matters would tend. According to which advice, having gotten time and place
conenienict in the gallery of the house where the duke was lodged, after renewino
of our firfi acquaintance made at erwick, the tinime before the aize of Leith,
and iome speeches paflld betwixt us; he began to fay to me, how he in England
had favour and credit, and I in Scotland had will and fricndfhip of many, it was
to be tho't there could be none more fit infrumnents, to travel for the continuance
of the amity betwixt the relmns, than we two. And so that discourse upon the pre-
ient itltc of both, and how I was cntercd in that action tending so far to the quccn'
tlifhonour, I was willed by him to confider how matters ltood in this, hhat hollour
I had received of the queen, aind what ico\'vcnlicncics her dcfirnation iin the matters
a.lid to her charge might breed to her poeftclt. lcer rctli-cct was not little to the
c;owI ot England,i there was but one heir. 'FTe aIlailtons mv uiritii(Is had lhe
n1ext rclpet), and that I should eflcen the ifile of h r body would be the nmore al:-
f( tionate to inc and mine, than any other that could, attain to that crown. Ail
IUt it fliuuld bc Inc tcltl thlut tie affirimed her dillnni lii it, i:t .uihlc vii, ;itin ] '...

i iin

to abfracR the letters of her liand write, that file should not be defamed in iEngland.
My reply to that was, how the matter had passed in parliamenr, and the letters eecn
to rmy, so that the abftra6ling of the fame could not then secure her to any pur-
pose, and yet should we, in that doing, bring the ignominy upon us. Affirmin it
would not be fair for us that wa' to proceed, feeing the queen's majesty of England
was not made privy to the matter as the ought to be, to be in rcfpet we were pur-
poUlv come in England for that end, and for the - of the grants of our caue.
The duke's afwer was, he would take in hand to handle matters well enough at
the court. After this, on the occafiol ot certain articles, that were required to be
lefo'ved on, before we entered on the very declaration of the very groLind of our
action, we came up to the court; \where nme new commilioners were adjoine to
ihe former, and the hearil of the matter orda;ned to be in the parliament house
;it Vefminfter, in pretence of which conimiffioners for the said queen, an ---
through the--rebuking of the queen of England's own commilTioners, we uttered
the whole of th: ation, and produced such evidences, letters, and prob.tions, as
we had, which might move the queen's maijetly to think well of our cause. here-
upon xpeicing her highnels declaration, and feeing no great likelihood of the falme to
be suddenly given, but daily motions then made to come to an accord with the laid
queen, our matters in hand in Scotland, in the mean ealion, tanding in hazard and
darnger, we were I ut to the uttermost point off o.:r witt, to imagine wherculnto the
matters would tend, the' albeit we had left nothing undone for jultification of our
causes, yet appeared no end, but contiinual motions made to come to tome accord with
the queen, and restore her to whole or has reign. I had no other answer to give them,
but that I fhouli neither do againi conlcience nor hnour in that matter. Notwith-
flanding feeing this m! plain arfver wrouht o end, nor dipatch to us, and that I
was informed that the duke bcran to miilike of me, and to tfeak of me, as that I
had reported of the liid queen irreverently, calling her - and murderer,Pbn :L) y
I was advised to pa!s to him, anrd l ie him good words and to purge nmyfelf 'li"'','-"'
of the things objeced to me, that I ihorid not open the sudden etry of is evil
"race nor have him to our enemy -- -i.:n:ierilr !is g.eatincis It being thf'e-
withal whifpcred, and fliewed to n:;,, that it 1 Ueparted, he anlliing dilcontented ad
not satisfied, I might peradvr nture ;;l, i iiclh tr-eul in my way, as my throat miglht
be cut before came to jenrli( .. Anrd tiirrcFi.Lr trce it might well enough appear
to her marriage, I tliould not 'it hm ii utter dilpiair, that 11y, good will could not
be had therein. So few dvs bcf,'re my dpartirnir, I came to .1. iark in Hampton -
court, where the duke and I nit ti.:>iter, aid there I dcclare l unto him that it

as come to my ears, hw ibme mi report fhoul L bt made of me to hin, as that

1 hould speak irreverently a::d :ft!',' ,f the laii ql en mny overei n mother, Inuch
words as before expreflrd, that hC nlii'.t --e-- thereby yrliV atiC-tlio ti) to 1ojl', .i.
to alienate from her, as that i c i;J Ilt 1 ;,L 1 r, nor be ctotent of iher prefirmCilnlt,/;t ,.
howbeit he m;glit pterfiade hi'nir-lr (.i :li . titr;r,.', ifr ;rs the once was tle p.i fin
iii the world thai t loved be j:, i:. '' it;.. t ir to )e IJ :iz:tr utito I-r, ail h r'-
iig received luch advllancemeill t :;' i ... i ',: !'r, i wv;r rie.t si unl rate o lfo ul-
ni.tural ever to wish 1hir bo)dy til " ;iei,,

o ic. i1: iu :: Wx' uiijti uly reported oit

le, (Ihowloever the truth re i' t!'" :'.:lr ai t)

I t le Ir.ci(.t tiofl l o i t ici ft ,

Iniw miy t(vercigl, had ioio cl ,:: t (' ; 'i i.to itiis caIe, lill tlh,; 1her o riw prel-
finll was te occatiur if that iv;i , i' 1 r' t) 1-'---- .....u'rfoer (od ithilJ mv, le ro
i' r heatit to repent of lier iby ;a!t i' .' or i i lt ', 1
, : aftr lier' ,.r)\t;, c'p'i .

it: ( ,

ance, that fle should be separate from that ungodly and unlawful marriage that he
v.as entred in, and then after were joined .with fuch'a godly and honourable a per-
fonage, as were affefioned to the true religions and whom we might trust, I could
find in my'heart to love her, and to'shew her as great pleasure, favour, and good-
will, as ever I did in my life; and in cafe, he flould be that perforage, there was
none whom I could better like of, the queen ---in--- -of England being made
privy to the matter, and she allowing thereof, which being donoe I should labour in
all things that I could, to her honour and pleasure, that were not prejudicial to the
king my sovereign's eRfate, and prayed him not to think otherwise of.me, for my
anffedion was rather buried and hidden within me, awaiting until God hould direit
her to know herself, than utterly alienated and abftrafed from her; which he seem-
e to accept in very good part, faying, Earl of Murray thou thinks of me that thing,
whereunto I will make none in England or Scotland privy, and thou haft Norfolk's
life in thy hands. So departing, I came to my lodging, and by the way, and all
night, 1 was in continual thought and agitation of mind, how to behave myself in
that weighty matter, firif, imagining whereunto this should tend, if it were attempt-
ed without the queen's majesty of England's knowledge and good will, this realm
and I myself in particular having received such favour and comfort at her highness's
hands, and this whole isle such peace and quietness, since God poffered her majefly
with her crown. And on the other part, feeing the duke had dilclofed him to me,
protefing, none other were or should be privy to our speech, I tho't I could not
find in my heart to utter any thing, that might endanger him; moved to the utter-
most with these cogitations, and all desire of seep then removed, I prayed God to
lend me come good relief and outgate, to my discharge, and fatisfalion of my trou-
bled mind, which I found indeed; for upon the morn, or within a day or two there-
after, I entered in conversation with my lord of Leicefler, in his chamber at the
court, where he began to find firange with me, that in the matter I made o diffi-
cult to him, standing so precisely on conferrence, and how when I had in my com-
munication with the duke, come o far-and there he made ome discourse with

l'c'..bly me, about that which was talk betwixt us, I perceiving that the duke had----
' ,/'ud. the matter to my lord of Leicester, and thinking me thereby discharged at the

duke's hands, therefore I repeated the fame communication in every point to my
lord of Leicefer, who desired me to (hew the fame to the queen's majesty, which I
refused to do, willing him if he tho't it might import her highness any thing, that
he as one -- by her majesty, and for many benefits received at her highness's
hands is obliged to with her well, should make declaration of the fame to her ma-
jefty, as I understand by ome peech of her highncfs to me, he did. This my de-
claration to the duke was the only caufc, that hlid the violence and trouble pepar-
cd for me unexecuted, as I have divers ways underfland. 'I he fame declaration
was obliged to renew since in writing. of---fent to my servant John Wood.
The 'full whereof, I trult, flie shewed the duke, and fuinething also I wrote to him-
self, for it was tho't this (hould edeem ome time, that the duke hould not fuddlcnl
declare him our enemy, for his grcat-ricfs was oft laid bes' ic me, and what fricnlfilip lie
had of the chief of the nobilitv in England, that it mniht appear to the queen's mnaa
icfty of England-lo cold towards us, and doini not1li!ng publickly that iniglit ccin fa -
vourlable tor us, we had onmic caufc to ILilIp)c( that her hIiglhnecs should not be contra-
iiitis to the marriage when it hould be propofc(l to her, '1lie flarp mcfllate leinl by
i:.r majclty with the lord 30yd, who had the like conminilion from the duke tulcill

(o far to the aid iuieen's preerment, as it were propofiing one manner of Lnndicor'
from both, gave us to think that her htghnef. had been Joreitln in the duke's dc-
sign, and that he might be induced to allov tereof. But howbeit it was deviled
ii Ellgland, that the lord of Leth]ngtoln should, come as from me, and break the
matter to her high nec, as her majeity in a lette' declared that he looked for his
coming, yet that devlile proceeded never of me, nor the noblemen at the conventilpro *, .
could no wife accord to hs fnding, nor allow of the matter motioned, but altogether ,vo.ce.
midiked it, as bringing with the lfame great inconveuiencies, to the surety and quietness
of this whole isle; for our prdceedings have declired our mifiikiig and diflilowance
*of the purpose from the beginning, alid if:wecad pleaifd, he was ready for the jour-
ney. And in likewise it was deviled to give conrent .that the-- between the

'aid queen and lIothwell, hould be fuffired to proceed in this realm, as it was de-

fired b the laid lord Bodl, by reason we could not underfand what was the queen's
majcfty's pleaiIre, and allowance in that behalf----And whereas ye mean, that
her highness was not made privy of any such intention, the fault was not in me.
The first motion being declared, as I have written, to my lord of Leiceiter, and by
him imparted to her majefly, so far as I could perceive by ome speech of her high-
ness's to me, before my departing. Thus I have plainly declared how I have been
dealt withal for this marriage, and how just necessity moved me.not to require dire-t.
Jy, that which the duke appeared so--- unto. And for my threatnings, to
aflent to the fame, I have exprcfled the manner; the persons, that laid the matter
before me were of my own company. But the duke since hath poken, that it was
his writing which saved my life at that time. In conclusion I pray you persuade her
majefly, that flie let no pecches nor any other thing paflcd and objelced to my pre-
judice, move her majefly to alter her favour- towards ine, or any ways to doubt
of my alured contfancy towards her highness; for in any thing which may tend to
her honour and surety, I will, while I live, beflow myself, and all that will do for
me, notwithffanding my hazard or danger, as proof hall declare, when her ma-
jefty finds time to employ me.

APPENDIX

T t
VOL. 1I.

# APPENDIX TO THE SECOND VOLUME. No. I. (Vol. II. p. 2.) William Maitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leicester, March 20th, 1570, from Ledington.

A P P E N D I X

'To THE SECOND VOLUME.

No. I. (Vol. II. p. 2.)
'\illiain MIaitland of Ledington, to my lord of Leicester, March 2th,

1570, from Ledington.

HE great desolation threatned to this whole realm, be the divisions thereof A Origa&.
in dangerous fadions, doth press me to frame my letters to your lordship,
in other fort, then were behovetull for me, if I had no other respect, but

only to maintain my rivate credit; therefor I am driven to furnish them with mat-
ter, which 1 know not to be plaufib!e, whereupon by misconstruing my meaning,
fbme there may take occaion of offence, thinking that I rather utter my own pal-
sions, than go about to inform your lordfip truly of the state; but I trust my plain
dealing shall bear record to the sincerity of my meaning; to make the fame sensible,
J will lay before your lordship's eyes, the plat of this country; which firit is divided
into two factions, the one pretending the maintenance of the king's reign, the other
alledging the queen to have been cruelly dealt withall, and unjustly deprived of her
itate; the former is compoed of a good number of nobility, gentlemen, and prin-
cipal buiroulh3 of the realme, who shall have, as Mr. Randolph beareth us in
hand, the queen's majesty sour lovcreigl's allowance and protecion ; the other hath
in it some most principall of the nobility, and therewithall, good numbers of the in-
ferior fort, throughout the whole realm, which also look asSuredly that all kings do
allow ti.cir quarrel anll will ai them accordingly. WVhat conlcquence this di ifion
wi I draw after it, I leave it to your lordship's confidcration, there is fallen out another
division, acedentally, by my lord regent's death, which is like to change the state of
the other two factio.s, to ilcreafe the one, and diminifi the other, which is ground-
ed upon the regimer;t of the realm. ,Iome number of noblemen apire to the go-
verment, pret nding riht thereto iy reason of the qeen's demiflicon of the croun,
and her commifion ranted at that time for the regiment luring the king's mino-
rity, another faclion doth altogether repine aainft that d(ivilion, thinking it neither
fit nor tolcr:i)lc, th it three r four of the mcaneff fort amongst the carls, flha!l pre-
funme to chal llenge th tlhmfel es a rule over the who'e realme, the next of the 11c.id,
the tirfl in rank, the wreatcit a;I!w.) both for the antientrv of her h ufie, dcgr e,
and forces, hi i g

n ; ktrd ; thi order they tliink prcpofierous, that tlic hntm.ir

ft fh II he PIl,,ccd in i[nuic' fl .clion to conimm.nd, and the greater fli.ill cintiniue

iat, ltvat l men to tyev; hrfi.cs th it, thle) think if the coinnifflion liad in tIn e l -I

giinigirt Icn valewable, (which the' itoft part will not r.int) vet can t not h'L ex-
te ded t~o the, tlir nt, lntr lh,it the cnllidli ,ns thercin'o irnne(i l arc cerif(l, al;d )
thle (fl t of the whole v(.id ; h(e lh It r pull ofl this divilii lath lli [a ' [iCt ll(c 's,
fir IrliIeCs the queen's f.tlnou, whitlh is wholly o that tide, a gleat nlut ;l)cr of (lic'c

'1' t z tlat

that h..ve heretofore possesed the king's obedience, do favour the f me, and will not
yield to the goverment of the other, whose preferment for respects thty mislike,
when the queen's (faion flall be increased, with a part of the king's, and these not
of least fubllance, and yow may judge wh.t is like to infue ; an other incident is
like to mo\e men to enter in furtler diliourfcs, it is given out here in Scotland,
t,',at the queen's maiefvt is setting forth some forces towards the border, whi h shall
enter this realm, to countenance these, that aspire to the regiment, and fupprets the
cont ary faaiion, and bruts are spread, that the fame shall be here out of hand;
thf(i thi think theniieies of eq;ial force with their contrary faction at hoi c, or
rather an over-match to them, yet not able to encounter with the forces of another
prince, rather than )ield to their inferiors, will, I fear, take advise of nceflitv,
and evill councillors, and Lfch also the maintenance of some foreign prince, whereby
her mrnjcfty (altho no further inconvenient were to be feared) muit be dciien to cx-
ciixe c t:harges, and it oull appear there were con Fiiiracy of ail the cil.ments at
one tim to ft us together by the eais, for now when the rumour of your foiccs
corn ng towards the border is spread abroad, even at the fame time is arrived :t
Dumharton, a galzeon with a mciienger sent exprefly from the king of F. arce, to
that p'rt of the nobilitv, that favours the queen, to learn the slate of the country,
and what ufpport they lack or efie, eit:lrr for furtherance o her afairs, or for ticr
ovn iafcty; afluredly this mefi'ge will be well received, and fufcred accordingly,
this is the prefenit itate of Scotland. Now if your lordship would also know my
opinion, h,w to choice the best, as the cafe standeth; I will in that also fatisfie
your iordfhip, I am r-quired from them to deal plainly, and your lordship shall judge
wither I do t) or not; for I think it plain dealing, when I simply utter my judge-
ment, and go not about to difgiife my intents. I trufl- the queen's majesty hath a
defi e to retain at her devotion the realme of Scotland, which she hath gone about
to purchase, with befiowing great charges, and the loss of some of her people;
this desire is honourable for h.r h;ghnefs, Profitable for both the contry, and of
none to be disallowed ; specially if it be (as I take it) to have the amity of the'whole
realm, for it is not a portion of Scotland can serve her turn, nor will it prove com-
modious for her to suit the friendfhlip of a faction of Scotland, for in so doing, in
,ganinLg the belf, (he may lose the more, and the fame would bring all her ations
with us in fupicion, it she should go about to nourifil fadions amongst us, wich
meaning I am sure never entered into lcr majesty's heart; then if it be the friend-
flip of the whole he doth demand, let her not, for pleasure of one part, go about
to overthrow the remnant, which will not be so faifable, as some may give her to
underfLt nd ; but rather, by way of treaty, let her go about to pacify the whole
Itate, bring the parties to an accord, reduce us all by good.means to an uniformity, so
hall she give us all occasion to think well of her doings, that she tendeth our wealth,
and provoks us universally to wish unto her majesty a most profpercus continuance;
by the contrary, if fur the plealure of a few, file will fend forces to fupprcfs theft
whom they mislike, and so confcquently offcnd many ; men be not so faint hearted,
iut they have courage to provide for their own fafty, and not only will embrace the
riea.ns partly offered, but will allfo procure further, at the hand of other princes.
'lhi) fur mine own part, I do abhorr, and protest I desire never to fee forces of
Itrangers to fct foot within this land, yet I know not what oint neceflity may drive
mren into, as if men in the middle of the ea were in a hip, which suddenly fllould
be Let in lire, the fear of burning would make them to leap into the sea, and oon after

3 thel
64

the fear of the watter wou'd drive them to cleive again to the frcd snip, Co for avo d-
ing prifent evil!, men will many times be inforced t have rn ciu, fe to anotller, no les
dangerous. Trust n;e forces will not bring forth any good fru t to her' maljctl,'s
behove, it must : e some way of treaty fiall serve the turn, wherein by my former let-
ters your lordlip dloth know already what is my judgement; yow fee how pl inly I
do write, witliout confideratien n what part iny cltters may lIe ta'cel, yet my hope
is that such as will favourably interpret them, haili thilnk that I mean as wvell to her
niajefy, and that re. hle, as these that will utter oilier laIngage. I wih (h con-
tinuance of te amity betwixt the two contrss, without ther refpea, a d wi!l int
conceal fr. n her majeftc any thing, to my Iknoewldge, tenditg to he prejudice the e-
of; if I Lall erccave her majesty taking frank de.lineis in (vill part, 1 flhil froni
thenceforth for ear in the mean season I will not ccate to trowb!e our lordfip, ;i
I shall have occafijn to wiite, and so I take my leave of your lordship.

No. II. (Vol. II. . .)
A letter of queen Elifabcth to the earle of SufTeIs, July 2(, r5, ,

I G H T trusty and well beloved cousin we greet you well, this day we have '
received vour letters of 28 the last month, with all other letters, lcnt from .1

. ,f i,)

Scotland, and mentioned in your letters, whereunto anfi'er is dired to be gi en be-\- . i. lI>.
fore the tenth of this month; which is a very fIort time, the eightinefs of the
matters, and tlhe difance of the places confidcred; r ei'cr:'ef's we have, as the
Ihortlncfl could susser it, resolved to give this anfwver following, w-hich we will, that
yow, by warrand hereof, shall cause to be given in our name to the earl of Lennox
and the reft of the noblemen convecnd with him. Vhere it is by them, in their
letters, and writtings alledg'd, that for lack of our resolute anfA'er concerning the
eftablifhiing of the regiment of the realm under their young king, great inconveni-
enlces have happned, and therefore they hale deferred now at their last convention to
dterminc of the famine, who shall have the place of governour, until the 2 ft this
month, before wh ch time they require to hijve our advise, in what person or persons
the goverment of that realm mall be efalaliffed, we accept very thankfull the go
w-ill and reputation they have of u, in yielding so fran'kly to require and follow our
advise in a matter, that toucheth the state of tliir kIng, their selves, and realm lfi
near, wherein as we perceive, that by our former forbearing to intermeddle therein,
they have taken rome difcornfort, as though that we would not h.ve regard to tliir
state and fuerty, so on the other part, they of their wisdoms ought to think, that it
might be b the whole world evill interpreted in us to appoint them a form of go-
verment, or a governour y name, for that howsoever we should mean well if we
fli, uld do so, yt it could not be without ome jealousy ini the heads of the estate, no-
bility, and community of that realm, that the goverment thereof hould be by me
specially named, and ordain'd ; so as finding difliculty on both parts, and yet mifik-
mng most that they hould take any difconfort by our fohbearing to show our mind
therein, we have thought in this fort for to proceed, coofidering with ourselves how
now that realm had been a good space of time ruled in the name of their king, and
by reason of his base age, governed heretofore by a very carefull and honourable per-
son, the earle of Murray, untill tat by a mifchicvous perfor, (an evil examplc) lie

wviv

was murdered, whereby great disorder and confusion of necessity had, and will more
follow, if determination be not made of some other fpeciall pcrfon, or perfuis, to
take the charge of governour, or superior ruler fpeciall, for administration of law
and justice, we cannot but very well allow the desire that these lords to have lome
fpeciall governour to be chosen ; and therefore being well assured, that the r own un.
defienanding of all others is befl to confider the slate of that realm, and to discern the
abilities and qualities of every person meet and capable for such a charge, we hall
better fatisfie ourselves, whom they by their common conlent shall f rfl choose and
apipoint to that purpose, then o(f any to be by us aforehand uncertainly named, ani
th.t because they shall perceave that we have care of the person of their king, whio
by nearness of blood, and in refpet of h:s o young years, ought to be very tcncr
;.nd dear to us, we shall not hide our opinion from them, but if they shall all ac-
cord to name his grandfather, our cousin, the earl of Lennox, to be governor alone,
(c. jointly with others, (whom we hear to be in the mean time by their common con-
f.:i:t appinted lieutenant general) reason moveth us t think that none can be cho-
in il tht whole realm, that shall more desire the preservation of the king, and be
mi'r meet to ha\e the goverment for h s safety, being next to him in blood of av
noblenman of that ream, or ellehere; and yet, hereby, we do not mean to pc-
crive to them this choice, except they shall of themselves fully and fieely allow
thereof; furthermore we would have them well asured, that wl:tfboceer reports
of deviles, re, or flall be spread or invented, that we have already yielded our
mind t, )ie'd to alter the slate of the king or goverment of that realm, the fanml
.ie without jut cufe r ground by us given, for as we have already advertiied them,
that althou'h we have yielded to hear, which in honour we could not refuse, wlh. t
the queen of Scots or her part hall fay and offer, not only for her own aradice,
but fr the wealth of that realm, yet not knowing what the fame will be, that flail
e ofirt!d, we mean not to break the or!er of law and justice, by adancin, her
. aule, or prejiudging h r contrary, before we shall dclliberatel and allredly fee, u-oi
the hicarini ( the whole, some place neceflhry, and jus cause to do ; and therefore
tindin that re ,im ruled by a kiiin, and the fame affirmed by laws of that realin,
and ti: reof ivclcd by coronation and other solemnitics used and requisite, and gc-
incrallv so rec ived be the whole ettcs, we mean not, by yielding to

h ear the com-

plaiints or informations of the qu.en againfl her son, to do any at whereby to mike
conrclufin of govermcnts, but as we have found it, To to susser the ae

t

) cotiinue,

cca not to fufcr it to be altered by any means that we may impelie , a; to our ho-
nor it doth belong, as by your late ctions hath manifcltly appeared, untill by lOime
iualice, and clear caufL-, we shall bh dirsdl y induced otherwise t declare our oi-
iion ; and tis we would h. ve them to know to be our determination and courfc that

xe mc.in to

h
old, whereon we trutl they for their kin may fee flow pliinly and ho-

uirablv we mean to procced, and how little caurf they have to doubt of us, what-

l,ecver to tle contrary thy have or hall hear ; ad on the other part, we pryiv
them of their widms to think how unlhono i.i;able and contr.iry to all liuniii ,iider
it were for u, whelin tlie cqueen of Scotlai dolli 1o many wI;is icquire to hear her
c 'e, :'and dothi oftlr to li oi lercd be us in te lii i I', : s well ir

l attrs betwixt

(J1'i ll (. :n:1 1d li , ;is hto. it lui 'sl and liCer (i alnd l i palty ol tlhat realm , igaiilnl
w

li'; t

*

}:( li: i (, l, i 11 i ld il ove uis to i to gi\c r , tliait w Ce hliouli a olr.-

i!,, c.( iil\ ' al;nd irctl , bii',re the cl ci s lie ic i'd :iii conlidcrcd, .s ic wr t ,

'vc ;i jiiuig mcnt or lllitteic ce cith r for oI nlelves or flr th' in, whoa n tl. i miaktthi to
l h

j~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~1I
66

her contraries. Finally ye h.:al :ddmorifh then, that thc do not, I; nmrf n-
ceiving our good meancli towdss them, or by i direct allertions cf tecr .iJer-
fary grounded .n uritruhs, hin!'r or weaken their own cause, ill fh fort, that our
good .ianing tow.irs thenm flall not lake such cffct tuwardsi tcni, as they) filall de-
lire, or them elves have need of. All tli.s our anfwcr ye hanil cause be rl en IhCn,
and let them know, that for the fhortnc's of time, this b.rg the end of t hi fecrmn
of this month, we neither could make any longer decl ration f our nm nrd, nor yet
write any fvceral letters, as if tinevmited we would have done. 2 Ju!,
1570.

No. III. (Vol. 1. . S.)

The ifhop of Ross to flcretary Lidington from Chattifworth.
I HAVE receiveJ our letters dated the 26th of Mav, here at Chitttifworth, the ::. :-':.

10ith of Januar\', h.t o:1 the receipt thereof I had written to you at jci.;rtl, like

as the queen did with my lirdl Levingfion, by the which you will be rcolved of
many points contained i )our aid letter. I writ to you t at I received ty.ur letter
and cred.t from Tlio. C wv at London, and frit to Leiccitfr to ko)w hlie cleCan of
En -land's mind whether if y u hould conic here or not. He f;t me nword, tat
flite will no w2ays have you come as one of the commilioners, bccaule he i )ct of-
f-nded with yo ; and therefore it appears good that ye come not hither, but trcnmin
where you arc, to utie your wifdomn and diligence, as may bess advance the quten's
afiairs, for I perceive your wcil and safety depends thereon, in rcftl)cc of the "ica:
feid and ennimity born against you by your Scots people, and the gre. t ieiTrfip taken
of cyur father's landis; both were sure denonfiratiolis of their malice. ' t I imn
enc,)uraged by your stout and deliberate mind. Ature yourfelt no dcli;ence shall
be omitted to procure upports forth off all parts where it may be had, d \ e nwil not
iefufe the aid neiticr of papiff, Jew, nor Gentil, after my advice ; aid to thii end,
>'uting this treaty. let all things be wrll prepared. And feeing my iod Sc..ton isde-
irous to go into Slanders, the queen thinks it very necefary that ic i' do, for the
duke D'Alva has gotten express command of the king of Spain to ie support, and I
;;m sure that there he shall have a d both of Slanders and the po;'c, for it abid
ot)ly on the coming of some men of countenance, to procure and cci e the lamn '.
lie miuf needs tarry there, on the preparations thereof, uritng tl;is treaty, hiil
will be a great furtherance to the fame here. Tihe queen has alre.ti. wiitt.i to the
,li.ke D'AI. a !or this cfeict, advertizing of hiis coming ; there is cc tai; lusi (j' on m-
;;Cy coming for fiipport of the Einglifhien, as I wiote to you before, ftioi le li'T.
\\'hereupl)n I wouid he h.id a general comr iilicion to cal i., thlem, arid rcccive fuich
(nms as hall be givCen. Tihe means fhiall be found to caulie you be anfuc;nert (, th
ltuns yol writ for, to be diflpouit upon the furnishing of thie cattle ot Edcnburl! , f1
being fme honelt and true man wvre fnt to Fnds

to

Fn receive i;, as si;id is, lli 1ii

I would you prepared and IL t. C)rtcrs flhall be taken for the mictlJ as v 'r w'it of.
\Ve have proponit your av)ce Jit cni!ilg to trat w th thli te Iueren of i'rtl;d, fir
ietiring of her forces pintyoally fir lack of aid 'ol r aifwceis to t liileliiln
are tlo't very ood, but above .ill keep) ou weil out of their haul >, il t cfe,
ctlote prudcntcs fi.ut i(rpente. You liIy take expcie'nce with tie hard (.ail- i
with11 1it', how )y' w,ild 1'c ilfed if yc '\.e li.IcI ,

l ;1dI \.t
l;l 1 i .t
l ,itl1 (' d.il.r

b;;!_',

1," .. ;n m Jio nationes prav ; alway no fear, with God's grace, fal' n:e me
i!:r r;k from her mijeity') fervicc. Since the queen of EnTland has reft f '( t',t ;,
crine here, ii appears to me qi;o nondum ctt fedata malitia amoretoruni, &c. ld
thelef ci're it Atilol or Cthenes might by any means be procured to conic, theiV were
the nlioft si ! r the pupol ', Rot hcs were ali meet if he ad I were not both' i ,::e
i;, !:-mc; 1 tll'e treat\y would get the le's credit either in Sco)tland or here. ''hrc-

ai ..v.v's, andl fcnd the best ay i' serve the turn, and fail not Ro' et Mcl' ii co r

v'ith l tit'n, w ocver coines, for so is the queen's pleasure ; in my lat picket, x ,;!i
lar..' FP'(o)o, to you, in the bcilliniig of lMay, I 'nt a letter of the queen's o,'n
,'a: -. wr]i; to', iim, which I trutl ye received. I am forrv ve cone n,t fr the gmc.,i
:ci ;'f' I hoi.J to have had by your prci;ecc, i-or you couil well have hatilied tli
u,;-m; cf E':!Lnmi, after her hun:our, as you were vwont to do 'T'he rcf I rel :,
our good xv'io;-.n, praying God to fenid you alth. From Clhattiluwithi the I 5ti
,Js JIn aijry.

No. IV. (Vol. II. p. 2.)
'[ihe declaration of John Cais to the lords of Grainge and Lethington

zoungare tipon the Sth day of Oe. J;71.

Hereas you desire to know the queen's maecfty's pleasure, what flie will do
for appeasing of there controversies, and therewith has oered yourfeilves to

ie at her commandment, touching the common tranquility of the whole inc, and
the amity o both realms ; her plcafure is in this behalf, that ye hould leave ofi' the
maintcnace of this civil discord, and give your obedience to the king, whom she
xsill maintain to the utmost of her power

AND in this doing, fle will dtal with the regent and the king's party, to receive
you into favour, upon rcafonable conditions for security of life and livings.

Ai.so she fays that the queen of Scotts, for that he has praaifcd with the pope

and other princes, and also with her own subjects in England, great and dangerous
tilclons againf the slate of her own country, and also to the defirution of her own
'cribn, that she fiall never bear authority, nor have liberty while fie lives.

IF vc refue' the!f gentle offers, now offered unto you, he will presently aid the

klin's party, with men, ammunition, and all ncefFary things, to be had againtk
vou.
%O l.

ViWHrr.RuroN her majefy requires your answer with speed, without any delay.

No. V. (Vol. II. p. 34.)

Articles fcnt by Knox to the general ambly, August 5th, 1572.

'F IRST, decfiling a new act to be made ratifying all things concerning the king andl

. .: ' -... his obedience that were enacled of before without any change, and that the
I llo ) . . milnifncir: whl have contrlavecnd the former acSts be correctcd as accordeth.
5( I! 1 ,T fute be made to the regent's grace and nobility maintaining the kilg's

caul. that whatfiovcr pitocccdcth in this treaty of peace they be mindful the kirk

be

'be not prejudg'd thereby, in any fort, and they specially of the ministers, that have
been robbed of their pufiTcfions within the kirk during the time of the troubles, or
otherwise dung and injured, may be rcflored.

To fute at the regent, that no gift of any bifhoprick or other benefice be given to

any person, contrary to the tenor of the acts made in the time of the first regent of
good memory, and they that are given contrar the said ats, or to any unqualified
person, may bc revoke ad made null be an a- of fIcrit council, and that all bi-
hopricks lo vacanid may be prfited, a qualifid pers-ons nonlinat thereunto, within
a year after the akilg thereof, acc(rdig to tle order taken in Lcith be the com-
nriflieners of the nobility and of the kirk ill the month of January last, and in fpc-
cial to complain upon the gio ing of bilhopnck of Rots to the lo:-d lethven.

THAT no pentions of benlices, great or small, be given be firnple donation of

any lord regent, with ut content of the poflefibr of the ifids benefices having tittle
thereto. and the adtmiiion of the filperintendent or commissioners of the province
where this h!enetce lycth, or of the bishops lawfully cleed according to the said
order taken at Leicli; and desire an a of council to be made thereupon, until the
lext parianmelt, wherein te famine may be tipecially inaced, with inhibition to the
loird. of fficion to give any letters or decrects, upon such iinlplc gifcs of bcenreice
or pe:tlens not been given in manner above reliearfed, and that the kirk preicit!y
aiienibied decl re all such gifts null 1o far as Icethi in their power.

'i'lA'I' the rl- foirm of presentation to benefices, which vwere i the firil and fe-

conid regents timec, be not chang'd, as now it is commonly ; but that this claui be
contained in the prefeltation, that if the perfibs prefentd make not residence, or
be fland.lous or found unworthy either ill life or dofrine be the judgment of tile
kirk, (to which aliile he shill be fuljes) or meet to be transported to another
ruOini at the light of the kilk, thie Iid prcfentation and all that filall 1all thereupon
ihall he null and of no force nor cftfect and this to have place alto in the nomina-
tion of the bishops.

'rFl * r an a be made in this aflembly that all tlings dne in prejudice of the

kirk'b alTimptions of the thirdi, either be papifIs or others, by giving of fews, life-
rents, or tacks, or any otherwise difioing the said afined thirds, be declared null
with a solemn protestation the whole kilk difafifnitethi thercto.

'I' AT ail act be made decering and or:;.iainZ all bisllls, admitted to the order

of the kirk now received, to give account of their whole rents, and intromifions
therewith once in the ycar, as tile kirk fli li a[p )i:t, for such causes as the kirk mny
easily confider te fnle to be mno!t epediett a i neceiLr.

ANENT the jurifdiitioin of the kirk, that the ia.i,c be detcrmined in tils ainmblly,

because lthis article hatLi becn long tpoonli to make fute to the regent and council
for remcned ' a :'a alt nCillceugcrs .1nd exconiimuliic;te pcri ,bs.

1,A'I, that oilde(' be taken anent the procurcis ot the kiik, who procure againlf

tinitcrs and minillry, and for futting ofjult cc of the kirk's actions in the Eflion.
VOLo IL

INo. 'VL
U u

No. VI. (Vol. II. p. 39.)
PclarLition of Henry Killigrew, Efq; upon the peace concluded the

2jd Feb. 1572.
B E it known to all men, by these presents, that I Henry Killigrewe, Efq; am-

bafltidor for the queen's majefly of England, Forasmuch as, at the earnest mo-

tion and Iolicitation being made to me, on her highneis's behalf, there is accord and
pacification of the publick troubles and civil war within this realm of Scotland areed
and concluded, and the fame favourably extended towards the right honourable George
earl of Huntly, lord Gordon and Baidzenoch, and the lord John lamilton, son to
the duke's Grace of Chaftellarault, and commendatour of the abby of Abirbrothock,
for the surety of the lives, livings, honours, and goods of them, their kinfolks,
friends, icrvants, and partakers, now properly depending on them; in treating of
the which aid pacification, te murderers of the late earl of Murray uncle, and the
earl of Lcvcnax graindfather, late regent to the king's majesty of Scotland his realm
anIdJ icees, as also an article touching the discharge for the frutis or moveable goods,
which the fid perSons have taken fa perlonis professing the king's obedience, or for
the damages done or committed by them, since the i5th day of Junij, 1567, and
before the penult day of July lall by pafled, by reaoln of the common cause or any
thing depending thereupon, being thought by the king's commiFaries materis offuch
wecht and importance, as the king's present regent could not conveniently, of him-
Iclf, remit or discharge the fame. Yet in refpei of the necessity of the present pa-
cification, and for the weil of the king, and common quietness of this realm and
leiges, it is accorded, that the matters of remiflion of the said murderers, and of
the dilcharge of the aid fructis, moveable goods, and other damages, moved by the
persons desiring the laid remissions and dilcharge to the queen's majesty my fovc-
cign, as to the princess nearest both in blood and habitation to the king of Scotts.
And whatsoever her majeft) fliall advise and councel touching the said remission and
iiclharge, the said lord regent, for the weil of the king and univerSal quietness of
the realm of Scotland, flhall perform, observe, and fulfill the fame. And in likewise,
lre said earl [luntly, and commendatour of the Abirbrothock, being urged to have
delivered pledges and hotfages for obfeivation of the conditions of the said accord
and pacification, hath required me in place thereof, in her majesty's name, by vir-
tue of my commiflion, to prolife for them that they flall truly and faithfully ob-
serve and keep the said pacificatio-n, and all articles and conditions thereof, for their
pits, and that it would pleas her n;jefty to interpose hererlf, as surety and cmu-
tiuncr for them to that ef'cLd, to the king's majetcy of Scotland their sovereign an
his laid regent, which I have done, and promilc to do, by virtue of his majcfty's
imiiiflioui, a, by the honouiable and plain dcaling of the hid earl and lord, their
icntoln to ;)c.:L' wvell al-pcars, the me being molt agi ccahle to tLe mind of tlie
qieiLn's Ilnajcty my overcign, which fb long by her minitterb hth tralvelled for tlhe
f.uid pacification, and in the end, at her motion and follicitation, the fame is ac-
(ordcd, knowing her majcfty's godly deqre, that the fame may continue unviolate,
and that the noblemen and others now returning to the king's obedience shall have
sufficient surety or their lives, livings, honours and goods. Thcreforc ill her lia-

C jcthly

jefty's name, and by virtue of my comminion, I promise to tie aforesaid carl Hunt!y
and cornmendator of Ahirbrothock, that by her majesty's good nicars, the said rc-
mirlion and discharge hall be purchased and obtained to them, their kinfolks, friend'!;,
servants, and partakers, now properly depending upon them, (the piCroris specificd
in the first abftinance :Aways exceptcd) as also that the said pacification shall be truly
obrcrved to them, and that her nmai efty shall interpose herielf as confieratrix thcrco,
and endeavour herself to caufc the lamre to be truly and finccrely kept in all points
and articles thereof accordingly. In witness whereof, I have to this prefint sub lcrib-
ed with my hand, and fealed the fame with milne own feal the 3th day of Fecb ,
Anno Domini, 15-2. And this to be performed by me, betwixt the date leror,
and the parliament which hall be appointed for tleir reflitution, or at the furthelt
before the end of the lid parliament. Sic fubfcribitur.

The bishop of Glasgow's note concerning the queen of Scotland's do'ry,
T i- E queen of Scotland, dowager of France, had for her dowry, beides othci er ;.

p^feflions, the dukedom of Turrene, which was (toemnlv contralecd and givcn C.tt.. , i l.

to her by the king and estates of parliament; which dukedom she pil'escd pcai- ' (il. 1. 1 V
ably till 1576, and then, upon the pacification betwixt the king and Mol' his
brother, to augment whose appennage this dutchy was given, to hich tl
queen of Scotland yielded upon account of princes, who were her near relation::,
provided the equivalent which was promiscd her flould be faithfully perforn:e.
So that year, after a great many follicitations, in lieu of that dutchy, the had grant
ed her the county of Vermaudaife with the lands and bailiwicks of Seuley and Vctrv;
tho' 'tis known that county, and the other lands were not of equal value wiih '.
rene, but was promised to have an addition of lands in the neighbourhood tu i:
equal value. Upon this letters patent were granted, which were confiirmed ;i t-hc
courts of parliament, chamber of accompts, court of aids, chamber of the tIe;.!ur,
and others neceflary; upon which he entered into pofl'fion of that county, ,-.
Afterwards, by a valuation of the commiilioners of the chamber of acco!np)ts, i:
was found, that the revenue of that county, &;c. did not amount to thoic of 7'u;l; :
by 3oco livrcs. But insetad of making up this deficiency accordiiirZ to julice,
omen of the privy council, viz. M. de Cheverny, the presidents of 1cllicvlc, N-
cocholay, and S. Bonet, in the name of the king, notwithitanriing of her atori;ii
loses, id fell and alienate the lands of Senlis, and the dutchy of Etllaimpes, t,
madam dc Monpenfier, fiom whom the king received money; of whicl fa+'
the counccllors aforcfaid obliged thcmliivcs to be guarantees, which hath hindred(
the aforelaid qecn to havejullice done her. So that madam de V, onie11f rl hath
been put in pollcioll of thete lands of Scnilis, contrary to all the declaration, pro-
tetfation, and alluranlccs of the king of France to queen Mary's ambadlor-dr. So
that the queen of Scotland is dlif)ofliclld of her dowry, contrary to all equty, with-
out any rcgard to her quality.

No. Ilr.
U 1II t

No. VII. (Vol. II. p. 44.)

A letter from the lord of Lochlevin to the regent Mortoun;

3 ,1 T T will please your grace, I received your grace's letter, and has confidered the
5.--- i fame. The parlbn of Camsey, was here at me before the receit thereof, direc-

E). o i.or- ed fra my lord of Mar, and the mafier anent my last ritten, which was the an-
torl'n I A- I fwer of the writing that the master sent to me, which I fend to your grace, desiring
cli _t:, me to come to Steiling to confer with them. I had given my answer betore the re-
Buiid. LNo. ceit of your grace's letter, that I behuiffit to be besyd Saln Androis, at ane friends
I'. treiyt, which I might not omit; I understand by my said cousin, that the king's

maiefty is to write to divers of the nobility to come there, anent your lordfhii,'s
trial, and that he had written before his departing to my lord Monthrois. I under-
fiand, likewise, he will write to your grace to come there for the lame ffeit, which
I tho't ood to make your grace foCrfcni of the fame, praying your grace, for the
!ove o' God Almighty, to loolc upon the bcft, and not to flecp in fecurit), but to
tun you with uifeignedl heart to God, and to confidecr with yourfclf, that when the

i'
ng': majesty was very young, God made himn the iiitrument to divest his mother

from her authority, who was natural princcfs, for offrnding of his divine majfl)v,
and that there ran no vice in her, but that the fame is as laigely in you, except
that our grace condcfcended not to the dcflruElioii of your nxife. For as to har-
iotrv, and ambition, I think your grace has as far cifendecd God, and far more il
avaritiouflcfs, which vycis God never left unplagucd, except speedy repentance,
which I pray God grant to your grace, for othrwifie your grace can never have the
love of God nor man. I pray your grace flatter not youiltlf, for if your grace bc-
lievcs that e have the good will of them that are the king's good willers yc deceive
yourlcif; for surely I fee prfcS'tly that your own particulals are not contented, lar
by the reft, a nd that niolt principally fr )our hard dcal.ng. I pray your grace,
bcir with me that I am thus lianilie, for certainly it proceeds from no grudge, but
from the very affctcion of my heart towards your grace, which has continued since
We weic acquainted. And now I fee, because the matter tlands in your grace's
handling with the lcing's majesty, for certainly, if your grace fall forth with him
now, I fee not how ye fall rnect hereafter ; pray 1 your grace to call to (Cod, and
look on the best, and cafi froml your grace both your vices, to wit, ambition and
avaritioulhefs. I am riding this day to Saict Androis, and trust to rturn on XVed..
neflay at the farthelf. If our grace wvill command me in any offices that arc ho-
r,fr, that I may d your grace pl: aflIre in t Stcrli g, advcrtife of your grace's
:nind, and fliall do to my power and knowlegC,a nd thi:s with my healitlic, &c. &c.

'to our trufy couin the lurd I.ochlevcn.

,i'n -u lli' T Ri-TRUSpTY conufin, aft.r our rioft lcarty c:nmitidal ti)nl , w e rcceived your letter
;i.,dl, 1F.. (' of tile 3d of Miarch, a.nd s we tke 'vour ll.iiin s tliercii i good part, as pro-
j\;l,)ltol .\r cceding fril :i si (in 1 ;1i i
an kilfnl; , in whofi., good afI ni(,i towalds us we never

.J x, '*..:!. doubted, ic ' 51 : nolt titlk it liirane th. t we purge oulICllt I f a of your ;iactl;ii-
U N ' ',1. oll ,

tion, as in conscience we find not ourself to have offended in. As touching our of-
fence to God, we intend not to excuse it, but to submit us to his mercy;
for ambition surely we think nne can justly accuse us; for in our private efnate we
could, and can live as wel contented, as any of our degree in Scotland, without fur-
ther aspiring. The bearing to the charge of the rovernnient of the realnm, ieecd,
mnon lead us, or any other tiht fInal! occupy that place, not finply to rcef])et our-
self, but his majefy's rowme which we supply, and therein not tranifcendiil:i the
bounds of ieafurc, , a, we trufl, it fhail not be found we have done, it ought not
to be attri'Lited to an' aniition in tus. For as soon as ever his maje'y i .ill thi;.k

im'elf read), and asle for his own.ii governiment, none (hall more willinily uarrce and
advtance tec !;lne no:r I, iCe I tin k intver to set my face agains: him, whocl h o-
nounr, lalety and p)ref'llvar ion : been so dear unto me, nor 1 will neC\ r believe to
iind otiic!wife at hisj hand tlhan f, our, althouch all the unfriends I hve in the earth
were aboutl hini, t) pe fu'.de him to the contrary. As we write unto you, our friendly
dealiing ad con ficrlee in the hou! c.f lar is not thankfully acquit ; as we truit
vourlelf confidelri, but I[eaCufe the anmbafadors of England, mny lord or' AnLus, the
cl;aiLc;ciLdr, trtc'afi'c'', aitid .oinic n(cbllcnl: rides vwef this day to fe the kin:ll, we
pr'y yolu hertil aedl l vourflf to be tere as so'on as ve can, and as e fia ;.:d
the Jikclihood of al!l :hin;s, let ns he ad'vcrized thereof, with your o., : ri'iiei, i;y
Alcx fira;', whoni we ha.'e thl't ,rod to to ind weft, feciti ny loi l ti ,xiinfs from
Sicrli il rictes to Doughl.s. And s( so w coiniit ','ou in the proteclion (of God. At
-Holyruodti uit, tlihe th f lMaich, 1i77.

I'OR t a,c, aJiiioufrllc laid to our chargd, indeed it lies not in us f) liberally to

deal th; int' c are, as to fa tisif all cravers, no; never fliall any lovcrign and na-
tivce bon princl , let be any ofticer, cfchev the difdiains of iuch, as thinks themjudges
to their own retv ard ; in na.ly cucs, I doubt not to sild tlie affiiance of imy friends,
hut wh.ur my a.ion. tf1ll :;:ipear Ui.;lOnCit, I will nct crave their assistance, but
Iet ime be.r ny sown burthen.

No. VIII. (Vol. I!. p. . )
The coppy of the king of France his direcions sent to Scotland wich

Scincur de la Mlote Fenrlon. Tranllated out of the l:re'cli.
IRST, on their majeflvs mrnf christian part, he shall make the mol honourable

salutation and visiting t ) the mort serene king of Scotland, their gcoo brotlicrh 'ler l''
and little foi, that in him is poflable.

To give him their letters that are closed, fuchl and fulch like ns they have written ' 3

to him with their hands, and to show cxprefly the perc-fet fiicnldflip ant fngilar as-
section, that their n;jeflys bear to him, and to bring back the anfwcr.

To take head to the things which touch near the mofi l'ecnce king, to the ci;ie
that his perfol may be in io dai, er, but that it nav be miof furcly prcefcr'(cd.

AN') that he be not hindred ill the lionet libetty that he ought to have, and tli;t
no greater, or firaiter guards be about hill tha hlie hlad bforc.

ANDI fiich like, that he be not ipeached in the authiority, that God hath given

to him of king and pilince fvcreign ab1,ve- his ftiijectsa, to the cffet lie niay as
irecly ordain anl comrlmanda i his afftais, and in the affairs of his country, with his
ordinary council, as he was used to do of bcloe.(

. HA r
7

THA.T his nobility, barons and commonality of hi; contry may have their free

liberty to resort to his serene majesty, without suspicion of greater guards or more
armed men about his perobn then the ufc was, that they be not affraid and hindered
to resort; and further that the fegnieur de la Motte Feiielon fall liberally and rc(ly
speak to the said ftrene king and council, requiring the re-establishing of that that
may or hath been changed or altered.

A ND that he may know if the principalls of the nobility, and other men of good

behaviour of the towns and commonality of the contry conveens, and are content
wvith the form cf goverment prefcntly with the said serene king, to the end that if
their be any miscontent he may travaile to agree them together, and that he return
not without the certainty of the famine.

AND if he may understand that there be any who have not used them so reverently

towards the said lrene king their sovereign lord, as the duty of their obedience re-
quired, that he may pray on this beha'f of his majely most christian the said serene king
his good brother, giving him councill wholly to forget the fame, and exerting themn
to do their duty towards his majesty, in time coming, in all refpeas with the obedi-
ence and true subjection they ought hm.

AND if the said legnicur De la Motte, perceves the said serene king to be in any

nianner constrained of his person, authority, liberty, and disposition of his effnirs,
than he used to be, and not convenient for his royal dignity, or as the sovereignty
of a prince does require, that he use all moyen lawful and honest to place him in
the famine, and that he imploy as much as the credit of his modt chr ftian majesty
may do toward the nobility, and fubjefts of that contry, aid as much as may his
name, with the name of his crown towards the Scottish nation, the which he
loves and confides in as much as they were proper Frenchmen.

AND that he wittnefs to the said serene king, and his estates, of iis conent, and

to all the nobility and principall personages of the contry, that his mofl Christian
majefiie will continue on his part in the most ancient alliance an confederacy,
which he hath had with the said serene king his good brother, praying his nobility
and contry, with his principall fubjcals, to persevere in the famine, in all good un-
dcrfianding and friendfiip with him; the which, on his part, he ihall do, observing
the famine most inviolable.

FURTHER his most christian majefly underfianding that the serene king his good

brother was contented with the duke of Lennox, and his ervife, the said fignieur
D)e la Motte had charged to pray his serene majesty that he might remain beide
him to his contentment, believing that he fiould more willing inteitain the points
of love and confcderace, betwixt their majestys and their contrys, because he was a
good subject to them both; and if he might not remain, without some alteration of
the tranquility of his estate, that he might retire him to his own house in the said
contry, in furenes, or if he pleased to return to France that he might fuerly--
and if it pleases his fercne majesty, to cause ccare and stay the impeachments,
that are made of new upon the frontiers, to the effec that the natural Frenchmen
miay enter as freely into the contry, as they were wont to do of before.

AND that there may be no purpose of diframation, nor no fpecch but honour-

able of the most Christian king, in that contry, but such like as is fpokcn molt ho-
Iourably of the fercnc king of Scotlandl in France.

HE had another I cad to propone, which he concealed till a little before his depar-

ture, to wit, that the queen, the king's mothcr, was contcnt to receive her son in
;iiffciation of the kingdom.

No. IX,

No. IX. (Vol .

I . 98.)
Lord Hunfdane to fir Francis Walsingham, the 4th of August, 1584,

roin Berwick.
SIR,

CCORDING to my formcr letters, touching my meeting with the earle of aic
Arran upon Wedinlday last, there came hither to me from the earle, the ju- M' 'ision

tice clerk, and lir William Stuart, captain of Dumbarton, both of the king's privirey '

\ .

council, to treat with me about the order of our metting, referring wholly to mep. -37.
to appoint the hour, and the number we should meet withal; so as we concluded
the place to be Foulden, the hour to be ten o'clock, and the number with ourfclves
to be 13 of a fide; and the reft of our troops to stand each of them a mile from the
toun; the one on the one fide, the other on the other fide, so as our troops were two
miles asunder; I was not many hor/emcn, bt I supplied it with footmen, where I
had Ioo shot on horse, but they were very near 5co horse well appointed : Accord-
ing to which appointment, we met yesterday, and after fume congratulations, the
earle fell in the like protestations of his good will and readiness to serve the queen's
majesty, before any prince in the worMl, next his sovereign, as he has done hereto-
fore by his letters, and rather more; with such earnest vows, as u.lcfs he be woife
than a devil, her majefly may dispose of him at her pleaure; this being ended, I
entered with him touching the cause I had to deal wth him, and so near as I could,
left nothing unrehearscd, that I had to charge the king or him with any unkind deal-
ing toward her majesty, according to my infiruCtions, which without any delay he
anwvered preSently, as )e ihall perceive by the said answers, sent herewith; but 1
replying unto him, he amplified them with many moe circumstances, but to this es-
seA. Then I dealt with him touching the point of her majesty's satisfaction, for
the uttering such prafices as has be. n lately set on foot for the disquieting of her
majesty and her estate, who thereof made undry discourses, what marriages have
been offered to his majcfty by fundrie pinccs, and by what means the earle has fought
to divert them, and fr what cauSes ; the one, for thar be marriage with Spain or
France, he muff alSo alter his relgiion, which as he is sure the king will never doe,
so will he never susser him to hearken unto it, fu long as he has any credit with
him; he denys not but the king has been dealt withal ihe praaices to deal aainfi her
majesty, which he has so far denied and refuSed to erter into, as they have left dcal-
ing therein, but hatfoever the king or he knowcth therein there shall be nothing
hidden from her m ijcil, as her inmjcety shall know very shortly ; surely it iccms v
his pecches, that if the king would have ielded thcrtunto there had been no fn.il
comIainy of IFrcn(h in Scotland cie now to diSfuiet her majesty. - This being
ended, 1 dealt with him earnetly for the fiay of this parliament, which now a:p-
proacheth; or at the least thit thLre may be nothing done therein, to the prciju icc
of thcre noblemen :rin others now in England, fur the foi ultting of their lvings
and goods, hercupol he made a 1on dic( ZlfC to me, filift of the earle of AngI:;
dealing about the earle of M1urton, then of his going out, notwilhltanding of unhdic
gracious osiers the king had made himi, then of the road of Ruthvcn, how tlat rc-
fi'ctly after thcy hal the king's majcfty in their hands, they imiprifoid iiiiinclf, dlc.:l
with the king for putting of the duke out of the rc.arl, the kin:, rful(c lo to do,
ithey told luh plainly that if lie would not lie should hlaive the carl o i rr.in's

he.td(

head in a dif ; th king askcd wh t ,,fFelce the earle had made ? and they anfwcre,
it nmuf be so, and should be so ; hereupi.n for the fafegnard of Arran's life, the king
was content to fend away the duAle, and yet Arran afterwards fundrie times in dan-
ger of his life; I aedged unto him t' e king's letter to the queen's mnjeftl, and his
aits in council, that they had done nothin, but for his fervir., and ithh his good
1 king anll contnt ment, who an I:cred mc'he duift do no rthlrwife, l r could not
do a .y thin bhut that which plcuafccd them, with such a number of other thiir dealin'g;
with the king whileif he was in their hand as arc too onr to e written, and too bad
if they were t ; I said the king might have let the q,'een's majesty's ambalfador ha ve
knoiwn his mind secretly, and her majesty would have relieved him; he anfwecli,
that the king wa; not ignorant that the apprehenhiots in that manner, poceeded
from M1r. Bow's pracicce, anl thereby dur!t not impa:t so nmuch to him, anid vet the
king was content, and diJ gi ,c rimiiion to) as manll, as would acknowledge their
fai lts, and ask rcmlnion, and fch as would nt, h thouliit hit to binifh, to try
their faii-thr loyalty, in wlhich time ther conf.,ircd the kintg's second aprehenfioit,
ali the killing of the caerc, and ot ;:., and seduced the minifers to their faction,
and! vc not fatlihtd with these colira is and trcafonable dcl in , (as he tern,
t ci n) are entered into a third, being in nt;nd under r hr m.jefty's protection, to
(litlo)o)Ir Ih r mjfty as far as in them lyeth, or at least to cause the king conceive
foii unk!inilcl in her maje v, ,r'r hlarb)::':- of' thh ; 1 wrote to yow what the
crtflacy was, te taking of tie king, tlicki:n of the eirle of Arran, and some
othels, thc takiln of tll ca lte of Edin'. and briinin home the earles, to take the
chlarge cf the king; all whi'-c (fCay. h) is by Driunmnn' confefced, and by the
pr') ft of (lencidadJul not greati denied, and the conflable of the catill thereupon
l.d ; thec carle brourLIt Dr nniin d nwih hinr as far as I.angton, wh re he lav to
iIave ci onflt'.l the coniifirna,- before me, but havin, at his lighti:ng, received a blow
n his leg with a hor;, si) as he coul l brin him no further, I rep!yed that I thougiht

vcr. thy i:; .'l not work any f-ich prlatices, in rcf: 't of th'e quece's ilnjcity,

..iJil; within iler r c;ime, and if thcice be any fuci nraiticcs, rcthy have proceeJed
t-ro11 (i ers, aln they not pri.vic unto them i; aid th't if it be not appnrtntly proved
a3atin the n, :tht it will be thoZ' t to be fonwi p L'te t, :.grav'ate the fault, andl
to, ;y ,':c t!cili the mlore o ,dius t t e kin.. Hle anlf erci nr , tint it (hr'cidu be ro-
ved : Itlffi:i intle, ti.lt they '!h;lold not be ab!e, vli t. i

l t. i.:l,. ir, s'r tne
o'.,n '! !';elt , i; to be l(iowed to p1 t of it, ild there-i .' Ci .';in ied, t"il t ; 1:r e.i-

'.1'. lhoald so 1press the kin fr tliem at this time, th.'t w(,\ti l raIe r hiidlcr tihi

ilotoc:' of til; .lmitty, ino furtier it, and tlI.t l!.c tic.n lck chi ,'

I life, he co.ld

nt, in a:n r al.;n, fe k to d thcem any 'n-od I l ! ib s he . ,

:rv'd *le, Ill t it he

would, lie dt e tit, this lafi matter bing taillii out as it i; a: i! t ueily if tilis Imattc.t
had not f-illen iut, I would not have doubted thic relorir t f tle cilrl , f \larr very
nuoitly, if hir l.jinily would hlave cmp'oycdl ni tcrcil, bit fr tit it.t oI .ii\nu,
I perceive tlih king i persuaded that tboth he, ald the e tie

rc of the DouglaLLs, hav

coinceived si o inmotall an liatrecd againit hiil nilt the call of Arran, about the tdeath
of ti carl ,f lMoirton, as if they were at tiime, tolnorIr)iv ncxt, they w milt nto)
leave t pratlice and lconfli, irc the death of th.i h(oth, and therefore a hirdl mtter
to do any th rg for hill: flally, he conclude, and required me to afllire her in j.liy
from the kiig, that there fI:ill nothingr be id from her, nor any thiin left ultdone
thai maiy fatislie her nmajelty with reafoi, and that the kinig hall never do aly thing,
'.or coilcnt to have any tlin:g done in her prejudice, so long as he had any credit

with:

with .inl, or authority under him. Having this far proceeded, he desired to fAo0
me his commilion, which is under the great eal, to himself only, which is as large
as may be, and yet fundrie of the privie councel there with him, but not one in corn-
mifion, nor present, nor near us all this time; having spent almost five hours in
there matters; he presented to me the Malter of Gray, who delivered to me a let-
ter from the king in his commendation, whom I perceive the king means to fend to
her majelty, and therefore requires a safe conduc for his passage, which I pray yow
procure, and so fend it so soon as you may; I let him underifand of the lord Seaton's
negotiation with the French king. He swore to me, that Scaton was but a knave,
and that it was partly against his will, that he lhould be ent thither. But his com-
mission and inflrution being of no great importance, he yielded the sooner; and if
Seaton has gone beyond his instructions, which Arran drew himself, he will make
Seton smart for it. Touching William Newgate, and Mark Golgan, he protested
he never heard of any such; he fays there was a little poor foul, with a black beard,
come thither a begging, who said he was an enemy to Desmond, to whom he gave
a croun, but never heard of him since, and for any Scots man going into Ireland,
he fays there is no such matter; if there be, there may be some few rafkels that he
knows not of; and touching the coming of any jesuits into Scotland, he fays it is
but the slanderous devise of the king's enemys, and such as would have the world
believe the king were ready to revolt in religion, who the world shall well fee will
continue as conflant therein, as what prince soever professed it mo ; and the earle
himself dos protest to me, that, to his knowledge, lie never saw a jcfuit in his 1 fe,
and did assure me if there was any in Scotland, they {hould not do so much harm
in Scotland, as their ministers would do, if they preach such doctrine as they did
in Scotland; and touching one Ballanden, of whom I wrote to yow, I heard from Mr.
Colvil, the earle avows constantly that he knows not, nor hath not heard of any
such man, but he would inquire at the justice clerk, and would inform me what he
could learn of that; thus I have made yow as short a dircourfe as I can of so many
matters, so long discoursed upon, but there are the principal oints of all our talk,
bo near as I can remember it, and for this time I commit yow to the Almighty. At
Berwick, the 4th of August, 1584.

The king is very dcfirous to have

my on Robert Carrie to come to him.
I pray yow know her majesty's pleasure.
Arran's anlwers to the griefis or articles proponed to the Ioid Huniiiane,

let down in another form.

S to the firait and revere perfccution of all such, as have been noted to liaie
been well aflfetded to the (luecn's majefiy, it cannot appear they were either

fr that cautfe puniifd, or hadlv dealt with, lince his majesty of late has been to
careful and diligent to choice out i'coi iflruiments to deal betwixt her nmjeiy and hlim,
as his majesty i.s donc in cleliig f our lordihip and me ; besides that in all their
accusations, their ig;od will and aftei:Cion horn to lhcr nlaje4ly was, at no time, laid
to their charge, ) it capital ations of tre.ifon iinl,1n way tlied 1now be the whole three
(.fates, and monii tlhati lniille to the world.

VOL. II. X x As

7-7

As for his majesty inhibiting, be publick proclamation, such as were baniliedl, 1no

to repair in England ; the bruits and whisperings that came to his majesty's ears, of
their conspiracies, and treasons, which since fyn they accomplihed, so far as in them lay,
moved his majesty to inhibit them to repair to any place, so near his majesty's rcalim,
least they should hve atempted there things, which hortly they did atempt, being
farther off, and more distant both by sea and land.

A s for reception of jesuits, and others, her majesty fugitives, and not deliverin,

them according to his promire, as your lordlhip propones, his majesty wnuld be molt
glad that so it might fall out by your lordships traviles, that no fugitive of either
reaime should be received of either, and when so shall be, it shall not fail on his
majefly's part, albeit in very deed this time by gone his majesty has been confirained
to receipt her majesty's mean rebells and fugitives, contrar his good naturall, ince
her majefly hath receipt, in effec, the who'e and greatest rebells and traitors li)
majesty in his own blood ever had ; as for the agreement with his majesty's mother
anent their aflociation, his majesty has commanded me, in prelence of your lordillip's
servant, to assure her majesty and your lordship, in his majesty's name, that it is al-
together false, and an untiuth, nor any such like matter done yet.

His majesty has also commanded me to aflure your lordship, that it is also flf

and untrue, that his majelty has, by any means direct or indirect, rent any meflage
to the pope, or received any from him; or that his nijefty has dealt with Spain or
nny foreigners, to harm her majcfty or her realm, which his majefit could have no
honour to do, this good intelligence taking place, as I hope in God it shall.

As concerning the contemptuous usage of her majesty's ministers, sent unto hi^

majesty, his majefy used none of them so ; and if his majesty had, sufficient cauic
was given by them, as some of their own writs do yet testify ; as I more particuld:ly
ic'esed your lordship at Foulden at our late meeting.

No.X. Vol. .I, p. II.)

Letter of Q< Mary to 0Q Elizabeth,

A\Iadanic ma bonne Sci',

.,, t],. 'v,

/ 'AflTcurant que vous avcz cu communication d' une lettre de Gray que voi-

'-. s1B. \ III. ,.JL tre honime ScnmLr me livra hier foubz Ic noam Id mon filz y rcconanoifl:tn:
I:,I. 1 7..; qu afi dc mot a mnit lec, Icflne> rait;ns que c dcl Gray nm'cficrivit en cli fre eftiant ier.

i' .i]d. increment pres de vous defmontrant I fuffifance & bonne intention du perfonag3c ic

vous prilr.ay Iiulcmient fuivallt cc que si de\ ant jc vOus ay taut inftaitment ilt):-
tuine quc vou me ptcriiic:tic.z dcfclailreir lib c Iet & ouveltemcint c point de l'.io-
clation ' entre mov & mnon filz & me dcflicr les mains pour proceder avcc luicomm c
je ju!cIay ctire cquis pour son bicn a< Ic mien. Et j'cntreprcni/. q iiy que 1'oat
vous (ie & piiifc iin ri-.pplrtcr id flire Inclitir cc petit l)rouillon qui pecrlfu id palr al
tunIS dc V(,s niinititCs ai cnltrcpri; cctte ftpartitioin Clit lt I1 y 't IllOiln enfcallt, & p(tU
y coiiilcncr ,je vils fiapplic n'otr\ ct quc C

e i ife pa.rlrl a cc justice (1crk qu,

vous a c :lalilvclicnlvnt cnlvoy) pour nnlcr par lly a Itnoll filz Ilo intentionl i'
ctl.i,, cc qj j mc me luli li li lC rctf'rc'/, (Ilant cc lC leroit qe pj)Ur deion-
tlaC C11 clcdt li Lo)IllC illt lntionll nc'i' VUr InI'Ivc ailCll ICt avoi a l'ccid C& IIIt .

l
tc 11

lien de natural devoir entre la mere & l'cnfdnt qui dit en bonnes terrmes eafre ern
*pefche p .ur vous me tenant captive en un desert cc que vous ne pourrez mieux def-
-mentir & faire paroitre vofire bon defir a notre union que me donnant les moyens d' y
proceder, & non m' en retenir & empefcher comme aucune de vos. miniltres pre-
tendent a fin de laiffer toujours lieu a leur mauvais & finiflres pracaiques entre nous,
La lettre porteque 'association n'est pas paflie, auffi ncluy ai-jej aais dit, bienque mon
filz avuit accept ; & que nous en avions convenu enfcmblc, commnc l'ace iign( de
fa main, & ces lettres tant a moy, quc en France en font soy, ayant donne ce menie
temoignage de fa bouchc propre a plufieurs ambafadeurs & perfonne de credit, s'ex-
ctifant dc n l'oser faire publier par craini de vous fentement, dnanldait forces pour
vols reiftier d'avant de e dclarer si ouvertement eR1nt journcllement perfuadc au
contraire par vos miniitrcs qui I y promctovent accquc une entrcirc a Yorck le
fai;e declarer votre erctcr. Au lurplus Mladame quand mon enfant feroit fc malheu-
rcux que de s'ol)iniaftrer en cettc extreme impecle & igratitude vers moy, je ne
puis pcnfcr que vols non plus qu'aucun aultre prince de a Chreticntc le vou-
lificz en cela ;lppl.idir ou mcintenir pour luy fayre acquerir ma nlaledition,
ains que plutos iznrctviendrez pour luy faire recongnoitre la raison trop juste & cv.-
(dit dcvant Dicu & les hommes Helas & encores ne luy vouloicr j'n uiter, mnay:
doincr avec droit ce qu'il tient par usurpation. Je me fuis du tout comife a vous, &
fidelement faites si il vous pleft quc je ne en foye pis qu' aupravant, & que ]e fau)fete
dcs tuns nc prevale defvant a verite vers vous, pour bien recevant mal, & la plus
grande affliction qui me fcaurroit arriver a fcavoir h perte de mon fils. Je vous sup-
plic de nme ander en cas qu'il perfife en ctte m'eficonoiifance de ion devoir, que de
luy ou de moy il vous plait advouer pour legittime roy ou royne d'Ecofle, & i vOL'
aves agreable dc pourfuivre avec moy a part Ja traitc commence entre nlus de qo
je vous requiers fans plus attendre de refpone dc cc mal gouverne enfant vous en r -
qucrrant avec autant d' affecion que je fiens mon coeur opprefic d'ennuy. Pour Die
fouvencz vous de la promefic quc m'ajcz fitcs de me prendre en votre protection
me raportant du tout a vous, & fur ce priant Dieu qu'il vous viueillc prcferver de
touts vos ennemys & diflimulez amys, comme je le desire de me confolcr de me
vcn cr de ceulz qui pourchaffent un tel malheur entre ]a mere & 'enfant. Je cefleray
de vous troubler, mais non a m'ennuier que je ne recoive quelquc conlolaticn de vous
& dc Dicu encore un coup je le fupplie de vous garder dc tout peril. JFuthbcry xa
Mars.

Vofire fidlemcnt voucc fceur

& obeiifante coufinc,

A la reyne d'Angleterre A R IE Q

madame ma bonne fcur
& coufine,

No . \.

A P P E N D I

No. XI. (Vol. II. p. i 1.)

A Testament by Q. Mary.

Cott. Libr. N. B. The following paper was transcribed by the revd. Mr. Crawford late regius
Vefpas. L. 16. professor of church history in the university of Edinburgh. Part of this paper,
P. '1+S according to him, is written by Naue Mary's secretary, the reft with the queen's

own hand. What is marked "' is in the queen's hand.

Orfiderant par ma condition prefente l'eftat de vie humaine, si incertain, que
perfonne ne s'en peuft, ou doibt affeurer, finnon foubs la grande et infinic

misericorde de Dieu. Et me voulant prevaloir d'icelle contre tous les dangers et ac-
cidens, qui me pourroient inopinement furvenir en cette captivit6, mefmes a cause
des grandes et longues maladies, ou j'ay et~ detenne jufques a present; j'ay advisc tan-
dis que j'ay la commodite, oa raison en jugement, de pourvoir apres ma la falut dc
mon ame, enterrement de mon corps, et disposition de mon bien, eftat, & affaires,
par ce present mon testament et ordonnance de mon dernier volontc, qui s'enfuyt.

Au nom du Pere, du Filz, et du benoife S'. Esprit. Premicrement, me recong-

noiffant indigne pecherefle avec plus d' offences envers mon Dieu, que de fatisfation
par toutes les adverfites que j'ay fouffert; dont je la loue fa bontc. Et m'appuyant

iur la croix de mon Sauveur et RedempteurJefus Christ. Je reeommende mon ame
a la benoifle ct individue Trinitc, et aux prieres de la glorieufe Vierge Marie, et
de tous les anges faincs and aindtes de paradis, efperant par leur merites et intercession,
eifre aydee a obtenir de efire faice participante avec eulx de felicite eternelle. Et
pour m'y acheminer de cueur plus net et entier, defpouillant des a present tout rcl-
lentiment ics injures, calomnies, rebellions, et aultrcs offenses, qui me pourroicnt
avoir cte fa ttes durant ma vie, par mes fubjets rebelles et aultres ennemis; J'en re-
{riet la vengeance a Dieu, & le fupplie leur pardonner, de mefme affecion, que
ji iy requicrs pardon a mcs faultes, et a tous ceuls et ccllcs que je puis avoir offense
d f.ii&s ou de parolles.

Jc veulx et ordonne, &c. [The two foll3wing paragraphs contain directions conccrl;ng
!;> plice and circzminjanc of hr bnial.]

Pour ne contrevenir a d gloire, honneur, et conservation de 1' Eglife catholique,

apoflolique et Romaine, en la quelie je veulx vivre et mourir, si le prince d'Efcofl'
moI filz y pttft etre reduiet contre la mauvaife nourriture, qu'il a prise a mon trcs
rrand regret en I'herefie de Calvin entre mes lebelles, je le laiffe feul et unique heri-
icr de mon royaunic d'Efcoife, de droit que je pretende juflement en la couronnc
d'.\nglctcrre ct pays que en dependent, et generallenent de tous et chacun mes meu-
'cs et niimeubles qui reficront apres ma mort, tt execution de ce present tefament.

1i nn), rt quc mnion dit filz continue a vivre en li1 dite herefie, Je cede, tranl-

' portc, ct faice donl " de touts et chacuns rme; droi&s, qucj- pretendc ct puis prc-
" tendrc a a couronne d'Angleterre, et aultres drouts, feigncuries, ou royaulmcs erc
i' depenlantz, au roy catholique, o aultre de ficns qiu'l luy plaira, avelucs advi.,
' conifentenment de fa faintetc; taut pour Ic voyr aujoulidhly Ic feul feurs appui de la
"rt:li]iou catholique, que pour rcconoiflince ie gratuites favcurs que moy, et lcs ni(n,;
: icullmandcz par nmoy, ot avons receu de luy en ma pius grande ncccifit ; t

b reig}uard

' refguard auiif an droi& que luy mefme peut pretendre a ces ditz royaulmes et pays,

je le fupplie qu'en recompence ii preign alliance, de a maifon de Lorraine, ct si

" il ce pleut de celle de Guise, pour memoire de ja race de laquelleje fuis sortie au
" cofte de Mere, n'a ayant de celuy de mon pere, que mon feul enfant, lequel
" cflant Catholique j'ay tousjours voue pour une de fes filles, si il luy plaifoit de
"l'accepter, ou faillant une de fes nicpces mariee cornme fa fille.

" Je laysei mon filz a la proterion du roy, de prince, et dues de Lorrayne et

" de Guise, et du Mayne, aux quelz je recommende et son eat en Efcofie, et mon
" droiA en Angleterre, f l eft catholique, et quelle le parlie de cefe royne."

Jc fautz don au " compte de Lcnox" de comte de Lenox tenu par feu son perc,

et commande mon filtz, comme mon heretier et fucceffeur, d' obeyr en cefl en droit
a mon volonto.

Je veulx et ordonne toutes les sommes et deniers, qui fe troveront par moy deues,

tien mis cauft de doid cftre faits " a Lohliven" etre promptement payes et acquittes,
ct tout tort et griefs reparcs par lefdits executeurs defquelz J'en charge la conscience.
Oultre, &c. [ibl'ow tw or three paragraphs rcncerning articu.'ar legacy's, and then is
added] Faie: au manoir de Sheffield en Angleterre le jour dc--Mil cinq cens foi-
xant & dix sept.

Ajter a b.ank page follows i the qeen's hand.

" Si mon filz meurt, au comte de Lenox, ou Claude Hamilton lequel fe niontrera
i' le plus fidele vers moy, et plus constant en religion, au jugemnt de Ducs

d' de Lorraine et de Guyfc, ou je le rapport lur ce de ceulx a que j'auray donnay la

" charge de trayter avefque eux de par m'oy et cculx, a condition de fe marrier ou
' allien en la dite mayfon ou par leur advis,"

lrc/w near Iwo page; f particziar legacs.

c( Et le remets ma tante de Lcnox au droict quele peut pretendre a la contc d'An-
c gous avant 'acort fa't par mon commandement entre ma dite tante de Lenox et

c' le comte de Morton, veu quil a efie fait & par le fcu roy mon Marjr et moy,

" fur la promeflc de fa fidele afliftance, si ly ct moy encourions dangier et be-
"soing d'ayde, cc qu'il rompit, s'entendant fecretement au les nos cnnemis rebelles,
" qu' attemtprient contre fa vie,'e pour ceft effcl pris les armes, et ont porte les ban-
" niercs dLfploiees, contre nous, je revo,'ue aufli toute autre don que je luy ay fait
" de conte de Morton fur promefles de fes bons services a advenir, et entends quc

la dite Contc foit reunie a la couronnc, si ell fe trouve y partenir, comme fes tra-
' lIifons tant en la mort de mon feu Mary, que en mon baniflcrnent, ct pourfuit
" de la mienne I'ont mcrite. Et defends a mon filz de fejarays fervire de ly pour-
"dc luy pour a hayne qu'il aye a fes parents, la quelle j crains ne s'eftcndejufquc;
" a luy, Ic connoiflant du tout affcctionnl aux eilcmis 3c mon droite en cc roy-
" aumne, du qucl il eit pencolnairc.

J c recomincid moon nepveu Francois Stuart a mon filz, et luy commande deteniru
pres de luy ct s'cnfervir, ct je luy layfli Ie bicn dii co(ntc dc odlel fli onc(lc, cn
rcfpet qui'l oft dle mon fnig, mon fillcul, t ma cite laific cn lutelle par son pre.
" Jc dcclare qu mon Irere baltard Robert AbbC dlc S'. Croix na'cn quc pr cir-

c convenrtion ()rkenay, et quc Ic ne fut jamniays mon nitention, comnm i pirct par
" la icvocation qucj'ay fayte depuis, ct ctc aufli faitc d'avant l. af;e id xxv. .is,

'' U<

* -ce que j'aimois dcliberer si i ne m'euffent prenner par prison de fe de defayre aulx
*" citats je veu'x one que Orkenay fbit rcune a a couronne comme une de plus

neccefFaires pour mon filz, et fans la maylon in pourra etre bien tenuc.
' Les filles de Morra ne parvient accelii heriter, ains revient la conti a la Con-

' roilnc, i il ] iy plelt luy donner fa ou lilec en marriafge, ct il nome l'cn
" ienne ligne."

No. XII. (Vol. II. p. I 2 .)

A letter from Mr. Archibald Douglas to the queen of Scotts.

A.':i - D LE SE your majefy, I received yotrr letter of the date the 2th of Novr, and

i'i l wl;. j in like manner has feccn sone part of the contents of one other of the lame
; .. t. i-
i .date, directcd to Monfr. de M\ovifir, amnbali:lor for his majcfly the most Christian

kii~i, both which are agreeable to your princely dignity, as by the one your higih-
net' desires to know the true cause of my banishment, and offers unto me all fvour
i I fhll be innocent of the hcinous t'aLl, un mittcd in the pcrron of your hufoand
o<f cood memory, lo by the other the laid ambll ador is wvil't to declare unto me,
it your huiban's murder could be laid jufly aginft me, that you could not foilici.
in my cause, neither yet or any pcrfon that was participant of that execrable fad?,
but would fcek the revenge thercof, when you shol!d have any means to do it
'our majcfty's offer, if I be innocent ot that crime, is most favourable, and your
Jdlire to know the truth of the lanme is most equitable ; and therefore thit I fliould
xvih i all my implicity, fineerity a. d truth answer thereunto is most rcafonable, to tlhe
end that vour princely dignity may be my help, if tm ini!ocence shall ufficicin r
appear, aind procure my condemnation, if I be culpable in any matter, except in the
kni wilcge of the evil disposed minds of the most part of your nobility againfit your
aid hulband, and not revealing of it, which 1 am ailured was uillftcicntly known to him-
self, a:d to .ll that hlad judgment never so little in that Jcalin; which also I was con-
strained to understand, a he, that was fpicially employed hbetixt the carl Morton,
and a good nu hber of your nobility, tih.t tl-y might v ith all humility intercede at
vo,:r noijefty's hand for his re'icf, in 1un11 mattes s as are roic fpccially contiiiied i n
tie declaration follow na, which I am con traine J for lmy own justification, by this
cttci to call to your majefry's renmembraiec. Notwithttainding that I am allured t
n', ..icf, the reading thereof will not finally offend y r princely mind. Ir may
pleate your najefty to remember, that in tile year ot God 5(,6, tlce laid earl of
Mlorton, with divers other nobility ;,nd gent. W(re declared rebels to your nmajcft-,
and banified your realm for infllent murder comnitted in your nmajcky's own chalinL,
w, ich they allcdged was done by coilnma 'd of your Intbaiind, wiho notwt Ita(iii,
affirnied tt he was compelled v them to Lfbfciibe hle warrant given forr tlh.t cliei,
ihowfoever the truth of that matter remciis amongit them ; it appertains not to mie at
this time to be curious; true it is that I was one of that nulmber, that :Ceavi:y ol-
fencded againilt your majcfty, and p lied i France the time of our laniiflnlllt, at the
desire of the cit, to humbnly pray your brother the Most Chlilian kiing, to inter-
,.eed that our (ofences milght be pardoned, and your majcfiy's clemiency cxtclded to-
wa.ld IIus, alltit divers of no (mall reputation, in that realm, was of the Opinion,
iat tlie laid fit mlcritcd ncithcJ to be rcquilit for, nor yet pai}olcd. Alwayz)s inch

l,» %,., k,

was the careful mind of his majety towards the qiietniefs of that realm, that the
dealing in that cause was committed to MonfP. de Movifir, who was directed at that
time to go into Scotland, to congratulate the happy birth of your foll, whom :l-
imighty God of his goodness may ioing prefere in happy ceiate and perpetual fe icity
tlhe careful travel of the ai de wIeiir was so effectual, and your majefly's nl:i so
inclined to mercy, that ithin lhort fancc thereafter, I was permited to repair irl
Scotland, to deal with carls Murray, Athol, Bodvel, Arguile, and secret' Li!Jng-
ton, in the name and behalf or the Ifti arl Morton, lords Revcn, infay, arid rc-
;lanlcnt colnmjl(lis, t't they miii ht make oircr in the names of the l' ii cetti, of any
matter that might i;itifv yotu- nrjcf's wrath, ard procuic your clC'mncy to
be extended in theil' '.\, Lui ; ..t ;iv cotmini to themn, aifter had opened the et-
sect of my nieflage, thevl ti

,ired that the nrriae 1,twixt ,t and your Iluf'bind

had been the ocailion already ,of great evil ill tih.t realm, ailt. if our hufb.l shou!d
be Ilffered to follow the appetite anil m; id of such a. e'r; aboult him, that kiind of
dealiig minht rodluce with time wvl'(f cffct ; Lfr heliiin o f incuivenience
that might fall out by that kind of tdealir, the) hd tlhouiht it conle.'Cnlnt tio iii
thlcmlk'i'c in league a ht band with om e

other nlrliucen, rei;l\'cd tn o(),'c yvolr :' 1-

jeit\' as their tiattiral iovcrei, and have nothii to do with your hutitu

lU coi:n.!: "d

whatbc.cr, it tie f.hi,) earl vo')l: f'r hirlFJf cnter it.)

th. tt badt ul c. ilft'Jcr;cv

with them. they could I)e content t h hib), rc'q:i and tiivcl by 11 ,llc! wtil
your n.ljcfiy for his pardonl, )ut bc' ,rc they ouild ail farlthlr proceed, they derired
to kow the said earl's mind herein ; wljni I ha1 ail(vere.l that he nor his friedis,
at niv depa!rture, could io( li tat

w th any fuc'i like :matter would be p1)poijt, aimd

therefore was not iliftructred what to answer therein, r(he dcfired that I houlil re-
turll fiificicntlv itlnfrdtCd in ti': Inattcr to Sterling, before the b.ptilin of your son,
whom God miilt pl'rc'Cer'; thiss nielite was f.:ithlti;ly dciivered b i mc at New-
castle in Englaand, where the said earl tllen rellainel. d, in prcfnce of ihis fricansnd
(ompany, where tihev ;ll ci ;;icreiindcd to have ino farther dealing with your hul-
band, andt to enter into tc ftidi band. 'it th is deliberation I returnted to Ster-
!iiru, where at th;ic lretefit o the Ilolt Chriilian king and the ueen's imaijef ot
Lilland bly their nambajidt!rs prefb nt, your ;:jceyv's graciius pardoln was granteti
unto them all, tuider codtlion al vas t!h.,t they flould rml1ail ib.iifhcl i forth of the
icalm, tie filacc of two 'ears, nnd farther during y(oulr nl.liCis plcafurc, which li-
mnitation w,:s after mitiate a te hi umble rcque ii of your oirn nubilitv, f) that iln-
mcdiately after the said e.r! of lortn repa;;:id it Scotllnd to (hllittin;gaimc,
where the carl Bodvcll and cecretary Led;ngton conmi to llim; w'hact i)'cch palled
there amongfl them, as (;od fal b e ni uJl e, I kew nothig at th)t time, bitt
at their dcparturie I was reqiec't.! 1'yth l ai'Jd earl Morton to .Iccomp.mL tile (anl
3od(l ell and i 'crctarv to I'tc;: l: 'h,

:n t) retu n with i'Lich ;ilAcr as thl fhiidu

<obtain of your nijcfly, wihich 'i:'! rivtn to me by the .id plrflos, as (;od l lll
be my jud(e, waIs no other t'.an the !'i: worls, ' i clila

to the eal Mortlon thalt the

' quciteen ll liear no iC LcL 'l Ft' .t ' rtt( : )ilte.d uit l i.) ; '" i t I et:t'it

that tl rwce fwer night (be

il m ti' I , le , l.'retar'v leiltonl said, tl:lt tlie '.ilI

would itifllciciltly ui( derh la ,.d it, 1 lLcit Fl v or o

no e ait tlhat tiCme itllti .t(t vlliit

i.Iltd :;iin >Il' tliem . It is knl o.it lt) :ll I a ii, uP:. veill l t't:li lling lettct; i.(ft he -
twixt the fald call anti l .hii it i .'l hii ti l v

t becoit;e in di\vres fatlion;, :s :illi> .tt.c

bt)ck (tt ', irtht to the 1 i r

t ; 'l,' n the :firm

tha tlit thle a il oft' o1 rtol ha;'
coilIfclc(l to tlheti, befuIore 'l dcal., that (th earl HoidvCll c to (ilitlitiicne

tst

to prepon the calling away off the king your husband, to the which proposition the
fdid carl of Morton affirms that he could give no answer unto such time he night
know your inajefty's mind thelein, which he never received. As to the abomina-
ble murder, it is known too by the deporitions of many persons that were executed
to the death for the committing thereof, that the fame was executed by them, and
at the command of fich of the nobility, as had fubfavit band for that et'eEt; by this
unplealant declaration, the most part thereof known to yourself, and the remain-
der may be underfrood by the aforesaid witnesses that was examined in torture,
;ind that are extant in the custody of the ordinary judges in Scotland, my innocency
io far as may concern any fact does appear fufliciently to your majesty. And as for
Lin, dealing aforesaid, I can be no otherwise charged therein, but as what would ac-
cuic the vefll that preserves the vine from harm, for the intemperancy of such as
immoderately use the fame. As for the special cause of my banishment, I think
the lame has proceeded upon ane opinion conceived, that I was able to accuse the
carl of Morton of so much matter as they alledge himself to have confefled before
fie died, and would not be induced, for loss of reputation, to perform any part
thereot. If this be the occasion of my trouble, as I suppose it is, what punishment
1 hould deserve I remit me to ynur majesty's better judgment, who well knows how
careful ever ilk gentlcman should be of his fame, reputation, and honour, and how
tar ever ilk man should abhor the name of a pultroun, and how indecent it would
have been to me to accuse the earl of Morton, being so near of his kin, notwith-
Itanding all the injuries I was constrained to receive at his hand all the time of his
government, and for no other cause, but for shewing of particular friendship to par-
ticular friends in the time of the last cruel troubles in Scotland. Sorry I be now
to accuse him in any matter being dead, and more sorry that being on lyff, be such
kind of dealing obtained that name of Ingrate. Always for my own part, I have
been banilhed my native country those three years and four months, living in anxiety
of mind, my holl guds in Scotland, which were not small, intermittit and difponit
upon, and has continually since the time I was relieved out of my last troubles at
the desire of Mlonf. de Movifir, attended to know )our majesty's pleasure, and to
await upon what frrvice it should please your majefly for to command. Upon the
8th of April inft. your good friend fccretary Velchingaime has declared unto me,
that her highness tho't it expedient that I hould retire myself where I pleased, I de-
clared unto him I had no means whereby I might perform that desire, until uch time
as I should receive it from your majefy. Neither knew I where it would please your
highness to dire& me, until such time as I should have received further information
from you. Upon this occasion, and partly by permifion, I have taken the hardrcfs
to write this present letter, whereby your majesty may underftaid any part of mv
troubles past, and firait present. As to my intention future, I will never deny th
I am fully rclolvcd to spend the refi of my days in your majesty's service, and tlc
king your fun's, \wlerbeocvcr I fiall be directed by your majelty, and for the better
peil rming thereof, if to fllall be your niajcty's )plafuile, to reconmllend the tryal
it my Innocency, and examination of the verity of the preceding narration, to the
king your son, with icqucfl tlhat I may be pardoned for such offInces as concerned
your majefiy's fer\ie , and vair common to all nen the time of hia lis aige anid ner
donit to all, except to me, I fllould be the bearer thereof myself, and ht direc5cd
in whatfoevcr service it fliould please your mnajclly for to coinrmalid. Ms hIumnile
I bcfccclh yourt Ilaicljy to condtir hercul, ad to b o lb graciou as to givc old't', Lthir

I

I may iave means to serve your majefy) according to the sincerity f tmn me3n11:,
ai:d , ecxpecting your majesty's anfwcr, after the kissing our hanid with all h um:i:-,
I ti:e !avc from London.

No. XII . (Vol. 11 p. i14.)

Le.ce; 'rom the king of tcors to hI'r. ,
rc'~ibl D,.u,,i his a :.;'.:-

ill IaLnglan1; ,

O c i, ,6.

"'~Rcl;er ve up yourself na lancer in the carncne
dic.iln fr y miothr, i;r v .-,, .

don,- it too long ; and hink not that any y(u:; travcelils cai 9do r. (o if i.

be tak.ii, tuo thei au with my dealing with tlai;:Fe ihtlt e; tih [i u-c::] ;:;,;L.).L;,. -
t'h,ir )1: iL lticiliroe, gis ye lookc for the co:iiL[ncu iice of iIs, i.' ,' :,1 , ' '
you, lair 1n p!ns n(r plainncs in this cacc, but leade my i'itl x.. ,.n 'I ,
!Lan-c ieith, and conform yourself quhollic to the contcntis thairf' ;l i: t'.;; ;,.-
Cquci.: lt. nIl reali the fruiRis of youre great credit thcre, athcr low or licver, 1 ',-
well. (Otobcr 1586.
Letter to fir William Keith, ambaffcador in England, probaliy from -

cretary Maitland. Nov. 27, j5 86.

-B Y' your letters ent by this bearer, (albeit concerning no plcafhnt flcjcl) his ia- c,., ..

B jcty conceives wel of your carnclitncfs and fidelity in your noltitionls, a j

allb'-.

of iilr. Archibald's anliity' an(d diligence, whorn you so greatly prailc an:. recon- .' l.
mend. I wilh the ifife corrcfpond to his najefty's oinion, your care and tiacll, .. il. -;.
and his great diligence as you write. His ma3jery takes this rigorous )procecdinll
2.ainfl his mother deeply in heart, as a matter greatly concerning him both in ho-
nour and otherwise. His highneflus acions and behaviour utter plainly not only how
far nature prevails, but also how he apprehends of the fequcl of that process, and t
what moment he eftcenis it. There is an amlr:flhde flhortly to be direlcted, wherein
will be employed an earl and two counsellors, on whose answer will dependi the
continuance or diflolution of the lamity and good intelligence between the princes
of this ile. In the mean season, if farther extremity be uscd, and his majcll0y's tiit
and request difilained, hs highness will think hilinclf dlifioiourcd and coniitllined
far besides his expectation and deserts. \Y' my perceive lls imajfity's dllpufitiol
by hi letter to you, which )'ou filall impart to Mr. Archlibald, and L)th dea)l accord-
inng thereto. I need not to recommiend( to )your care, concerning your nlltcr's fir;-
vicc both in wcil and ill honourl. As you and your co.llc;u:lr ihal.l u liave you lli
in this behalf, f) for my own part, will I interplret our filh tioi) to v); i nlific. I
ani gl.tl of that hear of )youllult, iand I do fully credit t1,1at you et' e of ,;r. ,r-
chibaldi, wholu. fiends lhire mak, e treat accou nit o luI pr)itcf(l'l iri.i t, tl;c
,iuccii, bcfid(Lc tlh duty lie owes t the kinr's uiiaj'e( h i I 11n. ',tl.c J .11 (

0

{trained to remit to next uccaOliotl, halivrn, tI:ric tle i) ' Chc thlcle .\' lili';
(whlich of thlicil- lves may bear xvitnle. ol my laifte.) '\ i fling yol .1 pI'i.'i,,, 1-
isuc of )our ncegotiitil1 1 cu!miit o'li, 'e'. Illviuidhul! .', N 'v ' :' 1 5 '

V.O!.. 11.

.!' 1

THi- people, and all estates here are so far moved by the rigorous proceedings

against the queen, that his majefly, and all thit have credit are importuned, and may
not go abroad for exclamations against them, and imprecations againff the queen of
lEnland.

No. XIV. (Vol. II. p. 143.)

To the king's majefly, from Mr. Archibald Douglas.

. ctt ~',. l ,EASE your majecfy, I received your letter of the date the 28th of September,

Im d: -e i |L the 5th of Oclober, which was the fame day that I directed XV"i. Mlurrav to-
-.inal i;n the wards your highncfs; by fu h letters as he carried, ard others of several dates, your

t . I' majefy may pciceive tlat I had omitted nothing so far as my tavel might reach
I \.;· i,';. unto, anent the performing of the two chief points contained in the said letter he-

for the receipt thereof, which by there presents I must repeat for answering of the
: "'lfaidis. As to thle firt, so far as may concern the interceeding for the queen your

majcfly's mother her life, I have divers times and in every audience travelled with
this queen in that matter, specially to know what her full determination must be in that
point, and could never bring her to any further answer, but that this proceeding ag:ainst
her by order of justice was no less against her mind, than against their will that
loved her hes: As towards her life ihe could give no answer thereunto, until fiich
time as the law hath declared whether file was innocent or uilty. Herewithall it
was her plcafure thus far to inform me, that it was a number of the aflociants that
carneflly preflLd her that the law might proceed against her, giving rcafons that so
long as ihe was fufrered to deal in matters, lb long would never this realm be in
quiet, nither her life, neither this tRate in assurance, and in the end they used this
protcfation that if she would not in this matter follow their advice, that they should
remain without all blame whatfoevcr hould fall out; whereupon tihe had granted
them liberty to proceed, least such as had made the request, might hereafter have
charged herfeif with inconvenience it any flould happen.

AND by myself I know this her speech to be true, because both papist and pro-

teftant has behaved them, as it hath been her pieafure to declare, but upon di-
vers respects, the one to avoid ulicion that otherwise was conceived against
them, the other upon zeal and care that they will be known to have for preservation
of their sovereign's life and state in this perrelous time, upon consideration whereof;
I have been constrained to enter into fomic dealing with both, wherewith I made
her majecty acquainted; the poteft:ints, and fch as in other matters will be known
to hear no fulall favour unto your m.Ijeflity lervice, hath prayed that they may b)
cxcufd from any dealings ill the co:,trary (f that, which by their oath they have
:ivowcd, and by their pfcecli to their lbvercign requestcd fur, and that before mly
colmilin in tils country; if they should now thicrwilf do, it would produce no bet-
ter cfle(t biut to nmake them fuujcctt to the acculation of thcir f;vcrcign, wlihe it
Ihould pleafc her to do it, of their inconstancy, in giving councle whereby thcy
mliht incur tlli d, iic r of ill counccll, arld be confcquicilt worthy of p1)iinlhmcnir.
'Ciih (,f tlle papiftP,, :s [ didt deal with, went immediately, nd; told her IIiljtiy
what I had f(lkcn to tihem, iwho albeit he undrlitood te imatter of bcfoire, leit
'cr nie ;lid decliartd to Lm nmy own fpccch that 1 hlad uttered to tlicm, willing 111i

>,)^~~~~~~ o'

for the weil of my maifter's service to abftair from dealing with 'luch, as wore ;1,
yet sufficiently moved to think of my maltcr as file did I craved leave of ,ir mai-
jefty, that I might inform them of your niaj ltv's late behaviour towards her, a;nd
the state of this realm, whereunto with fonm diflic Ity file ce her coIfeit. A:
my late departure frorn court, which was upii the 5thl of tiii. in!itl t, a:l tlhe d:i
after that he lords of this grand jury lha taken their Ieaves of her Inmjeft) to g'
northward to Tothringham, it was her pleasure to promi e t., hav(e t!thcr fpcch ii
this matter at the returning of the said lords, and to gi've fuil anf ser accor!i: ' to
your majesty's cotenttment to the remainder matters, that had p-oponit in n.iine
of your majesty. As to the 2 part concerningi the alTlciati;,: ) and . li: th t tle
promise made to the mater of Gray conccining your majc ty's title mn:iy be fu'i led;
it appears by the said letter, that the very p)oiit, whereup;ni e ( Ieitin th 't mr t.
bring your majesty's title in doubt hath not bein rightly at thu r t :r of the Liil
letter confidered, which I take to have procccdLd tor I. ck o(' rictdii: (f thie a;t (
parlianmeit, wherein is fulfilled all the plromile mae lby the r;'ccn to the I id ma!ict
and nothing may now cause any doubt to arifc aiint y)'iur f.ii titl', :ecept th.ut ;i
opinion fliould be conceived by these lords of this 1p.iliament that are t) v !lchmcn :
this time agaiift the queen your majesty's mother, thait your mljety is, (cr

re:t' b.:

proved hereaft.r afienting to her proceedings, a id U inc th;.t lot'es )'oir in::.jt:, 'n Ici-
vice were of that opinion that too) carneft requle migt nihmove a roun, v]t rcl'c ')!
fI;lpicions might grow in men so ill afftcted in that niattcr, wlicih I thlo' mil rit i
helped by obtaining of a d-claration in p'ailianient (of your ilajefi:': iii jycIce .i
this time, and by reason that good nature: aid iplblic h1onclftV wolid )con'trai 'vo;i t-
intercede for t e queen your mother, which would carry wit itl lt; w.h )it an fr-
ther, some fuflicion that mnight mn: e ill afTr'lcd ilmen to doult. Jn mn f r;tier let-
ters I humbly craved of your inijefly tlit lni i

learned menil inl the laws, night be

moved to advise with the words of the alociation, and the i ;i:igation conti ned in
the at of pailiament, and vithall to advise whli;tt fuliiciois ef:t , )'otr trnl fly's rc-
quell might work in thcie ch'l.lerick Iinle at tili time, nld low thel't mil 's 1m llt
be belt moved to receive reason ; a up(on all thefc cnilidcraltioils t!:ec migh: li. xc

i)inrned tile words of a declarator of yuiir ni jePy'> iniioce;ce to be (btained irn his
pailiament, and fill l t! rcc-t', tle very wx Vrd( of a protiefntiin si t flme ctj t
that might bi eff ie lor y: !r mie l!t)''s

-r. ic., a:Id for my better itl IioIt'; A'-

bcit this w is Imy fiinplc o:iliioln, I h :i i:' e c:)llt ntcJ to f,'ij -

;t:iy dir'C i l it i11 I

plea(e your imaje;lty to give; I a\ce a '; 'y o nd ti i illta I. I'.' C t th l ie

( ..i

of this rall, who iemls not to be ftleikdl i1. c. i . i and I tih .ir lc I li Iroe !i,
deal tl i' vin wit i fich of the 11pa1 lii lt a m a

llv il il l i il'l , ' (1.)itl t of il, . I'},

binl t e ic (ii:] of l l' proceeding, il t

i) ltt l' ice tl r :lind , colt..in.l !

othc i ti : I ol sevei'l idate%, I ati C1 i'trillc ld to liy the whole (luen hti',. '.'-.,:
nt. ijuit , ia;d to l it l

11111 a'y t i. t 1till ini lrm;l tiolln mi ' li e sint i 111t n : w'1. .i;

i ' -

ti er to do lereill, i; tlii liitld tl e, \ltd i

il ;11

1 r' cl

- i\'e i e aii' ,il li i ,'1 f,

{}}:[l\ :.;oe i a 1Ibc di li g.: cc~,id~n, to slh

diteot!ot :,s 1 li x.' :;h,'.1i, i,'e,. .,=.

A n':11l 1i: r C. ( ot ;(l ,IJou, [o ei ), v, wi,)

1 1, rntn your :, s il ; . l ;. (1, .1:1 \m, .

.Ii l":; ., I hI:ll il!v taike m y i'' t I,:1 ti :' thlis tl ' a ol ( ). i ].

" )

': 1

i1

ti'l "\'. tI'iIC lh.Ii t ii iie.i a:id ol o., ,
1 ,l it.

l \' )

A memorial for his majesty by the Master of Gray.

i Jran. j
5(,,i T will please your majefly, I have tho't meeter to set down all things as they oc.

'n Oi~'l l cur, and all advertisements as they came to my ears, then jointly in a lettre.
l '0 0 1 came t Vare the 24th of Decr. and sent to WVm. Keith, and Mr. Archibald

,oil '. of 'ir Douglas to advertize the queen of it, like as they did at their audience. She pro-
.q. Dick. i . nifitd the qlecn your majesty's mother's life should be spared till we were heard.
; I1 l:. . T'he ?.7th, they came to Vare to me, the which day fir Robt cane to Vare, where

they shewcd us how far they had already gone in their negociation, but for that the
di!'courie of it is set down in our greneral letter, I remit me to it, only this far I wilt
tcefity unto your njefy that \\'m. Keith hath used himlfilf right honelily and justly
till our comrinz, relpedi ing all circuimf{ances, and chiefly his colleague his dealin.r,
wh:ch indeed is not better than your majfty knows already.

THIE 'i2th day of Dec. we came to London, where we were no way· friendly

received, nor after the honest fort it has pleased your majesty use her ambafidors,
never man sent to welcome or convey us, This fame day we undertocod of Mlr.
de Bclievre his leave taking, and for that the custom permitted not we sent our cx-
cufcs by Mr. George Young.

ITiiE lit day of Jany, \V'l'. Keith and his colleague according to the cuflom

sent to crave our audience. We received the anwer contained in the general letter,
and could not have answer till the 6th day, what was done that day your ajcfly
has it in the genera, yet we was not out of expectation at that time albeit we re-
ceived hard anfwc-s.

THE 8th day we speak with the earl of Leiceftcr, where our conferrence was, as

is set down in the general. I remarked this, that he that day said plainly the de-
taining of the queen of Scotland prisoner was for that she pretended a succession to
this crown. Judge then by this, what is tho't of your majety as ye {hall hear a
little after.

1T;E th day we speak with the French ambassador, whom we find very plain in

making to us a wife discourse of all his poceeding, and Mr. de Believre we thank-
ed him in your majefly's name and opened such things as we had to treat with this
queen, save the ladi point, as more largely set down by ur gcneral.

I'T is tho't here, and some friends of your majesty's advilcd me, that Believre hi;

negotiation was not eft'fctual, and that the resident was not privy to it, as indecd [
think is true, lor ince Bclicevre his perting, there is a talk of tiis l.i (flu;iac;u his
fervains ttken with his whole papers and pacquets, which he w.i iin iun i.irlnc,
for that they chlre him with a clnfpiracy of late aainlt the qi'n htie u-r h,.
It s allcd:cdl !hi:r iLrvnt has confled the matter, but whuon I hall tnlit i :l(l ,.
not, but tl 1 fee proof I Iltal! account limn ;an hieft I: in, for indeed (I ]' ;,i.
pirs, and (;!'i c (\witluit ldobi) who lhath been very ifit i n tiis iiiltt, r. i il".v
lini tli,t the queen and cal of Lcic(lier hl.i dediicd ti fptai with 'uI in rli .l'
;tnd i 'i .l it ' h i-;opl) i l; ie . :tvc e it sic lly lli.t l tho't it nicet(tt, I t l v l.rI l tl.
e1ln svliv I coniriuii.tc that to lliml, for th.it I h.ial le'n fisiu( tcd 'y IA l:,, I
]it r no ' It \5'" , I,i ids in ila.nce to have don( evil sic r s in h r (rrvtct, t',, 1'

!shh

r ]

lI my' x'i t lfi; tha,t m y c.li;c.(t dc:il;ng in ti s flioii(d I, :i thflic'li t tll tn .,,, 'i l .
11l w\. IL'S ;tid tl.lt thli. kiiave rNai< whIu now had beti ved i lci., d
I l in tl;i A,

evil offices; he desired me, secing he saw only with other folks eyes, that I fhiouI
no ways impute it to her, for the like he had done to himlelf by Naui his pcrlFuafin.
I answered he should be my witness in tlat.

'I'H. 9th day we fcnt to court to crave audience, which we got the loth d( ; t

the first, she said a thing long looked for hould be welcome when it come., 1
would now fee your master's offers. I afwvered, no man makes offrs but for !;ii.c
caue ; we would, and like your majesty, first know the cause to be cxtai:t for whii h
we offer, and likewifc that it be extant ti'l your mrijefty has heard u;. I think it e
extant yet, but I will not proriic tor an hour, but you think to fli.t in i loi. rt.
answered we mind not to ihift, b to offer from our so CIC;ln all t!,:;, ; litr v, I;!i
reafbn may bc; and in pecial. we offered as is et down in oi gt.),:,!, ;til v.!, ~. -
fuled and tho't nothing. She called on the three that were in the il , .;' i.
of Leicester, my lord admiral, and chamberlain, and very clfpitciu: l i.[t ;it .u
our offers in prelence of them all. I opened the l;1il part ;:nd liid, M l .iin i ,r i'.,
refpe§t is it that men deal against your pcrfon or eliate fur !hr culc ? -i i-. ul',c. !,
because they think (he hall succeed to me, and for that th ih a p.pilt, !i':-.il!.
aid I both the causes may be removed, he said she would be ig!d to ;ii Iiilli it.
If Madam, said 1, all that he has of right of fuiccelFii v ci i the kii: ;:.r

Li '

ir

reign's perlon, were not all hope of patpifts iciiIovc(. ihe a)fl' i .. .
Then Madam I think the queen his mother i{Ail \vilin tly dnemit ail h.;- :

i I

his person. She answered fie hath no ri'ht, for flc is dcl arn unall. i'ic j I
said, if he have no right, appearingly the hope cceafes already, tl t it i., nt, to c
feared that any man attempt for her. The queen afllwered, but ill p is li. '
not our declaration: then let it fall, fays I.' in the king's pcrfboi by hici :i!; .tti;i:i.
The cail of Leicefler answered, She is a prisoner, how can flhe !eni:. I .i'vc,
the demission is to her so , by the advice of all the triendl, fli !.is in Etii:', :,u i
in cafe, as (od forbid, that any attempt conttir the (1 cun ic. avli ;;, \v, 'h.l
party with her to prove the dcmiflion or aina ion to Ihe i:' i.il r 1i;,! ;1 :-
opposite party and having all the princes her si >inc:( ft;r iin, l.i'i li ::!'l f r t he
efficacy of it with his majcftv of before. T'he ue c

;, lh c,,,' ! ,). .re -

bend my meaning, and fir Rob opened the nattc a_:i n, ill '.t ir!i :is i:.
underflood not. So the carl of Leicefier ani',vl elI itht oui n(.irii . , t,,it :::
king hould be put in his mnother', pl.Le. it i(l, t' q.: i ' thlt p'.i
nyftlf in a woife cafe than of bet(,ie; bl' (G:d .l . l, !that vwcri to cu; n' .'.
throat, and for a dutch, or an e.rldome t )y.,u]il, · :,; ; Lr i:lc!i a3 v(cu v ould c,:e
fime of your delperate knaves kill ne. No, by ( !, ' i 11 I u; ' , iu that L,1 (c1.
I answered he craves rioting of your maje!t' bilt (.: of hi-, ti'. .' I t
Leicefler answered that were to make hinm p.it th, ;l , , :. ',
he will be far mure party, it he be in he pl.c t '

l ' d :! . :. !( , fft . :..

longer, but haid flie wo uld inot hive a wotll n ii i t '.i 1 .

i V ! f; .

i. i!

your king what o d I huave dro e for in1 i;i 11i ' il: t . (. ii';i (1: 1 1 ..l Ii' 1,.
lie w'ls horn, ;i.r tlhiat I 1ild to keep tihe! ..;- r!..[t :1 \/ fl. ,l !\.\ II i:;, .1',.
if he bieak it slill 1I ' a: (!iJolll t

,ult, .l.l l i

t: i ll; i 'k I ..i.c

/ o ,!c t i.. 1

farew ell; but w e (I fClh uit, \i l I ,' k t ,. I 1' i h1l iii iii.t ]i, ' .t t'c '; i .
for S day, ; lieh rcilil(l . Si r rh' , , v l , i , I.. l. l
anr hour ; and lfo c 1l h1 l '

ie 'l .' i ' [ ]'.I' ii. . *,.' '

l

for oficla, but ;ill ,' si t l,(lt;

ii ,t.l ':I

. l ', In ,

l' i

, 1 , ] :

' ,i ,:

. ' ,

Ll;lt they n11iid to lfjlluw l li,

, :LtK ! , a1

'

( .[1 .. ' . ' i i
lc1 :.. :.I 1 .

self, which I like the worse; for without doubt, fir, it hall cut off all friendship
ye had here. Altho' it were that once they had meaned well to your majesty, yet
remembring themselves, that they have medled with your mother's blood, good faith
they cannot hope great good of yourself, a thing in truth I am sorry for; further
your majefly may perceive by this lass discourse of that I proponit, if they had
meaned well to your majesty, they had used it otherwise than they have (lone, for
reaoln has bound them. But I dare not write all. I mind something to speak in
this matter, becaure we look fhurly our letters flall be troucit by the way.

FOR that I fee private credit nor no means can alter their determination, altho'

the queen again and the earl of Leicelter has desired to fieak with me in particular;
I mind not to speak, nor fhlall not; but afluredly shall let all men fee that I in par-
ticular was no ways tyed to England, but for the refpea of your majesty's service.
So albeit, at this time, I could not effectuate that I desired, yet my upright deal-
ing in it hall be maiiifcfled to the world. We are, God willing, then to crave au-
dience wi.cre we mnd to use farply our inftruaions, which hitherto we have used
very calmly, for we can, for your honour's cause, fay no less for your majesty, than
the French anibaflidr 3r has said for his mafler.

So I pray your m c:ajjy colider my upright dealing in your service, and not the

cle!-t, so iiiadl it been double by any I night have here had credit, but being I came
unly tor that cnifc I will not my credit ihall serve here to any further purpose. I
pray God prefcrve your niajefy and fend you a true and sincere friendhip. From
LJonl .ii this I .ti of Jan. 1586.

I unli.land the qjucen is to fend one of her own to )our majeftv.
To ti -iSilt ho. my lord vice chancellor and secretary to his majesty,

from the malcr of Gray.

,

. 1 Y lord, I fend you these lines with this inclosed to his majesty, whereby your

C (1. lorldfip shall undlerIand how matters goes here. And before all things I pray

., . y'.;r: u. r lordllip nove his nm!jcirt to 'dpcCt my diligence, and not the eftc t in this
,. '1 -, ' ,- Ic,': tition, for I fc!r i it had been for the crown of England to myself I could
A.0 l. i. '*. ', (: d, , rinore, an: lt n ,t unfl ends have advantage of nme, for the world fliall fee

.-i- ; ' t'iit h lov.d En land i)or his ma jrtlty's service only. I look fhlortly to find your lord-

fl.il) p i end as ye ima le promil, and hy God I 'till e to you if I can. \n . Keith
nand 1 ldcircd, if r:;!rtc!'s had gone well, to have run a coiii u that your lordship nmriht
ha \ here hbcKn in credit iand others diftppointed, but now I will do for you a for
mylitf; \w. il is to ca;Ie for lln cCedit here, for in contience the',' iean not honcli-
lv t te .ilr' oc inr lov(T;r ii andl il they may, lie wili o tile ,ct his Inotlhr is gone

( I

! If:!! n t, 1

) t i'ol c tl y lord without all kind of t'rui l I p)iay y()o to aivi!i

lin !' t 'i 1 i: n ,t i> vc, ''. 'lIcy liyv here, thlat it t lias lieen ltd byl) one who

I; ;[ld it lr.i in , ,

'i l~it )y defi lc d not the kin, anild 1l' 1]l d to ;ib lc, Iceranol it
' 't i. 1.:i'. '!;*. ' 1,, [.:i: icn, :nd g: i\'t all ex;i l cic i t Iy kiii Jl.i 'sl s t!h fotirt, I

.

.:i,' it d it l : 'r I ' ;ll t,:,:

< t I \\.is al; lured y ou l e\r'c l . l I iok 'li it. M r.

\r i.l
l is

'.', \I 1£ ,

1: i t.' l it, \ .t yo

I lo( dil ) lia s l i .l ,i

1 ol'ih l i lltlis rm : t'irt , r t.

v

!' "1 ,' a , in I..l i I, I , <(i;;(11 lh'io,

. i I ; i l

o tIt, l~i \ , {,ir ; It 1( 1 th I

Ilne k:iVi
w !l

i ati1 t( ' :: tlliX \ aX\', ¢t' I )'l , i

)'i ltl a s l ([ Il lit\ ,

1 ti th

at, h n It dctlo ti

li, '

' :li'

l ' , ,, : 1 .! ', ,

,i. X',' ! t :}! 'j, t) '.'t* d , ;e ,11 hi

t
;'al . , t}

, .

l
!

[k
<i;.

s,
90

it would consume more paper than I have here, so I defer it to meeting. Tiere is
a new coinpiiacy alicdged against the queen to have been intended, for the French
ambassador resident t'.rec of his men taken, but I think in the end it shall pruve
nothing. M1r. Stafford, who is ambafador for this queen in France, is touched with
it, his bother is aken here, always it has done th s h.,rm in our negotiation, thar.
all this council would not move this queen to medic with the queen of coti d' .
blood, till this invention was found forth. I remit all other things to the iniclocd.
Wle minded to have Tent to his majecfy a di!courfe, which we have et d,wni of al!
our proceedings since our hi her coming, but we are urely advertized that the . ar r
is to be trusTaut by the way for our pacqucts, o that we defer it till our own corni::;
this I have put in a pr vy part beside the pacquet. \We shall think t.ikc ic;e n
Fryday the 3th day, where we mindl xactly to follow the rigour of our Initiu
tions, for it cannot stand with the king's honour that we fay les than the I'rcenit
ambaibador, which wag, le roy ion maifire le peult moins faire que lc reicrtil. o
that about the 24th I think we (hall, God willing, be at home, except that lonie ftly
come which we look not for. 'I'he queen aind the carl of Leicetler h:as delired to
speak with me. I refuued Lave in presence of my colleaguec, by rea n I fee a (eter-
mination which particular credit can not lidp, ad I crave no cr edit but for that
cause. It will pleaie your lordlhip retire the incloiL'd from his minacity and k.;) it.
So after my service commend-d to yourlelf and bedfelloe:, I commit you to (Gad.
From London the i2tli of Jan. 1586.

To the king's majefcy, from fir Robert McLlvill.
IT may pease your ma:jef,, since the direion of our former letters, we 1ha .ia-l-. 2 .::.

dience, and her majesty appeared to take our overtures in good partl in preli'ncc ', -_

of her council albeit no offence would take place with them, havi, g t.iken ref) u- ' i"i:al I
tion to proceed with extremity, not the lets it pleased her m::j-lty to d fire us to ifay i *: , , I i
for two days on taking our leave, until he had adviscd u;on our ['ropoition ; lincc , 'd

\ :.i

which time, her majeltv is become more hard by fiom letters (a, we are infourmeid) \ i' .
has come from Scotland, making some hlope to believe that your mnajelly tal;es nIt .
this matter to heart, as we know the contrary in efi'ec, and had o ble rcnlovcd
the like opinion out of h r mintlv's mind, which by finiler inormation was cre-
dited, their reports has hinderd our commiffii, and abultd this queen, fLarin: ill
like manner we shall be fla'yed until answer come froin Scotland by ticch pcr(;i as;
they have intelligence of. Anid albeit that it will be well enough knoivn to all nli.'
how heavily your majcily takes tihefe pr(cecdillgs to heart, the tiuth is, ti.It t!.y
have bv this occasion so perfui.ded tlhe (qicn, t!Iat it is like to h:nder our neC',it.i t

.

As ll, Allyour Stewart is to lbe (irected in their palt), by olur klnowlc', '.;i
has iwanlt't miore of Ins cledit, tai I belicve he m:ly pecrform, a1nd we wvill. I'1:
to (detit fl , this dealinl, fitt in it des hal1, and li is noi t mleet t ir

t a

I rl ,

remittinig to) youir n ijcily's (;kccid dIlic tio ti take order licrelin ; s we liall 1 1tl.' i rI
able to your m:it. jty not to onilt ny poinlt vwe have ill ,irge, i;s the titll i , thl
mailser of (irhliyc has l)iehaivd hii tfelf very lightly and dilrkc tly ill tli. i,., ,, .'

i ,',

cvil tayne witl be divv r' ill it 11i r p tiie who were , ' I), fore Its si i .. \' . '!,t'
been the aldiig to the n11 11i rals \\'l i i; bh orl n us h1)cl cO ian)ly, l it I tl.. . , ,1
troubled with others. W)I.cll Iel ie th
l tIt left nutiliiL', un!JunI tlI.it lie I. ! il

a. ,
'*.'

charge. As for mater Archibald he has promised at all times to do his dewoyr,
wherein he shall find true report made to your majesty, craving pardon of your ma-
jefty that I have been so tediou, after I have kifled your majesty's hand I humbly
take my leave. Praying God to grant your majesty many good days and happy, in
wvhofe proteation I commit your majesty at London, the 20th of Jan. 586.

S I R,
ALBEIT :Maler George has not been in commission, he is not inferior in his

fc.vice to any of us, as well by his good advice and diligent care he takes for the

!vancement of your £rvkie, wherein we have not been a little furthered.

To the king's majesty, from the master of Gray and fir Robert Melvill,

,' pr, ,'EASE it your majesty in the last audience we had, since our last advertizement,
-i, 3,' "^ rby XV'. MIurra" , we find her majesty at the resuming our offers something miti-

ji.il, gated, and inclined to confider more deeply of them, before we got our leave, at

rtE-, !l:,-t. so our rafonl n, certain of the council, namely my lord of Leicester, fir Christopher
il \ A l:_i.. Haton, my lord Hunudon, and my lord Hawart being present in the chamber, gave
o\ i- ol. little share of any gieat contentment to have her from her former resolution,

now carfin in prplexiter what ti:e hould do, always we left her in that state, and
iincc have daily prci]:d corfiirrcnce with the whole council, which to this hour we
lavec not yet obtained. This day we have sent down to crave our leave. The
Ig.ratif hinder which our ngotiation has found hitherto is a prfuafion they have
iihre that cithor eyour maIv deals superficially in this matter, or that with time ye
min y be moved to diglt it, which when with great difficulty we had expugnit, we
iid anew that certain letters written to them of late from Scotland has found some
place of credit with them in our contrare. So that resolving now to clear them of
that doubt by a spec al mefTage, they have made choice of fir Alexandcr Stewart to
try our highnefi's meaning in it, and to persuade your majesty to like of their pro-
cecdings, wherefrom no terror we can lay out unto him is able to divert him, he
has given out that he has credit with your majesty, and that he doubts not to help
this matter at our highness's hand. If he come there that errand, we think your
m:rjefty will not oversee the great disgrace that hs attempts fhdll give us here, if he
be not tane order with before that he be further heard, and if so te that any other
be directed (as n:r intelligence gives us there hall) our humble suit is to your ma-
jefIy, that it may plea!e your highness to hear of us what we find here, and at what
point we leave this matter with her m ijefty, before that they find accidence, the
caulcs whereof remitting to our private letters. We commit your majesty for the
pr(:fct to God's eternal protuction. From London this 2zft of Jan. 1586.

No. XV.

# ADDITIONAL APPENDIX. I had no opportunity of seeing several of the following papers, till those sheets of the history, to which they relate, were printed off. For this reason no references are made to them there; but I have supplied that defect by marking the particular passages in the history which they serve to illustrate. No. XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 358. Line 10.]

ADDITIONAL
A P P E N D I X.

I had ni. opportunity of feeie;g fiveral of the follcwu'ig papers, t,' t ofe hets of ite,

h/loy, to wlitlh they relate, were printed of. For this r-eiifo n references are
made to them there; bt h.2ve supplied that defreS by marking the particular pas-
fa s i the hi0ory which they serve to illustrate.

No, XXXI. [Vol. I. p. 358. Line Io.]
Account of the sentence of divorce between the earl of Bothwell and lady

Jean Gordon his wife. From a manuscript belonging to Mr. Da-
vid Falconar, advocate. Fol. 455.

P O UN the 29 of Apryle 567, before the richt hon. Mr. Robert Mail-
land dean of Aberdene, Mr. Edward Henryson dotor in the laws, two of
the senators of the college of justice, Mr. Clement Little, and Mr. Alex.

ander Symne advocattis, commiflers of Edenr ; compeered Mr. Henry Kinroife, pro-
curator for Jean Goudoune countes of Bothwell, constitute be her for purfewing of
ane proces of divorcement, intendit by her contra James erle Bothwel her husband
for adultery, committed be him with Befle Craufurde, the purfucrs servant for th-
time; and icklyke, for the aid crle, compeared Mr. Edmond tHay, who efter hr
had perfued and craved the prfuer's procurator's oath de caltuniai , if he had ju!s
c'us to perfew the fa d action, and otened it, denyd the lybl, and the said l\r.
Harrie took the morne, the lait day of Aprlve, to prove the fame pro prima. 'Tic
quhilk dy, having produced Ionlc witneflls, he took the next day, beini the r of
\I av, to do falrthlr diligence. Upon the quhilk of MaIy, ihe produccd limiC nlin
vitneflcs, and cnunced farther pro)battioune. Aftei quilk, ih desired a term to e
iigi'ncd to pro .ioulcc ftntcicc. I'o whom the fid cominflur' .iitEi.cd "ctt r.',
next, til (it .\Ii'v ti l)'( ;til' eC f niltenllc thcrci!, fecitl(Iu alhll i ata c v ro,,: ,
qtlilk ;v.r.,rJin"lzl '.t \-',i .c: ti:t l. t\ in I.LVItir of !11e l.(c*rlcwar.

11, i l

, \' 1t'. 1: !! . l'

! I', l.l t j , tl, i ; '11l . i. !, i c l

il

li t jiij I

.
I'I

e
d1I
' ii l.in, 'I
.

t' ,i I i. ;:, 11 I '.'.1." w .,' 1,)

1 '., : 1 ', , .

; I , .. i , ,,

;. ' t,, tllr c' w

.t1,
;1

t ' l
1 i i
,)lluit'

.t,,: i',i

: , ,'

I I"

t

) ' ')lt, rni, i , ..n, 1 ,, '.b lll) 1 )l

)t i'll . ', , ' \'i :'l in [,Jil~', i l) , :,v., . .': ,

.l , .1a 1'~L d cb l o n) il
(_)]a{)

V\ ',, ! ' ,{'. .' I',0)W

gow, and parson of Egclfhame, Mr. Alexander Creichtoun, and Mr. George Cook
I hancellor ot Dunkeld, and to Mr. Johne Manderftonne, chanon in Dunbar and pre-
bceidar of Pcltrune, or any ane of them. ' his commiffione is datit 27 Aprile
r167, was pre!cnted to two of the saids commiflioners, viz. Mr. Andr. Crawfurd
;i;,i Mr. John Manderfioune on Setterday 3 May, by Mr. Thomas Hepburne parson
or Auldhanflocks, procuiator for the erie of Bothwell, who accepted the delega-
tiounc, a:nd gave out their citation by precept, direted, I)ecano Chriftianitates de
laitliiigtonie, inc vrci vicano fcu curato eccle. parochiae de Creichtoune, feu cuicunq;
!teii c.tceliano debite requifitis, ser summoning at the said erles instance, both or
the ladv p.crinally if (he could be had, or othcrwaya at the parofche kerk of Creich-
lUirie the tinic of fervicc, or at her dwelling place before witnefles, primo, fecundo,
ttrtio et pemptorie, unico tamen contextu protuplice edicao. A:nd likeways to be
witncefs in the said matter, Alex. bishop of Galloway, who did marry the said erlc
and his lady, in Halyreud-houfe kirk, in Feb. 1565, fir John Bannatyne of Auch-
noule jufiice clerk, Mr. Robert Creichtoun of Elliot the queen's advocate, Mr. l)a-
idc Chalmers provolf of Creichtoun and chancellor of Rots, Michael - abbot
of Melrofs, and to compear before the saids judges, or any one of them, in St.
Geils kirk in Edinr. on Monday the 5 of May, be thamfelves, or their procurators.
Upon the said 5 day, Mr. John Manderfloune, one of the juges delegat only being
prefcnt compeared the fame procurators for both the parties that were in the former

T\|o\\o!r: i;' proces, Mr. Edmond Hay ( articulatlie ) and some of the wit-
h~. pa:lt':it- nefcs fumrnond produced, and received for proving of the fame. The said procu-
h i,:c,.Ie. r.tor renounced farder probatioune, and the judge assigned the mornc, the

(th of May, ad publicandum producta, nempe depofitioncs ipforum teftium. The
quhilk day, post publicatas depositiones predictas, Mr. Hen. Kinroe, procurator
for the lady initanter objecit objetioncs juris generaliter, contra pro dutae, in-
luper renunciavit ultcriori defenfioni; proinde conclufa de confenfu procuratorurn
hinc idc c;iufa, judex praedidus ftatuit craftinum diem pro termina, ad pronunci-
andam fuam fenteiitiani definituram, ex deducis coram co, in praefcnti caufa et pro-
cefl. Conform hereunto, on Wednesday the 7th of May, the said judge gave out
his sentence in favors of the erle, declaring the marriage to be, and to have been
iull from the beginnig, in refpec of their contingcnce in blood, which hindcrcd
thair lawvfull marniage without a difpeilfation obtained of bcfoir.

No. XXXII. [Vol. I. p. 4CI. line I,.)

Queen Mary to EQueen Elizabeth.

M A D A \1,

.'t l', ( .[

, / I thouiiih tlic ecccffity of my cause (~ hich makcth me to be importune to you)

'. i. \ (ilA. d(o nmke aou to judie that I aiil out of the way ; yet such as have not my
,I1I;! l!ro ibly pallion, nor the ricfpc'ts whereof you are pcrfiladel, will think that I do as my caufc

d

t...

!,i,:i. doth i'uir. \ladam, I have not accuscd you, neither in words, nor in thought,

to 11.tve ucild ytt(r fltf ' vil towaiid mne. And I believe, that you have no want ot
gotd i lcunderl ll.ilng, to kc( p you from pciewafioni agailnf your natural goodl incli-
n.;ti(o!. ulit inl the lca iii time, I can't chlute (having Iny fnfs) but perceive very
evil fruithertne in my nautter, finict my comling hither. I thought that I had sis-
?itly lilfLurlcil u:to v t thc dtfieolnluoJitic3, which tlis delay brinSgcth unto

.) rite,

me. And especially that they think, in this next m nth of August, to hold a par-
liament against me and all my servants. And in the mean tine, I am tfayed here,
and yet will you, that I should put myself forther into your country, (without fee
ing you) and remove me further from mine; and there to me this dishonour, at the
requests of my rebels, as to fend commissioners to hear them agaiiiu me, as ou
wold do to a mere subjer, and not hear me by mouth. Now, madam, I have pi o-
mifed you to come to you, and having there made my noan and complaint of thcl'
rebels, and they coming thither, not as pofiflbrs, but as fubjets, to anCwcr. I
would have besought you to hear my justification of that, which they have ffly fcr
furth against me, and if I could not purge myf'lf thereof, you might then difchargc
'our hands of my causes, and let me go for such as I am. But to do a. you fay, i!
were culpable I would be better advis'd ; but being not o, I can't accept this }i I

honour at their hands, that being in pofl"ion they will come and accute me befolt
your commissioners, whereof I can't li.e: And feeing you think it to be a;ai.f"
your honour and confignage to do otherwise, 1 befcech you that you will not bh
mine enemy, untill you may fee how I can dilcilarge m! f-.lf every way'. Andl to
susser me to go into France. where I have a dwry to maintain m ; or the !cl
to go into Scotland, with aflurance that if there come aly thanci; thi'' r, I i:li
bind myself for their return without any prbejudice to ou, o(r i if t ii. ',ou not 1I
do thus, I protest that I will not inpute it to falihood, it' re1.:citc :rat;rs in .:
country, without making you any other ditci:a;g so; it. Do witll nmy body as o,.
will, the honour or blame shall be yours. For I had ath r die herc, and that ni
faithful servants may be succoured (tho' you ou'd not lo) by l{han.gets, than t.,
susser them to be utterly undone, upon' iope to receive, in time to come, particular
commodity. There be many things to move me to far that I thall have to do, ii,
this country, with others, than with you. But iorafmiuch ;as, nothin hath follow: '
upon my last moan, I hold my peace, happenl what ay happ. I have as lees t,,
bri'de } my fortune, as to seek it, and not find it. Further, it piecl you to gi
endure -'
licence to my fubjets to go and come. This hath bi n rcfnuiaJ bL my lord Scri-),
and Mr. Knolls (as they iay) by your coimmandnment, hc'caj I wouid not cdpa'r
hence to your charge, until 1 had anfwve of this letter, t' fhcie'd thein that you
required my antwcr, upon the two pl i:',tb, c(ntlti:cil i n your 1rttr:.

THE one is to let you b.icfl/ undcrtand, I alm cime to vou to nli.Ikc m nio.!!t

to you, the which being heard, I would declare unto ou mine ininoceicy, anJ tici;
require your aid, and for lack thereof, I can't but make my moan aoin! cnipl int t'
God, that I am not heard in my jft quarrell, and to appca! to othcr plii.cs tc
have refpcct thereunto, as my catit requireth ; and to you, in:ll.Um, ii if i f ll, al i' i
you shall have examined your ctn!cilcnc- before hiin, anrd have him r wilt i','
-And the other, which to (oilo urthci' into your touintl', .illi 1:,!' , .,' . ,
your presence, I ill ciic':i. tl.,i a. n, I tlvoulr, but xvill ji. t, L (01

ak '' ,,. ,,

obeyilng it a.; a thing inrctil. II I.i ]I:( in1 tin , I )etec(']l (

' , t . ':1 t :

m y lordl I trrics, for I can't w ii .lt !:. l, ),;\' r t e l :1'. - o;

h. ji '., .1,.'

Alfb to ful'rlr nie, if it l) Cti '.(tl, \.'i'i. t.(l dt i a 'i , t u i i ; :. : '

,-

loc cr it be out of thiii ll,'. 1 .';i lt;. ' )O i vil 1i i, , li '.' 'I ''

I, '

qeIIf{, hfr (your lhonour's tfake, it;(-( : it i'th n1,,tl !l' xf .,,ln 0: il! ,<11, i ;!t,, . .:
j i.s t\, .nd.s mc oth rwilx' , ;' id fr, ., tlhit (.1 iiiii'. ' ,,wn .a c ,Oi, I ,,. i
C , ',: :.

li .

111 d 1 ai.[t 1 rti[ , v illh \otll:.. ';Jltl .l ( ', ,,,, 1 'l it krl'. C r,

H . , , .. , ,' }

\', ,:,
I

/ ,* ' i' .*

A P P E N D I X.

fiall be bound to you fol it; and happening otherwise, yet I can't blame you. As
for my lord Fleeming, feeing that upon my credit you have suffered him to go home
to his house, I warrant you he fliall pass no further, but shall return when it shall
I.. ,.i;;,/;. plcafe you. In that you trust me, I will not (to die for it) deceive you. But from

Dumbarton I answer not, when my L. Fleeming small be in the Tower. For they
which are within it, will not forbear to receive succour, if I don't assure them of
yours ; no, tho' you would charge me withal, for I have left them in charge, to
have more refpe& to my servants and to my eflate, than to my life. Good siser, be
(f another mind, win the heart, and all shall be yours, and at your commandment.
I thought to satisfy you wholly, if I might have een you. Alas ! do not as the
iirpcit, that foppeth his hearing, for I am no inchanter, but your sifter and natural
coutin. If Caesar had not disdained to hear or read the complaint of an advertiser,
he had not o died; why should princes ears be flopped, feeing that they are paint-
ed so long ? Meaning, that they fould hear all ad be well advised, before they an-
sier. 1 am not of the nature of the bafililk, and lcs of the chameleon, to turn
you to my likcnes, and tho' I shou'd be so dangerous and curs'd as men fay, you
ale lufficiently arm'd with conflancy and with justice, which I require of God, who
give you grace to ufc it well with long and happy life, From Carlile, the 5th of July,
1568.

No. XXIII. [Vol. I, . 403. line 12.]
A letter from mry lord Herries to my lord Scroop and fir F. Knollis,

September 3d, 156S.
i. ", 1' ;'i, ¢Y lordc, plcafit your honourable lordships, I am informit by James Borth-

' .( ;,a

)-.V
J. wick, lately comrn from the queen's majesty your overane, that it is fchawin
:. i ; ' j:, t) hLr hi;hlnefl, I fuld have ridden ill Crawfurdmure, fen my last cuming into this

. ' realm, upon the earl of Iurray's dependants. And that I fuld hve caufit, or been

of counfall to cottifnien to ha\e ridden in in Jglald, to flay or fpulzie her majesty's

1L', cc s.

A.1Y lords, I thou.ht it light ncedlul because your lordships is, be your foverane,
,ommanecd to attend upon the quc'n's miiiicfly my miftrers, so having daily acccfs
:' thir matters, to declare upon the truth; humbly desiring that your Iordfhips will,
;or (icd's canul, certiiicate the queen your foverane tht fame.

As (God lives, 1 have neither ciiictcd, ior any wie has had knowledge of ony
-,nlm ,a'an's Iyd(lni d

in England, to do the flil)iccRs thcreof hlurt in bodies or goods, fcne

l' ic-Lc of Leith; arid as I undefiiand it lli.ill be fuid true, tlat gifony ic open
lur h d(onc, it is by the queen my fovcc igl's dil ledieilts, and that I have not rid-
,lc;l nor liitu no Scottiflnlln, lnor COImliiiili:,'] ,ly tlUll to be dlone to them, fen
lily 'on!;iT;, ;'omn the q'ueCi's majety f lil .ilnJ, it is v'll kend, for that never ae
wi l c mplin 0t 111 .

-I HAv : (lne mol c oodi to Cr;awfuil inrc, iinr vur 'lie call of Murray has (d ic,

and wiil I' 1(athl'lt to, do thcnm ;ily 11.n11, thill lie v l!. Lxccpt tih (e'S
I olil ilr fovcrc;rlg , con'I.il;:(l 1 .llc rl'i.lrt tol I} tI)'l, (;IulIlcof tins is tik:'I ;i-
der a inv entit lc.li , lher ;race fll l.e ti U;Lh , .'iIJ 'ie tli I;caIt: us tliu.' nicu

i; 1 ,

here, quhom of sic report fall be made, that baith would serve hir, and may, bet-
ter than they unworthy liars.

MY lords, I understand the queen's majesty your sovereign is not contented of'

this bruit, that there fhuld ony Frenchman come in this realm, with the duke of Chat-
tlerault. Truth it is, I am no manner of way the counfall of their cuming, nor
has no sic certainty thereof, as 1 hear by Borthwick's report from the queen's
Inajefly your sovereign. And gif I might as well fay it, as it is true indeed, her
grace self is all the wyitt, and the counfall that will never let her take order with
my maifirefs cause. For that our sovereign havand her majesty's promise, be writ-
ing, of luff, fricudflhip, and assistance giff need had to requirit, enterit that realm,
upon the 6 day of May, fen that time the queen's majesty has commanded me di-
verse timies to declare tfe would accept her cause, and do for her, and to put her in
peaceable possession of this realm", and when I required of her majesty, in my malf-
trefs name, that her highness wold either do for her, (as her fIecial trust wa fell
wold) according to her former promises, or otherwile gif her counfal wo!l not con-
sent, (as show her grace I sand diverse repugnant) then that sic would permit her
to pass in France, or to some other prince, to eek support, or f:iiili hrrcc ,
(quhilk was agains all reason) that she wold permit her to return in her awin cln-
trie, in sic fempil manner as he came out of it, and said to lier mjeitv .ne of thir,
of her honour, would not be refufit, fecand that he was coreld in hic rami uponl
her writings and promises of friendship. And ficlike, I laid to her hi incl', i'f
my maiftrefs had the like promile of her nobility and catcs, as ihe h:i of hric:;f
I ihould have reprovit them highly, gif thay had not coniicicendit to o of ti':.
three, and io I fay, and so I write, that in the warld it shall be maii:t rep !ched.l'ii-,
gif this promise taketh not other good eftfc, nor yet it does. Notwithii ,
get gud answer of thir promires of friendship made to my fiovrcign, c.t to put her
grace in this her awin countrie peaceably, we have fund the contrary wirking hv
MAlr. Middemore, diretit from her highneis to flay the army that cuift d:wn our
houses. And alfua, in the preceding of this late pretendit p.arliaiment, promifeRi
twenty days before the time to myself to have caused it heen diflhargit A:d ret
contrary to this promise, have they made their pretendit manner of forfaultur-e oif k

I

men of guid reputation, hifilops, abbottis, and barronis obedient fujectb to our so-
vereign, only for her cause.

THEY have also difponit, fci our fovercigns caufc was taken upon hand be tle

queen's ma fiy of that Ic:ilm, :an huinirdc tiloulfhnd pounds Scots wolth of her aw nin
true fubje[ls geir, undr the color of thc;r law, gtoundit up)on their fallc, trcafon-
able, ifowin, authority.

THE murders, the oppreffionl,e the bnrigs, tle ravifini of wonmn, hli: de-

firut on of pol!ic, both eccli.liicl'l a!)i tmporal, in this mean tinme, as in n
former writi ni, I laid i was lmi nta.ible to ony chrifiin niilil to hlear of, xcept (,, I
gif grace, 'c profeflion of the ('.ul, i](: o' f 'ins t rilt profcLlit hle olur lin,'c,
counfall a;d l. :

eil: , bh l:il ,i 'l;dit, n l r thl t. ild in m ity thli.i t l,: I lil twixt ,i

realmns, lmi l' of 1n c) ntil inii ( ill d. I lt in tlhi> articl , lnd thin ll roi.ce dlii;
I)Lutti~ nil\ l tb il; (dilL[ r l'holll ' !l , .

I o 1'~, I~. I,,Id , "il- tl.e (PlC 'nI' , mwl,] fly { I! l It r'':]lni,

l mn1 (l l!l i ilil ' nld)!

; Ni 1 !' } 1 l

(, ili'', ,

,ll1,o' ;iTi Ir: ,i;

tt'i. i ,

1)'

i r

irtl l, ' (1l

[ l.n 1t1i tehi

|l ('m l l )

i,1 l t; '.[;[i' 1 ,
ii ..!

...i.'l' I
i' ,

.'lc'c 'e. [i ' :ll': !

. ' !

,,I

l'. 1

i r

i
(, i illi
,

a

]C
1 1 .; i

quherein be a word promift truth was observed, promise, in the name of the eter-
nal God, and upon the high honour of that nobill and princely blude of the kings of
Inglaud, quhereof she is defcendit, and presently wears the diadem, that she will
put my maiftrefs in her awin country, and cause her as queen thereof in her autho-
rity and firength to be obeyit, and to do the fame will appoint an certain day with-
in two months, at the farthest. As we underfiand this to be our weill, fua will
we, or the maiit part of us all, follow upon it, leaving the Frenchmen, and their
evil French phrases togidder. And therefore, and for the true perpetual friendlhip
of that realm, will condition, and for our part, with the grace of Almighty God,
keel) sic heads and conditions of agreement, as noble and wife men can condescend
upon, for the weill of this haill island. As I have been partlings declaring to the
queen )our sovereign, quhilk I shew to your lordships felfis, both in religion, in
the punishment of the earl Bothwile, for the queen's last husband's laughter, and
for a mutual band of amity perpetually to remain amangis us.

Dov rsILESS, my lords, without that, we may find sic time*and friendful work-

ing, as may gif us occasion baith to forgett Middlemore, and this late pretendit par-
liancnt, we will turn the leaf, leaving our sovereign agains our will to reft where
the is, under the promise of friendship. As I have baith said, and will ever affirm,
nm-de be your sovereign, quhilk was only cause of her graces coming in that realme,
and sLeek the help and moyen of French, or Spanish, till expulfe this treasonable
and f.,llc pretendit authority, quhilk means to reign above us.

MY lo lds, I desire your lordships confider, that it is he, that maid desires the

amity betwixt Ingland and Scotland to continue, and of a poor man befl cause has,
that writes this.

lMy hctllcr, the laird of Skirling, fchaws me, that in your lordships commun-

ing wiLh him, it appearit to him, your mind was we hold susser the earl of Mur-
ray to work, altho' it ware agains reason to us, and complain thereof to the queen's
nIliefiy, and her highness wald fee it reformit. My lords, her majesty will be over
ncikle troublit to reform the wranges we have fuitainit already. For I am sure,
,if reason and justice may have place, our maiftrefs, and we her subjes, have re-
c. ived xprcfs wrang, far above two hundred thousand pounds fierling, in the time
of this unhappy government, feeing the reformation of fa great causes, comes, now
a dliys, oI flowlie, and the uniodly law of oblivion in sic matters so meikle pratis'd,
I think, nowther for the queen's honour, nor our weill, your lordships would fua
mnean, nor that it is good to us to follow it. And that ye will give your sovereign
sic advcrtifement hereof, as your good wifCdms shall find in this cause meet. It
vill be true and friendful working for us, indeed, and nowther French phrases, nor
boafnilt, and findintg little other cfieCt, that will caule us to hold away the French-
ncn. This, is plainly wiittcin, and I desire your lordships plain answer, for in
truth and plaines langclft continues gud fric;ndlhip, quhilk in this matter I pray
God may lang Contilue, and have your lordfh'ps in his keeping. Off Drumfieis,
the 3,1 dy of September 15(8.

Your lordships at my power

to command lcifuliy

I 1 R R I S.

Qieen Mary to Q. Elizabeth.
M A DAME ma bonne foeur. J'ay refceu de vos lettres, d'une merme date ; - \.r .1-6

I'une, ou vous faites mention de l'excufe de Monfl. de Murra pour tenir ton C,,tt. ib.

pretendu parlement, qui me femble bien froid, pour obtenir plus de tollerance que je Ca;. i. a: 0
m'eftois persuade n'avoir par voftre promeffe, quant a n'ofer donner commiflion de i;ilal.
venir fans un parlement pour leur peu de nombre de noblefte alors, je vous refpons,
qu'ils n'ont que trois ou quatre d'avantage, qui euffent auffi bien dit leur opinion
hors de parlement, qui n'a eflt tenu tant pour cetre efefe, mais pour faire ce qu'ex-
preffement nous avions requis eflre enipefch.s, qui eit la forfalture de roes subjes
pour m'avoir eftes fidelles, ce que je m'affurois, jufques a hier, avoir eu en promefli
de vous, par la lettre ecrite a mi lord Scrup e Maifire Knoleis vous induire a ire
contre eulx, voire, a les enfayre refentir; toutefois jc vois que je l'ay mal pris, j'cn
fuis plus marrie, pour ce que fur votre lettre qu'il me montrcrent, et leur parole, e
l'ay si divulguement afluray que pour vengeance que j'en defiraiTe, si non mettre dif-
ference entre leur faux deportemens, et les miens sinceres. Dans votre lettre auli
datee du o"'e d'Aouft, vous metties ces mots. " I think your adverse party, upon
"my sundry former advices, will hold no parliament, at all ; and if they do, it
"shall be only in form of an asSembly, to accord whom to fenJ into this re..lm,
"and in what lort; for otherwise, if they shall proceed in manner of a parliain,'llr,
" with any a of judgement againit any person, I hall not, in any wife, .lw
' thereof; and if they shall be so over!een, then you may think the fame it'. tb

of no other moment, than the former procedures; a31d by such th ir r.ifl i!: -
ner of proceeding, they shall most prejudice themselves and be aflu(red to finl.
me ready to condemn them, in their doings." Sur quoy, j'ay cnticn;n1.c: ries

ferviteurs, les faifant retirer, fouffrant elon vofire coinmandemnet idetre taufinimcl
nommrs traitres, par cculx, qui le ont de vray ; et cncore d',trc l or\oqts pii
efcarmons dies, ct par prinfes de mes gens et lettrcs, et au contraire vous etes iii
formCe que mes fubjets ont evahis es voftres, adanme qui a fait cc rapport n'cfl p:;
homme de bien, car laird Serford et son fils font et out elics mcs rcbcih.s dcuis I.
commencement; enquircs vous, s'ils n'efto'ent a Donfis avics culx, j'a oi o,: i
refpondre de fa frontiere, ce qui me fut refus(, ce qui mn'ndcvroit aftcs dc ihatlrr,
ncanmoins, pour vous faire preuve de ma fidc!li', t dc Icur falfitL, s'il vous nc a

taN

donner le norn des coulpables, et me fortifier, je commandray moeu s subcs s piuir-
fuivre, ou si vous voules que cc fit les votlrcs, ics ninlis leur ayderont; je 'ou:;
prie m'en mander voifre volonte, au refle ines flibjc': ficiles feront refponfil':,bc .
tout ce que leur sera mis f Ics centre vous, ni Is vo rsle, i ic s ebells, rdcli-i ci qi
me confcillates les faire retirer. Q2iant aux }'i,'.ii; s, j('c:rivis que I'on ni1l i fit
nulle pourfuite, car j'cfperois tant en vous, qelic i' ;ln :,:ois lbefign,--je nu I('c(
si le did aura en mcs Icttres mais, jc vous jure c.,;i; t i )ili qul jC c ('ay ch-oe d(;
monde de leur venue, que cc que ii'ecn a'.i nm.ii i::, i n'rn ai oui !c I'r.ncc ::)lt
du monde, ct n c le pui croirc pour celt ocanilO, t i i! lii .1nt, c'cf fitan; 111011 Ln I.
ni conifentcnict, PIourquoy je (vous fuil flit inrj n.c coI1M.iamlci ;lns Ill'o lilr, Cii '
iuis pr'ft dc tenir tout c quc j';ty tl-crt : X . -

icr K nil s., t (v lls ;;liilln e iji '(..l c

.il tit1,qu'il vous pleit m'ofrir, Icri rcfciie .v.ui;t t: ulcs I . s

i, :s du i (inld , t:ii;lit

France leivit la pour preflcr Iurc rtolnr a (tcue coiditioi;, quc

1 rc'ic:. lrt, . ili. , .i

m cit1, cn 1so ti', ct lonnel ai ni, coillill Iii. 1 il.lC ( f ( Vri

v i ; nl:i:. 1la (

i l;o.' (t iiti

ie rOlld coiillfurf, j'ay ta t 'llt

d'nc 'is Iu' on t

votle oC ti! , l;(ill:j(c l I. nC. jtI ,lt ,I :i
jp.a pa1ollc, toutcs m Cs acions vous lo t dcf';Ui(i;. c tt 1 .K l,'t 'ti oitt'- [':' t. (;1 .i

il m'eft impossible de m'affurer de vous, pour les manteries qu'on vous a fait, pour
deftruire voftre bonne volonte de moy; par quoy je defirerois bien avoir ce bien vous
faire entendre ma sincere et bonne affetion, laquelle je ne puis si bien defcrire, que
mes enemis a tort ne la decolore. Ma bonne foeur, gagnes moy; envoyes moy querir,
n'entres en jalousie pour faulx raports de celle qui me desire que votre bonne grace;
je me remettray fur Mester Knoleis a qui je me fuis librement defcouverte, et apres
vous avoir baisce les mains, je prieray Dieu vous donner en fante, longue et heu-
reuse vie. De Boton, ou je vous promets, je n'efpere partir, qu'aveques voftre
bonne grace, quoyque les menteurs mentent. Ce 26 d' Aouft.

No. XV. [Vol. II. p. 68. line 9.]

Letter of Walsingham's to Randolph, Feb. 3. 1580-r.

S I R,
('ott Lib. T HAVE received from my lord lieutenant the copy of your letter of the 2sth of

the last direSted unto his lordship, containing a report of your negotiation with

the king and his councill, in your second audience, wherewith having made her
majeity acquainted, he seemed somewhat to mi/like, that you should so long defer to
d aldor t'-e enlargement f Empedocles. But I made answer in your behalf, that I
thought you were directed by the advice of the said Empedocles friends, in the fol-
liciting of that cause, who knew what time was fittest for you to take to deal there-
in, with molt effet, and best success, with which answer, her majesty did in the
en(l reft very well satisfied, touching that point.

'Yo R putting of us in hope that D'aubigny might easily be won at her majesty's

devotion, was at first interpreted to have been ironie spoke by you. But since it
fccmeth you insist upon it, I could wish you were otherwise perluaded of the man,
or at klal't kept that opinion to yourself, for confidering the end and purpose of his
coming into Scotland, as may be many ways sufficiently proved, was only to advance
the qiecn's liberty, and reception into that government, to overthrow religion, and
to co:'"ure a foreign match with Villenarius, wherein the inclosed copy, which you may
iL to g, od purpose there, shall partly give you ome light; there is no man here can
I-c ('it lidcd that he will change his purpole, for so small advantage, as he is likely
to tiidl by it, and therefore vou shall do well to forbear to harp any more upon that
linn , .s have already written to you. The prince of Orange fending, I fear
will i t be in time that it may do any g,od, for betides that thefc people are in
thltellves flow in their rcolutions, their own affairs arc, at prcfent, so great, their
ftat: lo confused, and th, plincc's authority lb fnall, that lie cannot so soon take or-
d-r in it; and )yt for iin on [)irt, I h ive not been negligent or careefb in tlie
n.ilttl, hayini,, more i

th.: tcc \v.iks palit, sent one about it, fron whoml never-

thells I dlS , vet hear no(thilg. '1 ; letttr<, )yn (lelire ihould \written thither by
the l'icinit lniilt'rs, I live i'otln order to Mr. Killingtew to piolure, who, I
(ldo l,t not, will -irillx' l i)rrfomni it, si that, holpe, 1 fll,!l lihlc thel n to fend you hy
the next Amitl 1') 1 ICOllllli )y(tu to (;od(. At \Vhitchi tll.tl;e til o l
o F blrualy 1 So.

iour vi\'ry lov\ing co si 'l !
an i '1it,

"
1 .\. \' A , I N(; ;A .\A.

' ' ;,

/ ''. '

,,, '

i ' ' '.: r ', r,

/

I,

,, I'

. , ,

' ./. /i, " ,/ . /;.. i

'

.

. 1 i /y

,'. I l,,;:,,,', /)'lIt .

'1. c',,, * >
i) *./,/ ! 'l : J 1'..,., /, ( - '_ - o.

3 Feb. 158o.
Sundry Notes gathered upon good diligence given, and in time to i,

btter manitefted, being now thought meet to be in convenient !f,It
uicd, and laid ag inft D'Aubigny, to prove him abusing the In[;,
the nobility, and that state.
F IRST, it hath been informed, by credible means, that D'Aubigny was privy C

and acquainted with La Naue, the king's mother's secretary, comin ito Scot-

land, and of his errand there, tending chiefly to persuade the king, to think and . .. ,
eeficm it an evil president for princes, that fubjccs might hlave po,.vr to dei-i;e.
their lawful fovercigns, as they did hij mother, who was not inded, by ary mieal,
to dcfcat him, either of the present government of that rcal:n, or t of tl;c poloie
sion of the crown and inheritance thereof, but rather to affit'e the fame to him; :n;;
that for the accomplishment of that assurance, the king fiou!J have bccn a';iid I !
drawn to have governed, for some short time, as prince, ca ii:n g D'ubignv to ri.:
as governor of the prince, by commiflion from the queen his mother, until t.
king's enemies were fupprefled; after which time, D'Aubigny should have poer
given to eflabliih and rfign that kingdom to the king, by his mother's volunt:r,'
consent, whereby all ich, as had before been in action againfl the queen or he!
authority', might be brought to itand in the king's mcrcy. And for that the kin l
rnight live in more surety, D'Aubigny hould be declared both fcond person in fuc-
ceiTon of that crown, and also lieutenant-general of Scotland, and that D'Aubigny,
tefore his departure out of France, received commission from the king's mother to
the effects remembered, or near the fame. That in this behalf he had conference
with the bifSops of Glasgow, and Ross, and with Sir James Baford, with which
rcrlons, and with the Duke of Guilf, he had and hath frequent intelligence, an1:
by Sir James Baford he was advilcd, to confer with the Lrd John Hamnilton be-
tore his repair into Scotland, whereunto he agreed, and yet afterwards he Icnt (on
John Hamilton to the said Lord John to excuil him in this part, allidging, that i:C
did forbear to come to him, leit thereby he Ihould marr or hinder greater cis to
be executed by him in Scotland.

'IHA T before his coming into that realm, the nobility and country were rwell

q'ictcd, n.l united in good colncord, with reat love betwixt the king and noiiity,
;lnl aongf the noblcle, but he hath both drawn the kiiig ;r ainfl: lfndry of te
chicfetl of his nobility, that have been most ready aind ha.lv expended tiiir Ii .1
and polli sio)ns to pIefirvc reli ion, and defend the king's pcifi,, his (rl'i 'nnAet !nd
tflat:., a;ld llto hath given occasions of gre;t fiilpioilns an.l . encee to h(( ii ;:-
d iered betwixt the king alnd hi; nobiiity, .id e'( ciallt' with luti ,S h..\'' 1l''i inl
n-o(tion aaiifit the king's mother, anil her athl-ritv, who bv 1 '1a. a ld linto; ,
i.ie fid i niii in and pr Ci , lioid hla\ b;'en roiel 't il:t ) no l (1.11 'tl, LI:i
;o '{i Iti n , ard wlho :lo m;!y tild thtliii'\ ill no liil 1' ri, . !: l'; , i

- * l -

f'.' -is thil' kin "; car, alult th lii; [pt ' n(c , ;il li iv

,'ctl

ft t

l 1 i l i i i;A .

i l.'

;i I tt 1, ul i l,

.'

, 1 'I pitl.'!ltl1' (!;i >,
I 1l,

'o l,. IJ

1

THAT he hath drawn the king, not only to forget the great benefits done to

lim ani his realn, by the queen's nmajcefy of England, but albo to lcqi:ethe t fame
with sundry signs of great unthankfulhcfs, and wouidilng therewith the honour of
her majesty, and thercb' hath adventured to shake the happy amity long time conti-
nued betwixt those princes.

AN D wicreas these griefs were to be repaired by gentle letters and good ors, to

ha'/c palled, and been done betwixt them: In which rer)pet, the king and council
having resolved to write to her majesty, for her highnes' betlcr fatlifaction in the
l::te negotiation of Mr. Alexander Hume of Northberwick, had tiven order to the
linY's ftcretary to frame that letter: He minding to bre.k the bond of amitv in fun-
ler, willed the secretary to be sure that nothing should be in!erted in that letter,
w.vhereby the king should crave any thing at her hands, seeking thereby to cut off all
loving courtesies betwixt them, as by the declaration of the said secretary may be
Letter learned, and thereupon further approved.

THAT under the hoe and e:couragement of D'Aubigny's protection, Alexander

KIing presumcd with that boldness to make his lewd harangue, and by his means
Lath hitherto ecaped chafliftment and correcqion, due for his offence.

THAT Sir James Baford, condemned of the slaughter of the king's father, hath

becn called into tat realm by Lennox, without the privity of the king. And wher
., the laid Sir James found in a green velvet desk, late the earl of Bothwells, and Jlw,
alnd had il his hands thZ principal band of the corifpirators in that murder, and
i.an bell declare and witnief who were authors and executors of the famen; he is
drawn by Lennox to suppress the truth, and to accuse such as he himnflf knoweth
to be innocent; and as by order of law, will be so found, if they may have due trial,
which, contrary to all jufice, is by Lennox means denied.

This is the ciarge again/ D'/uli!,yl metined in th foSrcgng letter by IJil.ngiaam ~
lut iy Laford ihey mcean Sir j.imes Bjfar.

No. XVI. [Vol. II. p. 102, line 18.]
The Scottish queen's offers upon the effe:l of her liberty propoundcd by

her secretary Naw, November IS84.
rT HIE queen my miftrcfs being once well aured of your majclty's amity,

1. VWILL declare openly that fhc will (as it is sincerely her meaning) firat-

ly to j;in tul:o your niajcfly, and to the fame to ield and bear the chict honour and
rcljiLt, liL'c:ui all other kings and princes in Christendom.

2. SHI1 will fr\car, and protet: follemnly, a ficecre forgetfulncfs of all wrongs

which she may pretend to have been done unto her in this realm, and will never, ii
any iot or nanner whatfocver, shew oflence for the fame.

j. SHte will avow and acknowledge, as well in her own particular name, as alro

foi her heirs and others dcfccnding of her for cvcr, your majcfly for jult, true, d
lawful queen of lngland.

4. A .;

10.

C('tt. I.;b.

A . c '

tI.
i o ;.

4. AD co:irciriut, x.ill renounce, as wc!! for hcrflci, ;is si her f. Ctd lieir, a,

ri :ts alld rcielnces which ihle may claim to the cro-, ii of iEngland, dulng )o 0r
iriiijclv's life, andl other prrjudice.

. SHE tivll ;I l revo:k all a nds and fchews, !by er lic-cetofn c imadl , e' 'retcllce to

this fani crown. to il(,c prrjdic( o() your In).i:ii, s mas i c the iet iil.- ( i the i'1 .,
and (tilc of queen of Lnl.ia::;i, ,: the camslli CaNc ot i :L,]r o

' ;

il icr late 1 i
and }ifiand.

6. S will renounce te pop 's bull, fr o Inr,;cl s n:ay bI expor,;;1:c to tu'n

in her favour, and for her behoof, touchi'l the depirivation of y iour mnf:jf , and ,,i:i
dcc:.rc t!hat (he wvill never helci ad Irc !herl:f wit it.

7. SHE will not prof'cute, during lour ni;jcit'i lifc, byS op ;n fJrc or citer-

wa's, any publick declaration of iher ri-ht in thc ftuccefion ( f this r!i in , f) as Ic-
cret ailurance be gicn unto her, or at the leafl uhit; '' ,

pl .it io decidirn;

thcrecf fiall bc made in the prejudice of her, or f ti. 1:! l;.r io: , ('liill.r \on'
nmajeftys' life, nor afcraftr your dcealc, unltil such tiime a, theI , ::

, li,'n hc !iii I i.r-
trpoil, in publick, free, and gencral almnbly of the pali.Tn, [: i, r.'!i.

8. SE will not pradcifc, dircLtly or indirectly, witi any o!' yur nnUti 's 'ul-

jc'ts, neither within nor out of your realm, any t hin tcndil;nl : \t!r, (i\i Cl ii-
riegn, again2f your nmaejity and your eflatc, be it under pict..t ot reI i.,;i O' fur
civ.l and politick government.

q. Sirl will not maint.iil or support any o your ubj; e' c dlarc' rbL-,I: and
convicted los trcafon against you.

Io. SHrE will enter into the afiociation, which was fcwe her at 'infidd

for the firety of your maicfry's lifc, so as there be cndei or riht cx)xpriated
I'):I clauIcs, w hich will ihew to your majeicy, when I liall have the copy there-
of, as I have hcfore time required.

11. Si,: v.'ill not treat with foreirn kinrgs andil prince, for .a wa r or touble

ngaini il this fiatc, and will renounce, from this time, all c;iLic;rics niacle or to be
inaJe in her favour for that efipc't.

12. i'Uls'Tii't';. RE., this realm ecing anliilcd by any civ'l or forecin wair, he

Vwill take pa:i t with our rmajefi-, and will ailt} 'you in your (-'':' \\ith all her
rorcis and nie.ls, depending of hcrfelf, and with all her fricnds of CIrif'ind,:nm.

1 . A\ni to that crtic, fur the mutual (deCfenCe and maiintella;nc of voir Ili.li-c

si', and the two realms of this ifie, fle xu ill entcr Vwith '.;r !rje in a l-_.:-'
defenfic, a.s (hail be more particularly adilcd, and ill prfi'..u: .s I' uci a in
her the kin I hier son to do the like. I le ]eaoues with all p.irt aioad (il:iJin;
Finm, ;and cli'C( i;:ly the aniticnt Ic;iaue between France ad Scoti d

i, in tait v.licl,
lTa;]l not be .E-.ilitl tils prefenlt.

1. Snt,: t ill nler into a league ofonfive, hnvinr frooil fdiiancce or ferret de-

cl::,'.atiiin ard ;:L!;nowllcNinlct of h(ler ri'ht in the li(cefii- l ofl ,: , 1 tand

tiiiii , tlat t li.i ipe fin: any breach letwit ]i;incc anld 'i . r;lin, (w'iec, fil,.
r1:!cth tI ,d ev xer to) li|ipi n) the. jut valuie ol lier (o.i 1v l I,;l lie ji ced fir hc r
]: i;':tCs f' the revelle it lihe crowvtl.

'
. i !: ;lir;in e (of le, I p ii

p S

;i i i (and ceni lt , fli' (olh ( i to : .bi I:'r-

i i n t;i, r'i.d:i for a (eti;l tiin ', (l ltr hl , i.' (;li }he i t :ixe li., Il'i <'\\'r
j i ;s ; ;' \ ;i(-h, i ,

P a', il l c li , ,t n th'lil ty ii,.':' i,,r e,- p):ou ,, .L, , :,, iit i,

. ..., ;.) :

( .:t; ,

s (lTC ut (if ili;, C uili tix\ il tl '

l i i . tt
l. , I..: ' i', i,,l \ .lh

, C

Ii'[ (!1

I

,/

'

,t ,' ;"

, '

'
.

16. AND in cafe your majefly do agree to her full and whole deliverance, to

retire herself at her will out of this realm, the said queen of Scots she will give sus.
ficicnt liofai-e for such time as will be advilcd.

17. IF fine abide in this realm, he will promise not to depart out of it, with-

rcut our 'icence, so as it be promised unto her that her slate, in such liberty as hall
be accorded unto her, fllall not be in any fort altered, until after tryal to have at-
ttmplted again f your life, or other trouble of your eflate.

I S. IF she go into Scotland, he will promise to alter nothing there in the religion

x\\!ich is now uscd there, he being suffered to have free exercise of hers, for her and
iir houfhuld, as it was at her return out of France; and further, to pull out every
root of new division between the subjects, that none of the fubjecss of Scotland flhall
he sifted for his conscience, nor contfrained to go to the service of the contrary reli-

19. SIIE will grant a general abolition of all offences done againfl her in Scot-

.11!, and things Lhall remain there as they are at this present, for that respect, sav-
;i , that which hath been done against her honour, which he meaneth to have re-
voked and annulled.

2?'. SHE will travel to fettle a sure and general reconciliation between the nobili-

ty of the country, and to cause to be appointed about the king her son, and in his
council, such as fiall be fit for the entertainment of the peace and quiet of the coun-
try, and the amity of the realm.

21. SHE will do her best to content your majesty, in the favour of the Scots lords

banished, and refuged hither, upon their due ubmilfion to their princes, and your
majesty's promise to assist the said queen and king of Scotland against them, if they
happen to fall into their former faults.

22. SE will proceed to the marriage of the king her son, with the advice and
good counsel of your majesty.

23. As she will pass nothing without the king her son, so doth she dcfire that

he intervene conjointly with her in this treaty, for the greater and perfeLter
affuiance thereof; for otherwise any thing can hardly be established to be found
and continue.

24. IHE aid Scotch queen trutfeth, that the French king her good brother, ac-

cording to the good affection which he hath always hewed her, and hath been afresh
teflified unto me by Monfr. de Manniffiere for this said teaty, will very willingly
intervene, and will aflift her for the surety of her promises.

25. AND so will the princes of the house of Lorrain, following the will of the
said king, will bind themifelves thereunto.

26. F o R other kings and princes of Chrifrendom, she will assay to obtain the

like of them, if for greater solemnity and approbation of the treaty it be found to be
necessary.

27. SE (doth dfire a fpecdy answer, and final conclusion of the premisses, to
the end to meet in time with all inconveniencies.

z8. ANu in the mean time, the more to fircngthen the said treaty, as made by

her of a pure ai;l frank will, he dcfireth that demonstration be made of some rc-
leafment of her captivity0

Objection,
IO/

Objections againlt the Scottiif queen, n;'cr f.cretary Walfinghamc's

hand, November i5S4.

T -I E queen of Scots is ambitious, and i'andeth ill acIcd to her majift:, nd
_T therefore it cannot be but that ciic lilcrty should bring peril unto her majeftv.
THAT her enlargement will give coliftort to papifls, and other ill ae.iLtd sub-
jers, and greatly advance the opinion had of her title as fuccefTor.

THAT as long as she shall be continued in her majeftl's ponfltion, fie may

serve as it were a gage of her miijely's fircty, for that her friends, for fear of the
danger ihe may be thrown into, in carse any thing fhouild be done in her favour,
dare not attempt any thing in the offince of her nmljcfy.
November 'What course were fit to be taken with the queen of Scots,

1584. 5 either to be enlarged or not.

H E course to be taken with the said queen may be confidored o in three C(,t T L,,
degrees; either, :i.

:.

I. 1o continue her under c:ftody in that state flie now is.
2. To rcfitain her of the present liberty she now hath.
3. OR to set her at liberty up n cautibn.
r. TOUCHING the first, to continue her under cuffody under that slate fle now i;

it is to be confidered, that the princes that favour that queen, upon the compllaint fie
naketh of hard ulage, are greatly moved with commifcrition towars her, and pro-
niie to do their endeavour for her liberty, for which purpose, her minifiers f!licit
them daily.

AND to move them the more to pity her cafe, she acquainteth them with her of-

sers made to her majesty, which appeared to be in less profitable than reasonable
for her majcfty, so as the refusal and rejecting givcth her friends and favourers cause
to think her hardly dealt withal, and thcrefore may, with the better ground and rea-
ion, attempt somewhat for the fttting of her at liberty.

Ir is also likely that the said queen, upon this refusal, finding her cafe defperatc,

will continue her pracice under hand, both at home and abroad, not only for her
delivery, but to attain to the prcfent poflifion of this crown upol her pretended
title, as he hath hitherto done, as appearth, and is mnoft anileft by letters and
plots intercepted, and chiefly by that late alteration of Scotland, whith h.it pro-
ceeded altogether by her direction, whereby a gap is laid open for the malicc of
all her majesty's enemies, so as it appearcth that this manner (If keepi ng her, with
such number of persons as file now hath, and with liberty to write and rtccive let-
ters, (being duly coniidered) is ofenfive to the princes, tle aid queen's friends ; a-
ther chargeable, than profitable to her najefly ; and flijCet to all flich praii (cs a;
may peril her mjefty's pIcr;)li or (late, without any povilion for her n.Ljclly'-
safety, and therefore no way to lie liked .,f.

2. l otClllINC; the fCCend, t rcltraini her in a more fralitcr dcIcC oF(J the li-
berty filc hath hiitherto enjo)ed.

I .t

It' marr, at fil ffil-ht, be tihoe :it a renedy very apt to fiop tle courec of tn

danlecrous tics fuitreod hretoore by her: or, true it is, that this lemc i
mieht prove very prolitable, if the realm of Scotland flood in that fort devoted to
her maietly, as few years pail it di ; and if the king of that realm were not likely,
as wcil for the rela(ea of his motlihr, s tor the advancetenitn of both their preten ced
tit l, t attemiltt i.orchat agail'.t this re.tn and lher maje{tv, wherein he fhoLld
neithcr lack foreign afiiltance, nor a party h re within this realm : But the kiti ai
thlat realnm fitndin arfitted as they do, this refiraint, inflead c.f renedcyi.nr, is
]ilelv to breed theil inconvcniencies following:

I: ,Rs'i, It will increase the ofP'nce both in him, and in the reft of the princes her
fticn3s that imn ikc. (;i' her rfraillt.

SECONDLY, It will i,,\ th.i jufi c.iufe to take some way of redress.
LASTLY, It i: tO 'J L'oiibt!d, that it may provoke some di)erate ill di!fp;f. J

perlon, all hope of her li-.rrtv removed, to attempit fo!ewhat againli: her majeflv'
own person, la imatter a'lve ,:! othe'rs to be eiihed) which inconiencnc' beinl.r
duly confidcrc, it will a '. .r manifcfily, that the reltraint, in a fIrailghter dericL,
is likely to prove a rCemley fu'ibjCe tovcry hard evei t-.

T'i-1E latter degree, vwethier 'twere fit to fat the fid queen at liberty, minil'reth

faic c.an!e of doubt, touichinl the manner of the liberty, in what firt the fanme i
to be peitolin, whether to be continued here within the lealm, or to be rcl, u:d
i!lto hier own co(ntr.

f-ii'T isii, this prpofiriot, bciore the particularities be weighed, i to he coi. -
tiered in :elcrality

l'o?. it is very hard for a 'ell affieted fubljes, that tendreth her majclyv's firectv,

ani wei lie tli either the nature of the Scottilh queen, beinginclin(ed to ambitiou
a id reveile, of her former ae ions, what plraticcs file hath ilt on foot molt dan-
grrous tf;r her majelly and thi re.ilim, to allow of her liberty, being not made ac-
quawined with such caules, as tinme hath wrought, to make it le's perilous than it
hath been, nor with such cautions as mar, in some iort, be deviled to prevent both
Lher anmbiition and malice ; and therefore to make this apparent,

IT is to be confidered, that the daner

that wasin the moather, is now grown

to be in the f n. He pretendeth the fame title l'e doth : Such as do aect her, both
at home and al oad aifro at him ; (and i is the more dangerous for tat he i;
uinmarried, which may greatly .dvanIc s-is tiitn1'; alnd t t le is a ml.n, w.ere-
by ie m ay enter into acionl in his own peron i \herefhc i, rcifraiiine, he is at
liberty; is own re Im is noiw altogether at i h t divoitioni, an tie party afitl tcd t,
tis crow'!in ab.d'ed ; toi a the nl.ttcr duly contllcdtl, n,.iite cI i lr ity no1 r frllai;t
di'b l natly alter tile c.i.;( f.l peCni- towards lier mijefCy), nlefit 111 y uc l p.) ill' s ias

. 'ty 1,e n.ite bv wayv of treaty with Iher, t,.e dalter likcly to grow -rom tle kini

l l l ,n lie i
l -,,,i .d lot.

lit r il thilis he!,al it mily le ob()j('lcd, that so lon as the mother irl- t:is il
her i ;ia . 's .iatnd', i ktl ei wil! aittemipt nothlil(ng for (.ir ot It; mile r' p ril.

I o thi <,li( I'iti it 1may hr tinl te el, irift, 'I'lnit the', hope tl.t I -r i..l ei.,

I1til
a ,1 piniit ol ]el<t,, atI il i liteI to iterc y, \si;l not p ilt i'le 1 tictl t r te

IJ.

lii'1 (i''-i (e ,

t ia ll 1 fl;e fl.all h i:e to irl i, by g , pi)to l, e1iil .;hl ". i .' ' !u, .l lsi
'1 !t ~i l me w 'l w ;,1 1It I ,. i.-i.ld',', ((; i'!ein :~ in \wi}.p,l pie.ie aimn tlhe ',t1: j i{,t~!.l,

', I ' '* : i ;

[.

t ; t'' i,'i. It ( i t IIl /.v r': ll l I ()its tise ; [
l t 'i; I l

\ '
I

ANI ) a hfil., the ILt'.iir awa'v of ns mo ,h.r, h b:rin fl-r n: in the !i'eid tl ,

:

both foAriCrtl a!]ltnl ;. a , al;t';t helre vitilil the rln, v.'wi aplcar so c il. ;a . -
nmedy, (which nmi,'v ali the e , i r

c.'afprate bth hm and her prt, to pr-ci c ':

more courage and he.rl t rev;'en e, il any such hard mcaiur ud be cn u

i

her) as they w ili fupl o for the r .ton abov cIecii d, that ; fh c.'.tc V ; '
be ued.

IT may also be obiected, that the f tin of her at liberty will rreat'y cnc unl_'.

the papists both at home and abroad ; i.,t herein, it the -rvi, be dulv cn '
that may be niade by parlian;int boeth lhere ad there, tey ia'.1 Iat' i c.' .
difcninfort than othcrwile.

THESE two doi;lts being rcfo!ld, andi the perils t that s in t mother :ap-

pearing nioft manifcfily to be fec'ni in the Ifol accompaniied xih inore d .:ic', ;. t'1
due conflderation had ahlo of such remedies as may be provided fur tlhe p;'c;cni:';
of the dangers, that her liberty maiy minifterjul cauit to Jde.ibbt of; there vwi: ic
good caufc f h)ope found, that the faie will r.,tier bhrtze benelft thnnl perils.

Now it rcetih, in wiat fort thc slid libeity f11 b. p'.iformcd ; if it hlll1 he

thougiht mctt fil, fliall e continued within the re.itn with lo;ne iimitatiion, c'lcci-
ally in that plac e lie now reside th, the cou1ntlv, round about bclrn to init a te
in rli'on s it s, it is ;.'eatIy to be doubted that wi. vnct;' muci inicrealr the c .r-
ruption, arnd allin, aw.y. in that behalf. biedeis, fire fiioildl have con.mority,
with mucih more cafe, andj si cd, to ciitert-in piac;:ices w.tiiii this realm, tliin by
beingl i her (owa country.

1I. abroad feel)ly ilthout limitation either in Scotland or France, then fi;al! her

n;:ajefly lose tihe gages of hier Lffcty, then fiail hie be at hand to ive advice i fur-
th:eiance of fiucl praiices, a hl.ve i ccn Ilid for to fir trouble in this reahn, nvh,.'ici
file ha.tlh hCenr priicipal p:;rtv.

FoR the fir-i, it is anf.crcd before, that the refpecl of any perils that na be-

fal unto her, will in no fort restrain her i'on. For the other, if it be coinidced
what harm her advice will work unto herfeif, in refpete of the violation of the
treaty, and the provision that may bc m de in pailiament here, it is to be thought,
that he will then be xel! advisecd, bfcure she altelmc t any fuclh 1matti r, whicih Iow
she may do without perrill. leildes such prince', as have iinterpoiedl their faith anj
promise for her, cannot with honour aTil her, herein the French King will not
be found very forward, ho, in n-iot fr.end'y fort, hati] lately rjccted a!l fucel re-
qucifs, propounded either by hLr, or her son's miniiers, that might any wa

; of-

lend her maijcft'. And so to conclude, freing the caul of Ler grief shall be ta. cn
away; the Frencch kinrg gratified, who c a incdiiator r

or her, and will iii ke, tliat,

by ay Sanifi prritice, fie fiotuld bei drawn to viol.ate her flith ; that the r{lt o,
the prince l Il hve no 110i' calufC of OfleiCC, liut rttilc to tlinik h11olouri-.!)l (i ;(er
nriajc)ty, colilidceing tlhe bcottilh qcucen's carriage towards her, which hath (elrved
no way any fucil flvour; the noblemen of Scotland fall be rcftored, who will e
a good flay of luch cotrfunel ls a may tend to the troublling of this realmn, cfirei;l y
Ihavinlg lfo rood a groundI ol

O W.i rant as the parlianment to flt;nl tntto; tie liri'es

and; prills which her pr;licc; mliit have bred to this rcaln (hall be avolimhd; ;1ri
lirlly, tihe hope of tlle papils fliall e takcn aw.iy, by fI;ch good piCO dions, is i
both tlle 1(.dlns mat y ie itdte, wleiclby the lpeiril tliat might fall i to her ni.iji l 's
own pelforl, (a init(r of all oiletrs to hl weighed) hall e avoitdi, wVicn by theli
chllige tll at in. lma lo\V by ;iily Il i1 wicked and timgodly practice, tlhey 11h,.l Ic
thelir catl no way ictevel in p),oit ol lliii. ,,

.,eafons to induce her majcfly to proceed in the treaty under Secre-

crctary Walsingham's hand.

C-t. I ;' T-r -IAT such plots as have of late years been devised (tending to the raising of
c.a!ii. C. . troubc within this realm) have groAn from the Scots queen's ministers and fa-

vourer, not without her allowance and seeking: Or,

THAT the means used by the said ministers, to induce princes to give ear to the
fid plots, is principally grounded upon ome commiseration had of her restraint.

TIAT the flay, why the said plots have not been put in execution, hath proceed-

ed, for that the said princes have, for the most part, been entertained with home
and domefick troubles.

THAT it is greatly to be doubted, that now their realms begin to be quiet, that
fomcwhat will be attempted in her favours by the said princes.

THAT it is also to be doubted, that somewhat may be attempted by some of her
fautors in an extraordinary fort, to tle perrill of her majefly.

T'HAT for the pre:ervation thereof, it fiall be convenient for her majefly to proceed
to the finishing of the treaty, not long fithence begun betwecn her and the said queen.

No. XVII. [Vol. II. p . . .]

A letter from S. Armis Pawlet.

S I R,
0: ii1. C.l. Did forbear, according to your direction fi:niied in 3'our letters of the 4th of

. j this prefcnt, to proceed to the execution of the contents of Mr. WVaades letters

unto you, for the dif,)efing of this lady's unnecefliry ervants, and for the seasing
of her money, wherein I was bold to write unto you my simple opinion, (although
in vain as it now falleth out) by my letters of the 7th of this initant, which I
doubt not are with you before this time; but upon the receipt of your letters of the
5th, which came not unto my hands until the 8th in the evening, by rcafon as
did appear by indorfement, that they had been miilaken, and were sent back to
lVinllor, aitcr that they were entered into the way towards mne, I confidered, that
being accompanied only with my own servants, it might be thought that tl.cy would
be intreated to tay as I would commland thein, and therefore I thought good, for
my better discharge in these money matters, to crave the affiiancc of Mr. Richard
Br;gntt, who le,)airing unto me the next morning, we had acccfs to this queen,
whom we found in her bed, troubled after the old manner with a dcfluxion, which

as lallcn down into the fide of her neck, and had bereft her of the use of one o
her hand1, lunto wlhom I declared, that upon occasion of her formcr pradLifcs, doubt-
inr lIll: flit would l clitt thercin by corrupting underhand oine had iniembers tf
hiis ll.itc, I w.,, cxpielly comlmandlled to take her money into miy h ands, and to relt
.mltl, erile t (ir it, when it fliall 'e required ; a, lvifli he r to deliver tih lhIid nioney
unt , me with qluitniifs. Alter nally ldenials, inaliv xclanlations, aiil may bitter

r,,tls a .i I l l

you, (I i.y n1otlin'gZ of her r.ilg :gnijil hi5fell) wxv h

i ll .t :illitr' .it;i i

:.bt j r ,l ly milt have lcir b1uidy but lie.' liait flc [hoild c\l allt c

Ilr. ,

(.' li;
r

to deliver the key of the cabinet, I called my servants, and ent for barts to break
open the door, whereupon he yielded, and causing the door to be opened, I found
there in the coffers mentioned in Mr. Waade's remembrance, five rotis. of canvass,
containing five thousand French crowns, and two leather bags, whereof the one had,
in gold, one hundred and four pounds two (hillings, and the other had three pounds
in silver, which bag of silver was left with her, affirming that he had no more mo-
ney in this house, and that he was indebted to her servants for their wages. Mr.
Waades note maketh mention of 3 rolls left in Curle's chamber, wherein, noCUle can tell
doubt, he was misreckoned, which is evident as well by the testimonies and oaths ofy°O the trut
diverse persons, as also by probable conjectures; so as in truth we found only two rolls,° this atte r
every of which containeth one thousand crowns, which was this queen's guifte to
Curle's wife at her marriage. There is found in Naw's chamber, in a cabinet, a
chain worth by etimation one hundred pounds, and in money, in one bag nine
;undred pounds, in a second bag two hundred fourscore and fix pounds eighteen
liillings. All the foresaid parcells of money are beflowed in bags, and fealed by
Mr. Richard Bagot, saving five hundred pounds of Naw's money, which I reserve
in my hands, for the use of this houfholJ, and may be repaved at London, where
her majefly hall appoint out of the money, received lately bv one of my ser-
vants, out of the Exchequer. I feared left the people might have dil;e.ried this
money in all this time, or have hidden the fame in fonle feciet corines, for doubt
whereof, I had caused all this queen's family, from the highelt to the loweit, to
be guarded in the several places where I found them, so as y' I had not found the
money, with quietness, I had been forced to have searched first all their lodging,
and then their own persons. I thank God with all my heart, as for a singular b)el-
sing, that that falleth out so well, fearing left a contrary success might ha.'e moved
some hard conceits in her majesty.

TOUCHING the dilperfing of this queen's servants, I trust I have done ro much,

as may ffice to satisfy her niajefty for the time, wherein I could not take any ab-
solute course, untill I heard again froin you, partly because her majelty, by Mr.
XVaade's letter, doth refer to your consideration to return fucli as shall be diichargi to
their several dweilings and countries, wherein, as it feemeth, you have torgotten to
deliver your opinion; partly, for that as yet, I have received no ani wcr froml you, ot
vour resolution, upon the view of the Scottish family sent unto you, whit perltous
you will appoint to be difmift; only this I have done, I have beito,,vcd all such, a
are mentioned in this bill inclosed, in three orfour several rooms, a's the alme may
-uffice to contain them, and that their meat and drink hall be brought unt'o themn
hy my servants. It may please you, to advertie me by your next letters, in what
foit, and for what course, I hall make their pal).rt, as also, it they f(lill lay that
they are unpaid of their wane*, what I hall do therein. Yt is (aid that they
have been accustomed to be paid of their wage at Chrifim;s, tur the whole year. ': 1.
Her majefly's charge will be somewhat diminlbhed by the depart re of tis pteople, ' "

..

and my chargc, by this occasion, will be the nmore eaf. lut lte prfons, ;ill it 1

a

iaftian, are such illy and iimlple fouls, as tlicie wias no Lreat cautle t scar t ,li'i '
praacices, and upon this ground, 1 was of opinion, i my formnr lerttc th, ll :,ii .
tiis difmifldc trainl fiould have fo'lowed their iiiteCrs, until thle next remove. a!! ,
there to have been llfckll.tgcd upcon the fiutldcn,, for (loni!t that the lil. in.ld ,ve ia;i
bedclayed, yf ,si, did tear, 0o expc t iy ard in1ca lre.

I 1' b
Vor. )[,

0t I-ERS filall cxcufe their foolish pity as they may ; but for my part, I renunce

my part of the joys of heaven, yf in any thing that I have said, written, or done,
I have had any other refpet than the furtherance of her majesty's service; and so I
1 a

l n t earnLetiy pray you to affirm for me, as likewise for the not seasing of the

money by Mr. Manners, the other commissioners and myself. 1 trust Mr. Waade
hath afwered, in all humble duties, for the whole company, that no one of us did
so much as think that our commission reaching only to the papers, we might be
bold to touch the money, so as there was no speech of that all to my knowledge,
and as you know I was no commissioner in this search, but had my hands full at
Tyxhall, discreet servants are not hatily to deal in great matters, without warrant,
and cfpecially where the cause is such as the delay of it carrieth no danger.

YOUR advertisement of that happy remove hath been greatly comfortable unto

me. I will not fay, in refpe of myself, because my private interest hath no mea-
fi.re of comparion with her majesty's safety, and with the quiet of this realm. God
grant a happy and speedy yffue to there good and godly counsels; and so I commit
you to his merciiul protedtion. From Chartley the oth of September 586,

No. XVIII. Vol I. p. 149. line 17.]
Copy of a letter from the earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, &c. touching

their proceedings with regard to the death of the Scottish queen, to
her majcfiy's council.
] T may pcafe your honble good lordihips to be advertised, that, on Saturday the

4th of this pielfet, I Robert Beale came to the house of me the earl of Kent in

the county ot - to whom your lordship's letter and message was delivered, and her
majesty's commiflion shewn; whereupon I the earl forthwith ent precepts for the stay-
ing of such hues and cries as had troubled the country, requiring the officers to make
sHay of all such petfons, as should bring any such warrants without names, as be-
ture had been done, and to bring them to the next justice of peace to the intent
that upon their examination, the occasion and causes of such seditious bruites might
be bolted out and known. It was also resolved that I the said earl of Kent should
on the Monday following, come to Lylford to Mr. Elmes, to be the nearer and
readier to confer with my lord of Shrewsbury. Sonday at night, I Robert Beale
came to Fotheringay, where after the communicating the commission, &c. unto us
fir Amice Pawlet and fir Drue Drury, by reason that fir A. Pawlet was but late re-
covered and not able to repair to the earl of Shrewsbury, being then at Orton fix
miles of; it was thou2gt good tt we fir Drue Drury and Robert Beale should go
unto hinll, which we did on mn rning; and together with the delivery of her
m;lijtL' Cvt (-i;ili(lon, and your lordship's letter, imparted unto him what both the
a(;l (,f Kent and we thoulrht meet to b done in the cause, praying his lordship hi-
ther the day lowilrg, to confer with me the said earl, coicerniiing the fame; which
lis loldfil) pronlifl.. And for the better colouring of the matter, I the aid earl of
ilircwhbury lent to Ir. Bi:ale ajufiice of peace of the county of Hunt ngdon next
ad ljoini g, to wlhon I coiu)municated that warrant, which Robert Beale had under
yo)ur lorjlip's lh.uall, fr the lyinl ot the hies and cries, retquirin himl to give
nutice thereof to the town of l'ccrborouii) ;and cf)ccially unto the jultices of peace
I .0

of
1

of Huntlngdonfhire, and to cause the pursuers and bringers of such warrants to be
itayed, and brought to the next juRtice of peace; and to br'ng us word to Fother-
ingay caffle on Wednesday morning what he had done, and what he hould in the
mean time understand of the authors of such bruites. Which like order, I also fir
Amias Pawlet had taken on Monday morning in this town, and other places ad-
joining. The fame night, the sheriss of the county of Northampton upon the
receit of your lordship's. letter came to Arundel, and letters were fenit to me
the earl of Kent of the earl of Shrewsbury's intention and meeting here on
Tuesday by noon; and other letters were also ent with their lordflips afnents
to fir Edward Montague, fir Richard Knightly, Mr. The. Brudenell, &c. to
be here on Wednesday by eight of the clock in the morn ng, at which time
it was thought meet that the execution should be. So upon Tueclay, we the
earls came hither, where the sheriss met us; and upon conference between us it
was resolved, that the care for the fending for the surgeons, and other neceffarv
provision should be committed unto him againfi the time. And we forthwith re-
paired unto her, and first in the pretence of heifelf and her folks, to the intent that
they might fee and report hereafter that fie was not otherwile roceeded with than
according to law, and the form of the ifatute made in the 27t11 year of her majefi_'s
reign, it was thought convenient that her m:ajefy's comoiiilion ihould be read unto
her, and afterwards she was by sundry fpeechcs willed to prepare lierfelf against the
next morning. She was also put in remembrance of her fault, the lih.iurable man-
ner of proceeding with her, and the neceflity that was imposed upon her majesty tor
proceed to execution, for that otherwise it was found that they could not both stand
together; and however, fithence the lord Buckhurft's his being here new conspiracys
were attempted, and so would be still; wherefore since he had ow a good while
since warning, by the said l..rd and Robert Bcale, to think upon and prepare hertelf
to die, we doubted not but that he was, before this, fettled, and therefore would
accept this melfage in good part. And to the efiect that no chriftan duty might be
said to be omitted, that might be for her comfort, and tend to the alvation oth of
her body and foul in the world to come, we offered unto her th it if it would please
her to confer wihthe bishop and dean of Peterborouhi, she riiht; which deI:!i,
we had, for that purpose, appointed to be lodged within one mile of tiat place. Hlere-
to she replied, crofling herself in the name of the ath r, the Son, and the Holy
Ghuft, fas ing that she was ready to die in the cathoiic Roman faith, which her a-
cefors had profceieJ, fiom which ihe would not be removed. And albeit we ued
nr.ny persuasions to the contrary, vet we prevailed nothi g ; and therefore, when
she demanided the admittance ot her priefr, we utterly deniid tiit unto hr. I re-
upon, fie demanded to unrderfland what anfwcr we lhad touchig her foliier ptitiin
t, her najeity, conlcerriirl hiLr papers of account;, and tile befiow in of hr bicv.
'i'o the frt we had none Iotter answer to make, lut that we ti(otiit it their wce
not sent blbroe, the ilnme mnili t be ir Mr. 'kVadc'.s cultiody, wlho a rnlwv in i 'lncc,
11ad (ieng Icer

I papels cou 1 not anly wife p)lcalre hler Il:;jicly), we dutcd Inut bt

that thle Lime flhoil(e 1 lc divred unto futi as flic hioilld iploiit,. Flor, hil 0or ,wn
priits, we zindoubteily thlioniit tlhat ll najfLlv would linit mikLe

i;r:' 1ti>I;t of lih'

lhin', n;11 thereforic in ou r opini(i s) lic uight fi'(t (dow wh:1 i c ie ii,' i hlv
dtni', ma d hllc h.ille fliou ll be iip,. tt iin) lier oml

jctl ', oft hx) ll b h l; aind

oLlcr:, m l.,{t ex[pec' all

l ou. tefy. 'I odttct)i !'i her >oly, we kil1tv lot liri.ii( i';

picaflur, uId thociclotc could icr y
Ijiih l1 i. her petition nlOud be dil) 'J, i( Iraji-

Jl I, h ?. I.,10

ed. For the prancce of B;!';ngton, he'-utterl denied it, and would have inferred ie,
that her death was for her rellgion ; herieuitYit wai 'eftfoohs by us replied, that for
many years file w;is nt' touched for ritigoti iori''"ofio6ld 'have been now, btit that
this procecding aairniher was for teafo', :ii' that lihe was culpable of that horrible
,- ii piracy for diltroying her majesty's pe'ren; which file again denied, adding fur-
t r. that ;i!lbit she for herrelf'forgave them that were the procurers of her death,
E c: she doubted not but that God would take vengeance thereof. And being charged
witl th- de, ofitions of Naue and Curl to prove it against her, fire replied, that file
;,(-cuffed none, but that hereafter when: she hall be dead, and they remain alive, it
Shall be seen how indifferently she had been 'dealt with, and what measure had been
l'ed unto her; and asked whether it had beerr heard before this, that servants had
been practised to accuse their mifirefs, and hereupon also required what was become
of them, and where they remained.

UPON our departure from her, for that it seemed by the commiflion, that the charge

of herwas in the disposition of us the earls, we required S. Amias Paulet and S.
Drue Drurie to receive, for that night, the charge, which they had before, and to
cause the whole number of soldiers to watch that night, and that her folks thould be
put up, and take order that only four of them hould be at the execution, remaining
aloof of, and guarded with certain persons, so as they should not come near unto
her, which were Melvil her fieward, the physician, surgeon, and apothecary.

WEDNESDAY morning, 'after that we the earls were repaired unto the castle, and

the sheriss had prepared all things in the hall for the execution, he was commanded
to go into her chamber, and to bring her down to the place where were present, we
which have signed this letter, Mr. Henry Talbot, efq; fir Edward Montague, knt.
his son and heir apparent, and WiVliam Montague his brother, fir Richard Knichtly
knt. Mr. Thomas Brudeneil, Mr. Beuilr, Mr. Robert and John Wingefield, Mr.
Forest, and Raynor, Benjamin Piggot, Mr. Dean of Peterborough, and others.

AT the flairfold, he pawsed to speak to Melvil in our hearing, which was to this

effe&, " Melvil, as thou haft been an honest servant to me, so I pray thee continue
to my son, and commend me unto him. ' I have ot impugn'd his religion, nor the
:eligion of others, but wih him well. And as I forgive all that have offended me
n Scotland, so I would that he (hould also'; and beseech God, that he would fend
him his h ly spirit, and illuminate him." Melvil's answer was, that he would so do,
and at that initant, he would beseech God to assist him with his spirit. Then she
diemanded to speak with her priest, which was denied unto her, the rather for that
he came with a fuperflitious pair of beads and a crucifix. She then desired to have
icr women to help her, and upon her earnest request, and faying that when other
gentlewomen were executed, she had read in chronicles that they had women al-
lowed unto them, it was permitted that he should have two namel by herself, which

r-, ere Mrs. Curie and Kennedy. After she came to the scaffold, first, in pretence of
.ilnm all, her imajcftie's ommillion was openly read; and afterwards MIr. Dean of
'ctcrhor-ouhl, accordiin to a dirctlion which lie had received, the night before,
iro)ni us thie ill-, wou' ih;ave' made a godly admtiliiition to her, to repenit and dye
/c'] i, the flclr ot (;,,d an11 charity to the wolld. Blut at the first entry, sic u:tcrly
',:fu . it, tiiv in' tlhat ihe was a catliolique, ;rid that it were a folly to move her,
tbeing o iellltit ely niitded, and that our pr.,yers would little avail her. lZVhcre upon
to the intlt.it it migit iapl)par that we, and tie whole afllernl , i.id a clrftian dcfire
t;, i\av,' lic hec well, a godly l)rlyei. coincciv'd by l\r. Dean, was read anil pro-

lnolluncc.

nounced by us all. That it would please Almighty God to fend her his holy fp;-
rit and grace, and also, if it were his will, to pardon all her offences, and of his
mercy to receive her into his heavenly and everlatting kingdom, and finally to blels
her majesty, and confuund all her eemies;" whereof M1r. Dean, minding to re-
pair up hortly, can icw your lordship a copy.

THIS done, he pronounced a prayer upon her knees to this effect, 11 To be-

feech God to fend her his holy spirit, and that he trusted to receive her salvation in
his blood, and of his grace to be received into his kingdom, besought God to for-
give her ennemies, as he forgave them ; and to turn his wrath from this land, to
bless the queen's majeftie, that fle might serve him. Likewise to be merciful to her
son, to have compaflion of his church, and altho' the was not worthy to be heard,
yet he had a confidence in his mercy, and prayed all the faint, to pray unto her
Saviour to receive tier." After this, (turning towards her frvants) she desired them
to pray for her, that her Saviour would receive her. Then, upon petition made by
the executioners, he pardon'd them; and said, he was glad that the end of all her
sorrows was so near. I hen she miflik'd the whinning anti weeping of her women,
faying, that they rather ought to thank God for her resolution, and killing them,
willed them to depart from the scaffold, and farewell. And so resolutely kneel'd
down, and having a kercheff banded about her eyes, laid down her neck, whereupon
the executioner proceeded. er servants were incontinently removed, and order taken
that none should approach unto her corps, but that it ould be embalmed, by the ur-
geon appointed. And further her crosse, appareli, and other things areretained here,
and not yielded unto the executioner for inconveniences that might follow, but he is
remitted to be rewarded by such as ent him hither.

THIS hath been the manner of our dealings in this service, whereof we have

thought good to advertise your lordships, as particularly as we could, for the timen
and further have thought good tofignify unto your lordships besides, that for the avoid-
ing of all finilter and slanderous reports, that may be railed to the contrary, we have
c.ufed a note thereof to be conceiv'd to the fame effect in writing, which we the
saids lords have fubtcribed, with the hands of such other there the knights and gen-
tlemen above named that were present at the aion. And so beseeching Almighty
God long to bless her majesty with a mofi prosperous reign, and to confound all his,
and her enemies, we take our leaves. From totlhringay Cattle, the 8th of Febru-
ary r586, il lift

Your lordships at commandment.
N. B. This, as well as ieveral other papers in this Appendix, is taken sion a c!-.

lcion made by Mr. Crawfurd of Drumnfy, hiflurior:aphcr to Q: Anne, now
in te library of the facuity of Advocates. Mr. Crawfiird'; tranfcribLi I;,t
omitted to mention the LUook in thlc Cutt. Lib. whic it is to be found,

No. X 1,

113

No. XIX. [Vol. I I.

p 154. line 2.]
The objections agaiiift Mr. Davison, in the cause of the late Scottifi

queen, muf: concern things done either, i. Before her trial at Fother-
ingay. 2. During that session. 3. After the fame.

C(no" i. i. F F O R E her trial, he neither is, nor can be charged to have had any hand
Ci !'. i. O at all in the cause of the said queen, or done any thing whatsoever, con-

cerning the fame direcly, or indirecly.

2. DURING that feflion, he remained at court, where the only interest he had there-

in, was as her majesty's secretary, to receive the letters from the commiflioners, im-
part them to her highness, and return them her answers.

3. AFTER the return thence, of the said comrniflioners, it is well known to all
her council,

1. THAT he never was at any deliberation or meeting whatsoever, in parliament,

nr council, concerning the cause of the said queen, till the fending down of her ma-
jcfty's warrant unto the commiflioners, by the lords and others of her council.

2. THAT he was no party in signing the sentence, passed against her.
3. THIAT he never penned either the proclamation publishing the fame, the war-

rant after her death, nor any other letter, or thing whatsoever, concerning the fame.
And

THAT the only thing, which can be specially and truly imputed to him, is the

carrying up the raid warrant unto her majesty to be signed. She fending a great
counsellor unto him, with her pleasure to that end, and carrying it to the great feal
of England, by her own special direcion and commandment.

FOR the better clearing of which truth, it is evident,
I. THAT the letter, being penned by the lord trefurer, was delivered by him un-

to Mr. Davison, with her majesty's own privity, to be ready for to sign, when fie
should be pleased to call for it.

2. 'HA r being in his hands, he retained it at the least five or fix weeks unpre-

fcntcc, nor once ofcring to carry it up, till the ent a great counsellor unto him for
the lame, and was sharply reproved therefore by a great peer, in her niefty's own
pi ccncc.

3. 'I'T .T having signed it, he gave him an express commnandment to carry it to

the feal, and being scal'd to fend it immediately away unto the commifiloncrs, ac-
cording to the direcioln }cis!t' appointilg the hall of Fothering.y for thie p[lce
of executioo, nifilking tlc court-yard, in dlivers rcflpecs, and in conclutfion alo-
lutcly I'ibad hlinl to troublle hlr any further, or let lher lc.ar any niore tl;heco, tili it
was done. S'he fr lier pllrt, having (as he Ifid) perforned all that, in law (,
rcallon, could be required of her.

4.- \iICi-I diredtions notwithllanding, lie kept the warrant seal'd all tliat ni!i t,

and the greatefl p)art of the next d.i in h liIIUe, trouilit it ack with ilm to l,
court, acquainted her injelly withal, and fining, her m.ljelty rcfolved to pr',cl'
therein, according to her forncr dirculioin, alnd yet cdious to cairy the nllittc [,,

as she might throw the burd.n from herself, he absolutely refolvd to (quit his lands
thereof.

5. AND hereupon, went over unto the lord trcaiurer's chamber, to-ethcr with

lMjr. vice-chamberlain Hatton, and in his presence refto:ed the fame into the hands
of the said lord treasurer, of whom he had before received it, who from thenceforth
kept it, till himself and the reft of the council sent it away.

WtHICH, in substance and truth, is all the part and interest the said Davison had
in this cause, whatsoever is, or may be pretended to the contrary.

TOUCHING the fending down thereof unto the commiflioners, that it was the gc-

neral at of her majefy's council, (as is before mentioned,) and not any private at
of hI: may appear by

I. IHEIR own confeflion. 2. Their letters sent down therewith to the commi -

fioners. 3. The testimonies of the lords and others to whom thvy were diretl.
As also 4. of Mr. Beale, by whom they were sent. 5. The tenor of hr majesty's
firit cmmiffion for their c-alling to the fiar-chamber for the fame, and private ap-
pearance and fubmiflion afterward inftcad thereof, before the lord chancellor Broom-
ley. 6. The confeflion of Mr. Attorney-general, in open court confirmed. 7. v'
the sentence itself upon record. 8. Besides a common at of council, containinll
an answer to be verbally delivered to the Scottifl ambassador then remaining here,
avowing and justifying the fame.

Now where some suppose him to have given some extraordinary furtherance there-
unto, the contrary may evidently appear by

I. His former absolute refusal to sign the band of aflociation, bing earnestly
prefled thereunto by her majefly's self.

2. 1-hs excusing of himself from being used as a commissioner, in the examination
of Babington and his complices, and avoiding the fame by a journey to the Bath.

3. His being a lean to tay the commissioners from pronouncing of the sentence
at liotheringay, and deferring it till they should return to her majefiy's prefcnce.

4. His keeping the warrant in his hands lix weeks unprefented, without once cf-
fering to carry it up, till her majesty sent exprefly for the fame to sign.

5. EHis dcferring to fend it away after it was fea'd unto the commiflioners, as he

was specially commanded, flaying it all that night, and the greatest part of the next
day in his hnds.

6. A D finally, his refloring thereof into the ands of the lord treasurer, of whom
he had before received the fanae.

WHICH are clear and evident proofs, that the said 1)avfon did nothing in this

cause whatsoever, contrary to the duty of the place he then held in her ajeity s
service.

Cal. C. 9.

T''HI seems to be an oriLinal. On tihe iiack i; tlis titie,
TH'IE innocency of Mr. Da.vison il the c !:i flt ! ti! ate Scottufh queen,

Letter

No. XX. [Vol. II. p. 238. line 29.]

Letter from , Sir Robert Cecil, to his Majesty King James.
ii t: r' -- ^vO S T worthy prince, the depending dangers upon your affeafionates have

1 , !;], . been fucl, as hath inforced silence in him, who is faithfully devoted to your

' ....

t1-. pcifon, and in due time of trial, will undergo all hazards of fortune, for the main-

J ;i...l .
* * ticnauce of thejuft regal rights, that, by the laws divine, of nature, and of nations,

is invefied in your royal person. Fall not then, most noble and renowned prince,
nom him, whose providence hath in many dangers preserved you, no doubt to be an
in!tiunient of his glory, and the good of his people. Some secrets, I find have
been revealed to your prejudice, which must proceed from ome ambitious violent
t"girited person near your irajefry in council and favour; no man in particular will I
accuse, but I am Cure it hath no foundation from any, with whom, for your service,
i have held correfpondencc; otllerwife, I had, long since, been disabled from per-
;,tmiance of those duties, that the thoughts of my heart endeavoureth; being only
Jkow~n to this worthy nobleman bearer hereof, one noted in all parts of Chriftcndomn
uor his fidelity to your perlon and state, and to Mr. David Fowlis your mol loyal
.i vain, my firl and faithful correspondent; and unto James Hudlbne, whom
ha\ x so nd: in all things that concern you, most secret and assured. It may, therc-
1;,I), plefe voui majeity, at the humble motion of O, which jargon I desire to be
the iDorfernent of your commands unto me, that by some token of your favour,
he nmav U..dria:, :n what terms you regard his fidelity, secrecy, and service. My
t'Iiliiuatcc a.iLciiuni to your p;ifotn, (not as you are a king, but as you are a good
I.i, , anti have juli titll, aitcr my sovereign, to be a great king) doth transport me
f.,) I[refuilption. Condemn not, most noble prince, the motives of care and love,
;ilthu' iixed with d(ifects in judgmnt.

r I, therefore, firit beseech vojr m.viety, that for the good of those, whom

God, by divine Providence, hath defined to your charge, that you w uld be pleated
to have an extraordinary care of all practicers, or pracices, against your perf n ; for
it is not to be doubted, but that in both kingdoms, either out of ambition, faction,
or fear, ther are nianv that desire to have their sovereign in minority, whereby the
sovereignty and Date nmight be wayed by partiality of subalternate persons, rather
than by true rule of power and justice. Prcferve your person, and fear not the
practices of man upon the point of your right, which will be preserved and main-
tained againIt all aflaults of competition whatever. Thus I leave the protection of your
peroni, and royal posterity, to the Almighty God of Heaven, who bicfs and pre-
fc ve you and all yours, in all rcgal happiness to his glory.

2. NEx.r to the preservation of your person, is the confcrvation and secret keep-

li, of your councells, which, as 1 have said, ;:re often betrayed and discovered,
sither out of pretcnidl zeal in religion, turbulent fact on, or base conception, the
which your majelty is to regard with all circuimfprclion, as a matter most dan-
gerous to your person ad flae, and tihe only means to ruin and dlctroy all thrfe,
that {sand faitllfully d(evoted to your iaj flty's ferice. Some particular., and pec-
f ns of this rnature, I nlake nij doubt have been dilcovcrcld by the uldcavours of thlin,
nrtJocma, tihe bearer hercotf, f wlhom your nma;jlly ilmay be furlltcr informed.

3' ''''i

3. THE 3d point considerable is, that your majelty, by all means poflible, secure

yourself of te g od affecion of the French king and States, by the negotiation ot
lome faithful secret confident; the French naturally diliafling the union of the Bri-
tilh Islands under one monarch. In Germany, I doubt not, but you have many
allie, and friends, but by reason of their remote itate, they do not bs much iporte
this affair, which muff be guided by a quick and sudden motion.

4. WHEN God, by whose Providence, the period of all perions and times is de-

termined, shall call to his kingdom of glory her majelly, (altho' I do afiurcdly hope
that there will not be any quefiion in conpetition, yet for that I hold it not fitting
to give any minute entrance into a cause of so high a nature) I do humbly beseech
your majesty to design a secret, faithful, and experienced confident cfrvant of yours,
being of an approved fidelity and judgment, continually to be here reiident, whose
negotiation, it were convenient your mjeity should foitifi, with such lecret trutt
and powers, as there may not need 14 dys respite, to post for authority, in a cause,
that cannot endure 1o hours respite, without varieties of idancer. In the which it is
to be confidered, that all such as pretend lcaft good to your eftablifhmcnr, will not
in publick ppung your title, but out of their cnning, ambiioun, will fcck to gAin
time, by alledging their pretence of conimon good to the t,te, n V!0olou(ltinj oc
good conditions for difburthening the common weal, of divers thrd laws, hcavy
impositions, corruptions, oppreflions, &c. which is a niain point t, lead te popu-
lar, who are much dilulled with inany particulars of this nature. it were therelore
convenient, that these mnotives, out of your naiefly's providence, Ihould be prevent-
ed, by your free offir in theif points follbwilng, viz.

I. THAT your majefly would be pleased to abolifl pui vaiors nrnd purvaiancc, be-

inn, a matter infinitely offinlive to the common people, and the whole kingdom, and
inot profitable to the prince.

2, TH A r your majcfty would be pleased to dlifolve the couit of waunlt , bcin tlie

ruin of all the noble and ancient families of this icalm, by bacl matches, and eil
education ot their children, by which no revenue of the crown will be dcfravd.

3. TIIE abrogating the mult'plicit of renal laws, genra'ly repined ;i.:ii: by die

fubjeti, in regard of their uncertainty, being inny tililts datcric Iron their tiuc
meaning, by variety of interpretat.on.

4. THAT our majefl.n wvill be pleastd admit free outport of the native ccmlro-

dities of this kingdom, now often refirail cdl Il fubltcrnate 'crioins f or private pro.
fit, being most prejudicial to the comimerce oY all mcrch-illts, and a1 [ll.n Idleiucti(ii
to the true indufiry and mlanaufaturc of all kin loin, anld

a gainlf the pr, it cI the
crow'n.

I'IItEsE, hbcii lby our maj{tv's confients in thle poirt of t;nl prop.uidid, will

afluredly confirni unto ylr najjfti the Ilcnrt. ard aftctiols t the whol:e iil.inr,,t
aind ahfolut ly plcvei)t a]l tiiiiint 1'i i. an1d tl vcit of d'i( ilt l p1 li,1

1 t, l..!t,

, u i 1,i

pretext of co rinm ol) ood, would leck to p1 tiolil ' t l m i 1 11 i o| ill ( 0i

opii) t i]

powr, a(uln tlicreb\' to dcroatt e ltoil y(.n r by.i

jl

r (.ui![) ,1.i!J ihcc lvtir, by
prrccly merit f your iimoderation, ju.ign I it, iidl jfii.c.

\'Ut;R nl;ij(ily' l favour, thUs to tl'(lie l(cl, ill ]1o v:w i n .icli ihe

pr( si: of the clowln, Lut idvani ce tl(he. ' lie 1 d(!i ll)( ti: iltlC .

' i (,f ii, lli cr

(,iti(.rs, wii li 'fe ari mcrccnila)' t (i<,fi ts l tl il1e rrllC t llin' 'ik, .1ik .I n-
dallt , ill 1 o ly liiil fo[ic t tlu iiieit; lit in ;iiitc will bc tlit ',.t i.i. lu lthe LI -

\'V i . II. (' c- I J'"u,

dom, which will confirm unto your majesty the universal love and affeftion of the
people, and establish your renown in the highest esteem to all pofierity.

THE Lord preserve your majeflie, and make you triumphant over all your ene-
mie-.

MY care over his person, whose letters pass in this pacquet, and will die before he

leave to be yours, shall be no less then of mine own life, and in like efleem will I
hold all your faithfull confidents, notwithstanding I will hold myself reserved from
being known unto any of them, in my particular devoted affeaions unto your ma-
jefty, only this extraordinary worthy man whose aflociate I am in his misfortune,
doth know my heart, and we both will pray for you, and if we live you hall find
us together.

I BESEECH your majeily burn this letter, and the others; for altho' it be in an
unusual hand yet it may be discovered.

Your majefiy's mofi devoted

and humble servant,

A CRITICAL,

# CRITICAL DISSERTATION CONCERNING The Murder of King Henry, and the Genuineness of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

A

C R I T I C A L
DISS E R T A TION

CONCERNING
The Murder of King Henry, and the Genuineness

of the Queen's Letters to Bothwell.

T is not my intention to engage in all the controversies, to which
the murder of King enry, or the letters from Mary to
Bothwell, have given rife; far less to appear as an adversary to

any particular author, who hath treated of them. To repeat,
and to expose all the ill founded assertions with regard to these
points, which have flowed from inattention, from prejudice, from
partiality, from malevolence, and from dishonesty, would be no
less irksome to ryfelf, than unacceptable to most of my readers.
All I propose, is to aflift others in forming some judgment concern-
ing the fats in dispute, by fating the proofs produced on each fide,
with as much brevity as the cafe will admit, and with the fame
attention and impartiality, which I have endeavoured to exercise in
examining other controverted points in the Scotch hiltory.

IN order to account for the King's murder, two different fyflcms

have been formed. Tie one fppofes Bothwell both to have con-
trived and executed this crime. The other imputes it to the Earls
of Murray, Morton, and their party.

VOL. II. 1) d Ti

THlE decifon of many controverted fads in hiflory, is a matter

rather of curiosity than of use. They stand detached; and what-
ever we determine with regard to them, the fabric of the story
remains untouched. But the fad under dispute in this place is a
fundamental and eflential one, and according to the opinion which
an Hitlorian adopts with regard to it, he mufi vary and dipofe the
whole of his subsequent narration. An hifiorical iyftem may be
tried in two different ways, whether it be consistent with probabi-
lity, and whether it be supported by proper evidence.

THOSr who charge the King's murder upon Bothwell argue in

the following manner; and though their reasonings have been men-
tioned already in different places of the narrative, it is necessary to
repeat them here. Mary's love for Darnly, fay they, was a sudden
and youthful passion. The beauty of his person was his chief
merit. His capricious temper soon raised in the Queen a difgufl,
which broke out on different occasions. His engaging in the con-
fpiracy against Rizio, converted this disgust into an indignation,
which fle was at no pains to conceal. This breach was perhaps,
in its own nature, irreparable; the King certainly wanted that art
and condescension which alone could have repaired it. It widened
every day, and a deep and fettled hatred effaced all remains of as-
fedtion. Bothwell observed this, and was prompted by ambition,
and perhaps by love, to found on it a scheme, which proved fatal
both to the Queen, and to himself. He had served Mary at diffe-
rent times with fidelity and success. He insinuated himself into
her favour, by address and by flattery. By degrees he gained her
heart. In order to gratify his love, at least his ambition, it was necef-
fary to get rid of the King. Mary had rejeted the proposal made
to her for obtaining a divorce. The King was equally hated by the
partizans of the house of Hamilton, a considerable party in the
kingdom; by Murray, one of the most powerful and popular persons
in his country ; by Morton and his associates, whom he had deceived;
and whom Bothwell had bound to his interest by a recent favour.
Among the people Darnly was fallen under extreme contempt. He
expected, for all these reasons, that the murder of the King would
pals without any enquiry. And to Mary's love, and to his own

1 address

address and good fortune, he trusted for the accomplifihment of the
reft of his wiihes. What Bothwell expected really came to pals.
Mary, if not privy herself to the design, connived at an aion
which rid her of a man whom she had such good reason to detest.
A few months after, she married the person who was both fufpetedd
and accused of committing the murder.

THOSE who charge the guilt upon Murray and his party reason i.

this manner. Murray, fay they, was a man of boundless ambition.
Notwithstanding the illegitimacy of his birth, he had early formed
a design of usurping the Crown. On the Queen's return into
Scotland, he insinuated himself into her favour, and engrossed the
whole power into his own hands. He set himself against every pro-
pofal of marriage which was made to her, left his own chance of
iucceeding to the Crown should be destroyed. He hated Darnly,
and was no less hated by him. In order to be revenged on him, he
entered into a sudden friendflfip with Bothwell, his ancient and mor-
tal enemy. He encouraged him to perpetrate the crime, by giving
him hopes of marrying the Queen. All this was done with a de-
sign to throw upon the Queen herself the imputation of being ac-
ceffory to the murder, and under that pretext, to destroy Bothwell,
to depose and imprison her, and to seize the sceptre which he had
wrefled out of her hands.

THE former of these systems has an air of probability, is con-

iftent with itself, and solves appearances. In the latter, ome as-
fertions are falie, some links are wanting in the chain, and effects
appear, of which no fuficient cause is produced. Murray, on the
Qeen's return into Scotland, served her with great fidelity, and
by his prudent adminifiration rendered her so popular, and io
powerful, as enabled her with ease to quafl a formidable in-
furretion raised by hiinfelf in the year 1565. VWhat motive
could induce Murray to murder a Prince without capacity, without
followers, without influence over tlle nobles, whom the Queen, by
her neglc&-, liad reduced to tle lowell c late of contempt, and wlio,
after a long di-racc, had regained (according to the mlt fvoura-
ble fulppofiti(n) the precarioI p(flcfilioo of her lavour on l a fCw
daiys bor()c hi i dctli ? it is lif icult t conlce ive what Muml y
I li.)11 to

1) (1 d 2, far

fear fom the King's life. It is no easy matter to guess what he
could gain by his death. If we suppose that the Queen had no pre-
vious attachment to Bothwell, nothing can appear more chimerical
than a scheme to persuade her to marry a man, whose wife was fiill
alive, and who was not only fufpeded, but accused, of murdering
her former huffand. But that such a scheme should really succeed
is still more extraordinary.---If Murray had instigated Bothwell to
commit the crime, or had himself been accessory to the commiffiorn
of it, what hopes were there that Bothwell would silently bear
from a fellow criminal all the persecutions which he suffered, with-
out ever retorting upon him the accusation, or revealing the whole
scene of iniquity ? An ancient and deadly feud had subsisted between
Murray and Bothwell; the Queen with difficulty had brought them
to ome terms of agreement. But is it probable that Murray would
chufe an enemy, to whom he had been so lately reconciled, for his
confident in the commifiion of such an atrocious crime ? Or, on
the other hand, would it ever enter into the imagination of a wife
man, first to raise his rival to supreme power, in hopes that
afterwards he should find some opportunity of depriving him of
that power ? The nmoi adventrous politician never hazarded such
a dangerous experiment. The most credulous folly never trusted
such an uncertain chance.

BUT however fSrong these general reasonings may be, we must

decide according to the particular evidence produced. This we now
proceed to examine.

THAT Bothwell was guilty of the King's murder appears,

a. From the concurring testimony of all the cotemporary historians.
2. From the confession of those persons who suffered for aflifting at
the commission of the crime, and who enter into a minute detail
of all its circumstances. Anders. v. 2. 65. 3. From the ac-
knowledgment of Mary's own commissioners, who allow Bothwell
to have been one of those who were guilty of this crime. Good.
V. 2. 213. 4. From the exprets testimony of Lefly Biflop of Ross
to the fame effect with the former. Def. of Q. Mary's lion. And.
2. 76. Idv. 3. p. 31. 5. Morton, at his death, declared that

Both"
4

Bothwell had follicited him, at different times, to concur in the con-
fpiracy formed against the life of the King; and that he was in-
formed by Archibald Douglas, one of the conspirators, that Bothwell
was present at the murder. Crawf. Mem. App. 4. The letter
from Douglas to the Queen, published in the Appendix to vol. I.
No. 12. confirms Morton's tellimony. 6. Lord Herreis promiies,
in his own name, and in the name of the nobles who adhered to
the Queen, that they would concur in punishing Bothwell as the
murderer of the King. Append. vol. I. No 23.

THE most dire& charge ever brought againif Murray is in thele

words of Bishop Lefley, " Is it unknown," addrefing himself to the
Earl of Murray, " what the Lord Herries said to your face openly,
"even at your own table, a few days after the murder was corn-
" mitted ? Did he not charge you with the foreknowledge of the
"fame murder? Did not he, nia ci-cuitioile uJiis, flatly and

plainly burden you, that riding in Fife, and coming with one of
( your mofi assured and trufly servants the fame day whereon you
"departed from Edinburgh, said to him, among other talk, This
A night e're morning Lord Darnly hall lose his life ?" Def. of Q.
Mary, Anders. v. 2. 75. But the assertion of a man so heated with
faiti n as Lefley, unless it were supported by proper evidence, is of
little weight. The servant, to whom Murray is said to have spoken
there words, is not named ; nor the manner in which this secret con-
veriation was brought to light mentioned. Lord Herreis was
one of the most zealous advocates for Mary, and it is remarkable
that in all his negociation at the court of England, he never once
repeated this accusation of Murray. In answering the challenge
given him by Iord Lindsay, Herreis had a fair opportunity of men-
tioning Murray's knowledge of the murder ; but though he openly
accuses of that crime ome of those who adhered to him, he in-
duftrioufly avoids any insinuation against Murray himself. Keith
Pref. Xli. Mary herself, in a converlatiun with Sir Fraicis
Knolles, accufel lMorton and Maitland of being privy to the muruc;-
but does not mention Murray. And 4. 5. When the 3;lilj) of
Rol, and Lord llcrrcis thcmfelvcrs appeared before the ng!idh cou:i-
cil, January , 1569, they dclacd thcmeilvcs ready, in obedience

to

t o the Queen's command, to accuse Murray and his associates of being
accessory to the murder, but " they being also required, whether
( they or any of them, as of themselves, would accuse the said
": Earl in special, or any of his adherents, or thought them guilty

thereof;" they answered, " that they took God to witness that
none of them did ever know any thing of the conspiracy of that

"' murder, or were in council and foreknowledge thereof; neither
" who were devisers, inventors, and executors of the fame, till
"' it was publickly discovered long thereafter by some of the assassins

who suffered death on that account." Good. v. 2. 308. These

words are taken out of a register kept by Ross and Herreis theme
selves, and seem to be a direct confutation of the bishop's assertion.
The bilhop himself repeats the fame thing in ill stronger terms.
And. 3. 3 1

THE Earls of Huntly and Argyll, in their Protec/tion touching

she murder Of the King of Scots, after mentioning the confe-
rence at Craigmillar concerning a divorce, of which we have given
an account vol. . 330. add "So after these premisses, the mur-
li der of the King following, we judge in our consciences, and hold
" for certain and truth, that the Earl of Murray and secretary Le-
' thington were authors, inventors, counsellors and causers of the
' fame murder, in what manner, or by whatfomever persons the
' fame was executed." Andeif. v .

4 88. But. . This is

nothing more than the private opinion or personal affirmation of
there two noblemen. 2. The conclusion which they make has no
connetion with the premies on which they found it. Because
Murray proposed to obtain for the Queen a divorce from her hus
band with her own consent, it does not follow that therefore he
committed the murder without her knowledge. 3. Huntly and
Argyll were at that time the leaders of that party oppolite to Mlurray,
and animated with all the rage of faction. 4. Both of them were
Murray's personal enemies. FIuntly, on account of the treatment
which his family and clan had received from that nobleman. Ar-
gyll was desirous of being divorced from his wife, with whom he lived
1on 1( good terms. Knox X28. and by whom he had no children.
Cravwf Peer. 9. She was Murray's fitr, and by his intercll lIic

3l . it
6

had obftruded that design. Keith 5 i. These circumstances would
go far towards invalidating a positive teftimnony; they more than coun-
terbal ance an indeterminate suspicion . . It is altogether uncertain whe-
ther Huntly a nd Argyll ever subscribed this protelation. A copy of fuclh
a protestation as the Queen thought would be of advantage to her
cause, was tranfimitted to them by her. Anders. v. 4. i86. The
protestation itself published by Anderson is taken from an unfub-
fcribed copy with blanks for the date and place of subscribing. On
the back of this copy ispafted apaper, which Cecil has marked
" Answer of the Earl of Murray to a writing of the Earls of hunt-
6, ly and Argyll." Ander 194, 95. But it can fcarcebe cfteemed
a reply to the abovementioned proteflation. Murray's answer bears
date at London, January 19, 1568. The Queen's letter, in which
flle inclosed the copy of the protestation, bears date at Bowton, Jan.
5, 1568. Now it is scarce to be supposed that the copy could be
sent into Scotland, be subscribed by the two Earls, and be seen and
answered by Murray within so hort a time. Murray's reply seems
intended only to prevent the impression which the vague and uncer-
tain accusations of his enemies might make in his absence. Cecil
had got the original of the Queen's letter into his custody. Anders.
v. 4. 86. This naturally leads us to conjeture that the letter it-
self, together with the inclQfed protestation, were intercepted before
they came to the hands of Hluntly and Argyll. Nor is this mier
coiinjeure alone. The letter to Huntly, in which the proteflation
was inclosed, is to be found. Cott. Lib. Cal. C. I. fol. 280, and is
an original subscribed by Mary, though not written with her own
hand, because he feldorn chose to write in the English language.
The protestation is in the fame Volume, fol. 282, and is manifefily
written by the fame person who wrote the Queen's letter. This is
a clear proof that both were intercepted. So that much has bccn
founded on a paper not fitbfcribed by the two Earls, and probabiy
never seen by them. Betides, this method which the Qucen took of
fending a copy, to the two Earls, of what was proper for thmn to
declare with regard to a conference held in their own pirelenlcc, apl-
pears forncwhat fulpicious. It would have been more natural, and
not so liable to any mifiiltcrprctatiou t have dclired theml to

wite

7

write the most exac account, which they could recolled of what
had passed in the conversation at Craigmillar.

TEE Queen's commissioners at the Conferences in England accused

Murray and his associates of having murdered the King. Good. 2.
28 . But these accusations are nothing more than looe and general
affirmations, without descending to such particular circumfiances,
as either ascertain their truth, or discover their falsehood. The
fame accusation is repeated by the nobles assembled at Dumbarton
Sept. i568. Good. 2. 359. And the fameobfervation maybemade
concerning it:

ALL the Queen's advocates have endeavoured to account for Mur-

ray's murdering of the King, by supposing that it was done on pur-
pose, that he might have a pretence of disturbing the Queen's adminif-
tration, and thereby rendering ineffectual her general Revocation of
Crown lands, which would have deprived him and his aflociates of
the best part of theireftates. Lefley Def. of Mary's Hon. p. 73.
But whoever confiders the limited powers of a Scotch Monarch, will
fee that such a revocation could not be very formidable to the no-
bles. Every King of Scotland began his reign with such a revo-
cation; and as often as it was renewed, the power of the nobles
rendered it ineffectual. The best vindication of Murray and his
party from this accusation is that which they presented to the Queert
of England, and which hath never hitherto been published.
Paper Office. AnSficers to the objecaions and alledgance of the Queen, alledging, the

Earl of Murray Lord Regent, the Earl of Morton, Marr, Glen-
cairn, lume, Rut/hven, &c. to have ecen moved to armour, fJr that
the, abhorred and might not abide her revocation of the alinatioln
made o' her property.

IT is answered, that is alledged but all appearance, and it appears

God has bereft, the alledgance of all wit and good relemnbrance,
for thir eaions following.

IM-
8

IMPRIMIIS, as to my Lord Regent,. he never had occasion to grudge

thereat, in refpeA the Queen made him privy to the fame, and took
resolution with him for the execution thereof, letting his Lordship
know he would assuredly in the famine except all things fie had
given to him, and ratefy them in the next parliament, as ihe did
indeed; and for that cause wished my Lord to leave behind him
Mafier John Wood, to attend upon the fame, to whom fie de-
clared, that als well in that as in all others her grants it flhould be
provided, yea of free will did promise and offer before ever lie de-
manded, as it came to pass without any let or impediment, for
all was ratified by her command, and hand write, at the Iarlia-
ment, but any difficulty.

ITEM as to my Lord of Morton, lie could not grudge thereat

quha never had of her property worth twenty dollars that ever 1
knew of.

Item the fame, may I fay of my Lord Glencairn.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Hume.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Ruthven.
Item the fame, I may fay of my Lord Lindsay.

ONLY my Lord of Marr, had ane little thing of the property quilk

alfua was gladly and liberally confirmed to him, in the aid parliament
proceeding a year; was never ane had any cause of miscontent of
that revocation, far less to have put their lives and heritage to si open
and manifef ane danger as they did for sic ane frivole cause.

Gy'F ever any did make evill countenance, and show any mif-

contentment of the said revocation, it was my Lord of Argyll in
fpeciall, quha fpak largely in the time of Parliament theiranents to
the Queen herself, and did complain of the manifest corruption of
ane act of Parliament past upon her Majefly's return, and fa did
lett any revocation at tiat time; but the armor for revenlre of the
King's deid was not till twa months after, att quhat time there was
no occasion given thereof, nor never a man had mind thcrcuLo

VOL. I.

I. i -
E c C'

HAVING thus examined the evidence which has been produced

against the Earls of Murray and Bothwell; we shall next proceed
to enquire whether the Queen herself was accessory to the murder
of her husband.

No sooner was the violent death of Darnly known, than Itrong

suspicions arose, among some of her fubjeds, that Mary had given
her consent to the commission of that crime. And. 2. 156. We
are informed, by her own ambassador in France, the Archbishop of
Glasgow, that tie icniments of foreigners, on this head, were no
less unfavourable to her. Keith. Pref. ix. Many of her nobles loudly
accused her of that crime, and a great part of the nation, by support-
ing them, fcemi to have allowed the accusation to be well founded.

SOME crimes, howevcr, are of such a nature that thev scarce ad-

mit of a positive or direa proof. Deeds of darkness can seldom be
brought perfectly to light. Where persons are accused not of being
Prinzcipals, but only of being Accefyaries to a crime; not of having
committed it themlelves, but only of giving consent to the com-
mifiion of it by others; the proof becomes fill more difficult: and
unless when some accomplice betrays the secret, a proof by circum-
flances, or presumptive evidence, is all that can be attained. Even
in judicial trials, such evidence is ometimes held to be sufficient for
condemning criminals. The degree of conviction which such evi-
dence carries along with it, is often not inferior to that which
a-ifes from positive testimony; and a concurring series of circum-
tiances satisfies the underfianding no less than the express declaration
of witnesses.

EVIDENCE of both these kinds has been produced againfi Mary.

We hall sirss confider that which is founded upon circumfiances
alone.

SOrME of these suspicious circumtances preceded the King's death

others were subsequent to it. With regard to the former, we may
obfcrve that the Queen's violent love of Darnly was oon converted
into an aversion to him no less violent and that his own ill conduct,

and

and excefles of every kind were such, that if they did not justify,
at least they account for this sudden change of her disposition to-
wards him. The rife and progress of this domeitic rupture, I
have traced with great care in the history, and to the proofs of it
which may be found in papers publiflied by other authors, I have
added those contained in App. N° XVI. and XVII. The Earls or
Murray, Morton, Bothwell, Argyll and Huntly confidered the
scheme of procuring for the Queen a divorce from her hushnnd,
as one of the most flattering proposals they could mke to her, anii
employed it as the mos powerfill inducement to prevail on her to
content to a measure, which they had much at heart, but from which
they knew her to be extremely averse. And. . . .

2. 't.

Croc the French ambafnador, who was an eye witnef; of what he
describes, not only rcprcfents her diifufi at Dat rnly to be extreme
but declares that there could be no hopes of a reconcilement betwecI,
them. "The Queen is in the hands of phylicians, and I do ahre c.,tI
you is not at all well; and do believe the principal part of her dif- '
ease to consist in deep grief and orrow; nor does it seem pofibie
to make her forget the fame. Still file repeats thee w.ords, 1 culd
CJ'iZ to be dead. You know very well that the injtry v fe has re-
ceived is exceeding great, and her Majeffy will never iergeit it,-
To speak my mind freely to you, I do not expe(, upon everal ac--
counts, any good underflanding between them [ i. c. the King and
Queen] unless God effenually put to his hand.--His bad de- Decctm. 2:
portment is incurable, nor can there ever be any good expeced
from him for several reasons, which I might tell you was I present
with you. I cannot pretend to foretel how all may turn, but I
will fay, that matters cannot fubiifl long as they are, without being
accompanied with sundry bad contequences." Keith, l'r-f. vii.
Had Henry died a natural death, at this juncture, it mufl have been
confidercd as a very fortunate event to the Queen, and as a fenrnn-
able deliverance from a htIllband who li ;d bcome altogether odious
to her. Now as lcnry was murdered a wc weeks ftcr-
wards, and as nothing had lhppened to render the (Qucci's aver-
sion to himl less violent, the opiniofl ot thO tlVIof who onlidir I.ary ns
the authur of an event, which was illnlilCitly 1O agreeiabl to her,
will appear perhaps to ome of our nradLcr to be neitl:r ulnnlatural

1' c c .:' ,o

nor over refined. If we add to this, what has been observed in tie
history, that in proportion to the increase of Mary's hatred of her
husband, Bothwell made progress in her favour; and that he be-
came the object not only of her confidence but of her attachment,
that opinion acquires new strength. It is easy to observe many ad-
vantages which might redound to Mary as well as to Bothwell from
the King's death; but excepting them, no person, and no party in
the kingdom could derive the least benefit from that event. Both-
well, accordingly, murdered the King, and it was, in that age,
thought no violent imputation on Mary's characer, to suppose that
(he had consented to the deed.

THE iteps which the Queen took after her husband's death add

strength to that supposition. T. Melvil, who was in Edinburgh,
at the time of the King's death, alierts that " every body fufpeed
the Earl of Bothwell; and those who durst speak freely to others,
said plainly that it was He." p. 55. 2. Mary having ilfued a
proclamation, on the 2th of February, offering a reward to any
person, who flould discover those who had murdered her husband;
And. 1. 36. a paper in answer to this was affixed to the gates of
the Tolbooth, February 6, in which Bothwell was named as the
chief person guilty of that crime, and the Queen herself was ac-
cufed of having given her content to it. And. 2. 156. 3. Soon
after, February 20, the Earl of Lennox, the King's father, wrote
to Mary, conjuring her, by every motive, to prolecute the mur-
derers with the utmost rigour. He plainly declared his own sus-
picions of Bothwell, and pointed out a method of proceeding against
him, and for discovering the other authors of the crime, no less
obvious than equitable. lie advised her to seize, and to commit to
lure custody Bothwell himself, and those who were already named
as his accomplices; to call an Assembly of the nobles; to iifue a
proclamation, inviting Bothwell's accusers to appear; and if, on that
encouragement, no person appeared to accuse them, to hold them
as innocent, and to dismiss them without farther trial. And. . 40.
4. Archbiihop Beatoun, her ambassador in France, in a letter to
Mary, March th, employs arguments of the utmost weight to
persuade her to prosecute the murderers with the greatest severity.

4( I can

" I can conclude nathing, (fays he) by quhat zour Majesty writes
to me zourfelf, that fen it has plefit God to conserve zow to taLe
a rigorous vengeance therof, that rather than it be not aually taine,
it appears to me better in this warld that ze had loft life and all. I
ask your Majeftie pardon that I writ fa far, for I can heir nathing
to zour prejudife, but I mn conftraindly writ the famin, that all may m,
come to zour knawlege; for the better remede may be put therto;
Ileir it is needfull that ze forth haw now rather than ever of be-
fore, the greite vertue, magnanimitie, and conflance that God
has grantit zow, be quhais grace, I hope ze fall overcome this most
heavie envie and difplefir of the committing therof, and conserve
that reputatioun in all godliness, ze have conquili of lang, quhich
can appear na wayis mair clearlie, than that zow do f;ck jullice that ,;,
the habil warld may declare zowr innocence, and give teflimony ;-
forever of thair treason that has committed (but fear of God or

,,

man) so cruel and ungodlie a murther, quhairof there is fla mloi/K ,.i..
ill spoken, that I am confirainit to alk zow mercy, that neithcr
can I or will I make the rehearsal therof, which is oivr odious. ,.
But alas! Madame, all over Europe this day there is na purpose in
head ia frequent as of zour Majeilie, and of the prclent itate of
zour realm, quhilk is in the molt part inttrpretit iinit-erly." Keith,
Pref ix. 5. Elizabeth, as appears from Append. Vol. I. No. XIX.
urged the fame thing in strong terms. 6. The cilcumftances of the
cafe itself, no less than these solicitations and remonstrances, called
for the utmost vigour in her proceedings. Her hulband had been
murdered in a cruel manner, almot in her own presence. I-er
fubjeds were filled with the utmost horror at that crime. Both-
well, one of her principal favourites, had been publickly accused as
the author of it. Refledtions, extremely dilhonourable to herself,
had been thrown out. If indignation, and the love of jufice, did
not prompt her to purfuc the murdreers with ardour, decency, at
leaf, and concern for vindicating her own charadter, fIlould have
induced her to avoid any appearance of remilniels or want oi
zeal.

BUT intfead of this, Mary continued to difeover, in all her ac-
lions, the utmolt partiality towards BUotli\vll. ,i On the iStth of

Fcbruary

February, five days after the murder, fne bellowed on him the re-
version of the superiority of the town of Leith, which in the year
i ;65 she had mortgaged to the citizens of Edinburgh. This grant
was of much importance, as it gave him not only the command
of the principal port in the kingdom, but a great ascendant over
the citizens of Edinburgh, who were extremely desirous of keep-
ing possession of it 2. 2. Bothwell being extremely desirous to

* Cpy, fionm the ci, 1

nal In the Chater-l'ofe of the city of Edinburgb of an fjifgna-

'cu to te ive3,fm 97' the fuprririty of Lcith by tucen Aity to the Earl of Bsthwcll.

Maria D) i gratih Regina. Scotorum, omnibus probis hominibus fuis ad quos
rafcantes litcra pervccrint t falutem. Sciatis, .!uod nos ad memoriam reducentes mul-
i/picx bouum v-rurn et fidele frvitium, non tantum quondam nofrai chariflimax
mutri lMaril Regime regni nofbii pro teinpore in noftra minoritate faEtum et impen-
fuin, verum ctiam nobitlmet iplis, tam intra partes Gallix quam intra hoc nostrum
.cin mn, ani cxteiitioin!n iiofri honoris ct .iuCtoritatis in punitione furum, malcfac-
til nlm, ct tIianfgrlrfnium infra idem, per noltrum confifum confanguineum ct conllia.
'-iuin Jacol)tui comirm 'n lthuilc, dominum Hills, Creighton et Liddifdale, mag-
rnum admiralltm regni nofiri, comnmiiionim et oncrationem ad hunc efectum ha-
bentem, per quas ipfc fum corpus et vitarn in imagno periculo pofuit; ac etia:n, in
;peroiln.rt tiie ct eXt(intio:le niijri diti frvitii, flam hereditatcm, supra fumman
i ,in;. mii:lii um mercaum hujus noltri regni, alicna.vit ac fit. Et nos cogitantes
nqto', cs n'ih.ra principali honorc et dcvoria, diftuni nofirum confifum confanguineum
.'v ccnfili.i;ium cum quodam accidente et gratitudine rccompcnfare et gratificare in-
itt!nbit qul" nos commiloe fibi concedere poterimnus, unde ipfe magis habilis omnibus
-li'Lt.ris temporibus cfle potcrit, ct ad hujufmnodi perfeinrmandum in omnibus caufis
Iu c\a enrti us: In recoGnpcnfationcm quorum pri-tcmilrlrum, ac pro diverfis aliis noftris
:-.tionabi;ibus caufis ct conlidcrationibus nos moventibus, Fecimus, Y&c. dicum Jaco-
bum coinierm 3Bothuile, &c. ac fuus hlixedes mafculos uofcunque noflros Icgitti-
mIJs, >ec. alfignatos in t-ad literas reverfionis fLtaas, c. per Symoncm Preston de
itolem riilitrm, pra-pofitnm, balivos, consules, t commnnitatem hujus noftri
bu':i ide EIdinhurgh, pro fiplis ac fuis fcccltbribus, &c. nobis, nofiriique here-
tlibu tccll:ibus, lCt as igniatis pro redcmptionc 8&c. fperioitatis totins villa; dc
Lcithi c imlnirnor.i:ta. t er nos diilis pr-tpolito &cc. Lub revcrlionc alicnata contincntis
ftul;ln.in dt.:c i I n;liliiiu Incr1cal ti im nct pt r ifciipt m numerandaml ct calculandam
in paI , ,;i.:;, i c!i li . i

di l('dl lltrlll,, fCtipr p nonitioc quadriginta dierum, ut mo-is

cfl, V( It i ;ili i. re ric, i: li!is &c . de data hvo Otctol. 5, &c. (The rclt is
;orm, .,:'.in I(i;,.i:i; : . Clanle t ilbloeltte warr andic.c) IN CtJU; R I 'IESTI MONIU M
pr.f! r!ti!li : il:l;ti:nL: (ii.linni iofll ;t :ipponi fcnlllus. A pind ldiilll gh, dcim o
.jl i i:tl

, (l( 1m !1i t( I r .ll:llii, anno L1 oi: li liillclim o qluingelcltfimo fexacl iml) iexto,

9' ;':'('l it')lit XC!iiy'!.tO qult I
nto.

'J'lr great leal entire.

obtain

obtain the command of the cafile of Edinburgh, the Qecen, in,
order to prevail on the Earl of Mlar to surrender the government
of it, offered to commit the young prince to his cuflody. Mar
conented; and fle inflantly appoint:d Bothwell governcr of the
castle. And. i. Pref. 64. Keith, 39. 3. The inquiry into the
murder, previous to Bothwcll's trial, ceems to have been condudted
with the utmost rcmifnefs. Buchnaan exclaims loudly againfi this.
And. 2. 24. Nor was it without reason that lie did so, as is evi-
dent from a circumfiance in the affidavit of Thomas Nelson,
one of the King's servants, who was in the house when I:s mafler
was murdered, and was dug up alive out of the ruhllifh. Being
examined on the Monday after the King's death, " This deponsr
fchew that Bonkle had the key of the felLre, and the Qucenis
fervandis the keyis of her thalmir. Qphilk the Laird of Tillibar-
din hearing, laid, HPaid thair, Iere is ane ground. Efter qhi'k
words fpokin, thai left of, and procedit na farther in the inquii-
ticn." And. 4. P. 2. 167. Had there been any intention to icarch
into the bottom of the matter, a circumstance of io much im-
portance merited the mol careful enquiry. 4. Notwithftand(iI
Lennox's repeated follicitations, notwithitandingr the reaf)bablenels
of his demands, and the necefiity of complying with them, in
order to encourage any accuser to appear againit Bothwell, lhe not
only refused to commit him to custody, or even to remove him
from her presence and councils; And. . 42, 48. but by the grants
which we have mentioned, and by other circutnmancc, diSiovered
an increase of attachment to him. 5. She could not avoid bri;ginr
Bothwell to a publick trial; but she permitted him to fit as a mem-
ber in that meeting of the Privy Council, which direced his own
trial; and the trial itself was carried on with such unncceffry
precipitancy, and with so many other suspicious circumfiances, as
render his acquittal rather an argument of his guilt than a proof
of his innocence. These circumllances have all been mentioned
at length, Vol. . . 344, &c. and therefore are not repeated in this
place. 6. Two days after the trial, Mary gave a public proof ci
her regard for Bothwell, by appointing him to carry the fccptrc
before her at the meeting of Parliament. Keitll, 378. 7 I tat

4. par

."
, D

parliament, ihe granted him a ratification of all the vast poffefions
and honours, which he had conferred upon him, in which was
contained an ample enumeration of all the services he had performed.
And. . x17. 8. Though Melvil, who foresaw that her attach-
ment to Bothwell would at length induce her to marry him, warned
her of the infamy and danger which would attend that aion,
she not only disregarded this salutary admonition, but discovered
what had passed between them to Bothwell, which exposed Mel-
vil to his indignation. Melv. 56. 9. Bothwell seized Mary
as fie returned from Stirling, April 24. If he had done this,
without her knowledge and content, such an insult could not have
failed to have filled her with the most violent indignation. But ac-
cording to the account of an old M. S. " The friendly love was
so highly contraaed between this great princess, and her enormous
subjed, that there was no end thereof (for it was conftartly esteem-
ed by all men that either of them loved other carnally) so that she
suffered patiently to be led where the lover lift, and all' the way
neither made obstacle, impediment, clamour or resistance, as in
¥such accidents use to be, or that ile might have done by her prince-
ly authority, being accompanied with the noble Earl of Huntly,
and ecretary Maitland of Lethington." Keith, 383. Melvil,
who was present, confirms this account, and tells us that the
officer, by whom he was seized, informed him that nothing was
done without the Queen's content. Melv. 58. io. On the i2th
of May, a few days before her marriage, Mary declared that the
was then at full liberty, and that though Bothwell had offended her
by seizing her person, :he was so much satisfied with his dutiful
behaviour since that time, and so indebted to him for past services,
that fie not only forgave that offence, but resolved to promote him
to higher honours. And. i. 187. ii. Even after the confederate
nobles had driven Bothwell from the Queen's pretence, and though
the saw that he was confidered as the murderer of her former
husband by so great part of her fubjeEs, her affection did not in the
least abate, and fie continued to express the most unalterable at-
.tachment to him. " I can perceive (fays Sir N. Throgmorton)
that the rigour with which the Queen is kept, proceedeth by order

from

from there men, because that the Queen will not, by any means,
be induced to lend her authority to prosecute the murther; nor
will not content by any persuasion to abandon the Lord Both 1.ell
for her husband, but avoweth constantly that nhe will live and die
with him; and faith that if it vere put to her choice to reliinquiii
her crown and kingdom, or the Lord Bothwell, fle would leave
her kingdom and dignity to go a imple damsel wilh him, and t.ha
£he will never consent that he hall fare worse, or have more harm
than herfielf. App. p. 42. See also p . From itis long enu-
meration of circumstances, we may, without violence, draw the
following conclusion. Had Mary really bee cce ,lay to the mur-
ther of her husband ; had Bothwell perpetrated the crime with her
consent, or at her command and had the intended to fRifle the evi-
dence againfi him, and to prevent the difcoverv of his guilt, f-e
could scarce have taken any other fleps than thote she took, nor
could her conduct have been more repugnant to all the mnaxims of
prudence and of decency.

Ti-E positive evidence produced againit Mary may be classed
under two heads.

I. T-HE depositions of ome persons who were employed in com-

mitting the murder, particularly of Nicholas Hubert, who in the
writings of that age is called French Paris. This person, who was
Bothwell's servant, and much trusted by him, was twice examined,
and the original of one of his depositions, and a copy of the other,
are flill extant. It is pretended, that both these are notorious for-
geries. But they are remarkable for a simplicity and nnvact vwhich
it is almoftl impofilble to imitate ; they abound with a num-
ber of minute faCts and particularities, which the mos- dextrous
forger could not have easily assembled, and connected together
with any appearance of probability; and they are filled with cir-
cumrtances, vwhich can scarce be fuppoed to have entered the ima-
gination of any man, but one of Paris's profefliiio and caac'lcr.
Llut, at the fabme time, it min.u be acknowledged that his depositions
contain tome improbable circuniftainccs. He seems to have been
a fooliih tlkative fellow v tihe scar of death ; the violence of tor-

VOL. J. IF f f turc ;

I7

ture; and the desire of pleaSing thofein whole power he was, tempt-
ed him, perhaps, tofeign sone circumflances, and to exaggerate o-
thers. To fay that ome circumtfianccs in an afidavit are improbable
or false, is very different from faying that the whole is forged. I f-s-
ped- the former to be the cafe here, but I fee no appearance of the lat-
ter. Be that as it will, ome of the most material fato in Paris':;
aflidavits reft upon his ingle tefliinony; and for that reason, I have
not in the Iliftory, nor flall I in this place, lay any firess upon them.

2. TilE letters said to be written by Mary to otlwell. Thefc

Lave been frequently published. The accident, by which the
Queen's enemies got them into their poff.cfion, is related Vol. .
371. When the authenticity of any ancient paper is dubious or
contcfled, it may be ascertaincd either by external or internal cvi-
dcnce. Both these have been produced in the prcfent cale.

I. EXTERNAL proofs of tile genuinlcnefs of Mary's leitcrr. ,.

Murray and the nobles who adhered to him affirm, ul:ol;, tci
word and honour, that the letters were written with the Q:ccii'
own ihad, witl which they were well acquainted. Co,:di. 2.
64, 92. 2. The letters were publicly producced in the pa;iimc;v-
of Scotland, December 1557, Good. 2. 36o; and wre fl jar
confidered as genuine, thatt they are a a-iinihl:
Mary, as one chief argument of her guilt. Good. 2. 66.
['hey were fihewn privately to the Duke of Norfolk, the iErl o,
Suflcx, and Sir Ralph Sadler, Elizabetl's colmmiioners at York. In
the account which they give of this miltter to thelti .iress, tss cv
feenm to confider the letters as gcnuine, and express no lilpicif;.
of any forgery; they particularly obfcrve, tliat tlhe matter c'-
tained in them is lch, that it could hardly lie invented ani
deviied by any other than Lerfelf; for tlhat tlcy difcourt! (,i
some things, xwhiclh were unknown to any other than to hcrli-L.;
and Bothwell ; and as it is hard to counterftit lo many, so tlc P:lt-
ter of them, and tlih mallcr how these men cnmic by thei is ILu!]
as it fecineth tllt (;od, in wlfol f ig llt imtllder a b Ioodlhlled ()of ti
innocent is aboniablel , vwould not peCrlllit tlie f1lnc to L):: ;,i (,l
concealed." (;ood . 2. 142. Thcy fcicm to lhavc iae fiich ain
in0rculli(n oi tc )luke c(os Noifllk, tlnt inl a l: Ic'lolult I.t'tc ti,

I (c
18

Pembroke, Leicefl-er and Cecil, he has these words, " If the mat-
ter flall be thought as detestable and manifest to you, as for oulght
we can perceive it feemeth here to us." Good. 2. 1 54. A. After
the conferences at York and \Vehninftcr were finifhlcd, Elizabeth
resolved to call together the E ars who were then at court, and to
lay before them the whole procerdings against the Scotch Queelr,
particularly that " the letters and writings exhibited by the Regenr,
as the Queen of Scots letters and writings, hould also be ihew-
ed, and conference r i . comn parion] thereof made in their ihlit.
with the letters of the said (Qee' being extanlt, and heretofo-e
written with her own hand, ad icnt to the Queen's Majefly ,
whlerecby may be searched and cxamincd what difference is betwixt
them." Good. 2. 252. They a:iembled, accordingly, at lamnpton
Court, December 14 and 5, 1 5' ; and " The originals of tle !et-
ters iippofed to be written with the Qacen of Scots own hand, were
then also presently produced and petultd ; and being read, were
duly conferred and compared, for the manner of writing, and
fashion of orthography, with fndry other letters long since here-
tofore written, and sent by the said Queen of Scots to the Qucen's
nMalefty.--- In collation whereof no diiiLrence was found." Good.
2. 2 6. 5. Mary having written an apologetical ictter for her con-
dut to the Countess of Lennox, July Io, 157o , flhe transmitted
it to her husband then in Scotland ; and lie returned to the Countcfs
the following afwer " Seeing you have remittit to me, to anfvcr
the Quele the King's mother's letters ent to you, what can I fay

but

M: Mary's letter lhas never bcen published, and ought to have a place here, wvhr'e

f'.idcnlce o all ides i fairly prod ccd. aa, if the \vrIng and faile rcpor;
,1 r~.'lis, ilncmci \wcill hIliawill r traitonlis to zow, and nal.ace to nimLhli tlruiL .i

if mc by zo'cre ad(lxic, had not lo far ItiUrred you aR;Lis my inl'occncv, (ald I

imflit Ily agani; all kndncfls, that V.ow h;vc nlot onclic as1 it wcre c()olmdcpnit- r-c
w.vrangfulli, hoI to hiated nc, iLs l lnc wovrdis and opLtie d'.ildJ I c teffitEtit tr' ;il the
wIarlde, a ma1iT ItL niill) kil'g in owv a;is zowr awn l\\ I wold not have omit-
'it thIn II llr Illniy dc\\'i ill WI )'ti ii; to 7.0W c l'lii , 11,nc uti i f i n11ti v

( W u i re :s

' 1dc of i: I t

hopi-;. \\ itih ((olis l'.i)'c :ail t)lIL j, ,itxc

uy) ini ' (.'y ki.v\,illn

t,) Z \V, is I trillt it is : lad o

tho il , t i, l pairt o( .all ilillL'.ul it pel(oih ;, tlh)tIt

.t lift not to tlo ihle) 70o v loi a ti Y ll' till t ft1 {l il .1 ri.iiic' i:; llio(;'t. tti. t ill (il

:I .ytl, luhill,: i' lic tliai .lluOl ir zoutit litil l eui , a.nid lil y c le; i'
; . i: in 1i !...

F 1 1 2 C tlltli'j.

I9

but that, I d.npto arvellto:fee hir writ the beflifhe.can for.hirfql:f,
to feame to purge Lirof;:thit, quhairof many befyde nme are certainlv
perfuadit of. the contrary, and I not only affirit by my awin knaw-
ledge, but by her handwritt, the confeffionis of mea goneto the
death, and uther infallibil experience. It wull be lang tyme that
is hable to put a mattir so notorious in oblivioun, to mak black
quhyte, or nnocency to appear quhair the contrary is fa weill.knawin.
The maift indifferent, I trust, doubtis not of the equitie of zoure
and my cause, and of the jufr occafioun of our miflykyng. Hir
richt dcwtie to zow and me, being the parteis interest, were hir trew
confeffioun and unfeyned repentance of that lamentable fa6t, odious
for hir to be reportit, and forrowfull for us to think of. God isjuft, and
will not in the end be abused; but as he has manifested the trewth,
so will he puneife the iniquity." Lnnox's Orig. Regiz. of Letters.
In their-publick papers, the Queen's enemies may be fufpeded of
advancing what would be mot ubfervient to their cause; not what
was agreeable to truth, or what flowed from their own inward con-
vidion. But in a private letter to his own wife, Lennox had no
occasion to diflmble; and it is plain, that he not only thought the
Queen guilty, but believed the authenticity of her letters to Both-
well.

2. WITH regard to the internal proofs of the genuineness of the

Qeen's letters to Bothwell, we may observe, i That whenever a

cuntrey. To the quhilk albeit I be never fa willing, I wald be glaid to have zoure
advyfe thcrein, as in all uther thingis tuiching him. I have born him, and God knawis
with quhat daunger to him and me boith; and of zow he is difcendit. So I meane
not to forzet my dewtie to zow, in fchewin herein any unkyndnefs to zow, how
unkyndlie that ever ze have delt with me, bot will love zow as my awnt, and refpeft
zow as my moyer in law. And gif ye ples to knaw farther of my mynde in that and
all uther thingis betwixt us, my anmlhafldor the Bifop of Ross fall be ready to con-
ser with zow. And so after my hairrlic commendationis, remitting me to my faidc am--
balrador, and zour better confideratioun, I commit zovw to the protecioun of Al-
mnghty God, quom I pray to prcferve zow and my brother Charles, and caus zow.
to knaw my pairt better nor ze do. From Chatifworth this x of July 1 57o.

To my Ladie Lennox Youre natural gudc Nice

my moder in law. and lovyng dochter.

paper
20

paper is forged with a particular intention, the-:eagernefs of the
forger to etablifh the point in view, his:folicitude to ut' off all
doubts and cavils, and to avoid any. appearance of uncertainty, al-
ways prompt him to use expressions the most explicit and full to his
purpoie. The passages foiffed into ancient authors by Heretics
in different ages; the legendary miracles of the Romish faints; the
supposititious deeds in their own favour produced by monasteries;,
the falle charters of homage mentioned Vol. 1. p. I . are so many
proofs of this assertion. No maxim seems to be more certain than,
.this, that a forger is often apt to prove too much, but seldom falis
into the error of proving too little. The point which- the Queen's
enemies had to eftablifl, was " that as the Earl of Bothwcll was
chief executor of the horrible and unworthy murther perpetrated, &c.
so was she of the foreknowledge, counsel, device, persuader, and
commander of the said murder to be done." Good. 2. 207. But
of this there are only imperfect hints, obscure intimations, and
dark expreflions in the letters, which however convincing evidence
they might furnish if found in real letters, bear no resemblance to
that glare and superfluity of evidence which forgerie. commonly
contain. All the advocates for Mary's innocence in her own age,
contend that there is nothing in the letters which can serve as a proof
of ier guilt, Lefley, llackwood, Turner, &c. abound with pa!iTges
to this purpose; nor are' the sentiments of those in the prcient age
different. " Yet still it might have been expected (fays her iatep:
defender) that ome one or other of the points or articles of the
accusation fiould be made out clearly by the proof. But nothing
of that is to be seen in the present cafe. 'There is nothing in the
letters, that could plainly hew the writer to have been in the fore-
knowledge, counsel, or device of any murder, far less to have
persuaded or commanded it; and as little is there about maintail;ini
or justifying any murderers." Good. . 7. How ill advised wecre
Mary's adversaries to contraa so much guilt, and to prafdife so many
artifices in order to forge letters, which are o ill contrived for cf:t-
blinling the conclifion they had in view ? Had they been ft bao
as to have recourse to lorgery, is it not nitural to thinl that they
would have produced foictliing more explicit and decive As
it is a!lrnoi iLmpoflible to invent a lo;ig narration collfiing of nlany

6 c( l' .ut .

circurflances, and to connedt it in such a manner with real fadts,
that no mark of fraud thall appear; for this reason kilful forgers
avoid any long detail of circumstances, especially of foreign and
superfluous ones, well knowing that the more these are multiplied,
thi: more are the chances of detection increased. Now Mary's
:ltters, especially the first, are filled w'.th a multiplicity of circum-
Ilances, extremely natural in a real correfpondencc, but altogether
forcign to tile purpose of the Queen's enemies, and which it would
have bceel pcrfect foliy to have inserted if they had been altogether
im:ginary, and without fbundation. 3. 'T'l truth and reality offeveral
circulmiances in the letters, and these, too, of no very publick nature,
are confirmed by undoubted collateral evidence. Lett. . Good.
2. p. . The Queen is said to have met one of Lennox's gentlemeln,
and to have omrne conversation with him. Thomas Crawford, who
was the perlon, appeared before Elizabcth's commahilioners, and
confimed, upon oath, the truth of this ircu1mllanlce. He likewi(
declared, that during the Queen's ilay at Glasgow, the King re-
peated to him, every night, whatever had palled, through the day,
betwecn her \Iajefy and hin, and that the account given of tlieiC
coniverltions in thle firl letter, is nearly the lrune with what the
\;i;g conmmunicated to him. Good. 2. 245. According to the
arme letter there was much dilourlc betweenthe King and Queen
u:'ncLrning Myinto, Ileglait, and Walcar. Good. 2. 5, io, 1.
\Vhat this might be, w.,s altogether unknown till a letter of Mary's
p-clil-vcd in the Scotch College at Paris, and publiihed, Keith,
Pref. vii. dif, overed it to be an affair of lo much importance as me-
rited all the atiention the paid to it at thattime. It appeirs by a
letter fom the French ambafiador, that MaTry was rubljeCi to a vio-
lent painl in her fide. Keith, ibid. This circumta ance is mentioned,
1.ett. i. p 3'. in a manner so natural as caln Icarce belon' to any
but a gcnine prodhutinl . 4 If wve fIlll iill think it probable to
-i'sp},oic that lo many real cilrcumfilanccs were artfully introdiuced i: to
ihe lettc'rs by the ibrgers, in order to give an air of authnti itc t>
!cir pirotducltin n; it \\will fcrce be

b polibl to hold the ifame opi)ii(;:i

'ncer'nin' g til ae t ollo ing pa;ltic ul.ar. Icfbrc the ()Lccn bLt,-; 1 ler
i v le ttc'r to Iot)li\ cll, ihe, aS s
is ufiual amoiLngl tlholc wvlo \vritc lr

ci- cocci llin a lvariety of I-bject, madc /l/cs or ///c//;T/!//ln/,'

of the particulars The wiflhed to remember; but as ih !fate up -it-
ing during a great part of the night, and after her attendalts were
afeep, her paper failed her, and she continued her letter upon the
fame iheet, on which fl e had formerly maJe her memorandums.
This fhl herself takes notice of, and makes al apology for it:" It
is late; I desire never to ceafie fom writing Iu:to you, yet no\ are-
the kifiing of your hands, I will end my lettcr. E;::culc my evil
writing, and read. it twice over, ExcuFc that thing th.n: i, (rilit, i2
I had na paper zeferday, quhlen I wrait th.it of the tn~. -'i; :-1. (I;( ,1.
2. '. These memoraindums fiill appear in the mlidd!e ! it;e l tter,
and what we have Iaidl fems na ural!v to account for the I''i;, n r h ow
they rigpht find their way inito a real letter. Ir is !crce to hle si o d
however that any forger would think of plaiiljr m:in-;orlndt!'n iin tic
middle of a letter, where, at first light, thwv nmae: ; .,!'i :,t- I ':d
io unnatural an appearance. But if any f(hll c:ll ctjn"'

r Li' rfi c-

nmnt Ib far, as to fippofc that the forgers were bo artful a; to throw
in this circurlianice, in order to preserve the appearance o' u;rc:ui!nC-
rnei, they muill at least allow that the Qujeen'i ene!ic:; , v i!o e:-
pioyed there forgers, could not be ignorant of the d,";. :'.i t:'.': -
in ; o(f tlifce ilort notes and rmemorandums; bt v,. ii t', -
nmilt.ting thiem lo far as to imagine that they were t r,;..- / /, 7:
L/e'A:'i', i. e. points concerning which the (Qlecn hlad! 'c !':: '
verba.'i in!r'uctons. Good. 2. 152. Tliii the\ cannot 'l:! I. -
for the Queen herielf writes with so much elal c:t-i-fs conet ! ' ..
different points in the nemorandums, tt tre w,, s 1o n, i t,':
civing any creoit or inltruC:lins to the bea!er concern' irli .',i
The memorandums are iindeed the cilents of the lkttcr . 5 '
mentioning her conivcrfations withi the Kinr aleout tie as ir o(
. ',vInto, Hicgait, &c. 1ivs, " The rnrn [ i. . to *nl)orro)wt I -\.li
fleik to hiim up)on that point ;" and tlhcn adi , " As t t(' iet l o f
WViilie IIie iut's, lie contfedi it ; b1)t it w : t!he' ( ' c, i. ti
morning j olter my clmminglor hel did it." ( ,jod. . ).

o. ii
'1 .-

i>nj)1, whi o l c' ,ltld not lhave beel made till alier the c( vcit . It

liap led, Chems :itier to l. ,,'c ilCcnl ini lt t Ct'

i i, >i.

( cn , :

i

tie body (Aof th(e letter, or, pOcih F:, (lie hav:i x vr' ittell it ( i rie
n)argTin, it xv;'; t.I' cn tlience into tlhe t' . { w

it, ip:'', i

,

i. tter to b), a ir(. o ne, ad 'l ' itit ki at (d.:. cI t

n. ;.;

!i
. l.'

bar, this iirclfnlfance appears to be very natural; but no reason
could have ilduiced a forger to have ventured upon such an ana-
cihrolnilin, r which there was no ncceity. An addition, perfcdly
i!,lr to thli, miadc to a genuine paper, may be found, GooJ.

I,',, on ;'1e o:her hand, f ary ilcrfcif, and the aldvocatc fr

1:L i n!o;>:,:ce nliave contePnded that thefc letters were forged by her

-e.st s, G: ,rp --c t la oi.er

reputation, and to juliif tir ow '

.,.:j:-u1 I is lot iec1ciirv to take notic of thc argunlt:,

W '. . .1 . n to.'n age, it i fppo t of this opinion
tie ; iV-.:.j c

v' lc 11 Ve

h I ive al.readv made, co ntai a full r il-'

to tilon. An a;;1or, who as iqu ire .1 into the affairs of that Zt-
i"Ji' x ', rc:L iii4.l" .,d wlo has acquied I uch knowledA oi

.. h.i ltel ii ild (as he atirnms) a d:o rati o tti
;' ;y ; .l'- aette "s. 1 ii;T dei.l lC ie i(5 Uponl C-
vidti iC. i e;;:i.i.i a:d x

& ctern:. \\' . tl r1cL! to te fol Lr Ie

tri'ai,:l.itilo' . .'i. i :';1 i 's Latin co ;v

'wli a_,
ti: cw.py is oC5 aS

1 a ,;'i eL.;n cf i-he ;cotcii copy ; and

i y coniq.; thyc ae}:i rtion of

lie .: '. ,,

c;eni'es,' t' thai ei \I rote teini iiiL;uaS iy in French, is

aeco'il ,; i; tii:; i.;':ai.: iLiJ'iu' i. ln o tian!l tiLils, by' t ppoin,/;
s ;1.1 L I . ,1 _ i , _ . rI L. i 1I

ii Uic 1 l s I U
thaIi w'i.s;, ih.M l'i'!rg y ..i pr':,.tcde , no c lbn could be foi i ca, -

I '

(' I iLiiiy' ,he F renc ianiage,

hltters whi.

v4)id . - for il'se (hiCeIsJ; fr taLit realon thiey \eCre hrIt conijoofei
i; '- ; t L .. .. i l , th Fren ch i:nter-pItc-cI , it wo ii lee:2t ,
lid i1..5' t!,]Ld"si.ihln r.t !il a

. :ll ' ':l'l's ; allnd t,erel ore ,iuc nal nV trai l...to

t;iCI, .i':) i , n. , a'.d ';L I li Latill t:'cV \v,e ren.'IrCd i:tr_,
l'Ci;ic '. ( ... i. _ "' , 0,o.

(1h. it

i . ',;

; . ' l i ;itil:1..'1'h;() f i. .

i l2 ii;;^ ; '.,, \'}.i :1 ;,ii i . v

So
5' s, .t .1 aeI;!,!

e e'ry.(t aI p1.

- of . '>

',.* ,.'.1 :'

I' . ;, .! l ti'' iietc'1 , c bct,, ;i tme t)wo i;,l \\ ','
I.i, 'i .Lr it ai der il'' '.''e that to :' ;uiv '"" ,.' . "

' l:.:; .

operations should be necessary, in order to procure a few letters to
be written in the French language.

BUT without insisting farther on this, we may observe tl-at all

this author's premises may be granted, and yet his conclusion will
not fllow, unless he likewise prove that the French letters, as we
now have them, are a true copy of those which were produced by
Murray and his party in the Scotch parliament, and at York and
Westminster. But this he has not attempted; and if we attend to
the history of the letters, such an attempt, it is obvious, mut
have been unsuccessful. The letters were first published at the end
of Buclanan's detetio. The first edition of this treatise was in
Latin, in which language three of the Queen's letters were ubjoined
to it; this Latin edition was printed A. D. 1571. Soon after a Scotch
translation of it was published, and at the end of it were printed
likewise in Scotch, the three letters which had formerly appeared
in Latin, and five other letters in Scotch, which were not in the
Latin edition. Next appeared a French translation of the Detedcion,
.nd of even of the letters; this bears to have been printed at
Edinburgh by Thomas Waltem 1572. The name of the place, as
well as of the printer, is allowed by all parties to be a manifefl in-
poilure. Our author, from observing the day of the month, on
which the printing is said to have been finifled, has afTerted that
this edition was printed at London; but no stress can be laid upon
a date found in a book, where every other circumtance with regard
to the printing is allowed to be sale. Blackwood, who (next to
Lefley) was the befl informed of all MIary's advocates in that age,
ifnirrs that the French editi :n of tlh DetcLtion was publishcd in
Fran;ce: '" 11 [Buchanan] a depuis a.ioult5 a cefte declamation un
petit libcllc du prctcndu manrage du Du c de Norfolk, et de la fcon
de son proccs;, t la tout envoyc aui: f';crcs a la Rochclle, IcljlUcls
voyants qlu'il poiuvit lervir a la cautc, I'onit traduit cn Fra(Is::;i, ct
iccluy lut iin rilcc a I'. dlil bouti l, c'cll a dire a la Rochel l, par
Thomi;as \ ail 'ci, 11i a p-)If ct l.it a li iir. M artyre de .i aiC.
icbb. . 2 6. 'I'ica autt (

' t lnc',c/cc (,

Il'l g)cs .

td r,

' ]nd tli l

t ihe

L talltor (,1 the Dctction. Iit iccI'iv 1',-

\V o ,. if.

J_ . ! :
in c, ' ':!lz

· . ) ~ ~ ~ IV I

25

mierement compose (comme il femble) par George Buchanan Efcof-
soys, et depuis traduit en langue Francoise par un Hnuonot, Poi-
tevin (advocat de vocation) Camuz, soy difant gentilhomme, et un
de plus remarquez fediteux de France. Jebb. i. 425, 443. The
concurring testimony of two cotemporary authors, whose residence
in France afforded them sufficient means of information, mult
outweigh a flight conjecture. This French translator does nt pre-
tend to publih the original French letters as written by the Queen
herself; he exprefly declares that he tranllated them from the Latin.
Good. I. J03. Had our author attended to all these circumfiances,
he might have saved himself the labour of so many criticifins to
prove that the present French copy of the letters is a translation
from the Latin. The French editor himself acknowledges it, and
so far as I know no person ever denied it.

WE may observe that the French translator was so ignorant, as

to affirm that Mary had written these letters, partly in French, partly
in Scotch. Good. . 103. Had this translation been publifshed at
London by Cecil, or had it been made by his diretion, so gross an
error would not have been admitted into it. TIis error, however,
was owing to an odd circumflance. In the Scotch translation of the
Detection, there was prefixed to each letter two or three sentences
of the original French, which breaking off with an &c. the Scotch
translation of the whole followed. This method of printing traif-
litions was not uncommon in that age. The French editor ob-
ifrving this, foolifily concluded that the letters had been written
partly in French, partly in Scotch.

IF we carefully confider these few French sentences of each

letter which fiill remain, and apply to them that fpecics of criticimn,
by which our author has examined the whole, a clear proof will
ariec, that there was a French copy not translated from the Latin,
but wlich was itself the original from which both the Latin aldt
Scotch lhave Cben translated. This fiullitccrit;c iil muilft lncc rilv
bic dilal:rcal le to illany readers, but Iluc'ily ;1 few lentlec s only
1ar to hc cx;!iiici, \which willrci'icdr it cxtreLmlv ii')rt.

IN the firfi letter, the French sentence prefixed to it ends with

there words, y faifoit bon. It is plain that this expression veu ce ue
peut un corps fan cur is by no means a translation of cum plane
perizde efAm atque corpus fine corde. The whole sentence has a spirit
and elegance in the French, which neither the Latin nor Scotch
have retained. Yufques a la dinee is not a translation of too prandii
/cmpore; the Scotch translation qlhile denner-time expresses the
Ienle of the French more properly; for anciently quhile signified
zltill as well as during. Ye n'ay pas tenu grand propos is not jutly
rendered negzqe contuler-imn/ermonem cum quoquamn; the phrase uted in
the French copy, is one peculiar to that language, and gives a more
probable account of her behaviour, than the other. uigetzit bien qu'il
)j'jai/oit bon, is not a translation of ut qui jludicarent id non c//e ex z/u.
The French sentence prefixed to Lett. 2. ends with apprendre. It is
evident that both the Latin and Scotch translations have omitted
altogether thete words, et toutefbisje nepuis apprendre. The French
sentence prefixed to Lett. 3. ends with pr/ezter. f'aye vcill' plts Iard
/a haut is plainly no translation of diutius illic morata /in ; the
sense of the French is better exprefled by the Scotch I haz'e w'al/ki
ltlcr therc-up. Again, Pour cxcui/r v/?ofre aaire is very different
frotm ad cxcz./nZznljm noa onegotlz. The five remaining letters never
appeared in Latin; nor is there any proof of their being ever
tranilatcd into that language. Four of them, however, are pub-
lifhlcd in French. This entirely overturns our author's hypothesis
concerning the necessity of a translation into Latin.

IN the Scotch edition of the Deteclion the wlholczi('t is prilnted

inll French as well as in Scotch. It is not polible to believe that
this Scotch copy could e the original from which the French was
tranilated. The French confits of veries which have boh mca-
iure and rhylme and which, iln many places, are far flom blil]g-
inelegant. The Scotch conlills of' an equal nlumber of lilacs, lhut
without melafurc or irhymic. No\v no mIan could ever tlhin k of ;
thiln-lo ;i aburd and inmpialicabti llo, as to

rqir trnlil',ltc

certailn iveln nu111mbr o lillCe in pro, into a equtal l numlr' (;I
vc'l es, wlicre othl Incalfurc ;nIn rhlnic vwelr to be C oblervcl. ' i'
Scotch, on tihe coI'iarv, :Ipl, ;.:I s I;uiifilv to be a trm.ill iti:!i i'

( o

'l t
r

27

tlhe French; the phrases, the idioms, and many of the words are
French, and not Scotch. Besides, the Scotch translator has in fe-
veral instances mifaken the sense of the French, and in many more
exprefes the sense imperfectly. Had the sonnet been forged, this
could not have happened. The directors of the fraud would have
understood their own work. I shall satisfy myself with one example,
in which there is a proof of both my assertions. Stanza viii. ver. 9.

Pour luy j'attendz toute bonne fortune,
Pour luyje veux garder fantc et vie,
Pour luy tout vertu de fuivre j' ay envie.

For him I attend all gude fortune,
For him 1 will conserve helthe and lyse,
For him Idefire to ensue courage.

,At'en in the firfl line is not a Scotch but a French phrase; the

two lalt lines do not cxprefs the sense of the French, and are ab-
iolute nonIfnfe.

THE eighth letter was never translated into French. It contain3

much refined mvyticifm about devices, a folly of that age, of which
Mary was very fond, as appears from several other circumstances,
particularly from a letter concerning iprefas by Drummond of
Hatthornden. If Mary's adversaries forged her letters, they wcre
certainly cmip'oyed very idly when they produced this.

1RO;M these observations it seems to be evident that there was a

French copy of Mary's letters, of which the Latin and Scotch were
only tranlations. Nrothing now remains of this copy but tofe
few sentences which are prefixed to the Scotch tranflatiun. The
French edlitor laid hold of thce fcntcnccs, and tacked his own
ttanlltion to theml, which, io far as it is his work, is a iervile and
:I very wl ctc}c i tranilation of Buchanan's Latin ; whereas in thlle
intrclOii l, 'v t n tc'ltccs, we Ihave dilcc('(ve 'ld il!rog(0 mlarks (o thc;r
bliin orii;iln!') ;nd cr, rtain pirout [lihat ti:y\ arc nort tranilated irm
t ic Ialtin).

IT

IT is apparent, too, from comparing the Latin and Scotch tranf-

lations with these sentences, that the Scotch translator has more
perfectly attained the sense and spirit of the French than the Latin.
And as it appears that the letters were very early translated into
Scotch, Good. 2. 76; it is probable that Buchanan made his
translation nt from the French but from this Scotch copy. Were
it necefl'ay, several critical proofs of this might be produced. One
that has been already mentioned seems decisive. Diultius llic mio-
rata juri bears not the leafl refembiance tojay veci/t; plus tardl li
hazit; but if, instead of I walkit [i. e. watchedj laiter tere-zip, we
iippofe that Buchanan read I waitit, &c. this mifrake, into whlic
he might so easily have fallen, accounts for the error in his tranf-
lation.

THIESE criticisms, however minute, appear to be well found-

ed. But whatever opinion may be formed concerning them, the
other arguments with regard to the internal evidence remaiin in
full force.

THE external proof of the forgery of the Queen's letters, which

our author has produced, is extremely specious, but not more solid
than that which we have already examined. According to Mur-
ray's diary, Mary set out from Edinburgh to Glasgow January 2 ,
1 5(7; she arrived there on the 23d; left that place on the 27th;
ihe, together with the King, reached Linlithgow on the 2tth, flayed
in that town only one night, and returned to Edinburgh before the
end of the month. But according to our author, the Queen did
not leave Edinburgh till Friday January 24th ; as i(e flayed a night
at Callendar, fie could not reach Glasgow ooner than the ven-
ing of Saturday the 25th, and ile returned to Linlithgow oti
Tuet(lay the 28th. By consequence, the firfi lettcr which supposes
the Queen to have been at !Last four days ifi Clafgow, as well as
the feconId letter, which bears date t Gla:iow Sa/lur-d, m;,,i',/n,
whereas (he did not arrive tlhere till tlhe evc.illg, int i. be forgeric.
Tl ilt te Q en did not set out t'o:n 'itili i;'gl ioner thln the
24th of Jalluary, is cviie.lnt ta lie ce tei.te s) f()m the ptl lic rC-
coreis, which contain a 'co/'s 61 o/i/z: 'a:ci: 5f ,' i-',,,,t by

*;I1n.,

29

James Boyd to Margaret Chalmers granted by the Queen on the
2.2th of January at Edinburgh; and likewise a letter of the Q een's,
dated at Edinburgh on the fame day, appointing James Inglis
taylor to the Prince her son. That the King and Queen had re-
turned to Linlithgow on the 28th, appears from a deed in which'
they appoint Andrew Ferrier keeper of their palace there, dated
at Linlithgow January 28. Good. I. 8.

THtis has been represented to be not only a convincing, but a

legal proof of the forgery of the letters said to be written by Mary
but how far it falls short of this, will appear from-the following
considerations.

i. Ir is evident from a declaration or confession made by the

Bifnop of Ross, that before the conferences at York, which were
opened in the beginning of OCtober 568, Mary had, by an ar-
tifice of Maitland's, got into her hands a copy of those letters which
her subjects accused her of having written to Bothwell. Brown's
trial of the Duke of Norfolk, 31, 36. It is highly probable that
the Bishop of Ross had seen the letters before he wrote the defence
of Queeln Mary's honour, in the year 1570. They were published
to all the world together with Buchanan's DeteCtion, A. D). 57x.
Now if they had contained any error so grois, and so obvious, at
that time, to difcovcry, as the supposing the Queen to have pasTed
several days at Glifgow, while she was really at Edinburgh; had
they contlined a letter dated at Ciafgow Saturday morning, though
the did not arrive there till the evening; is it pofible that the hcr-
self, who knew her own motions, or the able and zealous advo
cates who appeared for her in that age, hould not have published
and clexni d this contradiction, and, by so doing, have blasecd, at
once, the credit of fueh an impoiftre ? In disquisitions which arc
natl'ally alrtlr;l and intricate, the ingenuity of the latest athor
ma'y difi)vcr lmany thinls, which have cd'aped the attention, or
baflel the 1fiacity of tlol, who have formerly coniidered the lainC
fuilject. But \xvll a n ittcr of fact lay o obvious to view, tis cir-
cun:lfl iice of its heinll unllerveld by the Q(tl :n herself; or by any
of her adherents, is almoil a dcmonflitioli that there i; ftme inil-

Ii tak
3" o)

take or fallacy in our author's arguments. And so farare any either
of our historians, or of Mary's defenders, fiom calling in question
the common account concerning the time of the Queen's setting out
to Glasgow and her returning fiom it, that there is not tle leafi
appearance of any difference among them with regard to this
point. But farther,

2. THOSE papers in tlie public records, on which our author reds

the proof his aflertions, concerning the Q(ee.n's nmoions, are noc
the originals subscribed by the Queen, but copies only, or ;ranll-
tions of copies of those originals. It is not ncceilurr, nor would
it be very easy to render this intelligible to p:eCi-ls unacquainted
with the forms of law in Scotland ; but every cot!iiian convcrant
in business will underfand me, when I fay that the precept of con-
firmation of the life-rent to Boyd is only a Latin copy or note of a
precept, which was fealed with the Privy Seal, on a varrant froni
the ignet office, proceeding on a iignature which bore date at
Edinburgh the 24th of January; and' that thle deed in favour of
James Inglis is the copy of a letter, fealed with the Privy-
ieal, proceeding on a signature which bore date at Edinburgh Jl:nu;ry
24. From all this we may argue with imine de ree oi rcaloin,
that a proof founded on papers, which are o m:iny removes dillat
from the originals, cannot be but very lame and uncertain.

3. AT that time all public papers were ihcld in the name bothr

Co the Kingi and Queen ; by law, lic King's frubiL ;Lption \va M

; Ic i

requilite to any paper than the Queen's ; and tberciJ:e un!c'fs the
o:riginal signatures be ro duced in order to atKt'tai tihe prtic r:>
lay when each of thel signed, or to prove that i'h wi t;gncd oiilv
1by one of them, the legal proof a:iliiin fi-oll tie i-ilp: Lr

v':;;i,

be, tat both the King and (uell lii gcd tiicm t Edinbrr?.., oni
thl 2-.1th of January.

. . THI1 dates of tile w:i;ram; ts o(r ,^eccv'.r< ile 1 .; t''c l i

' re ,

; 1; it i ge, s'\i\ i l a'

'.lKl i

t; ini ;i

':!; -,itl I.'.?'.:; I ' *'r

l b

! ' , ,l,

; i,'. at ,1; tlic' lpi;.':'l't:!~' ( illt '

1 . ''i I, ::'.i (Jl t"'i;kill''' lt'it ', tilL'[c

.;...s U'L' l
( L;tl ,2 ui L. tI.uc, i'i:c ,lli l l;ime, .:ili c&:O' icvc'r I. rclic

Sa r~i tJ)Iie ; ox rim lmun

-AC~~~~~~~~~~~~~~o111 ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ii )i

upon. This abuse became so frequent, and was found to be so per-
nicious, that an a of parliament, A. D. 1592, declared the
affixing a falle date to a signature to be High Treason.

5. THERE dfill remain, in the public records, a great number of

papers, which prove the necessity of this law, as well as the weak-
iiefs and fallacy of our author's arguments. And though it be no
cafy matter, at the diflance of two centuries, to prove any particular
date to be false, yet furprizing inflances of this kind hall be pro-
duced. Nothing is more certain from history than that the King
was at Glasgow 24th January 1567; and yet the record of fig-
natures from I565 to 1582, Fol. i6th, contains the copy of a figna-
ture to Archibald Edmonfton aid to have been fjbficribed by o0ur
Sovereigns, i. e. the King and Queen, at Edinburgh, January 24th
1 567 ; so that if we were to trust implicitly the dates in the records
of that age, or to hold our author's argument to be good, it would
prove that not only the Queen, but the King too, was at Edinburgh
on the 24th of January.

Ir appears from an original letter of the Bishop of Ross that on

the 25th of OCober 566, Mary lay at the point of death ; Keith,
App. 34; and yet a deed is tobe found in the publick records,
which bears that it was signed by the Queen that day. Privy feal,
Lib. ;. fol. 89. OuchJ'crll)'.

ACCORDING to papers in the fame book, fol. 3, the Queen muff

have been at Edinburgh December 2 , I 566. According to othcr
papers, fol. 99, oo. ihe muff have been at Stirling Iecember 2 1;
and if we depend upon other papers, fol. 1 12, the muff have re-
turned to Edinbulgh on December 22d. These various motions
are altogetlher repugnant to history. The Queen during all that
time remlained at Stirling, on account of the Prince's baptism ; and
we partictularly know that flh was thlre 1)ccember 22(1, b a let-
tr of D)u Croc the Frcnch ambafildor, who mentions a.i inter-
view lie had with her at Stirling on that day. Keith, Prct. VII.

I' lt-

BOTHWELL seized the Queen as he returned from Stirling, April

24th 1567, and (according to her own account) carried her to
Dunbar with all diligence, And. . 95. But our author relying on
the dates of iome papers which he found in the records, supposes
that Bothwell allowed her to stop at Edinburgh, and to tranfac
business there. Nothing can be more improbable than this fuppo-
fition. We may therefore rank the date of the deed to WYright
Privy eal, Lib. 36. fol. 43. and which is mentioned by our au-
thor, Vol. I. 124. among the instances of the false dates of papers
which were issued in the ordinary course of bufineis in that age.
Our author has mistaken the date of the other paper to Sorbes, ibid.
it is signed April 4th, not April 24th.

IF there be any point agreed upon in Mary's hiflory, it is, that (fe

remained at Dunbar from the time that Bothwell carried her thither,
till fie returned to Edinburgh along with him in the beginning
of May. Our author himself allows that tie resided twelve days
there, Vol. i. 367. Now though there are deeds in the records
which bear that they were signed by the Quecn at Dunbar during
that time, yet there are ohers which bear that they were signed at
Edinburgh ; e.g. there is one at Edinburgh, April 27th, IPrivy
£eal, Lib. 3'. fol. 97. There are others said to be signed at Dun-
bar on that dav. Lib. 31. Chart. No. 52., 526. lb. lib. 32. No.
154, 157. There are Iome iigned at I)unbar April 2th. O(thers
ait Edinburgh April 3cth, Lib. 2. Chart. No. 492. Ohers at
Dunbar May ift. Id. ibid. No. 5. Thefc diifferent charters sup-
pothe uee t he

Queen to

av ma many ulknown, improbllell, and

incontifelit journeys, that they afforl. the cleareli ielcmoltratioln
rhlat the dates in thefl records ought not to be deipeclnded on.

TiIs beconmes more evident lfom the date of the cllirte;' liiid

to be li-gned April 27tl, whicll happene that yclr to be a Sll-
day, whVich was Inot, at tliat tilme, a (lay of Ii)incl i et-
land, as appears fom the looks of /(,'Aif///, tlle k1pt by thec li,(ci'

'f lcfiion.
VOL. 11 .

I 1 11I

FROM this short review of our author's proof of the forgery of

the letters to Bothwell, it is evident that his arguments are far from
amounting to demonstration.

ANOTHER argument against the genuineness of these letters is

founded on the stile and composition, which are said to be altoge-
ther unworthy of the Queen, and unlike her real productions. It
is plain, both from the great accuracy of composition in most of
Mary's letters, and even fiom her solicitude to write them in a fair
hand, that he valued herself on those accomplishments, and was
desirous of being esteemed an elegant writer. But when fie wrote
at any time in a hurry, then many marks of inaccuracy appear.
A remarkable instance of this may be found in a paper publiihed,
Good. 2. 301. Mary's letters to Bothwell were written in the ut-
moit hurry ; and yet under all the disadvantages of a translation,
they are not destitute either of spirit or of energy. The manner
in which the expresses her love to Bothwell hath been pronounced
indecent and even hocking. But Mary's temper led her to warm
expreflions of her regard; those refinements of delicacy, which
now appear in all the commerce between the sexes, were, in that
age, but little known, even among persons of the highest rank.
Among Lord Royflon's papers there is a series of letters, from Mary
to the Duke of Norfolk, copied from the Harleian Library, P. 37.
B. 9. fol. 88, in which Mary declares her love to that nobleman
in language, which would now be reckoned extremely indelicate.

THE sonnets and some of Mary's letters to Bothwell were written

before the murder of her hulffand; some of them after that event,
and before her marriage to Bothwell. Those which are prior to
the death of her husband abound with the fondest exprefions of
her love to Bothwell, and plainly discover that their familiarity
had been extremely criminal. We find in them, too, rome dark
expreflions, which her enemies employed to prove that fie was no
tranger to the fchemcs which were forming against her husband's
life. Of this kind are the following paflagcs, "' Alace ! I ncvir dif-
invit ony body; hot I remit me altogidicr to our will. Send me
advertilcmcnt quhat I fall do, and quhatleacvcr thing come thcroft

[

I fall obey zow. Advise too with zourfelf, gif ze can find out ony
mair secret inventioun by medecine, for he fuld tak medecine and
the bath at Cragmillar." Good. 2. 22. "See not hir quhais fenzeit
teiris fuld not be fa mekle praifit and eftemit, as the trew and faith-
full travellis quhilk I fuftee for to merite hir place. For obtain-
ing of the quhilk, aganis my natural, I betrayis thame that may
impefche me. God forgive me", &c. ibid. 27. " I have walkit
laiter thair-up, then I wald have done, gif it had not been to draw
something out of him, quhilk this berer will fchaw zow, quhilk
is the fairest commodity that can be offerit to excuie zour affairis,
Ibid. .2. From the letters posterior to the death of her husband,
it is evident that the scheme of Bothwell's flizing Mary by force,
and carrying her along with him, was contrived in concert with
herself, and with her approbation .

H h h 2 HAVING

T THAT letters osso much importance as those of Mary's to Bothwell should have

been entirely loft, appears to many altogether unaccountable. After being produced
in England before Elizabeth's commiflioners they were delivered back by them to
the Earl of Murray. Good. 2. 235. He seems to have kept them in his posses-
sion during his life. After his death, they fell into the hands of Lennox his fuc-
ccflor, who restored them to the Earl of Morton. Good. 2. gr. Though it be
not nceltarily connected with any of the queflions which gave occasion to this Dif-
fert.tion, it may pet haps satisfy the curiosity of some of my readers to inform them,
that after a very diligent search, which has lately been made, no copy of Mary's let-
ters to Bothwell can be found in any ot the publick libraries in Great Britain. The
only certain intelligence concerning them, lincc the time of their being delivered to
Mot ton, was communicated by the accurate Dr. Birch.

XT: rRAcT of the letters of Robert Bowcs Efq; ambafTador from Queen Eli-

zabeth to the king of Scotland, written to Sir Francis Waliingham, Secretary of
Ilate, from the original rcoifier book of Mi. Bowe's eItters, frolm I th of Augufi
1582, to -tlh September 1583, in the pofrflion of Christopher Ilunter, M, D. of
Durham.

i 582, 8th November, fiom Edinburgh.

Ai.uBE r I have l)een borne in hand, 'l t t r

the cofr whereinli in, iiil

o{ lettrs btwee t otil

thSttill ()iccn and the 1arl of Bothwlvll, had been dcliveed

to filldry h1,1n Is, ;and thereby xvas at priclnt waiting, and unknown whcw it
reIted, te I hatve ( 11 tell (c tinly by tle Ilior of lltitif alidyne' meatns, till both
tle cli-r ;:nld .ilso tle w itiio are coin:, ald now reuiiiiLii with the Larl ol Gow-

rie,

HAVING thus stated the proof on both fides; having examined'

at to great length the different systems, with regard to the fads
in controversy; it may be expected that I flould now ronotunce

fen-

rie. who, I perceive, will be hardly intreated to make delivery to her Majefly ac-
cording to herMajctiy's desire.

Thiis time pafi I have expended in searching where tlhe coffer and writings wcre,

wherein without the help of the prior I ionild have found great difficulty now
I will ciFay Gowie, and of my success you shall be Ihortly advertised.

12th of November 1582, fiom Edinburgh.

BECA.USE I had both learned, that the casket and letters mentioned in my lalr,

before these were come to the polfefion of the Earl of Gowrie, and also found
that no mean might prevail to win the fame out of his hands without his own con-
ecnt and privity; in which behalf I had employed fitt infltuments, that neverthc-
Icfs profited nothing, therefore I attempted to eflty himself, letting him know
that the said caikct and letters fiould have been brought to her ."'ajefiy by the
osier and ood means of good friends, promising to have delivered them to her
Majely before they came into his hands and cuflody, and knowing that he did bear
the like affetion, and was ready to pleafire her Majesty in all things, and chieflv
in this that had been thus far tendered to her Majesty, and which thereby should
be well accepted, and with princely thanks and gratuity be requited to his comfort
ant contentment ; I moved him that they might be a present to be sent to her Ma-
iefty from him, and that I might cause the fame be conveyed to her Majesty, add-
ing hereunto fich words and arguments as might both stir up a hope of liberality,
and also best effeft the purpose; at the firtl he was loth to agree that they were
in his poffliion, but I let him plainly know that I was certainly informed, that they
were delivered to him by Sanders Jordin, whereupon he pressed to know who did
bi inform me, enquiring whether the foils of the Earl of Morton had done it or
no; I did not otherways in plain terms deny or anfwcr thereunto, but that he
might think that he had told me, as the prior is ready to avouch, and well pleased
that I shall give him to be the author thereof; after he had said [thoughj all these
letters were in his keeping (which he would neither grant nor deny) yet le mnight not
deliver them to any person without the consents and privities, as well of the Kinag
that had interefl therein, as also of the eft of the noblemen enterprifcers of tlh
.Acfion againfl the King's mother, and that would have them kept as an evidence
to warrant and make good that aion. And albit I rplicd, that their action
in that part totuching the aflinaltion of the crown to the Kingl by is nohle-, had
iec(ivled filh cllablifhment, confirmnation, and fciltth, by at of l':rliamenit and
otit pillblick authority alld illirlnel nt:;, as neither fhi ,Id tli:t Cafe be flnffrc( t,
(01mie i dieli:l or (ii'fliton, nor 1f-h fclolkl and p:lpe rs) otii to bl) (hw(Ved for ti
(PIengthn.iil,, til'b ref [o is thile might well le left ;il! l'< l dcitld t tl' h l;i( :
of 1lU lM.ijcl ly, to w llhoni they (\\ ltC l
deli ed b ltorlc lhe ill i h ,l k'cpin) ; yt tli

Vwould

sentence. In my opinion, there are only two conclusions, which can
be drawn from the fLls which have been enumerated.

ONE,

would not be removed or falisfied, concluding, after much reasonings, that the
EaIl of Morton, no: any other thiit had the charge and keeping thereof, dri at
an-i' time make delivery ; and becaufeO it was the first time that I had movedl hin
thirein, and that he would gladly both answer her Majesty's good exprctation in
him, and also perform his duty due to his sovereign and aociates in the action afore-
iaid, therefore he would feel out the said c.iket and letters, at his return to is
houic, which lie thought hould be within a short time; and upon finding of the
iame and better advice, and consideration had of the cause, he would give filrthLr
anLer. IThis refoltiion I have received as to the thing ; and for the pfent I
could not better, leaving him to give her Majeity such tllimony of his go d wNill
towards her, by his frank dealing herein, as ihe may have cause to confirm hCi
higrhncfres good opinion conceived already of him, and be thereby drawn to greater
goodncFs tovatrds him. I shall ftlill labour him both by myself n a also b all other
means, but I greatly diftruf the delired liuccefs herein.

24th of November l 2, from Edinburglh.

For the recovery ththe letters in the coffLr, come to the hands of the Earl of
;or-ic, I h ae lately moved him carncffly therein, letting him know the purpose of
the Sconti lb Qeen, both givinrg out that the letters are counterfeited by her rebels, and
:ilfoi Iteain thereon to have thici delivered to her oridefilced, and that the means \hich
ihe \will nmake in this behalf shall be so great and effCtual, as these writings cannot be
i.i'ly ;kept in that realm without dangerous offence of him that hath the cullody
tlhere f, neither all heb that is once known to have them be suffered to hold them
in hiD hand..

n 1t ic.vith I have at large opened the ptrils likely to fall to that ation,

and the parlties th in, and particularly to hinmfcif that is now openly known to have
the polirfilon of thci'C wiitings, and I have lettin him fee what ficrty it ihall briing
to the fai d canfl and all the parties therein, and to hiimfif, that thciL; writin s m.iv
be will -fcrecy and good order comn1it.led to the keeping of her _l.Mjelly, that '\ ill
have them ready h lilfover any ue fh,1ll be for them, an1.l by her Highlinefls co1n-
te lani c dciciid theml and the p.arties froln fach Vwr on gfull oLbjctions as f:il! 1be laid
irliift them offLieing at length to him, that if lie be not fully {itiieil herein, or
do)libt that tl;e ri of the afliciatcs ih:ll not like of the delivry oi them to hEi.
maiefl)y in tillis <oo InallnnCl, and si tile t intelrit rIhearfed, that I (liall readily, ipon
mectin'l i and confer'lnce witih thiei, proctre tl il a iiL t ill this part ; (:t mnltter nore
ca.t to ()Ilr than to performI11) a d, ft ,

l L novir hi l t tiat r llie ll CtI .ecv .nd

bellelit ol' tle cane, and th;it h1'r '.Incfl) good

g ( ))i 1 towards himfi'lf ni.:t 1i.

(iily ;itl d :i111(1 on ifil li l id

l : i

' ta lil .ie l iw i l f-; lih l r in) hie would, xsiii-

(Lint ic dl ilIs 1 l plc, tfltInkly ( niniitt til.e lC w iiti,;. t) l'1_ NI. tl y s so,,d nhill:

i1( t]he ood ]!C[ .

. i l t it.i .l. A.iLl ,l!r dh.tlL.' |L !

n c. di , ., I lid, tl11tt ] R 'illd

11 ; 1i ,il1

it,

w :ln l

1) t Al i\,j.i .

ll lit te

'\ ;J', ie

l Ki ;n illt

n i t .

)!t i i t

l
n

, ii

t ) K

! ,.ills i lii Si)vCei C 'i t i, 11nd '(prejldii' t l lilt' .Ili .io; ,', i Il i l .L tiil, ati tl I, 'C-
i, l; . I.o d;l si ml iii. tl fe til tl ia 'i n\ t!i. l. l .l; , , . l Ieltt i mtIi. a I J,

\vl.t

ONE, that Bothwell, prompted by his ambition or love, en-

couraged by the Queen's known aversion to her huiband, and pre-
fuming on her attachment to himself, fruck the blow without
having concerted with her the manner or circumstances of perpe-
trating that crime. That Mary, instead of testifying much indig-
nation at the deed, or discovering any resentment against Both-
well, who was accused of having committed it, continued to load
him with marks of her regard, conducted his trial in such a man-
ner as rendered it ipofible to discover his guilt, and soon after,

what he might do, and how far he might satisfy and content her Majesty; promif-
ing thereon to give more resolute answer; and he concluded flatly, that after he had
found and fecn the writings, that he might not make delivery of them without the
privity of the King. Albeit I flood long with him againfi his resolution in this
point, to acquaint the King with this matter before the letters were in the hands
of her Mlaclty, letting him fee that his doings there should admit great danger to
the cause ; yet I could not remove him from it. It may be that he meaneth to put
over the matter from himself to the King, upon fight whereof I hall travel cffec-
tually to obtain the King's content, that the letters may be committe to her Mna-
jelty's keeping, thinking it more easy to prevail herein with the King, in the pre-
sent love and affetion that he beareth to her Highness, than to win any thing at the
hands of the associates in the ation, whereof some principal of them now come and
remain at the devotion of the King's mother; in this I fIall still call on Cowrie
to search out the coffer, according to his promise; and as I hall find him minded
to do therein, so hall I do my bell and whole endeavour to effect the fucccfs to her
1\ ajefly's bell contentment.

2d December 1582, from Edinburgh.

BrCA USE I saw good opportunity offered to renew the matter to the Earl of Cow-

ric for recovery of the letters in the coffer in his hands, therefore I put him in
mind thereof; whereupon he told me, that the Duke ot Lennox had ifoght earn-
elily to have had those letters, and that the King did know where they were, so a;
they could not be delivered to her Majesty without the King's privity and ontl, nt,
and he pretended to be still willing to pleaflre her . aiefty in the (ai, lt far a he
may with his duty to the King and to the rcll of the aociates in that at'ion ; but
1 greatly di-trnfl to effect this to her Ml ,ajclys pleaflre, h erein, ne:c-L'hclcl , I
(hall do my iittcirmiu cidavours.

\\'V :uIrTII'R j.tmes VI. who put the F.arl of (;owi( to deaill, A. I). I5, an21

fci/.lc all hi; cfL, ts, too, (1'are t dellr y his miotikLr's lctt.l .,, tor whlolk hiluu iir
li w\s at that tilme cxtl c.'ly zea lous; Vwhetlher they have peilCti.Il by' )n1e i11-
known iaccident; or whthert they may not ill remain iltol)b' vced arnOl' the .,-
chives of ome o ur giteat .amilics, it is inpollible to dletemine.

in
3S

in opposition to all the maxims of decency or of prudence, vo-
luntarily areed to a marriage with him, which every cofidera-
tion should have induced her to detest. By this verdit, Mary
is not pronounced guilty of having contrived the murder of her
huband, or even of having previously given her consent to his
death; but she is not acquitted of having discovered her appro-
bation of the deed, by her behaviour towards him who was the
author of it.

THEE other conclusion is that which Murray and his adherents

laboured to etablifl, " That as James, fumtyme Erie of Both-
wile, was the chiefe executor of the horribill and unworthy
murder, perpetrat in the person of umquhile King Henry of gude
memory, fader to our Soveraine Lord, and the Queenis lauchfull
husband; fa was fie of the foreknowledge, counfall, devile,
perfwadar and commandar of the said murder to be done." Good.
2. 207.

WHICH of there conclusions is most agreeable to the evidence,
that has been produced, 1 leave my readers to determine.

1' 1 N I ;.

39

# ERRATA in Vol. II.

# ERRATA in the Appendix.

E R R A T A in Vol. II.

PagQ 35. line 6. from the bottom, for renderered r. render. p. 36. 1. ii. for Here r.

There. p. 44. in the Note, I. penult. r. restored to. p. 72. 1. ,. from the bottom, r. te
Clergy. p. 220. 1. xz. forfeveralr.fome. p. 231. inthe Note, 1. 2. delethat.

E R R A T A in the Appendix.

Page 4. 1. 1 2. r. theyr tyme. 1, 13. r.feeing ambition. 1. 30. r. for over r. ever. p 6. 1. 7.

for the flick r. theyflick. 1. o. from bottom deleand. p. 7. 1. . for as r. are. p. 9. 1. 27.
for highinefs r. honour. p. . 1. . 8. forfuperior r, fihprior. p. . 1. ii. for ringrave r. rhin-
grave. p o20 1. 20. for haze r. having. 1. 29. for/laidr. flood. p. 21.1. 3. from bottom
for oficiary r. efficac. p. 22. 1. 3. from bottom for covenant r. convenient. p. 26. 1. 3. for
or had r. r he had. 1. 4. for that though r. that things. 1.9. from bottom r. Atlole Seurr, Mlor-
ton Carver. . . 5from bottom, r. oculatus teofis, p. 27. 1. 8. from bottom, for niaJfes r.
marches. p, z2.. 1n. lt. r. whereof. p. 24. 1 z2. r. Andrew Car cf Favdcn fl, 1e .

1. 27. for

dagger r. dag. p. z8. 1. o2. for lue r.seu. p. 37. 1 o. for boldnejs r. col.inesi. . 39. . I .
for charger. change. p. 42.1. 19. for oly r. unes. p.

p .5 1. 112. from bottom r. among

nvhich, one. p. 57. 1. 3. forfavours r. fJvourers 1. . for his r. its 1.. for fiatio:s
r. defanaat.ons. p. 60. 1. 8. from bottom, for 're r. he. p. 6. 1. I. for i;feijt r. prjs'd.
1. i . for f;:h r.fJek. p. 66. 1. 4. for that r. of 1. 1. 5. dele toyiel'. p. 69. 1. 19. for
een r. being. p. 72. 1. 7. for tret r. trtrfl. .p. 78. 1. 2. from bottom for dclrdi. i p. 9
1. to. for/eniien:fnt r feulemrent. 1. 1i. r. is'piet. . 1 . for ut/er r. oftr,. p. 80. 1. . r de~
:ir:. 1. . 5 from bottom, r. droic7s. p. 81 1. z3. allitei r. a/liir. p. 83. 1. penult. for to r.
by. p. S4. . 6. r.J;bJhrivzit. i 3. r. I'/al/tbame. p. S;. . . r. 1

r. ere. 1.

from bottom, for your r. oa. p. X8. . .. r. Fot/.ringha .

me . ¢9 . 6. from bottom, for
jLrbidden r. bidden. p. 9z. 1. 6. r. perp/,:lt.

1

# INDEX.

I N
N. B. The Numeral Letters refer to the Vol. and

Pages.

A.
A DA MSON, archbishop of St. An-

drews, is excommunicated by the fy-
nod of Fife, II. 119. He excommu-

nicated his opponents, ibid. is restored by
the general aflembly upon conditions, 20zo.
His mean submission to the general assem-
bly - - 174
Abany, Alexander, Duke of, cabals with his

nobles against his brother K. James III. I.
48. is made prisoner but escapes to France,
ibid, concludes a treaty with Ed. IV. of
England, 49. procures afliftance to invade
Scotland on mean conditions, ibid. returns
to Scotland, and is restored to favour, o.
cabals again but is forced to fly to France,

- ~ ~ - ~- ibid. 5r

Duke of, made Regent during tho

minority of K. James V. I. 31, 53. after
fcveral unfucccfsful struggles with the nobi-
lity, he is forced to retire to France, ib. 54
IAIezcon, Duke of, QElizabeth long amuses

the court of France, by carrying on a treaty
of marriage with him, - II. 59
Al/en, cardinal, published a book proving the

lawfulness of killing excommunicated
Princes - II. 107
AIAa, Duke of, his intrigues, in favour of Q.

Mary, II. 23, 6, 37. is recalled from his
government of the Netherlands 43

.4,,brrIfjhr;, their office 1. 73, 74
AI:,d/rews St. the archbishop of, remarkably

cured of a dangerous diflemper, I. 6.
the motives of his opposition to the Q. Re-
gent, 136. his great influence on the bench
of Bifiops and weight in Parliament, 140.
governed the church with great moderation,
141. perlccutes the rcforilmers, 142. per-
fi)rms great cfrvice to the congregation
4g;linlt tlie French, too. is iipiloeod tor
celebrating Mass, 258. ruins Q( Mar-v's

the Figures to the

affairs by his imprudent condut, 388. s
taken prisoner in Dunbarton castle, and
hanged - - II. 5
----- the castle of, demolished by the

French - - I. 99
--- the prior of, promotes a treaty be-

tween the Q_ Regent and the Reformers,
I. 153. is provoked to leave the court,
15r. is one of the chief promoters of the
reformation, 168. ome account and a cha-
racter of him, ibid. 169. artful endea-
vours used to undermine him, 169. pre-
ftmption of his innocence of the designs
charged on him, ibid. is ent by the con-
vention to invite the Queen to Scotland,
216. is received by her with confidence and
affe&tion, 217. restrains the turbulent spirit
of the people against popery, 228. is sent
to restrain the licentious pracices of the
borderers, 233. executes his commiflion
with vigour and prudence, 234. a confpi-
racy against him discovered, 24z. is crea-
ted Earl of Mar, 244. becomes obnoxious
to the Earl of Huntly, ibid. fee Mar and
Murray.
Angus, Earl of, was the only man who asserted

the independency of his country, I. 19, 2o.
assumes the Regency during the niiliori,
of K. James V. 31. 54. is unable to gain
hisafetions, 54, is attainted and flies into
England -
--- Obtains leave to return into Scotland,
11. -9. surrenders himself to K. Janies VT.
88. lie with several others fcize the castle
of Stirling to oppose Airan, 92. they are
forced to tly ito England on the approach
of the King with an army, (92. he is at-
tainted and his estate fobfcitcd, 99. is con-
cerned i a plot in favour of Spain, 178.
is seized and coimmitted prifoncr to theaflic
of Edinburgh, i 7. cfcapc and flies to te

I i i moun

-- ------- --~11
. -

D'

s ·X ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~s

mountains, ibid. 80o. offers to submit to a
trial, 183. sentence is prouounced against
him, 1Y4. he refauestofubmit 185
./njou, Duke of, a marriage proposed between

him and Q Elizabeth - II. 21

Xnne, a Princess of Denmark, married to K.

James VL. II. 170, 171. her arrival in
Scotland and coronation, 173. heads a
party that opposes the chancellor 181
JArchbij/ols, Bi/opse, Deans, and Chapters revi-

ved in Scotland during the King's minority,
II. 33, 34. this gives greatoffence to many
of the clergy, ibid. an at of assembly
againf these offices, 74. Bishops made
fabjec: to prefbytries and assemblies, 119.
a great firoke given to their authority, 159.
None of them present at the Queen's coro-
nation - - 173
/4,ri Earl of, is appointed to carry the crown
matrimonial to the Dauphin of France, I.
14o. uses his interest with the reformers to
make a treaty with the Queen, Regent, 153.
leaves her court in resentment of her trea-
chery, 155. refuses to accede to a treaty
with Murray theRegent, 422. is soon as-
ter forced to submit, 423. as as lieute-
nant to the Queen after the Regent's mur-
der, II. 5. is prevailed on to join the
King's party, 8. quarrels with Athole, 47.
confederates with him against Morton, the
Regent, for their mutual defence, ibid. they
remonitrate against him to the King, 50.
they raise forces against him, 55. negoci-
ates a treaty with him by the mediation of
Q Elizabeth, 56. is promoted to the of-
fce of chancellor, 57. the King's autho-
rity delegated to him and Lord Sorbes
against the popish Lords, 187. his forces
are defeated in an engagement with them

- - - 188
./fri/ocracy, predominant in Scotland I. 201

'nadao Spanish, preparations for it, II. 16r.
it is defeated - - 166
Arrai Earl, is appointed Regent during the

minority of Q Mary, \. 83. his charader,
ibid. 84. contents to the fchcmes of Eng-
land which disgusts the public, 86. be-
comes suspicious of the Earl of Lenox, 87
is forced to renounce the fiicndfliip with
England and declare for France, 88. and
so persecute the reformers, 89. publickly

abjures the doctrine of the reformers, 9o.
is contemned by one half and little trusted
by the other part of the ation, 91. heads
the partizans of France and defenders of
popery, ibid. attempts in vain to seize the
murderers of cardinal Beatoun, 97. is forced
to make a truce with the conspirators, 98.
his eldest son is conditionally excluded all
right of fuccefllon, oo. his mean conceflion
to the court of France, 107. gets the title
of Chatelherault, ibid. is undermined by
the Q. Dowager, 113, 114. proposals and
arguments for his resignation, i 5. he con-
sents to it, 16. retracts by the influence of
the archbishop of St. Andrews, 117. is at
lalt prevailed on and gets advantageous
terms, ibid. fee Chatelherault.
Arran Eldest son of the Duke of Chatelhe-

rault, joins in an afrociation with the refor-
mers, I. 166. narrowly efeapes intended
ruin at the court of France, 67. is full of
resentment against the French on that ac-
count, ibid. 168. the congregation follicit
Q. Elizabeth to marry him, 209. his great
imprudence with regard to Q.Mary, 23;
discovers a conspiracy against the Queen's
favourites, 242. loses his reason, 11. 57,
58. is imprisoned by Morton 58
-- - late capt. Stewart, gets that title and

effate, II. 69. is appointed to conduc
Morton from Dumbarton to Edinburgh, ib.
tortures several of his servants cruelly, ibid.
his infamous marriage with the countess of
March, 71, 72. his variance with Lenox,
72. is frultrated in an attempt to rescue the
King at Ruthren, 78. is confined prisoner
to the castle of Stirling, ibid. 79. regains
his liberty and the King's regard, 85, 86.
resumes his power and arrogance, 86. gets
the Ruthren conspirators declared guilty of
high treason, 88. is detested as author of a
persecution against the clergy, 94. is gain-
ed over to Q Elizabeth's intercet, 97, 98.
gets several forfeited effates, 99. his cor-
ruption and insolence, o;. is made chan-
cellor and has unlimited power, ibid. his
venalty is imitated by his wife, ibid. his
monitrous tyranny andoppreflion, 106, 107
his power undermined by Wotton the Eng-
lifh envoy, 115. is confined in the cafle of
St. Andrews but son recovers favour, 16

hIi8

his ntereft finks much, 117. is stripped of
his honours and spoils, and reduced to his
original station - - 118
Articles Lords of, their origin and business, I.

69. by whom chosen, 70. the subsequent
variations and political use made of this in-
ftitution - - 7, 7
Arundel Earl of, is appointed a commiflioner

to the conference at Wefminfter I. 414
I/hby, ambassador from Q Elizabeth to Scot-
land, II. 163. his great promises to King
James, ibid. his promises are soon forgot,
166. he is afamed and withdraws pri-
vately from Scotland ibid.
4jajgination, the frequency of it in Scotland,

how accounted for, I. 311-313. several
instances of it France, 313, 314. a stop
put to it there and in Scotland, 314. fcve-
ral great men approved of it, 315. pre-
vailed greatly afterwards - . 174
fsJTembly of the church of Scotland, the firit

but feeble and irregular, . 215. another
aflembly, their demands from the conven-
tion, 235. two other afibmblies in vain fol-
licit an augmentation of their revenues, 252
they address Q Mary in high strains of
complaints, 294. an aflembly proceeds at
Glasgow notwithstanding the King's inter-
dition, II. 74. two assemblies yield many
of the privileges of the church to the King,
o24. declare it lawful for Ministers to fit in
Parliament, 207, 208. fee Cl-rgr.
./jciatio,, formed in defence of .Elizabeth

agairlin Q. Mary - I. lot
All/, e Earl of, the occasion of his quarrel

with the Earl of Argyl, II. 47. joins with
him in opposing Morton the Regent, ib. dies
fuon after an entertainment at Mlortons, 57
suspicions of his being poisoned ibid.
A:bigne Lord de, second Ion of the Earl of Le-

nox, arrives in Scotland fiom France, II.6o
becomes soon a great favourite of K. James,
ibid. high titles and pofis bellowed on him,
ibid. notes againll him, appendix oi. fee
I.'ox.
Ad.rian family, their origin and power, I. 74

B.

abi/.o., Anthony, oime account of hiin,

gL II1. I-z. the rife of lii, conipiracy againll
Q. Elizabeth, ibid. the nauucs and fchemc

of operations of his associates, ibid.
they are betrayed, sized and executed,

_- - 124, 1S
Bacon, Sir, Nicholas, appointed one of the

commissioners to the conference at Weit-
minster - - I. 414
Baliol John, his claim to the crown of Scot-

land, I. 8. is preferred by Ed. I. o. soon
forced by him to resign - ibid.
Bal/ard, a trafficking priest, follicits an inva-

sion of England from Spain, II. 122. joins
in a conspiracy to murder Q. Elizabeth, 123
is discovered and taken into custody, 124
and executed - 125
Barons, their jurisdicion very extensive, I. 18.

the differenee between the greater and lesser
whence, 66. three hundred of them remon-
ftrate againit the conduct of the Q. Dowa-
ger, 130. the lesser admitted by their
representatives into Parliament, II. 16o.
petition of the lesser Barons to Parliament,
app. Io. fee Nobl/s.
Bafiicon Doron, a book published by King

James VI. strengthens his interell in Eng-
land - - I. 209
Beatoun cardinal, made use of by K. James V.

to mortify the nobles, I. 58. his preten-
sions to the Regency on the death of that
Prince. 82. forges a testament of the late
King, ibid. his views how disappointed,
ibid. his character, 83. opposes the Earl
of Arran Regent, 86. excites nioft of the
nation againt the English, 87. seizes the
young Queen and her mother, ibid. cajols
the Earl of Lenox, ibid. obliges the Re-
gent to renounce England and declare for
trance, 88. and to persecute. the refor-
mers, 89. cngrofles the chief direction of
affairs, 91. his double dealing with the
Earl of Lenox resentcd, ibid. is murder;d,
95, 96. hib death fatal to the Catholic,
97. a vain attempt to revenge it, ibid.
fcandalos reports concerning lhi 12()
Bcdfoibd Earl of, comes as Ambaflador fromn

Q. Elizabeth to witnef, thce ):iptift of
J;!nics I. 1. 33.2. i. inllilutions, ihid.,
333. his ltters to Sir \ . Ccci!, nppcldi.

- - -7, 3°, 3(

I//c1,,r.n Sir l.csis, j, l'icc clik K. Ja .ini, s
rclid.cnt t ondoi, 1 1. 1 joi in pro-
linoti g (. Elizabeth's intelcil in ScotlJnid
1 i2 ibid.

ibid. is sent with her Envoyinto that oun-
try - - ibid.
Black Mr. David, minister at St. Andrews,

his ridiculous and seditious exprefiions in the
pulpit, II. 19, 196. being supported by
the clergy, he declines the civil jrif-
diftion, 196. is condemned by the privy
council, 197. is sentenced by the King
to reside beyond Spey - 198
Blaciader captain, and three others executed

for the murder of Darnly - I. 370
Boethius Hecor, his hiltory of Scotland, ome

account of - 1 4
Bolton Cafle, QL Mary confined a prisoner

there - - . 401
Bonat, a foreigner, made governor of Orkney,

_ - 1. 129
Borderers, an attempt to reflrain their licen-

tious pratices, 1. 233, 234. QMary vi-
fits them, 323. a fcufflethinhic there

in which the
English warden, &c. are made prisoners,

- 11.46
Bl'rt/.wick Lord, assists the Queen Regent in

defending Leith -I. 183
Bot/h't',!l Earl of, intercepts a fium of mo-

ney from England to the congregation,
1. 18r. av-ours the Quecn Regent, but re-
fide .t I hi. own houne, 183. his resent-
mient againll the prior of St. Andrews,
245. is by him when Erl of Murray and
Regent summoncd to a; public trial, zSo.
prevents it by leaving the kingdom, ibid.
a sentence of Outlawry against him pre-
vented by the Queen, ibid. is permitted
to return, 289. escapes with her after the
murder of Rizio, 310. Come account of
his former behaviour, 317. commences a
favourite of the Queen, ibid. 3 8. Whe re-
conciles him to several Lords, with whom
he was at variance, ibid. he increases in
favour with her, 320. circumfianccs con-
curring in this, 321. he is wounded in at-
tempting to seize one of the borderers, 3 3.
the Queen's extraordinary regard for him
on this occasion, ibid. to secure adherents
he obtains a pardon for Morton and his as-
fociates, 334, 335. proposes the rtora-
tion of the popifi ecclesiastical jurisdiCtion,
336. his viewi in this, bid. 337, is sus-
pcLted the author of Darnly's murder, 343.
is charged with it by Lenox, 345. but Rill
favoured by the Q2een, ibid. appointed

governor of Edinburgh Castle, ibid.. his
trial is hurried on, 346. remarkable par-
tiality in his favour, 347. Lenox acctfes
him openly, 348. comes to his trial with
a great retinue, 348, 349. is acquitted by
a jury, 349. the trial univerfallycenfiircd,
ibid. 350. challenges any that would ac-
cufe him, 350. several ads of Parliament
pawed in his favour, 351. he procures an
at in favour of the reformation, ibid. 352.
prevails on several of the nobles to recom-
mend him as a husband to the Queen, 352,
353, 354. seizes the Queen on a journey
from Stirling, and carries her to Dunbar,
356. his view in this, 357. obtains apar
don under the great feal, ibid. procures a
divorce from his wife, 358. carries the
Queen to the cafle of Edinburgh, ibid. is
created Duke of Orkney, 359.' and mar-
ried to the Queen, ibid. is not allowed the
title of King, 360. be watches the Queen
very closely, ibid.. endeavours to get the
Prince into his cuflody, ibid. 3l.. is al-
larmcd with an association of the nobles
against the Qeen and him, 362. carries
the Queen to the castle of Borthwick, ibid.
raises forces against the confederate Lords,
364, he marches against them, 365. pro-
poCes a ingle combat, 366. this how pre-
vented, ibid. takes his last farewell of the
Queen, and i forced ta,fly, ibid. fends for
a casket of letters fiom Q. Mary to him,
371. they are intercepted by the Earl of
Morton, ibid. his miserable fate, 380, 381
refletfions on, his conduc, 381. copy of
his divorce from Lady Jean Gordon, appqn--
dix -

9R
- late Francis Stewart, created Earl of

Bothwell, II. 167. is imprisoned for con-
fulting witches, 17 ;. scapes and attempts
to break into the King's presence, ibid. re-
tires to the north, 176. he and his adhe-
rents are attainted, 178. fails in an at-
tempt to seize the King, ibid. i> taken un-
der protftion of Q. Elizabeth, whQ folltits
for hini, 8Q. seizes the Kig's person,
181, i8z. forces him to difinis thcchan-
cellor and his other favourites, 182. and
to grant him a rcmiflion, ibid. his bold
and insolent behaviour afterwards, ibid. 183
i, encouraged by the Englilli albafltdor,
185. inakcs another attempt to come at

the

the King, 186. is repulsed and obliged to
fly to the north f England, ibid. is aban-
doned by Q Elizabeth, and forced to fly
into Spain and Italy, 190. remains in in-
digent obscurity, and is never after recon-
ciled to the.Kir. - ibid.
"--- Adam, bishop of Orkney, performs

the ceremony of marriage of Q. Mary to
the Earl of Bothwell I. 359

BotiUIhzellhazh. fee Hamilton.
Boulogne, wrefled by the French out of the

hadis of the Engliflh, I. to6. they consent
to restore it and its dependencies to the
French - - ro8
Bowes, Envoy from Q_ Elizabeth, accuses Le-

.nox of disturbing the peace, II. 63. is re-
fused an audience, ibid. is ent to encou-
rage the conspirators at Ruthren, 79. to
enquire about K. James's correspondence
with the pope - 210
Bol'd Lord, his ambitious views in the time of

K. James III. frustrated -

. 30
-- is prevailed on to join the King's party

against Ql Mary, II. 8I. joins the Ru-
thren conspirators 77
Br.;ienNe Count de, comes as ambaflidor from

France to witness the baptism ofK. Ja. V.

. 33z
Brine Robert, his claim to the crown of Scot-

land, I. 8. his grandson aflerts his right
and vindicates the honour of his country,
1o. he attempts to reduce the power of
the nobles - 39
- a priess, employed by the King of Spain
to seduce the Scot's nobles - II. 167
-- Mr. Robert, a presbyterian minister,

performs the ceremony of the cororation of
K. Jamies's Queen 11. 173
-- Edward, abbot of Kinlefs, acquits him-

self wsith address and reputation as ambafla-
dor at the court of England II. 208, 209
- Mr. Robert, a minitier, his resolution
in refi;ing to publish the King's account of
Gowries cnfpiracy, II. 229. is deprived
and banished on that account ibid.
uc/'arna.n George, his hillory of Scotland,

some account of, 1. 4. remalrk- on his dia-
logue de jure R(,giis, 157. alone accuses
Q_ Malry of a criminal correspondence with
Riio, 305. approved of aflaffination, 315.
lis partiality in overlooking an a of Par-

liament in favour of the reformation, 352.
attends the Regent into England when cal-
led on t accuse Q Mary, 404. was one of
the preceptors of K. James VI. 1I. 48.
commended for his great genius 256, 257

Burleigl,, fee Cecil.
Burrozghs, when firlt represented in Parlia-

ment. -. II. 179

C.
C IS John, a declaration of his in name of

QElizabeth to the Lords of Grainge and

Lethington, app. - 68
Caithiwefs Earl of, hisproteftat the trial of Both-

well for the murder of Darnly I. 350o
Cain, the patron and restorer of prefhyte.

rian church government - 1. 213

Cambande, some miilakes of his I. 333. 34
Canongate near Edinburgh, a Parliament held

there - II. 1 6
Cad-dan, some account of him, I. 6. his

remarkable cure of the bishop of St. An-
drews - - ibid.
Caret' Sir George, ent ambassador from Q

Elizabeth to encourage the conspirators at
Ruthren - I. 9,
- Robert, sent by Q Elizabeth to footti

K. James after the death of his mother, 1I..
i 4. is not permitted to enter Scotland,.
ibid. was the first' that brought K. James
intelligence of the death of Q Elizabeth

--- - z46, 247
Cajket of letters from Q. Mary to Bothwell,

seized the Earl of Morton, I. 371. her
enemies avail themselves much of them

- ibid..

Cajils Earl of, joins the King's party, II. 8
Cajelnai, the French ambassador is employed

to procure the consent of his court to her
marriage with Darnly, . 273: he endea-
vours to make up the differences between
the Queen and him, 320.. his interceflion
in behalf of Q. Mary - II. I o
Cathr-ine of Mediois, aumes the government

after the death of Francis 11. her ton, I. zit.
her harlh treatment of (Q Mary, ibid. her
views in behaving more friendly to ier, z)i.
bends her whole endeavour to deliroy the
Protcftants, II. 21. her artful condut
with that view, - ibid. .

, Li'.

Ccil, his-great apacity as a minister, . 1.98.

219. is employed to negotiate a peaceSwith
France, ibid. over-reacbe- the French
ambassador in the treaty of Edinburgh, 2 19.
is appointed a commiflioner to the confe-
rence at Weltminfler, 414. is sent by Q.
Elizabeth with proposals to Q.Mary, I1.
9. has an interview with her which ex-
cites Q, Elizabeth's jealousy, 43. is treat-
ed harshly by Q Elizabcth or consenting to
Q. Mary's death - 153
--- Sir Robert, son to the former, heads

the party against Effex, J. 232. his cha-
raster, 233. his great assiduity, ibid. en-
ters into a private correspondence with K.
James, 238. a letter from him to his Ma-
jefly, app. - 16
Celebac of the popilh clergy, a chief engine of

their policy - I. 123, 148
Charles V. Emperor, his great power, 1. 74.

and unlimited ambition, 75. is checked by
Francis I. ibid.
- K. of France makes a league with Q.

Elizabeth, 1---- I. 27
Chatel/erault Duke of, that title conferred on

the Earl of Arran, Regent of Scotland, I.
107. his right of fuccellion to the crown of
Scotland maintained, 136. enters a pro-
teltation to fare his right, 138. joins the
reformers in endeavouring to expel the
French army, 163, I64. joins in aocia-
tion with them, 166. is looked on as the
head of the congregation, 168. -his FLfi-
lanimity, ISo. becomes obnoxious to Q
Mary, 235. his jealousy of the prior of
St. Andrews, 242. deprived of his French
pension, 26x. is alarmed at the Ear! of
Lenox's return to Scotland, 268. an ac-
commodation brought about by the Quecn's
influence, 269. adheres to Murray in op-
poling the Queen's marriage, 290. is par-
doned on his lhumile application, but forced
to reside in rance, 293. his partizans
gruniLle at Murray's being advanced to the
Regency, 384. returns from France and
lieds the Quceen' adherents, 422. ij
made her lieutenalnt-gnciral, ibid. his re-
fblution waverin, tlie RlLint conlllits him11
prilboner to the calile o Idiniburgh, 423.
i, let at libcrty by Kik;ld .K e id join, the
(,)uucu': pa1ty), 11. . i i ;rolaimcd trai-

tor by Lenox the new Regent, 8. isrecon-
ciled to Mortop the Regent, 39. artitles
of a treaty hetween them» ibid. his death

'- - 45
Church of Scotland, revolutions in it after the

union of the crowns, 1. 254, 255. feeaJ-
fembly, clergy.
Church Lands annexed to the crown by Parlia-

ment --- . 158

Clans the inflitution and nature of, 1. 23
Clergy popilh,their great riches and power, . 57

12i. were made use of by K. Jam.V. to sup-
press the nobles, 57, 58. made a confider-
able body in Parliament, 122. their great
influence over the laity, ibid. they engrof-
fed learning, 123. and held many of the
chief employments, ibid. their power en-
creafedbyCelebacy, ibid. they feizedthe
efRates of the intestate, 24. and tried all
matrimonial and testamentary causes, ibid.
become obnoxious to the laity, 125. their
great corruptor, whence, ibid. these of
Scotland particularly dissolute, z16. their
weak defence of their tenets, 127. try in
vain to impose falle miracles, ibid. their
impolitic conduct to the reformers 143
_--- reformed, try in vain to recover the

revenues of the church, I. 215, 26, 218.
procure a debolition of all relicts of po-
pery, ibid. a new regulation concerning
their revenues, 236---240. they are no
gainers byit, 240. their tipends what in
thoie days, ibid. are offended at the mo-
deration of their leaders, 259. occasions
a tumult among the people, ibid. 260.
more complaints of their poverty, 269, 335.
arejealousof Q. Mary, ibid. the fiall al-
lowance appointed to support them all, 336.
their application for payment of their fti-
pends of little effect, 383. frefl complaints
of the deficiency of the funds for their
maintenance, 433, 434. are put off with
fair words and promil , 4 4. archbiflnps
&c. introduced among them by Morton,
11. 3, 34. their grievances under his ad-
iiniltiation, . they iiappove of the Ru-
tl-lln conspirator , So. by Livouring them
they povoke the il'ing, 89. revere laws
iin:ide aga;nil thnem, z, )j. they of Edin-
burgh fly into I'ngland, )3. as do fveral
otlhcrs that w\Y Ie liiult iIll cnt, 94. ii
11

vigorous

vigorous measures againt them, 99. they
obtain no redress on the restoration of the
exiled Lords, 118. represent their grie-
vances to Parliament, 157. a maintenance
provided for them by Parliament, 159. they
prevail to get Presbyterian government eita-
blifhed by law, 177. their zeal againIt the
Popish Lords, 183, 184, 192. their rash
proceedings, 192, r94. they ere a tland-
ing Council of the Church, 194. vindicate
one of their number who declined the civil
jurisdiction, 196, 197. their ianding Coun-
cil ordered to leave Edinburgh, ibid. this
occasions a violent tumult there, 98, oo.
they use their utmolt efforts to spirit the
people, 201. are deserted and fly to Eng-
land, zo2. their power greatly reduced,
ibid. are prevailed on to give up many of
their privileges, zo3, 204. are retlored to
a feat in Parliament, 206. this violently
opposed by many of them, 207. but car-
ried in their general Aflembly, zo8. these
entitled to this privilege are laid under
many regulations and reftritions, r23.
they are brought under great fubjedion,
214. the revolutions among them ince the
Union of the Crowns - 254, 255
Cinton Lord, appointed a commissioner at the

conference at Welminlter I. 414
Cockburn of Ormifton, receives a supply of

money fiom the Englith to the congregation,
I. 18i. is intercepted and robbed of it, ibid.

Coin in Scotland, sone account of, 1.177. 11.44
Commijaries appointed to try causes in place of

the Spiritual Court, I. 258. they are de-
prived of all authority - 336
Confijion of faith by the Reformers, confrnted

to by Parliament -1. 205
Cogregation, the Proteltants diltinguifhed by

that name, 1. 49. their leaders enter into
an association, 153. arc involved in diffi-
culties, 179. apply to Q Elizabeth for as-
filtance, 180. money fnt them by her in-
tercepted, 18. make a rash and defpera'e
attempt on Leith and are repullied, ibid. 82.
are no less unfortunate in a cond flkirnillh,
18z. are quite dispirited and retreat to Stir-
ling, ibid. 183. are joined by the body of
the nobles, 183. their army dwindles away,
184. are anilmated by Knox, ibid. they

apply again to Q. Elizabeth, 85. their
parties harrafs the ' rench, rgo. are assistcd
by a fleet from England, ibid. conclude a
treaty at Berwick with the D. of Norfolk,
19t. the design and'fibitance of this treaty,
19z. negociate a peace with France, 98.
articles of the treaty, 199. they reap many
advantages from it, 200, 201. fee Refor-
mation.
Covenaot, National, fiamed in defence of the

King and Government, 11. 164. the na-
ture and reasonableness of it, ibid. i65.
the progress of it since - 16;

Courtejy of Scotland, what 1. 1x3
Craig, a minilter, boldly testifies against Q.

Mary's marriage with Bothwell 1. 39
CrauJforii, Capt. of Jordan Hill, furprizes

Dumbarton Caltle, II. 13, 14. the diffi-
culties of that enterprize - 14
--- Earl of, one of the heads of the Spa-

nifh faction, I. 163, 167. offers his ter-
vice to the K. of Spain, 167. joins in re-
bellion against the King, 69. is forced
to submit to him, ibid. and imprisoned a
short time - - 17
Crichtoa, Regent during the minority of K.

James II. his barbarous policy I. 44, 45
--- a jesuit, a plot against Q Elizabeth

discovered by his means - If. too
Criminas, a remarkable instance of the diffi-

culty of bringing them to justice I. 17
Cr-o du, the French Ambaf'ador, refuses to

countenance Q.Mary's marriage with Both-
well, 1. 39. attempts in vain a reconci-
liation between the Queen and the confe-
derate Lords, 365. mediates a truce be-
tween the King's and Queen's party in Scot-
land - - II. 28
Croown matrimonial of Scotland granted by Par-

liament to the Dauphin of France, 1. 138.
deputies appointed to carry it, but are pre-
vented -- 1 i
Cuninghan Robert, appears at the trial of

Bothwell in name of the Ea'rl of Lenox,
I. 349. demands a dclay, which i rcfulifed,

ibid.
Curie, one of Q Mary's fccrctaric::, is seied

and c rried prif0ner to .ondon, I1. 127,

.128 is protduced an evidence againf her

"~ ~~--~ - 135

D,,, 71/v,

D.
D rnly, Henry Lord, proposed as a hus-

baud to Q. Mary I. 265. his right of

succession confidered, ibid. 266. is per-
mitted to visit the court of Scotland, 271.
arrives there and quickly gains the Queen's
heart, 272. his charaetcr, 274. disgusts
several of the nobles, particularly Murray,
ibid. cultivates a familiarity with David
Rizio, 275. is despised on that account,
276. grows intollerably insolent and haugh-
ty, 82. schemes to affaflinate Murray,
284. a plot to seize and fend him to Eng-
land prevented by the Queen, ibid. evi-
dences of this, 285, 286. his marriage
with the Queen celebrated, 287. is ho-
nourecd with the title of King of Scotland,
288. is implacable with relvret to the ex-
iled nobles, 297. loses the Queen's assec-
tion Ly his untoward behaviour, 302. de-
mnand& the Crown matrimonial, ibid. 303.
becomes suspicious ofRizio's ill offices with
the Queen, 303. his resolution to be aven-
ged of llin encouraged by the nobles, 305.
articles agreed on between them for that
purpoie, 306. Heads the conspirators who
perpetrate the murder, 307. confines the
Quecn ater it is committed, 308. prohi-
hits the nrleting of the Parliament, ibid.
in;akes hiS eicape with the (2tleen. 309, 310.
hler hatred to him increaes, 31 . is neg-
lcded by her and treated with little refpcet
by the nobles, 319. resolves to leave Scot-
land, 321. Iis wayward and capricious
Lhaviour, 322. he w\stes the reasons of
hi., conduct to the Queen, ibid. his fhrange
behaviour at the baptifin of the Prince, 332.
a filie realon alledged for thi confuted,
3 3. r rirle to lisi fathcr at Glasgow, 335.
falls lick there, 337. conjeCtures concern-
insg lid diteniper, ibid. is neglected by
the QlcCn, ;3S. lhe iftervw;nds visits and
c(xprelfl', fItlcction for lill, 339. lie is pre-
v.llcd on by her to corne to Edinburgh,
3^1. is lodged ill ; Ic}ruate Iouf, ibid.
}le is ilur11 dercd thiecr, 3.12. his chLartrter,
ibid. ; procl.iiiitioni iliued for dilfoverillg
the niurderr., 4;. ;t rc.mii nquiry ade
itEO it, 344- -3'o. C;Lapt. l:lcli;kaddcr and
rlire (c othL i, executed onl tlhat :(Ccotllut, ,34.
nit' cont'clioJ of Morton tle Re(gent at hi'

death concerning the murder, 11. o7. pa-
per of objections of the Court of England
against his marriage with Q Mary, App.
a dissertation concerning his murder, at the
end of vol. I1.
David 1. K. of Scotland, his profusion to the

church, - I. 12I

- II. troubles during his minority, . 28
Davi/sn, sent into Scotland by Q. Elizabeth,

as a spy on the French Ambassador, 11. 83.
is sent to gain Arran's interest to Q. Eliza-
beth, 98. this he soon accomplishes, ibid.
brings the warrant for Q Mary's death at
Q. Elizabeth's desire, 144, 145. is char-
ged by her with disobeying her orders, 153 .
is imprisoned, tried and fined, and loses all
favour, ibid. objecions against him in the
cause of the late Scottish Queen, App. 114
Defi, Monsieur, is sent with a supply of forces

to afift the French against the Englilh in
Scotland, I. o16, his success there, ibid.
DiJfipline, ill the Church, the firit book of

compoed, I. 21;. why obje&ed against ii
a convention of the States, ibid. another
attempt in favour of Church discipline fiuf-
trated, - - 11. 73
Douglas, the power and property of that fa-

mily, I. 29. they aspire to independency,
44. Will. Earl o murdered by K. James
II. 45. his son endeavours to resent it,
ibid. is forced to fly into England, 46

- William, Q. Mary committed a pri-
loner to his caitle of Lochleivcn 370
--- George, brother to the above, aflilts
the Queen in making her escape 385

A-rchibald, one of Darnly's murder-

ers, 11. I2i. undergoes a mock trial for
that crime and is acquitted, ibid. ib sent
Amnbaliador to England, ibid. letter from
him to the Qof Scots, app. to the King.
DI)ar), Sir Win. enters Scotland with an army

to support the Queen's party, 11. . they
join him and drive off the Queen's, ibid.
he procumes a truce between the King's and
Queen's parties, z8. conlie with forlces to
:iflil Morton in besieging the calile of Edin-
burgh, 4o. which is orced to firrelder 41
- Sir 1)r1e, i;. appointed onei of OQ Mary's

keeper - - . 10o

),,/:', Lord Robert, reconinlcnded by 2.

Elizabethl as a hulband to QiMary, I. -iz.
\iwhy a ti vurit oft Q Eliz.tietlL, ibid.
lh,3hly lpromo:cd by her, bid (. i s

al lUo.O

fitnation extremely delicate, 264. becomes
suspicious of Cecil - ibid.
Dumbarton Castle, furprized and taken in the

King's name by the .egent II. 13, 14
Dury, a minister of Edinburgh, banithed from

his charge by K. James, for his free invec-
tives against the courtiers, II. 7. after
being restorcd he is driven fiom it a second
time for app:.oving the Raidof Runven 89

E.
E Dinburg/h, is taken and burnt by the Enjg-

liflI, 1. 93. a great fray there he'.wgeii

the French and Scots, 11o. is Itized bv
the Reformers, i S. its inhabitants ae
terribly alarmed by the French, R18. a
treaty there with the French and l'lngilih,
199. a loan demanded of it by QL Mary,
293. which is granted for the fupcrioiry
of Leith, 294. the treaty of infilled on by

( Elizabeth, 333, 334. is poil'cfrrd by

the Queen's party, 11. 3. and fortified by
them, i6. the City and Caile hold out
againlt the King's forces, 26. is reduced
to great straits by famine, ibid. 27. is re-
lieved by a truce, 28. the citizein take up
arms to promote the King's marriage, 171.
they rife again and insult the King and his
rinilters on the murder of the E',, l of Mur-
raV, 176. aiiil the King a'ginil liuntly,

S6. a violent tumult there on accountof the
Cilergy, i9q,-200 they iec severely p-
nitlied for it by the King, zoI,-zo3. their
minitlers return to their charges 2o;~. di-
vided into priilles and number of nii:lcrs
increased, ibid. they decline pullilhin5
the account of Gowries c nfpiracy, 2-s.
all, except one who is banihzed, are per-
fuaded by the King to do it 22-
F,,v'ard I. of England, deItroved the public

archives of Scotland, . 4. is made um-
pire between Bruce and Baliol, 7. his art
to acquire the fuperionty of Scotland, ibid.
Ilis wars wihli the Scot0. ulnder R. Ibruce

-.. -- in, 39
s'j'li/oti., .;a'1 of, is prevailed on to join the

King :., part/ - - 11. iS

}''/,:[.' ''/', her pec.crab '

.l Icccflion to tle
Crot oi

of l:'lgl;hinl, . lo. upport the coIgrc-
?:ation in Sc(tlan i ,

i io, Ipiing in her

ltqplii., 18 . reloile., to fippILt ttllh oi l
I,. l;:cll .,pplic;tio , li . her L )oLd ti'--

dust in matters of importa nce, ,S,. nlc-
tivea that determined her torai"ilt them, ibid.
188. her deliberate and efolute conduct,
191. fends a strong feet t their ania.ance,
ibid. concludes a treaty witi them, ibid.
192. her right to the Crown of England
allerted by Francis and Mary in France,
200oo obtains advantageous terms for te
Scots, 201. is foliciCdl by the Paliin'n. ':
of Scotland to marry te i 1; of Arr:1 i,
209. this 'l" dcclines, 210. t feeds of b r
difeontent with Q I Ma ry, 19, o20. hlc
jc.loufy of the fucesln, ibid h. 2 c. er
excefiive vanity ard jealousy of 'fary 1 be:. -
ty, 223. her diiiimullltion to hcie, 2'.!.
refutes er a fate condu it, ibid. lknd, to
congratulate her arrival in So.'anJ, 2o.
refules a conc. flion made by ( Mary. 2 .
her jealouiy of her right bItc.ved her i ,t

lmeantl ations, 232. lher rci-.mb',incc to
tILn. VI. ibid. a perfllnal interview x itll
Q(_ IMary propored, 2;i. the artfully dc-
clines it, 2 2. her views in regard to (.)
Mary's marriage, 25S, z56. aflumes a dif-
agrecable autholity, 256. nanies one for .
husband to (Q Mary, 262. the diftrentc
qualifications of her ministers and favorite,
ibid. dilfembles with Q. Mary about her
marriage, ibid. z'5. and likewif with re-
gard to L. Darnly, 266. alfronts Q.Ma:y
by her insinuation concerning Lcnox, z5-.
is perplexed about the marriage of the Scot
till) (Queen; 2-1. permits Darnly to viir
the Court of Scotland, ibid. affecs to d.
clare ag:ainlt Q< Mary's marriate o ii-.,
2--. her reasons for this c ndud, 2:.
liir great diliimnlation in that aflair, 2x.
her harfl andt deceitful behaviour to MIui
ray and his afibciates who hnd fled to her,
292. is tluck at hearing of the hbirth of
lanes VI. 31 9. consents to ltand golio,)
ther to him, ibid. the Parliament ,id.l:e,
her to fettle the lilccefiio, 32. this gtI..t'y
enbarraflts her, ibtid. :-'. fle fotl:i:d
g:'ins her Iarli.lnlCire, i;n cd..ivr, t
.crommodate licr diitcnc wit ili M:i:\-,

3?. writes to her to delay; tile tria of
1):lr)'"s uIiu!r'lcrs, 4.S8. nitclpf:'e ill hi
l)eIill when .t llprifoner, i. ier ;imbal'
fldhr i rctt,le'd ;. cif to Q: ilr), 3--,o
s1i' ofl: ' aslli:lin/c t t . otlhcL l ld ,, ilbid,
her el lil .ill iii eiice u il tilce dili)ofal of
/ ) l.lov in lher alnival nll llglland, 3''2,

! , kl :,)

g33. resolves to detain her there, 394.
her notivcs to this conduct, ibid. 39 ;.
fends her letters of condolance and gives
,ori:rs to watch her condua, 395. fle
gladly accepts the office of umpire between
her and her fuhjets, 396, 397. receives a
very preling Icrter fiom Q. Mary, 39.
her precautions against her, 4oo. appoints
commiflioners to hear (Q Mary and her ac-
cuclrs, 405. her important situation on
that occalion, ibid. her views in this at-
iair, 40o, 407. receives the Regent's de-
nmand, 410. removes the Conference to

/efminitllcr, 411. her mean artifices to
get the evidence, of (Q Mary's guilt froml
tlc Rcg-nt, 417. treats her with greater
rin-our, 41i . writes a harsh letter to Q

l:! ', ibd. e tliniiil 1es the Ret ent without
:pp:o;ing or cudenining iinm, 419. but
feeureI' flupPorts his party, 4zo. makes
propoi';: (i th !ie Regent in her f;i'our, 4-j.
Norfolks piojct concealed from her, 42;,
.t27. difcovcrs and defeats a rebellion in
(. Mary's favour, 431, 43z. retblves to
deliver her up to the Regent, 434. her
grei.t concern at his death, II. I. conti-
nues to encourage factions in Scotland, 2.
her olitical conduc with regard to Lenox,
0, 7. is excommunicated and deprived ot
her kingdom, &c. by the Pope, 7. sup-
ports the King's party in Scotland, and
names Lenox to be Regent, . propoles a
treaty of accommodation between Q. Mary
and her fubjcdts, 8. procures a ceflation of
holliiiiies, 9. fcnds proposals to Q Mary,
ibid. her artifices in the conduct of this
affair, , , 1 . appoints commiflioncrs to
frame a treaty, ii. finds a pretence to
rendertheir meeting fruitless, 1 2. a marriage

'iropot d between her and the D. of Anjou,
2r. declarej openly againlt the Quccn's
p:lotv, z5. conclude a treaty ith lranme,
-. hCer ntivc, for negociatin a peace
between the two paities in Scotland, 30, 37.
is jealous of Cecil interview with Q. IVlary,
4;. ncgociates a treaty between Morton
and his adverfries, . ler alnwcr to l.
lames's demland of a pollfilion of an elate
ill llnglad, 56, 7. a marriage between
hert aind the D. of Alencon propoled, 59. in-
terpoels in behalf of Mlorton, 63. her

elliiuresi in order to fa ve him, o(). colil-
tetlancs the conspirators at Rutliven, 79.

i; alarmed t a conspiracy against her, 0,
9'). the designs of Q. Mary's adherel.s
agaialt her, 97. endeavourl to recover her
intercit in Scotland and gains Arran to her
interell, 8. amuitf (Q, Mary with a fruit-
lets nepociation, oo. a new conipiracv
againit her, ibid. an association formed
for her dfence, iol, oz. her suspicions
of Q. Mary, o12. her lifet ndangerid by
a conipir.c, 107. this how iiicoVlied
and prevented, ibid. occalions an Cxtiaol-
dinary llatute fbr her prclervation, Io..
is in a dangerous litualion sion the progrels
of the holy league, ri2. endeavours to
form a confrde: acy of the Protetlant Princec,
ibid. and to proceed with rigour againil
Q MalIli, ibid. 1i4. advances her intereli
in Scotland, and popoes a league ,ith it,
114. fettles a penion upon K. une., I i .
concludes a t;eaty with Scotland, 120. ,ac-
count of Babington 's consp'iracy againit he-.
122,- 25. hei diiliilulation atter (QlMiar's
conviction, 137, 138S. her anl;er to K.
amnes's intercellion for her, 141. her fai'-
ther difiimulation and anxiety, 143. signs
the warrant ibr her execution, 144. hter
fpccch to Davison on that occasion, ibid.
afbies to lament Q Mary's death, i .
several marks of her artifice in that affair,
ibid. 153. fle endeavours to looth K.
James, 1 4. provocations given by her to
Spain, 16z. prepares to meet its resent-
mcnt, ibid. 163. endeavours to iccure
Scotland, ibid. tries to prevent K. Jamne's
marriage, 70o. follicits him to treat con-
fpirators againit him with rigour, 1 c.
evades the decision of K. James'sright of
fucceliion to the Crown of England, 2oS.
is dilbulted at ieveral of his proceedings,
210. dilcovers his correspondence with the
Pope, ibid. freih grounds of her iufpicio,,
232. her condut with rega-rd to the Lail
ofl flex, 33,-- 37. herirrecitolutiol con-
cerning hiib deatli, z37. and great concern
after it, ibid. receives ainmaliadors so
K. Iiames uith regard and incireale hiis ftl-
lidy, z318. her lailt illniues, 241 . conjec-
tures concerning the caules of her melan-
cholv, 242, 243. her de.ath, 2.4. and cl(i-
raLter, ibid. 25. d]clled the K. of t 'coi
her LIcefbr, 2'46. 1omen of ler letters,
ippi. 3, 28, 35, 36, 39, 47, 48, 5, (t'.

1.., / ..

El//'ir.fon, fecrctary to K. James VI. deceives

him into a correspondence with the Pope,
II. z 2. is tried and found guilty of high
treason, 212. and pardoned on the QOcen's
intercefion - ibid.
E':llti/, the Eng;ihi fcize and detain K,

Jiames I. of Scoi!and lone a pilrifol.cr, I. 29.
the nobles there humnbled, 3?. had cirl
two holufs of Parlian:et, (7. tiecv in-
vade Scotland, 92. thei de-rcdatio!< there,
94, 9. a pcae bcticcin Jn al:-n, lrance
and Scotland, (;. in.vade Sc land a:i'i!,
101. g:in i ;e':t v'.trslv, IC., 10). it
pIo'Ves of litnic :xvart:e to tlcnl, i.
t.-ii foJ'C t;,c S c t in:Io a Clof i r ! r'n \ it i
la;n!ce, Ic;. coIlc'nd a ,-i eiec, ICS. ;i.
F.liih fleer arr ivc in Scotland to :ift thei
(oiigreg;.!lon, Iio. a pcc cino(l,:dded bc-
tween t[inil, t11. tlhe enter cotla:d ;iud
bli icge the l'rench in .eitl), ic)i. arIe 1e-
veral tiniicrl-'lnli ed ,

I1., caulcs of their

bad Iucceli. ibid. 1i),. articles of t;ec-ty
or penca, iC 1. tihey uit Scotla:;,d, 2-2.

.;iicti.o)ls o the i(it )1 ft' cccEio; to tl;r
(C o'\n.'1 2 0,--223. tlhe n il ;i il:1Ctt filvotLris
(Q \'lit}':

, r hlit of i'iic': fio , 22 . a Ica ue

beti.een L i.

n, :iinid trance, 1I. 2z. be-

t. cein ni.i and and Scotland, IzO. the
nation:! covenant apte( in J'nu!;id. I'
TJY.:^.. i ''.\\ '. iati \2.:-\ inr: o.uc d 1. 11)

i:l'. rerSi',; lin t in tlhe Lhu1i h, folle ice-
eeoint C4, 1. 13.a aa; ;!rensrt to r]eie It,
,II , , *t. it al'oliic v the Aieiia-
bly, 7. J.:i'dit;LouL aboiiiilcd, :74. iee
/Ir ,ith:/ 1s.
Eir/!, Eari o one of the headis of the Spa-

nish flacion, I . i. hiJ offers of fcr'ice to
the K. of Spain, t . anpers in rebellion,
lt . is forced to iubmit to the King, ibid.
i;'!-'pifonet d for a fiort time, 170. jOins in
anothcr conipiracy, 19. is umnioncd by
the K inti to Itlrrerider, ibid. offers to ub-
Init to :; trial, iS3. sentence pronounccd
aainit i l - - -- h14.
E;,i.e of D)In, i'; emploC Idl hy tlhe Queen-

JRcc:.t t., dccci c the r)teilaits, 1. i o.
ii's refincint (.I tis tli (;l, - ibid.
--- l.ord, goerl,or of' t, inhur'li C;iile,

aIts ;i neutral j:pIrt bic\vcui the (Queen. Re-

e lent ail the con treiiiton, I 1 3. reccivcs
tlit Quec'n- lte'cl t il; o (li L '.iilc, 1)3. is
.ic's lx;: ill, h,':
i. h2 .1 h(t,1i o.

Ai-'- lic u hci '.si.~i diuc'sisson" of

the education of K. James VI. II. 48. ad-
mits some of the nobles to make complaints
to him againfl Morton the Regent, 5,-. i
turned out of Stirling Calile by hi s NI'ephe c
tihe Earl of Mar - - : 3
Et/'.al/, the French Envoy, endeaviourb to

c.!iru6 a treaty be t

t cen ngland and Scot-

land - - 1. 1 o
S/I',, F.arl of, set up b the Engliflh Paplls

as a candidiite {or the Crown, ]1. i':.
heads a parts in }nilairnd, 2;2. his ch.--
raier, iLd. is great ily iinolhed lx lOe
Q(een, 233. favours the K. of Scot, ;iid.
otr:i;s the ( f- ce of od .ieutenant and
(.oitm:ndLr in Ics in Jrelard, 234. is
uniucccf- ul in that extedition, ibid. re-
ccXves a iihnr;h letter from the Quecn, ibil.
returns to EIngland and is confned, i'!d.
i tied anl ccnircd, ili . cl'.d it, :', to
firit up King Jamcs, 23 . hi raill .rdnI
fi,:ntic conrdut, 23'). is again taiken i' o
culfody, iiid i.

his d th 237 his fsil : r:d

a'iociatc. are relored to their honour, ;'air
thei accciiion of Kilu- !l lane -i ii.
EZir,ci the laite of; at the beginning of the

bixtcenth L' Cnturv 1. -i
Ex.Sntuiirionc a terrible engine of the l'>-

pil Cle;gy - --- ,. ! I.

F.
F El. TO , an En2lilsman, fxcs trie Po'e's

e.xciiniiunication ofQ(. Eliz.ahth, on ti e
gates of the bilhon of London's pa:c:,

11. 7
Frllaon, M. de la Motte, sent by the French

King to interpolt for K. James when con-
fined bv the Ruthven conlpirators, 11. S.
is forced to return witho'i : fuccels, iLd.
Fiia'// g';cro.omrnt, its origin and :.riltocr:taicl

gemus, 1. 12, 13. caufis which linlitedi
the power of feudal monarchs, 14. feuial
vaflals lialle to few taxes, I , a rcmia k-
able inflance of ilic flcilenclts of feudal go-
vernment , 17. tie m)ull pertet idea of
tlie feudal fyieir

lt w

hoaw ;tined, 37. lli:t
of it in England, (5--('7. and ill bsctl.nd,

-1-- 67, (,S
Fy;, a populous and po\scrful tounty much

devoted to the congllcg ition, 1. ic). is
dlclroyed antd 1ipslondcild by tle J re1ch, idl( ,
tlt ) 1) l

od f, eX; xco)uniii ici:: tile areli i-
fliop of St. Andrcws tfr coIntumacy, II. I I

K k _ tlicy

they excommunicate the popish Lords

_ - 183
Fcrbes Lord, with the Earl of Argyl, is sent

against the popilh Lords, II. 187. are de-
feated by them, - 188
Fordun, John de, his history of Scotland when

wrote - -. 4
lo'/i'c- Sir John, warden of the English bor-

der, a scuffle between him and the Scots

II.. iiS
Ff./rr'Sgny Castle, Q. Mary's imprisonment,

trial and death there, 11. 128--149
France, the consequences of the subversion of

the feudal government there, 1. 72. a body
of French arrive in Scotland to support the
Catholics, 99. they reduce the calfle of
St. Andrews, ibid. another party of them
:rrive there. o16. their traniaCtions there,
ibid. ic9. conclude a peace with England,
ioS. their politic conduct, og9. they
leave Scotlnd, ibid. their articcs in a
treatv of miarriage bet e D

the Dauphin

and the Qo.f Scot, 13i, 136. endeavours
to expell the French arlnv out of Scotland,
163. another party of them arrive there
and forrify Leith, 17o. they exaiperate
the people by their insolence, ibid. they
are lent againll the congregation, 189. they
detlrov and plunder Fife, and a-e nuch liar-
rafFcd by pa:tics of the congregation, 190.
arc gre'atly ali.nr. e by the arrival of the
Enghil fl eert, 19o. theyl return to Leith
greatly liari-ili alnd e:.laulled, 191. are
believe(d thLic b thle llnyilil and the cn-
greL .irti,), io4. tliey .' gi ie\cral alvan-
ta':e', ibid. i;. tihei ii oti- cs for con-
clui.l n;; a p.c cc, 1)7. in-o;i.iticni tor that
purpose, I'S. :iitt!c:, ot thie treat', 199,
o00. they Clea' fe cotllanld, :cz. tle lIre;ch
:d'ditie Q Mary to nioderale nieatlire>, 2z7.
their prol-ofli., by an aim aliador ILjcitLd,
iibid. they a rce to Q . i\ J;U'S n i iari: ec
with Lod D .i iil, 7.1. the li eiiLti;uilel
of tl:ci Ir io':!, --

i4:

/' I ',,r,

" "i\ii ,t copy li . d i''t
lion:I :i'O ent

tl ) t. tl, :tiL, l-l- ,3

J . '.,, 1. IJ . it" a C.IC r, tib) i ;i:], tit lu pio-

j~'t, (1 C |;]L. \. - i '

h i, 'i

t,) t e ':cil;-, ,);. I, d, . lli ()9

-'"'- J]. ({)llt"> t() til.' c(1o\'ii ,1l I 'i: (C,
1. ,. *;'. 1. . 1 li.,jt.,- , ibi . i, . i: a t-ili -

ed by the Duke of Guise and
Lorrain, ibid. 166. he treats
lants with great rigour, 197.

cardinal of
the Prote-
his death,

210

G.

IFFO R DS, Doflor and Gilbert, their
notion concerning the ax' fulnef of kil-

ling heretica. excommua!icated Prnces, IL
122. they join in a conspiracy to kill Q.
Elizabeth, ibid. Gilbert being gained by
Walsingham betrays his abcliarcs, 124. is
employed to carry on a foreign correclon-
dence with Q Mary -- I
Glamis, Lady, is condemned to be burnt for

witchcraft I. 8
- Lord, chancellor, intimates the King's

order to Morton to surrender the Rcgency,
II. o. is killed in a rencounter of Stirling,

53

- the tutor of, joins the conspirators of

Ruthven, 11. 77. his bold fpcech to King
James, 78. he with thd other conpirators
icize the caltle of Sirling and erect their
fiandard, 91. he is attainted and his estate
forfeited - - 9
G'/ago.-zv, bilhop of, a note of his concerning r

the Queen of Scotland's dowry, app. - 7 I
G/lrcairi Earl of, joins the Ruthven confpira-

tors - 11. 77

(;/c'-,.rt the battle of - II. I8
Gor'.ii Sir John, a scuffle in the freets of

lEdinbulrg bletween him and Lord O()rIvy,
1. z9. being coniiied for it, lie liak
his elc;!;'e, ibid. when ordered b the
Qpuee n to iurrender lhimnif he takes up altn5
,,ainllt Iher, 24s, 2.6, 247. is defeated
and together with his brother Inade p iiO,-
ners, 2.19. he is beheaded and hi brother
pardoned - ibid
ord,/O,, Loid, ft at liberty Z- z8

- ir Adam, exerts himself for the

Queen':; inteli f in the north, 11. (,. his
charate.c: and good co n uct a;, s ildier, S
(,ovri-e LE:Il of, joins in a contliracv to ti:,

the Iing at Rutlie l,, .11. 77. , visited and
lpatdoiid by te King after liis eleape, ..,
liecotites 'il)peC ted :aiit1 is ordei ed toi 1 ',nc-,
91. del.y s lhiib '(iy;iet alli i- ti;ll n into
cullod , ilbi. lie is tried aid C.xcutetd,

Cowrie,John andAlexander, sons of the above,

their charaCter and conspiracy, II. 214.
the surprising circumfiances of that remark-
able tranfaftion, 215-z 8. several diffe-
rent conjectures concerning it, 219-228.
their dead bodies brought into Parliament
and condemned, 229. their eflates and
honours forfeited, and name abolilhed for
ever, ibid. different accounts of this affair
publifled but not fatisfaftory, 230--z32. fce
CGraham Sir David of Fintry, accused of a

confpiracv n ith the popilh Lords in favour
of Spain, II. 19. is conviRcd and be-
headed ibid.
G,ra mailer of, some account of him, II. o-;.

he becomes a favourite of King James Vr.
ibid. is gined to Q' Elizabeth's intercft,
jo4. berays Q(- Mary, ibid. peruades
K. ames to write a harlh and undutiful let-
ter to her, ic. joiun with others in pro-
imotiiig Q.t li.zabeth' interclt in Scotland,
114. his treachery when icnt to intercede
for Q. Mary, 143. his barcnefs dicovered
he is lilgraced, i;o. Ili vain attempt
against l-cretary Maaitland, ibid. adt in

iXaly as a ifly from te court of Jn1gl:ini,

210. a inciioi al ot his for his Vi jei-,
app. 83, Oq. to the Ifecrctary of lt:, o
G,:;/e duke of.: is violc;it counicis withi iv:ird

to the Sclt, I. i.. is nmurderlJl at te
liege of O(leans, - 2,

-- his iatrigue, aaih, 5 (2 Eli' d)etl, I .

i, 97. is a pri'!lc ': i,'itcr o[ tili
hloly league, 1 1 , 1'.. uriv, t, e ';cnel
King out of ins cai:l, - 1:;i

IT.

H T )
D D Nc T U A, sei .d and forti -

ihed bv tc Englilh ,

1 lo. . relievedl

Iby the lFrenclh --- 10o

lam il ,s, thle rift of tliat l' illy, 1. 30. L -

bitrary proccediu ot M1lorton thle Regent
agaiuEll it, [I. q . j C /',/5 '//''iruti//.
--- of Ilotli 1.11i , t:Ilen prilon.:r at
thle batce of lI1 r.l, ic, I. 40O. i i'l
:aad condelncd Ie ..illton, ild.. ,!. :. ,
:t p);t on t o

11 11 lurItil l itv t )ll legeC t1 t1

i,!tcrcelli ol IKnox, ibidl. an :l(. uontl ,
hlis iudtii, M Iurrad, in', .M;'",

r,l!.,

l.,. ec:ip';j, .130. i, lereived 111 tliuili l.h ;it
.1 !Unilto, , . ~- 11. i

Hamilton Mr. Patrick, the sirs who faffered in

Scotland for the ProteTlnt religion I. 141
Harforid Earl of, invades Scotlandwith an

English army, I. 93. burns Edinburgh
and Leith, ibid. is made Duke of Somer-
set, and protetor of England, o11. fee
Somcriet.
alto.n, vice-chamberlain of England. the ar.
gunent by which he prevailed on QMvary
to plead at her trial - II. 13
IIttirv 11. of France, fends forces to afiit the

Scots, I. 99. a marriage proposed between
his son the Dauphin and the youngQueenof
Scots, 10, 106. excites tlhe Scots to in-
vadec England, 31. his infamous impoii-
tion on Q. Mary in the treaty of marriage,
13I;. persuades his son and Q Mary o
alitnc the titles of King and Queen of Eng-
land, 143. hls death - 1C4

- 1l. degenerates greatly on his accef-

sion to the crown of Franc', ii. lii. en-
ters into a private i:cociation with QE Eli-
x.l,.eth, 13. intcrlo:es feebly in behalf of
Q, .1y --- 3

---- VI of ngla-nd. by his fsftem of

rifbo"ni;ti;: lI cc.)nl;.s f ;;-'i:i abl)Ie Iboh to

::pit, atnd I';or!i. ntS i.

I 9. FropciLs

an intcrviceiV \iih Is. Jines V. d. iid. is
diilsppointe in dd
him d eclares war

t''<i5ih Sc')'':':d, (r. in.'-d's ir but is

1;:ceil to !\t,'l'. i;ii..

s ( . !- : n impor-

tu.'t!,: .1i, o th,: ! ,I; i ':: il l :ic.'pc,
'-';. l;, il !ur' ce

u i ',slc o.nd h'ow oi>-

t .L!;cJ , lii' 1lhc1 C: i.h re' : a: d to it

o01 to'! d ,th of James V'. .L.
' ee iil-

'( rl.'l.d Ly hLind'f ad od'io;s to tle

Sc:,,. h^. :ittcm;:s to g,1 t'-]c v<legincv
lvy ('I. a ]romises, h;,

Iov.;i ' , 'coland,

92. t'I, !ivil:; ill condltii ted tuinl., to n')

rrCi)e';'t, 9' . ' iCciN o' Ld rusv>ard.1. tlhe
1':l:l 01'I .l ', i)d5. (T'cc U:

Ti'; the Ilur-

d 'ercr.', c i :.l l.;) t,,.n,

11.

cIll, d(1 ,t

andt cl tra clr, ib)id.

i u . i.is in.ci.,;. t

conaldi,, 14;. e .c!ud.I, tilh 'cot t: 1 ) I'y

11s ''
-, oI]l, jil) C :li.t i. ;.t i opOi(.5[ ;

si '

ii i i,, ll, 1. fie. (:
t h e ti .I t'? ,lIt

I

ni'i hi , .l2{ . he and thle Idu' - .;le cr) ini

It lis [ ri!' ~iCi 's to the c' l": otf I,, ribiit ),
!;,

7 i) irI ll tI'% t e l

':o '"s , .

sie t) M

o1 '-
toll Lo eli ,ii te le'CllCy, .1. 5o. aiLce it

rs his behaviour in Parliament, app. 5o.
a letter from him to Lord Scroop and Sir F.
Knolis -96
Iicik/,fd, secretary to the Duke of Norfolk,

betray-s him by difcovcring his intrigues
with QO ary - I 23, 24
Hi'/ar.s an,.l1 jl/es, an attempt to civilize thei

b K. Jamc, VI. 1I. 23. regulations for
that purpose, 240. three towns cndued
wvrth the p;ivilegcs of royal boroughs or-
deied to be buiit there - ibid.

-,g/.'n, a pricl of Reitis, maintained the

la fL tinss of killing hcertical cxcommuni-
cated Prince, - 11. zz2
Ilo: e, Lord, fcrt by K. amnes VI'. with a !e-

cret embafly to the pope - II. 21

l-iuard, fee Norfj5rf.
.luisdan.me Lord, governor of Berwick, his in-

terview with Arran - II.
Hu:tly Earl, tho' a catholic, joins the rcf;t:-

mers in opposing the French army, I. i( i,
1(4. alfills tlimn only with fair promils,
183. hi> sither conicurrence with thcni,
1c5. lone account of that famiily,
243. his enrmity againll the oung Qucen's
lniiiifers, ibid. his retentment inflamed by
an accident, 245. appears in open rebel-
lion againti the Qecen, 47. his plot againl
her iniiiifrs difarpoiited, ibid. breiks
ot into open rebellion, z.!. is troiddtn to
death in a battle, 249. 1's faily pro!e-
cutcd with the utmroit iigour, 250. ievcral
anecdotes and conjectures concerning I'is
plct,ibid. z25. i attainted by Pailiament,
2 8. the attainder repealed and the family
restored to eflate and honours, 351

- his attachment to l3othwcll, 347,
353. refuses to submit to the Regent 3-:.
is forced to do it, 4.23. ats as lieutenant
to the Queen after the Regents niurcer. II.
5. is proclaimed a tiaitor by Lenox the
new Regent, 8. receives blome noncy and
promiles of affillalnc from Spaii, ibid.
agrees to ai treaty with Mhorton the Regent,
139. is one of the heads of the Spaniftl ft;e-
tiOlo, 163. engags to llhcl'rirce of P.irna
to fe re the Kmiiof Spain, 167. is inlri-
oedfoned r a n Olt tinllc, 1i). trects a il iln-
daid of relellion ibid. bn forced to f-11)
niit to the King, ibid. is alain iipi ifoincd,
-, o. is loo(,n ct at il:cb ty, ibid. I Vcceic

acommifion fror the King, 176, his bar-
barous murder of the Earl of Murray, ibid.
is summoned to surrender to jftice, 1-9.
flies to the mountains, 180. offers to sub-
mit to a trial, 183. sentence pronounc:d
againfl him, 84. refufcs to submit, il;.
makes another desperate attempt but is
forced to fly -- lS

I.

J AMIES . was detained long a prisoner

in England, I. 29. troubles in Scotland
,urin; that time, ibid. wVs muchI ir-
pioved by an Engliih educ,;tion, 40. his
policy on his re:urn to Scotland, .4. his
characer, 42. fipprefies the power of the
nobles, ibid. they being exafplerated con-
spire againlt and murder himn 4,

I. troubles in Scotland duriii hj:

minority, 1. 30. his attempts againl t'! ,
nobles, 4, 45. murders the arll of
Douglas, 45. procures sveral good l;',.
to be pa:i!d, 46. reduce, the power of t:i
nobls, ibid. 4- his dc.at 4
.---- 11l. the l-ite of Scotland durilg ):i

nminoritv, 1. 3o. hi. i;npolitic coniliit-,
47, 48. kills one of his brother.,, and is
invaded by another, 4S, 49. is grealy in
fulted lbv his nobles, o5. hi- dfelicilsl
minioris, ibid. weas the ii ri't thi: a}pFii t d
a Itanding guard to his pcrion, 51 ';I
nobles are provoked to take arrms : a'ii|
him, ibid. is killed in a battle agnii
them, ibid. 52. his charatcr ibid.
--- IV. his chiaraier, I. 52, 53. i

killed in a battle againi the En hi h at
Flowden 53
- V. his minority long and tulbulent, J. 31.

tranltaftions dluring thait time, 53, 51-- i-
fumes the govecrnlnic'it s ihle very )yon1
54, 55. his clharasr, 55. his tc;iletr
for humbling the nobles, 5--59 i dii
verted from it bv the clegv (o, (1. t.:iks
a'in fior tle dclli'e ofl Is kinldlorn, (,i
his nobls iretlin[i to follow him, tiro\v:
hinl into a deel) mclancholy, GC, i;
which is iciealetd by a ui-pliiling dilfc:tt ot
his foiccs, (3. h lis ictt, 64. retfcctioi
on his conduCt, ibid. he rfuled an alli-
ance s'itli Cltarlje V Limplclor 7'

7,: ,',

.si s VI .

l 318. his baptiftm,

33-. the care o him com litted to the
Earl of Mar, 34J. is b-y im aprefrcedl
firon falling into the hands of Bothwell,
36 1. is crowned, -76. the nobles op-
prefred by M'lortoi tilc P e.cl.t. turi) th. Ir
c)cb to ilim I r rcdclt i I 4I l

. his e du-

cation and dilipfition, ibid. . 9. he b-
coimis iil-picious of the RegCnt's pOMer,
4). difrcovers, eC'lv g' :at attichmnlnt to
si vouritec, 00. adopt> twvo of dif-trent
di lp)o!it ons, ibid. cnt(ers Jdii <l i

Iurgv ti

girca.t IOblemindty, 62. is b\ his Lavouites
engaged ill unpopular inleaure 7-, 7 .
is liz/d b a partt of nobles at Ruthen,
77. :1d tfrcd to receive compl.ints
.,ainlit his fvsourites, ib.. S. dili. nimbcs
tltth thelil and ban5ilc s enox, 7). is
br it 'hrt to htirlin" and JIflvroodhoui'c. i.
his concein atLenovs deat'i, anld Iegaid for
hi mrnmor/, ibid. receiv\c the rencli

'!l b iiLdor witih ret reip-c,'t 83. makes
his -feape fromn the confpiltors, ibid. t.
ilsolves to treat them nwith moderation, t.;.

ifita (;oiwrie and grants him a pardon, ibid.
,reneC'c his fondcls for Arran, ibid. ,0.
is liv inir pertfuaded to violent ineafures
a ri.intl the confilrators, aSC. his answer to
l iaulihl letter fi-om () lizabeth h

on their

bchalf, K-. is by her interposition tendered
ioire vioicnt agtinft them, S8. is pro-
vo!ted by the clergy, 89. his ftceps to
.ueinle them, qz. his profusion to Arran,
eO. fend a new favourite tolngland againit
the banished Lords, 103. devolves the
v.hliol recal authority on Arran, 1oS.
writes an undutiful letter to his nlotier,
iic. is threatened to be disinherited by
hel, 11r. receive> a peniion fiom Q Eli-
:lbeth, 11;. is reconciled to the exiled
J.orid, I17, becoimes popular by conclud-
.s;g ' tr nts ' ith 'n,

hl:nd, 120, 121. his

.itan i thou', bchaiviotil with rega:rd to arclid.

Dougla,, iid. his enle;ivours to save his
lothlcr's life after lie. condcnll tio, 139,

o. i .lre l. i,, ietil :ItIcth rdc atCtl, 154.

:irgtutmesiL s tlifid 1bs thie Fl gli!l millisiers to
patcfy i1inm, ibid. 155. i, frced to lisle
hi, rCIClltitment, 15. attellpts to unite the

(o!le ., 1 57, 15. is courted hoth y
ptaiti and l'tglid 2, 10, i3. relolvcs

vigorouily to a.llere to the latter, i.
ta; cs several leps with that view, ibid.
1. l

his skill in the popish controversy,

i S. wrot a commentary on the revcia-
tis) s, ibid. his maxims with regard to po-
pe. , Jibd. r'),. his exccfilve lenity to
coniihi',rat . agi.intl hi:n, i50. recilves t:
m il v tlh I rincels of Denark, o. arits
ucd to revent it, iid. the marliagc s
conr.umni:atd in Norway, 171. paLis ie-
vei'al ini,)ntls in Denmark, ibid. reflic-
ti m o hli condut there, ibid. z. . is
u.-is al i Scot' and with his Queen, 17;
ind blgc> tlhe P-'r.flyter-ians, 174. tlhe ill
coinfc.iLctic of hi, Icnit, iid. i-;. hi
:.'il iga'inltt xitchcraftk, 17; . is solicitcd
' (). 'Jliza.;beh to treat the conlpiri-ater
;i5r iilkhlt i r il1

w ist ilur, I" o. ii fiupectd

of conni' inh .itl thn, i, I. is fuiiprizue
and i.i,cd b. L t' Vcl), iid. and tc. d

iot!lncii abui id, il id . . il ilctLcd
of favouring tihe popilh Loi's, 1 3. i in
new danger from them, rS (. del'gates
his authority to Argyl and Sorbes againlt
tllhei, 187. goes in person againil tim,
ibid. watices their lands ani giariions ticir
c ialcz, ibid. his right of the iucceflio to
the cown of England opposed by the pa-
lq15t, i89. his lenity to them incenses the
cLrgy!' ad people , 193, 94. is mch
provoked by the obllinacy of the cerg,
19. gives orders against them, 197, i^S.
i; m;uch insulted and in great d(ingelr i
Ed(inburgh, 198--200. leaves Edinburgtl
and proceeds with severity ;gainfl the ecti-
zenii, '-zo20;. acquilres abiolute donmi-
nin in eccleliallicil aairs, zo04, 20;.
fit:rngtaeli; hiis inl parliiament by reftoriug
the b-ats oftlieeccclcfiallics, 26, 207. en-
(eavouls with fucccfs to gain a party in
E'glallnd, 2zo. increases hi.; reputation by
publiiijng hiis Bafiilion )orion, 209. i;
:,cculfd by Q._ Elizanbcth of correfluonding
\ith the Pope, zio. this lhe denies ian
how accounted for, 2zr. other reportr
roncerning this, 212. is at glcat pa!ins to
gin thle olinani catlolicd, iid. bis regu-
lations x\ ith regard to thle cutclli, 213. the
nmylterilout aflair of Gowry's conlpirac'y,
24,.--,j33. liL cautious bc;la'iour in regard

to

to the Earl of Ex, 235. fends ambaffa-
dors to save him, 236. they arrive too
late, 237, hc icftores his son andaffociates
to their honours after his accession, ibid.
continues his intrigues in England, 238,
230. his interest greatly flrengthened there,
ibid. 239. endeavours to civilize the high-
lands and isles, 239, 24.0. is proclaimed
King in England after the death of Q.E!i-
z.abeth, 2 1, 26. is proclaimed likcevife
in Scotland nd prepares for his journey to
England, 47. cnters London and takes
ponflfion of the throne, z.8. his charac-
ter how diti'enr t from that of Q. Elizabeth,
ibid. a letter from him to Mr. Archd.
DOnugeis, ap -- 85
l]ur-rn,'/s Cale, rctfLfes to furrendcr to QL

M;,ry. . 47. it is forced, and the gover-
nir puni:iied - ibid. 2.j
i'l,, the liberty of, how rcfclrved, I. 73

K.

Ei/T [ Sir William, sent to interccde
for (Q2Mary wien under sentence, 1I.

i . letter to him from fecrctary Alait-
ia!,d, app. - - 85
A-',; Larl of, appointed to scc tlhe entence

againit Q. Mary executed 1J. 1q5
Kfr of lernl-ilhrlt, ravages Englaid on the

murder of Murray the Regent, I. , 2.
his deIign, 4. has a scuffle with the Eng-
lifh - 1 I
- Ceo. brother to L. Nevwbottlc, is (lif-

covered s\hen ready to fail to promote a
plot in Spain, JI. 178. his Icheme opened.
ibid. cicaps out of prilon 181
A'i//l;zc.' Henry, his declaration on the peace,

157. app. - - o
.Kigs feudal, the most limited of all Princes,
1.. . general causes of this, 14. their
revenues were but small, ibid. 1;. had
no sanding armies, 5. and jurildikTion
limited, 16. means used to extend the
royal authority, 3. their jurifdicion en-
larged, 35. tlte extraordinary ililuncce of
the Scottilh Kings in PaIrliament, 65. the
reason of this - ibid. (9
I/siua/l/ of Grange, one of the murderers of

Ic(atoun is recalled by the Q. Dowager, I.
i t2. his attainder reversed in Parliament,
7.$. offers to fight Bothwell in tingle

combat, 366. his interview with Q.Mary,
in name of the confederate Lords, ibid.
rescues Maitland from confinement, 431.
labourb to support the King's authority and
restore harmonv after the murder of the Re-
gent, II. 3. accedes to the Queen's party,
ibid. 4. provides for a siege by increasing
his garifon and fortifyng Edinburgh, .
proclaims Lenox's authority unlawful and
ufliarpcd, 16. attempts in vain to prevent a
meeting of the Parliament, ibid. forms a
scheme for surprising the King's party, 19.
is at first lfccefful but afterwards defeated,
20. comes near to an agreement with Mar
the Regent, 31. a treaty ith Morton,
breals it off, 37, 38. fires upon Edin-
burgh f-om the c.ailc, 38. is besieged
by the Regent ailted by Englith forces,
40. is forced by a mutiny of the garifon
to capitulate, 41. surrenders to Drury the
Engliqi[ general, ibid. is by order of Q.
Elizabeth deliveled u to the Regent, 42.
he and his brother are executed 13
K.:,'! ;s Sir Francis, sent by Q. Elizabeth ;wit

letters of condolcnce to Q. Mary on her ar-
rival in England, I. 395 iome of is let-
ters, app. - 51, 5, 5
K:oax John, a famous reformer, his charater,

I. iii. after being ome time abroad he is
recalled by the periecuted Protcllants, 151.
inflames the multitude at Perth with rage
againif the papifls, ibid. his notion con-
cirn ing the government of women whence,
156, 157. his residence fixed in Edin-
burgh, 1. complains of the lukewarm-
ncei of the ieformers, 174. his opinion to
the cnvention of rciorm-rs that it is lawful
to rfitl and dcip ivc y rannic.l Princes, 76.
animate. and revives the dfponding con-
gregation, 1iS, i85. complains of the ne-
glct of the reborlner.s in providing maintai-
ninice for their preacherIs, 207, rccom-
mend> tlhe (Genva model of church go-
vernmient, 2 13. propofls fuperintelndntl c
in the clurch , 2 4. coIlli>ol- thle filii
book of dliciplinc, 1 . renounces friclnd-
flip with the Earil of Murray for hi> mode-
ration, 239 i:, tried for encouraging a 1 1u-
tily among the 1p)ople antd tlquitted, 26o.
popilli judges concur in this decision, ibid.
2(1, is publickly accused by Miitland of

pre.lchin'',

preaching seditious do&trine concerning re-
iiflance, zo7. characters of the two difpiu-
tants, ibid. approved of several instances
of aflhlination, 31;. agrees to ione regu-
lations concerning the eleicion of Bilhops,
I . 34. his death and cha:nraer, 3,. 3(.
his eulogium by Morton the Rgent, 36.
articles sent by him to the general alienblyv,
ipp. - C

L.
l , .4NGSIDE, the battle of, I. 93g

Li,- zn cardinal, is sent as Nuncio

fiom the Pope with a present to (Q l Mary
of Scoltand, 1. 323. is flopped at ari,

3-9
Lo5ag:e holv, a confederl-c of rman catlio-

,cs so called, 11. iiw. univera lly
agr!eed to by then ;;1 over ,Euroice ili,.
Learzi.,g, thle rev: al of proilotc) the rIctr-

matilon -- . 1t9
Li'ler Earl of, appointed a comiPniioner to

thi, conference at \VeC!minlr, i. 41
L '.,' burn: by theili. iith, 1. 93. oirt; led by the

French, I-o. b:fi.e l by the ''nliii, i,
Q(. M .a r I l.ie tliere from l'r.i , j. the
fulcriority of it granted b, her to Edin-
bi:rgh, 4. i.i ci,:cd and forticied by Mor-
ton and the Regent, -- I1. b
L,;-.vl Earl of, arr-ives in Scotland from France,

I. S is much courted by cardinal Be' ouii,
ibid. his pretcniions to the iuccelioin how
founded, go. relents faetoun' deccitful-
nties to hiil, 91. heads the rforilci and
the advocates ior the Englilh alliance, ibid.
{urprizes the Regent and cardin:l, 92. is
outwitted by the cardinal, ibid. continues
alone in the interil of England, 93. is
forced to fly to that couit, wihere ihe is Ic-
\:;'.icd, ibid. i, nmarrid to a niece of k.

cl nrv ,v wliclih hi bclcaine fiither to a

race of Kings, ibid. 9t. hii, claim to the
Int ce'fion, 2'(,. i' ilmp]il i lncd i- a

I eciet

corrlefp.ondnc \with (n;Miry;, ' -,.

i i

vitcd tclcrctiv by her to ictuln to S).l i lld,
ibld. airives i Scotland, and i rcivd
with gI t

l t iiaity

l )y l'her, ,S. lhii so

fi'it:nc i 1r''iealcil, and lie i]. Icll,'t d tO Ii,

l.itr andi henLI u( r'. by tihe i I' liic t, I,).

Il, l;ady si'nt prlotintr t heo ih osl ot lIoi -

,.'!,,. :'9' . ;a ld trel., d .irl lig,)ti', . ' ,. hc

,,':l . on

;J l . !' i ,'o lc, ,, ol hi. sn, )
l. ; il i1'.

murderers, 344, charges othwell with it,
34. the prosecution is hurried, 346. lie
craves a delay which is refuted, 347. he ir
left alone in it, ibid. follicits Q. Elizabeth's
intercll to obtain a delay, 348. inlills on it
by proxy at the trial but is over-ruled, 349.
being apprehcnfivc of danger le flies to-
wards Engl-.nd, 35;0. his countess accf-s
( )Mary of the muider to Q( Elizaleth,
397. he appeaL; at tle confernccle at WVeit-
mil!tler and iccufes Q Maly of tile murder
upon oath, 4.1 . returns to Scotland pro-
telted by an Englifi arm', II. ( i elected
Rege.nt, , 8. his projgref agrilft theQ)uen's
party, ,. appoint cmniiiio ncLrs to fiame
a treaty v ith thlife of the OlecI!, 1.

i ur-

plri.C numbinrton caltle 1, -1. j!iis tile

/'-.i; of M , t) at Leth, 1 ., . i O. ids a loi, -
lia.mnit in the l.'allom''2, ia'lh(J.

m ti;:hecr at
cLiillg, l 19. l i i ' U;i ,i::c.e a:,i killde there

iiid. 20
L':.-x, late iaubine, Ii S c.a lie . II. Ci,

join9 will ti iil ,e ig' other nm :-au: ilc t')
Iiirideiiien iVi ortit, iid. I e:' ipC'' pc e-
r ', . Q El;z.;ibctli d i

' ;' ' hii to Lc

rumored fioml the priv) c.L.; : , 3. ac-
cuted b' hier Iilltisioi;,r, t,-. Arran tries
in vaisn o Ul'i':Lt himl, . is cminiined
b, 1K. Jaies at the re(luceit o L'. no le to
leave the lkngdeom, 79. p1u oiirh I d par-
t,ll Ol vario u pi'eliicee , - O.a, ) I1. i l rns
in\vilntlllgly to tiranlice wilerI J s.on dSie,
xi. his imimn,)r vintica e and miuch rc-
gaddl by tlie ing. ibidi. died a I'rotc-
ltnt. - - ibii.

-- . of, leii ai thle Kiing' lieutenant in tie

north alter dilfperli ng the 1topill Lords I . 1S:;
Lrji' Norilnan, millur(lis cidinal Bcntoun, .

y . h and hii aflibciatla keep ouSIl'rii'n of
t c c.ilti of 't. \itlre,\ c, -.

it. a tru'C

\xii i

til KR 1ec t, 9 . .eC e toli. l l

. lr I'v
15cmv \ 1Il - Ibi

ic°

- i-L-p

ilo f iol,, iv 't bll ' l'l c:it o-

lis 1n S cotl. i l 10i e m$,l . ().i ii\ lji [trclit
iutL<t'i/, 1. '( . hi l,,i~opv;l. to her rc.jc -

iln l.".our ul)1 /l airVy, 11.2 ',,. r, corn-
linid lo n t tIoe 1r

lind

h tlrn

c r l ii , i ibl-

111!]l ' I |'',;] l 111 __ _-
/./,,,\ \ mld, , tli C', llthe p!'r l otild f'oil the1

conils l, 1t :1, It t ) l~ ; ,.

V (li.t |ix llii ,uld Ic-

t ,ii I '' "ii\ ' itn[, 1. i ,. j ll l the '

il ti l-
\ 1 1 '!)i)1 ll'; . I . ' *

X I 1 / :, . .

,oLachlevin castle, Mary committed a prisoner

there, I. 370. her cfc.pe from thence, 38
-- Lord, letters to and from him, ap-

pendix - - 72
Logan of Reflalrig, an alledged accomplice in

Gowries conlpiracy, r1. 220, 221. is tried,
and his estate forfeited long after his death,

- - 222, 223
Lrds confederate, associate against Bothwell

and Q. Mary, I. 362. raitf forces againfl
them, 363. publifi the motives of their
conduct, 364. prevail on the Quc.n to fur-
render to them, 367. afumrne the title of
Lords of the secret council and the royal au-
thcrity - - 370
·--- popish, conspire against K.James, 11.

167. arc treated by him nith great lenity,
169. form a new conspiracy, i-8. the King
proceeds gainft them, 179. more of hile-
nity to them, 183. frclh dangers from
them, 86. they receive money from Spain,
ibid. zeal of the clergy againlt them, iS.
are declared guilty of treason and th ir
eltttes forfited, ibid. defeat tle King', ar-
my, iS8. are difpifecd on the Kin's ap-
proach, ibid. go abroad d

ad give fci:-

rits to keep the peace, I89. retul n to Scot-
land, and petition for leave to reside in their
own houses, 193. this granted by a con-
vention of estates, ibid. recant their errors
and are absolved from excommunication,
205. relapse, and are again reconciled to
the church of Rome, ibid. are rclored to
their estates and honours - zo2
Lorai, cardinal, gets fomc of the bcfl bene-

tices in Scotland, - . 14o
--- Princes of, their ambitious views, I.

144. instigate the Dauphin and Q. Mary
to take the titles of King and Queen of
England, 14;. refolhc so invade- Eng-
land, 146. and to check the reforna-
tion in Scotland,i lid. the cardinals great
influence over the young King, i6F, i(6).
drives the (Qccn R eenlt of Scotland to vio-
lent iiciafiires, 1 71, 172. their violences oc-
cifion a confipiracy atlginfl thlem, 198. eic
forced to withdraw their troops from Scot-
land, ibid. they insult the Scottifll anll)1lf
Idtlor, r'C. h1;ve great owcr over tle
younng King and Qcuen, 2 .. re forcd to
cnltrad tlieir views on tle datl, of tle
K11)ig - tI,

Luther, a bold and principal promoter of the re-

formation, I. 119. the rapid progrcfs of his
doarine, - zi z

M.
M A'70 R John, his hiflory of Scotland,

some account of, I. .
Alai/i'ald of I.ethington, secretary to Mary

QLeen Regent, leaves her f vice antd jiins
the cong egation, I. 183. his character,
184. is ent by them ambafi ador to Q. Eli-
zabeth, i85. fends thein aiiurance o her
proteftion, S8. is sent b Q. 1Mary to the
court of England, 23 1. n akes a cn;ccfion
to Q( Elizabth, ibid. acconpanie- QO Mair
in a progrcfs to the north, 2.46 he i- ecm-
ployed by (Q Mary to delire a personal in-
terview wtith Q(Elizabcth, 2 5. pubi-'ly
accuses Knox of reaching leuiiious dcc-
trine concerning refilancL. 270. intimtes
to Q. Elizabeth the intention of Q_. Mi:ry to
marry Darnly, 277. prudently conceals her
relentment from Q. Elizabeth, 279. p o-
poles moderate meafuies with regard to ()
Mary when imprisoned, 373. attends the
Regent when cailed on to accuse her in Eng-
land, 4o4. he disapproves of this measure
ibid. his intrigue with the Duke of Nor-
folk, 408, 409, 424. is imprisoncd by the
Regent, 430. is relieved by Kirkaldry and
secured in the caltle, ibid. 431. proposes
a coalition of the two partie, after the mur-
der of the Regent, II. 2, 3. accedes to the
Queen's party, 4. is deprived of his office
of secretary, and proclaimed traitor, S. is
attainted in a Parliament of the King's par-
ty, I6. agrees with Mar, 31. his views
in refuing a reconciliation with Morton the
Regent, 37, 38. rejecs overtures of atreaty
with him, 3 . is beifeged by him in the
cafile of Edinburgh, 38. i forced to capi-
tulate and surrenders to the English genei;l,
41. to avoid the Regent's relcntmcnt lie
dtiipatclhes himself, 43. several of his let-
ters, app. 11. 63, Sg

ir- John, is made secretary for Scot-

land, II. i . concurs with others in pro-
moting Q: Elizabeth's interells there, ibid.
attrempts againll him by capt. James Sew-
art, lait. Arran, 16. they prove aboltive,
and he is advanced to ie chancllor, 15-.
:al atteipt to rcnIove hifn from that oflice.

frullii;t cd,

frustrated, 69. his death, 9go. a copyof
verses in honour of him wrote by the King,

~~- ~~- ~ibid.
Mar Earl of, that title conferred on the prior

of St. Andrews, 1. 244. accompanies the
Queen in a progress to the north, 246. he
and his affociatce narrowly ecapes affafli-
nation, 247. he is created Earl of Murray,
248. fee M.rra.
- the t;tle is conferred on L. Erfkinc, 24q.

the person of the young Prince put into his
hands, 34;. his resolution in prefcrving
him from Bothwell, 361. is chofni Regent,
I21. labours to brinl. a about a eneral

eace, 3 1. is thwarted by Morton and hlii
associate, ibid. 52. dies of mlanchol,,
ibid. his characr, ibid. hi.; merit and in-
tegrity was acknosledged by both prtics,

ibid.

the voung Earl, being imposed on by

Morton, turns out his uncle fionm the calle
of Stirling, 1. 3. join the Ruthven con-
fpirators, 7-. he V\ ith the oers seize
Sterling caltle, and crc their landard, ().
is attainted and his eltare forfeited, 90. is
pardoned and ritorcd to ellate and lio-
nours - -- II-, IIS

lr,.rc/ countciir of; hIr infamnous mairi;lc

with the Rarl of Arran, II. 7I, -7
l.iy of Gui'e, Q.Dowvager of Scotland, takes

a considerable hare in the government. 1.
il-. is much addidled to the French inte--
eli, ibid. projets a marliage of her daugh-
ter to the Dauphin of France, ibid. o0.
becomes instrumental in promoting the re-
formation, 113. aspires to the ofiice of
Kegent, ibid. promotes difl'fct;ion to the
prelent one and favours the reformers, 1i4.
visits the court of France, 5. returns to
ecotland to take pofl'fi5oIn of the Rgcncy,
ri6. after oine op ofition fihe obtains it,

17. confers several oliccs of trull upon
fitangers, 129. Ipnpoles to lay a tax upon
land, 130. is forL cd to drop it, 13i. tries
in vain to excite a war with L'nl.ind, ibid.
the nobles vigorously oppose Ih r mncafurcs,
32. treats the lctormers with great rc-
fpet, 133. obtains a concefiion iroi tlie
J'arliancnt in f'tvour of the I)at1h, i;'.
het artfll Ilnai:!gcli it of the Icl)rlimer,
ibld. 13). bellows lie vacant benefice on
forcillelrs, 140. flue altcrs her condiiit to
th secfollncrs, 1.3. ellimonllratcs agaiil1

the violent measures of the Princes of Lor-
rain, 147. is persuaded by them to perse-
cute the reformers, 148. her rash answer
to their remonstrance, 149. summons their
preachers to appear before her, ibid. breaks
a promise she had made them, 50. marches
with an army againit them, 52. concludes
a treaty with them, 153. this fie again
breaks, ibid. her severity at Perth, ibid.
her schemes dilco-ceredl, 15q. she goes to
attack them, i ;. has again recourse to
negotiation, 156. she is llartled at their
demands and gets time to anfver them, ".
violates anolher t;ie.ty, 8. loses Pclith
and forccd to abandon Stiling and ELin-
burgh, she retires ith prccipitation to Dun-
bar, ibid. maiches to attack the rctormlers
at Edinbugh, 161. gains time by her ar-
tilice, ibid. makes another treaty xxith
them, 162, her artiices to undermine te
prior of St. Andrew., i69. the ablurdity
of her fchieme, ibid. -o. get, a rei,-
forcemnclt of french trooFp v, ho f!orti ;y Lci ll,
ibid. fle dificgards a remonitrance of te
reforners, 171. is influenced by fire-nct
counlcllors and pcrfwaded to violent ina-:
lures, ibid. 172. retires to Leith on tr:
approach of the reformels army, 17 3. Ii:r
prudent and artful ondut there, ibid. r
haughty and inmprious anirver to a frel: iec-
mnonltrance rom themn, 174. is by a con-
vention of them deprived of her ofthce if
Regent, 176. the foundation of this fen-
tcn.c, ibid. iS. foments dciffrences anoi.
them, 179. is defeted by her principal c-
crctary, 1 3. fends firench troops againit
the rcformecrs, iS9. retires inro the calli
of Edinburgh on the approach of the Eng-
lilh, 193. Ier death and character, 1Q'-.
irepeted of her violent lmeafurcs, 107. ii-
ileiced to the inthllrusiins of a cftornced
pi cacher - ibid.
anrL; (Qpeen of Engl:and, her pclrfecu ing reii ,,

1. ln8. hK.r dcatli, -- I.;o
-- cQCeen of Scotsbt Sir, 1. S. a rop,-

f.il to imai; - iher to l'd VI. i;4. fle is de-
manlided y lley V'Ill. S;. her mnar;age
to the )aphlil, of I rance rotpled, oC.
a tIty for that pr}oli (OyIKludcd,

st7.

Iie i' lent to bc ed.! itt ill i': 1iLn , iblid.
tlhe tl l cotjl ( c (' thi,, ibid. i. ir-
jp fcd on Ly thl ,lt.llt's of thle 1'c i lh ill
til c :t 'o' it i i ' , . hrt ll,111
i;Ii'

1.1J 1 I . i (tik -

celebrated wth great pomp, 136. they
take the title of King and Queen of Eng-
land, 14. Ih ia mlkcs conceflions to the
congregation, 199, 200. declares Q. Eli-
zabeth's right to the crown of England,
ibid. file acquires an entire ascendant over
iher iu'ali.d, 210. flic is overwhlelmed
x\ith reat afilifion on hij death and retires
to Rheims, 211. (lhc is invited by the con-
v1 'tion to return to Scotland, 21 i6. an
cinilstrv fiom the catholics in Scotland pro-
pi'os violent nieafurcs to her, ibid. file is
dl terinined to moderation by the French
and the prior of St. Andrews, 217. is p:e-
v;l!ed on to prepare for her return to Scot-
I!:nd, z28, the origin of the diicord be-
twVeen her and Q Elizabeth, zi9, 220.
her prctenions t h the crown of Thi!land,
2zo. is evi cd on account of her beatty,
22r, tidemnds a Life condu froi, Q. E'i-
7caetlh whiich i i filid, '24. leaIcs ranlce
with great cluCt:cc, 2 ;. laniid, at Lcith,
ibid. , ni;:ilhaii t'te by the change ofher
situation, 2.. ie eral ditadvantages at-
tendin her accelion, ibid. -2-. Tfme cir-
cunLlin!icc. to her advintage 2 ", 2208.
iher ccolnl'ii-hlmcpti of bodv and nmind, ib.
thie l rilnt; of ler capel inulilted, ibid.
pro ;i;'cs the , e ccrcile oi hcr reliti'on,229.
iif ; a rocl:mination in favour of the Pro-
relkanr , ibid. 23o. employs them only in

cthe a(ilninil:i;Iit; , =30. atC!elpts to gain

Qz Ei:abeth': -'.-ur, ibid. makes a con-
ccji an tu tilC, 2'T. whlich i' rejcted, 232.
11i ii .ii:a lLr pL:.iC entry in o Edinburgh,
ibd. .1 i cile. oCFI!ced to hr religion on
that oteiioo, 33. difcouragcs the at-
tenpils of the p.pitils to gain her favour,
234. hclr averion to the fmily of Hamil-
ton, 23,. lmakes a progreis into the north,
240. ir i nitlers narowl v cica pe alTfl:i-
nation, 2 _-. is rcfi;'d cc( fs to the c stile
of l:I.Leli, ibi.d. hcn e in the utinoll
coll!1cr;: Ition i-; relievce l>v ihe laon ;'o, and
ot)i r'l 'l. , i l . I r f;,rc' ic defeat liunlt-

et:, ic(, cll ioln, (). 1)1 i dcetires :!n inte.r-
v >vt, ^r lil () l .li/,abeh li, 2 I. Iiel'oc'i -

ai,;1tid lU bliil'Lrcnt ri aIr , ; , ;p

c ier

!'c 1/.'Ii'artj'-:. ')Ilicr lillLO 11, ilj]l. I, ib( rc tl
li> bI: r tlc authoiit.ltine l.'h'a oiir of (-
1' i '. tll 2,:). to) phl1 l' i l

.' l bljc ie-
'11111i,, ag t;g i./ll[ a t ri' g alli:nce, 2 -' .

determines not to ratify the treaty of Etdin-
burgh, 258. further negociations for ier
marriage, 26i. d;fcovers the v;ews of
Catharine of Medicis, ibid, 262. Lord Ro-
bert Dudley recommended to her a a '-
band by Q Elizabeth, 262. h heis
highly offended at this. 263. difenllcs
with Q Elizabeth, ibid. z6j. entertaius
thoughts of marrying Lord Darnly, 265.
ihe recall Lenox, 266. is affronted at a
letter of Q. Elizabzth, 267. her indiffe-
rence as to lie reforned, and zeal for the
catholic rcl;ion, 269. is taken with Darnly
at firil light, z-z. is greatly moved at (Q
Elizabeth's infutlring craftines, ibid. 273,.
necotiates with the court of Rome for a dii-
peinlation to marry Darnly, z73. and the
conient of the court of France, 274. im-
peciis on Randolph, but applies to Q.
Elizabeth for content to h1er marriage, 270,
277. whiclh (he afc,:L to rleflufc, 277 ill
releitimenit ihe popofe, to fend an angry
meflage to Eli/abetli, xnhich Maitland prc-
verts, 2-9. jullifies her condut to the
Engliih ambafiador, ibid. endeavours to get
Murray's conentent, 2S. courts the pope's
protection, and receives a lubidy fiom him,
Ibid. her great addreit, in ga;.ing the con-
lent of her fubjeft>, 2'53. tp events a plot
againli Darn', 2S4. imlnn ons her vafTls
to take arims againil Murray, 28). and
him to appeal bfore her, 2z7. her mar -
riage with Darnly celebrated, ibid. dl!e
confers the title of King of Scots Lpon him,

SS8. this ilep censured, ibid. ier relcnt-
inent againfl the malcc )nnt, ibid. fhc
marches againil tem, 29. rejets the
interceflion of Q Eliz:bethi in their behalf,
291. continue her march againi the re-
bel>, ibid. her conduct and courage on
that Occ lion, ibid. 291. dive>. them out
of Scotland, 291. her fulther resentment
againlt them, 2)3. ha rccourfe to vral
de'icce to raile money, ibid. 94. her
proiperit) p omotei her religion, t9,;. her
deliber.tio:s concerning the exiled l.ords,
z9). (determtiei, tt) treat til'll9 wili leniit',
.''. iu divelrtcd fohiI this li hler religion
ain l.rInch inilatIcc, ilbid c. thi, t he
oiIr·c- (f I her ;itLI- Ii;ter fittui.s , 300. her
iiltenItio I tot retllOcc pti(i'C', 301, i dit
gu3 tc wit Juil i)nit yv', ill len ilt l)Lhaviou:-,
3 1. lh -r/llililrity Wil ILiao liEnd tlc

XiG%;,

King, 303. vindicated from any criminal
correlpondence with Rizo, 3;-307. uses
her utmot endeavours to pri've;nt his mur-
der, 30o. she is confined by the conlfpi-
rators, ibid. /he gains thle .;in. a:Il ci'-
capes from them, 309. is rccitcied to
the exiled nobie3, 3io. her hatred to
Darnly increales, 315, 316. ;aind tvour
for Boithvell commences,

1 37. ect n

C: iihlc

ionie ldoinci' c feudl s ;n n tc I,(.clc:,
318. is dclivered of her ion Janitc \ I. in
the Cafill of' dinburgh, ibid. invite f-
veral to;eign princes to lis baptifin, 3;9.
continues to treat Darnlls itlh ni 'i ct,
ibid. her attachlncnt to Bothcvcll inciafcs,
320. prevents Darnl' intended iiiithi,
322, 323. ifits the bordels, 323. a i-
Irance ot her regard 'or Bothwell oni tlltt

cealiion, ibid. hoQ' ihecrira'td (3 Elizabeth,
32 4. her ig'ht of Succcllion tivourcd l.v
the 1.nglilh parliamlnt, 32z. f1t enIdel-
vourb to avail hcerl-lf of that opportunity,
32z, 3z-. the takes an extraordinary ltcp
in favour of popery, 38. rIcccivcs l pt e-
icnt froin the pope, but llop his nunc'); ait
Pal is, 329. end'cavours to pt

'curc a bet-

ter lfblilitncce or the rcformnd clr gs, ibid.
330. her avcriion to the King cxccllic,
becomes melancholy, 33o. fle dIclic a
divorce from him, ibid . 331. goes to
Stirling to celebrate he;- ons i: t tilil, 3 2.
is greatly ofi,'ndcd at the king'. beliav'tovl
on tat occasion ibid. rclorcs the t,'i ilI
eccleiaitical 3juiilicion, 3 ,. Ihc ncoi, t
ot the .Kiini dnri'1' his nickni os, ; ;.. thc
breach between themi bccol. e  jllar.,).,
i'id, 339. Ile vift it hiim at Glal.;\',
339. the motives of her dil inluiatio
on that occalion, ibid. 340. 'Ievail 011
him to come to EdinbuLgh, 3 . Ihr lu

I
picious behaviour to hln thlle, ib;d.

2. iftile: a procl:inationl si dilto

vciring h li1 inrldiclo '., 343. i:, iLi (,i.ld
to hiave I)c n . ccell'ry to it, ilbid. ni .har-
gcd. sitli it ibload a> . \ 'well a; l':l, i. '
'oe. to 'ilit hl, oi ;l i t '

rii:,, ;i i. i,

111(.i o l

} IC' .rtnn by l rorl\ ll, \,:o ; , i.'. ,

-liil i calii ,, li, to D)li l.1,1', ild ll '[

i .;

({) l.I ,inb[] l,}, , jS, :,,,.1 i]l: li .l .) i/ltil
po[l , 1 ;

(3 ,

.

e !t

n 1 apolo o ' ( '

t 7l; ,

oi l '. i

1, , n

. I : i ll , ilid.

a e r i ,]( I'. .i

csltlthe in gle l m .li? .,l ), :l , i;

, 1, i. ;'

;il)l'i'oat, t().l i ll] a111

. l at :i[ ' it!)lll, ii[
of' tie nobleas ; , ll ici, ( z. il.c utb,

ibses a nianifedo to v 'c h e

Ii r conl, ci',

363 i cnduceC( to te ctr1of' L"
vhi]k, ]itid. nice s sx g19

i ot h s 1 s In

agiaintn he confe-e!ratu 1 ru "j an
tenipi l a a Oi1I.... .'C

Lt f1rcesi a ii;c t corn'

de' Ll 307. I0 m11Lt-d lw + anIn d~m i
mob, il AI Y to c,)ih 2

lent a p onner to oelilo (3 3 - -
l:lizallie·ih jin d;l ,cs in I i 0 alsl 3 t o:

jut], 10 is

Cf(1s I n, tlt cc

tisrates cl(cclt 51911lr, 1 3 · the','o 'lie
lier to rotin the (verlnment -'
difitA('llt 1. 10010'.,on tlil 10U . I 0
3 9. is llttCis 1110ses ' thle osss·in ot

tAIuof '0er' '2 hcr 3'Hs'v
hc rin'; l 2~`:i os' n P c Cli B

I 1t"( t' 1''le~'1 dc.

ci 5 20 ll( r Sc to
a' cind ~ nby 11(Ill iti.>, rnd 2 tt'10le10o3

.11,1 t ICc mononedin her
;in r n tlcr, h c ,rtro (Is l tted

ii~~~~~i~!c, c·~

cotiie tts 1Sq

p p'c:tjittte s,i'
Ill' a C1 110 , )2 I I'e arnl OttiitU 'Le

1 i~~~~~~~~~c1
Ie' to 1 ' II3 4 go " ti (C'2

It' 0 i' cct b

Oil

t~~~~~i~

c

i

lO~~~ccI~1 1 1 ' '0 l it lk
.1 5 1 lt li t to51

~~t, (1111[ hul··

'Iii ''I''~ ii

~i.. I

.: :l~. i . I..~ it,', to ~i t
It1 -11~

Regent, 414. is accused likewise by the
Earl of Lenox, 415. her commiflioners re-
'fuse to answer, and demand a personal in-
terview, 46. they protefl against future
proceedings, ibid. a suspicious circumstance
against her, ibid. 417. her commissioners
withdraw from the meeting, 417. her re-
solute answer to a harll proposal of Q Eli-
zabeth, 418. avoids any farther progress
in the enquiry, 419. is enraged at the pro-
ceedings, and proposes desperate measures,
420. spreads chimerical conjectures with
that view, ibid. 421. proposes a divorce
from Bothwell, 4Z4. is influenced by the
D. of Norfolk'o schemes, ibid. exchanges
many letters and love tokens with him, 425.
consents to proposals from the Englilh no-
bles, 427. their views in this tranfacion,
426,-428 a rebellion by her adherents
againfl Q-t Eliz.abeth, 431. is removed to
Coventry, 433. Q. Elizabeth thinks of
deliveriwg her up to the Regent, .34. this
projeci ho;v diiappointed, ibid. 435. ac-
cefiion of l'ver,il to her party after the mur-
der of the Regent, II 4. they elndavour
to foment a war with Eniln(ld, ibid. her
authority proclaimedi at Llitkhgov, 5. her
parties defeated by the new Regent, 8, 9.

ihe answers propolals by Q: Elizabeth, 1o.
attempts in vain to get foreign affill.ance,
ibid. appoints commissioners to frame a
treaty for her liberation, 11. this proving
fruitless, fhle is more itricily confined, 12.
the invalidity of her resignation declared in
a Parliament held by her adherents, 17. act
of Parliament in England to curb her and
her party, 21. fle looks for proteftion
from the King of Spain, zz. is denied the
privilege of an ambassador at the Court of
England, 2z. is more close confined and
watched, ibid. proceedings againit her in
England, ^8. her interelt neglected by the
French, z9. is hurt by the malfacre at
Paris, 30, i. her adherent, divided into
two f. i.o) , 3-. one of then joins with
Mlorton t I(egent, 39. review of the
clitratciCs of her adh crcnli and opponent>,

1, 4. . he r 1)r llt1 l it j , 4. . is c.1r-

riCd to llu.xton \VCli'., .13. olecs eIvcral of
lier frie d, bI y deJ.ttl, 45. It:ll-; a Icttr al.l
picl'utl. > i,'r im, 59. her meltenLer why
dlltlll¥l ~ l Slt.llt i'.t'iIl1 himl, dld. iher 1Ii-
cilL-.1 ;it lii toll iiiciiieii, . t )y thie K LRuIIVeII
. izi'ir,iteIi ., "2. ciliil ;ini to (_ Ili..t-
beth of e her iuId ulitge, ibid. and begs liter

intercession for the King her son, ibid.
Throgmorton's conspiracy in her favour,
95-97. a fruitless negociation with Q Eli-
zabeth, oo. is alarmed at an association
in defence of Q Elizabeth, 102. is com-
mitted to more severe keepers, 103. betrayed
by Lord Gray the Scots ambassador, 104. a
statute for the preservation of Q Elizabeth
proves fatal to her, o18. is more rigor-
oufly treated, 109. her complaints to (i
Elizabeth disregarded, ibid. is, by the
French ambassador's interell, removed to
Tuthbury, I o. is undutifully treated by
the King her son, ibid. her paflionate
complaint to the French ambassador on that
occalion, ibid. 1 . threatens to disinherit
him, 1II. several discoveries allcdged a-
gainit her, I25, Iz6. (he is guarded with
unusual vigilance, 127. her dometlics, pa-
pers, &c. are seized, ibid. i28. she is con-
veyed to Fotheringay Caflle, i2z. delibe-
rations concerning the method of proceeding
againlt her, ibid. 29. is suspicious of poi
son or private murder, z29, 130. vindicates
herself to the D. of Guile, 130. the coni-
missioners for trying her arrive at Fotherin-
gay Caitle, ibid. her pirited peech when
refusing to plead, ibid. 131. is at length
prevailed on, ibid. ihe protells againit the
authority of the court, 132. the accusation
againll her, ibid. her defence, ibid.-' 34.
her sentence, 1 35. irregularities in her trial,
136. the sentence is confirmed by Par-
liament, ibid. who demand the execution
of it, ibid. 137. France interposes feebly
in her behalf, 13, 139. the sentence a-
gainftl her publilhed, 141. she is treated
with the utmolt rigour, ibid. her latt re-
quell to Q Elizabeth, 142. refutes the
afillance of a Proteltant Bilhlop or Dean,
ibid. artifices uled to inflame the people
againfl her, 44. her behaviour at her
death, 146-1 49. fcntiments of hiltorians
concerning her, 149. her charaLter, 15o,
15. her prlon described, 151. is bu-
ried, firlt at l'eterborougl and afterwards
at Wetilinlllter-Abbey, 152. letters from
her, app. 7, 9-, 9). her will, app. o.
objections ;tgainit her by Watllinghain, app.
o10. whit courle to be taken with her,
ibid. a dilleltLtoati on the ienuinclcl;; of
her letters to lBolhwell. llnd of Vol. IT.
MAlv,.rv'// lolid, arnives frolm Spain and pre-

pares' orces t) join them, 11. 103. hii fiol
lowers dilperlied, hl: is takeli priloner, ilid.

AMl'Li

Melvil is sent by the French King to obfcr.'e

the motions of the .icn-Pecgc:'t and licr
adverftrie, I. 16. sent to mnkie ou a dii-
fercnce between Elijzbeth and i.lar,,

la '.

brings about an appc'rancc of friend'.ip
between them, ibid. ib sent to info in ().
Elizabeth of the birth of K. Jtlm; ,

1. 311 ).

puts a letter inr') the (Qecn's Ihar n:i :'.
her nmarriaige \.i.h Bothl.veil. q;. i, oicdtl
to fly froi: coulr, 35(. a'I. . fa;es
to Imodlrate mI.llcecs o

upon hii, fcaic fro

the Ruithven coili l ators - i . ,';
---, Mr. Andrewltc, a clelyrens , his cim-
raftcr, 11. 4J. zca. aofly o poe> I' pl:o-
pacy, iid. dccline tle cil j aril iitin
in ccclefiitical nmattrs, 9o. is forccd to
fly into ngland to avOuiL pcrlecution ibid.

Sir Robrt, Ient by K Jaine, to inter-

ccJe with Q( lizabethi for (Q Mary when
und.r l.n: 'ncc I. 142. e.x-ecu;eC hlis conm-
miliion ith fidelity ad zeal, 143. a nic-
noiioal of i- to the King, app 91.

--- Mailer of the hulliold to Q_ Mary,

take', his lalt iarcwel of her, 11. I47. her
parting fiecch to hinl -- 148

sii//aw.r, Sir Wrn. eint by Q. Eli.zabeth wilth

propolals to Q Ma!y - I. 9
lMoN/:;, B;3flop of Valence, employted by1 the

French to conclude a peace with Engl.nd
and Scotland, I. 198. terms agcreed to by
him - 1 99-20

7 b,/gomaer appointed A rchbiihop of lafgow,

I1l. . is refilled and excommnicated by
the general A\tlemly for hi> niioral life

4 - - ibid.
]lotrlorer-V3, Conitable of France, endeavours

to prevent the Dauphin's marriage \\ ith
Ma , I. 133, 134. his prudent advice to
Henry II. 1o5. makes a ilende: appear-
ance in favour of Q. Mary I. 9
Morc/r., Earl of; his iJri-ctlreote conllutt a to

the Rcformation, I. 3. accompalnis Q.
iMary in pogref to the Norlli, z )'. in-
li:atc. ID)a nly to b)e vengted o iio, 3 ;.
takes the dirctioll of thatit Cnite pli/ze, 37.
is admiitted into the (QCeen's prcl lce, who
promises liiin a pardlon, 309. i frcc(l to
fly into En\lanld, 310. otain:, lil p:irdon
on Bothwcll's ntcrceflion, 33- 33 feixcs
a; c:.(:cet ith letters friom Q M.ir to li'oth-
wvcl, 371. he , by . l fiilbti' inter-
poition, in fvour \vitl the Kini's pairty as-
ter the 11urdelr of the Regent, I . . ap-
poinited one of the coilllliolicl lo treit
with te (Queen's party, 11. Ils deiiilds
frilll'.lntt', tll ini'cting, I z. is tiI'el ill-
liieilcct l I) the Couiit of I'.gland, 1 . coill-
umai;:, the King's lo ie' tIt l .itll, ii . hlii
civcral litirmillics withl tlic (.cc' loiccs,

ibid. closely besieges Edinburgh, and com-
mits great cruelties, ibid. :, suspension pro-
cured b te English and Frcnch ambaia-
dors, 27. a coa ition of parties revented
by him, 31, 32 he is ciofen Regent, ibid.
his mercenary ingratitude to the Earl of
.Northumbcrland, 33. obtains the tempo-
r;rlti.: of .rchbilioprick of St And:cvws,
ibLd. labour, to procure a peace between
the two partie 3(. attcmits in vin to
gain Maitland and Kirkaldy, 37. 3 n;lak-s
a treaty ith C.tilherault and Huntly, 3).
gets poiTfliion of the Ciltle of Ediniurgh,
41. his severity to Kil aldy and hi, bro-
ther, 43. his adminiir.tion becomes odi-
ous, 44. hi various methods of gratis ing
his avarice, ibid. 4. connie, ait the dil-
putes of the Clergy, .7. he irritatec the
nobles, ibid. Arg ll and Athol refue to
aniiicr his unnmmons, ibid. makes a vain
atteImpt againit l.ord Claud I amilton, 4..
dilcovers the defignt of the noble> i air:lt
him, and prol-ofe' to ref tin his office, 5o.
his refign:tion accepted by the King gives
universal joy, . obtains an approbation
of his coniduct and a pardon in ample for;,
52. continues to swatchl the motions of his
advefa-ries, ibid. is forced to surrender the
Catle of Edinburgh, ibid. resumes his au-
thority, 53. gains the Casile of Stirling
and a feat in the Privy Council, 54. pro-
cure:; a meeting of the Parliament at Stir-
ling, ibid. 5 his fccurity ratified in it,
;. forces are railed for and againt himl,
ibid. he is reconciled to his adversarics by
the intcrceflion of (Q Elizabeth, 56. is
suspectcd of foul play at an entertainment
in his own house, 57. his illegal proced-
ings againll the family of IHamilton, ibid.
8. the King's new favourites underiniie
him, Gl. he endeavour> to prevent thenm,
62. Q Elizabeth interpoferc in his favour,
(3. is chargedi with being accelanl to the
l]te King'.s death, (01-. lc i. conslined im
dificr.ent prions, ( . ditcourigcs an ;it-
tempt to refcuec hii, ibd. all his iends
tar1 turnied out o olice, (C.. lie is tcied
and condemined, (). his irelolttc calli be-
lhaviour and contllion lib ilc and i ;It hi'
(deathi , o, 71. his boJy is trecited witli ig-
noliny, 7.1
]i/li,'lO, i':1111 of, late lprio of St. Atndrew's,

goes with a handfuil of' Illl men alainll lIuntly,
J. :4S. l)y hi, great tl:ill and c-uirage ci
giins a coilplete vi.ory, 2.t9. hlis gr-:lnt
i conifirmled by 1') ili.liiin nt, 27'. cilal
altiiifl lhim hy 1 Cilex and )arnll , . I

-

Il', averlioln to i)arnl) anil other coult .i-
vourite, 'So. calls otilulwell to Il.ii .t

tri.l ,
I

trial, ibid. h;s reason for opposing Darn-
ly's marriage with the Queen, 281. he
and his affocistcs arc made the dupes of Q.
Elizabeth's policy, 283. concerts to seize
Darnly and carry him to England, 284.
this prevented by the Queen, ibid. avoids
affallination intended him by Darnly, ibid.
evidences of these plots, 285, 86. the
Qeen's vaflals are called to arms againlt
him, 286. he is fummonried to appear be-
boec her, 287. is again summoned and
outlvawed on his non appearance, 288. is
forced to fly with his ailociates into Argyl-
fhiic, 20. they are int;e-ceded for by Q.
.Elizabethl, ?9q. ae pursued by the Qicen,
and obliged to fly into England, 291. they
jneet with unexspcced ill treatment from Q.
1iizabeth ibid. z92. court Rt.io to in-
tercJe ith the Qulecn for h;m, 29-.
mny of his old f;cids fc.llicit for him,
ibid. the (Iuen's favour hon intercept-
cd, :'-, 2ar. a Pailliament is called to
atraint th;n, 301. tis, how preventel,
s'e2. end i

a i alciatt:s arrive at Ediln-

hbui,h, oO. are graciously received y
the Kinlg and Cleer, ibid. are alarmed at
the Quccn's efiape. bht soon reconciled to
he;, ;31. he is appointed R.Kgcent during
the minority of King James I . 3 ). his
harl behaviour in a visit to the Quecn,
ibid. the fucccfs of his wife adminiitra-
tion, 38Y. procures many of the Queen's
party tojoin him, ibid. gets the place, of
strength into his hands, 32. his ofice of
Regent confirmed by Parliament, 383. his
-severe and haughty behaviour difgults i:-
veral, 34. his adherents in sreat conitLr-
nation at the Queen's escape fromn Iochle-
ven, 386. his prudent conducl on that
occasion, 387, DLats the Queen's arimy
at Langidce, 389. ic improves this vic-
tory, 400. hli lenity to the priioncrs, iid.
he calls a pailianicnt, 802. i c.illed upon
by Q_ I'ii ti.;iti to inl;r:te his condut,
,0o3. lic arrive, .tt Yoi k, .lo;. hl,. views
ill thi: aftlir, 4o6. coinp;iint, (Tf tihe
(.ice n':, co(mnlilotiolicr aigaint ll i, 407.
lie belihaes with reat rclerve oil thi, c-
cafion, ibid. 40S. thib part of his condutit
accounltedl for, o08, 40o. intrigtucs with
tlc )i;c keos Noifollk, id. Iis demands

(o11 the lli igfi conlinlillioneri, 40), 41o.
mfixk er the colnplaint. of the ():.cn'ls coin-
llii;n,;:,, w itlo lt tolliiiill o ,II lle 11111detl ,

1%i,, 1 i i

.1

1 gree. to 1 ie. the corlleielnee

il)o 'ix l l Vt,\ lllniiiilli.'l', 1. . i'. i;l'eC ioll;tely
reci.cdl , Q. I.li.,ilrli. Iwhic (ill(1n (.
RIl:'y, .1 I; - p're ailt l on l)y l'i abelli
o ;at( iiit Mr;l)y ( theli II.l, ,. 1 . pil
i4nt o:. hIi c\ideilicc , 1 . i, dili ll d
( by

Q Elizabeth withouit approving or con-
demning his condua, 419. his party is
secretly supported by her, 420. returns to
Scotland and by his vigorous conduct breaks
the Queen's party, 421. he eccives pro-
pofals both fiom Q. lizab'eth ad (QMary,
423. he difappoiats Noif;k, .-9. an ac-
count of his murder , 43, 4'. ': cha-
rafer, 436, 437. his death r c. amcinted
by Qa. Elizabct and thlc ing's p-',, II. 1,
n.ucl anarclh tle Corif.:qiiUncC of it, 2. part
of a letie' of hi,, n : p. . his heir mur-
dered by the Earl olluntly, JI. 176

N.
.A.i fecicrtnr to Q. Mar, is sent by her

wsith a '.tr, anti precents to her ion.

.I . 59. 1 ivoif,, ed x.'thout iecingrthiml,
ibid. is felnt wx tho r of

o humble religna -

t ii 10 Ei. :il at ri:,

In ( is le'iztd and

fert plifini r ro Lr.ono, 2-, 128. is pro-
d(lLc.d Ian Cvid'iilC i ".':..i iie r 135
A-,i,/ i'ovcri .ni1nd plrevent., Parr' s design to

niudcier IQ lizi'iabt I G-, 1o8

f5oi/s, tli-- c'tCtnl': 1i 1

o , I. , 9 be-

coie trbuler.t anld fnrmni iblc, 2o. their
puo'Ver ,:'cater in Sc>tl.imd than in any other
Ikingdoim. 21. the caufls of tii., 2--2.
tlieir power of long duraion, 32. it be-
colies intolerible to the i'inccs, ibid. they
are hlunblei in IFrance and England, ibid.
but corilinue ligorou in Scotland, 33. dif-
cords aniong tlicm cincouraged, ibid. their
junridiction cir cunr.clibed, 3;. are greatly
imortl;ieid ib K. Jlames . 5)--cn. ''e dil-
appointed in a cheme t fIhw their rclent-
Iment, 61. r-etffe to attend the Kino into
lEngilnd, 62. they fcize the revenues of
the church, zo. rculbe to part with them
to thi reIfrmd clcry), 207, 21 , 210.
difinlfilons aniong them, 24.. a conven-
tion of them iplp'io v the c(iQueen's mi riage
to Dinlye, 282. fvCleral of them icc'liil-
milend lotihiell as a hitlandti to , 153,
;a rllraige c(insliiiiti(rn of them on tii: cca-
ion, 35.1. a :ily ofthecm afloci atc atgaillil er
alidllotlwiv 1el,3( thieirlifiernt vicvws in thi.,
ilbi. a pI;lL) y of t1cnl .i vouli tlie Q.ecen
371. tlhey are muliUl diliirited by the good
coridulut of Murray, 381, 81, . tlu', are
muhcli provoklled iy Morton thle legcilr, II.
47. tliink of cedrcl;s ftirol tlhe King, 4,.
i(i s ifl)itfi)rin of thi.' R iegent's lowvr it)

iliim, 5'. I l'.iI\' to t tllem coiH'l ir ' I:iiiill

tile l .in},',

I l.iVO Ill, It( 7. tIhey I ( )li,

i(lln alld I've thclil ol, 78. tl'."

L.-

} oit'tt l;l :n11.1 illt .:titit' Il O til(' 1 ', 1 1::
tllhe ling ;Ittl llt, to IrcoucilCe I',:t i ' ,l]l,!
;l it t'Iilt thl l), 1 57. tit Lv',/'r,

NKrfolk, Duke of, appointed a commiflioner

to hear the cause between QLeen Mary and
her accusers, I. 405. forms a scheme of
mounting the throne of Scotland, 408. in-
trigues with the Regent and Maitland ith
that view, ibid. 409. he represents the de-
mands of the Scots to Q. Elizabeth, 410.
his farther negociations with refpet to Q
Mary, 424, 425. endeavours to conceal
his designs from Q Elizabeth, 425. is im-
posed on by the artifice of the Regent,
42;, 46. gets the consent of many of
the Englilhi nobles, 426. his project ap-
proved at foreign courts, 428. is disco-
-cred and defeated by QElizabeth, 429.
flies to Norfolk, 430. he surrenders on a
second summons, and is ent prisoner to the
Tower, ibid. is set at liberty, and con-
tinues his intrigues with QMary, . 22. is
betrayed by his secretary, 23. is seized
with his dependants, and accused by them,
24. is executed, ibid.
iTorLirumbnerlan., Earl of, attempts a rebellion

in favour of Q Mary, 1. 431. his scheme
defeated, 43 2. he is seized by the Regent,
433. is delivered up to the governor of
Berwick, and put to death at York, I. 33.
ANc/izg/ka;, Countess of, feme account of the

tranfafion concerning the lall cf Eilex's
ring, I1. 242.

0.
O CTAVJl1INS, their inllitution and ex-

tenive powers, II. 191. they under-

mine the iiag's minilcers, ibid. become
odious, and a combination is formed aainii
them, ibid, 192. being split into faions,
and envied by the courtiers, they rcfign
their commisilon, zo5.
O)g;/.vi, Lord, has a icuffle xith Sir Jolln

Go don in the fireets of Edinburgh, I. 245.
Oip/a.:, Mailer of, joins the Rutliven con-

ipirators, II. 77.
Orae:g, Prince of, fends an agent into Scot-

land, II. 67. his inlll uion:, iLid. is
ailiiflinated, 1 2.
O1'0i/1, commander of the French troops in
Scotland, endeavours to promote war
xith England, 1. 132. hi; dcfin frtillllatrc,
dild. the number of troops ulider lhis coin-

rand, 154. infligates the Qieen Regent
to violent measures againll the Reformer,
155. is sent by Q. Mary t demand a fi.fe
conduft from (. Elizabeth, during her
voyage to Scotland, 224.

P.
P AISLE; Abbot ofarrives inScotland,

. 87. creates a suspicion of the Earl of

Lennox in the Earl of Arran, Regent, ihid,
88. i, made Archbiflop of St. Andrews,
99.
Pnis, the massacre of, iT. 29, 3. rejoicins

of the popii. party on account of it, 30.
the conitcrnation and horror of the Pro-
teltints, ibid.
Pa/'niecrt, the nature of their or;ginnl con-

ttitution, 1. 6o-67. particula1ly that of
Scotland, 67-8 , 202. a parliament helil
on an e:traordinary occasion, zo2. a di-
ficulty flarted and anfivered, 203, c.4,
their proceedings with regard to reli<;io.l,
204. condemn thePopilh and apprloe thl
Reformed Doctrines, 205. feteral other
regulations of the fame tendenc , zc6.
their validity called in quefiion, 207. ec-
ccc.l their powers, zo8. their proceedings
laid before the King and Queen, ibid. a
parliament in favour of Bothwell, ;3I.
pats an a in favour of the Refbrmation,
ib 3 .

3 confirm the proceedings of the

confederates, 3S3. parliaments held both
by the iing's and QCueen's partice, II. i(,
17. another of the Queen's adherents, iS.
attaint upewarJs of 20o of their orpolnent,
ibid. a p;:rlimrtint at Stirling by the King' s
party, 1). silrprized by thc (Quen's ad-
herents, ibid. another at Stirling,, 4,
one at l.din)urcgh, 6I. and on the Kiin's
belig of ac, 158. several new ln\\s ma:;di
th cre, i. 161. theleierBarcnl adnii tci
into parliament, fio.
Pairr, I)octor, uindertakes to ntirdnr Q:. .li

za;lbctli, II. 107. is cncoUr.lgd li) .I11
get'; ahblfution from the PIope, iid. lii,'
dcfign llov prevented, ibid. 1(t'. is exc-
cuted, ilhid.
ptI/r//.r, a citlit, pti)liflics :1 book in f.ion,i!

of tlhe litijilta o' Spa;in''; riol t f t;,C reli
to the CL o , of England, 11. 18,;.

M m in ',
i

Pafqitnadcs and Pitures, acclfing Bothwell of

Darnly's murder, I. 343, 351. a law
made aainft them, 351.
Patten, Williun, his account of the Scottifi

antient military discipline, I. 1o3.
Pau/ct, Sir Amias, is appointed one of Q:

Mary's keepers, II. 1 03. his rigid severity
to her, 109. discovers her foreign cor-
refpondence, 12z. his rude treatment of
her, 141. refutes to be concerned in pri-
vately aflhfinating her, 145. a letter from
him, App. 108.
Pi- v,:, Bishop of Amiens, is appointed to

support the popish interest in Scotland, I,
172. drives the Qeicen Regent to volent
measures against the Protellants, ibid.
Pertb, an insurrection of the Reformers there

against the Papitls, I. I 5. its inhabitants
are fverely treated by the Queen Regent,
153. a French garrison placed there, ibid.
14. is besieged and taken by the Pro-
tellants, 158. a great tumult there on ac-
count of Gowrie's conspiracy, II. 318.
Phi/'p 11. of Spain, married to Mary Queen

of England, I. 8. reinforces his army
with her troops, 131. his great power, 11.
iiz. joins in the holy league, ibid. re-
folvcs to invade and conquer England, 162.
his preparations for it dilatory, 166. his
dcfign fruflratcd, ibid. meditates an inva-
sion of Englani through Scotland, 167.
intrigues with some Scots Lords with that
view, ibid. remits money to them, 186.

Pr.?,,,, the battle of, I. 102.
/'ii V. Pope, excommunicates Q. Elizabeth,

deprives her of her kingdom, and absolves
her fubjets, II. 7.
PTr'o, one of Babington's conspirators againfl

Q Elizabeth, 11. 123, discovers the plot,
P'olrot, a frantic zealot, aaffinates the Duke

of Cuile at the siege of Orecans, . 2z.
Pl'i/, M1r. Robert, a miniller, and one of the

Lords of Seflion, protels against laws op-
picl-ive to the Church, II. 93.
Pypr- v, where moll flourishing, . Izo. what

kind prevailed in Scotland, ibid, 121. was
p;rtly grafted on lIcatienifin, 159. is
Mnuch hurt by the congregation, 20o.
their dotIrines condemned by parliament,
}.i!. the juiridiction of their courts abo-

3

lified, 206. their worhip prohibited, ibid.
attempt in vain to gain Queen Mary's fa-
vour, 234. the great influence of Popery,
299, 300.
PocLer, the baltance of, the great consequence

of preserving it, 11. 73.
Prefiyterian church government eflablifhed in

Scotland, I. z21. is confirmed by King
James V. 177.
Prrote/ants, in France, violently persecuted,

1. 167. are moderate on Q Mary's arrival
from France, 229. are employed by her
in the administration, 230. a scheme for
suppressing them all over Europe, 299. a
league formed for that purpose, II. I2.
See Reformation.

R.

AMSA4AY, a favourite of K. James IIIT
narrowly ecapes the fate of his ao-

ciates, I. o5. is appointed Captain of the
King's guard, and created Earl of Both-
well, 5 . See BothBwell.
Randan, Sieur de, employed by the French

to negociate a peace with England and
Scotland, I. 198. terms agreed on by
him, 200, 20o.
Randolph, sent to encourage the congregation,

I. 180. (See App. .) congratulates Q.
Mary's arrival in Scotland, 230. urges the
ratification of the treaty of Edinburgh,
231. is imposed on by Q. Mary in the
affa;r of her marriage with Darnly, 276.
sent into Scotland on the murder of Mur-
ray, II. 2. interposes for Morton, 66, 67.
flies from Scotland in the night, 68. is ent
again there, and concludes a treaty with
England, 123. several of his letters, App.
7, 14, 15, 24, 29, 30, 33.

Ratc/fi; See Sefx.
Reformatin, its progress in Scotland , o.

account of its firll preachers, i . is much
influenccd by England, 12z. two remark-
able inltruments of promoting it, 113.
it makes great progrcfs, 1 8. causes con-
tributing to promote it, 9'. its advan-
tages over popery, 128. is favoured by
the (. Regent, 133. an inlance of rc-
gard for it in Scoiand, 34. the whole
party not chargeable with Cardinal Bea-

toUii's

tomu's murder, 14. . a priefl burnt for em-
bracing it, 4+2. the reformers violently per-
fecuted by the Archbishop of St. Andrews,
ibid. are proteaed by the Q Regent, ibid.
apply in vain to the popilh clergy, 143. a
persecution against them puflied on by the
French interelt, 48. the preachers -uml-
moned before the Regent, 149. they are
deceived and declared out-laws by her, 50.
a riotous infurlrccion of them at Perth
againis the papist, 15 . prepare to defend
thcmfelves against the Q een, 5z. con-
clude a treaty with her which fle presently
breaks, 153. they take arms again againit
the Queen, 55. infifi on redrcfiing civil
as well as religious grievances, 156. tih
influence of the reformation on libert:, ibid.
they besiege and take Perth, 15S. they 4izc
Stirling and Edinburgh, ibid. commit
great violence on churches and monafleries
i 9. their condu't how accounted for,
ibid. an inflance of thir moderation, 160o.
tix theirrefidence t Edinburgh, 161. tile
Q.ueen- prepares to attack hem, ibid.
make another treats with her, 1z. .ire
forced to abandon lidinburgh, &c. but al-
lowed the exercise of their religion, ibid.
demand the expulsion of the French army,
163. are aware of their danger from
France, 166. their party itrengthened,
ibid. remonfrrate againll the French so-
tifying Leith, 171. take arms in their
own defence, 172, 173. rernontllrteagain
to the Regent, 174. are highly incensed
at her imperious anfwcr, ibid, 175. by
advice of a convention deprive the Queen
Dowagcr of the office of Regent, 176.
the foundations of this condut, ibid, 177.
the growth of it encouraged by parliament,
383. See Congrrgation.

Ri^Xalih'ts, the ample jurifdiion of I. 8
Re/li',/,gi:?, the privilege of, to whom belong-

ing, -- . iS
RrcvzPgr, encouraged both by cullom and

law, -- I. 34
A' T,,',,ic of the church, proceedinl, of p;r-

liLillnlit t onceIrning thlie' , - 1. 20

.b',/.//'z, n :!.'rnt for the P'opIe it ondonl nc-

yot'citei t1o Q.lMarl, l 11.s. hi, i',ll-
>licnt v'ith e i), v). o orfilk. 2 , 24

Rizio David, tome account of hiiim i ail li.,

rife, I. 275, 276. Darnly's conneiior
with him, 276. his good offices courAti
by Murray, 297. his great inteJei ai:n
familiarity with the Queen, 303. iincul-
the hatred of Darnly, ibid. and of tli,
friends of the exiled Lord, ibid. fe-velr.!
concurring caufcs of tii:, ihil, 304.
combination formned to iiurderlilm, 30o.
he is murdered in the (Quii'., palac.

- - 317, °'

Remans invade Britain , . give e
te ea-

lieit accounts of the Scots, - ibid.
Rojs biftlop of, zcaloullv promotes Queen

Mary's interel at London, Ii. 2-,, :.
is confined O tlo e Tower a:d i reateUne
witl capital )pun.illiment, 25. is let t i1
berty ad blnilhel the kingdoni, ibi.
fmle letters of his, App. - g. 6-
Rubai, a foreigner, made keeper otf ti:.

great feal of Scotland, - I.
RatL-'vn Lord, the msurder of' Rizio proprotdi

to him ly Darnly, 1. 305. heads the con-
fpirators againlt him, 508. hi) pait ina
that tranfaition, iid. is admitted io
the Queen's prell nce who prornifes him a
pardon, 309. did not repent of it at his
death, - - 3,
---- created E. of Gowrie, he and his

associates seize the King, and remonfirate
againl his favourites, 11. 77, 7. diive
them from him, ibid. their conidut ap-
proved in an aflfeubly of the iate., .Sc
the King cefcpes from them, 84. 1,v A -
ran's inltuence violent me;afurc are de-
termined againit tbem, 86. (2_ !iza-
beth intcrcedes in their bcialf, ibid, 8.
are declared guilty of high trcalion, So.
take refuge in foreign countrilc, iiid.
are harihly treated y (. llia.;iilh, io.
a reconciliation witli her brloulr}t ..b!,'l,
115, Ii 6. return (t, o'J;'i: 1 ;l , ;' r
conciled to tlie Klilig, 11. ti : ,, <id -
ration on being relloe'l r' i ti cil. 'ri , .,
11ono1uis, li . th( ji ' . '

I ' i'

f iellnd tile clerl-, v, - ;

------ - tlIat 1.,iiic ;llolitlJ 1: r,, '.
il: 11,

11. 229). lee' (;r,c', I'.

I''lldl, XI flat,

MI ,'
A1 inl il -

SAD£ER, Sir Ralph appointed a com-

millioner to hear the caule between Q.
Mary and her accufcrs, - I. 405
S.?Ii,/i/an, s of Calder, lord St. John, sent to

lay the proceedings of the congregational
p:'rliament before the King and Queen in
Iranlce, I. 208. is coldly received and dif-
niiikd without a ratification by them, 209
S.',z.',y, a Spanih officer, his desperate refb-

lution to kill Q. Elizabeth, - 11. 122
,',: i;;n,/i, its aiptient hiltory fabulouS, I. I.

the origin of the Scots, 2. their hiflory
wh retmarkably obfture, 3. some account
of thie writers of' it, 4. is divided into
fiur periods, . a review of the third
;e,. ionme account of the controverry
'conlccning its independency, ibid.-o.
thi the cause of great aninmoities and much
bloodilcd, . tile fate of Scotland

liCenI Bruce began his reign, 12. It be-

gitn to have an influence on the fate of
dliltant natiolis, 76, 77. infuence as to
iie balance of power, 77. Rate of Scot-
lind at the birth of Q_ Mary, . is in-
vaded by tile 'g! and tfycr-l places
b-rnt andplundered, 93. much alienated
from the Engliih, ibid. 94. a peace con-
cuded between England, France and Scot-
land, 9g. computation of damages done
by the Englilh in Scotland, 94, 95 a new
breach \ith England, oo. isinvaded by
a great EngliRh army, ioi. the Scots are
dcfeLatd with great slaughter, 102, 103.
their manner of fhting at that time, lo3,
Io4. a inarriage agreed of their young
QCeen and the Dauphin of France, 1o7.
they tioon repent this ilep, 109. a fray at
Edinburgh occasions their utter ancrfion to
the French, o. this inflamed by another
incident, 129. they decline a war with Eng-

niiid, Ii . sei'nd reprelntatives to witncfs

() MLiy' i mina 1 ilgc, l j -. their care as to
tih marliage articles, ibid. 135. tlley Ic-
fiilc conlniit to the demand:; of the lIrcnch,
136. fi)tlr of tlhir deputics fufpilscd to lie
poifiocd, i . whiich Inuch cticreii:,l the
s\ citiiioa, 13d. gtan1 t the crown nll ti illo-

nial to the Dauphin, ibid. they apply to
the English for afliftance against the French,
180. 185. an English fleet arrives for
that purpose, I90. conclude a peace with
England and receive an English army, 191,
192. all parties agree in relenting the
French, 195. a treaty between England,
France and Scotland. 198, 199. both
Engliih and French armies leave Scotland,
202. they rejoice much at the death of
the young King of France, zz2. fend to
invite the Queen to Scotland, 26. rejec
proposals of an ambaflador fiom France,
z17. slate of Scotland on Q( Mary's re-
turn from France, 226. the great zeal of
the nation againit popery, 229. the Scots
brought into contempt by Q. Mary's con-
duct, 361. in a miserable condition after
the murder of Murray the regent, II. 17.
itate of fations at that time in it, ibid. 8. a
league concluded between Scotland and
England, 20. a view of the revolutions
of Scotland since the accession of James
\V 249-260o. of the policy of the ate,
249- 54. and of the church, 254, 2%z.
of the genius and taste as to learning, 25h.

2G6
Scott of Buccleugh, enters and ravages Eng-

land after the murder of Murray the re-
gent, II. 1. 2. the design of this q
Scroop Lord, sent to condole with, and watch

Q Mary on her arrivalin England . 395
SePioj Lords and Court of, by whom firtt ap-

pointed, . 36. the President and one half
of their number of the Clergy, 123
S$./ci Lord, aflifts the Queen Regent in de-

fending Leith, I. $83
Shr/.eLVsby Earlof, the charge of Qh Mary's

person committed to him, 1. 412. why
removed from that office, II. oz02. is ap-
pointed to fee the sentence againll her exe-
cuted, 45. letter from him and the Earl
of Kent concerning her death, Appendix,

I 10
S.:,,ili, Bifiop of Ross, a zealous l'apill,

concurs as piclident of the efiion in ac-
quitting Knox of a charge of trealon, .

26o
Son:r.ri/ Duke of, enters Scotland with a pow-

crlul army, . 101. is rcduced to a very

Ciittji~1

critical situation, ibid. defeats the Scots
with great slaughter, 102. this vi&ory
why o little advantage, 104. cabals
againll him at the Court of England, force
him to return, ibid. is ruined by hisene-
mies 8oS
Spa/in, great wailike preparations there, II.

162. See Armado. the Infanta of, set up
as candidate for the Crown of England, 189
Spanij ambassador is ordered to leave Eng-

land, for intriguing in favour of Q. Mary,

II. 25
Sprot, hisdifcoveries concerning Gowrie's con-

fpiracy, 11. 2z--222. is executed, 222
Ste.art, James, prior of St. Andrews, is ap.

pointed to carry the Crown matrimonial
to the Dauphin of Fiance, 1. 40. See
St.. A-4dNS s.
---- Efme, Lord Aubigne, his arrival in

Scoland, 11. 60. See Aolgiiy.
--- Capt. James, his character, II. 6.

becomes a favourite of King James, ibid.
acculcs Morton of the murder of the late
King, 64. is createdEarl of Arran. See
yrrran.

Col. William, commander of the

King's guard, contributes to his escape from
the Ruihlien conspirators, 11. 8+. icizes
the Earl of Gowrie 91

Francis, created Earl of Bothwcll,

1. 67. joins in a treasonable correfpon-
dence with the Popiil lords, 168. See
B2ciLhvcl
-, all of that name combine in opposing

tile Chancellor, II. 18
S/riing seized by the Reformers, . 158. a

parliament there by the King's party, II.
19. is furprized by the Queen's adherents,
and a great fray ensue;, ibid, c
S/ro.^%i Leon, conimands a body of French

ient into Scotland, I. 9). reduce> and de-
moliflle the Calle o St. Andrews, ibid.
Sec Fanr.
?,,.'7b.n', a remarkable fiatutc coo.cclning it,

I. 100
./, 'ii!i/cti/;tls proposed in Ithe Church u' Sc.-

land, 1. 21z . thuit bulfiiri ,, ibi

/,/'i.x arl ol, one of the curoniiifi)c . to

lhear rte cnulci between (2. M.ir :11ii lCi.
acculce.', I. 405. asl;mblec a pos 'itl.i

army on the borders, II. 3. he and Scroop
enter, and ravage Scotland 5

T.
T X upon land, firlt proposed in Scot-

land I. 130
Throgmorton Sir Nicholas, sent ambaflador ex-

traordinary from Q. Elizabeth, to oppore
Q Mary's marriage with Darnly, I. 279.
his inrerceifion for the exiled lords is much
regarded, 297, 298. his enmity to Cecil,
ibid. is sent to negociate Q. Mary's libe-
ration, 372. is refused access to her by
the confederates, ibid. some letters of his,
Appen. 37, 39, 43, 46, 48, 49
--- Francis, is charged with a conspiracy

against QElizabeth I. 95. at- firfl he
denies, but afteliards confefi's it, ib. 96.
reflections on his confefiion, ib. 97. is
executed, ,
Tichb,'ii/-ne designs to affiafinate Q Elzabth,

1I. 123

lTrcln, persons guilty of it, tried after their
death by the law of Scotland, II. 221

U.
X TIAzTO'T, a foreigner, made comptroller

of Scotland, I 1 29
U;so, of Scotland and England, the adv:in-

tagesof, 1I. 253, 254

W.

A LL.ACE Sir Wiliam, bravely a-rted
the liberty of his country, [. 1o

li/ji/nglsam, secretary to Q lizabeth, sent

an'ba)ad or to I-. Ja mcs \' . 1 i.. retuc rr
withiout fucccf , ili . mnakes a '.'vlouLr,4l':
crport to her concerning :rsntcs. S. intri-
po s ill favuii o Q Mary, 1 ,z. ildto-
\ers Babingtoi's conlpiisaiy, 124 \\ liv a
tdeteiinii;ied an.i invcter;te c'(li'- t.) (.
Ma:i)ry, 127. a Ictttr fru;in i;n, /\illi.

I ic)
.'., .'. , Earl of. flurc-cr :. So( iu.l lc intl'll

'r'.aicnt lt ) rt(.s d,, I. lo ..

/.',,; ... ,, iic cLirtcrcncc concc;
o ,ina; ( _

' ;.li ll ;c;c, 1. ,1

.,
/. t t.:/

JeYtm /land Earl of, atempts a rebellion in

favour of Q Mary, I, 431. his schemes
discovered and defeated, 432, 433. he
escapes to the Notherlands, ibid.
tWhitorn, the prior of, imprisoned for cele-

brating Mars I. 258
ji'ilox, a minister, declares for refiflance and

deprivation of tyrannical rulers, 1. 176. is
called to attend the Q Dowager on her
death-bed, 197
lWifhar George, his illegal execution, reveng-

ed, I. 46.
Ifithcrafi, vigorously prosecuted in Scotland,

I[. 175
Il/o, dean of Canterbury, employed to

negociate a peace with France, I. 198

--- Sir Edward, ent by Queen Elizabeth
into Scotland, 11. ii4. his character, ib.

soon gets into high favourwith King James,
ib. procures a league between the two
kingdoms, ibid, 115. underminesArran'
power, Ii5. forms a plot on King James,
and forced to withdraw without taking
leave, 116, 117

V.
ORK, the conferences there concerning

Queen Mary, I. 40C

Z.
Z UCHE, Lord, sent ambassador by Q.

Elizabeth, to remonllrate againlt King

James's lenity to the Popifl lords, 11. iS.
his treachery on that occasion, ib,
F I N 1 S.

RK 1'M
